Iter Carolinum, BEING A Succinct RELATION OF The Necessitated Marches,
Retreats, and Sufferings Of His MAJESTY CHARLES the I. From January 10. 1641.
till the time of His Death 1648.

Collected by a daily Attendant upon his Sacred Majesty during all the said
time.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid over against the Anchor Inn in Little Britain.
1660.

To the Loyal Reader.
I Do here present thee with a compendious collection of thy late Sovereigns
afflictions, which are many and unparalleled, in so much that I may truly say,
(though therein contradictory to the wise man, who says, There is nothing new
under the Sun) that there was no such deed done or seen from the beginning of
the world until this day.

Look not hereon, I conjure thee; unless with tears, nay indeed how can thou?
to see the King driven from place to place, affronted, neglected, despised,
hungring, and thirsting, reviled, persecuted and defamed. So that he might
justly take up that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10. etc. And indeed hinc fons
ille lacrymarum; From this Fountain came all our future sorrows: This, this, I
say, was the cause of our succeeding miseries, our inestimable loss and almost
inexpiable ruin; but propitiatur Deus, so infinite is God in his mercy that he
not only can but will pardon, though his justice severely denounces this
Sentence ^: The soul that sins shall die.

But our present time speaks better things. We have the pool of Bethesda,
whereat many have lain groaning even despairing for help, and Now God has sent
his Angel and moved the water, and the whole Nation by stepping in, are healed
of the disease they too too long labored under: O terque quaterque beatus!
Thrice happy he whose Loyal actings by Heaven have crowned been with such a
blessed success, that after times shall call him and confess he was his Countries
Honor, and his Princes Shield. Pardon I pray, good Reader, this zealous
digression, and in the short ensuing Tractate please to take notice that it
begins at the 10. of Jan. 1641. when his Majesty was forced by Tumults from
White Hall, and is continued till his death after the manner of a Diary,
pointing out his travel from place to place, with their distances from each
other; his abode therein and entertainment, succinctly withal, yet mystically
relating the most remarkable passages and battails occurring in that time. I
need say no more, but let it speak for its self; I suppose there are many who
will remember much thereof; I know the Author my Father and Self were Testes
oculati, speaking only what we had sorrowfully seen and known. Oh that
Posterity may never know the like! but for ever rest satisfied in their
undoubted Sovereign, that his Generation may never fail to sway the Scepter in
these Kingdoms, while the Sun and Moon endures: Which is the cordial prayer
of his Majesty's most faithful Subject,

THOMAS MANLEY.

A List of his Majesty's marches and Removes since his coming from London, on
Monday the tenth of January, Anno Dom. 1641.
January, 1641. Nights. Miles. 10. FRom White Hall to Hampton Court ij xij 12.
To Windsor xxviij x February. 9. To Hampton Court, riding somewhat out of the
way j xij 10. To Greenwich j xiv 11. To Rochester j xx 12. To Canterbury iv
xxij 16. To Dover ix xij 25. The Queen went aboard to Holland in the Lion. 25.
To Canterbury i xij 26. To Greenwich ii xlii 28. To Theobales iv xvi March. 3.
To Royston v xxi 7. To New Market v xx 14. To Huntington i xxiv 15. To Stanford
i xxi 16. To Grantham i xvi 17. To Newarke i x 18. To Doncaster i xxviii 19. To
York cx xxviii July, 1642. Lincoln Journey. 7. To Beverley v xxii 12. To
Doncaster i xxviii 13. To Newarke i xxviii 14. To Lincoln ii xii 16. To
Beverley ii xlv Leicester Journey. 21. To Nottingham i lx 22. To Leicester iv
xvi 26. to Doncaster i xxxii 7. to Beverley iii xxviii 30. to York xvii xxii
August, 1642. 16. to Nottingham, Earl of Clare ii lv 18. to Leicester i xvi 19.
to Stonely Abbey Sir Tho. Lee iii xx 23. to Nottingham Earl of Clare, where his
Majesty set up his Royal Standard xxi September. 13. to Darby iii xii 16. to
Utoxeter i 17. to Stafford ii 19. to Wellington i 20. to Shrewsbury iii 23. to
Westchester iv xxviii 27. to Shrewsbury xv xxviii October. 12. to Bridgenorth
iii 15. to Wolverhampton iii x 17 to Bremichem Aston, Sir Tho. Holts ii 18. to
Packington, Sir Rob. Fishers i 19. To Killingworth i 21. To Southam ii x 22. To
Edgcott i ix

Edgehill Battle.
23. October. The great Battle at Edghill was stricken, the Earl of Lindsey
General for his Majesty, who was killed in the Fleld; and his Majesty,
notwithstanding the Treachery of his chief Gunner, the loss and retaking his
Standard, with the death of Sir Edmund Verney, the over-eager pursuit of the
Parliaments wing of Horse, by Prince Rupert, (whose Soldiers too soon fell to
Plunder) remained sole Masters of the Field, and the next day had the Plunder
of the Field.

26. To Aynow on the Hill iv x 28. To Woodstock ii x 29. To Oxford iv vi
November. 3. To Benson i x 4. To Reading iv x 8. To Maidenhead ii 10. To
Colebrook ii 12. To Hownslow ii v

Brainford Fight.
After Edgehil battle, his Majesty having continued his marching as aforesaid
toward London in the way at Brainford, fell upon some Forces of the
Parliaments there, falling into their Quarters, and with much courage putting
them to the worst, till relieved by other Regiments lying near it, became a hot
fight in the fields, lanes and streets: His Majesty's forces still valiantly
maintaining their ground they had at first got, until by intelligence
understanding the vast supplies both of horse and foot that were coming out of
London; sinding it impossible to be absolute Victors, it was thought fit to
retreat with honor and safety, which they did, marching away through Kingston

Nights, Miles. 13. To Hampton Court i 14. To Oatlands i iv 18. To Bagshott iv
viii 19. To Reading, which immediately upon the Kings recess was surrendered to
the Earl of Essex ix x 29. To Wallingford dinner, Oxford supper, and there
during pleasure

November 1644. A List of his Majesty's Marches from Oxford to Bristol,
Gloucester Siege, etc. Beginning the 1. of August 1643.
Nights, Miles. 1 FFrom Oxford to Farrindon dinner, to Malmesbury supper and
bed j xij xvj Bristow taken by the King. 2. To Bristow vj xxij 8. To Tedbury
dinner, to Cirencester supper and bed, Sir William Masters j xx viij 9. To
Pansweek j xj Gloucester besieged. 10. To Macseon, Mr. Selwins near Gloucester
xxvj iv September. 5. To Pansweek j iv 6. To Bantley-Hill dinner, to Coverley
supper and bed j viij 7. Diner in the field, to Sudeley Castle supper and bed
iv xij 11. Diner in the field, to Evisholme supper and bed j xiv 12. To
Parshall ij iv

The Earl of Essex approaching with his Army, the King raised his Siege from
Gloucester, and marched --
Nights, Miles. 14. To Evisham ij iv 16. To Snowes hill j vj 17. To Norlich,
dinner, Alscoc supper j xij 18. To Faringdon dinner, to VVantage Sir George
Wilmots supper and bed j x 19. Diner in the field Newbery, to supper and bed
Mr. Coxes, and on Wednesday the 20. the great battle was struck there iv x 23.
To Oxford -- during pleasure xx April 1644. 9. From Oxford to Childrey the Lady
Fetiplace j xij 10. To Marlingborow the Lord Seymers j xiij 11. To VVantage
diner, to Oxford supper and bed -- during pleasure xv x May 1644. 16. To Coley
near Reading ij xxij 18. Diner to Compton, Oxford supper and bed -- during
pleasure xij xiij

A List of his Majesty's March with his Armies toward the West, etc. Beginning
on Sunday the 2. of June, An. Dom. 1644.
June 1644. Nights Miles. SUnday the 2. day, in the afternoon we went from
Oxford, to Woodstock, and returned back that night on Monday morning the 3. day
about 6. a clock his Majesty came back again to Oxford j vj Monday the 3. day,
and Tuesday the 4. About 9. a clock at night his Majesty marched again to
Woodstock ward, but left it on the right hand; to Burford to supper; the 4.
day, and that night lodged at Burton on on the water at Doctor Temples ij xviij
Wednesday the 5. to Evisham, Mr. Alderman Martins i xv Thursday the 6. to
Worcester the Bishops Palace vi xii Tuesday the 12. to Bewdley, Sir Thomas
Littletons iii xii Saturday the 15. to Worcester again, the Bishops Palace i
xii Sunday the 16. to Bradway, Mistress Savages i xvii Monday the 17. to
Burford, the George i xii Tuesday the 18. to Witney, the white Heart iii vi
Friday the 21. to Blechenton, Sir Thomas Coghils i vii Saturday the 22. to
Buckingham, Sir Thomas Richardsons iv xii Wednesday the 26. to Brackley the
College there i ii Thursday the 27. to Culworth, Sir Samuel Danvers i viii
Friday the 28. to Grymsbury, a Yeomans house i vii Saturday the 29. to
Williamscot, a very poor man's house ii iv July 1644. Monday the 1. to
Dedington, the Parsonage i ii Tuesday the 2. to Morton Hinmarch, the white Heart
i xii Wednesday the 3. to Evisham, Alderman Martins ix x Friday the 12. to
Coverley the E. of Downs, by Bradway and Sudeley i xvi Saturday the 13. to
Sapperton, Sir Henry Pooles near Cirencester i vii Sunday the 14. to
Bodmyngton, the Lo. Herbets of Ragland i xiv Monday the 15. to Bath, Sir Thomas
Bridges the Governors ii xi Wednesday the 17. to Mells, sir John Horners the
Kings by attainder ii viii Friday the 19. to Bruton, sir Charles Bartleys ii x
Saturday the 20. to Ilchester, Master Dawes house iv xii Wednesday the 24. to
Charde, Master Barcrofts a Merchant of London i xii Thursday the 25. to
Hunington, Doctor Marwoods a Physician i xii Friday the 26. to Excester Bedford
house, sir John Partleys the Governor i xv Saturday the 27. to Crediton diner;
to Bradinch, Mr. Seuters supper i xvi Sunday the 28. to Crediton, Master
Tuckers house i viii Monday the 29. to Bow, Mr. Philips a mean quarter i x
Tuesday the 30. to Oachampton, at Mr. Rotenburies i viii Wednesday the last, to
Lifton the Parsonage house i viii August 1644. Thursday the first, to
Trecarroll Mr. Maningtons house in Cornwall i ix Friday the 2. to Liskerd Mr.
Jeane a Commissioners house vi viii Thursday the 8. to Boconnock the Lord
Mohuns, but called from thence to make ready at Mr. Glins of Glinford,
affrighted from thence by the Militia, his Majesty lay in the field all night
in his Coach on Boconnock Down a Heathy place i v Friday the 9. to Boconnock
again, where his Majesty quartered xxi v Saturday the last day, to Lestithiall,
thence toward Foy, his Majesty lay in the field his meat and drink dressed at M.
Hixts, the Militia disarmed, E. fled the field, the Articles confirmd. ii v
Nights, Miles. And here his Majesty's Clemency was most Eminent, when having
all the Infantry at his mercy, he not only pardoned the Soldiers in general,
but admitted the chief Officers to kiss his hand, only refused that favor to
M. G. Skippon, as being too great an enemy to his Majesty's Honor and safety.
ii v September 1644. Monday the 2. to Boconnock the Lord Mohuns again ii v
Wednesday the 4. to Liskerd Master Jeanes i vii Thursday the 5. to Tavistock,
the Lady Glanvils v xv Tuesday the 10. to Widey near Plymouth, yeoman Heales
house iv x Saturday 14. to Tavistock, the Lady Glanvils iii x Monday the 16. to
Oakchampton, Mr. Rottenburies i xii Tuesday the 17. to Excester, Bedford house
the Governors, at Crediton vi xx Monday the 23. to Chard, Mr. Barcrofts at
Honiton dinner vii xxvii Monday the last day to South Parrat, Mr. Gibs dinner
in the field i viii October 1644. Tuesday the 1. to Maiden Newton, Mr. Osbornes
dinner in the field i viii Wednesday the 2. to Sherborn lodge the Lord Digbies
dinner in the field vi xii Tuesday the 8. to Stalbridge the E. of Corks dined
there i v Wednesday the 9. to Stirmister Newton, Mr. Reeves dinner in the field
i iii Thursday the 10. to Brianstone near Blanford, Mrs. Rogers iv vii Monday
the 14. to Cranborn lodge the E. of Salisburies, dinner in the field i x
Tuesday the 15. to Salisbury, D. Sadlers Chancellor, dinner in a little Lodge
iii x Friday the 18. to Andiver, the White Heart, dinner in the field i xv
Saturday the 19. to Whitchurch, Mr. Brooks dinner in the field ii vii Monday
the 21. to Kings Clear, Mr. Towers dinner at VVhitchurch i v

Yet his Majesty's March from the West in October.
October 1644. Tuesday the 22. to New-bury, Master Dunce, dinner at Kings Clear
v. vi Sunday the 7. a great and second battle betwixt his Majesty's Army, and
the Parliaments, by the same hands his Majesty had disarmed and shown mercy to
at Lestichiel, wherein his Majesty had much the better of the day, and yet was
advised to desert the field, whereby -- etc. His Majesty marched to meet
Prince Rupert at Bathe, Prince Maurice, General Goring, and most of his
Majesty's household about 9. a clock that Sunday night marched from Denyngton
Castle to Wallingford, and the next day Monday the 28. came all to Oxford,
waiting for his Majesty i xxv

His Majesty's remarch from Bath to Oxford.
Nights, Miles. Sunday the 27. from Denington Castle marching all night, and on
Monday the 28. came to Bath, and there ii l Wednesday the 30. to Churchston a
widows house i Thursday last, to Cirencester, Sir William Masters Baronet i
xxvi November 1644. Friday the first, to Oxford supper, and there during
pleasure. A List of his Majesty's Marches from Oxford toward Denyngton Castle,
both to relieve it, and to draw off the Ordinance left there the 27. of October
before. Wednesday the 6. to Bullington green the Randes vouz dinner, Oxford
supper, where P. R. was declared General with great acclamation ii i Thursday
the 7. to Wallingford Colonel Blagues the Governor -- xii i Friday the 8. to
West Illesley the Bishop of Gloucester in comendum -- viii i Saturday the 9. to
Denington Castle where was a great skirmish with the Parliamentires in Newbury
field, whence we retreat (...) lay on the Castle all night -- viii i November.
1644. Sunday the 10. to Lamborn Mr. Garrets -- viii ii Tuesday the 12. to
Marlingborough the Lord Seymers -- viii v Sunday the 17. to Hungerford the Bear
-- viii ii Tuesday the 19. to Shelford, Master Brownes, The Kings birthday --
vi ii Thursday the 21. to Charlton near VVantage, Sir George VVilmot -- vi i
Friday the 22. to Farington, Sir Robert Pyes -- vii ii Saturday the 23. to
Oxford dinner, and there during pleasure -- xiv all

Anno xxi. Regis Caroli, May.
A List of his Majesty's several Marches, beginning upon Wednesday the vij. of
May, Anno Dom. 1645.
Nights, Miles. WEdnesday the 7. From Oxford Woodstock -- i vi Thursday the 8.
to Stow ith wole, Master Jones -- i xiii Friday the 9. to Evisholme, Alderman
Martins -- i xii Saturday the 10. to Inkeborow, the Vicaridge -- i vi Sunday
the 11. to Droitwicth Master Barrets -- iii ix Wednesday the 14. to
Cofton-hall, Mrs. Skinners, Hawkesley-house taken by P.M. in our march a
Garrison -- i x Thursday the 15. to Hemly near Wolverhampton, Mr. Wars -- i xii
Friday the 16. to Bishberry near Sturbridge, Mr. Grosvenors -- i vi Saturday
the 17. to Chetwin near Newport, Mr. Pigots -- iii xii Tuesday the 20. to
Beaton near Drayton, Mr. Churches -- ii viii Thursday the 22. to Park-hall near
^tone, Mr. Cromptons -- ii x Saturday the 24. to Eaton ith Clay, Sir Tho.
Millwares -- i x Sunday the 26. to Tutbury dinner, Lord Loughborow -- ii vi
Tuesday the 27. to Ashby de la zouch E. of Huntingdons -- i ix Wednesday the
28. to Coats near Loughborow, Sir H. Skipwiths -- i ix Thursday the 29.
Remarched to Elstone near Leicester, which we faced with Soldiers, the R.
defaced with fire -- ii x Saturday the last, to Leicester, which was taken by
his Majesty at 2 mane soldiers rewarded with the plunder, the slane equal on
both sides, the Countess of Devonshire we demolished with fire -- iv iii June
1645. Wednesday the 4. to Wistow, Sir Richard Halfords -- i v Thursday the 5.
to Lubenham near Harborow, Mr. Collins -- ii vii Saturday the 7. to Daventree
the Wheat sheaf from whence Oxford was relieved from a siege, and victualled --
vi xiv Friday the 13. Remarched again to Lubnam, Mr. Collins -- i xiv Saturday
the 14. An alarm afrighted the King and Army from Lubnam at 2 a clock in the
morning to Harborow the Generals quarter, thence about 7 toward Naseby, where
the Parliaments Army quartered, rashly fought with them, were utterly defeated
through the cowardice of the horse, which fled to the walls of Leicester 16.
miles, never faced nor rallied till there, whereby many of the horse, all the
foot were either slain or taken prisoners, with some of his Majesty's servants,
all the Ordinance, Ammunition, the Kings stuff, Houshold-carriages, and all the
Baggage of the Army were totally lost, the Parliament having the clearest
victory given them from the beginning; the King himself in person being
necessitated, with his own troop only to charge through their body for his
escape; from ^eicester we marched to Ashby de la zouch in the night, and came
thither about break of day, and halted there -- i xxviij Nights, Miles.
Saturday the 15 to Lichfield, the Governors in the close i xij Monday the 16
to VVolverhampton, Mrs. Barnfords a Widow i xij Tuesday the 17 to Bewdley the
Angel ii xiii Thursday the 19 to Bramyard dinner, to Harriford supper xii xxiv
July 1645. Tuesday the first, to Campson dinner Mr. Pritchards, to Abergeveny
supper, Mr. Guncers. iii xv Thursday the 3 to Ragland supper, Marquis of
Worcester xii vii Wednesday the 16 to Tredeger dinner, Cardiffe supper Sir T.
Tirrels defraid at the Countries charge i xx Thursday the 17 to Tredegar, Sir
William Morgans to bed i viii Nights. Miles. Friday the 18 to Ragland dinner,
etc. On Tuesday the 22 to Mr. Moors of the Creek near Black-rock, and came
back to Ragland, supper but came in so late as made us doubtful of his
majesty's return; the Scots approach, and our own causeless apprehension of
fear, made us both demur and doubt, on the first what to resolve, and in the
latter how to steer our resolutions, which involved us in a most disasterous
condition, etc. vi xii Thursday the 24. From Ragland to Mr. Mores of the Creek
to pass over at the black-rock for Bristoll, but his Majesty sitting in
council, and advising to the contrary, marched only with his own servants and
troop, that night to Newport on Uske lay at Mistress Pritties i xxi Yet his
Majesty's March in July, 1645. Friday the 25 to Rupperra, Sir Philip Morgans iv
v Tuesday the 29 to Cardiffe dinner, the Governors at our own charge vii vii
Nights, Miles. August 1645. Tuesday the 5 to Glancayah Mr. Pritchers dinner, at
Brecknock the Governor, supper i xxix Wednesday the 6 to Gurnevit Sir Henry
Williams, dinner to old Radnor supper a yeomans house, the Court dispersed i
xviii Thursday the 7 to Ludlow Castle no dinner, Col. Woodhouse i xiv Friday
the great fast the 8 to Bridgenorth, Sir Lewis Kirkes the Governors i xiv
Sunday the 10 dinner near Wolverhampton in campis, at Lichfield supper the
Governors in the close ii xxii Tuesday the 12. to Tutbury castle pr. in camp.
and lying at the Lord Loughbrows i xii Wednesday the 13 Ashborn in the Peake, Mrs
Cakaines i xiv Thursday the 14 to Chattisford near Bakewell, E. of Devonshires
i xiv Friday the 15 to Welbeck Marquess of Newcastles ii xii Monday the 17 to
Edlington Master Bosviles i xi Nights, Miles. Monday the 18 day, to Doncaster
the three Cranes ii iii Wednesday the 20 to Redford, master Lane a Lawyer i xiv
Thursday the 21 to Newark the Lord Danecourtes i xiv Friday the 22 to Belvoyre
the E. of Rutlands i xii Saturday the 23 to Stanford the George i xii Sunday
the 24 to Huntington the George i xvi Monday the 26 to Woborn the E. of
Bedfords ii xxi Wednesday the 27 to Ascot near Winge E. Carnarvous i xx
Thursday the 28 to Oxford at ChristChurch and there ii xx A second List of his
Majesty's Marches from Oxford on Saturday the 30 of August, 1645. SAturday the
30 to Morton Hin the March white Heart i xxiv Sunday the last, no dinner, supper
at Worcester, a cruel day iii xxiv September 1645. Wednesday the 3 to Bramyard,
Mistress Baynhams i x Thursday the 4 to Hereford dinner Bishops Palace i x
Friday the 5 to Lempster dinner at the Unicorn, to Webley supper the Unicorn i
xiv Saturday the 6 to Hereford dinner Bishops Palace i vii Sunday the 7 to
Ragland castle supper, 17. Monday, the 8 to Abergain dinner, Ragland supper,
14. Thursday the 11 to Ragland supper, Abergeveny dinner 14 vii xlv Sunday the
14 to Monmouth dinner the Governors, to Hereford supper, monday the 15 we
marched half way to Bramyard, but there was Leo in itinere, and so back to
Hereford again iii x Wednesday the 18. the Randezvous was at Athurstone there
dined, 10 miles, to Hamlacy supper, Lord Scudainores i xxvi Thursday the 18 to
a Randezvouz 5 miles from Hamlacy, with intention for Worcester, Poins and
Roscester in the passage, whereupon we remarched toward Hereford, so to
Lempster, then to VVebley, thence to Prestine, there halted at master Andrews;
this march lasted from 6 in the morning, till midnight, etc. i xxviii Friday
the 19 to Newtown Mr. Price, a long march over the mountains ii xiv Sunday the
21 to Llanvillin supper, dinner Mr. Prices i xx Monday the 22 to Chirke castle,
sir Jo. Watts the governors i xiv Tuesday 23 to Llangollen 4. to Wrixham 8 to
Chester; a great fight between Chester and Tarvin, the King Victor, but made no
use of it, leaving Chester unreleaved. This was performed by the same horse
that fled at Naseby on Rowton Heath against Coll. Poyntz, and the Army under
his command ii xx Thursday the 25. dinner at Chester, marched to Hawarden
Castle, ha^ted there thence, to Northop, to Skiviock, to Potvary, to Denbigh,
Will. Salsh. of Bohumbed Governor iii xx Sunday the 28 dinner at Denbigh,
supper late at Chirke castle i xviii Monday the 29 dinner at Chirk castle,
supper at Halton in Mongomery-shire Master Lloyds i xxvi Tuesday the last,
prand. in camp. supper at Bridgnorth the Governors ii xxx October 1645.
Thursday the 2 dinner at Ridgheath, the Randezvouz, supper at Lichfield the
Close i xxii Friday the 3 no dinner, at Tongue supper Mr. Suttons i xv Saturday
the 4 no dinner, at Newarke supper Lord Danecourts ix xxvi Sunday the 12 to
Tuxfords the white Heart i xii Monday the 13 dinner in the field, at Welbeck
supper Marquess Newcastle i xii Tuesday the xiv. no dinner at Newarke, supper
Lord Danecourts xviii xii November 1645. Monday the 3 day of November, Anno
Dom. 1645. His Majesty about a 11 a clock at night, went out of Newark,
marched all that night, all the next day being Tuesday at 12 a clock that
night, halted at Codsbury, Wednesday about 10 a clock in the morning came to
Banbury, made an halt and dined there at the castle, and afterward the same
Wednesday the 5 of November about 5 a clock in the Evening came to Oxford to
supper, and continued there during pleasure iv xc

His Majesty went from Oxford the 27 of April 1646. toward Newark to the
Scottish Leaguer there, but in regard of the privateness of his going away,
Oxford being at that time beleagured by Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, and the
fewness of his attendants, being at the most but two, we have no certainty
where he stayed by the way, but shortly after he appeared in the Scots Army,
who pretended to protect him from his English Rebbels and for the better
securing his Majesty's Person from danger as was pretended they stayed not long
after at Newarke, but by easy marches removed with his Majesty's Person from
Newarke to Newcastle, where the solemn Argument between his said Majesty and
Master Henderson happened concerning Episcopasie, and Church Government, to his
Majesty's everlasting Honor. But such was the horrid perfidy of those
Treacherous Scots, that in stead of the expected safety of his Majesty's
Person, Judas like for money, (though a far greater sum) sold and delivered
their Sovereign LORD and KING, into the hands of his English Rebels, who by
this means had under God a power to resettle the Kingdoms Peace: But they were
blinded to their own destruction; and having taken the Lords Anointed in their
pits, they now used him as they listed, carried him whither they pleased, and
indeed treated him no otherwise then as their Prisoner, for with a strong Guard
of Horse and Foot in the month of February 1646. the depth of Winter, they
begin to remove him from Newcastle in manner following:

His Majesty's Gests from Newcastle to Holdenby in February 1646.
Nights. Miles. 3 DAy from Newcastle to Durham i xii 4 From thence, to Aukeland
i 5 From thence, to Richmond i 6 From thence, to Rippon ii 8 From thence, to
Wakefield i 9 From thence, to Rotheram i 10 From thence, to Mansfield i 11
From thence, to Nottingham i xii 12 From thence, to Leicester i xvi 13 From
thence, to Holdenby dur. plea.

Long had not his Sacred Majesty continued there, but he was by a part of the
Army under one Joyce, violently taken from thence, and brought to his Honor of
Hampton Court; where for a while he seemed to begin to reassunie his Pristine
Majesty, being admitted to see and to be seen; but Cromwell fearing the
frequencie of so great resort might spoil his Traiterous designs with much
Serpentine craft and devilish subtlety, persuaded and insinuated into his
Majesty's heart doubts and suspicions of mischief intended against him; the
only way for preventing whereof, he affirmed to be the withdrawing his Person
from thence, to a place of more strength and security, and to that purpose
nominated the Isle of VVight, to which place his Majesty led by the Innocence
of his spotless Conscience, was decoyed, and at his arrival found himself
overreached; for he was immediately secured by Colonel Hammond, who then was
Governor in the said Island, and kept a long time a prisoner there in the
Castle of Carisbrook; until afterward, upon the Petitions of most Counties of
England, a personal Treaty was appointed to be held in the said Isle at
Newport, for which end Commissioners were sent thither with Instructions, and
the Treaty begun, and prosecuted with so good effect, that his Majesty's
Concessions at that time were voted by the Parliament a sufficient ground to
proceed on for the settlement of the Peace of of the Kingdom. But here again,
his Majesty is violently and traitorously seized by the Army then under
Fairfax his command; by whom December the first, 1648. He was brought to Hurst
Castle in Hampshire, and there kept as a prisoner, till the 21. of the same
month, when he was brought to Winchester, thence the 23. to Windsor, where
for little time he stayed, attended by strong Guards of soldiers, till about
the 9. of January following; when they removed him toward London, and brought
him to his own House at Saint James's, and consequently to perfidious London,
(Oh unfortunate Monarch!) where not long after with hellish effrontery even in
despite of Heaven, at noon Day before His own House White Hall, in the open
street with armed multitudes of soldiers, they Sacrilegiously murdered that
Blessed though unfortunate Prince) CHARLES the First;

There being actually guilty of that horrid murder, by giving Sentence, and
signing the Warrant for his beheading.
John Bradshaw, President. John Lisle, William Say, Oliver Cromwell, Henry
Ireton, Sir Hardresse Waller, Valentine Walton, Thomas Harrison, Edward Whaley,
Thomas Pride, Isaac Ewers, Lord Gray of Groby, Sir John Danvers Knight, Sir
Thomas Maleverer Bar. Sir John Bourchier Knight. William Heveningham, Alderman
Pennington, William Purefoy, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, John Blackiston,
Gilbert Millington, Sir William Constable Bar. Edmond Ludlow, John Hutchinson,
Sir Mich. Livesey Bar. Robert Titchbourne, Owen Roe, Robert Lilburn, Adrian
Scroop, Richard Deane, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius
Holland, John Carey, John Jones, Miles Corbet, Francis Allin, Peregrine Pelham,
John Moore, John Aldred, Henry Smith, Humphrey Edwards, Gregory Clement, Thomas
Woogan, Sir Gregory Norton Knight. Edmond Harvy, John Venn, Thomas Scot, Thomas
Andrews Alderman, William Cawly, Anthony Stapley, John Downs, Thomas Horton
Thomas Hammond, Nicholas Love, Vincent Votter, Augustine Garland, John Dixwel.
George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave,
Thomas Wait.
Counselors Assistant to the Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
King; Dr. Dorislaus, Mr. Ask, Mr. Steel Attorney General, Mr. Cook Solicitor
General, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Phelps Clerks to the Court.

Officers of the Court.

Sergeant Dandy Sergeant at Arms, Colonel Humphrey Sword Bearer.

Messengers, Dore-keepers and Criers, were these, viz.

Mr. Walford, Mr. Radley, Mr. Pain, Mr. Powel, Mr. Hull, Mr. King.

Sir Hardress Waller, Coll. Harrison Commissary Genenerall Ireton. Coll. Deane,
and Coll. Okey, appointed the place to be the street before White Hall, and the
time the 30. of January.

FINIS.

