THE Dissenting Casuist: OR, THE SECOND PART OF A DIALOGUE BETWEEN PREJVDICE, a
Dissenting Country Gentleman, AND REASON, a Student in the University.

BEING I. A clear Justification of the Execution of the Laws against
Dissenters. II. A Comparison of the Arguments on both sides concerning Monarchy
in general. III. Concerning an Elective Kingdom, or whether a Lawful Successor
or true Heir upon any Misdemeanors may be excluded.


Saepe etiam Stultus opportuna loquitur. LONDON, Printed for T. Sawbridge, at
the Three Flower de Luces in Little Britain. 1682.

TO THE READER.
THE first Part of this Dialogue (being not above three Sheets) was designed
only by way of Preface to this; I being forced to dig upon Rubbish, before I
could come to their Mine of Gold: but really if you are impartial, you will
conclude with me, that this is mere Rubbish too. If in the first Part they were
represented as gross Fools, they must thank themselves for it, not me. If
people talk idly, I cannot help it: I am sure if you will take the pains to
keep them company, you may hear the same every day. But Ugliness does not care
to have its Picture drawn. I am no common Pamphlettier, neither do I at all
delight in it; being very well satisfied in my Conscience, that the Works of
our Tribe will never be sent to Foreign Courts, or translated into another
Language: I believe it is with most of them as it is with the Poets, they first
get the Itch of writing in their Fingers, (being perhaps an Infection from the
Pen they hold) and then it presently spreads over their whole Bodies, so that
they can never be at quiet till they are scratching upon Paper.

My design is only for the good of my Country; but if I signify but little
toward it, my Zele and Loyalty will be commended.

This Discourse is not levelled against any particular man, but against all
their Arguments that have been, are at present, or are to come; and that is a
bold word you will say, but read and judge.

I have engaged with their Champions, condescended to the little ones, and
resolving (as much as in me lies) to clear the Country of all sorts of Vermin,
I have dived into Stews, Haylofts, and Boghouses. If I have not been very exact
in my Quotations on the Margin, I suppose every Author can find his own words
out. I am sure I have not abused or misinterpreted his Assertions. Pardon pray
the Printers Errata, and I am

Your very Humble Servant, T. W.
June 20. 1682.
The Dissenting CASUIST: OR, The Second Part of a Dialogue between Prejudice a
Dissenting Country Gentleman, and Reason a Student in the University, etc.
Prej. Come, Sir, I am desirous of entering into a second Discourse with you;
the Distraction of the Times makes me thoughtful, so that I find I am forced by
my Conscience and good Nature to raise up as many Arguments as is fit and
convenient for a man in my mean capacity. I keep several Persons in pay,
sending them out to Taverns, Coffee-houses, etc. to see if there is any thing
more to be gleaned and pic'kd up toward the maintenance of our Cause, and the
heartning on of the Righteous, that they may not have reason to say, they are
weary of these Sh -- -- Sh -- -- te
Carryings on. And truly I think my self as Loyal as he that keeps a Regiment
of Soldiers at his own charge, and is hourly at his Majesty's Service. Well
then, first, I say you Crape Gown-men are rank Papists, downright Devils,
though you hide your cloven Feet, though for the present you are pleased to put
on the Garments of the Angels of Light. Your Pride, Ambition, Covetousness,
etc. show that you are possessed. The Restoration of the Abbey Lands, and the
pretended Riches of the Church, Cardinals Caps, etc. the dear embraces of the
gaudy painted Whore, are the Objects of your furious and extravagant Loyalty.
Your Covetousness is so great, and A Scandalous Libel called Speculum
Crape-Gownorum Part. 2.
there is such a uumerous Fry of you, that hunger and thirst after Maintenance,
and so few bones in the Nation, that you snarl at all who do but pretend to
share with you. We may easily discern whether the Good Pious Nonconformist
Ministers, or the Priests of Baal, are the truest Levites, or the chosen of the
Lord; the Actions of the former being wholly, and without the consideration of
worldly Gain, directed to the Spiritual edification and recovery of Souls, to
the preaching of the Lord Christ, etc. whereas the Zeal and Divinity of the
latter must never mount or fly abroad, unless it be upon Wings that are adorned
with silver and golden Feathers, unless for every Scripture Sentence so much
Money is paid down as may recover the Preachers Spirits, render him in good
Plight, that he may come up with the greater Assurance and Eagerness the next
Week.


Reas. I do not understand what you mean by all this Ribble Rabble, unless
(that in your Judgment) it is a thing unbecoming and irreligious, that our
Ministers do not preach, and perform their Spiritual Offices in any place,
without a Promised Maintenance and Salary, or without Respect to things that
are sordid and temporal. I am very far different from this Opinion, or do in no
wise think it unbecoming, or that a care for a competency of living deserves
the Epithet of Sordid. We know that Men's Minds are now grown more carnal and
sensual than ever, that really Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, nor in the
Hearts of worldly men; that "Interest and Riches is the only God adored here,
that the Man that can show a good Face, and an Acquittance for so much Money,
shall gain more Respect and Honor than Virtue it self if she be naked. Alas!
we have very few Philosophers amongst us that will admire Wisdom in her Rags. A
Knavish Mahomet if he sets in a Throne shall gain more Followers than a True
Christ if he once lay in a Manger. Men will scarce be convinced by the Doctrine
of that Person who does owe him Money, or who is beholding to him for his
Bread. It Is very requisite, yea and necessary, that they should be endowed with
the greatest Plenty both of Riches and Honor; First, because as I told you, it
gains them a greater Respect from their Auditors, who on this Consideration
will more easily yield up their Hearts and Attention. Secondly, because there
will be greater Encouragements, where they may not be liable to ill Fortune,
and the Crosses and many Accidents of the World, or have their Studies
interrupted, or that glorious design of making men eternally happy, swallowed
up in Poverty. We often see what Authority the Presence of a Bishop has over
his vast Congregation; whilst perhaps the Poor Curate is attended only by a few
serving Maids, and very drowzily hearkened to, though perhaps his Doctrine may
be the same, or every whit as good. In my small reading I have found that
heretofore Justin.
Idem fuit Rex and Sacerdos, and that many like Aaron have almost went hand in
hand with the Moses or supreme Magistrate. I would not have you think by any
means, that I am willing they should be encouraged to Luxury, or an ignoble
Ease, or be pampered in any Vice; for, I suppose all this while if they should
not have the discretion to manage themselves according to the strict Rules of
Morality and Christianity, that there is a King and a Power above 'em, that
will see they shall be otherwise disposed of. If men were truly judicious, and
would respect them merely for their Function, there would be no need of these
external Daubings to set them off, none of these gildings on our Altars.


Prejud. Methinks they should be contented with the Spec. Crap. p. 6.
Tithes of Unity, Love, and Charity.


Reas. Yes, if men would give it them, I am sure they would then rejoice as
much in Self-denial and Want, (although I suppose a Self-denial in their
Affluence too) and think themselves as great as they possibly could in all
their Glories. I am sure you will not think I can have any other design than to
speak my Judgment and Opinion. I am ashamed to see a reverend grey-headed man,
profound in Learning, exact in Morality and purest Piety, after many years toil
and labor, become only a Chaplain to a toyish Lord; and then to be thrust up
in a Garret, set at the lower end of the Table, rise at second course, and be
thought only fit company for the Steward and Butler. I confess it might be
more pardonable thus to use a young, raw, slovenly Fellow, who has crept into
the Clergy unawares, whose mean Education and Dullness may somewhat deserve
this; yet methinks they should not choose a person, whose Office is so sacred,
for Formality sake, or that they may have occasion sometime or other to deride
him. The Superciliousness of these Patrons make the Clergy so much despised,
and the name of Parson to become so scandalous. They do it that they may be
more securely debauched, and exalt themselves thus, that it may be thought
impudence in the Fellow that says Grace to advise or recall them. Their wiser
Ancestors did think it Preferment and Honor to enter into that Sacred Office;
whereas these being foolishly ashamed of it, make us guilty of Jeroboams sin,
and for the 1 Kings 13. 33.
most part force us to take in the meanest of the People. If you would
thoroughly weigh these things, you would be far from having them stripped of what
they have, or that they should follow the pretended self-denial of the Saints,
but that rather they should be higher advanced and honored.


Prejud. This Courtier-like way of yours, in standing upon these Punctilio's
Honor, this impatiency of Affronts, shows that your Minds are tied to your
carnal Hearts, that Honor and Preferment is your only aim. The meekness of
our Brethren, their Philosophical neglect of the World, will teach and instruct
you otherwise. They think themselves as Servants to all, and know that by being
the least, they do become the greatest; that if they themselves do not provide
Scrip and Shoes, it will be provided for them.


Reas. Apology for Ninconformist Ministry.
I understand you cannot or will not see so far as other men. Mr. Baxter very
proudly tells you, he refused a Bishopric, and confesses he has so good
natured and so kind a Flock already under him, who allowed him a very competent
and large Maintenance. They are for pulling down Bishoprics, and for dividing
Inheritances, that all of them, who are now excluded as Rebels and Traitors,
may then come in for a share. Their sin of separating from us, as I shall prove
to you anon, is wilful and devilish; Ibid.
and if so, according to their own Confession, common Drunkards, Swearers,
Fornicators, are rather to be tolerated in a Commonwealth. Do you think that
these have the spirit of meekness in them, or the least spark of true Piety,
who fly in the faces of the Kings Officers, when they come to disturb their
seditious and disloyal Meetings; contend with them as if 'twas their
Inheritance, openly defy Heaven and the Ordinance of an Onipotent God? "Not
but that an Ass resists his Master as much by standing still or running back,
as if he had kicked at him. If their Conscience tells them they must needs
preach, and by no means hide their Talent, if dispensing the Word is their
only aim, let them go and plant the Gospel amongst the Indians, where perhaps
there will be no Authority to resist, no commission of such deadly sins. But
they object and say, they do not understand their Language, and if they should
try at it, they could arrive but half Ibid.
way, speak it imperfectly and very disorderly, which would be apt to procure
derision and disesteem. What do these deep sanctified holy men start at such
trivial things, who profess themselves ready every minute to undergo
Imprisonment and Death for the Name of the Lord Jesus? Away, it is such nonsense
and ill arguing that a Boy may discover it. I believe we must think of a
Pensylvania for them too, and ship them off by the next fair Wind. I am as much
against Persecution as any man; there is no one pitieth the poor Protestants in
France more than I do; but I am far from calling the execution of the Laws
against our Dissenters Persecution, yea it is a thing necessary and
commendable, without which true Piety can never flourish, nor Church and State
ever be at quiet. Those in France were called by their King, the meek, the
willing, the best Subjects in the world, as if he was sorry his Religion forced
him to such hard usage; whereas of our false Protestants it has been long ago
declared, that they are a perverse generation, and that for Subjects it is
impossible to have worse. Believe it Sir, it is true as a Good Divine has said
before Dr. Sprat Sermon. Apr. 20, 82.
me, There is scarce any one that adheres to this Party, but either he, or some
of his near Relations, have been already forgiven; they carry about with them
the black guilt, not only of Rebellion, but of an ungrateful Rebellion after
Pardon received: A sin which the Devil himself is not capable of committing.


Prejud. Sir, I will not believe one word what you say; but pray did not Peter
and Paul preach the Gospel though Baxt. Apol.
they were forbidden by the Jews that were in Authority? I tell you, if their
Conscience assures them that they are in the right, and that they must preach
the Gospel, the Authority of Kings and Emperors to the contrary signifies
nothing: We must obey God rather than Man.


Reas. We must obey God in a good cause rather than Man in a bad one; but if we
can obey God and Man too, and do not, we are in a very desperate condition. But
S. Peter and Paul knew and had assurance from the immediate hand of God, that
it was his will that they should preach the Gospel, and that the Commands of
the Jews were in no wise to be obeyed. But I cannot see how this Instance
pleads for you, who have no such assurance and command to resist Authority. And
that you have no such manifest assurance, that you cannot pretend Conscience in
this case, that your sin of separating from us is wilful and devilish, and ill
natured, as I promised you a little before, I shall come now to prove it. I
suppose you are not ignorant that Conscience is divided into three parts.

First, into a gainsaying or resolved Conscience. Bishop Sanderson.


Secondly, into a scrupulous Conscience. And,

Thirdly, into a doubtful Conscience.

I mean by a resolved or gainsaying Conscience, a Conscience where there is
true grounds, plain and manifest Texts of Scripture to back it on, or plead for
it. Now that Dissenters cannot say it is out of this Conscience they resist,
that they cannot show any true grounds, any manifest and plain Texts of
Scripture, I shall say no more but appeal to their Writings, and to the whole
World, if it be not true; Whether this their grand Reason, We must obey God
rather than Man, does determine whether the thing commanded is lawful or not
lawful, whether it is enough to make a resolved or gainsaying Conscience, or is
any true Argument for their Nonconformity.

A scrupulous Conscience is that where the Conscience does incline one way,
where it is not fully resolved, and in every particular satisfied, as being
built only upon Probabilities.

A doubtful Conscience is that where the Scales hang even, without inclining
one way or the other, so as the weak and fickle man cannot well resolve which
way he should take.

Be therefore in either of these the Nonconforming Conscience, why I say the
Injunction of Authority does overrule either of them. I will give you advantage
in an Example; Suppose a Prince commands his Subjects to serve in Ibid.
a War that is unjust, where there may appear to the understanding of the
Subject great likelihoods of such Injustice; why I say for all this the Subject
is bound to fight in this quarrel, nay he is deep in Disloyalty and Treason if
he refuse the Service, whatsoever pretensions of Conscience he makes for such a
refusal. And this I am confident you your selves will acknowledge. Neither need
he trouble himself that he shall bring the guilt of innocent blood upon his
head, for the blood that is unrighteously shed in that Quarrel, he must answer
that set him to work, not he that spilt it. And truly it is a great wonder to
me, (I speak it without passion) that men that are able to weigh the force of
Precepts and Reasons, that bind Inferiors to yield obedience to Superiors,
should be so nonsensical and irrational, as to be otherwise minded in our case,
which is of the like nature. When there is a certainty and an uncertainty, we
must let the uncertainty go, and cleave to that which is certain. The general
Rule is certain, that we must obey the Magistrate in all things not contrary to
the will of God; but the particular is uncertain, whether Conformity commanded
by the Magistrate be contrary to the will of God or no, (I say it is uncertain
with you, because I suppose you are scrupulous and doubtful of it.) Wherefore I
say, if you cleave to an uncertainty before a certainty, persist in
Nonconformity, uncertain with you whether lawful, rather than to a certain and
positive Command of submitting to Superiors; I say you show your selves to be
wilfully blind, wilfully irrational, your sin to be devilish and ill natured,
the Proposition that I was to prove.

Good God! that the Apostle should command thee positively and plainly to obey
for conscience sake, and thou should infer from hence, that thou should
disobey for conscience sake too. That you should submit your selves to 1 Pe. 2.
13, 16.
every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake: As free, and not using your liberty
for a cloak of maliciousness, is the earnest desire of S. Peter and God himself.


Prejud. But, Sir, for all your haste; if you affirm that an uncertainty and a
thing controvertible, (the Supreme Power determining the case) does find the
Subject not to dispute the Authority or his Obedience; I say you are in a
mistake. For all those Articles of Faith, as Worshipping Images, Charge of the
Tory Plot maintained, p. 4.
Transubstantiation, etc. are controvertible, und uncertain, and in dispute
between us and the Papists; but though the Authority of Angels should command
me to believe and comform to these things, I ought not to do it.


Reas. You must understand me in things indifferent in the matter of
Ceremonies, and the like, where the Conscience does not gainsay, and is not
otherwise resolved. Now that I should not consent to the Worshipping of Images
and Transubstantiation, etc. I have clear positive proof, the one being
expressly forbidden in the second Commandment, the other in a clear Text of
Scripture, and being repugnant to my Senses and common Reason. And this is the
sense of the Mr. L'Estrange.
Author, whom the Pamphlettier pretends to bring to an Absurdity, being first
pleased to mistake his meaning.


Prejud. I have met and read of Arguments, that seem to make it out, that our
Dissenting Brethren act in all things according to Divine Truth; that the
Execution of the Laws is a downright injury, abominable injustice and
persecution. And though I have scraped them out of a scandalous Libel, they
seem to be pretty tolerable. First he says, that Spec. Crape.
the generality of the Dissenters are good men, and that they fully answer the
description of a good man, Psalm 15. that is, they behave themselves dutifully
and obediently toward the Civil Magistrate, and justly toward their
Neighbors. And though perhaps he cannot justify every individual person,
nevertheless he hopes you will not be so imprudent as to throw a whole Quarter
of Wheat away, for the mixture of a Peck of Tares.


Reas. The whole Body of them resist and murmur at the Authority that commands
them to raise their Meetings, and therefore how can you have the impudence to
say, they are dutiful and obedient toward the Civil Magistrate?

One swears the D. of Y. is a Traitor, that he fired the City, nay that the
King himself had a hand in it; makes it his business to undervalue men, and
undo them in their Credits, giving out that they are broken and bankrupt, etc.
Another that was formerly a Crony to S. Stephen sends B. the Hopmerchant.
Hop Poles to be turned into Protestant Flails, drinks to the Memory of a pious
Traitor, and nothing but Blood and Wouuds if the Company refuses it. Then there
is another with a long Chin swears all the Bishops are Papists, and that he in
time will strip them of their Lawn Sleeves, and make them look as ridiculous as
so many Jack Daws without their Feathers. And here is one that being weary of
secret Faction, comes forth boldly, and prosecutes people at Law for Scandalum
Magnatum, and then if he thinks he has vexed and tormented them, he will go no
further, will let fall his Suit, and for half a minute be at quiet. He grins
like a Dog, and in the evening walks about the City, and like a Lion seeks
whom he may devour. Here is a Company sent to Taverns and Coffee Houses to
dispute the case, to blow the Coals with a stronger Breath, and if it be
possible to make it flame out. These are to make Bonfires, raise Tumults, and
as if it were a perpetual Whitsun Ale, they stop every Passenger, force him to
drink a Health to My Lord -- and The good old Cause his Lady. And will any one
make me believe, that these are not Juglers, Baxters, and Owens, and Humble
Moderators, etc. behind the Curtain, that guide these Puppetae by a secret
Spring, and send them dancing into the world?

A Conventicle in short is a Nursery for packed Juries, Injustice, and
Rebellion; and to invert what you say, a Quarter of Tares, and scarce a Handful
of Wheat in it.

But if there should be any good men, any Gouges now See the Trial of Char. I.
his Judges.
alive amongst them, they must fare as some of our late Kings foolish Judges,
who were only Hearers, and did sit only for Company, but were hanged (though
against their wills) for Company too.


Prejud. But the man says, they do exercise according to the Liturgy of the
Church of England.

The Liturgy of the Church of England contains no more Spec. Crape.
than only Truth; The Dissenters speak and pray according to Truth: Ergo --

The first Proposition you your selves will grant, for if the Liturgy contains
any thing besides Truth, it contains a Lie, etc. which you will never own. And
then that the Dissenters preach nothing but Truth, nay the Truth of Truth,
Divine Truth all the world will grant.


Reas. No, I my self will never grant it. I will show you a Book called The
Dissenters Sayings one of these days, where if you don't find their Doctrien to
be faithfully collected, and in them cursed Lies, the Lies of Lies, Hollish
Lies, I will be contented to take that punishment upon me, which the Dissenters
deserve. But as to the Argument, the Author shows he had forgot his Logic at
this time; there be two Brethren of it, and very much like it in another
Author: If Impotency be a sufficient Tory Plot, p. 15. and 19.
cause for dissolving the sacred tie of Marriage, because the main end of
Marriage, the propagating Mankind, is thereby frustrated; it may be equally
reasonable to debar the D. of Y. the Espousal (a pretty Conceit) of the
Government, who is perverted to an utter incapacity of answering the ends of
it. Again; If a Papist can exclude (unlawfully) a Protestant, a Protestant may
(unlawfully) exclude a Papist. And of another Author, whom I have forgot at
present, that would prove the Scripture not to be the Word of God, because the
Word was made Flesh: Ergo --

This by the by; now to the main point. If the Liturgy contains nothing but
Truth, they that speak and pray according to Truth, speak and pray according to
the Liturgy. If this Glass contains nothing but Wine, he that drinks up the
Wine swallows down the Glass. Look upon your Argument a second time, and tell
me if you dare that there is Consequence in it. A man that stands upon Bow
Steeple, and repeats the Commandments, that preaches. Christ and him crucified,
in Highways and Ditches, speaks and prays according to Truth; yet
notwithstanding this person shall be looked upon as irregular and profane, and
punished accordingly. In short, the Liturgy of the Church of England is a
certain Form and Manner agreed upon by Authority for the better Utterance of
the Truth, and therefore he only that acts according to this Form and Manner,
comes to Church, etc. does act according to the Liturgy of the Church of
England.


Prejud. Sir, this is an Argument that we have cherished for these many years,
and I am sure it is impossible for you to confute it in so short a time as you
pretend to do.

We lose our Christian Liberty if we must be forced to obey this Form. We lose
our Christian Liberty, when by Human Laws things indifferent are determined
either the one way or the other: Now Ceremonies and Liturgy are indifferent
things, if they were not determined by Authority; And why Ecclesiastical
Constitutions should 1 Arg.
determine us precisely to one side in the use of indifferent things, which God
and Christ have left free, I know no Reason.

By inducing a necessity upon the thing they enjoin, 2 Arg.
they take upon them to alter the nature of things, and make that to become
necessary which is indifferent, which God only can do.

It makes these indifferent things of absolute necessity unto 3 Arg.
Salvation, forasmuch as it is necessary to Salvation to do that which he is
bound in Conscience to do, (and you say we must in Conscience obey Superiors;)
so that by this device Surplice, Organs, Kneeling at the Communion, Bowing at
the Name of Jesus, etc. are necessary to Salvation. I say, all this is a grand
Imposition upon Christian Liberty.


Reas. I will answer these Arguments with as much brevity as I can, and
abstract from the large Discourse which Bishop Sanderson affords you.

To the first Argument I answer, That the determining of any thing in unam
partem, takes not away a man's Liberty. For the Liberty of a Christian to any
thing indifferent Bishop Sanderson.
consists in this, that his Judgment is thoroughly persuaded of the
indifferency of it; and therefore it is the determination of the Judgment in the
Opinion of the thing, not in the Use of it, that takes away Christian Liberty.
For Example: If my Friend invite me to Supper, shall I not promise him to come,
because the Liberty I had before to go or not go will be determined by making
such a Promise? It is a very vain power and indifferency, that may not be
brought into act or actually determined; but God made no power in vain, as is
long ago agreed upon both by Philosophers and Divines.

To the second Argument I answer, That the nature of the thing enjoined is not
changed, but still indifferent; though for some conveniences there is an Order
to use them added to that Indifferency.

To the third, It Is the Obedience that is necessary to Salvation, as being
immediately commanded by God, and not the things commanded, for they are still
indifferent. A Master commands his Servant to go to Market, or wear a Livery,
the Servant is bound in Conscience to obey his Master; but his going to Market,
or his wearing a Livery, the things supposed to be commanded, by every one must
be concluded to be indifferent, and not at all necessary to Salvation.


Prejud. It Is Popish to say, Humane Laws bind the Conscience as much as Divine.


Reas. The Papists teach this Doctrien not only in respect of the Obedience,
but of the things commanded; which we do only in respect of the Obedience.

I would desire again, that our Dissenters would consider, whether the pretense
of a purer Religion, or the loss of Christian Liberty or Conscience, will
excuse them. Corah's Rebellion was upon these pretenses, and though he Numb. 6.
was not actually in Arms, but did only associate against and separate from
the Government, yet God punished him with a most severe death.

Again, our Ceremonies and Methods were agreed upon Sir William Smiths Speech,
De. 5. 1981
by a Parliament, had the consent of both King and People. Which when I have
seriously thought on, raised my admiration, how any man can think himself
hardly dealt with, when he is required to comply to that, to which he had
before consented: or that he should think it reasonable that separate
Assemblies or public Conventicles, should be permitted in opposition to the
established Government. I cannot understand it otherwise, but that these
persons who frequent Conventicles, and give themselves up to be ruled and
directed by their Teachers, allow these Teachers both Infallibility and
Supremacy; and not only so, but also a Legislative Power, to make what Orders
they think fit, which is indeed to lose your Christian Liberty, and to make a
Prince and a Pope in every Congregation. Besides, these public Conventicles
proclaim our Divisions to the world, discover our weaknesses, and must needs
cause a potent neighboring Prince to cast his Eye upon us, who will not want
the suggestions of Ambition and Interest to try his Fortune; and if he should,
who can withstand him we being thus divided? Methinks the ill consequences
which may be foreseen to arise from such plain demonstrations of a divided
Nation, should prevail upon the most tender Conscience, not to be guilty of any
thing that brings such certain ruin to his King, Country, and Protestant
Religion; especially having Liberty according to Law, to exercise his Religion
in his own way, in his own house, with his own family, and an addition under
Five more; which indeed is too great a kindness, and more than they will ever
deserve?

If a Kingdom can be safe, when it has persons in it that Sir William Smiths
Speech, Apr. 24. 1682.
confederate for the mutual assistance of each other, upon all occasions, when
they will spare no pains or cost for the advancement of each others Interest,
when they scarce trade with any other but themselves, and have no manner of
commerce with any of the Church Party, or any Loyal man. If to set up a
Commonwealth in a Kingdom is safe, I desire they may enjoy themselves without
any further molestation; but if not, if on these accounts, we are in very
dangerous conditions, we must apply our selves to the Remedies, to the due and
strict Execution of the Laws to prevent it.

You see I don't insist upon old stories of 41, because some of you have been
so good or so cunning as to disown them; whatsoever I have mentioned is almost
at this very day to be seen. This is the time for Union, now or never; that
great Mountain, as you are pleased to term it, and that pretended hinderance, (
viz. the Obligation to renounce See the Act of Uniformity.
the Solemn League and Covenant) has its end; for it was to cease March 28.
1682. as you may see in the Act of Uniformity. If I be not deceived, Mr. Baxter
promised us when that time came, to throw off his Nonconformity, and convince
the world that he was naturally meek and peaceable, and that it was not
Obstinacy or a blind Prejudice that made him separate from us all this while. I
wish he would be as good as his word, and bring his Party with him, that Strife
and Janglings, Seditions and Rebellions, might die amongst us; that that Unity
might be preserved, which God looks upon to be his greatest Attribute, that Men
might not be forced to confess themselves Christans, that those ungrateful and
hard Laws might be wholly thrown by, which I am sure the Apostles themselves,
if they were alive, and in our Circumstances, would make use of.


Prejud. You are extremely out of the way, they are the only Christians in the
Nation; Popery had long ago come in upon us, had not their Pious, Godly Zeal
opposed it; though you maliciously aver, that it will never prevail, unless it
take Presbytery in it is hand, unless a Conventicle covers it: but all this
while you have spent your Forces against seditious Meetings, against the
Persons that separate from the Church, and yet you have as real Enemies that
lie unseen in your own Bosoms. As you told me heretofore that there were Popish
Tories and Protestant Tories, so I find there are Conventicle Whiggs and Church
Whiggs; these latter (though conforming to the Ceremonies of the Church, and
swallowing down every thing that is given to them) being as averse to the
Government as the former. Wherefore, since the bare Execution of the Laws
against Conventicles does in no wise reach them, or will stop their Mouths,
since you pretend to be so good and skillful in Expedients and Remedies, I
desire to be satisfied what your Art and Policy would be pleased to prescribe
in this Case.


Reas. Truly these are dangerous Enemies, and make us think them to be so, and
be the more concerned, because they are of our own Household. I am amazed at a
professed Knave, an impudent, barefaced Hypocrite, nay one that tells us
himself, though he embraces with one hand, he will stab with the other.

It would be looked upon as Injustice and Arbitrary Government, if such a Law
was enacted Now, as was heretofore in Rome, hindering private Cabals,
restraining all Tavern-Politicians; Sueton.
but they must thank themselves, if we fly to the utmost extremity of Justice,
rather than suffer our selves to be basely undone. But since we cannot force
them to a compliance, since they are so maliciously wise, and understand
themselves so far, as to sin within an hairs breadth of the Law, and come
within an inch of Treason, let us try if Arguments will signify any thing with
these white and black Traitors, these giddy Republicans, if spreading their
Errors before their Eyes will make them see their no-Interest and Folly.

We know (that besides their little Cavils and Pecks at See the 1st part of
this Dialogue.
the Ceremonies and Constitutions of the Church (which we have in our former
Discourse vindicated) that their two grand Topics are, whether a Free State
(as they call it) or a Commonwealth is not more convenient and more to be
desired than Monarchy. And secondly, Whether a Popish Successor, or a Successor
that does not please the humor of the People, for certain Misdemeanors,
cannot be Excluded? or, (which is almost the same) whether England is not an
Elective Kingdom? I shall not be over curious in these Points, or desire the
assistance of Cobweb Antiquity to lead me; but whatsoever of Reason or Religion
lies in my way I shall unfold it to you, having always thought, that though a
Custom is never so ancient, that it derives it is Pedigree from Adam, yet if it
is discovered to be sinful and inconvenient, that no one is obliged to follow
it.


Prejud. But to the Point, I say a Commonwealth is more to be desired than
Monarchy. I will argue only from the Conveniences of the one, and
Inconveniences of the other.

1 Arg. First, Monarchy professes it self accountable to none but God, so that
its very Nature is inclined to Tyranny; whereas a Commonwealth is a Government
styled by all Politicians, Free. There Is Venice and the United Provinces what
Wonders have they done! The first having stood a See the Plea against Monarchy,
printed in the year 1652.
Bulwark for above a thousand years against the Turk; and the latter from her
Infancy a Wall to the King of Spain's Enchroachments.

2 Arg. In a Monarchy, its Issue being married to Foreigners, the Crown may be
transferred from one Strangers Head to another, whereas in a Commonwealth, we
and our children may enjoy it.

3. Arg. God gave Kings to the People in his wrath, and that scandalous
Adoration usually given to Princes, had its beginning from the bitter root of
Idolatry.

4 Arg. Monarchs are commonly ambitious and covetous, ungrateful, swayed by the
foolishness of Women, and Favorites; whereas Many are not so apt to be
intoxicated Ibid.
with the fumes of Power and Flattery.

5 Arg. Kings are more in danger of violent Deaths; and it is observed in every
Family, within three or four Generations the Heir is an absolute Fool, whereas
a Senate never dies, and is perpetually wise. Ibid.


6 Arg. In a Monarchy the Kingdom may descend upon an Infant, and the
Succession may be long in dispute, and so the State must be without Government
till he comes to years and Discretion, whereas there is no such thing in a
Commonwealth.

I could reckon up several more inconveniences in Monarchy, but 'twould be
tedious to you and me too to recite them all: wherefore I shall only conclude,
that it is a mere Imitation and Ape of the Pope, the one being Vicar General
for things Temporal, the other for Eternal.


Reas. That Is only a little Rhetoric, for Kings and Monarchy was before ever
the Pope, or his pretended Predecessor S. Peter, was thought of. The hopes of a
share in Government, and that silly childish desire of Change, has prevailed
upon you. But that I may show you conveniences in Monarchy, and inconveniences
in a Commonwealth, I say,

1. In a Monarchy the private Interest is the same with the public. The
Riches, Power, Strength, Reputation of the King, arise only from the Riches,
etc. of the Subject; for if the Subjects be poor and scandalous, the King must
be so too. Whereas in a Commonwealth the private Interest being separated from
the public, each Senator shall snatch for himself and his Family, and lazily
broodingover his Bags, from the misery and leanness of the People grow fat and
happy.

2. All the conveniences that you will attribute to one General in an Army, as
having no Partner, does not force his Soldiers to Divisions, as they are not
molested with contrary Counsels and Commands, the very same you may conclude in
Monarchy.

3. There cannot be so much Secrecy in the Counsels of a Multitude, as there
is in a Monarchy; a thing which is so essential to the preservation of the
State.

4. In a Commonwealth there certainly will be Distraction in Opinions, so that
they will not help but hinder one another; and if there is no business for them
abroad, they will make War amongst themselves, and oppose one another for
particular Interests at home. So Venice and the United Provinces, (which by the
by do place several things wholly in their Duke and Prince of Orange) if Action
had not employed their thoughts, I dare engage would long ago have grown
Plotters and mischievous, and by a dozen years continued peace would have been
undone.

5. A Commonwealth is more inclining to Arbitrary Power and Tyranny than
Monarchy, though placed in one Man, that is mad, extravagant, foolish, and
Popish; and though he professes himself accountable to none but God. A
Commonwealth is more subject to evil Counselors and Flatterers, nay rather
than want they will flatter by turns to serve each others Ambition. The
Favorites and Kindred of Monarchs are but few, of an Assembly many; so that
every one will look to be respected, and desire that his Ambition and
Covetousness may be satisfied. Besides, they too profess themselves accountable
to none but God; for if they have the Power in their own hands, to whom can or
will they be accountable? Or, since they have so many Friends, who will be
forced more to Ingratitude and Knavery, or have more occasions to be Rogues
than these?

6. I wonder you a Republican should think it an inconvenience, that the
Monarchy should descend upon a Fool or an Infant, when for a while comes in a
Council or an Assembly, so much beloved and desired by you; from which he could
not have the understanding to dissent or contradict.

7. The Admission of a Foreiner and Stranger to a Kingdom is not always an
inconvenience; for that King James was a good Prince, that the Union of the
Kingdom is an happiness to us, every body will affirm.

8. Monarchs and Kings are certainly sent by God, good or bad; the former being
a blessing, the later a punishment, sent from Heaven upon a Nation. I know that
it is very common with some men, to infer from 1 Samuel c. 8. 1 Samuel c. 8.
that God sent Kings in his wrath, and as a curse and affliction to his People:
But if these men are any ways inclined to find out the Truth, they will see
that 'twas a Bad King that God sent in his wrath, the Government of Kings being
long before in other Nations, to which Israel (rejecting God for their Monarch
and Guide) desired to be like, and which provoked him to anger.

And then Solomon's saying, In the multitude of counselors Pro. 11. 14.
is much safety, has been very often in their mouths; as if Solomon, who was
himself a Monarch, had given advice that a Parliament Government and a
Commonwealth was the best. The meaning of the words is this, that it is
M^^slerus, (...), etc. Groti^^, etc.
good and convenient, when a Monarch goes to war, to listen to the advice of
many Friends, that so having all things laid open, he may choose that which
pleases him best, or is most necessary; that to proceed with discretion and
deliberation is the most probable means of safety.

But after all this I do acknowledge, that there is no Government without
inconveniences. Indeed I will grant you many to be in Monarchy; yet let the
inconveniences be never so great, I am sure Civil Wars, Amarchy, and Confusion,
will outweigh them all; which must necssarily be in a Commonwealth, and which
shall be the only Answer I give to your Arguments.

Monarchy has the fewest and least inconveniences, is the most honorable, most
exact, and most perfect Government, as being after the example of one God, who
first presented us a Pattern.

It Is true, if you imagine a Plato's Commonwealth, think that there is no such
thing as Interest in the world, that every one is for the public good, the
Government you plead for might seem somewhat plausible. But whilst Man carries
Nature about him, whilst Craft, Pride, Covetousness, and the Devil is in
Mankind; whilst there is scarce ten righteous persons amongst us, to stop the
judgment of Fire and Brimstone on our Nation, that Genesis 18.
false intoxicating Notion of Liberty that you have got, that desire of being
like beasts in a wilderness, wild and uncontrolled, that eagerness of a
Commonwealth Government, must necessarily cast us into ruin and destruction.


Prejud. But all this while I am for a Commonwealth. Now let us consider
whether England is not an Elective Kingdom, whether the true Heir or lawful
Successor, if not pleasing to the People, cannot be disinherited. Let us
consider, First, the Legality, and the Practice of ancient times. Secondly, the
Equity of it, and the unreasonableness of a contrary Doctrine.

1 Arg. As to the Legality and Practice of former times, I could tell you
stories from Egbert down to Mary Queen of Scots; so that I don't question but
every one will make Observations from it, that it has been the constant Opinion
of all Ages, that the Parliament of England had an unquestionable power to
elect, limit, restrain, and qualify the Succession as they please, and that on
all occasions they have put their power in practice; and that the Daniel, Henry
I.
Historian had reason for saying, that Seldom or never the third Heir in a
right descent enjoyed the Crown of England.

2 Arg. As to the Equity, and unreasonableness of a contrary Doctrine; I say it
tends directly to subvert the Government, and to put the Life of the King
regnant in the hands of the Successor. The next Heir may commit Rapes, Murders,
and Treasons, burn Cities, betray History of Succession for the Earl of H.
Fleets, may conspire against the Life of his Prince; and yet after all if he
can by flight or force save himself, till some of his Accomplices can get the
King dispatched, in spite of all Laws and Justice he must come to the Crown
and be innocent.

Though passive obedience, and the forgiving of private Tory Plot.
injuries, is laudable; yet Offenders and Offenses against the Government are
of another nature and consideration.

In case of Minority, Madness, Folly, the trial of the Kings Sufficiency, is
without question in the Parliament. And if that be allowed, shall wicked and
contumacious Plea for Elective Kingdom.
Principles and Practices be exempt from their cognizance; since the Fool or
Madman cannot be liable to so severe a Censure, as he that imploys his wit to
the destruction of the People?

The Crown is not a bare Inheritance, but an Inheritance History of Succession,
Ibid.
accompanying an Office of Trust; so that if any man's Defects render him
incapable of the Trust, he has forfeited his Inheritance.


Reas. To the first Argument I answer, First, though the disinheriting a true
Heir was the Practice of some of our Ancestors; yet from thence it does not
follow, 'twas legally and lawfully practiced, for (as you have heard several
times) Though a thing has been often done, it is not therefore well done.
Cromwell's Usurpation will not justify another hereafter; neither ought the
late High Court of Justice to be a Pattern and Model to Posterity how to erect
the like. Now whether the Precedents of our Forefathers were equitable or
righteous, comes under your second Head, where you pretend to show the Equity
of it, and the unreasonableness of a contrary Doctrine, to which I shall speak
anon.

But a while to the Legality of it. I am sure we can show more Precedents of
Kings holding their Crowns by right of Primogeniture, than they can to the
contrary; it being desired by most Monarchs of the Christian and Heathen World,
though sometimes a Factious and Disloyal Party grows to be so numerous, as to
bilk them in their Endeavors. And though we cannot determine who is the
nearest in the Family, in a long Line of Succession; (as sometimes I have heard
you object) yet whom we think in our Consciences to be the person, we must
submit to him as if he were the real true one.

The Bond of Allegiance, (whether sworn or not sworn to) being, as it were a
Law of Nature, perpetual and indispensable, shows the Illegality, which, though
perhaps it may not oblige us to Successors in the Lifetime of our present
Sovereign, yet at his Death it certainly enjoins us to see him safe in the
Throne, to look upon him as true Heir and lawful Successor, being the Issue of
the deceased Sovereign, and not to join with an equivocating Party, who do
interpret the Oath of Allegiance Tory Plot.
to mean him to be the Lawful Successor, whom a discontented sort of People are
pleased to call so, or set up.

Besides, though we should grant that 'twas the Practice of our Ancestors to
legitimate and illegitimate as they please, that they had the Power to Elect,
Limit, Restrain, or Qualify as they thought convenient, you will agree with
us, that 'twas by the Consent of King, Lords and Commons, or in case the King
was dead, of Lords and Commons; why how is this applicable to the case of the
D. of Y. where there was only the single Votes of the Commons, which never were
perfect Laws, or had the same force by themselves, as if the King and Lords had
consented with them? The King and Lords rejected the Bill, and above the third
part of the Nation thanked them for it; wherefore I conclude that the Practices
of our Ancestors are nothing to the purpose, and your beloved History of
Succession (written for the satisfaction of the Earl of H. but confuted
sufficiently already) and your Stories from Egbert to Mary Queen of Scots, by
this to be utterly confounded.

But if you do ask me, Whether, if the K. should dye, I think the Lords and
Commons would do the feat? I answer no otherwise, but that it is a vain thing to
imagine it will or can ever be done, seeing the former too daily protest
against it, nay, and S. himself begins to recant.

Now that the King and Lords had Equity on their sides in so doing, that the
Doctrine, though contrary to yours, is not unreasonable; I shall show by giving
full Answers to your Arguments.

To the second Argument. Though I grant your Supposition, that the next Heir
should commit Rapes, Murders, etc. were mad and foolish, I say, it is not in the
Power of the House of Commons to exclude him from the Crown, neither can there
be shown one Precedent that they may imitate, seeing 'twas always allowed that
the House of Lords had as much, or more Authority than they, and the King a
Negative Voice. Neither does this tend to the Subversion of the Government, if
this irregular Heir should come to the Crown, but rather to the establishment
of it, it taking away any Success that the the scandalous and unjust
imputations of a giddy Rabble might make for the future upon one that is
innocent. If Immoralities and Crimes would do the business, a present Monarch
would not want Enemies that should asperse and depose him.

The Doctrine of Passive Obedience ought to be embraced by the public as well
as the private, for though I agree with you, it may not be observed in respect
to Foreign Affronts and Abuses, yet Subjects ought to observe it in respect to
their Prince, being at all no dishonor to the State.

And though I grant you too that a Crown is an Inheritance accompanying an
Office of Trust, yet I cannot yield that a House of Commons, nay, if they were
joined with the House of Lords too, the King declaring to the contrary, are
capable Judges, whether the Heir can be defective of that Trust, or forfeit his
Inheritance. And though he were really defective, Mad, and of ill Principles,
they must for all that submit, and bear with him; his Power being as much the
Ordinance of God, as the Power of the wisest, best Prince in the World. These
are but Subjects to the King, while living, or to his lawful Heir, when dead,
(by which lawful, you must think Natural Affection meant the nearest of Blood)
and in them to be placed the Sovereign Power. Now if the two Houses could
dispose of this Sovereign Power, you must think they had as great or greater in
themselves, than the Sovereign or highest Power; which to affirm is Nonsense.

The King has his Authority from God, and to him Sir William Smiths Speech.
alone he is accountable: He has the Laws only from his People, by which he
ought to govern, which Laws you Dissenters mistake for the Authority. The King
therefore ought not to be importuned by the People to do any thing contrary to
what he judges lawful, for he alone must answer for the irregularities, not
they.

But to go a little farther with the Equity of it. Do Ibid.
you think it reasonable, that a man should be punished in praesenti, for a
fault to be committed in futuro? If a Bill had been presented to a Grand Jury
against a Man, upon presumption he would commit such or such a Crime a year
hence, surely they would never find the Bill. This of the D. of Y. is of the
same nature. His being a Papist cannot be a fault, until he was to succeed to
the Crown, and that is uncertain whether ever or never. But if God has made an
Election, it is not for you to say, Nolumus hunc regnare. It would be to
question Divine Wisdom and usurp upon Gods Prerogative, in whose hands are the
issues of Life and Death, and all other Events, to which all men in prudence
ought to submit, because they know they must do it whether they will or no.
Fears and jealousies ought not to make People extravagant. Disputes of
Succession are dangerous. The controversy between the House of Y. and
Lancaster had almost drowned us in our own Blood, if the Good God in his
infinite Mercy at last had not relieved us.

I cannot see why People should be so desirous of an Elective Kingdom, seeing
Disorder in the mean while must tyrannize; and seeing Burgesses, Aldermen, and
Mayors of little Corporations cannot be chose without Tumult, Noise and
Confusion, an unanimous Consent being seldom or never heard of amongst them.

We murdered and deposed the Royal Father, and we have seemed to repent in dust
and ashes, cried mightily, and requested of Heaven that the sin might not be
laid to our charge, that the bitter cup might pass from us; and shall we be so
impudent and ungretefully wicked, as to murder him again in his Posterity? We
shall not be excused at the great day, because we have persisted in our
iniquity, neither will God be frighted into a forgiveness. It Is their right,
and nothing but an immediate Voice from Heaven can make it otherwise.


Prejud. Electing and Excluding had been practiced by Gods own People, and
countenanced by God. What else is the meaning of Gods giving the Kingdom of
Israel Tory Plot.
to Saul of the Tribe of Benjamin, the youngest of Jacob's Sons; or to David
the younger of his Fathers Sons, and of the Tribe of Judah; while none of
Reuben's Offspring ever sat upon the Throne? Or if God may by Prerogative
dispense with this Law, how came David to put Adonijah by the Throne, and seat
Solomon in it?

After Solomon there was not one bad Prince longer endured, than the People
were constrained out of mere necessity: to whose destruction also they were
oftentimes incited by God himself.


Reas. Your own Author in two or three Leaves after confutes himself, and tells
you the Commands and Examples in the Old Testament, cannot countenance such an
Assertion, nor can the Civil Constitutions of the Jewish Tory Plot.
Economy oblige any Christian Kingdoms, there being very special Reasons to
the contrary. As God had a special Prerogative for giving his Kingdom of Israel
to Saul, so had David too, when he excluded Adonijah and gave the Kingdom to
Solomon, it being by the immediate direction of God himself. But now God
forbearing to speak to us immediately from Heaven, sends us word, that The fear
of a King is as the roaring of a Lion: Prove. 20. 2.
whosoever provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul. That we should not
touch his anointed, nor do his Prophets harm. Speak thou to us, and we will
hear thee; but let Exodus 20. 19.
not God speak to us lest we die. This is a most absolute obedience to Moses.
Concerning the Right of Kings God speaks by the mouth of Samuel, and says,
This 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, etc.
will be the right of the King which you shall have to reign over you; he shall
take your sons, and set them to drive chariots, etc. He shall take your
man-servants and your maidservants, and the choice of your youth, and employ
them in his business, etc. So that whatsoever he will inflict on you, it must
by no means be resisted. But let us hear what the Gospel says, The Scribes and
Pharisees Mat. 23. 2, 3.
sit in Moses chair, and therefore all that they shall bid you do and observe,
that observe and do. Where can there be a more simple Obedience implied, and
what can command Subjection more plainly? Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, for conscience sake. I know that grand Impostor and
Mountebank Buchanan, with his Zany Milton, explain these places as if they were
spoken to the scattered and weak Christians, that they should be subject out of
policy, because they had not opportunity and strength to resist. But it seems
very strange to me, that if common prudence only and self-preservation were in
the case, that the Apostle should urge it with so much vehemence and
extravagance, that they should be desired to live for the Lords sake, and for
conscience sakc, when afterward they so eagerly strove to die for it.

Is there not plain positive Practice consonant to these Doctrines? Did not
Christ, as soon as he was seized on by the High Priests Officers, severely
rebuke the great Apostle St. Peter, for but once using the Sword? Blame an
untemperate Zeal, proceeding from an unreasonable Passion, without any Call to
his Superiors? Chide him for wounding the High Priests Servant, though he was
performing a most unjust action; but, he being commissioned by Public
Authority, taught, that every Private Mam must submit to him? Will you think
too that Christ did this out of policy, because he was too weak to struggle
with them? No, he tells you, he could have fummon'd more than twelve Legions of
Angels to his immediate rescue. But he would not employ them as a triumphant
Dr. Sprat, Sermon. Ap. 20. 12.
Host, but as an Harmonious Choir, to sing peace on Earth, good will toward
every one of you.

If it is then forbidden on the Penalty of Death, of perishing by the Sword, to
rebel against those most cruel Tyrants, most fierce Enemies to the Christians,
Monsters of men, either of no Religion, or a false one, and yet a disgrace to
Heathenism it self; If however, on the most Solemn Obligations of Conscience,
they were not to be opposed, much less destroyed by any Christians; what can be
said greater, or more august than this? What stronger, what more Sacred
confirmation can be given to our conscientious obedience to another manner of
Authority? By how many ties, Temporal and Eternal, are we bound to yield a
faithful Subjection to our Christian Kings? under whose Protection many
Subjects prosper, though against their Wills; Kings, who are the best nursing
Fathers of the best Church in the Christian World.


Prejud. Christ and his Disciples might well bear with this; for their Kingdom
was not of this world. They came Joh. 18. 36. Charge of the Tory Plot
maintained.
not to divide Inheritances. Which rather implies than denies, that such whose
Kingdom is of this World may dispose of Inheritances.

Reas. Truly the Christians Kingdom too is not of this world, for if it were,
they would be of all men the most miserable. They came to imitate Christ, to
submit to every Ordinance of Man as he did, to bear afflictions, to follow him
through a Sea of Blood, though 'twere through the wilderness of Popery, and most
severe inconvenienees.

There is not a Virtue in the whole Life of our Savior Mr. Manninghams Sermon,
Dec. 7.
proposed to our imitation, which has not for its Appendage that which the
Animal man calls Misery; though it proves in the event, the only winging of the
Soul, the highest exaltation of humane nature, which had never been honored
with the Union of God, if it had not been in order to suffer.


Prejud. It Is a good thing in private men to bear Afflictions patiently, not to
run into an evil to avoid them, to glory in their tribulation. But when, Sir,
the State is concerned, when the question is, whether they must suffer a Popish
Tyrant to reign over them when they can-hinder it, they will tell you they
don't think themselves bound to such narrow, private Apprehensions of things,
neither will State Policy allow of such directions as passive obedience would
give them. They will not Spec. Crape. part 2.
call those things evil which you may. A Captain of a Man of War being like to
be taken by the Enemy, is bound to sink his Ship, and blow up it may be three
or four hundred men, rather than deliver his Charge to the Enemy. One would
think it an evil in it self to destroy so many innocent Souls; yet unless this
be done, the Captain shall be shot to death by the Laws of War, and looked upon
as an Enemy.


Reas. Suppose I do grant in some special cases, that State Policy ought not to
call those things evil which private men do, (as requiring satisfaction for
injuries offered by a Foreign Kingdom, which I hinted to you before;) how does
this excuse Subjects from committing an evil against their Prince, who are
commanded as Subjects to bear with him, and obey him.

Then your Instance in a Captain of a Man of War, does not hold true, for it is
seldom or never practiced, that he shall be shot to death, if he is in those
circumstances, and unless he is under suspicion of Treachery. Neither ought he
upon any account to sink the ship, or destroy so many innocent Souls; and if he
is punished for the Nonperformance of it, his Punishment is severe and unjust?
Religion binds us not only to our Personal Capacities, but as to our Relative
and Politic too, as we are incorporated into Kingdoms, Families, and other
Societies. Dr. Wallis, S. Resurrection asserted.
As Societies are made up of single Persons, so the acts of Societies, and of
Persons related, whether sinful or virtuous, are in Gods account the Acts of
particular Persons; and are in those Persons punished and rewarded according to
their Deserts, both in this World and in that which is to come. And thus the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, with those about them, are said to suffer the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire, when indeed it is the Persons of those Cities that
do suffer. These are the words of a Learned man, who is said to be a
well-wisher to your Party, but I hope he is belied.


Prejud. If we must bear every thing as Subjects, that is inflicted upon us, if
we cannot choose the Person to reign over us, where is the Liberty of the
Subject all this while?


Reason. What, will you commit Treason, and plead the Liberty of the Subject?
Have you not free Trade, free liberty to buy and sell, to choose your own
Habitation, your own Diet, your own Calling and Profession, educate your own
Children as you think fit, etc. If any thing is to be decided between the
Sovereign and Subjects, is there not an Appeal to the Laws? Have not your
Lawyers free liberty of Speech to plead for you? and does not Majesty it self
condescend to their Judgments? Are you laden with Taxes? are your Estates
taken from you, and have not you leave to take upon you so much Impudence and
Ingratitude, as not to give one part in a hundred to him who protects all you
have, and gives you your very Being, etc. Is not the Government according to
the Established Laws, and has not the Kings Speech to the Parl. at Oxford.
King declared it shall be the Standard and measure os his Actions? You pine
and murmur because you cannot have the Liberty to be Rogues and Rascals. I do
certainly believe a Popish Plot, and, though I will be more candid than other
men, as not to think there is a Presbyterian one; I am sure you, as single men,
without any Combination, outdo the Papists in their Villainies. When any of
your Herd is hurt, you, his fellow Swine, run about him, and gruntle against
the Government, and by right or wrong resolve to relieve him. You would take a
Monarchs Crown from his Head, and call it the Privilege of a Parliament. Those
that own themselves to be but the Great Council to a Sovereign, are desired by
you not to behave themselves as Counselors, but like Sovereigns too.


The Prophecy of Mercurius Menippeus in the Year of our Lord 1641.
IF the Londoners by this time have not enough of Parliament, may they still
consult Images, and adore a Representative; still quarrel with Superstition,
and never be at rest. They will perceive at last what kind of Physic is
Reformation, and being drunk once a day. Sure all the Women in the City are
with Child by Baxter and the Devil, that they ever since longed for Presbytery.
For, were Altars Plea enough to offer up the Bishops? Must good Abel suffer for
his Sacrifice? Sure his Masqueraded Holiness was the Pope, and Justice on Ben.
Harris' s Ears, Auricular Confession. Pl -- -- -- ket strived to bring in
Popery, and was executed like the Poor Ass for drinking up the Town Moon. The
Dunghill is sweeter than the Jakes, and Doctor Salamanca. Caesar' s Tragedy is
best presented in the Senate, and Westminster is the ready way to the Tombs.
There has been none of late disguised but the three last Parl -- -- -- -- nts,
and a Hangman. Henceforth take heed of Vizards, though never so holy, though
there is the Liberty of the Subject, and making a Glorious King in the case.
It Is the Thiefs best play to kill the Judge, and the Dissenters to rail on, and
be for Excluding. What Wolves besides these but would have tended such a
Romulus? Such an Elias what Ravens but would have fed? A Prince whose goodness
might rather fear Idolatry than Injury, deserved rather to be prayed to than
spit upon, made a Saint in our own Nation rather than to be sent into Scotland.
A Prince, whose Merits were so far above all Flatteries, that the oiliest
Courtier was as scandalous, as that Chemist, Fiddler, Buffoon, Painter, Rhymer,
Railer, Drunkard, See Absalom and Achitophel, a Poem.
Glutton, Zimri; as foolish as those Rabsheka's of No Popish Successor. Give
the King no Money. A Prince, whose Innocence has taught the * whole Nation
Allegiance, and made Pilk -- -- -- ton See the Addresses.
a non est inventus Royalist; and kept turncoat, Curse ye Meroz, Mushroom
Hickeringhil, a long time from being damned. A Prince, for whom College and
the City Charter do dye Martyrs; and for whom Tony Coop -- undertook a
Vindication. But now, alas, poor Potapski is become Captive to his Charge. The
good Apostle converts his Jailer; Who with the other Viper, Prince Prettyman,
do kiss his hand, and are innocent. For they knew he dispossessed so fast, they
could not find Devils enough to bait him. Had Bet -- -- -- I that railed at
him, been on the Bench, or wore his Chain longer, according to the Story, etc.
I will hold five Guinnies he had been Tyburn'd before Christmas, and the ill
looked Dagon should have fell before the Ark. It Is a Question, whether he is
more miraculous now for curing Disloyalty, than he will be hereafter for curing
the Evil.

Grant, O Lord, the King a long Life, that his years may endure throughout all
generations.

Let him dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving Mercy and
Faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

Defend the Duke, O Lord, and let his Enemies have no advantage against him,
nor the wicked Dissenters approach to hurt him.

Open the Eyes of the three last Parliaments, and let them confess before thee,
that they have done those things which they ought not to have done; and left
undone those things, which they ought to have done; and that there was no help
in them, etc.

Amen.
So Prays T. W.

FINIS.

