LAW-POWER; OR The Law of Relation, Written in the heart of Ministers and
People by the finger of God, is mighty, through Him, to prevail with both, to
live as a people separated to their God, and from the world, specially at the
LORDS TABLE.

So shall we be separate, I and Thy people, from all the people that are upon
the face of the earth, Exodus 33. 16.

Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the
lips of knowledge, Pro. 14. 7.

I will be their God, and they shall be my people, wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17.

Come out of her My people, That ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Henry Cripps in Popes-head-Alley. 1656.

THE CONTENTS OF The seventh and last Treatise.
Six things are premised, which may help us to make judgment, whether the
Ministers of this persuasion, That all are to have Admittance to all
Church-Communions upon account only of their Infant Baptism, have the law of
this Relation of a Minister written in the heart by the Spirit of God. Then is
shown, what this law of Relation is; And that where it is, and bears rule in
the heart of Minister and people, it will appear so to do, by what he
teaches his people, by his walk with them, and theirs with him, That all be
well suiting to the Rule, decent, and according to Gospel Order. In the next
place is shown, That the way of Gods people walking together according to
Gospel Order, is every where spoken against; And that Separation from the world
is the great offense in that holy way, yet such a thing there is, and must be,
a separation suitable to the mind of God; for he that will not separate from the
world, and false worship, is a separate from God. There is a Communion of
Saints on earth, they do often meet and commune together. Some exceptions
answered, Ministers that stand cross to this way are advised; They that pretend
to this way are Cautioned. The judgment of the learned and Godly is taken-in
here, and so concluded.

CHAP. I.
DEAR SIRS,
WE crave leave to treat with you about those words ere set down in the close
of the former Treatise, The power and virtue of the law of Relation written in
the heart; If ye never met with those words before bless God you have met with
them, and make much of them now. These are Maschil, none like them so far as we
know, to instruct your selves, and us to a right understanding of the way, to
point the eye to it, to guide the foot in it, that our walk therein may be
according to sound judgment and discretion.

ordained Ministers. Well, If you will say more, we think all the Godly in the
land can join with you in your desires: but stopping there* we believe they
will stop too, and cannot pray the same thing. Though yet we believe, That all
other faithful servants of Christ, have the mind of Christ, they love order,
they hate confusion. Notwithstanding we take the boldness to tell you our
persuasion That a Godly man will as soon pass under Tyburne, as he will under
the hands of those Ministers for ordination, whose way and judgment, as to
Church-Administrations, is full-up with them so often mentioned. And this be
spoken without the least refection of Dishonor upon the Churches, governed by
Presbyters, who separate from the world at the Lords Table, as we suppose.

Srs, We beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ His sake, and love of the
Spirit; for His Churches sake; for His Truths-sake; for decency, and order
sake; for the Office, or Stewardship-sake, whereof you must give an account
shortly, Consider, putting it upon your thoughts: ye say ye are the Ministers
of Christ; ye stand in His stead; ye are Stewards in His House, ye are Stars in
His hand; What are ye not, which we, with your selves, account ho^ourable,
makes for your stabilitie, and strength, security, and safety. Put this to
your souls now; and if it be possible deal clearly and truly at this point
in the resolution of this Question; Has God caused you to pass under this
Relation of Ministers? Then He has written the law of that Relation upon your
hearts; What man has done, should be little with you, and without something
more, is nothing to us; Has God caused you to pass under that Relation? that
is the Question: If you say yes, hold it forth, that all may see you speak as
well as hear you, and give Righteons judgment, That the Lord has written the
law of that Relation upon your hearts. Now the Lord God help you all, and
every one to look after this writeing of God upon your hearts; for we are more
than jealous, as you give us sad cause; That, it is not yet done, we mean the
law of this Relation is not written upon your hearts. You may think it is, and
you may say it is, It is nothing to us, nor we believe to any Godly man in all
the whole Nation, what you say as to this matter, or what you think, while we
see what you do: Saul speaks as confidently, as you may do, and surely he
spoke as he thought I have performed the Commandment of the Lord, which was,
that 1 Samuel 15.
Amalecke should be utterly destroyed, nor person nor thing spared; That you
have not said Samuel; What means then this bleating of the Sheep in my
ears, and the lowing of the Oxen, which I hear? There are none so confident
in believing (we mean a counterfeit belief) than are they, that are most
outrageous in sinning; The fool rages, and is confident. So may ye say ye
have kept the charge of the Lord; You have performed His Commandment, ordering
matters in His house, as becomes Stewards there.



Secondly, What means then those Beasts in the shape of men, and they are the
worst Beasts, presenting their Infants to Baptism, and themselves to the Lords
Table? not requiring of them so much as a bare profession of faith and
repentance: all that, they can make; yet more than is required: What means
all this, if the law of your Relation be written on your hearts?

Thirdly, What means this (which being granted will prove an In* let to, who
knows how great a flood of ungodlines) That things must be ordered in Gods
house, not according to the Principles grounded in Gods Word, but according to
the Principles of Infant Baptism? What means all this? If the law of your
Relation be written in your hearts?

Fourthly, What means then, That unreasonable, and wicked men pass for
Believers, having no faith; and for Disciples, who hate Discipline; and for
Saints, who persecute holiness? If the law of your Relation be written in your
hearts, can this be?

Fifthly, What means then, That this monstrous body, we mean your Church,
has so much glory, and favor in your eyes; and the Church of Christ the true
members thereof, as in charity you should judge, so little; That alone
honorable with you, this alone despicable, so far as appears to man's eye;
you are every day washing the face of the one to make it look goodly, and
fair before men, and so to in-state it in, and possess it of glorious
matters, while you bewray the face of the other (which must needs be, while you
wash the one) not with dust, as you may read hereafter, but with mire, and
dirt? Surely ye could not do so, if the law of this Relation were writton on
your hearts; for thus ye and we read; In whose eyes a vile person is contemned;
but he honors them that fear the Lord: Well, The Lord knows who are His,
and He has made some of them to know it, that they are His, for Him they
serve. And now they know, That He loves them, and to the end, that has no end
He loves them. And now for man's love, if they have it they thank him for it;
if they have it not it matters little, and troubles them less upon their own
score. But this they know, That upon whose heart soever this law of Relation is
written, this law of love is written also; For every one that loves Him That
begat, loves Him* also that is begotten of Him, 1 John 5. 1. Idem est motus
animae ad finaginem and rem, says Aristotle some where; The love that bears
up the soul to God, bears it also to the Image of God; Qui amat-supra amat
infra, he that truly loves God above, heartily loves his Brothe^ beneath. But
see what it is to swallow down the Principles of Infant Baptism, and to
regulate all matters in the house of God according thereunto? as some do; for
it is to the men of that way and judgment we speak.

Sixthly, If you have the law of your Relation written upon your hearts; what
means then, that you do with your poor people, sottish, and brutish ones;
so contrary to this law? In suffering them to take Sanctuary at the Ordinance
of Baptism? thereby to shelter them from the wrath that is to come? and while
they live in their sins, give them right, and title to all
Church-Administrations? Surely, surely, they, that feel the law of this
Relation upon their hearts cannot do so, no not for a world can they do it;
it were to make a poor ignorant people to believe a lie, which we are assured
is far from your purpose to do: But you know there is finis operis, and
operantis; utter destruction of souls will be the end of this work, though it
is not your end that are the workmen; no, the thought of it, that you should
destroy souls is an abomination to you. Let your work, as to this matter, be
an abomination to you also. You cannot in evil things, and doiugs separate
the end from the means, (if the man will go onn sinning, his end will be
perishing for ever:) as ye ought not in good things to separate the means from
the end. (if the end I drive to, be eternal life, the means must be taken
that conduce thereunto.) Therefore by the mercies of God, we beseech you, and
because of the terror of the Lord, His heavy wrath, and displeasure, doleful,
and dreadful punishments, that must be the portion of all Stewards, that feel
not the law of their Relation written upon their hearts. by the finger of God
there, and regard not to feel it, we would persuade with you to Consider these
matters, what your doings have been, and are, how agreeable to the mind of your
God, rule of His word, law of your Relation; advise with one another about it,
and then speak your minds.

Having praemised these six things for trial, whether, the law of your
Relation be written upon your heart, we proceed herein according to the
proposed Method, and first to show

CHAP. II.
WHat an influence this law of Relation written in the heart by the finger of
God, has upon the doctrine, and practice of a Minister; We will speak of him
single; for as it is with one, it is with all, who find that law as aforesaid,
and of his Doctrine first,

Paranymph, or spokesman, he speaks a good word for Christ where ever he
comes, if it be seasonable, thereby to make-up the match, and betroth the soul
unto Him; He labors to come within the bosom of a sinner, and grapple so
powerfully with his spirit, that He may take no nay at his hand: and for the
attaining this end, and to make him see what need he has of Christ; He will
lay open the loathsome nature of sin, and let-in the terror of the Lord upon
the Conscience, that the careless, and rebellious sinner may come to a parley
of peace, and be content to take Christ upon His own terms, and take up the
profession of the Truth, and not stand at the Cost This is Gods resolution to
humble the soul so low till it can in truth and seriousness bid Christ welcome
upon any conditions. His mercy and the blood of His Son is so precious and
unvaluable, that He will not cast-it away where no notice shall be taken of it;
but He will make the he^rt subscribe experimentally to that Truth of His. 1 Timothy 1. 15. D. Re. Tr: p. 389.
: Though so doing he must part with all he has of His own, his dearest lust
and all: And here He discovers to the sinner, as he can, the cunning fetches of
his cursed heart, and hunts him out of his Muses, that he may not cozen
himself, and sit down with some reserved Delusion, and go no farther. And
this is the Lords way sure in whose stead he stands, and therefore craves of
Him daily His eye salve, that he may stand in His counsel, and walk in His
way, and do that which he has seen with his heavenly Father, as He has
done, and by His Word and Spirit still does; so does he in His strength, and by
the directions of His Word; We will insist upon this a little.

When ever the Lord brings any soul over to Himself, He first hides pride
from his eyes. Man, every man borne into the world, and growing up there, is a
stout rebel, a stiff-necked, creature, as his father is; and as years add
Cubits to his stature, so is there an addition made to his pride, and
rebellion: as he growes-up, he grows more like his father every day; now so
soon as the Lord God is pleased to deal with this man by His Word, and
Spirit, He knocks down this Monster pride, for this beares-up mightily against
the Word, and Spirit, and, like the possessed man, breaks the cords, and bands,
the good Spirit would bind him with; as easily till the Spirit has set them
on, as we can do, burnt flax, or make a thread snap before the Candle.
Therefore this prido is discerned, and slain first, which is enmity in the
will, affections, and mind; There it is still when discovered, and slain
there; but it does a man no hurt, being discovered, and slain, as pride does
not: for though it be, as they say, as the heart is, the first that lives, and
the last that dies, yet the man is humbled for his pride, and walks softly all
his days, and does put forth an holy enmity now against all that in his soul,
which exalts it self against his God, his Lord, his Christ, and Word of His
grace.

Secondly, This is it he would bring home to his own, and others hearts. The
Lord God by His Word, and Spirit, hides pride from our eyes first, by giving us
a sight into our selves, what an hell there is within us, and makes it look
like hell, whereas before it might look like heaven; what a dunghill there is
within us, and makes us smell the stench of it as of a Dunghill, whereas before
it did savor with us, as a garden of spices, or a bed of Roses; And then
according to the exceeding riches of His grace, and abundant mercy through
Christ, gives us a sight of Himself, Job 42. 6.
a saving experimental knowledge of Himself in Christ; we heard of Him before
with the hearing of the ear, (and how did we slight Him, till pride was hid
from us, our proud heart was subdued) but now our eye has seen Him. And what
then? Now He is exalted in our souls, for we are made low; Now He, and He
alone rises in our thoughts higher, and higher still, and so we fable; now sin
appears to be sin (the worst can be said of it) and grace appears to be grace
(the best can be said of that too) it is grace; now Christ is exceeding
welcome; for sin is above measure sinful. He is precious, sin is vile.

The hony-combe trampled upon before, while we were full of Prove. 27. 7.
our selves, that is, proud, relisheth now like an honey-combe, as it uses to
do with an hungry soul, and truly now we would abhor our selves, and
repent in dust and ashes.

First, To apply this to our purpose, ye must take Gods way, if you mean to
do Gods work; and this way you cannot choose, but take when ever ye go to
work, as workmen, that need not be ashamed, feeling the law of their Relation
written upon their hearts.

Secondly, Preach Christ unto the People, lift Him up as an Ensign before
them; So the Apostles did, so the Ministers of Christ do, that feel the law
of their Relation; they tell their hearers what lost ones they are without Him,
what glorious creatures they are being found, and accepted in Him; His fullnes
will convince us, as one says, abundantly of our emptiness, His Job 9. 148.
purity will show us our spotts; His All sufficiency, our nothingnesse labor
by all means, attend, and insist upon the means, which you cannot, but do,
if you feel the law of your Relation, how to woo for Christ, as His
Paranymphs, speaking a good word for Him.

Thirdly, Be sure you lay your groundwork well, we are more than jealous of
you about that matter, as we told you before. Tell your people home, as you can
to their hearts, what a Cup of wrath they are borne to, and that they must
drink it up to the bottom, the very dregs of it, if they go out of the
world, as they came in, without any real change wrought upon them by the Word
and Spirit; for they were borne Children of wrath, so soon as they were
Children of men; and they have been ever since they were borne, filling-up
their measures; and after their hardness, and impenitent heart, treasuring-up
to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God.

Fourthly, And tell them herewithall, which you must needs do, if ye know the
law of your Relation, and feel it written upon your hearts; That their Church-
privileges they hold themselves borne unto, being Baptized there, trusted to,
and gloryed In, as the manner is, stand them in no more stead, than the Arc at
Shiloh did the Jews, or sacrifices multiplied, or the Temple of the Lord; The
Rock and Manna; Circumcision, or the Lords Super administered at Corinth; Beat
them off from putting any Confidence in the flesh; if you do not, you do
nothing to purpose; nay you must tell them more, If no inward glory be gained
by our glorious privileges, (which indeed the Nation partakes off above many,
if not above all in the world) these will serve but to expose us to more wrath,
and fiery indignation from the Lord, rendering our condition worse, than was
theirs of Corasin, Math. 10. 15. ^am. 4 6. 10. Ezekiel. 5. 10.
and Bethsaida, and our judgment from the Lord more intolerable, even in this
world, as Jerusalems was, and at the end thereof, than Sodome's, and Gomorrah's
was. And these things you will speak before the people sadly, and mournfully,
as the Apostle says; weeping; for you know who said it, though you know he was
an Heathen; If you will have us weep, you must weep first. When you find the
law of your Relation pressing upon your spirits, Ye will not mention before
your people the principles of Infant Baptism, as ye have glossed them with a
Comment worse than the text; nor will you make mention of godfathers, or
godmothers either; Something we have read how they came in at first; But when
the law of your Relation constrains you, ye will see no need of them now, the
Church of the living God shall be no more abused with them, nor that ordinance
profaned. But these things ye know better, than we can tell you, Blessed are
ye, if ye do thereafter; And what are you if ye do contrary to what you know?
we say not, but leave it upon your thoughts.

Fifthly, Preach sound doctrine to them, holding fast the form of sound words;
and whatsoever is contrary to it, Command them to bid defiance to it, yea to
curse it as Paul did, being that, which their soul must abhor, when they
feel the law of their Relation; Thus ye do, ye will say but we doubt it,
because your people are so well pleased with your doctrine; Now certain it is,
as once the Apostles found it to be, and told us it would ever be, especially
in these latter times, they will not endure sound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
which will make them sound in the says. Sound doctrine is to a swinish
spirit, (such is every spirit by nature, till the good Spirit has wrought
thereon,) like a corroding plaster to proud flesh, or a lance to a sore full
of corruption, which will cut to the core, and cut it out. We intend chiefly
this.

Sixthly, While you are delivering forth unto them sound doctrine, take this in
with it, which shall argue its soundness, and you sound also; That your
peoples hearts are very unsound, and their ears uncircumcised, notwithstanding
with their ear they must attend, for therefore they have an ear, and the very
male of their flock they must lay out this way, all their strength, else Math.
1.
deceivers they are, and they are accursed.

But this is not all you tell them, you will make them know, as ye can, That
there is an intus prohibens, that stands within like an armed man, and till it
be remooved, or subdued, will oppose all that is good, keep it from entering
the soul, viz: The enmities that are there against God, and the word of His
grace. They come James 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1.
to hear, and cast it out they cannot, nor is it possible with them, as their
case is so to do; yet are they commanded to do it, nor is the command in
vain; They must endeavor to do it, looking up to Him, and spreading it
before Him, and attending the means whereby it is done, we mean, whereby this
enmity (for that one word contains all) is discovered to us, and slain in us
by sound doctrine soundly preached. This is the point you must insist upon, as
did your Lord before you; The absolute necessity of regeneration, or of being
begot and borne again; do not sooth up your Disciples with that vain title,
and lying vanity, They were borne and baptized such. It is notoriously false
and known so to be in all the earth: We are borne more like Devils, than
Saints; at the best, we bear the Image of the earthly.

Indeed you must tell them so, they are, while they are, as they were borne
into the world, and best pleased to be what they are, so far from being
Believers, Disciples, Saints, that they are, as was said, wolves, dogs, swine,
and much worse, because a beast in the shape of a man is the worst beast.

Ye have heard, or read what that excellent man Mr Bolton said to his dear
Children, when he was departing from them, He verily believed that none of them
durst think to meet him at that great Tribunal in an unregenerate state. And
was he not well assured of what he spoke from his Lords own mouth? Except Joh
3. 3.
a man be borne again he cannot see the kingdom of God. And he gives the
reason at the sixth verse, (we borrough that Learned Dr. K. Preface, page 4.
man's words) for that which is borne of flesh is flesh, and is as incapable of
seeing the mysteries of the kingdom of God, as fleshly eyes are of seeing
Spirits.

Ye must preach this sound Doctrine to their ears soundly, and till it sound
unto their hearts, and is taking there, what ever they are in your eyes, they
are as vile, as the vilest in the Lords eyes, and in the eyes of His people,
(for they are not washed from their dung Pro. 30. 12. Isa. 4. 4.
and accordingly they must be dealt with, thrust away from partaking in sacred
things, as you would heaps of dung out of the chiefest rooms. When ye are at
this point dealing soundly with them, ye will see cause to pray, and the godly
with you, as the Primitive Saints for the Apostles of Christ, Grant unto Acts
4. 29. 5. 20.
thy servants that with all boldness they may speak thy word, all the words
of this life, that He commands you, for if all must be heard, all must be
spoken, and spoken it must be, as the Oracles of Acts 10. 33.
God, and not teach only, but command with all authority, that so ye may
commend your selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, as he did
who felt the law of his Relation written in his heart; Your people shall know,
if ye know the law of your Relation, That ye are the Lord's Ambassadors, ye
speak in the person of Christ, and in the virtue of His Spirit, and must
speak as if Christ by you spoke unto them, that is, as having power and
authority committed to you for the edification of the Church.

And be sure ye begin right, Assuring them they were not borne with a Christ in
their hearts, but enemies to Him; that they stand at an infinite distance from
Him, and are wilfully set on it to have no acquaintance with Him; therefore
they are but false conceits, and presumptions, of their being in Him, before
the Word, and Spirit has been praevailing with them. Assure them, they, by
nature, hate the Lard of life, and holiness by Him, more than they hate that,
their soul most loatheth; and they love Prove. 8. 36.
death, and a curse in the procureing cause of it) as a father loves his
dearest Child These things ye must speak to them with all boldness, for these
things are most profitable for them to know first. This our hurt is not to be
healed with pleasing words; But now ye shall be dealt hatefully with, dealing
faithfully with them, as was told you, We cannot endure wholesome words.

But the law of your Relation will help you to swallow that, and more; and ye
can remember what the Lord, and Master found from His hearers, and all His
faithful servants ever since; This may comfort you too; you shall have no hurt
from them, though they do their worst. And if you gain any of them unto
Christ, they will be your dear Friends to their death, because you told them
the truth. And for them that persist in their hatred, you know it is not a
simple hatred, with which we hate most hurtful creatures; for it is mixed with
fear, and dread of you, speaking to them, as men that know the law of your
Relation; they hate you, but they fear you too, as a man (so that learned man
Dr Reynolds) hates a Lion, or as a Malefactor hates the Judge, as a theife
hates the light: For just reason we have been longer at this point; we leave
it upon your thoughts, and so hasten to the practice of a Godly Minister, to
see what that will be before his people, when he feels the law of this
Relation written upon his heart by the finger of God. But first we would for
you and our Instruction, from these premises draw these conclusions, and then,
we will proceed to show what a Godly Man's practice is, we mean, his, who
feels the law of his Relation written in his heart.

finger of God, which does write the law of this Relation upon Ministers
hearts, shows them the ordinances 1 Timothy 3. 16.
of their Lords house, how they ought to behave themselves there, all the
formers thereof, and all the laws thereof, writes Exek. 43. 11.
he in their sight, as in former times so now that they may keep the whole
form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them; But this the
Spirit of God never does before He has made them ashamed first of all they
have done, contrary unto the true way of Gods worship; They shall shame
themselves for this, or God will cast shame upon them; He will humble them for
all their abominations before; He will reveal to them the right way of the
service of His house. And therefore it may be, God will not use those
Ministers, how choice soever are their parts, who departed from God, when there
was a general departure of the Nation; for why may it not be now, as once God
threatened; when Israel d^d depart from Him to false worship, That they should
bear their iniquities; they might be employed in mean services, but they
should not Come near Him; The Lord had listed up His hand against them; And it
may be feared the Lord may do so against some Ministers, now adays; How ever,
except there be extraordinary repentance, and taking shame unto themselves, The
Lord may remember what they have done, when Israel departed from God: and what
their complaints were, and what little use, and improovement they have made of
the blessed liberties they have had since to order matters in their Lords house
full-up to what He has commanded. In the next place

Secondly, They that know whose spokesmen they are, in whose stead they stand,
have learnt Christ, and can teach Him, useing great boldness, and liberty of
speech; They are as the Officers of a great Prince going before Him, to
praepare a way for Him, and will make bold to strike and to scatter those
unruly throngs of men, who press too near upon His sacred preson; They will
boldly smite with the rod of His mouth; they will cry aloude, and not spare;
they will (as he says) pull down mountainous lusts, subdue strong holds; They
will, in the strength of God (that is the scope, and end of their Ministry)
bring low every mountain, and hill; make the crooked straight, and the rough
smooth; This in desire and endeavor they do. And if any show themselves stout
against against God, making their brows brass; These will set their faces as
flint against all these; for so God has commanded, and so does the law of
their Relation command

Thirdly, They do all things in right order, and according to their pattern:
they proclaim war first with men's lusts, comeing as with a sword in their
hand, and fire in their mouth against them, and so make room for peace in the
hearts of men, which passes all understanding; But they will make them know
first they are enemies to this peace, while they are enemies to holiness, and
friend with themselves, and their sins. These that understand their Commission,
the power of Christ they are invested with, together with the law of their
Relation, will assure them, that they must cast hell upon their sins, or upon
their souls; If they will continue to be workers of iniquity, they will
hold-on to work out their damnation to the utmost.

Fourthly, They that preach as men that know the law of their Relation, find
not one principle (of holiness) no not one, thorough the whole book of God,
which is peaceable.

Indeed all tends to peace at last, but intends war at first. What may be
found among the principles of Infant Baptism, they know not, nor will they
seek to know; They will go by Scripturerule, which assures them, if they
please men (men's lusts) they cannot please God.

Fifthly, These searching, and reprooveing Ministers, these profit the hearers,
and do their souls good; these, and only these; whereas a partial,
unsearching, and un-reprooveing Minister (to use that learned man's words) is
one of Gods curses against a place, the forerunner of a final, and fearful
visitation; Hos. 9. ^.
The days of visitation, and recompense come says the Lord; the Prophet is a
fool, the spiritual man is mad; for the multitude of iniquity, and the great
hatred. If a man, Mich. 2. 11.
walking in the Spirit, and falsehood, that is, professing the work of a
spiritual man, and yet betraying His Office, or in a false, and lying Spirit
prophesying of wine, and strong drink, that is, cherishing and encourageing
sensual Livers in their pernicious courses; He shall even be the Prophet of
this people. Thus in all ages, and never more apparently thus, than now in our
days has the Lord punished with an extreme revenge the Rebellion of a people
against His Gospel.

Sixthly, They that will preach the Truth as it is in Jesus, as their love of
Christ, and law of their Relation constrains them, shall find Luthers words
true, That this preaching will derive the hatred of the world against them.
They shall stand as a Mark for all the world, with the god thereof, to shute
against. Therefore, (for something has been spoken this way already, and more
may be spoken anon.) In the last place.

Seventhly, These are, and there is more than need they should be so above the
world; They are dwellers in heaven; Christ in them by His Spirit, they in Him
by their faith; they feel the law of their Relation working as strongly in
them, as the law of sin in their enemies; and so they can, as was said of
Luther, bear the hatred, and shocke, the rage and violence of the whole world;
they have a back of steel, and underneath everlasting Arms; they cannot be
greatly moved, never remooved from their Anchor-hold. We proceed.

practice before his people, and within Gods house.

First, His practice will be humble, and meek; so he will walk with his God,
and before His people. The Godly wise A lifted-up spirit (in any man) the
greatest closer of the heart against the truth of God. Dr. Owen of Jol. 72.
will never think him to be a man of God, if he be proud, and haughty. It was
a distinguishing Character, that Beda gives, whereby to know a man of God, and
that he will preach to the people the preaching of God: If he be a man of God
follow him, says he of Augustine, that counterfeit Saint, And Englands feigned
Apostle. But how shall we know, said the people, whether he be a man of God, or
no? Beda answered; If he be gentle, and lowly of heart, he carries the yoke
of the Lord, and will offer unto you to carry the same yoke; but if he be
disdainful, and proud, then it is certain, he is not of God, nor has heard
Gods word, nor can endure His yoke, and little good service can he do; A
proud person being like a gouty hand, or swelled Arm, which troubles the
body, does it no service.

Surely a true servant of Christ is as like his Lord and Master as can be,
lowly, and meek; for he remembers still, that for His sake, and to teach him,
He stooped as low, as the feet, and washed them; and a little while after
became a Worm and no Man, humbled Himself, and became obedient unto the
death, even the Death of the Cross.

Secondly, As he feels the law of that Relation, of a Minister, so also, of a
father to His people, and they to Him in the Relation of Children, even as Paul
was, he desires, and endeavors to be gentle among them, as a nurse, cherishing
her children; 1 These. 2.
exhorting, comforting, charging every one, as a father does his children; And
how curiously does he walk before them, looking round about him, least he
should loose his way, or miss his end, Ephesians. 5. 15.
and should be blamed in that, for which he blames others; he considers with
all his heart, turpe est Doctori, And remembers all along his walk, that his
people observe him more in the street, within, or without the house, than they
do in the pulpitt; their eyes are more intent upon his doings; than their
ears are unto his sayings; and thereafter they fashion themselves, and their
whole course commonly, by what they see him do, not to what they hear him
say, unless he speaks to please their Lusts; Therefore feeling this Law of
his Relation, with all his care, he is careful here; so as he can say, as his
pattern before him; Ye are witnesses, and God also how holily, and justly,
and unblameably We behaved our selves among you that believe; (And they were as
careful to give no offense to them that were without) We must add this, That
there be no mistake here. These that know the law of their Relation, behaving
themselves thus gently, are as sharp as who are sharpest, in reprooveing of
sin, for it is good to reproove, as God reprooves. Ye remember who he was, that
did not frown upon sinners because they were his sons; but God frowned upon
him, and brought sore displeasure upon his family: Great sinners must have
great reproves; as he says; Job 13. 39^,
Some must be saved by fear, a sanctified means to pull them out of the fire.
Ye must cast them into the fire, that they may escape the fire; Pitiful
cruelty is better than cruel pity. Some in dealing both with sinful
practices, and erroneous opinions of men, handle them, as men handle thorns,
as if they durst not touch them; this fatneth sin, and confirms error. May
we not add; do not some deal with Drunkards, as sweetly, as they should
deal with Disciples? And with notorious sinners (unexcommunicate) as if they
were Saints? It were infinitely better for them, if they had been delivered-up
to Satan; for now they are delivered-up to their own hearts lusts. Liars,
evil Beasts, Slow-bellies, (as the most of your Nominall Believers are, if not
all) must be rebuked cuttingly, that they may be sound in the faith. Sores must
be cut, and lanced, before they be healed.

Thirdly, They that know the law of their Relation, and feel it upon their
hearts, do know, they stand before the people as Ambassadors sent unto them
from the Prince of the Kings of the earth; nay they are in Christ's stead;
therefore as they must speak unto them, whereof before; so must they deal
with them, as to all Church-Administrations; neither more nor less; but
full-up to their Commission; even as Christ Himself did do, when He was upon
the Earth, and has appointed to be done, till His return from Heaven, all
that, which is comely to be done, by all those, that stand in His stead; and
are Stewards in His house; whereto so much has been said, that we shall say no
more to it in this place; Nor shall we speak to this Relation, which indeed
contains much: they stand in Relation of Shepherds to their sheep; they
walke-on before them (like the Admiral Ship carrying the Light) and they look
well to their walk, and observe as well, who follows them; and accordingly
they deal with them; and who will not follow them, but follow after Srangers,
unto Strangers let them go; for these good Shepherds will make a difference,
as becomes men instructed to Ezekiel. 34. 17.
Discretion: and so are enabled to judge between Cattle, and Cattle, the Rams,
and the He-Goates.

When we have said all, (and how little is our All in these matters?) ye may
summe-up all in this one Relation of a Minister of Christ; he that finds the
law of that one Relation written in his soul by the finger of God, they humble
themselves to walk with their God; and treat with their people, as a father
with his children; standing before them in Gods stead, they deal with them, as
becomes faithful Stewards, and good Shepherds. In a word, They make clear
proof, that they have learnt Christ, and can teach him; when they show forth
His life in theirs; when they walk, even as He has walked; when, as He was,
so they are in this world; when the same mind, judgment, affections are in
them, which were in Christ Jesus their Lord.

From all this, we would draw these Conclusions, and then proceed.

Intus and in cute as ye say, or endeavors his utmost so to know, the state of
his people, as exactly well in desire, and endeavor, as a father does the
state of his children; a Steward the state of the household; the Shepherd the
state of his flock. It is his (...), and not a (...), his very work, and
buisines to know That; we mean the state of his people; for,

Secondly, Put the case, (for teaching sake we may do it, though it be not
possible, but that a Minister knowing that Relation must know it) That he
knows not the state of his people; then this must follow; he must speak unto
them generals only, for not knowing their states in particular, he cannot
speak unto them in particular, and so deal with them answerably. Some of them
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not: they trample pearls under their
feet, turn again and rent the Dispensers of them; accordingly these must be
dealt with. Some again, and none of the worst have need of Corrosives; other
some may need Cordials; Some have need to be searched, and humbled; some to be
encouraged, and comforted; their states in particular must be enquired into,
that the Minister of Christ may do accordingly. We remember the expression,
that James says, Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be healed. As if he should say, none can be able to pray
for you so effectually for your comfort, as those, That know your sins well,
and so can confess them before God. A Minister must know the state of his
flock.

Thirdly, That there is no case, or condition, these people can be supposed to
be in, but this Minister of Christ upon whose heart the law of his Relation is
written, is able in the strength of Christ, by the supply of the Spirit, to
give in that, which shall fit the case, be an adequate, or proportionate
help, aid, succor, cure thereunto; he shall be able to give-in Reproof,
correction, instruction, counsel, comfort, as the case and condition shall
require. And

Fourthly, In the last place* This will follow: If their estates in particular
must be enquired-into, then they must be dealt with in particular, alone, and
apart; And there must be time and place for it. This the people will not
endure, and this course ye seem not to approove, neither, we shall hear your
reasons, wherefore, in due place. We have told you what you will teach in point
of Doctrine, and what you will do in point of practice, so soon as ye shall
feel the finger of God writing the law of your Relation upon your hearts.

CHAP. III.
people will do, in whose hearts the finger of God has written the law of
their Relations. They will speak, and do the very same thing, which all Gods
people, Minister and people speak, and do, in whose hearts the Law of their
Relation is written.

It may be asked here; What are these Relations? And what is the Law thereof?
Briefly, and to narrow these matters as much as we can.

Their Relations are these; First, The great, and dreadful God for His dear
Son's sake (manifested in the flesh) stands related to them, as theirs, their
God; they to Him, as His people; more particularly, the great God says of
every one of these; Thou art my Disciple, thou art mine, Isa. 43. 1. He again
Ecchoeth forth to his God, And I am thine Lord; (for all is reciprocal between
God, and this gracious Saint). The intercourse is mutual; if He say, He is
ours; We say again, we are thine Lord, and we give our selves to thee; The
claim is mutual; He claims us for His; we Him, for Ours. Thou art mine; I
am thine. Briefly, there is the Relation; Now the Law is this; As Jehovah God
says to this person (so singly we must speak) All I am, and I am all; All I
have, and I have all; All I can, and I can all, I am for Thee, who do trust
Me, art my Disciple indeed, My Saint in Truth; So now says this Believer, this
Gracious Saint, this seperated-one, What I am, it is of Thee; What I have, it
is from Thee; What I can, it is by Thee. All I am, I have, I can, it is for
Thee O my Beloved Cant. 7. 13.
; It is a Curse that one should sow, and another reap; It is God that sowes,
shall the flesh, or the world, or the Devil reap? God forbid, He that sowes,
He shall reap, says that person, that feels the Law of His Relation. For
thus this Person says to his Lord, and his God. Thou have said, even because
it pleased Thee, so to say, That all Thine is mine; And by Thy grace, I say,
and shall never cease saying of it; And All Mine is Thine. There is the Law of
that Relation.

Secondly, The great God stands to them in the Relation of a Dear Father; they
to Him as Dear Children; God says to every one of them first, or last, I am
thy Father, and call Me so, My Father; He, or she Echoes again to Him, Thy
son, Thy daughter; there is the Relation; The law thereof is this; This
Heavenly Father in, and through Christ, makes over Himself unto His Child;
His Love and all; This Child makes a deed of gift, as we may say, of himself
back again, unto his Father, through Christ, by Whom he received all, gives
Him all his love, and all too little (yet he has not the less, but much more
for all his Relations here below, well corrected, and ordered, now God has
all) all his love, and all his fear, and all his service (but fear is all)
And now this Child shall be spared, as a father spares his, and so he shall be
served, For all things in heaven and earth shall serve him, and Minister to
him, if need be; And this Child, while he is himself, and not over-taken nor
surprised, is as tender of his Fathers Name, as he is of that he most dearly
loves, and as fearful to offend Him, as he is to offend the tenderest part
about him, the apple of his eye; There is the great Law of that Relation also.

Thirdly, The great God stands to them in Christ, as a Bridegroom (for as was
said, His love never decays; as servent at last, as at first) they to Him, as
His Spouse; He says to every one of these first, or last, I am married to
thee; Thou art my Hephzi-bad, my delight is in thee; I am for Thee; and Thou
shall not be for another, Hos. 3. 3. There is the Relation: The Law is this:
The Bridegroom is entirely the Brides; The Bride is entirely the Bridegroomes.
His delight is in her (that implies all, tongue can express, or heart can wish
open it never so wide) her delight is in Him, and that implies also all that is
expected from her: He sits down with great delight taking pleasure in her; and
she with the same delight, in her measure, taking pleasure in Him. There is the
Law of that Relation; we might be very large, and it is hard to speak little
of so much as might be said, once more.

Fourthly, He stands to them, as a Lord, they to Him as servants; He says to
every one of them, Thou art my servant: he, or she to Him again; Thou art my
Lord, (a Name of as much use and comfort as Jesus is with a Saint) and my God:
There is the Relation.

The Law is this, Thou shall do all that I command thee, as to the substance,
or matter, form, or manner of the work; what I command thee, and as I Will have
it done; all My will, and, all according to My will. The matter of a service
has been rewarded, when the manner of doing it has been revenged. I do it,
Lord, says this servant; speak, Lord, thy servant hears; Command, Lord, thy
servant does it; As the eyes of a servant looks to the hand of his Master; as
the eyes of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress, so my eyes wait upon Thee,
my Lord, and my God. We will only name two Relations more.

The Great God stands related to these His people every one of them, as a
friend to a friend, as a Shepherd to his flock. From this, and all that which
went before, we will set down these Consectories.

SECT. II.
FIrst, These are a peculiar, and choice people, a royal Priesthood, of whom
God says, You are my people; They again, Thou art our God; and being such
they must accordingly be dealt with. They shall dwell alone, they shall not be
numbered among the Nations. There shall be a better account had of them, who can
give a reason of their hope, than is of your Disciples, Believers, and Saints;
of no more account with their God than Infidels are, Amos 9. 7. While they can
give no other reason of their hope, but that they were borne and baptized in
the Nation.

Secondly, They are Children* and every one expects a Child's portion; Childrens
bread to be given unto them, and they will not receive it among the Dogs; They
are marvailously separated, Psalm. 4. We must be separated from them here, or in
hell live with them for ever. Learned, and Holy Sibs.
and now they can no more mix themselves with the wicked, " workers of
iniquity (though they would stoop to their foot; or take them into their
besome to do them good) than they can mix with their works; or light mix
with darkness, or Christ with Belial. The Children of God, they will not at
any time, or place, unless by a good warrant, much less at the Lords Table,
mix with the Children of the Dev^ll, their dearest fathers enemies as well as
theirs.

Thirdly, They are the Spouse of Christ, or His Bride; They will, through
grace, carry themselves honorably, and as becomes the Law of that Relation.
And if ever you will deal with them, which you will do, if you know the Law
of your Relation, you must take them out of the throng and tumult of the world,
as was said; The Bride of Christ is a virgin modest and shamefast; you must
appoint a set time and place to meet with them. If ye will not do so, not
feeling the law of your Relation upon your hearts, they will meet without you,
and they know who will give them a meeting (they doing all they do decently,
and in order) He, Who never failed them hitherto; You must take them out of the
throng, and tumult of the world alone, and apart, as the Beloved His Spouse,
Cant. 7. 11. and as He took the blind man out of the Town, Mark. 8. 23. And

Fourthly, These are the servants of the most High God; And the Law of that
Relation gives Law to their thoughts, all their saying and doings. Their eyes
look up to their Lord, what He Commands that do they, and what He forbids
that they avoid as an Adder in their path, or a she* Bear in their way: What
care they what the principles of Insant Baptism say, if these say but accoring
to that, we have heard said; they hear what the Word says, for the word has
bored their ear. They follow their Lord going before them by His Spirit in the
directions of His word, for they know His voice; and a stranger will they not
follow, but will flee from Him, for they know not (allow approove not of) the
voice of a Stranger.

Fifthly, They are the Friends of Christ; that is the Relation C^nt. 7. 15.
they stand in to Him; now He walks with them in His Galleries, and holds them
there, while He opens His whole soul unto them. All things, says Christ,
that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you; An Admirable
Scripture. Certainly Christ has heard great things of His Father. He is the
John 15. 15.
wisdom of the Father; He has been with the Father from all eternity; and the
Father loves Him; He will tell Him all the Glorious things He has in His
Heart, and Christ will hide none of these things from His Friends. Judge you
now how strong the law of this Relation is with all His Friends; will they not
deal friendly with Him? Think you: can they allow of any person, or thing,
that offends His glorious eyes? will they be a Companion of His enemies?
deriders of him, as the covetous are? A man's Companion is, (as he says) the
Counterpaine of himself. Of all other Mr. San^: page. 173.
things Company is the worst dissembled, as that worthy man has it from
Excellent Learned Preston. Truly they can say our fellowship is with the
Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ our Friend. And

Sixthly, Lastly, He is their Shepherd, they His sheep; they hear Him, and
follow Him in all things; And if they are as sheep without a Shepherd in
sight, They have an eye to see their great Shepherd, and over-seer of their
souls. He has undertaken for them, to follow them with His eye upon them
(where ever they are, to deal well with them Psalm. 32. 8. Jer. 40. 4.
,) and Him they will hear, and Him they will follow. An hireling they fly
from, and with Goats they cannot mix; In a word, and a plain word; They are
an abomination to the wicked, and the company of the wicked (visibly Prove. 29.
27.
such) in Church-Communions is an abomination unto them. They feed in clean
Pastures, upon the daintiest meat provided for them; They love to feed
together, to lie down together, to walk together, for what Communion betwixt
light, and darkness? Christ with Belial? with the wicked they cannot mix.

CHAP. IV.
First, WE have heard, That the Law of the Relation of a Minister (for that one
contains all those dignities, glories, titles of honor, His Lord has
bestowed upon him, calling them Angels, His par-Nymphs, or spokes-men to woo
and gain the good will of souls toward Him; Ambassadors, Fathers, Stewards,
Shepherds, Friends, we have heard how engageing all this is to a Minister to
preach pure Doctrine, and to live an holy life, which they must do, and cannot
do otherwise, having the Law of their Relation written upon their Hearts.

Secondly, We have heard also how engageing the law of the Relation the people
stand-in to their God in Christ, is, to them, being felt in them, written upon
their hearts by the finger of God; they cannot but walk (this law constraining
them) in the way of holiness, full-up to that Law, and their Rule, perfectly,
and with a right foot, as to their course, and way, or walk, though through
humane frailty, some of their steps may be out of the way.

SECT. I.
WE come now to the third part of our undertaking, which was to clear this
way of the Holy from the objections cast-in even by Ministers themselves, as
well as by their people (in Common account Godly, as their people are) as so
many scandalls or blocks, to keep from entrance upon the way, or from a
comfortable walking on-ward in it: And to tell our observation we have made
from our eye and ear, this first we find objected.

Object. 1. It is an uncouth way; who or how few enquire after it, or tread in
it? Not one Minister of ten, yet reputed Godly, nor one Man or Woman of twenty.
Nay may we not say scarcely one Minister of an hundred, or ten of a thousand
among the common people? To this we reply.

Ans. Granting what is said and cannot be denied, for where ye hear the
Ministers contradicting, you shall hear the people blaspheming, and this ye
and we hear every where. But this proves the Holiness of the way, because it
is spoken against every where, contradicted and blasphemed, Act. 13. 45. 28.
22. The way is as Christ Himself was, a contemned, slighted person, who asked
after him? and as the Church is, That walks in it (which was said) This is
Zion, which no man asks after, that is, very few, Jer. 30. 17.
But note it in passage, they that enquire not after this way, enquire as
little after Him, who is the way, the Truth, and the life; Who points His
people to this way, leads them in it, and carries them, as in His hand, to the
end of the way, eternal life; But this can be no grief to us, nor offense of
heart, That the way is so contemned, seeing Christ is so slighted, and His
Church so vilified; It is good to fare as Christ fares, and His Church fares,
The Spirit shall have the better cheer, if not at present, yet anon; The way
to Heaven is not the wide way of the world, which windeth to the Devil, but it
is a straight way, which few walk in, for few walk godly in Christ Jesus,
Holy Bradfords words.

Object. 2. Observe it well, and you shall see the poorest, and meanest of a
parish go this way, and but a sprinkling of them neither, here one and there
one, and yet so confident they seem to be of their way, they would have all
walk with them calling them to their foot.

Ans. Indeed they would (to speak to that first) wish, as that all could
prophecy, so all were as they are excepting their bands, scorns, and
reproaches, though these they must meet with, if they will be godly. But they
will never yield unto any, That this is any other but an holy confidence, and
their zeal for God, and love to His people, That all were the Lords people.
They wish that they could speak so gloriously of the Churches of Christ (we
mean as to the numbers of them) as ye speak of your Monstrous Church, They
are all holy; every one of them, and borne to Church Priviledges; But yet they
would account it almost blasphemy to say so to them; Indeed they could wish
they could see many wise men, and learned men, and rich men walking along with
them; and yet, though they see it not; yet they see no cause of discouragement
though. The day is come, which was prophesied off; The glory of Jacob shall be
made thin, and the fatness of Isa. 17. 4.
his flesh shall be made lean (we take it we may allude to that Scripture,
Relating there to a temporal desolation, which followed) for indeed the ways
of Sion lie desolate, and in comparison, forsaken; The wayfaring men cease
therein, and those few that walk therein are counted the veriest fools in the
world, (but by the fools of the world, the wicked, and unreasonable men there)
It was said of old, and it is the stumbling block still, which flesh and blood
will never pass over. Have any of the rulers, or of John 7. 48, 49
the Pharisees Believed on Him? But this people, which knows not the Law are
cursed; They were a poor people still, that saw their wants and were oppressed
with them; who followed Christ; These, and no other, except for His Loaves.

They must be fools (that is, they must know their own wisdom to be
foolishnes; their light darkness; their sight into heavenly Isa. 35. 8.
matters, blindness; their strength weakness, yea rottenness) they must be
fools, that walk in this way; There is, as one says, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Hill: Joh.
4. 19.
a kind of kingdom, which (of all the corruptions that are in the nature of
man) is the greatest impediment, and bar unto saving grace, and so to the
walking in His way; The Romans 8. 7.
carnal mind, or wisdom of the flesh; It cannot endure this way being enmity
it self against it; for such it is against God. Thy wisdom, and thy
knowledge, it has perverted Isa. 47. 10.
thee; and it is noted as a wonder, " That a great Company of the Priests were
obedient to the Act. 6. 7.
faith; That the Carnal Ministry should hearken after these things it were a
wonder. Learned men and wise men after the flesh, these are Lords they have no
need of God, they can live without Him; They bid, for the most part, defiance
to Him, and His ways; they would rather dye, than be pent-up in so straight,
and narrow a path: Indeed these Learned men (men puffed up with their Learning,
these knowing men (but yet know nothing as they ought to 1 Cor. 8. 2.
know, thinking they do know, and are lifted-up with that thought) these wise
men are as brutishly ignorant, as we a brutish, and sottish people are, at
these two principal points; for how little do they know about original and
actual sin, which is their disease? and how little about Christ, who is
their Physician? these are Mr Burges his words. So then they, that are wise,
and learned Page 41
after the flesh, must become fools, that they may be wise, and taught to
unlearne their Learning, as ^o any Confidence in that flesh, before they can
learn Christ, and know that they know Him, walking in His way. They to whom
the Mysteries of salvation are revealed must be babes. By whom is not meant
those, that have no knowledge, or are Children in understanding, but such as
are lowly, and humble, and weak, comparatively with others, and so carry
themselves, as weaned-ones, yet have their understandings opened, and have a
saving knowledge of Him, Who is eternal life, and their life; And this may
suffice to remoove that block of offense.

Object. 3. The principles of this way are not peaceable, for we see what work
they make, and what differences are caused between Neighbors and Friends.

Ans. We can say little to the peaceablenes of this way; we are verily
persuaded (which was more than once hinted before) flesh and blood will find no
peace, nor pleasure in it. It is a way most If you labor to do the work of
the Lord, pray think it not strange, if among men curses be your reward, and
detestation your wages. Dr. Owen. Jer. 15. 19. Page 10. Cum ab hominibus
damnamur a Deo absolvimur.
cross or contrary to one principle at least of Infant Baptism; And therefore
seeing that is reported to be a peaceable principle, this way, and every step
in it, standing in the greatest opposition to it, as do the remotest
extremes, this way can have no peace in it, as the world calls peace, nor
shall they have any peace from men, that preach-up this way, and walk in it.
But we hope the way is not the more to be disliked for this, but the more to be
liked, and the rather to be chosen; It is condemned of men, it is approved of
God: and that peaceable principle of Infant Baptism the more to be loathed. It
is a way of holiness, else those people, and Ministers, that have the Law of
their Relation written in their inward parts, would not walk in it. And
Holiness we know with the way of it, is a mere contraction to flesh, and
blood, and a very torment to it, as flesh and blood is a very bloody enemy to
Holiness; It would persecute and drive holiness out of the world, not thinking
enough, if it could help it, to drive Holiness out of the heart, whereat the
flesh is lifting every day, but conscience holds it, and will not let the form
of it go, the power was never there. Well; we grant that no principle of this
way, so far as we know, is peaceable; It yields no peace to the flesh, but to
the Spirit peace, peace. For being an holy or pure way, it must needs be
peaoeable; first pure, then peaceable. O it is a peaceable way James 3. 17.
to the Spirit; It yields more peace to the Spirit renewed, in one hour, than
that peaceable principle of Infant Baptism can yield the person all his life
time. Nay, that peaceable principle is like to end in desperate sorrow.

There is no peace to this peace, to be subject to the Prince of peace, the
more subject thou art in thy walk to Him, the more peace shall be upon thee;
The connection of these two is observable, Of the increase of His government,
and of His peace, there shall be no end; to show, says that Saint, on earth,
now in Heaven, D^. Preston.
That as His government increases in men's hearts, and is enlarged, so as a man
is made more subject to Him; so also peace Ephesians. 5. 9.
increases. In those, that are most subject, there is most peace, and
therefore He is called the Prince of peace, for where He rules as a Prince,
there is that peace, which He as a mighty Prince is able to procure to them.
But He landeth upon the soul, as an Enemy, and with His sword makes a Conquest
there, before He is to that soul a Prince of peace.

Object. 4. This way causes differences betwixt Neighbors, and Friends,
whereas, observe it well, they that walk in the way of a National Church,
both Ministers, and people, as Mr Hs: says, and we find it to be just so, are
very well accorded there is no difference between us.

Ans. This makes for the way still to be the way of Holiness, and that other way
to be the way of wickedness, because they are all (that walk in that broad
way) so well agreed and accorded. We do believe, That the veriest varlet in
the National Church agrees with Mr Hs: M^ Prynne and John Timson, and are all
three all one as to that Doctrine of free admission, That all are to be
admitted, even the worst of all, to the Lords Table, so be they stand not
excommunicated; These three are in one way, and of one judgment; how or
wherein can they differ? I have, said Luther, Non aliud habco robustius
Argumentum.
no stronger Argument against the Pope and his shavelings than this, That they
are all agreed and platted together like thorns against Christ, and the
offense of the Cross cease amongst them. This banding against Christ, and
(though in other things they differ greatly) all true Christians, has accorded
deadly enemies, as once it did Herod and Pilate; for upon the like account they
were made friends together, who before were at enmity between themselves, Luke
23. 12. Truly we cannot readily find a more peaceable principle, raking in the
dunghill of Popish superstitions, than is this, That although the worst of all,
are to have free Admission to the Lords Table. The Ministers of that persuasion
hold to this; the people love to have it so; what disagreement? For observe;

Secondly, Those places, and persons, and their way where their Religion is
rivited-in by Infant Baptism; Observe it in villages, Towns, Cities and see
how quietly and peaceably they live no difference among them in point of
Church-Administrations. Then again, observe those places, where Religion has
been Rivited-in by preaching the Gospel, the power of God to salvation, and
see what deadly fewdes, and devilish differences there are there; occasioned
by those hellish lusts in the hearts of men, which Gospell-light comes to
discover, and with a sword in its hand to slay, and with fire in its mouth to
consume.

We would remember more of Luthers words here also; If we were all quiet, and
lived at peace one with another, while yet we live in our sins, It is a sure
sign the Gospel is not come unto us; or it be come it has made no conquest
over us: it has not thrown fire amongst us, we have not felt it cutting like
a sword, making division betwixt us, and our lusts; for how well accorded, and
like Friends do we live, while Friends, and well accorded with our lusts?
Truly, said Luther, Nisi tumultos istos vide^em Christum in mundo non crederem.
Math. 10. 34. Luke 12. 51.
unles I should see what I do see, and hear what I do hear, words like
swords drawn out against God, and all good men, troubles, and tumults, and
divisions, I should not believe the Gospel to be in the world, for it brings a
sword with it where ever it comes, and causes Division; As we have read from
our Lords own mouth, and so have we heard, and seen. It is notable if we can
observe it* That the people of God were never vexed with more, and more strange
adversities or grievances to the flesh, than at that when the Lord Christ lived
amongst them; when were there more leapers, palsied men and women, lunaticks;
and men possessed with Devils? so usually it is with our Spirits, when Christ
Jesus our Lord lives within us; for He brings a sword, and makes Division
there; before He establishes peace in our borders. We proceed-on here.

Tell us we pray you what difference have you observed, for we doubt not, but
you have made your observation in the place where you were borne, betwixt
Pastor and people there; or in any other place, where you have made your
observation, and there is like Priest, like people, as the one is, such like
are the other, and a just agreement betwixt them; for indeed what should make
difference here in this broad way of the Nation? The whole Nation is Baptized
and every person there; and now Religion is Rivited into them by their Infant
Baptism* and thereby they are instated in, and possessed of all
Church Priviledges, for that is the peaceable *principle thereof. Certainly
those make-bates, the Spirit of the world without and that unclean Spirit of
man within will cause no difference there: They all goe-up to their meeting
place, as friends, then up to the Lords Table, as Believers, Disciples, Saints,
and in the Afternoon to the Alehouse, if they please their Church will pass
no censure upon them, what difference can be here? for Ask them now, what they
would have more to make peace amongst them, and to take away all differences?
Their Minister will give it to them, having indulged them so much, if they can
tell what they would have more, as to Church Administration; We te^^ our
persuasion, That Satan himself, as to their Church matters, desires no more,
and he seeks their peace so far, that he will not disquiet them; and therefore
he will not visibly appear among them, though he is their God, and Prinoe by
choice, and the head of their company, amongst whom there is so full a consent,
and no difference at all. To shut up this, The way of the holy, wherein Christ
walks with them, or in them, as they in Him, is as different from the way
wherein the unclean walk, as their person; are, so they look not to the
differences; They are no cause, but an occasion of it Every man should ^ay. The
occasion, did b^t help, the p^incip^ll; was my heart. Heb. 12. 14.
They follow peace with all men, and (giving a just offense to no man) holiness,
without which no man shall see God. We will take in here worthy M^ Mantons
words. All true peace, and sweet agreement, is founded in purity, and holiness,
which meekneth spirits; And the purest, and sweetest agreement is in the truth.
First there is a pure language, and then one shoulder, Zeph. 3. 9. One faith is
urged by the Apostle, as the ground of union, Ephesians. 4. He will bring it to that
at length; The world looks at purity as the makebate, but it is the great
reconciler. The world would have stirs ended, they would have no difference
in Church matters, neither would they have holiness; So in those matters they
must be well accorded amongst themselves. But the counsel is seasonable, Have
salt in your selves, and peace one with another, Mark 9. 50. Doctrine must be
kept wholesome, and Truth retain its savor, and acrimony, and then look
after Agreement.

Certainly where God has put enmity between those, there will be a difference
whilst the world stands; what a difference? what a war? what a contention?
what a bloody field is fought within the bosom of some Godly persons at all
times? If not of every Godly person sometimes? The flesh fighting against the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
the Spirit against the flesh, for these two are contrary; The carnal Romans 8.
7.
mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. You may as well persuade darkness to shine, as the fleshly mind
to obey, and be at peace with the spirit of the mind renewed. When all
differences are accorded, betwixt righteousness, and unrighteousnes; Truth and
falsehood, so as these may kiss, and embrace each other; When Christ, and
Belial; Earthly Adam, and spiritual Adam, when these shall meet and comply
each with other; Then shall the broad way, and the narrow be accorded too, and
no difference between the walkers therein. There is no more sure sign of an
holy way, than that the unholy differ from it, come not near it, turn their
back upon it, and pass away as they should do from sin, turn from it as
an abomination.

That is an holy way sure; whereto the wicked stand so cross, and contrary.
Let our souls choose, and delight in the choice of that way, which is an
abhorring to the flesh.

Object. 5. Yea, but they That pretend to this holy way, and to walk in it,
make it but a pretense sure; They are quite out of the way; for observe how
supercilious they are, and censorious, they pass by others with a kind of
scorn, bidding them as they bid, stand by, come not near us, for we are
holier, than you.

Ans. To this we will say, this first; That look what a man is in being he is
in working; the meaning is, If his being is in Christ, his walk is in Christ;
If he be out of Christ, he is without God in the world, and his walk is after
the flesh, and according to the world most contrary to Holiness.

But for this holy man, that walks in the ways of holiness; In desire and
endeavor his conversation is most exact, and pure; And of any sin, though he
cannot say he is free from any, yet he can say his soul abhorres the least
slighting, much more the scorning of any, be he or she never so bad; Oh no,
they that converse with him are his witnesses, and God also, that he is so
far from scorning, or slighting of others, that he is more inclined to
mourning, than to scorning; he can mourn over the Contrary minded, and, if he
might be suffered, he would rep^oove them for their contrary walking, even
weeping, letting as many tears fall from his eyes as words from his mouth; or
when his eyes are dry his heart mournes, or he wishes it might be so; And
groans from the heart, are as acceptable as tears from the eyes, as was said:
perishing for ever is such a mournful, dreadful thing to his thoughts; He
considers withal, who made the difference? and what has he, that he has not
received? then why should he glory either in himself, or over others? No he
that walks humbly with his God, cannot walk proudly before others; he is
meek, and gentle toward all, waiting when God will give repentance.

There is one consideration, and two Scriptures amongst many, which the good
Spirit has brought home unto this man, and sealed upon his heart; whence it is
he walks humbly, loathing himself, and admiring free grace.

The Consideration is, That all the Sons of Adam by nature Mr. Brinsley.
are, as one says, like so many carkases buried together in the same
Churchyard, or lying together in the same Golgotha, or Calvery, the same
Charnell house. Now this man, suppose it so, has Joh. 5. 25.
heard the voice of the Son of God in the Ministry of the Gospel, and now he
is risen from the dead, for Christ has given himself; Ephesians. 5. 14.
Surely he has no cause of glorying over his brother, that may lie still
rotting in that grave, but infinite cause has he of glorying in his God all
the day long, who has made such a difference, even because it pleased Him;
whereas, as to outward accomplishments, and natural endowments, his brother
might be like a flourishing Bay Tree, and he a poor sh^^^b, or bramble-bush:
His pride were Eccles. 4. 14.
intolerable, that out of a prison comes to reign, or of a despicable
wretch, is new become Prince in all Lands; This is the Psalm. 45 16.
humbling consideration, He has regarded the low estate of His handmaiden; The
well minding an oppressing Egypt, and an Read Holy Mr Sanders, p 103.
howling wilderness, will keep the heart very low in Canaan.

The Scriptures are these, And such were some of you, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Observe we
well what some of them were: Speak evil of no man, be no brawlers, but
gentle, showing all meekness unto all men: why? for we our selves also were
etc. Tit. 3. 2, 3. We thought it fit to be the longer here (though indeed we
hasten to an end) because we find good Mr Baxster after his manner, dealing not
so kindly, as became him with the people of God, at this point, and in these
words; I confess I have no great zeal to shut Christ out of all other
Societies, and coope Him up to the Congregations of these few, that say to all
the rest of the Churches stand by, we are more holy than you. These words are
in his Preface to Mr Hotchks his Treatise of forgivenes of sins, where they
speak very worthily each of other; He dips his pen in the same gall writing to
the Separatists, and Anabaptists in England; The Pharisees liturgy is of too
frequent use in the separated Congregations [ I thank Thee (O God) that I am
not, as other men are etc. nor even as this Publican] Thus he speaks not making
a difference. It might be easily shown here, That this good man frequently
wounds the most eminent Men amongst us for learning and piety, through the
sides of Separatists, Anabaptists, and Antinomians -- But we proceed.

Object. 6. It is said, This way of the Holy is a cloystered way.

Ans. We say that reasonably this cannot be said against it. For how does it
appear? They can say here much after the words their Lord and Master spoke;; I
ever taught in the Synagogues, John 18. 20.
and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have said
nothing? We may, we hope give-in curious Fullers his gloss upon this (we mean
in point of expressing himself by his pen) understand Him, that He never
wilfully affected Conventicles, as ashamed of his doctrine, or willingly
declined the Temple, when afforded convenient entrance thereunto; otherwise He
taught also on the Mount, in the Ship, in Synagogues, in private houses. The
Godly Ministers may say much the same; They preach in the public place, on
the stated day; and it grieveth them to see how thin their Congregations are,
yet when they are thinnest, and they have fewest hearers, even then they know
their Lord has sewer; Though indeed the people come more willingly to the
public place, for they Idol^ze places still, as they do their duties and
their sins, very superstitious that way; they choose to pray, and to hear
chiefly in the public place, what they do in the closet, God knows; It
seems but little, or to little purpose, by that they do in point of prayer in
the open place, and in point of practice at home, and abroad, which is with
most as contrary to the Rule of Gods word, as if they never heard a Sermon, or
the word of life preached unto them: But we were saying, they do not cloister
up themselves, nor their Doctrines, They are not, as a 'Candle under a bushel,
but on a Candle-sticke, and so would give light to all that are in the house.
If they speak in a private place, as ordinarily they do, and must so do,
come-in to hear, as many as will, the more the more welcome. They make a
separation no where; but at the F^nt (as they may see cause and warrant from
the best, and best learned, Calvin, Perkins, Amesius) and the Lords Table,
there they depart from the world. And there they have as clear a warrant to
do it: viz: to keep Dogs from taking holy things, as they have for staving
off a Dog from flying in their faces, or from leaping-up their Table.

You will say what? before the Church has passed their Censure on them, and
declared them to be Dogs?

It was said before; Christ will neither wait the leisure of the State nor of
your Church; He has given power into His Ministers hand to do if not more,
yet as much as that, To keep the wicked from communicating in holy things; The
manner of Godly Ministers in ancient times, as ancient Records tell you;
surely even in these matters it may be said as we read; The Remnant of Mich. 5.
Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from the Lord, as the
showers upon the grass, that tarryeth not for man, nor waits for the sons of
men; so we have concluded, That godly Ministers have as sure a warrant to keep
out dog^ and swine from communicating in holy things, as any man has* from
keeping a dog from flying in his face, or a swine from entri^g his closet; and
if ^e feels the power of this Relation upon his heart, he will find power
enough in his hand entrusted there by his Lord and Master Himself so to do;
and not to wait the State or Churches leisure, what they will do: Their Lord
has given them a key, and they must give it their hand; He power to them, they
must put it forth for them, and if not here at the Lords Table, then no where,
the key is of no use.

CHAP. V.
WE come to that, which the great Devider, that Selah-Hammalekoth, if we may
express it so, that rock of Divisions betwixt person and person, people and
people. Thus it is objected;

Object. 7. The people of God, as they call themselves, make a separation from
others, these shall not come to them, they will not come to these.

We will hear what two ready Scribes, well instructed both unto the kingdom
of heaven, have said to this Dividing thing we call separation. We will set
down what that holy and learned man says, who speaks much in a little,
contracting, as we may say, the spirits of a point into a few words, which are
these; Separation Eschol, p. 51, 52, 53.
generally hears ill in the world; and yet there is a separation suitable to
the mind of God: He that will not separate from the world and false worship, is
a separate from Christ. Now the separation here commanded from any person, is
not in respect of natural affections, nor spiritual care of the good of their
souls, Romans 9. 3. Nor yet in respect of Duties of Relation, 1 Cor. 7. 13. Nor
yet in offices of love and Civil converse, 1 Cor. 5. 10. 1 These. 4. 12. Much
less is not seeking their good and prosperity, 1 Timothy 2. 1. or not
communicating good things unto them, Gal. 6. 10. or living profitably and
peaceably with them, Romans 12. 18. But in (1) Manner of walking and
conversation, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. (2) Delightful converse and
familiarity, where enmity and opposition appears, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. (3) In way of worship and ordinances of fellowship, Rev. 18. 4.
These three, and the like commands and discoveries of God are most express*
Necessity abundantly urges it, spiritual profit, and edification no less
requires it. Causes separation from established Churches, walking according to
the order of the Gospel (though perhaps failing in the practice of some things
of small concernment) is no small sin: but separation from the sinful
practices, and disorderly walkings, and false unwarranted ways of worship in
any, is to fulfill the precept of not partaking in other men's sins. To delight
in the company, fellowship, society, and converse of unsavory disorderly
persons, proclaims a spirit not endeared to Christ. So far that Holy and
learned man.

We will make bold also to subjoyne worthy Mr Ant: Palmers Page 165.
words, which are these in the second part of his Answer to Mr Hs: objection
against separation from the wicked, unless in case of excommunication.

What if a Congregation be so leavened with Customary ignorance, and
profaneness, and scoffing at Holiness (as it is too too easy to find such; nay
where may one find better in the state they are now-in) and a godly preacher
comes to this people, and a few Godly own him; Must this preacher and those few
Godly be enforced to communicate with such? (after due means used for the
instruction of the rest) or may they not withdraw from the rest who are
scoffers at Godliness? sure we believe God and Angels and Saints will justify
such a separation in this ordinance, and to draw into a closser communion to
practice Discipline among themselves, specially while such a Congregation was
never orderly united, and joined, together by a free submission to the Gospel,
having in most places never enjoyed it in the power of it; which Consideration
indeed, wipes off many objections. So far that worthy man.

Truly, Reader, thou have the very marrow, and substance of the whole matter
already. Yet because we have made it our very work and business in this place
to remove the scandalls in the way to this separation, and the offenses taken
against it, and withal to speak to the understanding or the simple, as we our
selves are slow and dull to conceive; we take leave to proceed according to our
proposed Method, and this we would say first.

First, We take it from Holy Writ, That this must be, there must be a
separation. For as holy Bradford said, There are but two Masters, Christ and
Satan; Two kinds of people, righteous and wicked; Two ways, the way of
Holiness, and the way of wickedness; Two mansion places, heaven and hell; Now it
is not possib^e to serve both these Masters; If you join to one, you separate
from the other: And as impossible for the one, and the same person to be holy,
and unholy at the some time, as it is to be in an extreate heat, and in an
extreme cold at one, and the same time; As impossible to have our foot stand
in both these ways, as it is for one foot to tread Eastward, and the other
West; or to fix one eye on heaven, and the other on earth. Impossible also
that we should arrive at heaven, when we sail with wind and tide hell-ward,
as that one and the same way should lead us to two d^ffe^ent and contrary
Mansion places.

Hence then it must needs follow (to go over this again) that here must of
necessity be a separation. They that will with full purpose of heart serve
their great Master the Lord Jesus* Christ, must turn their backs upon them,
that will serve the other Master; And separate from them, as to any
familiarity, or intimacie with them. They that are resolved at this high point,
they will be holy, they have not a velliety, a faint wish, or cold desire, but
they will be holy, and walk holily; As the men of the world say, they will be
rich, come on it what will, they will be rich, though they make shipwreck of
faith (the profession of faith) and of a good Conscience: what care they, they
will be rich, though they pierce themselves thorough with many sorrows; The
others say, as resolutely too, with the help of God, and blessing upon the
means, they will be Holy; These now must make a separation from the other.
They cannot be holy, and unholy together; It is said that seldom it is, that
the inward and outward man prosper together; such an enemy walks and
prosperity is to the souls weal. But certain it is, holiness, and unholines
are so far from thriving together, that these would come no nearer together,
than the East comes to the West; Therefore the holy, and unholy must part, and
separate, as their ways must part, and when they come to the end of their way,
then there must be an everlasting separation, and as far, as heaven is from
hell those so separated mansion places. In the second place.

Secondly, Gods people must separate, for He has as marv^ilously separated
them, His gracious Saints, as He did between the Israelites, and Egyptians:
Now, how unworthy had it been, and Psalm. 4. 3.
unbecoming, for the Israelites to have mixed themselves with the Egyptians? I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will 2 Cor. 6.
be their God, and they shall be My people; Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you; and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters says the Lord Almighty. As if the Lord had said, not else; If ye
expect I should walk with you, ye must walk as is comely for sons, and
daughters, that look to have that sweet and comfortable presence of God with
them. If ye walk with the world, and as the world do, that is familiarly, and
not having buisines with them, nor with an intent to do good unto them; If ye
will walk with them, I will not walk with you says the Lord. If ye will not
separate from them, I Will separate from you, and woe unto you, when I depart
from you. It is, as if a man should be conversing with some nasty poluted
Creature, while He is talking with the greatest Prince on earth; or as if a
Bridegroom to some great Princess, should be courting of a strumpet before
his Ladies face; whence we conclude, That there is as good a warrant for
Ministers and people, that know the law of their Relations, to separate from
the National Church, as they have to separate from the world, and from
Babylon; God will have it so; If Ishmael fall a mocking, out with him, says
the Lord, Genesis 21. 9. 12. If they will separate from Me, separate ye from them.
Gods people will do as their Lord bids them.

Thirdly, We say that Godly Ministers, and their people cannot be said so much
to make a separation from the wicked, as these from them; The wicked will have
no communion with godly Ministers or people, unless at the Lords Table, o^ at
a feast of wine, and strong drink, we mean, where the flesh is feasted, no
where else, they abhor all other communions. You must communicate with them
in sin, else they will have no Communion with you; The world loves to Converse
with whom they love, their own; And should not they, that are chosen out of
the world love to do so too? The Godly need not separate from the wicked,
these will separate from them; These can endure holy Company no more, than they
can endure Holiness, which they have persecuted out of their house, and would
persecute it out of the world; And should these be admitted to partake of holy
things, who persecute holiness, and will Communicate with you no where else, but
at the Lords Table? and if not there, no where, And why so willingly, and
chearefully there? to speak that by the way.

Holy Bradford gives you, we think, the Reason of that, wherefore your people
are so ready to Communicate with you at the Lords Table? only what he spoke of
the Mass, we may speak of the Lords Supper (as to that we are speaking off,
and contending againg) The Mass will not bite the people, nor make them to
blush. Nor will this Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but the word
preached will do it, if it be heard, and obeyed, it will bite, and make us
blush, it will cut like a sword, and burn like fire, it will torment the
flesh, therefore the wicked will not come at it, if it be not a toothlesse
preaching; but if it bite they will bite the preacher, at least snarle upon
him, showing their teeth, or turning their backs upon the word; but setting
their faces to the Lords Table, thither they will hasten, there being nothing
(now that the word preached has not done its work) that can trouble them, or
make them ashamed; They may come Devils to it, and go home Devils, for no
man finds fault, said that Blessed man; The wicked converse with none but
those, that are like themselves; ye shall find them still platted together like
thorns; surely it gives a great lesson to the godly, tells what they should
do -- but we proceed, And

Fourthly, Take leave to tell you our persuasion, that if the Ministers shall
make no difference here between the precious, and the vile, but deal forth to
the one, as to the other at the Lords Table, the godly in Christ Jesus, all the
truly godly all over the Nation will be gleaned forth from them, shortly, they
shall not have one among them to Communicate with them. For if, as is recorded
of John, he would not come unto the Bath where Cerinthus was, that Blasphemer;
Can we think that the godly in Christ Jesus truly and indeed such will
Communicate among you, who admit as vile, loathsome, and abominable persons as
Cerinthus was, for you admit all, if not excommunicated. We will shutt up this
with a Complaint we have read, or heard off: where is now the zeal of former
times? the Communion of Saints? the heating and whetting of one another by
mutual exhortations? where is the boldness for the Lord? we have the light of
those times much increased, but the heat much abated; their light was burning,
ours but shineing at the most, and for the most part; Ignis, qui in illis
calidus in nobis lucidus tantum.

Fifthly, In the fifth place, and to speak that more fully out, which was
hinted before in the second Paragraph. They that work righteousness can no
more (upon choice) mix with the workers of iniquity, than they can mix with
their works. For their Lord, having set apart (marveilously separated, or made
wonderful) Exodus 33. 16. Psalm. 4. 3.
him, that is Godly for Himself, has given to this separated person a
principle of His own, even His own Spirit, to enable him to set apart, that is,
to consecrate, dedecate devote or sanctify himself, and his All to God; To
live all the days of his life as a sanctified or sequestered person to God, and
His service; and from wicked ways and companies. Be ye separate, and touch no
unclean Math. 5. 48. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15
thing, 2 Cor. 6. 16. God by His Spirit and Word, has made them like Himself
perfect and Holy in their degree and measure, as He is perfect and Holy above
all measure. These people are by way of similitude, likeness, or resemblance,
the Image of God being renewed, and stamped upon them, as their God is,
therefore they carry themselves God-like; Godliness being nothing else but a
Godlikenesse; So that as it is said, There is none like unto the God of
Jesurun: Deuteronomy. 33. 26. 29.
so also is it said in the same place; Who is like unto Thee O people saved by
the Lord? There is none like Thee, O Lord God, says David. It follows, What
Nation is like Thy people, even like 2 Samuel 7. 22, 23.
Israel? And hence it must follow, as Moses says, speaking of Gods people, So
shall we be separated, I and Thy people, from all Exodus 33. 16, Number. 22. 9.
the people that are upon the earth; and, they shall dwell alone, and shall not
be reckoned among the Nations. The sum is this, They that are made like God,
they cannot, upon choice, familiarly converse with, and delight in the company
of the wicked; A separate people, whom the wicked-one shall not touch, must
touch no unclean thing.

Sixthly, In the last place, we would remember, what two persons said in their
Contest for the Truth, and against the opposers thereof, and apply it to our
selves; Though, said he, I cannot dispute, yet I can dye for the Truth. The
other, though, said he, I cannot unfold Popish Arguments, yet I have two maine
grounds upon which I can stand, and bid defiance to Popery, to the Pope, his
Jesuits, and all the Papists in the world, Equivocation, and the Powder-plott:
So, though we can do little by way of Argument pro, or con, as they say, yet
we have two grounds upon which we stand resolved to bid defiance to Church
Communions with those that ground all they do, as to those signeing, and
sealing ordinances, or Gospel Administrations upon the Principles of Infant
Baptism only; (1) The first ground is, They have no Argument (that ever we
could meet with) but from flesh, or fleshly reason to draw us to it, or
persuade to a likeing of it: Now flesh Dr. Owen, Sanits persev: p. 298.
is not only a fool, but folly it self; not to be cured, but killed; nor
stirred up, but mortified; as that excellently Learned man says; And carnal
Reason, as it is the great Idol of corrupt hearts, so it is the feircest enemy
of God, and His grace.

2. The true Church is Christ's Bride, or Spouse, your Church is not Turatio
stulta es non sapis quae Dei sunt, etc. Luth: T: 3. 73.
the Bride of Christ, for would the Ministers of your Church prostitute her to
-- we will say no more, though if we should speak it-out it would be much the
same, which holy Bradford spoke against the Pope, and his Priests in his Letter
to the University, and Town of Cambridge; Can the Pope, and his Praelates
mean honestly, which make so much of the wife, and so little of the husband?
The Church they magnify, but Christ they contemn, if this Church were an
honest woman (that is Christ's wife) except they would make much of the Husband
Christ, and His Word she would not be made much of them, and admit they know
not what, or whom into His Chamber of presence.

CHAP. VI.
ANd now we think we have the hardest work behind to make a sweet and
cordial close with the Truth, and one with the other, and all in Christ; yet
why should this be an hard thing, if we can approove our selves; (we take the
boldness to rank our selves with you, so inferior though we be) lovers of
peace, and truth, and Friends to Righteousness, how can we be Adversaries? not
to say, enemies unto one another? We would have our Lord Christ call us
Friends, and deal tenderly with us, we must then more than show our selves
friends, and accordingly deal one with another; we must deal faithfully. So
deal with us, we pray you, as you may see cause; Reproove us, rebuke us, we
shall take it as a great favor, as an excellent oil from you, which shall not
break the Head, as a fruit of your love chiefly, as the case may be, shown in
Rebukes, though yet we think it not comely to return love for love,
considering the lownes, and meannesse of our persons; yet we should fail in
our Duties, and Christian offices we owe to each other, if we should not tell
you our fear at least, that the Lord our God has a quarrel with you; give us
leave Dear, and Honored Sirs to tell-out our fear, and what makes us to
fear.

SECT. I.
WE think Heldegardis her prophecy looks very wistly toward you, as bended
against you. The Masters likewise, and Prelates do sleep, despising justice,
and laying it aside. A little after, in a certain vision, the Church appeared
to her in the shape of a woman complaining, That the Priests had bewrayed her
face with dust, and rent her coat, and that they did not shine over the
people, neither in Doctrine, neither in example of life; And for these horrible
crimes and impieties, she threatens and prophesies unto them Gods most heavy
wrath, and doleful punishments.

This prophecy shall be to them that hate the Lord, and the interpretation
thereof to His, and our enemies; That ye may not be found in the Number of
these, nor be dealt with according to their measures, as these shall be dealt
withal, we take the boldness to Commend unto you certain heads of
Consideration.

First, That the day is hastening when your work shall be made manifest, and
tried as by fire; Ye should fear at the thoughts of the judgments, which is
written, and shall certainly fall upon those, who have polluted His Sanctuary,
done violence to the law of His House, That none that were unclean in any
thing should enter in there. Ye have suffered persons not separated from their
filthiness to eat and drink in His holy place* Ye will not bring swine into
your Hall, yet you will bring them into your Lords chiefest room, He has
visible upon this earth. Ye may bear rule for a time by these means, the
people loving to have it so, To have their Nasty persons and unclean courses
dawbed, palliated, and covered over with plausible names, and glorious titles;
But what A^^^ius sub (...) ^a^cti p^^fessione peccat. S^v:
will ye, and they do in the end thereof, when He shall be very jealous for
His Namesake, and the House of His Glory?

Secondly, Be pleased to Consider, and show your selves men, The Lord God of
Hosts, beholding the Seas of blood, and rivers of Tears, and hearing the
cries, sighs, and groans of all His destitute, poor, and needy ones in the
three Nations, and all over the world has rode upon the heavens to the Help
of His Church, and in His Excellency on the sky, that is, He has helped His
Church speedily, and showed His state, and magnificence, when He came so to
help her, making His Arm bare of flesh, bringing His people hitherto out of
their Egypt: made His mighty ones tread upon the waters, pass over mighty
floods; leap over walls; skip over mountains; break bows of steel, and
bars of Iron; set their feet upon the necks of their Enemies; Bind, destroy
them, whose height was like the height of the Cedars, and were as strong, and
as well rooted, as the Oaks; yet, destroy their fruit from above, and their
root from beneath; and it was done; The Lord gave His servants Dominion over
the mighty, so as His Warriors might say, O my soul, thou have trod down
strength. And all this in order to an Imperious Reformation anon, which will
not leave an hoof behind: and can only answer the desires of the faithful
(who cannot be content with an half reformation, no more than with an half
Christ) And shall certainly be, even full-up to their desire, so soon as He
has by His Spirit, and Word prepared them for it, who has said, He will give
them an expected end. But now see what all is come to, if the people of God
should be at your allowance? They should have a Reformation, which is a very
deformation, Beareing only upon the Principles of Infant Baptism. From this
Reformation, though ye make the best of it, the Lord deliver us, say all the
godly people all over the Land. It may serve your Church well enough: But is as
contrary to the Church of Christ, as darkness is to light, hell is to heaven.
And to A rest your thoughts here, we will offer this more to your Consideration.

Thirdly, Be pleased to Consider, That the Lord has done for His people in
these days, as once He did; He gave Egypt for Isa. 43. 3.
their Ransom, Ethiopia, and Seba for them; So has He done now; He has given
men for His Church, and people for her life; may we not conclude of these
things in the language of the Prophet, who has heard such a thing? who has
seen such a thing? Isa. 66. 8. Surely we may say, as Moses to Israel; *Has
God assayed to g^e, D^u 4 ^
and take Him a nation by Temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war,
and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched A^me, and by great terrors according
to all that the Lord our God does for us in England before our eyes; To take a
Nation out of the midst of a Nation is our case: A Church out of a Church we
^ad almost said, but there some would be angry. If England, finding (as now it
does) her children struggling in her womb, should go and enquire of the Lord,
as Rebecca did, Genesis 25. 22. Why is it thus? The Lord may answer, as He did to
her, Two Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated
from thee; A Nation fearing God, and a Nation Blaspheming God: a Nation seeking
Reformation, and a Nation opposing Reformation, And then.

Fourthly, Consider in the next place, whether ye have not, and still do
mingle these Nations together? an holy Nation, and an unholy together? a Royal
people, and a base slavish people, (slaves to their own lusts) whether ye do
not mingle these together? (if they will be mingled) at the Lords Table?
between whom the Lord has marvailously separated; setting a Selah-Hammat^koth,
a Rock of divisions betwixt them; But we need not make a Question here; ye
have joined these, making them to sodder together, if they, the godly we mean,
will take your liberty, and be drawn out to meet at the Lords Table.

And do not charge us here we pray you, nor let the Reader so do, That we in
any of this have charged any of the Presbyteriall Churches, no not yours,
provided, ye come off clearly from the way, and judgment M^ Humph: stands in,
as ye would from a quag-myre, wherein ye are sinking over head and ears:
Presbyterian Churches, we hope, are for the most part of them, faithfully
administered and therefore cannot admit of a mixed profane multitude to the
Lords Table.

Fifthly, Be pleased to Consider, and ask your selves what ye have been doing
all these blessed times all along while the Lord wonderful in Counsel, and
excellent in work, has been doing such glorious things in all the peoples
sight, that are not blinded with light. Certainly the voice of rejoicing and
salvation is still, as it has been, in the Tabernacles of the righteous.

And they are working together with God in His own strength, (who does all) to
helpe-on the glorious work of the Lord, and carry it on to an expected end: so
serving glorious providence, their God instructing, and enabling them so to
do: Nor are they discouraged at all, but rather the more animated, and
spirited to their work in the power of His might, seeing the contrary workings
(which must be looked for in such times) of the Devil, and Satan together with
all his cursed Children. He has great wrath now; (why so angry?) because he
knows his time is but short. We crave leave to put it to the Question again;
What are ye doing now, about the work we call Reformation, to the Midwyfring,
or bringing it forth into the world? do ye a sweat at this Neh. 3. 20. a
Nescit tarda molimina spiritus sanctus. Qui non zelat, non a^a^. We do not
love reformation, if we have not zeal for it Satan endures no mediocrity nor
will God; you must be wholly and ^^^^ely His* or lot at all; your ove must be
much, else He will account it no little ^atred; Not to love God and work for
H^^ in the same degree, hea^, and height of love, as we ^ought, is a degree of
hat^ed o^ Him.
work? do ye build earnestly? as they at Jerusalems wall, he was fyery hot at
his work, flagrante animo, as Junius translateth it; This work will not be
done else; As the Lord God has a zeal at this work, so have all His
servants, they work for God now, as the Devil and his servants work against
Him. The Devil knows he has but a little time, he will do as much work, as
possibly he can, and he will do it earnestly, and presently, he will not delay
a Minutes time, he sees all will escape out of his hands else; see what present
work he makes by the Ranters hands, and Quakers hands, and by the hands of the
corrupt Ministry in the Land, that filth, garbage, and common sink all over
the earth: see what work he makes by them, in their Churches and Chappells;
And among the rest see what work he has made by two at the least, and indeed
by all the carnal Ministry over the Nation. Verily, Dear, and Honored Sirs,
ye must work, as earnestly for the Lord, and Christ, as the Devil does now
with all his fellow-helpers in this iniquity do work against Him.

Sixthly, In the next place be pleased to Consider, what ye have been praying
for all these times? ye love Jerusalem, as ye have mourned for her; ye seek
for peace, and prosperity heartily, your peace here, and hereafter being
involved therein; ye are fellow-Commoners with her; joynt-adventurers in the
same Ship, on the same bottom, consider again, and again what ye have been
praying for all these tempest^ous times? when this Ship has been in so much
danger; sometimes covered over with waves, tossed with Tempests, and not
comforted; What? were ye sleeping all that time, or were ye praying? We will
take the boldness to answer for you here, so be ye will make full proof, that
ye are the Lords Remembrancers, and then you can never hold your peace, day nor
night; ye have enquired after the Accomplishment of those glorious things the
Lord has caused to be prophesied off, and His people to pray for grounding
themselves upon His promise, and His Oath; The calling of the Jews; The utter
downfall Dr. G: return of prayers. Page 13.
of all Gods Enemies; The flourishing of the Gospel; The full parity, and
liberty of Gods Ordinances; The particular flourishing, and good of the
Society, and place ye live-in; all they whose hearts are right, have, and do
treasure-up many such prayers, as these, and sow much of such precious seed,
which they must be content to have the Church (it may be) in after ages to
reap; We would add to these Holy, and Learned Man's words, those we read some
leaves after, page 43. That which was the Spirit of supplication in a man, when
he prayed, Rests upon him, as the Spirit of obedience in his course; so as that
Dependence he has upon God for the mercy he seeks for, is a special motive,
and means to keep him fearful of offending, and diligent in Duty to look
to his paths, to walk, and behave himself, as becomes a suitour, as well as
to come and pray, as a suitor.

To apply these momentous and weighty words to our purpose. Ye pray for the
calling of the Jews. Then must ye pray for the remooving of that, which has
let^ed hitherto, and will let till it be remooved. Surely the earth must be
shaken first, all those Crowns shattered to pieces, that will not be laid
down at the feet of Christ; The Heavens must be shaken too, else we are much
mistaken, all false Religions in the world, how specious soever in man's eye;
Gods house must be swept too, and His floor purged, from, you should know
what, because these out-sweepings, which must be, are your own doings; Then,
Is your mind intent upon all this? as your mind is, such your Prayers are, as
to that matter. Ye pray for the downfall of Antichrist; Take heed, ye do not
in whole, or in part, hold that-up, you profess to pray down. Ye pray for the
flourishing of the Gospel, and that your labors therein in special may be
taking and prevailing with your people, that thereby life, and immortality may
be brought to light unto their souls. Ye must not now practice cross to your
prayers, ye must not obstruct your own way to the blessing ye seek for: ye
must not then give that to Baptism, which the Lord Himself gives to the
preaching of His Word. So much has been spoken to this before, that we will
add little to it now, only this; Your Leaarned Brother fears not to tell us,
we owe our Religion to Infant Baptism. Truly we owe it, and give unto it as
much honor, we think; as he does, or ought to do, being an Ordinance of
Christ, and to be administered according to due order, as He has prescribed in
His word (which is we conceive to give due honor to it; yet we fear to say,
we owe our Religion to it;) no more than we owe our lives to that Master, who
has given us to wear his badge, or livery, we owe him all the service that is
due from a Creature to a Creature, but we owe our lives to God, our best
service, and all: so we owe not, as we conceive, our Religion to Infant
Baptism; but to the glorious work of the Spirit, together with the Ministry
of the word; thereby, as an Instrument in the Spirits hand, He Rivi^^s
Christian Religion into the body of a Nation, and into the hearts of His
people, grown up to the years of understanding; *Let the Covenant be opened
first, the abundant riches of grace therein, through Jesus Christ; whereunto we
owe our selves, and all, and the seals will follow of course; We take leave to
tell our persuasion: A godly Minister loses more by giving so much to Infant
Baptism, than he will gain by his praying for the success of the Gospel,
his God has entrusted him with.

Again, ye pray for the full (...), and liberty of Gods Ordinances, do ye
not? Take heed ye do not (...) ^ut the sinewe of this your prayer, and quite
weaken it, by granting a liberty, free Amission to all, whilst you set parity
aside, as a neglected thing, though it be the maine, even the all of the Duty.
Remember ye should still, the one is to be as full as the other, full liberty,
and as full purity. A liberty without purity will certainly bring us into
straightness of place (which we English anguish) Romans 2. 9.
such as we cannot tell what to doe-in to get one minutes time of ease. If ye
will give liberty, see it be stinted, and bounded within the bounds, and
limits, which God has set us; To keep within the compass of Gods Commands is
the best liberty of all; Then shall I have liberty; when? when I keep all thy
Commandments. If we Psalm. 119. 45.
would have liberty out of God, and beyond His bounds, our liberty will prove
our misery, our undoing, and utter destruction. Look ye to it, as ye look God
should look after you, and your prayers, That ye carve not forth so liberally
in your Lords matters, granting to your people a full liberty without regard
had at all to full purity -- But having said so much against your full liberty,
and all those impurities, which cleave as fast to that liberty, as ever any did
to their Idol, we will say no more here, only, as ye go on praying, ye will
go on sinning, and provokeing your Lord to His face in His own House, if ye
do not look better to His Administrations there, than hitherto ye have done.

Seventhly, Be pleased to Consider, That the Body, whereof our glorious Lord is
the Head, and the Savior; is as like Him, as likeness can be, a very comely,
and a glorious Body; and however little glory, or comelines may appear from
without, and none at all in the worlds eye, yet is she all glorious within
(partakeing of her Lords own glory, though not in the same degree) and every
one of this Mothers genuine Children are made Princes in all lands; where any
one of them is, there is a Prince how poor, and mean soever the outside be;
for whatever the Lord-Christ is by Nature; he and she are by Grace: Consider,
we pray you, this thing, then we know what will follow upon this Consideration,
so be, ye be much, if not wholly in it; That the fire will consume all that is
glorious in the world; yet a very little while, and there will be no
excellency but the excellency of Christ, and His Church, and Children; we are
bold to press you unto this Consideration again, because ye, and we know what
must needs follow thereupon.

First, Ye will give the Lord Christ the pre-eminence in your assemblies, and
at His Table specially, ye will set His dear Children, Beloved Friends, and
faithful servants next unto Him: And by no means will ye suffer that which
may offend, or grieve them: And ye will stave off those nasty filthy Creatures,
two footed Dogs, and swine from comeing near unto them, till they have
bethought themselves what they are, and of their uncleanness; And

Secondly, As ye know, The first thing, the Spirit of grace does within doors
is to set God and Christ in His own place, the heart; so that person, that is
acted by that Spirit will show forth or proclaim Gods Justice in the world,
and Christ His Righteousness in His Church, which is to set Him in His place,
a King, and a Prophet, a Prince, and a Savior, and persuade an hearty
obedience, and subjection to Him, to be directed by Him; for if a man be
subject to Christ's Kingly Office, His Prophetical office shall guide him, and
cause him not to err, in that he speaks from God, or to God, or in what he is
to do for God, and His People.

CHAP. VII.
WE would give you two or three Scriptures to muse upon; draw two, or three
things from them, and then draw to a close of all. The first Scripture, Isa.
52. 1. From henceforth there shall no more come into them the uncircumcised,
and the unclean; The like promise ye have, Joel 3. 17. So shall ye know that I
am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy Mountain; Then shall Jerusalem
be holy, and there shall no Stranger pass through her to defile her. No
stranger? to open that notion, as we read Mr. Ca^yl Job 15. p. 89.
it opened unto us; No stranger, that is, no child of Bolial, no wicked person,
shall pass through her, to defile, and pollute her: But strangers may pass
through her to be visited, and relieved by her. The other Scriptures, Mal. 3.
16. Then they that feared the* Lord spoke often one to another: Acts 2. 42, 43.
" They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship: And all
that believed. 1 John 1. 3. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
His Son Jesus Christ, Rev: 21. 27. and 22. 15. There shall in no wise enter
into it any thing that defiles, nor whatsoever works an Abomination; for
without are Dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, And who so loves, and makes a lie. From the premised Scriptures we
would Conclude. First;

SECT. I.
First, THat it is one of the highest privileges promised to the Church, that
a time shall come, when the wicked shall not come unto her; Awake, awake, Put
on thy strength O Sion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the Holy
City. Wherefore must Jerusalem the Holy City awake thus, and be ready in her
dress, in her beautiful garments? why? there is good news for her, from
henceforth, there shall no more come into thee, the uncircumcised, and
unclean. As if He had said, In times of Sions defection, or opposition, when
there was no due Reformation of worship, nor order among worshippers, than the
uncircumcised, and unclean came, and stood, yea even dwelt with thee, as thy
own Children; but oh Jerusalem! A Time shall come, when the uncircumcised and
the unclean shall not so much, as come into thee, they shall be rejected, and
cast out for ever; Profane ones shall find no place at last in Sion here
below; and Hypocrites shall never come into the Sion, which is above. Some
Hypocrites will come into the Church, when she is most refined, there is no
keeping of them out, till they discover themselves, and so are cast out, or
Apostatize, and so go out of themselves: possibly the Church Militant may be
so purged, and reformed at last, that as there shall be no profane in her, so
but a few Hypocrites. But into the Church Triumphant, we are sure, the closest
Hypocrite shall not Enter: God will wash off all the varnish, and paint, which
they have put upon the face of their profession, with Rivers of Brimstone, and
will give them then, the cup of His fierce wrath to drink unto Eternity. We
have been the larger upon this Scripture, because we find it so fully enlarged
to our hands, and it was so good, and so full to our purpose, that we could
part with none of it.

Secondly, Seeing this is the promise of God, and what He has spoken with His
mouth, He will fulfill with His hands, He will find faithful men, who shall be
His hands in all the peoples sight, for this separating, this reformeing work,
this making a difference; They shall lay-out themselves to the utmost of those
abilities, their great Lord shall give unto them, That the Saints may enjoy
unmixt Communions here below, and live together as if there were not another
among them; we say, they shall endeavor this matter full-up to the promise,
That the wicked, or Belial (in the original) he or she, that will not bear
the yoke of God, shall no more pass through thee; much less stay and lodge in
Nahum 1. 15.
thee; that is the promise; no man shall be yoaked with you, but See the
exposition Job 19. 386.
he that bears the yoke of Christ. This will be the day of Sions glorious
liberty, when all (within her liberties) bear the yoke of Christ, and none
shall be unequally yoked; This is the glory of the Saints below, and this shall
be perfect in the state above, but all the faithful in the land breath, and
endeavor after this; and the more earnestly, because this is promised, and
they think the set time is hastening, when it shall be performed; for they
cannot doubt, but that there shall be as great a portion of the Spirit of
holiness, and of unity, and as eminently powered out upon the Saints in these
latter ages of the world, as there was upon the first Gospel Church, Act. 2.
1. They were altogether in one place with one accord, as if they had all but
one soul; and they continued in the Apostles Doctrine, so in fellowship one
with another. And

Thirdly, That all the Godly, truly and indeed such all over the land,
Ministers and people must make a difference, a separation according to the
Command of God, and the practice of the primitive times all along upward to
this day, as to the point of Church Communion and fellowship one with another;
for as sure as they are sanctified ones, they are separated ones, dedicated to
God for the promoteing His glory, and carrying on the interest of Christ in
their own, and in the hearts of others; Man is a sociable Creature Man would
rather endure the greatest misery together with his friends, than enjoy the
greatest happiness by himself alon^. Dion. third Orat.
, he loves not to be alone, unless he be in meditation; and he is not less
sociable, because he is more holy; but he is more choice of his Company, As
every good man is, and ought to be, a man's Companion being (as was said) a
Counterpaine of himself, he cannot now converse among the wicked, upon choice
and with delight, (unless he could convey good unto them) more than he could
delight to be with those possessed men among the Tombs, Mark. 5. 3. It is with
the Saints now, as it was with the primitive Church, they associated themselves
in those days, so they must now; They continued in fellowship one with
another, as well as in the Apostles Doctrine; so they must do now: They were
all of one mind, and therefore fit to make one body; so are they now, as to the
maine, and principal things required of them, walking together in Church
Communions, and Gospel fellowship; The Communion, and fellowship of the Saints
is the lower heaven of the Saints, as says that worthy man; Therefore they can
no more converse Upon Job 16. 54.
among the wicked upon choice, than David could choose to live in Mesech, and
dwell in the Tents of Kedar; A savage and wild people, without the verge of the
visible Church; such company is like the torment once invented, of chaineing a*
live-man, and a dead-man together; The Godly in Christ Jesus count it a great
evil to be joined with unsavory dead wretches at any time, or place (much
more will they avoid it where they can at the Lords Table, (the only place
the wicked will join with them in) David prays, Gather not my soul with
sinners, Psalm. 26. 9. If we would not have our souls gathered with sinners
hereafter, for the present we must take heed of joining with them. A good
Gentlewoman, (as we have heard) being much troubled in Conscience, and ready to
go out of the world, prayed thus; O Lord, let me not go to the place, where
the wicked are, for Lord, thou know I never loved their Company here. And
this ye may have read also; Look with what Company we delight our selves-in
here below, with them, we shall be, and converse for ever, either in the
highest heavens, or in the lowermost hell.

We would add this more, to confirm us in this Truth, That the righteous can
no more, upon choice, be with the wicked, than sheep and lambs can be with
grievous Wolves, and Tigers; look, as of what nature the Appetite is, of the
like nature must be the food. Carryon, or such like filth will serve the Raven,
not the Dove; earthly food will satisfy a natural appetite, and heavenly food
will satisfy the heavenly appetite, that, and no other; so look of what
nature the man is, the like shall his Companion be, if he may be at his own
choice, with whom he will have communion, specially at the Lords Table. The
meaning is, Saints desire to feed with Saints, and they will feed with them at
the Lords Table, else they will not come at it; They are as choice of their
company, as they are of their meat, in all places, but specially at that
place; They desire to have Communion only with Saints, and that the precious
may be separated from the vile, that their feeding may not be with grievous
wolves, but with the harmless innocent and peaceable lambs of Christ; for if
Christ is the Center, and resting place of all the affections of the Saints, as
most certainly He is, then must the Saints abound in love one toward another,
in, and for Christ, which they cannot evidence any other way, but by often
meeting one with another, and speaking one to another, and working one for
another, what possibly they can. We will put a close to this in Blessed Sibs
his words. Next to the meditation of Christ, and the Excellencies that are in
Him, I know no way more effectual, than is holy Communion with those, that are
led with the Spirit of Christ, when we see the sweet fruit of it in others It
has been a means sanctified to do a great deal of good to many, and those
that delight not in it, never knew what the likeness of Christ meant; for
those that desire to be like Christ, they love the shineing of Christ in any.
They are a careless people to whom all companies are alike: But they that
walk circumspectly, looking round about, making it their only care how to
please God, these will make choice of those, that find some work of grace on
their hearts by the Spirit of God; if not, they may well doubt of their
Condition, and that there is no work of grace wrought at all, for grace will
make us love the like; As you see creatures of the same kind love to company
with one another, Doves with Doves, and lambs with lambs, so it must be with
the children of God, or else we do not know what the communion of Saints
means. In the last place, and in prosecution of that was last said,

Fourthly, We Conclude, That the Saints loving, and delighting in their
Communion together are fruitful, and useful to one another, while they are
together; and therefore do speak often one to the other; Thereby to stirre-up
one another pure minds. And this is a Duty so cleared in the book of God, to
be according to the mind and word of God, to keep off from the wicked, who
will keep far off from God; And oppose the means whereby they may be brought
nearer unto Him; It is so agreeable to the Divine Nature, and as we heard, the
new creature, to converse with their like, and so to walk together in Gospel
Order, that truly we cannot conceive what can be reasonably said against ^t by
any reasonable man, specially by Ministers of Christ. Nay we are assured
nothing can be reasonably said against it; True it is Ministers in name such,
and godly by profession, do oppose this Assembling together of Saints, but
they are ashamed, no doubt, to show so little reason, as to reason against it;
For to gain Instruction from lower matters; Can we think, That the matters,
or concernments of a parish are so considerable, That the chief men, or
Masters there with the rest, must meet sometime* to confer about them for
the better disposing of them, according to decency, and right order? Can we
think then, and think like men, that the matters of Christ, the concernments
of His glory in our salvation, will not require the like care and so Command
the people of God, Saints by calling, to meet often, and confer about those
high, and sacred matters, so nearely relateing to the welfare of that Body,
whereof the Lord Christ is the Savior, that these may be administered according
to the mind of Christ, and rule of His word, praescibed by Himself, to be
observed in His house by His Stewards there? If they will make full proof,
that such they be by fidelity as well as in Name, and by Office. Well, we are
confident our Lord and Master makes us so, (whose manner was to speak alone,
and apart with His Disciples) so do all those, that have gone forth by the
footsteps of the flock, following His steps; That all those Ministers who
oppose this Assembling of the Saints together, there to speak often one to
another for the ends aforesaid, are self-willed men, self-will is their reason;
so there is no argueing with them, who have nothing to oppose against this
Gospel fellowship, but their will, or carnal Reason; only we would commend
them to the Prayers of the Saints; And for thy self, Reader, if thou can
skill only in thy Mother tongue, we would Commend to thy meditation, that
plain English thou read, Ephesians. 4. 16. From whom the whole body, etc. and if
thou can skill in the Latin, Then we heartily commend to thee, Learned
Calvin's three doctrines therefrom, and Beza's observations thereupon, in his
notes common with us, and in his larger Annotations too large to be inserted in
this place.

SECT. II.
ANd so we make bold to give in our Jealousy, which may pass for better
Reason, than any self-will can give; why Ministers, reputed Godly, plead for a
loose way of receiving all sorts of persons to Communion at the Lords-Table,
and by promiscuous admissions, prostitute the Ordinances of Christ to every
Commer, opposeing in the mean while what they can (as they must needs do,
allowing such doings) the Communion of Saints here below, and fellowship one
with another.

First, Is it not because they would not displease the people? least thereby
they should open the peoples mouths against them, and shut their purses? As
certainly it would be so, for two footed swine, and dogs, who return to their
folly as those four footed ones to their vomit and mire, cannot endure to be
called such, and dealt with as such in point of Church Communion. Indeed, as
worthy Mr Manton says; this pleading for a loose way of receiving Epist:
before Mr. Sanders Book.
all sorts of persons to holy things, Looks as exactly calculated for a
wordly interest. We charge you not so as he does not; but we would charge you
in the name of the Lord, ye would examine your selves, whether it be not so?
And this we dare say to help you-on in your trial, That as long as a man's
heart is overloving, and over-delighting in any thing but God, he shall do
little for God, perhaps much against Him: For be he a man of great Part. 2. 359
illumination, raised gifts (as worthy Mr Burgess says) and parts, whereby he
is admired in the world, yet has not a crucified, and mortifyed heart; he
cannot but pray, preach, and discourse of those things, which though not above
his understanding, yet above his heart, and affections; And then little can he,
or will he do for God in his own private house, or in the house I have had
much to do with my proud swelling mi^d, my stiff neck, and stubborn heart.
Hier.
of His God. Therefore we would advise others, as we do our selves in Luthers
words, If they would overcome a world of enemies without, they must begin with*
their master-lust within, and when that Goliath is subdued, the Army is routed,
and they will fly; This I know says Luther by certain experiences, That I
have more cause to fear what is within me, than what is without; and I have
hit the nail on the head, when I say venture in omni Vbi non viden^ quaes^um
rident Christum; ubi datur u^ edant add^ci possunt ut credant. To^no. upon Hos:
10. 11. Avari^a est plerumque haeresinem comes somes, etc. Ames. in pe:
religione potentissimum Idolum, the belly swayes most in every religion;
though where that is served, Christ is destroyed, and they who make their belly
their God, makes the Lord Christ but an Idol. And this be spoken to bid you
beware of the world, if with full purpose of heart ye would work for the Lord,
or have a thought of joyneing with Gods people, or of their joining with you,
ye will break the staff of beauty, and bands quickly, and away ye will go as
Demas did, having embraced the present world.

Secondly, Is it not because ye do not stand in Gods Counsel, ye do not ask
at His mouth? Therefore your Judgment is so mistaken in the matters, which do
concern the glory of His house, and manner of His people in all times,
specially those, which were, as ours have been, yea are fierce, and perilous,
reforming times. A godly man looks fixedly up to His God, and then down to
His Word; he will go as far toward peace with all men, as his light will
guide him, and take Holiness with him; he dare not step one step in the dark,
for then he certainly falls into sin; more cannot be desired, and less ye
cannot do, if you do your Duty in great matters, and in small: look to have
a word for what you do, so shall you do things decently and in order; else
all will be out of order, as now they are.

SECT. III.
BUt this making a difference, and separating between the precious, and the
vile, is the stone of stumbling, and gives great offense. It does so, and so it
ever did, and so it will, and it must so do; To take away this offense we say,
first.

First, Holy Paul speaks fully to this, we think, do I now persuade men, or
God? that is, do I endeavor to persuade with you in the things of men, or in
the things of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ? do I plead His cause, or mine
own? or do I seek to please men? would I endeare my self to you, or Him to
you, and His matters, of so near concernment to your precious souls? This I
know, and would have you to know, If I yet pleased men, I should not be the
servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. It is not possible in these matters, but ye must
offend God and His little ones, or ye must offend men, who cannot possibly be
pleased; But where, and when God is highly offended, which of these will ye
offend? when ye can no more please both, than yecan serve two Masters; you can
remember who said it, The Lord God is a glorious Friend, and as dreadful an
enemy; Therefore He had rather offend the whole world, than Him; for what can
the world do to please, or quiet the Creature, when God is displeased? or to
disquiet, displease, or discompose him, when God is pleased with him? when He
gives quietness, who then can cause Job 34. 29.
trouble? and when He hides His face (so we may understand it) who then can
behold him? Who can endure the hideing of Gods face? we may safely understand
it too; If God hide the face of a man, that is, condemn him, pass sentence of
death upon him; (of which hideing, or covering the face was a symbol) Esth: 7.
8.
who can behold Him? who can see His face, have communion Mark. 14. 65.
with Him, whom God has put from Him, having separated him to destruction? It
is not then to be regarded, what offends men, but what offends God. Fear we
God, and desire we of Him, That He would strengthen us with All might,
according to His glorious power, to walk worthy of Him unto all well-pleasing,
being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God: Ye
will need all Might to enable to all pleasing, and to fence you against the
fear of men, when ye are upon this separating work. So true is that of the
wise man, The fear of Prove. 29. 25.
a man brings a snare; but who so puts his trust in the Lord shall be
safe, or set on high.

Secondly, Observe what God Commands, and buckle-up to the obedience of it, and
know, ye have warrant sufficient for this, Have not I commanded you? Come out
from among them, and be 2 Cor. 6. 17.
ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.

Ye say this is not meant of separating from a Church; we say so too; And that
no such profession of separation is required from this, or that, or any Church,
but only a separation from the world, especially at the Lords Table The Church
is that; from which the rent is; Haeresie divides from the head; S^hisme from
the body; Apostacy from both. Schism is a renting from Churches, and from
Saints. Separation commanded by God, and practiced by good men is only from
the world, and that which is of the world, that they may Cement, and sodder
together, being united to Christ their Head, and by charity one to another: so
this separation is not for want of Charity, but in all love, and humility
together, which makes them go stooping one toward another, that they may
advance one the other Heavenward. The Godly cannot join with the world in
their worship, for then they must join with them in their sin; so they are not
so much drawn from the world, as driven from the world, su^ati non fugitivi.
The blame of Schism, says Voetius, must not be upon those, who forsake those,
that have forsaken Christ, and His Truth; Therefore as not the punishment, but
the Cause makes the Martyr: so non decessio, sed causa facit schismaticum, not
the departing, but the c^use makes the schismaticke; he or she, one, or more,
that is a true separatist can say, calling God to record upon their souls,
That love to God, To their own, and others souls is the cause of their
separation, not want of love to their Neighbor, which may remind you of what
that Excellent Italian Divine Zanchi said, separating from the Church of Rome;
I now, seventy years old, testify together with my whole family, to the
Church of Christ to all Eternity, That I separated from Rome with no other
intent, but to turn again to Communion with her, so soon as she is turned to
the Lord, and is become as that Church was, whose praise is in the Gospel,
Beloved of God, called to be His Saints, Romans 1. 7. So they that are followers
of God, as Dear Children, can say, from whom soever they separate now, to them
they will gladly return anon, when they shall be turned to the Lord, which
they pray-for without ceasing.

Thirdly, In the last place, This fellowship of the Saints one with another at
their private meetings* has a very ill resentment with Godly Ministers, and
Gods people also; so we have heard, and so indeed we find it to be; And it
should be, surely is of a sad resentment to all the Godly in Christ Jesus all
over the Nation; That the practice of Christ with His Disciples conversing with
them alone, and apart; And the practice of all true Disciples in all ages to
this very day, should be spoken against now, discountenanced, and quite out of
use; For Saints not to converse Saints, not to hold Communion together; it is
to do most unbecomeing Saints it is indeed to unsaint themselves, it is to
make them look not like themselves, so as any one can say, There is a Saint.

The wicked will assemble together, and by their will, will not have a good man
amongst them which tells us what the truly godly Ministers, and people have
done, and still do, and must so do, if they w^ll approve themselves godly,
meet often together, that they may speak one to another; for each others good
for their Edification; And truly, we cannot Imagine, how any Godly Minister
can do less, but encourage it, that they should standout against it, is a
wonder; How else shall they know the state of their people? how shall they
understand, how they have profitted? how fit Guests they are for the Lords
Table? but of that before.

Surely they must be dealt with alone, and apart in these matters; A Minister
shall, as we are persuaded, find no more ready a way to discern between the
vile, and precious, than by appointing a private meeting place, where they may
confer one with another; The Godly shall find the wicked will not come at
them, They hate such meetings as they do the light, but what the wicked hate,
the Godly love. The wicked will not endure to be tried, being all dross, and
continuing such, must be thrust away; And near, and close trials of
sincerity, as that Excellent man says, D^. Owen. p. 195.
drive Hypocrites into Apostacy; But surely this course must be taken,
Ministers must call their people together, they must meet with them often in
private, else how shall they know who are fit ghests for the Lords Table?
There, there will be, as hitherto has been, profane mixtures, and hateful
doings there.

We conceive nothing can be reasonably objected against this, only this is
said, and much struck at, much the same the Princes had to say against Daniel,
6. 5. These private meetings are in order to an higher matter, drawing toward
a more close walking with God, and entering into Covenant in the strength of God
so to do.

Very true, and he that opens against this, sets his mouth against heaven; how
can a people maintain their fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and not
hold fellowship one with another? and how can they walk together as Friends,
and not in Gospel order, and by Church rule? And then why not engage in the
strength of God, and enter into Covenant, as to this thing, to walk humbly
with their God, as under His eye, and before Him, as becomes the Gospel, and
all true Gospellers? Worthy Mr Palmer has spoke much in a little to this in
the beginning of his book, which we would commend unto the Christian Reader:
And here we will tell our persuasion before we conclude* That since the Holy
Scripture calls the Church of God, and Church Communion, Heaven; It is not
only a Company we shall live Isa. 65 17. ^6. 22.
withal in heaven hereafter, But it is heaven now; And they who do not bend
toward, and breath after this Communion of Saints; Revel: pass^^.
are but base, and unworthy persons; The Lord God brands them, and so may His
people, as He does those we read off These 1 Chronicles. 4 23.
were potters, and those that dwelt among Plants, and hedges: there they dwelt
with the King for his work; these were some baser sort of the Jews, who, when
liberty was proclaimed for their return to Jerusalem, where they might enjoy
God in His true worship, chose rather for filthy Lucre sake, and other fleshly
advantages to stay in Babylon, and to serve among the potts. The application is
easy; We will only offer to their thoughts, who are so basely disposed, that
fearful threatening, * And it shall be, Zach. 1* ^7.
that whosoever will not come-up of all the families of the earth unto
Jerusalem, to worship the King the Lord of Hosts, even upon them shall be no
rain; no Blessing. This must be meant, as might be cleared fully, from the
20th verse; The glorious state, and condition of the Church in the time of the
Gospel, walking together in Church Communion. And therefore the Lord God takes
it very ill, at the hands of those, to whom He has proclaimed a Blessed
liberty; Yet they preferring their ease, and profits before it, will not
come-up (for it is up the Hill) to join with His people therein; Therefore He
threatens them, as we heard, They shall have no Blessing.

CHAP. VIII.
IN the shutting-up of all, we crave leave, first to address our selves to
your self, and brethren of the same persuasion with you. Secondly, Then to
those of our own rank ^^ Church Communion one with another. In the third
place, we will set down four savoury Speeches, spoken, as we conceive, in
answer to this very plea against separation here pleaded for.

But before we can have the least hope, that our Counsel should take, we must
take off as we can, another Reproach we stand aspersed with, which is this;
That we have made mention of three men (of a contrary mind and judgment to us)
with honor little enough to their persons, and contempt more than enough to
their books; But not answered any one of their Arguments, no not one; To this
we reply.

First, That we cannot make honorable mention of them, who have, to our
seeming, ^^st such dishonours upon our dear Lord and Savior, His Holy things,
and people of His Holiness, speaking all along in their Pamphlets most contrary
to Scripture, to Reason* and to the judgment of all the Orthodox Ministers,
and people, that ever were or now are in the world; As if the destruction from
God was no terror to them, and by reason of His Highness they could endure to
be an occasion of drawing down that Curse upon us, whereof we read, Levit. 7.
20. More dreadful ^ow under the Gospel than that was under the Law, because
Gospel Curses are most dreadful; The soul that eats of the sacrifice
Levit. 7. 20.
of peace ^ffrings, that pertain unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon
him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. We cannot speak,
(because we cannot think, honorably of those men, that have spoken so as they
have don, pleading for the Admission of those to the Lords Table, who have all
their uncleanness upon them. And yet we have not to our knowledge vilified
their persons, or spoken reproachfully of them, much less judged them as to
their present state and being in Christ; they may be for ought we know, truly
Conscientious, and men fearing God, and so, that they have don, has proceeded
from ignorance and mistake: only this seems strange unto us; that whereas all
three have been told their error, and little less than braied for it, yet they
should persist to bring* in that abomination into Gods house, which causes
Desolation. We cannot think or speak honorably of them for so doing. And have
so erred, though not in their hearts. And yet that saying may command all due
consideration; An erroneous head, and a Godly heart will not meet. Corruption
in judgment being like poison in the spring. But yet this Consideration should
be for a lamention, That the envious-one called the Devil and Satan, has so
mightily prevailed in these days, as to make Ministers themselves not a few,
studiously active in the mischeiving, yea ruining their own peoples souls. But

Secondly; As to our not Answering any one of their Arguments we say, That had
we as many spare hours as there are spare books in the world; and as well able
for such a service, if it may be called so, as they are who are best able, yet
we had not meddled with their Arguments; and these are our Reasons; for

First, Why should we actum agere do that we find so clearly and fully, so
learnedly and holily don to our hands; so Mr Hs: is answered is he not? And Mr
Prynn's twelve Arguments, if we may call them Arguments, for Free Admission of
all to the Sacrament, It being one of the most effectu^ll principal means for
real Conversion; are Answered with twenty set against them by learned Gillespy
of plessed Memory, which will be replied unto and reanswered, when blessed Juel
is by any of them who are of Hardings old* Taking way and judgment, the great
Rode of the world. And for John Timsons Arguments (who knows how many?) we will
single but one out of the throng, whereby we may make judgment of the rest*
and of the Answers thereunto; Unregerate persons, says he, have an hand to
take, and a mouth to eat, therefore a right to receive. This Argument, says
worthy Mr Collings, will prove a Monkies right to it also; I had thought the
taking, eating and drinking must be spiritual by faith; he asks how we will
prove it? And in a bold confidence, that this cannot be proved, he has argued
the Case afresh this last year, against two of his good Masters. And now we
have Cause to believe, he will be answered with silence, these worthy men Mr
Hs: Sanders, and M John Collings having, as we conceive, a command from their
God, Answer him not; his error, which some may call folly will not, by that
means, depart from him. They will commend him to God, and Word of His Grace,
which is able to do that which all the ablest men in the world are not able to
do, make his folly depart from him. In the next place because;

Secondlly, To make Answer was no part of our undertaking, but to give-in our
persuasion in some matters before specified in their proper place to a
neighbor Minister calling us to an account about them; and in special about
free Admission of all to all Church Communions. This we have don according to
our Measure, loosning the foundation upon which their whole building stands,
and taking away that rotten pillar, which upholds it which is this; That being
baptized into a Church, they are all holy every one, and eo nomine, all have a
right to all Church Communions, unless they be children in years, fools or
mad men. This is the very substratum or underbearer, upon which their building
stands, And whereby a great multitude which no man can number, being as the
sand of the Sea, are built up as high as Heaven, and, having no other stay to
lean to must be cast down to the lowe^ most Hell: To loosen this sandy
foundation, and to throw down this rotten building, or dawbed wall, before the
great hailestones fall, and a stormy wind rents it, was a great part of our
undertaking; that we might cast a flood, if possible, and utterly drown the
fools paradise, or lay our batteriers to his Castle he has (by your good
help, the Master Builder) built in the Air; his strong Confidence, we mean,
that being borne and baptized in a Church, he is a privileged man to abide in
Gods Tabernacle here below, and to dwell in His Holy Hill for ever and ever
above in the highest Heaven Had we the Confidence of one man, we would speak as
he does; for shame therefore disclaim this absurd irreligious paradox' for
which there is not the least shadow of Scripture or solid reason. A glorious
Saint put a short Question, and a shorter Answer thereunto, we will set it
down, and so an end of this matter; What brings men to hell in the Church?
false Confidence, says he, They bear themselves up as high as heaven, because
they were borne and baptized in a Church; they must be thrown-down as low as
Hell, If they have no other leane-to, to bear them up. Having (...) with
sorrows. We will commend to your Reading, as we said, Per ^otam di^^ onem quam
love pateat Ecclesie singulls ^ (...) Christi and Ecclesiae prospi^ite, pro
sa^ul^ate veifra veni e^es adjuvando, dormientes excitand^; nihil cogitantes
and ignorantes accersendo Jun^n locu^ ^.
and best observation, and the Lord set it home unto you* Isa. 62. 10. as our
English, 12, as Junius devides the Chapter, with his notes upon it; and so we
commend you to God, and the work of His Grace with you.

To your self Sir, who were the occasion of all, so this we would speak as
Hierom to Augustine; Si Culpa est respondisse, quaso ut patienter audias, multo
major est provocasse; sed facessant istiusmodi querimoniae, sit inter nos pura
Germanitas, and deinceps non questionum, sed charitatis ad nos scripta
mittamus. But then you must come clear off from that horrid opinion so often
mentioned, That the Receiving the Lords Supper etc.

purity of Doctrine, of Discipline, and life.

First, Let us not trouble our selves with controverted points; True it is, in
some Cases, Expositorum diversitas excitat attentionem, Diversity of opinions,
make the hearer more attent. But this is never where the Text is plain; or if
he be more attent he will be more unresolved. It is as true also, That Truth
getts advantage by a necessary conflict of arguments, but this is among the
Learned in the Schools; and when the Case admitts of some doubts; seldom or
never among those of our rank; And where the Case is clear and resolved.
Disputes among such, and in such cases, the more amuzes them, putting them into
Doubts, where they should make none; None at all; None at all, as we conceive
and have proved, whether all are to be admitted to the Lords Table? Whether
Christmas Day, as we call it, with the like, of the same stamp, or institution,
is to be kept holy? And being resolved at that point, as you are, in the
Negative, then, whether a Minister of Christ ought not contend with the
observers of that heathen-Feast; as Nehemiah did with the Nobles profaning the
Sabbath day, at least by conniving at those, who did. 13. 17. we take it, that
such cleared Truths as these and those relating to forms of prayer, are not to
be put to question, or if they be, we are not, as we conceive, to be careful
to answer in these matters; we are not to deliberate upon them. They that will
put these things to question, may fear to be delivered-up into a mind void
of judgment. And they that are resolved in these points, and would resolve the
gaine-sayers; Let them look into their (...). For what hope have they, of our
rank, to prevail with those, who have withstood the Resolves from Gods word
by the mouth of Gods faithful Ministers? They that contend for these matters,
are not weak ones, but vain and superstitious persons, built-up high in their
fleshly confidences, so as your words can move with them, no more, than can a
blast of wind move a tower of brass, or the waves a rock. In a word; Let not
us dispute Gods right, but give it Him; nor the laws of His house, but give
our observation unto them; nor the way of His people, but walk we therein, and
with so right a foot in desire and endeavor, that we may put a beauty upon
the way, and so adorn it, that we may draw others to it, to walk together
with us as Friends in it, having concluded within themselves, making
observation by our walk; This is the way of Holiness; for see how Holily they
walk, who are walkers in it; Only take this with it more, suspect that at the
least, to be a cursed liberty the worldly Church contends for; and reckon upon
that to be the Holy way, they would stand up against, contradicting and
blaspheming.

Amen.

Chillingworth speaks first, what the goodness of the man was, we know not,
but this speech is very good, If I did not find in my self a love and desire
of all profitable Truth; if I did not put away idleness, and earthly
affection, and to search to the bottom of my opinions in reference to Divine
matters, being prepared in my mind to follow God, and Him only, which way
soever He shall lead me; If I did not hope, that I either do, or endeavor
these things; Certainly I should have (little comfort in my separation from the
world at present and) little hope of obtaining salvation hereafter; There is
the first speech.

Mr H: Sanders speech is next: The power of godliness is first Page 175.
to be heeded; if we be nothing within; no great matter, though we sit at the
right, or the left hand of Christ's outward Kingdom; let us contend principally
to be members of Christ, to be of the invisible Church, imbodied in the Church
of the firstborne; here we cannot easily be too careful or too curious. But as
to external fellowship, though the mind of Christ in this also be to be
sought, and followed; ^et so much earnestness, and confidence needs not, as in
the other, Unless men take care how to live, it is not much matter, how they
worship. Thou may be, (this we take to our selves, as chearefully, and
thankfully, as this good man spoke it to himself, and his good people
heartily) in a purer Church than another, and yet be the impurer, and vainer
soul of the two; It is better to see a man's Conversation, commending his way,
than to see men beholding to their way for their esteem.

Mr Ant: Palmers words follow; An holy fellowship with Sermon upon Math: 8. 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, p. 85.
such as are Godly, by frequent Conference; communicating their experiences of
God in a more holy Church Fellowship than the mixed Congregations are yet
reduced into, will abundantly quicken and strengthen faith, and every gift and
grace of believers; and make much for the retaining and increase of comfort.

Dr Owens words follow, and therewith we will close all; You On Ezekiel. 17. 24.
p. 32.
that do enjoy Holy Ordinances, Labor to have holy hearts answerable
thereunto: you have heavenly institutions, labor to have heavenly
Conversations; if we be like the world in our walking, it is no great matter,
if we be like the world in our worship: it is sad walking contrary to God in
His own Paths; shew-out the power, and efficacy of all Gospel Institutions
in a frame of Spirit, course of life, and equability of spiritual temper all
your days. Keep up the power of private worship, both personal, and family.
I have seen many good Laws for the Sabbath, and hope I shall see some good
examples: Look what the roots are in the family, such will the fruit be, in
the Church, and Commonwealth: if your spirits are not well manured there, you
will be utterly barren elsewhere: that is done most cleareto God, which is done
within doors.

This being set home by the Spirit of holiness, will keep our foot close-up
to wisdoms ways, which are pleasantnes, and all her paths peace, and tends
to that Blessed End, that has no End, Eternal life. Excellent Bradfords good
Counsel, and prayer shall put a close to all.

Molest not the good Spirit of God, which is given you, as a gage of Eternal
Redemption, a Counselor, and Master to lead you into all truth; which good
Spirit, I beseech the Father of mercies to give unto us all, for His Dear
Sons sake, Jesus Christ, our Lord; To whom I Commend you all, and to the word
of His grace, which is able to help you all, that believe it, follow it, and
serve God, thereafter.

A Postscript.
THe Author humbly craves leave [after he has mentioned only (1) Augustines
short Apology for his long work, which will fit the Author very well speaking
that in seven Treatises, which might have been spoken, as one spoke, in so
many pages, if not in so many lines; That he much disliked, if not detested, as
his friend Nebridius did, a short answer to a great question, and would not
that any should expect the like from him, for then he would manifest his
indignation against it. And (2) what Justin Martyr spoke of old to the old
Heathen; These things we offer to your Consideration; If they seem agreeable,
to true Reason, and Scripture Truth, accept, and put an account upon them: If
they seem toys, as such contemn them; but do not hostilely persecute them.
And (3) he would humbly offer to Consideration what Learned Mr William Jenkin
has for the clearing the two chief Heads of Controversy here debated-on;
Admission of all Infants to Baptism: And grown persons to the Lords Table In
his exposition upon Jude, second part, page 274, 275, 276, 277, 278.] After
these three things, as the Author was saying* he humbly craves leave, he may
close his book, with the very words, as Augustine closes his of the City of
God. Videor mihi etc. I think with my self, I have, by the supply of His
Spirit, done my Duty, and discharged the Debt, I saw my self bound to pay to
my Lord; to His house and His people. Now they that think I have said too
little, they also that think I have said too much, Let both the one and the
other pardon me* And they that think I have said enough, Let them give the
praise not to me (I wholly disclaim it) but to their's and my Lord God with me.
Amen.

And Observing Lod* Vives in his Commentary, speaking as properly; take his
words too* If I have spoken that which pleases, let the Reader thank God in
my behalf; if any thing that displeases, let him pardon it for the Lord God's
sake. And for that which is well spoken, let him pardon that which may be ill
spoken, though never so well meant. The following words do not fit this work,
nor this place, for the Author cannot expect that from the Readers, though
never so Courteous, which, having neither time nor opportunity, he could not
possibly do himself; he means the Correcting the mistakes here, which must
be many, when the Author could at no time be advised with. And to point to one
or two mistaks where the sense may be mistaken by it, were there leisure for
it, would little advantage the Reader, for quid exempta juvat -- de pluribus
vua; The Reader readily grants that favor, he himself may crave.

An Advertisement of certain Books sold by Henry Cripps in Popes-head-Alley.
With a short Apology of the Author premised, why he is willing such public
notice should be given thereof.
TRUTH, has said it; How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another,
and seek not the honor that comes from God only. These words gave some
check or discouragement at the first; but after due consideration,
encouragement rather; for if this be the Aim and End of publishing to the
world these Books, the seeking honor of men; or, loving the praise of men,
more than the praise of God (If by these means it might be gained) Then let
the Lord God blast the work and the workman; Make him and it* as the untimely
fruit, which withers before the Sun. But if the workman in all this, has,
through Grace, Holy Aims and pure ends; The Glory of God, and the good of his
Neighbor, in rendering the doctrine hereafter mentioned (and the
bare-mentioning thereof is enough to render it an) abomination throughout the
land, which causes desolation there; Then let him and his work be blessed* And
let his God remember him concerning this also, and spare him according to the
greatness of His mercy. Amen.

THE LORDS TABLE ought not to be spread like that in an Inn for all comers,
published that it might prove an Antidote against the spreading infection of
that poysonfull doctrine, That all are to be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, It being one of the most effectual principal means for real
Conversion (says one next mentioned, the other say the same thing, though not
in the same words) held-out in three pernicious Pamphlets, which eat as does a
Canker; The one published by M* William Prynne some years since called A
vindication of four serious Questions; The other by Mr Humpheryes, notorious
all over the Nation The third by John Timson this last year, after learned M
Joh: Collings would have forbad the error of the man, which some may call his
folly, or madness, speaking in most pages of his said Pamphlet, as a man that
had deposed reason, and so could speak cross to sacred Scripture, right
reason, and the judgment of all the orthodox Ministers and people, that ever
were, or now are in the world.

FOUR GRAND ENQVIRIES, wherein the foundation, whereon that bloody and damnable
Doctrine aforesaid, bears, is loosened, viz. That all persons baptized into a
Church, are all holy, and eo nomine, have a right to all Church-Communions,
they and their children, how abominable soever they are, so be they are not
suspended from, not excommunicated out of the Church, nor are children in
years, fools, or mad men.

LAW-POWER, wherein we may see, The Way of Holiness paved forth before us, and
troden-in by all those Ministers and people, who have felt the law of their
Relation written in their hearts.

A TREATISE OF PRAYEY, wherein two Questions are resolved touching forms of
prayer, both in the Negative, That they are not good for the evil, nor of any
use for the good to teach them to pray. And six touching the Lords prayer, all
in the Negative, two only are specified here (1) That the intendment of our
Blessed Savior was not that His Disciples then or now should pray in those
very words. (2) Nor is the repeating that prayer in the pulpit, the Tessera of
a Godly Minister, because the hudling that prayer after the manner, may show
the man not so serious as ridiculous in praying.

INFANT BAPTISM is not the privilege of all Infants upon the bare account
only of their parents Baptism, published together with the FOUR ENQVIRIES to
prevent the evil may be taken-in from some unscripturall passages not
becoming sound doctrine, which the Reader may find in a Dialogue concerning
the practical use of Infant Baptism toward the end of the same, composed by a
learned Divine, and as is meet to think, orthodox, pious, and Godly in other
points, though in his zeal at this point, it is conceived, he has erred with
his pen, not taking the Word of God for the Rule and Reason thereof.

CHRISMAS DAY no Holy Day, published to prevent those heathen and raunting
practices; superstitious customs, Abominable prophanesses in fashion at that
time.

A MINISTERS DVTY, to Declare against all precepts and practices contrary to
sound Doctrine, and practice of Christ Himself, and all those He accounts
faithful putting them into the Ministry. Wherein it is proved also, That if a
Minister will live peaceable and quiet among sinners, he must suffer them to be
at peace and quiet with their sins, peaceablenesse of sinners being nothing
else, but impiety not opposed, in themselves, or by others; for, who ever is
not opposed by the stream, goes with it; and altogether, who will to the
Lords-Table.

A CHVRCH-COVENANT, lawful and needful to be entered into by all, that intend
to walk in Church* fellowship according to Gospel order.

The Authors Name is annexed to the Epistle before these Treatises; and the
Reasons of making them so public are given on the backside of the general
Title page.

Direction to the Binder.
General Title; Appeal; Conference; Infant Baptism; Lords Table; Christmas;
Forms of prayer; Ministers duty; four Grand Enquiries; Law-power; Covenant;
the Account and Exceptions may be stitched alone. If altogether then Account
before the Appeal, and Exceptions after Infant Baptism.

FINIS.

