A DISCOURSE OF THE NECESSITY OF Church-Guides, For Directing Christians in
Necessary Faith.

WITH Some ANNOTATIONS on Dr Stillingfleet's Answer to N. O.

By R. H.

Matt. 18.17. Si ECCLESIAM non audiverit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and
Publicanus.

2 Cor. 6.8. Vt Seductores, and VERACES.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXV.

THE PREFACE.
BEfore my entrance upon the following Discourse it seems necessary to
pre-acquaint the Reader with the occasion thereof.

Stilling fleet at the end of his Book of the Roman Idolatry, upon his
Adversary's importunity, published Thirty Principles drawn up (as he says
immediately before them) p. 557.
to give an Account of the Protestants Faith, in the way of Principles.

In the 13th of which he affirms -- That the Scriptures may be understood by
all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them in all such
things as are necessary for their salvation. Again in the 15th. -- That these
Writings contain in them the whole Will of God so plainly revealed, that no
sober enquirer can miss of what is necessary for salvation. Again in the 19th
-- That the assistance which God has promised to those who sincerely desire to
know his Will [where I suppose he means such assistance as includes not that
which God has promised to Christians from the direction and instruction of his
Ministers; for, this assistance here, is opposed by him to that] may give them
greater assurance of the truth of what is contained in the Books of Scripture,
than it is possible for the greatest Infallibility in any other persons to do,
supposing they have not such assurance of their Infallibility. [Where you may
observe that it follows much more; may give them greater assurance, than it is
possible for the highest Church Authority, Wisdom, Learning, or Divine
assistance, short of Infallibility, in any other persons to do]. And so in his
first Consequence he says -- There is no necessity at all or use of an
infallible [I add, much less of a fallible] society of men to assure men of the
truth of those things of which they may be certain without [them]; and cannot
have any greater assurance [than that they have already] supposing such
Infallibility to be in them.

Principles were considered; and especially the forenamed opposed, by a Roman
Catholic; as appearing to him not only untrue, but of most dangerous
consequence; as being very derogative from Church Authority, as to these chief
parts of their Office, the Expounding of the Scriptures; the Teaching and
Guiding Christ's Flock in all Truth necessary to be known by them; and their
Defining also matters of Necessary Faith, as Controversies in them do arise,
and Requiring from their Subjects a Belief of them; and also very hazardous to
men's salvation, in leaving each private person to entertain in Religion,
especially as to points thought more necessary (in which therefore the
Scriptures also are affirmed by the Doctor more plain), what in his own
judgment, after a to him-seeming sincere perusal of them, he likes best; even
though a much major part of Christianity, reading the same Scriptures, assert
the contrary; and this without any obligation of submitting his judgment in
such things to his Spiritual Superiors.

Principle it seems to be; that Luther, (when he had said to himself De
abrogand Missa private praefat.
-- Tu solus sapis? Totne errant, universi? And -- Quoties mihi palpitavit
tremulum cor?) reencouraged himself to proceed in his Reformation, though
contradicting the whole World; viz. Because the Scriptures were clear, and for
him, against them all: often using S. Paul's -- Licet Angelus de Caelo, etc.
Gal. 1. The Holy Scriptures the rest of the Christian World had read as well as
himself, but he meanwhile was conscious only of his own sincere endeavor; and
so the Principle secured him that he did not mistake, if any such point were
necessary, wherein he opposed them. From such Principle was the confidence of
the Protestants, then but a very few, against the sacred Council of Trent, i.
e. all the other Church Governors of that Age; Soave Hist. Couc. Trid. p.
344.641.
when they desired, that the Authority of the Fathers might be qualified with a
-- Fundantes se in Scripturis. Of which fundantes, whether it were so, or no,
they themselves, for themselves at least, would be the Judges.

From such a Principle, the Socinians departed from the whole Church of God,
Ancient, Modern, only pleading the Scriptures clear on their side. See
Volkelius De Vera Relig. l. 5. c. 7. -- Praesertim (says he) si sapientiam a
Deo petat, quam ille nemini denegat: i. e. if using their prayers and sincere
endeavors, though not consulting or obeying any Guides, or the Church; -- Quam
in iis quoque rebus, quae ad salutem sunt necessariae errare constat. From such
Principle it is that the Presbyterians Reasons showing Necessity Reform. p. 5.
denied Subscription to the 39. Articles except this clause were added, [so far
forth as the same Articles were agreeable to Gods Word] of which, [how farre]
they make themselves the Judges; And so also do the many latter Sects; who, for
a sufficient knowledge in all necessary points and trial of the Doctrine of
their Teachers therein, need nothing more than a Bible, and learning to read.
From such Principle that Mr. Chilling worth denies that any Church Authority
(not excepting the first four General Councils,) has just cause to oblige
others to receive their Declarations in matters of Faith. c. 4.. 18.
And elsewhere says c. 6.. 5^
-- That the Bible, the Bible only is the Religion of Protestants: and that the
belief of any thing besides Scripture, and the plain irrefragable indubitable
consequences of it [indubitable, i. e. to those, on whom they are imposed]
cannot [i. e. by Protestants] with coherence to their own grounds be required
of any without most high and most Schismatical presumption. From such
Principle, that Dr Stilling fleet accuses the whole Church Catholic, Eastern
and Western, for so many Ages before the Reformation, of so manifold an
Idolatry; where his own sincere endeavor to understand the Scriptures in so
necessary a point, he holds, cannot be mistaken; and therefore all that World
must be so. And thus what opinion may not One maintain against all, if he have
first a confidence concerning himself, that he has used a requisite industry
(which industry also must not be maintained greater than the meanest condition
of life may practice); and so, that Scripture is clear to him in all necessary
matter; and, Next, (the consequent of this) if he have a persuasion concerning
others, how many soever, (whom, by their differing from him, he knows to be in
an error), that either they have been defective in a sincere enquiry; or,
having, with him, discerned the Truth, yet for some secular ends falsify it?

Principle, also proceeds that Assertion; That there is amongst Christians no
Necessity of any other Judge (infallible, and much less fallible,) save
Scripture only, for deciding Controversies in any points necessary: which seems
to engage the Assertors to the maintaining also of one of these two very harsh
Propositions; either, 1 That all such points, as are in controversy among
Christians, are no Necessaries; but that it must pass for a matter of less
moment, as any thing becomes disputed: and particularly, No necessity of
believing or practicing on the Protestants side, for his attaining of
salvation, any of the points agitated between them and the Roman Catholics:
Which Proposition seems of a very hard digestion to be allowed and abetted by
those Reformers especially, who make such Declamations against the hainousness
of the Roman corruptions of the sense of Scripture even in the highest matters
of God's Worship, and Mysteries of our Redemption: As, in giving the Divine
Worship to a Creature; in the doctrine of Justification; Merit of men's good
Works. etc. Or 2 engages them else to the maintaining of this other
proposition; that, though the Scriptures are so clear in some of those points
in controversy (for, so they say they are in all Necessaries), as that no
illiterate person using a convenient endeavor can mistake in them, yet de
facto that the much Major part of the Christian world, having and perusing the
same Scriptures, is and has been mistaken in them for many ages; and has
thought the Scriptures clear to the contrary: which seems, on the other side, a
thing as hard and incredible; viz. to deny to so many Men and Ages, for
understanding the Scriptures, the using of such a just endeavor, as any
unlearned Protestant does, or may employ.

Principle seems naturally to proceed; in such a Church as holds it, a
Toleration of all Opinions that pretend Scriptures for themselves (however it
comes about that those of Roman Catholics find little favor by it); because
there is no just reason of suppressing the assertions of any party, where is no
competent Judge of deciding the truth in them, save the same Scriptures which,
read by both sides, yet do not end the Debate. A Toleration of all Opinions I
say (save perhaps such as invade and disturb the Civil Peace and Government).
Among which opinions tolerated also some will be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.19.
unless these men tell us, by what Judge these shall be declared such, and so
excluded. That Toleration of opinions was a Consequence of this Principle Mr
Chillingworth See chapter 4.
clearly saw; and so pleaded much for it, as only well consistent with
Protestant Grounds. Of which see more below. 38. etc.
96.

Consequences as these, then, N.O. was moved to write some brief Considerations
and Reflections on these Principles; observing herein the Method that they
prescribed to him. But now, since Dr Stilling fleet has not at all followed
the same (though his own) order in his Reply (whereby would more clearly have
appeared the many things therein that have received no answer) I also in this
Rejoinder shall take the liberty to change the former method of the
Considerations, and briefly to repeat N.O's Conceptions especially such as
relate to the forementioned Principles, reduced into such an order as they may
be more applicable thereto; and then consider, how far the Dr's Replies have
rebated their force, or confirmed his own Positions. And, after this done, lest
a considerable part of the Dr's Book, expatiating to other subjects, which, if
nothing pertinent to N.O's Considerations, yet may appear to some very
important to the Protestant Cause, may seem unspoken to, I shall accompany the
Reader through his whole Book with Annotations, following his Discourse whither
it leads me), on the passages that appear to me more remarkable: and so I shall
leave all to the judgment of the prudent and piously disposed, of what present
persuasion soever, who, not zealous for a party, seeks after Truth.

N.O, (as to a Christian's attaining a right belief in all necessaries to
salvation) are Obedience and submission of Judgment to the Church's
Determinations, on the one side; and every Christian's Liberty of Judgment in
their perusing the Scriptures, on the other. Where he will easily discover,
that the interest of those, who contend for Liberty, engages such persons, to
deny and evacuate the Infallibility and non-mistaking of any Ecclesiastical
Guides, even as to the same Necessaries, wherein yet they affirm the Clearness
of Scripture to every Christian using a right endeavor; so that none can
safely herein adhere to their sentence and judgment, wherein yet he may to his
own. Again, their interest; to set forth to the uttermost the defects and
failings of these Guides; their oppositions, and contradictions; and of every
one so much the more, as he claims a greater Authority: and therefore no
wonder, if the Pope is no better treated by them: To charge them, whether
Prelates or Synods, with passion, ambition, covetousness, or the like, in their
proceedings: To rip up and publish any their infirmities or vices, whereby they
may be thought less fit to be Guides of other men's Ignorance, or Conscience; or
Judges of their Differences: as if inferior and private persons were free from
such passions and self interests; and not born in a state, where some opinions
better served their profit and preferment than others, and where such
engagements clouded their Judgments.

Controversies; For, this thing would call for some public Judge: And, To
diminish and abridge points of necessary Faith as much as may be; Because all
such points must be affirmed so clear that no honest endeavor can mistake in
them: and, because thus the Liberty of Opinion in all other points may the
better be justified, upon the account of their not being necessary: and to
inveigh much against the Multiplicity of the Articles of Faith, that have been
imposed by the Church's Councils: To extend the Title of Catholic to all
Churches professing Christianity, Because these men allow no certain Judge to
determine Heresy or Schism, which may exclude any Church from being Catholic;
and because they hold only those points to be necessary to salvation that are
so clear in Scripture, as that all Churches agree in them.

Particular Churches, and of Civil States, to correct and reform within their
Dominions whatsoever Errors and Corruptions in Religion: As indeed it is most
necessary they should those, which first by a Lawful Ecclesiastical Authority
are stated to be so. But, how such Errors and corruptions shall first be
certainly known and distinguished from what are certain Truths, and
lawful-practices, which ought to precede a proceeding to reform them, This
uses to be passed over by them in silence.

So; To speak much of the lawful liberty and power of particular Churches and
States to change and alter, improve, abolish, (according to several
Constitutions of the Civil Government) things that are not essential to
Christian Religion nor expressly prescribed by our Lord or his Apostles; but, to
say nothing meanwhile, how, what are or are not such Essentials, or so
commanded, shall certainly be known and decided; Yet which acting the other
necessarily presupposes the stating of this. But, wisely, little talk they
have of this, because such thing would infer a Judge in these matters beside
Scripture.

limit the Authority of such Spiritual Guides; that it obliges not, when any
thing is repugnant to plain Commands of Scripture (which, it seems, either
these Governors cannot see, or will dissemble); or, when any other way found
not agreeable to Gods Word; and then judging, themselves, when it is, or is not
so; Or (if their own judgment may seem too partial) making an appeal to the
judgment of Common Reason against these Guides; as if both they, and the Major
part of the Christian World that follow them, had no such faculty, or that this
Common Reason were only in a few. Again that such authority obliges not in any
thing repugnant to the Evidence of Sense; as if either such evidence were not
considered by these Persons in Authority; or, that they had not their senses so
perfect, as other men. To distinguish between the several Ages of the Church;
and allow more Authority to the Governors of the past, (as thinking themselves
more out of their reach); than, of the present.

To annul as much as in them is the Subordinations of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy; or render them arbitrary and dependent on Civil States; and to level
as much as may be their authority and Jurisdiction; introducing such a
Polyarchy into the Catholic Church, as would not be endured in a Temporal
Government; nor is indeed suffered by wise Princes in a National Church within
their own Dominions. [ I will have one Doctrine, and one Discipline; one
Religion in substance, and in Ceremony: said King sames. Conference at Hampt.
Court.
]

Ecclesiastical and Civil state; and borrow aids from the one, as need is, to
relieve their subjection to the other. To require a joint concurrence in the
Secular Power for the ratification of all Clergy-Acts, though in purely
Spiritual Matters; whereby neither any Church-Doctrine nor Government can be
established in such State, which It prohibits; and contrary Constitutions and
Laws and Reformations are introduced into the Church, as the secular Magistrate
is variously inclined or informed; and Ecclesiastical Controversies transferred
into the Civil Courts; they not so well observing the Consequences hereof, when
a Julian or a Constantius appears; and that, if the secular Magistrate should
be of a Religion or Sect disliked by them, (suppose a Presbyterian, or a
Roman Catholic) such his Spiritual Authority turns to their disadvantage; and
that the same Ecclesiastical Rights of the Civil Power will destroy Protestancy
elsewhere, as here support it: And that (as S. Austin Epist. 48.
minded the Donatists preferring a Secular judgment in their Cause before the
Church's) -- Judicium Illius [scil. Principis] quem Vestri elegerunt, quem
Judicibus Episcopis praetulerunt, justissime contra vos custodictur.

Scriptures, that may seem to relate the Corruptions and fallings away of the
Clergy; Matt. 24.4, 5, 23, 24. -- Act. 20.29, 30. -- 2 These. 2.3, -- 1 Timothy
4.1. -- 1 John 4.1. -- Gal. 1.8.
that bid us to beware of false Prophets, and to try the Spirits, and to adhere
to the Gospel (by which they can only mean, to that which in their own judgment
is the sense of it) though an Angel from heaven should teach the contrary; to
take heed of Seducers and false Guides, that should appear in Christ's name
(applying such things to the Canonical Judicature of the Church, and not to
themselves rather) and to tell the people of Antichrists that are to come, and
store of false Miracles that are to be done; That they are bid to prove all
things, and hold that which is good [i.e. what they judge so] That if the blind
lead the blind both must fall into the ditch: That the Apostles claimed no
dominion over men's Faith etc.

All these for a -- Dirumpamus vincula eorum and projiciamus a nobis jugum
ipsorum, I mean that Yoke of Church Authority committed to these our
Ecclesiastical Superiors by our Lord Christ Jesus, and for the gaining
freedom of judgment and liberty of opinion, and declining of Obedience. All
which things, any way vilifying Superiors, and having something Satirical in
them, are ordinarily received with much applause by our corrupt Nature
uncorrected by Grace; which loves to have a Sovereignty placed in it self, and
to be made Judge of its Judges, and relucts against nothing so much as a
captivating of the Understanding.

effects of such yoke thrown off, and of such a Liberty established in stead
thereof, seem to be very sad. For, besides * the Sin of Disobedience to those
our Lord Christ has set ever us, (if indeed they be such Spiritual Guides to
whom we owe Submission of Judgment); * the heaviness of the Church's Censures
and Anathemas, (if these should be justly incurred by us); * the liability of
the more illiterate and ignorant sort of Christians (which are the most) of
falling into far more and more gross and fundamental errors, than can
possibly come from Obedience and Submission to the Church Governors, though
supposed also fallible; and * the great sins both in a Christian's Practice and
in the Divine Service, which such errors may bring along with them; Besides a
continual unsettledness in a belief that is founded on our own judgment, very
mutable, as things are differently represented to it; and hastily resolving
many times only because seeing few doubts; and, not because there are not, but
because we perceive not, the difficulties; Besides the solicitude and jealousy,
that such persons ought to have, concerning their not having sufficiently
studied the grounds of their Faith, or used a competent diligence to inform
themselves of the truth, (without which they may still miss of it): Besides all
these, I say; it happens, that several judgments reading the Scripture, and
understanding it in a several way, all assured of its Clearness in Necessaries,
and confident of their own Sincerity (which they cannot be of another's), hence
Sects and variety of Opinions (according to men's different capacities) become
infinitely multiplied; Hence Censuring also and vilifying of their Spiritual
Superiors, whose errors they think they clearly discover, -- ( which
Spiritual Pride, and conceitedness in Religion, and Contradiction to
Superiors, says Dr St. Sermon. on Act. 24.14.
are to be reckoned among the worst Symptoms of a declining Church): Hence
also in such diversity of opinion happens an alienation of Affections; and so,
very great Divisions and Factions. As we see, that those Sects departed from
the Church of England no way agree amongst themselves; and when any of them, by
their extraordinary increase, gets any power and dominion ever the rest, there
presently follows a proportionable endeavor to advance and propagate it self
and root out the other: because they would have all men of the very best
Religion, that is, their own.



Union and Peace; where is no Judge to end their differences, but only that,
whose Language, misunderstood, causes them; I mean, the Scriptures. Which last
Consideration was one of Mr. Chillingworth's Motives for reconciling himself to
the Roman Catholic Religion -- Because (says he Motive 10 Pref.. 42.
) by denying all humane authority, either of Pope, or Councils, or Church, to
determine Controversies of Faith, they have abolished all possible means of
suppressing Heresy, or restoring Unity to the Church.

Protestantisme, for the satisfying himself and others, (if any have the
curiosity to know it) be devised this Answer. Heresy -- That all men should
believe the Scripture [i.e. it to be Gods Word] and endeavor to believe it in
the true sense: for that so none such can possibly be an Heretic: says he.
But here, first, how shall any assure himself of having used a right endeavor?
Next, of those who do not so endeavor some may be Heretics; and, if
Heretics, ought to be suppressed; and cannot be suppressed without some Judge
of their nonendeavours, and of their Heresy, besides themselves; and such Judge
is the thing this man would decline. Lastly, If God has appointed some
spiritual Guides for directing people in the belief of Scripture in its true
sense, a right endeavor cannot be used herein, without repairing to, and
learning it from, them; the dependence on whom, for not incurring Heresy; this
Author would avoid. Unity in the Church, That there be a Comprehension of all
Sects and Opinions within the pale of one Communion Pref.. 43.
-- That (says he) no more be required of any man to make him capable of the
Church's Communion than this, that every one endeavor to believe Scripture in
its true sense. So he. Now, this men may equally do, in their believing it in a
most contrary sense, according to their different capacities; and the agreement
that thus can be among them will be only tolerating all disagreements. Of which
see more in the following Discourse. 96.

Satisfaction concerning True Religion, conjecturing the causes of the late
great increase of Popery in England, pitcheth upon this very san^e thing, that
induced Chilling worth to Popery -- Nothing (says he p. 178.
) among us (except ignorance and wickedness) increases Popery more than the
scandal of our numerous and some of them abominable Sects, when the people see
many zealous Professors turn Quakers, or Ramers, or Seekers, or Antinomians,
or Socinians, or Familists; and shall See the more tolerable parties
(Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Erastian, Separatists and Anabaptists)
condemning backbiting reproching making odious (if not persecuting) one
another, and shunning many of them the Communion of one another as they do the
Papists, This makes them think that they must seek some surer, soberer way,
than any of us have yet found. This cause of the increase of Popery he truly
discerned, viz. the continual increase of Sects in all Parties, save Popery;
and for this, Men, that dread the hazards of the next world more than this,
flee apace into the Catholic Church, there to find an unity of Faith, and be
at some certainty and rest. But, how shall the cause of the increase of Popery
be removed? Or, how can such a Principle in a Church, as the forementioned,
proceed to any cure of it? Of one sort of these Sectarists divided from the
Bishops he himself is; How can he deny to others the liberty he takes? Or must
he not come at last only to Mr Chillingworths device; where is no Judge, 1 an
universal Toleration of all good Endeavourers to understand Scripture; and 2 an
Internal Communion of Charity (for, an External, the Rites of which may please,
or at least may continue to please all parties, can never be invented; nothing
being more controverted than concerning the Celebration, Ceremonies, Virtue,
etc, of the Sacraments); But it seems by him, neither will those be attained
where is such diversity of Opinions: but, (to repeat his words) -- There will
be condemning, backbiting, reproching, making odious (if not persecuting) one
another, and shunning many of them the Communion of one another, as they do the
Papists. [I add, from Experience; And suppressing and crushing one another, as
any of them gets power.]

Christians Liberty usually take for its defense; and these seem the Effects of
it, where allowed: whilst the Contenders for Obedience and Submission of
Judgment to our Spiritual Superiors and Guides take quite the contrary Course.
They endeavor to plant in all their Subjects the greatest reverence and esteem
of the Lords Clergy, and Ministers, of their learning, wisdom, piety, and the
assistance of Gods Holy Spirit preserving them for ever, at least in their
highest Courts of Jndicature, in all Necessary truth. They maintain a strict
Subordination in the Church's Hierarchy, and an Unity of Government in the
Catholic Church, though spread through never so many several temporal
Dominions: all subjected to one Supreme Court and President thereof; and to the
same Definitions and Laws, as to matters purely spiritual; and these no way
alterable by Civil States. They urge the great Heresies in the highest points
of Faith, that the sharpest Wits in former times have fallen into by departing
from the sense of the Church; The greater men's parts are, they being more
prone, when swayed by Interest, or passionately addicted to a party, to embrace
and believe the most absurd opinions; because they can discover, and are
furnished with, more plausible arguments, and Verisimilities, to maintain them.
They press the necessity of an Unity both in Faith, and Communion; and, of the
latter its including also the first; a varying of faith varying also the
public Divine Worship and Service. They defend and urge a necessity also of
the Church's many Definitions in the Faith from time to time as any dangerous
opinions invade it; and so, the Faith also by the Divine Providence is
continually made more distinct clear and illustrious; and the Adherents to it
more united, from such oppositions; and they maintain the Authority of the
Church in all ages the same, and equal, and equally assisted from Heaven to
crush the one, and defend the other; else, that the giving way to diversity of
Opinions would at last leave no Fundamental of the Christian Faith unshaken,
and unquestioned; Atheism stealing in by certain degrees from indulging too
great a latitude in the Faith. Romans 12.16. 2 Cor. 2.9. Heb. 13.7, 17. -- 1 Cor.
1.10. -- Romans 16.17. -- Phi, 3.16.
They press the Scriptures that recommend Humility, captivating the Intellect,
not being wise in our own conceit, and that command in all things Obedience --
that they should all say one thing, and that there should be no Schisms among
them; but that they should be perfect in one sense, and one knowledge. -- That
they should continue in the same Canon or Rule. And -- Mark those that make
dissensions and scandals contrary to the doctrines which they had learned, and
avoid them. Which precepts cannot be observed, unless, there be in the Church
some Persons, whose judgment, doctrine, faith, spirit, all the rest are to
follow and conform to.

effects also of which Obedience to those Guides seem to be quite different
from those former ones of Liberty; and as happy, as the other unfortunate:
Great unanimity peace and concord in the Members of such a Church; where, in
stead of continual consultations concerning his Religion, and that made by
every laick from Generation to generation, without any settlement in those
matters, the consideration of which belongs to the Councils of the Church, is a
stable Union in Faith and Doctrine, with such a well grounded confidence of
these Guides their not erring herein, as there remains no expectation of having
something amended, nor fears of having it altered. Where the main business is
to believe and practice, as these teach him; and a great readiness to part with
any opinion which may perhaps be different, so soon as the Church is known by
him to teach the contrary; And, in any storm that happens to arise in the
Church and divide these Governors, He suffers no distraction to whom to pay
this his obedience; in any opposition of Inferiors giving it always to the
Superior Ecclesiastical, Persons, or Councils: Again, in any Controversy
concerning the judgment or sentiment of Antiquity, or former Church,
acquiescing in the Sentence of the present; whose authority he esteems no whit
inferior to that of past Ages; and both to be guided by the same Holy Spirit.

humble Christian, by an happy resignation of his Judgment where our Lord seems
to him to demand it, enjoyes a perpetual peace and rest from dispute, together
with all his fellow members of the same Body, as to all those matters of
greater moment, wherein these his Spiritual Superiors have published their
judgment; with much less trouble to himself, and more truth; not by studying
the Controversies, but assenting to the Church's Decisions of them; and so
remaining safe in his Faith without being Learned. And lastly, this Unity of
Faith and Doctrine in such a resolved Obedience is accompanied also with a much
firmer league and union of Charity (the latter being hardly to be attained, or
long continued, without the former); and with a blessed Uniformity also of
God's Public Service and Worship and of the External Communion of the members
of such a Church entirely the same in all Nations, (though no one Society and
Communion of Christians is so universally extended and diffused as it). In
which, Communion and Worship, the Faith, being once changed, presently makes
some alterations, (as it did in Luther's days): and none can continue long
together in their Communion, who are divided in their Faith. By all these
effects the security of such an Obedience seems much preferrable to the
perpetual instability of private men's liberty; and the plea for it much more
preservative of Church Authority, the Authentic Conservator and Expositor of
Holy Scripture; and more becoming a Clergy man. But, as it seems much more to
be desired, so, whether it be also sufficiently maintained, I leave to the
equal Reader's judgment in the perusal of the following Concertations: from
which therefore I shall no longer detain him. Domine, illumina tenebras
nostras.

THE CONTENTS OF THE DISCOURSE.
CHAP. I. Concerning Points Necessary: and a Right Understanding of the
Scriptures in them.
A Pre-Concession. 1 That the Holy Scriptures contain all points generally
necessary for attaining Salvation; and 2 That some of these Necessaries are
clear therein to all or most Capacities. 1. Proposition. That either a Writing,
so clearly delivering all points necessary as that no sober Enquirer can err in
them: Or, an Infallible Directer, where such Writing is not to all, in all such
points, clear, well consists with the Wisdom and Goodness of God in
manifesting his Will to Men.. 1. 2. That the Clearness of the Scripture
affirmed in Necessaries to Salvation cannot rationally be restrained only to
the points expressly mentioned in the Apostle's or other ancient Creeds, or to
those only, wherein all Christian Churches are agreed.. 2. Where, That
believing the Ancient Creeds, and Leading a Good Life (abstracting from one
duty of it, viz. yielding a due Obedience to our Spiritual Superiors) is not
sufficient for attaining Salvation.. 3.
3. That a Controversy, supposed in a necessary matter of Faith, cannot be
decided, when two contrary parties plead Clearness of Scripture on their own
side, without some other Judge beside the Scriptures.. 4. As the Controversy
concerning the Sense of the Text, Hoc est Corpus meum.. 5. Where, That such
Answers as these, maintaining the contrary, seem defective and unsatisfactory:
viz. * That there is no necessity, that some Controversies in matters of
Religion be decided.. 7. Or * That there are other Means of attaining the
certain Sense of Scripture [i.e. in some things] without such a Judge. [For,
the Question is made, When, after the using all such means; or, When to Persons
whose condition permits not to use such means, the Sense of Scriptures remains
still doubtful; as to many such it doth]. 8. * Or, That the Sense of Scripture
may be certainly learnt from the Determinations of Ancient Councils or
Unanimous Consent of Fathers. [For, as some Controversies in some Necssaries
arose and were discussed in the ancient, so may and have some others in latter,
times: and, since there is Controversy also not unfrequently concerning what
has been, the unanimous Consent of Fathers in particular points, or the
results of lawful ancient Councils, there will yet be wanting a present Judge
for determining these: and, since the Church of all times, former or latter,
has equal authority, any present modern Determinations seem as authentic and
obliging, as the Ancient.].. 9.
4. That, since the Scriptures are affirmed clear in Necessaries only upon the
condition of a sincere endeavor, one, not assured first of this sincere
endeavor (yet of which there seems no certain means), cannot be secure of his
not erring in Necessaries: For exampple, the Socinian. And this especially,
when a major part of Christianity understands the sense of such Scriptures,
against him. And the same uncertainty holds of one's having sufficiently used
other helps, if these also be required.. 11. Or, if here such a lower degree of
endeavor be affirmed only necessary and required, as suits with Christians of
the meanest emploiments and capacities, that such endeavor seems not
sufficient for understanding all necessary points. Or, if it be, that by such
an Endeavor, the Church Governors may as well be presumed not to err in
points necessary; and so the other people way safely acquiesce in their
Judgment.. 12.
CHAP. II. Concerning a Necessity of Church-Guides for instructing of
Christians in Points Necessary.
THat the Clearness of Scripture in all necessaries upon a right endeavor to
understand them, if meant without the help of the Church-Guides, renders their
instructing of the people, as to these points, not necessary: But, if
understood with the use of their help, implies the Scriptures in such points
not clear without their Exposition: and inferrs a necessity of the not erring
of such Guides in these points, that the people by them may be rightly
directed.. 13. Where, That such Answers as these in this matter seem not
pertinent. * That a manifold necessity of Church Authority is still maintained
[i.e. as to other arts of it, not this]: * That these Church-Guides are of
great use also for instructing unskilful persons in Scripture doubtful and
obscure; [but not said to be obscure and doubtful in necessaries; which would
overthrow the Supposition, that they are herein clear.]. 14.

CHAP. III. Concerning Obedience and Submission of Judgment due from the
Church's Subjects to their Governors in Divine matters: and, in these, the
more, the more they are necessary.
1. THat the Church's Subjects have an obligation of Obedience and Submission
of Judgment to their Ecclesiastical Superiors; and this as to points
necessary.. 19. Proved by Scriptures. Where the Texts Deuteronomy. 17.8. -- and 2.
Chron. 19.6. are vindicated form Dr St's Exceptions,. 22. And his other
Objections of the erring of the Highest Ecclesiastical Courts under Moses's
Law, in Ration. Account p. 241. answered.. 25.
2. That such Obedience and Submission of Judgment, if granted due to these
Governors, is, in any Division of them, to be yielded to the Superior,
Persons, or Councils:. 26. Where, Dr St's Pleas in behalf of the Church of
England, in order to this, are considered. Viz. * That there was no obliging
authority extant at the Reformation, Superior to that of this Church.. 27.32.
* That It was, then, free from the Authority of the Pope and Church of Rome..
29. * That It submits to, or consents with, the Church Primitive and
Apostolical; or, the truly Catholic Church of all Ages.. 31. * That It has
not been so guilty of violating the Church-Canons, as that of Rome.. 33. * That
Particular Churches may reform abuses and errors within themselves, when a
more General Consent cannot be obtained: [But not, therefore, when a more
general Dissent is formerly declared].. 34.
3. That Learned Protestants grant a Submission of Judgment due to
Church Authority from all such Persons, as have no demonstrable Certainty that
It commands them any thing contrary to God's Word.. 35. 4. That, setting aside
any duty of Obedience, the plebeian and unlearned ought, for the understanding
of Scriptures, to acquiesce in the judgment of those more skilful and studied
in them, without distinguishing those Necessaries wherein is supposed any
difference in men's Judgments.. 37. And that, what is to them using a due
industry clear in Scriptures, may be presumed will be so to their Guides. Ibid.
Where, The Answer; That Christians cannot be secure, that their Guides, though
they do not mistake in necessary matters of Faith, yet do not mis-teach others
in them; and the transferring Infallibility thus from the Usual Notion, of
these Guides their not erring or being deceived in these matters, to an
Infallibility of their not deceiving others, seems very unsatisfactory,. 38.
5. That to whatever liability to mistakes and errors the Church-Guides are
subject, yet there is less hazard to the Vulgar in adhering to their's, than to
their own opinions. Where, Such Exceptions and Answers as these that follow
against the former Obedience asserted in this Chapter, seem not solid and
pertinent. Viz: * That God has entrusted every man with a Faculty of
Discerning Truth and Falsehood: [But this, rightly used, will discern this
truth, that submission of judgment is due to our Spiritual Superiours].. 40. *
That Guides transgressing their Ride are not to be followed. [True; when these
Guides are certainly and demonstrably known to any to do so: but, who shall
judge of such certainty? and, were any so certain, or rather conceited that
they are so, yet all the rest will remain still obliged to Obedience.]. * That
the concurrent Sense of Antiquity is an excellent Means to understand the mind
of Scripture in places, otherwise doubtful and obscure. [But, here, not a Means
which may be beneficially used, but a Superior, that must be obeyed and
submitted-to, is demanded for ending Controversies.].. 44. * That no absolute
submission can be due to two Church-Authorities contradicting one another: [But
it is denied, that the Supreme have done so: and, in those Subordinate
contradicting, submission is due to the Superiours].. 46. * That, in the
present divided state of the Church, a man must make use of his judgment in the
choice of his Church. [But this judgment, rightly used, shows obedience and
subjection due, in any division, to the Superior, Persons, or Councils, as the
Communion we ought to live in and make choice of.].. 47. * That we may not
submit to all those who challenge the authority of Guides; nor to lawful Guides
in all things they may require. [Which as thus spoken in general, so will be
willingly granted].

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Infallibility of these Governors in Necessaries.
THat the Church is infallible as to Necessaries in her Lawful General
Councils.. 49. Proved * by the Practice of such Councils, accepted and
submitted to by the Church Catholic diffusive. 50. * From the Necessity
thereof for the preserving the stability and certainty of the Christian Faith..
51. * From the Promises in Scripture. 52. Where, That Dr St. holds the Roman
Church hitherto never to have erred in Necessaries.. 53. * From the Testimony,
of S. Austin in his proceedings against the Donatists.. 54. And, of the Greek
Church.. 56. * From Archbishop Lawd's, and, sometimes, Dr St's, holding the
Catholic Church, not only in its Being, but as to its Teaching and
Determinations, Infallible.. 57. Dr St's Replies considered * Concerning the
Practice of Councils.. 64. etc. * Concerning the Certainty of the Christian
Faith without Infallible Church Governors.. 63. * Concerning S. Austin.. 71. *
That the Argument from the Evidence of our Senses, urged by Dr St. and others,
disproves not the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church.

CHAP. V. No Supressing of Sects and Heresies without admitting an
Ecclesiastical Judge.
THat all Sects, for their Tenants, equally appeal to the Clearness of the
Scripture.. 81. That the leaving all men, for knowing Necessaries, to the
clearness of Scripture therein, without requiring their submission to the
Judgment of the Church, can afford no effectual remedy of Heresies and
Schisms.. 83. That the Constitutions of the Church of England seem contrary to
this; and to require Submission of Judgment.. 84. Dr St's Replies, contending,
that his Principles no way justify Sects, considered.. 86. viz: * That there is
a great difference between the Church of England's separation from Rome, and
that of the Sects from Her.. 87. * That no Infallibility is challenged by her
in respect of her Subjects, as is by Rome.. 89. * That her Doctrines are not
made necessary to salvation, nor any excluded from it, merely because not being
in her Communion.. 90. Nor any immediate auth^rity challenged by her of
obliging the Consci^nces of Men.. 91. Where; That, though none of these things
could be charged on her by the Sects that have left her, as they are by Her on
the Church of Rome left by Her, yet still by her example, as also by these
Tenants of hers, the Sects (though agreeing with her in these may think
themselves at liberty to depart from her for other things, wherein to them she
seems faulty or defective; as She, for this cause, did depart from her
Superiors.
His Replies, contending, that his Principles afford a just and sufficient
Means of remedying Sects, considered. 93. Where: That the Recommending of
Humility, Obedience, and a due Submission to our Spiritual Pastors, and the not
usurping of their Office, etc understood exclusively, to submission of private
men's judgment to them, and to restraint of Liberty of Opinion, or of
contradiction as to any of the Church's Definitions and Doctrines in matters of
Faith, are no sufficient means of suppressing Heresies and Sects. Yet, That, if
Protestants would only admit this latter of not contradicting, there could have
been, or can be, no Reformations at any time against any such Doctrines of the
former Church.. 94. And, That the Church's Authority, of making Rules and
Canons; of Reforming any abuses in Practice, or errors in Doctrine; of
inflicting Censures upon Offenders; of Receiving into, and Excluding out of the
Church such persons which according to the laws of a Christian Society are to
be taken in, or shut out, etc. if not extending to Excluding Dissenters from
her Doctrines and Definitions in matters of Faith, is still deficient, as to
the same purpose.. 100. etc.
Concerning the Consent said to be required from all her Clergy by the Church
of England to her Articles of Religion.. 104. Mr Chillingworths Proposal in
this matter for procuring a general Unity in Communion and Peace in the Church,
considered.. 96. The vanity and uneffectiveness of it as to the End aimed at..
97.
A Table of the Principal CONTENTS of the ANNOTATIONS.
THat Tradition qualified with the other Motives is a sufficiently certain
Evidence, Of the Infallibility of the Church, as Divinely assisted; Or, Of the
Canon of Scripture; Or, Of any other Divine Revelations, testified by it to be
such. p. 85, 94, 97. That either Infallibility of the Church, or of Scriptures,
may be the first thing believed from Tradition. And either of these proved from
the other, as either is first known. p. 123, 133, 169. The expression of a
Moral Infallibility vindicated, p. 94. And, that, as Moral Infallibility is
applied to Tradition, so, not to Church-Infallibility, as Divinely assisted.
Ib. That an Assent built only on a morally-infallible Evidence never comes to
be more than morally infallible. Or, that an Assent never rises higher than
the Evidence p. 96. The several ways, How, in a Divine Faith, an Infallible
Assent is said to be yielded to Divine Revelation. p. 87. On what account
Church-Infallibility necessary, notwithstanding the Certainty and self-evidence
of Tradition. And, that Christians, without this Church-Infallibility, are no
way certain* or secure, as to several necessary points of their Faith, because
not so clearly delivered or manifested, as to all persons, by Tradition. p. 89,
93, 97, 98, 125. That all Necessary Points of Faith are not clear in Scripture
to all capacities without the assistance of their Guides. p. 98. 170. The Text
2 Pet. 3.16. considered. p. 173. The Testimony * of S. Austin De Doctrina
Christiana, l. 2. c. 9. p. 195. And * of S. Chrysostom in 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3.
concerning Clearness of Scripture, considered. p. 233.
That several other Means of understanding Scripture void not the Directions
and Decisions herein of Church-Guides, where either the other means cannot be
used by Secular Persons of manual emploiments; or, used, leave the sense of
Scripture still ambiguous to meaner Capacities. And, that, the more certain
such other means are, the more they assure us of the Church-Guides their not
erring herein. p. 179. That the Canons of Councils do clearlier decide some
necessary points controverted, than the Text of Scripture; and so effect a
greater union of Doctrine in a Society submitting to them, than is among those
submitting only to Scripture. p. 133. That Positive Laws, besides the Law of
Nature, were from the Beginning in Gods Church; and the Church-Guides, then, as
to necessaries infallible. p. 91, 124. That, under Moses's Law the people were
enjoined Submission of Judgment to the Decisions of an Ecclesiastical Judge. p.
113. That from Private Men's (when using a right endeavor) the Argument holds
to the Church-Guides, (if using the like) their not erring or being deceived in
Necessaries: but is not extended so far as that therefore they are infallible
in another sense also, viz: so, as that they cannot deceive others, in
mis-teaching them in Necessaries. p. 136. That the Exercise of private men's
judgments in all things is allowed: but its erring, or the non-submittance of
it to another, where due, not therefore excused. And, that the charging
Christians to beware of false Prophets, seducers, false Guides etc. still
fixes them more closely to the true. p. 138. That Persons, consulting their
Guides concerning the Sense of the Rule, cannot judge of their Judgment,
whether right, by the Rule; concerning the sense whereof they consulted them:
i.e. they cannot learn the sense of the Rule from their Guides, and then know
the truth of their sentence, from the Rule. p. 140. How, or by what Marks, the
true Church is to be discerned from Sects: from which Church first known the
Enquirer may learn the true Faith. p. 106. 152. 155. 209. And that, In any
difference or contrariety of Church Governors, the Superior Authority is to
be obeyed. That Christians both prudently may, and in Duty ought, to subject
their Judgment in Divine matters to Church Authority, though supposed fallible;
wherever they are not certain of the contrary to its Decisions. p. 99, 223.
That all other Magistrates and Superiors are deficient and come short, as to
one branch of Authority belonging to the Church; viz. the Deciding of what is
Truth and error, Lawful and Unlawful in Divine Matters: for which
Infallibility is necessary to them, when not so to the others. p. 222. That
Church-Infallibility is clearly enough evidenced to Christians, both from the
Scriptures; and from Tradition p. 109. And that Catholics place this
Infallibility in a lawful General Council. p. 96 Where: Concerning the Decrees
of General Councils their being put in the Creeds. And an Universal Assent
required to them under Anathema p. 127. Concerning the Anathemas passed by
inferior and fallible Councils p. 127, 129. Some Quotations out of Dr Field:
and the Text Gal. 1.8. considered p. 130, 131. That Dr Field clearly maintains,
some Visible Church or other consisting of Prelates and Subjects, and giving
Laws, to be infallible as to Necessaries in all Ages: which Church the
unlearned at least are advised by him to search out; and so to follow her
Directions and rest in her Judgment. p. 103. The Deficiencies in his Tenent. p.
105.
That Miracles are not necessary in all Ages to attest the Church's
Infallibility. p. 116. That true Miracles for many good ends, advancing the
Glory of God and the Catholic Faith, have been continued in the Catholic
Church (but not so elsewhere) ever since the Apostles times. p. Ibid. How
Miracles signify the Infallibility of those, by whom God works them. p. 118.
The Latter Times of the Church doing Miracles in all the same kinds, as the
Former: and both, as our Lord and his Apostles did. p. 119. Several
Controversies in Religion necessary to be decided; and those, respecting
Manners, as well as Faith. p. 175. etc. By what Authority General Councils
assemble, and decide Controversies. p. 174. In what manner General Councils and
the Church-Guides are an Infallible standing Judge of Controversies. p. 132,
238. Lawful General Councils of any Age since the Apostles times of equal
Authority, and Obligation. p. 151, 160, 205. That we want a Judge for the
necessary Decision of many Controversies: As, for instance, Whether Latter
Times have altered what Christ or his Apostles delivered? or, Have imposed
things contrary to the plain Commands of Scripture? Or, Latter lawful General
Councils contradicted former? or, What former Councils are to be accounted
General, Legal, and Obligatory? Whether, what is pretended to be the concordant
sense of Antiquity, or to be contrary to it, really is so? Whether some things
repugnant to Gods Word are not commanded by our Superiors as things
Indifferent? etc. I say, that the Christian World is destitute of a Judge to
end such differences, unless the Present Church be It; and is, in such
Contests, to be appealed and stood to. p. 140. 141. That the present unanimous
Agreement of the Apostolical Churches, and especially the consent of the Prime
Apostolic See joined with them, was by the Ancients esteemed and urged as
Infallible; and to which all owed Submission of Judgment p. 180, 181. Held so
by those Ancient Writers cited by Dr St. By S. Jrenaeus p. 182. By Tertullian
p. 185. By Clemens Alexandrinus. p. 188. By S. Athanasius. p. 190. 203. By S.
Austin. p. 194, 206 By Vincentius Lerinensis p. 197. The place, * in S. Gregory
Nazianzen Ep. 55. concerning Councils, considered p. 194. * In S. Austin,
Contra Maximin. l. 3. c. 14. p. 194. De Vnitate Eccl. c. 19. p. 212. De
Baptismo. l. 2. c. 3. p. 213.
Arguments used by the Fathers against Heretics both from infallible
Church-Tradition, and from the Scriptures; and that those from the latter,
notwithstanding the evidence of the former, are necessary against persons not
submitting to the other, p. 190, 191. The Places out of Petavius and S. Hierome
concerning the Tradition of the Doctrine of the Trinity before the Council of
Nice, considered. p. 201. etc. Unanimous Consent of the Fathers, Primitive
Times, Catholick-Church in her Councils, in order to Our Obedience, how to be
understood. 159, 200. And Vincentius Lerinensis his Rule -- Quod ubique, quod
semper, etc. Ibid; not necessarily comprehending all particular Persons or
Churches. Universality (understood of the Catholic Church distinct from
Heretical) never, as to Necssaries, dissenting from Antiquity. p. 199. How the
believing of the Determinations of General Councils is necessary to salvation.
p. 164. That Heretical and Schismatical Churches are no Members of the
Catholic. p. 154. That a Church committing and teaching Idolatry is no true
Member of the Catholic Church. p. 80. etc. The Nicene Council to be obeyed,
suppose the Arian Councils more numerous as to the Bishops present in them;
because the Nicene more universally accepted; and the Arian, how numerous
soever, formerly declared Heretics. p. 146. 193. Of Pope Liberius and
Honorius, accused of Heresy. p. 146. 149. That no Certainty from Sense or
Reason can rationally be pleaded for any Doctrine against a General Council, or
Major part of Christianity, having all the same means of Certainty from Reason
and Sense, and they maintaining the contrary Doctrine certain. p. 143, 145.
Where: Concerning Veneration of Images. Communicating in One Kind. p. 144. That
our Senses are not to be credited, where is the certainty of a Divine
Revelation contrary. Nor does the Disbelieving them in such things prejudice
the Certainty of their Evidence as to all other matters, where no Divine
Revelation opposes. p. 142. etc. No Reformation lawful against the Definitions
of a Superior Church Authority. p. 236. In a Controversy, Whether a National
Church has departed from the truly Catholic Church of former Ages, who is to
be the Judge. p. 237. That National Churches and Councils are subject to
Patriarchal and General. p. 152. 226. That any particular Church may require
Assent from all her Subjects to her Doctrines of Religion, so far as such
Church accords therein with the Church Catholic. Because, in these she
infallible, if the Catholic be so. p. 222. Whether a fallible Church may
require assent to her doctrines, or to some of them at least, as to matter of
Faith; where she, as fallible, confesses she may err in such matters? Or, she
not requiring such submission to them as to matters of faith, Whether her
Subjects are not left to their liberty to believe in such matters what seems to
them truest? p. 228, 230. Whether a Church fallible can justly require of all
her Clergy the assenting to, and maintaining of, all her Articles of Religion?
And then, How Errors can be rectified in such a Church where all the Clergy
stand obliged to teach nothing contrary to the public doctrines thereof? And,
2ly. Whether, if this be justly done by the Church of England, it be not so by
the Roman, and by Councils, as to the Clergy subject to them? p. 228. Whether
the Church of England does not require Assent from all her Subjects to her
Articles of Religion? Or, leaves all men at least, saving the Clergy, to their
liberty of opinion. p. 82. 227. Whether a Superior Authority was not opposed
by the Church of England in the Reformation? p. 235. 238. How she Principles of
some later English Divines are said to justify Sects. p. 157. That private
Men's relying on their own judgment in the Sense of Scripture (believed clear
to any sober Reader in all Necessaries) against that of their Ecclesiastical
Governors occasions a multiplication of Sects. p. 221. 241. That the only
effectual means in the Catholic Church for preserving her Communion from
Heresies and Sects is requiring Submission of Judgment from her Subjects to her
Definitions in matters of Faith; and removing Dissenters from her Communion. p.
241. (Justified by the Apostolical Practice. p. 242.) And, in any particular
Church, is its Adhering to, and Union in Faith with, the Catholic. Of the
Inquisition, used in some parts of the Roman Church; not used in others. p.
242.
Errata.
Page 29. line 26. read assert. p. 39. l. 6. after us so; add where also we
are to believe our senses, that it tells us so. p. 53. l. 23. r. to Scripture.
p. 59. l. 10. r. did from. p. 73. l. (4) r. to bear. p. 87. l. (6) r. faith
is. Ib. l. (5) r. nor without. p. 96. l. 20. r. n. 3. p. 105. l. 8. r. sorry.
p. 163. l. (8) r. praxi. p. 164. l. 24. r. Patron. p. 183. l. (6) r. thither
from. p. 207. l. (6) Salvator. p. 258. l. 12. r. till. that.
Contents. p. 3. l. 13. r. parts of.

CHURCH-GUIDES Necessary for Directing Christians in Necessary Faith.
CHAP. I. C^ncerning Points necessary, and a right understanding of the
Scriptures in them.
AFter N.O. In his Considerations, has conceded to Dr. Stilling fleet. 1. That
the Holy Scriptures do contain all points of faith that are necessary to be of
all persons believed for attaining Salvation: See Consid. p. 22.
That in several necessaries the Scriptures also are so clear, that a very mean
understanding, in his reading them, needs no further Instructor therein; Yet He
there denies such an universal clearness of them in all necessary matters of
faith, as that they may be understood by all persons who sincerely endeavor to
know the meaning of them in all such things as are necessary for their
salvation. And, whereas the Dr. says Princip. 13
-- That it is repugnant to the nature of the design and the wisdom and
goodness of God to give an infallible assurance to persons in writing his will
for the benefit of mankind, if those writings may not be understood by all
persons sincerely endeavoring to know the meaning of them in all such things
as are necessary for their salvation: N. O. there answers, Consid. p. 13
that this may as well consist with the Design and the Wisdom and Goodness of
God, if, in those things wherein these Divine Writings are clear only to some
persons, more versed in the Scriptures and in the Church's Traditional Sense of
them, and more assisted from above according to their Mission and Employment,
he has commissioned and appointed these persons, continued in a perpetual
Succession, to guide and instruct the rest of Christians (many of whom are of a
mean Capacity and no learning); and has appointed these others also to learn
of them the true sense of those places or points of Gods written Will wherein to
these it happens to be obscure: As also it would, had he left no Writings at
all, but only Teachers to deliver his will perpetually to his Church. Either
way, I say, suits well with Gods Wisdom and Goodness, the writing his Will in
all parts of it so clear, as none sincerely perusing this writing can have, in
any necessaries to his salvation, any doubt. [For this Will, if supposed so
written, would render any further Ecclesiastical Guide, I say not as to many
other parts of the Pastoral Office, but yet as to the expounding of such
Scriptures, to such a person, useless.] 2 Or, the leaving a Standing Ministry
to explicate this his Written Will (the course taken also in giving the Law of
Moses) in any necessary matters, wherein the sense of it is to some disputable
and ambiguous. Which of these two God has done is the Question. N. O. denies
the former, (as the Dr. asserts it): and for his disallowing it gives many
Reasons and Evidences, dispersed here and there in the Consideration^^^ as the
Doctors Principles ministered occasion: which I shall endeavor here to
recollect in some better Order; and shall consider, where I find any, his
Replies: Reducing the Considerations, as relating to those Principles
forementioned, to these chief Heads or Chapters. 1. Concerning Points Necessary
and a right understanding of the Scriptures in them. 2. Concerning a Necessity
of Church-Guides for instruction of the people in points Necessary. 3. Touching
Obedience and submission of Judgment due from the Church's subjects to the
Definitions of these spiritual Governors, in Divine matters; and this more in
those matters, which are more necessary. 4. Concerning the Infallibility of
these Governors, herein. 5. And the Impossibility of suppressing Sects,
Heresies, and Schisms, without admitting such an Ecclesiastical Judge.

N.O. observes here, that, in the Dr's mentioning Necessaries for Salvation,
Necessaries cannot rationally be taken so strictly as to include only those
doctrines delivered in Scripture wherein all persons that bear the name of
Christians do agree; for, this would be to say, that whatever is any way
controverted is not necessary; which would conclude all controversies
heretofore defined in General Councils to be of non-necessaries, even those
definitions of theirs put into the common Creeds: and so it would become not
necessary, if any thing now generally consented-to shall happen to be disputed
hereafter. But, that by the same reason as we do not bound necessaries with the
Apostles Creed, so neither can we with the latter common Creeds; I mean, in
such a sense as some of the Articles of those Creeds are accounted necessary.
For, some Heresies may arise in latter times as pernicious as, the ancient
were; and, as the four first Councils lawfully thereupon enlarged the former
Creeds, so may other Councils in latter ages enlarge those of these first
Councils, to preserve the Church's subjects from any such new corruption of
such Creeds. Which New Articles, whenever made, N. O. contends, that, Consid.
p. 77
though these do not become necessary to salvation, so, as if the pure
nescience of them would condemn any, where is an invincible ignorance, or not a
sufficient proposal; Yet so necessary they may be still, as that the nescience
of them may be some way or other a considerable hindrance to their salvation;
and, 2ly. a resistance or opposition to them, when known to be declared by the
Church, a Mortal sin; and so this sin without repentance and amendment exclude
from Salvation.

Where N. O. also answers that Question, Consid. p. 78
) Why the believing of all the ancient Creeds, and leading a good life may not
be sufficient to salvation, unless one be of the Communion of the Church of
Rome? That, if he speaks not of the Roman, but Roman Catholic Church; and
means such a good life, as, whilst performing other duties belonging to a
Christian, yet is defective in the Obedience that is due to his spiritual
Superiors (for, if a good life be so understood as also to include this, the
Drs. supposition will be denied, viz. that any such person leads a good life).
then I say N. O. answers. That such believing and leading such a life cannot be
sufficient for salvation to so many persons, as either persist, without
repentance, in a wilful ignorance of their obligation to live in this
Communion; or, knowing this obligation, persist in a wilful neglect to reunite
themselves to it. Because all such persons live in a mortal sin, viz.
disobedience to, and a wilful separation from, their lawful and Canonical
Ecclesiastical Superiors, whom our Lord has set over them: And this sin
unrepented of destroys salvation, being the same that is so heavily condemned
by our Savior, Si n^n audierit Ecclesiam. And again; That we have reason to
fear that it is unrepented of, so long as they, having opportunity, either
neglect to inform their practice. Consid. p. 79
And that this seems a judged Case in the Donatists, (who pretended some such
thing for their security) if we will admit S. Austin's sentiment of it: for,
thus he directs his speech to them -- Nobiscum estis in Baptismo, in Symbol,
in cateris Dominicis Sacramentis [and I may safely add, with regard to some of
them at least, You are with us in a good life, with the former exception], In
spiri it autem unitatis, and vincul^ pacis, in ipsa denique Catholica Ecclesia
nobiscum non estis: And so he leaves them to the punishment due to those who
are out of It, and so separated from Christ its Head: That, as to a Christian
living in the 5th age of the Church the believing of the Apostles Creed, (as
those of the first age did) and leading a good life, would not be sufficient
for salvation to such a one, unless he continued in the Communion of his lawful
Ecclesiastical Superiors of his own age, when they required from him under
Anathema or penalty of damnation the belief not only of the Symbol of the
Apostles, but of all the Articles of the Athanasian Creed; (as in the beginning
and conclusion of that Creed it is clear they did): So neither will the
believing of these Creeds, to one living and leading a good life in the present
age, suffice, if he deserts the Canons and Decrees of his lawful Superiors,
requiring, on the same penalties, the belief of something more than is
expressed in these Creeds. Again, the Creeds chiefly comprehending
Speculatives, there must be a great Body of Articles also of necessary Faith
relating to Practicals; all which therefore also must be maintained by the Dr.
to be clearly delivered in Scripture.

The clearness of Scriptures then affirmed by him as to all necessaries must be
extended to more points than those contained in the Ancient Creeds; Otherwise
all modern differences between Protestants and Roman Catholics must be said to
be in unnecessary matters; wherein yet Protestants ground all their opposition
of the Roman Doctrines upon the clearness of Scripture on their side; and on
the other side also pretend the greatest danger to be in the Roman Communion
for her erring in them; as this Dr. in particular, for her teaching and
practicing Idolatry. In which point surely, or in none, it is necessary that
the Holy Scriptures clearly guide, and direct Christians.

Now, since a Clearness of Scripture must be affirmed by the Dr. in some Points
Controverted, else he must say that no necessary point can be so, a Question
will be; How, and, On what side, two Parties pretending to it, Consid. p. 19
such clearness of Scripture may be discerned? and herein N. O. sees not, how
the Dr. can allege or insist upon such a clearness, as to any advantage of the
Protestant Religion. For, since not only one, but all Parties pretend a sincere
^ndeavor in the right understanding of these Scriptures, and, after it, do
differ so much in their sense, with what reason or charity can the Dr. in those
many points debated, (surely, some, of the greatest Moment,) affirm the sense
of these Scriptures clear on the Protestant side, where the Major part of
Christendom understands their meaning contrary: as he must grant they do in
all those he accounts counts the common Errors both of the Greek and Roman
Church (a large Catalogue of which may be found in many Protestant Authors.)?
Or, will he charge all these as defective in a sincere endeavor? But rather,
Consid. p. ^0
such sincere endeavor being indifferently allowed to all Parties, he ought to
pronounce the sense of Scripture to be clear, if on any, on that side as the
Major part does apprehend it: Which certainly is not the Protestant.

Hoc est Corpus meum, so often repeated in the Gospels without any variation of
the Terms, to bear a sense clear on the Protestants side; that is, That the
Eucharist is not in a literal or proper sense the Body of Christ; whenas they
are understood in a literal sense by much the Major part of the Christian
World, not only the Western, but Eastern Churches also (as Monsieur Claude
concedes to his worthy Adversary Monsieur Arnaude): Claud in his last Reply l.
3. c. 13.
to which Party also may be added half the Body of Protestants, namely all the
Lutherans? Now, all these have used their senses, and weighed the Arguments
drawn from them, as well as Calvinists.

Text so much controverted among Obscure Scriptures (which therefore not
containing any point necessary to salvation, salvation is not endangered by it,
if a Christian should err or he mistaken in their sense) then how comes this
great Body of Christians merely by their mistake of its sense, in thinking that
our Lord means as the words sound, that the Eucharist is his very proper Body,
and so adoring i^ (as they ought, should it be so) how come they, I say, to
commit such gross Idolatry, as the Dr. in his Book charges them with, and so
all, without Repentance of it, if Idolatry be a Mortal Sin, miscarry in their
salvation?

And if, from a Major part of the present Church interpreting Scripture, an
Appeal be made to a Major part of the Ancient Church, pretended to interpret
them on the Protestant side, Consid. p. ^^
neither will this relieve the Dr; because, since this also [(...) what side
Antiquity stands] is a thing in Controversy, (fo^^d ^^^r^omg of it we are to
presume here like wise that, a sincere ^n^^^^owr being allowed to all parties
to understand the sense of the former Church, this also stands on that side as
the Major part appr^^^e (...) it. Now the present much Major part of
Christianity pre^e ^^oth (...) the sense of the Ancient Church, in^^^ p^^^ing
this Scripture (...) a Corporal Presence.

Query of N. O: How the Controversy shall bedecided, when, in a matter of
Necessary Faith, two contrary P^^ties say the Scripture is ^lear on their own
unde^^ I and this Author answering first p. ^92* (...) of determinine
Controversies in Religion by a Living Judge is not built on any sufficient
Foundation of Scripture or Reason, i.e. as I understand him, there is no
necessity of it. [Mr Chillingworth made such an Answer before him, but more
clearly, in these words p. 59.
-- That those places of Scripture which contain things necessary, and wherein
error were dangerous, need no infallible [Judge, or] Interpreter, because they
are plain: and th^se that are obscure need none, because they contain not
things necessary, neither is error in them dangerous.] But the Reader may
observe here, that the Dr. says only, of determining Controvdrsies in
Religion; leaving this term Controversies indefinite (as is usual with him);
when as N. O. speaks not of Controversies in general, (many of which he grants
not necessary to be decided) but expressly of controversies in points necessary;
that it is requisite the true sense of Scripture herein be some way or other
cleared, else Christians cannot know what to believe in them: Upon which reason
the Dr. himself also, in his Principles, Princ. 13.
pleads a necessity that the Scriptures be clear in them.

p. 197. -- That there are means of attaining the certain sense of Scripture in
doubtful places, without the supposition of an Infallible Guide; and so makes a
long discourse from p. 197. to p. 260. concerning the Means used in the
Primitive times, and the many good Rules given by the Ancients for this; As, a
diligent comparing of Scriptures; Considering the scope, design, connection;
whether the sentence be literal on figurative; illustrating the difficult by
places more plain; few by many; recurring to the Original Tongues, etc. Where
(...) N. O. e^qui^e^ how necessaries may be decided for those persons, who,
after all these means used, remain still in some suspense; or also for those,
whose low and mechanic condition or weak judgment cannot examine* these
things: can neither compare Scriptures, nor search the Testimony of Antiquity:
Whether; 1. (...). q.
for such, it is not much safer to adhere to their Guides though fallible (who
also have used all those other helps the Dr* mentions) for deciding these, than
to be committed to their own judgment, much likelier to err herein, than the
others?

s^^se of the Fathers formerly p^toted by him, and so also, I suppose, his own.
-- That, If after examining and com^ering Scriptures, etc. the dispute still
continues, and that it be not against the Rule of Faith in express words, but
about the sense of it, then, if ancient General Councils have determined it,
which had greater opportunities of knowing the sense of the Ap^stolical Church
than we, it is reasonable we should yield to them; but, if there have been none
such, then that the unanimous consent of Fathers is to be taken, so it be in
some new and upstart Heresies. And so says he -- There is no necessity of
Infallibility in the Guides of the Church to give us a certain sense of
Scripture: which was the thing to be proved.

If Ancient General Councils have determined it, etc. But I ask, When may
Antiquity and such obliging authority expire? and What if such ancient General
Councils have not, and some latter General Councils have, determined it;
whether is it not reasonable we should yield to them? and Whether the Church,
in all ages since the Apostles, has not the same and equal Authority?
Otherwise, if a certain distance from the Apostle's times does alter this
Authority, why may not the Arrians put in such an exception against that of
Nice, not held till after 300. years? and so much more against other Councils
later than Nice? Again, since new Controversies in Necessaries may arise in
latter times which such ancient Councils have not considered or decided, as
there did, after 300 years, several such as had not been discussed or so
resolved before, thus we shall have no Judge left for deciding them: lastly
when any Controversy arises concerning the Determinations of ancient Councils
or Consent of Fathers in any such Point, surely some Judge we must have for
determining this, before the Controversy can be determined. 2ly The Terms he
uses -- It is reasonable we should yield to them are general and ambiguous.
assent unto them? Else how do such Decisions direct our faith or belief at all
in these necessaries? 3ly, So it be in some new and upstart Heresies. But why
may not this unanimous consent of Fathers be taken against whatever opinions,
Elder or newer, that contradict them? But, if this Author means reasonable to
yield our assent unto them; and if, to lawful General Councils of whatever
times, he allows the same and equal authority; and will admit the authority of
the latter to resolve any disputes touching the consent or statings of the
former; what other thing is this but to come home to N. O's Infallible Guide,
which is lawful General Councils, or other known unanimous consent of the
Church Governors, Ancient, or Modern? Which Councils also, for the matters
they do decide, are a standing Guide not only to those present times when they
sit, or wherein they live, but to all Posterity. And so this Author at last
has pitched upon that very means of ending Controversies in Necessaries (where
the sense of Scripture, is disputed, and other means, the comparing of
Scriptures, etc. as to many, are either not practicable, or effectless) which
he had endeavored to avoid: the truth of which I leave to the Readers
examination.

Principle as restraining the clearness of Scripture to Necessaries to
salvation. Next: In its affirming the Scriptures in such necessaries clear to
men only on this condition, viz. their using a sincere endeavor for knowing
the right meaning of them (wherein also I suppose he includes the divesting
themselves of all passion and Interest that may any way blind them in the
search of Truth.) N.O. hence observes, that no private person can be secure of
their right understanding them, till they are first assured of having used a
just endeavor and reduced themselves to a clear indifference and
disengagement: And by what means may they be certain of this? Or are not the
simple or illiterate obliged to use much greater industry herein, than others?
And thus, one being left to himself, all things will be still in suspense. For
Example. The Socinians, esteemed as great Scripturists as any, it is, by all of
them erring to this day in a necessary point of Faith, very manifest that,
according to this Principle, they have not used a sincere and upright endeavor
to under^tand them: Nor yet the Major part of the Christian World in some other
Necessaries to have used their endeavors aright, if the Dr. have so used his:
for, these differ from him in this sense of Scripture. How then shall any be
assured of his having used a just diligence herein? Or, will not all be driven
for the want of this assurance, notwithstanding the truth of such a Principle,
to their Obedience and submission of judgment herein to the Church? And the
same may be said of ones duty of using also other helps besides his own
industry, as their repairing to the instruction of Churchmen or others more
learned; which helps for their understanding of matters that are doubtful and
require skill to resolve them p. 267.269.
the Dr. owns and recommends in his Answer to N.O. though in his Principles,
speaking of Necessaries, he forbears to mind the sincere endeavourer, or sober
enquirer, of them at all: One would think, because the consulting such helps,
if recommended by him, would have seemed to imply (as indeed it does) some
non-clearness of Scripture at least to such persons; contrary to the Dr's
Thesis. Here, I say, how shall one know when he has sufficiently used such
helps also herein? But, if a person may be certain when he has done so, so may
he be, when he has not; namely, when upon searching he is not certain that he
has; and so, all those that err in necessaries, suppose the Socinians, and
Roman Catholics, must be affirmed, if they examine it, conscious to themselves
of a defect herein.

unlearned and Plebeians, as well as the Divines and Doctors, Consid. p. 16
this sincere seems to mean not all possible, endeavor, such as is learning
the languages, perusing Commentators, etc. but, Chillingw. Answ. to Prefac.. 26
as Mr. Chillingworth (who anchored his whole Religion upon it) states this
point, -- such a measure thereof as humane prudence and ordinary discretion
(their abilities, and opportunities, and all other things considered) shall
advise: And, thus, such a clearness in necessaries must the Scriptures be
affirmed to have, as suits with the very lowest capacities. Such a clearness, I
say, even as to all the Articles of the Athanasian Creed, if these be esteemed
necessaries; and even as to the Consubstantiality of the Son with God the
Father. In which notwithstanding the whole Body of Socinians dares to oppose
all Antiquity, upon pretense of clear Scripture to the contrary. But then, such
a sincere endeavor put, as the meanest persons are well capable of using, how
can we deny it to be used also by the Church Governors, and so by it them also
well to discern all necessary Truth? and then may not the simpler sort with all
safety ^ely on their judgment: and rather, in a due humility, suspect a defect
in their own, than in their, endeavors? But of this more by and by.

CHAP. II. Concerning a Necessity of Church-Guides for the instruction of
Christians in Necessaries.
Principle of the Scripture's being so clear, as that every one, who sincerely
endeavors it, may understand their sense in all things necessary to their
salvation, is advanced by the Dr. as he often says, thence to infer no
necessity of any infallible Society of men to instruct and guide Christians in
such necessaries, N. O. in the second place observes Consid. p. 24. that from
such a Principle seems to follow something more than happily the Dr. would
willingly admit; viz. the non-necessiry of any Society at all, fallible, or
infallible, to explain these Writings, Consid. p. 24
as to Necessaries, unless perhaps these Teachers may be said to be left by our
Lord either for others to supersede their endeavors, or else only for
instructing them in non necessaries. And again, p. 49. upon the Dr's assertion,
Princip. Consid. p. 49
19. -- That the Assistance which God has promised to those who sincerely
desire to know his will may give them greater assurance of the truth of what is
contained in the books of Scripture, than it is possible for the greatest
Infallibility in any other persons to do, N. O. observes, that whatever Divine
Assistance is there advanced by the Dr. against the assurance that can be
received from Church-Infallibility, the same is more against any assurance that
may be had from the same Church fallible: and that thus it happens more than
once in these Principles, that in too forward a zeal of demolishing the one,
the other also was dangerously [that is, as to this particular, the need of the
Clergy for instructing the people in necessaries] undermined by him. And again
p. 83. upon the first Consequence drawn by Dr. St. from his own Principles,
Consid. 83.
-- That there it no necessity at all or use of an infallible society of men to
assure men of the truth of those things of which they may be certain without
them, etc. observes; that this concludes the uselesness as well of any
Ecclesiastical Authority, to teach men, as of an Infallible, to assure men of,
the truth of those things, which by using only their own sincere endeavor they
may know without them. So that as by this Principle he takes away
Infallibility, so does he also the Office of Gods Ministry, though not as to
every thing (in the proof of which Church Authority and Office, as to many
other things, the troubled Dr. would relieve himself in his Answer); Or, as to
this, of Teaching the people, if he will, as to non-necessaries, Yet, as to
this, the need that there is of any such Clergy for teaching the people in the
Necessaries to their salvation.

Reply, in his Answer to N. O. from p. 260. to p. 278. a reply long enough to
be good. Wherein he will first needs suppose, See p. 264, 262. 267. 270. 273.
274.
that N.O. charge him, by this Principle with undermining or taking away All
Church Authority p. 84.
: and next, shows, that he maintains still a manifold Authority in the
Governors of the Church; as this, Of their inflicting Censures upon offenders,
commonly called the Power of the Keys: Of their making Rules and Canons about
matters of Order and Decency in the Church: p. 267.
p. 268.
Of their proposing matters of faith, and directing men in Religion; where he
mentions also this the particular instruction of persons doubtful [which those
using sincere endeavor may well be in things not necessary; and so wherein the
Scripture may not be clear], and the public declaring [i.e. in Sermons] what
is the mind and will of God contained in Scripture in order to the salvation
and Edification of the souls of men: Of Declaring what errors and abuses there
are, and doing as much as in them lies to reform them. But, concerning that
only point N.O. speaks of, namely, a necessity of this Ministry, Clergy, or
Church Authority for guiding Christians in Necessaries to their salvation, so
that they cannot by their own endeavors attain the knowledge of all these
sufficiently without them, I find not a word; he that can, let him. So that N.
O's. charge remains still in force; and, could I find any such thing in him, I
see not but it must point blank contradict his Principles, and the words of his
first Consequence he draws from them but now recited.

That there are some common Principles of Religion that are or may be known to
all; and some precepts so plain that every Christian without any help, [I
understand him here, any help either of his Guids or any else,] may know them
to be his duty. And also, that within the compass of these plain and known
duties lies the capacity of persons judging of their Guides, if they carry them
out of their beaten way etc. [which Guides therefore he holds may misleade them
in these Principles: so that here is not only their not needing Guides, but, if
need be, di-or-cor-recting them].

That these Guides may be of great use for the direction of unskilful persons
in matters that are doubtful and require skill to resolve them: but this is not
in matters necessary; for, if the Clergy, here, may be needful or useful once,
so surely an infallibility of them would be more.

And he says p. 189. -- That be does not deny, that there are doubtful and
controverted places, but [denies] that the sense of Scripture is so doubtful
and obscure in the things which are necessary to men's salvation, that persons
without an infallible Guide cannot know the meaning of them. And again -- We do
not deny, that there are places of great difficulty in the Books of Scripture,
but we assert, that the necessaries to Salvation do not ly therein. And
afterward -- If a person then by reading and considering those things [believe
and] do what Christ requires for his salvation, what necessity has such a one
to trouble himself about an infallible Guide? I add; or about any Guide at all,
as to such matters? For, where one knows a thing once, no Guide (fallible or
infallible) is necessary for his knowing that thing. And if an infallible Guide
is not necessary here, it must be because a person may know the certain sense
of such Scriptures without him: but, if he knows the certain sense without such
a Guide, so may he without any Guide fallible also; for the fallibility of a
Guide surely does not render the Scripture more certainly knowable by him, than
an infallibility does: and therefore in such case neither is a fallible Guide
necessary.

That he no where in the least excludes the use of all means and due helps of
Guides and others for the understanding the sense of Scripture; [i. e. where
Scripture doubtful:] but such he affirms it not to be in necessaries to the
just endeavourer to understand it; of whom, and which, N. O. speaks. And, if it
be said; though not to the just endeavourer, yet to such others as will not use
their own endeavor such Guides may be needful or useful for directing them in
necessaries; so also I suppose will be a Guide infallible, that so such may not
err in necessaries after their having consulted them. Ibid. I find him excusing
himself, that in the Principles he drew up, he no where mentions these due
helps of our Guides, because his business was only about the Foundation of
Faith, and whether Infallibility was necessary for that, or no. But then, he
ought to speak nothing for the excluding Infallibility, that does also exclude
as well such due helps. And again, as he mentions, in his laying this
foundation of faith, a sincere endeavor, so ought he any other helps, without
which, as well as without a sincere endeavor, he holds the understanding of
Scripture, though clear, cannot be had.

If all those things which are necessary to salvation are plain in Scripture to
all that sincerely endeavor to understand them, it does not hence follow that
there can be no just authority in a Church, no use of persons, to instruct
others [but he says not to instruct them in these necessaries, already plain
to them]. So he asks there -- If he should say that the necessary rules for a
man's health are so plainly laid down by Hippocrates, that every one, that will
take the pains, may understand them, does this make the whole Profession of
Physic useless? To which who would not answer, Yes; as to such person, taking
such pains, for his understanding the necessary Rules of health; but not
therefore useless as to all other things? P. 275. I find him distinguishing
between Necessaries to Salvation and to Government; and granting, that for
Church Government these Guides are necessary. But meanwhile N. O's enquiry is
concerning the other member, how needful they are for knowledge of necessaries
to Salvation. Again Ibid. -- That as Christians are joined together in a
Christian Society many other things are necessary for that end, besides what
make them capable of Salvation. And p. 276.
-- that mon understanding what is necessary to salvation, yet have need to be
ruled and governed. True: but, thus, the Churchmen are required for Rule and
Government, but not for instruction in necessaries to Salvation.

In all this I find no necessity of a Clergy for guiding Christians in
necessaries; and, if there be, should he not have mentioned the consulting
them, (if it were but for the Independents, and Quakers, and other extravagant
Sects that may read him), as well as mention the using a sincere endeavor? and
should he not have given the reason thereof; Because Scriptures in some points
necessary are obscure without their using such help; and not, that they are in
all these clear?

CHAP. III. Concerning the Duty of Obedience and submission of Judgment from
the Church's Subjects to the Definitions of the Church-Governors in Divine
matters; and in these the more, the more they are Necessary.
O. advances yet further against the former Principle; That the Church's
Subjects have an Obligation of Obedience and submission of Judgment in matters
of necessary Faith to their Ecclesiastical Superiors; and that, considering
both the special Ordination and Commission, of these persons from Christ for
teaching to the World the Truths necessary to Salvation; and his charging
others to obey them; and also, their own ignorance, and their Superiors study
and Learning in such things divine, they therefore ought to depend upon and
adhere to their directions so much the more in any point of Faith by how much
it is esteemed more necessary; as, wherein there is a much greater hazard if
they should err.

N.O. urges Ephesians. 4.11, etc. See 1 Con. 12.28.
That our Lord has given as Apostles and Prophets, so Pastors and Doctors for
the consummation of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the Body of Christ [surely this in necessaries to their Salvation] until
all meet into the unity of faith, into a perfect man -- That [henceforth] they
may not be [as] children waved and carried about with every wind of Doctrine in
the wickedness and craftines of men to the circumvention of Error. Where the
Apostle naming the Design of this Divine Constitution of these Persons to be
perfecting of men in the unity of the Faith it would be too much violence Used
upon the Text to limit such an Institution only to a Guidance in
non-Necessaries to Salvation, upon the account of Necessaries sufficiently
clear to all men [ i.e. using a right endeavor to understand them] in the
Scriptures.

N.O. urges 2 Pet. 3.16. Where S. Peter observes, that in his time some
persons [for any thing we know diligent enough, yet through want of learning
and the instability of not adhering to their Guides] being unlearned (says he)
and unstable, depraved some places of Scripture, hard to be understood, to
their own destruction; which shows also these Scriptures hard to be understood
in points necessary: else, how their destruction follow their erring? and shows
their erring in these also not to be only for want of diligence, or Devotion,
or from their proverseness or folly, where the Dr. in his Answer p. 190.
to this Text, (for the rest he passes by,) would chiefly place the reason
thereof, but for their want of learning, says the Apostle, and of stability,
i.e. in adhering to their true Guides: and, as the Dr. grants, for want of
Judgment, which care and diligence cannot always supply. Urges also the
Apostles Precept Heb. 13.17. of obeying our Prelates and submitting to them, as
those who watch over, and must render an account of, our souls; and ver. 7, 9.
of following their faith: and not being carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines [which obedience and following their faith surely is not intended
only as to non-necessaries]: and urges our Lords Command also -- fi non
audierit Ecclesiam; that he, who in matters of controversy did not stand to the
determination and sentence of the Church should be held as an Heathen and a
Publican.

Law also were appointed Judges beside the letter of it; Consid. p. 25
which was not penned with such clarity, but that doubts and controversies
might arise concerning the sense: doubts, says the Text, not only between
blood and blood, stroke and stroke, etc. but also between law and commandment,
statute and judgment 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
seeming to gainsay one another; which doubts arising, their addresses were to
be made to these Judges, and whatever their sentence was, according to the
sentence of the law that these should teach them, and according to the judgment
that they should tell and inform them, they were to do: and that upon pain of
death. To do, according to such sentence; not only to acquiesce in and yield
some kind of external submission to, their determination and sentence (so as
men do to these of secular Courts) as to non-resistance, and the undergoing
such mulcts or punishments as were imposed on them; without being obliged
meanwhile at all to assent to, or believe, the truth of that which they
determine, or consequently act always according to it, as thought just and
lawful, [an answer the Dr. gives in his Rational Account p. 239.
and to which in his late Reply he refers p. 116.
N.O. who had before perused, and remained unsatisfied with, it; made, as by
him, so by Chillingworth, and other Protestants]: but (as N.O. expressly
cautioned p. 25.
against any such answer) to do according to such sentence, when they were
enjoined the observance of some law; that was formerly misunderstood by them
and so broken, and disobeyed: Where, none can can be obliged to do a thing, as
the Jews were by those Judges, but is by the same decree obliged to assent and
believe the doing it lawful. And, that this seemed clear enough from the words
of the Text: for who can reasonably interpret them thus? Thou shall not decline
from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand or to the left
(ver. 11.): that is, Thou shall not decline in not paying the mulct in which
they shall fine thee; or, not undergoing the corporal punishment they shall
inflict on thee: Thou shall observe to do according to all that they shall
inform thee, and according to the sentence of the law that they shall teach
thee (ver. 10.) that is, thou shall suffer what they impose, but not obey what
they enjoin. Again, that they were to do according to such sentence, upon pain
of death, not then only when the Litigants do acknowledge their sentence to be
(juxta legem Dei) conformable to God's law; (for, then, what sentence of the
Judge would stand good?); but, so often as the Judge should declare it to be
conformable to God's law; And when will a Judge declare his sentence to be
otherwise? Lastly, that if such an obedience as this, were now performed to
supreme Ecclesiastical Governors and Judges under the Gospel, more would not
be desired.

Considerations. And the Reader may here seriously consider; Whether, If out of
the Gospel were produced in express words the like command concerning our
Ecclesiastical Governors in Relation to it, Namely: If there arise a matter too
hard for thee etc. [in the Scriptures of the Gospel] thou shall come to them
and they shall show thee the sentence of Judgment. And thou shall do according
to the sentence which they shall show thee; Thou shall observe to do according
to all that they inform thee. Thou shall not decline from their sentence to the
right hand or to the left etc: Whether I say such an answer touching Obedience,
as is given here to the same words in Deuteronomy, would any way satisfy him.
Therefore here Dr. St. at last thinks fit to deny such an absolute obedience
due now under the Gospel to Ecclesiastical Governors, as was under the Law.
His words are -- p. 116.
We are ready to yield such an absolute Obedience, when we see the like
absolute Command for Ecclesiastical Judges of Controversies of Religion, as
there was among the Jews for their Supreme Judges in matters of Law. Much-what
like to which is that, he says in his Rat. Account p. 241.
-- If we had met with any thing so express, [viz. concerning such Judge in the
Gospel] nay that had any seeming tendency this way, how readily should we
submit our Controversies to his determination? To which I answer, 1st. That by
this he seems to retract his former answer given to the words in Deuteronomy:
Rat. Acc. p. 239.
viz. that they infer no more obedience, than that which is required by, and
afforded to, all Courts of Justice; and, that they include not any obligation
to assent to what is determined as infallible truth. 2ly. I say, since now
under the Gospel we have a written Rule no more free from Controversies, than
that given by Moses; and so, since there is the same necessity of such Judges,
we may rationally conclude, our Lord Christ under the Gospel has left us no
more destitute of such a remedy to end debates, than he did those under the
Law. 3. lastly, that the former Texts and others See 1. Disconcerning the Guide
in Controversies,. 7.
that establish the Church's Hierarchy do include the like command of absolute
Obedience to such Judge: only this upon the pain of a Spiritual, not Temporal,
Death. -- Sit tibi sicut Ethnicus.

Lev. 4.13, 15. -- If all the multitude of Israel be ignorant, and through
ignorance do that which is against the commandment etc. which he urges Rat.
Acc. p. 241.
to prove the Law-Guides also liable to errors (though this is not the matter
here in dispute) the like expression occurring Lev. 5.2, 3, 4. shows this to be
spoken of an ignorance not of the Law, but of the Fact; as if one has touched
some unclean thing and be ignorant of what he has done. But then, taken in the
Dr's. sense, this Text seems still more to confirm an absolute obedience
yielded by this people to this Grand Council, else the Whole would not have
been involved in their Error.

The Priests all along the books of the Prophets charged by God with ignorance
and forsaking his way; and (2 Chronicles. 15.3.) Israel having been for a long
season without the true God, teaching Priests, and Law; and lastly the High
Priest and Sanedrim condemning our Blessed Savior. I answer: * That under the
Law God in all times had a Visible Church in the Nation of Israel consisting of
Priests or Clergy, and people, not erring in Fundamentals and Necessaries; and
this Clergy instructing and guiding the people in such necessaries; as which
people had no Copies of the Law; and therefore as the Dr. often inculcates, God
was not deficient in manifesting by some other means to them his will, of whom
he exacted to obey it. That, in the Apostasies of Israel such Church continued
still in Judah; and that, in the two great Apostasies also that happened in Juda
under Ahaz and Manasses, we find a Ministry or Clergy, that was persecuted
before, concurring and acting in the Reformation, together with the Kings
Hezechiah and Josiah. And, * that such Church, whose Priesthood in necessaries
erred not, continued according to the Promise, Genesis 49.10. till the appearing
of the Messiah. Lastly, * that the Messiah coming with Miracles and manifested
by the other two Persons of the Trinity, by the Father with a Voice from
Heaven, commanding to Hear Him, and by the Holy Ghost seen descending on Him,
as also by the Baptist, was now from henceforth to be received as the supreme
Legislator; and nothing to be admitted from others or from the Sanedrim it self
contradictory to what he taught; which High Court therefore now, for the
accomplishment of his necessary Sufferings, was permitted by God to be the
greatest Enemy of Truth, and guided therein not by God's, but a Satanical
Spirit: Of whose Doctrines therefore our Lord warned the people often to
beware, and when he bids them, all that the Pharisees, who yet possessed Moses
his Chair, taught them, that to observe and do, it is necessarily to be limited
and understood, wherein their's contradicted not his Doctrines and Expositions
of the Law. The Texts therefore mentioning the Priests ignorance or falling
away, the Nation's being without God, Priest, or Law etc. are not to be
understood universally, but of some part of this Nation; as in the time of the
Judges; or afterward of Israel, when the true Church and Priesthood continued
still in Judah; or of some part of the Clergy, and that perhaps a greater, in
Judah sometimes apostatizing from God's true Religion and the Law of Moses; but
then, these by such Apostasy were clearly cut off from the Church, and the
whole Authority and Judicatory Power remained in the rest not so apostatized,
though supposed fewer; by whom the true Religion, when afterward meeting with a
well-affected Prince, from time to time received a restoration.

Hence therefore N. O. deduceth, that, Consid. p. 57
God having directed us, for learning our right way, to the obedience of a
Guide, he does take no prudent or safe course, who, p. 51.
committing himself to Gods immediate assistance shall neglect it; and break
his commandment in hope of his favor and help.

Obedience be once thus granted due to our Spiritual Guides as to learning
Necessaries: Next, That it is not hard to know, in any division and
disagreement of these, whose judgment, in such a case every Christian ought to
follow and adhere to, Consid. p. 81
namely always to that of such Church Authority as is the Superior; which in
most cases is indisputable; this Ecclesiastical Body being placed by the Divine
Providence in an exact subordination. As here in England it is not doubted,
whether we are to pay our obedience rather to a National Synod, than to a
Diocesan; to the Archbishop, or Primate, than to an ordinary Bishop, or
Presbyter. That so also, in the Catholic Church, the Subordinations among its
Governors, both as to single Persons, and Synods, are well known; and our
obedience, in any contest or competition, due sooner to our Bishop, than to a
Presbyter opposing him; to the Primate, than a Bishop; the Patriarch than a
Primate; and amongst the Patriarchs to the Patriarch of the Prime Apostolic
See; the same Subordination being also to be observed, for preserving the
Catholic Church perpetually in one Faith and one Communion from Heresy and
Schism, in their several Councils, Diocesan, Provincial, National,
Patriarchal, and Ecumenical; and in any of these Courts which consist of many,
when any dissenting in its members, here again our obedience due to the major
part joined with the President thereof. That therefore, by the
Church Authority, to which Christians are to render their obedience, is meant
still that Superior and more comprehensive Body of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, which, in any dissent and division of the Clergy, according to the
Church-Canons ought to be obeyed; and which has hitherto, in her Supremest and
most generally accepted Councils, in all ages from the beginning required such
submission, and justly assumed to itself the title of the only authentical
Interpreter of Scripture, and authoritative Teacher of Divine Verities. And,
then, Consid. p. 82
That obedience being settled here, he, who h^th any small experience in
Church Affairs, and is willing to observe his duty, cannot but discern what way
the major part of Christendom, and its higher and more comprehensive Councils,
that have hitherto been, do guide him; this being a Body not invisible, or
latent in a Corner; or a few divided from the whole; but a City always set on
an Hill in such an extended Unity of an External Communion, and such a
dignifyed Preeminency and universality of its Prelates, as no other Christian
Society can equal; a Candle on a Candlestick; a perpetual erected Visible
Pillar and Monument of Traditionary Truth, Consid. p. 89
frustra Haereticis circumlatrantibus.

N.O's thus subjecting our obedience, as to the deciding of Controversies in
matters Necessary, in any division of Clergy, to the Superior and more
comprehensive Body of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy according to the well-known
Subordinations thereof, and so excluding the liberty either of private persons,
or also of Churches or Synods, any way subordinate, from dissenting from the
Judgment and Determinations of such as are their Canonical Superiors; which,
if observed, would preserve the Catholic Church for ever in peace and from all
Rents and Schisms: the Dr. returns several Replies in justification of the
proceedings of the Church of England, as N. O. thought, much concerned in it,
and not to be vindicated herein from a Schism, in her Reformation (not without,
but) against a Superior Church Authority. This matter he disousseth from p.
280. to p. 285. where he seems to me somewhat unresolved what answer to stand
to. One while he says p. 180.
-- That the Church of England in reforming herself did not oppose any just
authority then extant in the world. Now, that Patriarchal or General Councils
are a Superior Ecclesiastical Authority, to which National Synods or Churches
owe subjection, is granted by learned Protestants. As, concerning Patriarchal
Councils thus Dr. Field p. 518.
-- These Patriarchs [meaning those chief Bishops of the Christian world that
contained under them the Metropolitans and Bishops of many Kingdoms and States:
every Church, as he says, being subordinate to some one of the Patriarchal
Churches, p. 513.
and incorporate into the Rules of it ] might convocate the Metropolitans of
their several divisions, and hold a Patriarchal Council; which was of greater
authority, than either those in the several Provinces, or of a whole Nation,
because it consisted of more, and more honorable Bishops. Again p. 557. --
That the Decrees of Popes made with the consent and joint concurrence of the
Western Bishops did bind the Western Provinces that were subject to him as
Patriarch of the West. And thus Bishop Bramhal Vind. p. 257.
-- What power the Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province, the
same had a Patriarch over the Metropolitans, and Bishops of sundry Provinces
within his own Patriarchate. And afterward -- That Patriarchs had authority to
convocate Patriarchal Synods, and preside in them, when Metropolitan Synods did
not suffice to determine some emergent differences or difficulties. So, in
Schism Guarded p. 349. he says -- That the Ecclesiastical Head of the Church
is a General Council; and under that each Patriarch in his Patriarchate; and
among the Patriarchs the Bishop of Rome by a Priority of Order.

England being also a part) since the^ 6th or 7th Age have determined several
points of Faith rejected and opposed by the Church of England in her
Reformation: the obligation of which Definitions and Decrees also does extend
not only to the times wherein they sat, but to all Posterity, till an equal
authority shall repeal them; else the Decrees of Nice, or of the other first
Councils would not oblige any aftertimes. Manifest also, that the Council of
Trent, called by the Western Patriarch upon this discession, and consisting of
all or the most of the Churches in Christendom (except those under the
Mohammedan tyranny), not only of the Roman, but other Italick Churches subject
to other Princes, of the Gallican, Spanish, German, and other Western Churches,
and its Definitions in matters of faith generally accepted by these Churches,
has made definitions contrary to the Reformation of the Church of England;
which Decrees (to use Dr. Fields words) made with the consent and joint
concurrence of the Western Bishops [I add, or of the most part of them; for, of
all is not necessary, no more than in the first Councils: for, so, no
Metropolitans or Bishops could be liable to the censures of Councils without
their own consent;] do bind the Western Provinces subject to the Patriarch of
the West. And therefore, these things considered, I see not how the Dr. can
make good these his words, that the Church of England opposed no just Superior
Church Authority.

Afterward, as not trusting too much to this Answer, he pleads the freedom of
the Church of England from the Pope and Church of Rome: When it was thus agreed
[ i.e. by the Church and State of England] that the Bishop of Rome had no such
authority as he challenged, what should hinder our Church from proceeding in
the best way it could for the reformation of it self? for the Pope's Supremacy
being cast out as an usurpation, our Church was thereby declared to be a free
Church, having the power of Government within it self. For this also, he says
p. 285. -- that it enjoys the rights of a Patriarchal See. And, whereas N. O.
in that very place the Dr. answers to, Pref. p. 5.
expressly names for this Superior Authority the most Supreme and most
generally accepted Councils that have been in a^l ages (which words might put
him out of doubt what N. O. meant by more Superior and comprehensive Body, and
by more Universal Church) this Replier, See p. 280.
very conveniently omitting this, closes together what immediately precedes and
follows it in N. O. (of which the Reader, if he pleases, may inform himself by
viewing the place) and then takes the liberty to descant upon him in this
manner p. 281. -- That which N. O. calls refusing submission to all the
Authority then extant in the world: was all the authority then extant shut up
in the Pope's breast? And p. 283. -- That by the more universal Church N. O.
fairly understands no more but the Church of Rome. Whereas N. O. whether
speaking of Super^our Authority, or its Infallibility, has made no where in
his. Book any application of it to the Church of Rome, or Pope at all; but to
Superior Councils. But, hither it much concerned this Author to force N. O.'s
discourse, to be the better able to confute it; So p. 282. he tells his Reader
-- The plain English of all is, the Church of Rome was against the Church of
England; [ i.e. in the Reformation]. But, after all this excursion, N. O.
speaks of an obedience the Church of England owes to Superior Councils,
Patriarchal, or General; and to those, whether former or present: and, that
showing its Freedom from the Pope, or Church of Rome, as a Co-Metropolitan
Church, will not serve the turn: nor yet, its being a Patriarchal, i.e. a
Primatical, Church; or, had it been yet in an higher sense Patriarchal: for,
neither was Dioscorus excepted from such a Superior Authority by being a
Patriarch.

N. O. by more universal Church may mean the greater number of persons [or of
Christians] at the time of the Reformation: and so he asks -- How he knows that
the Eastern, Armenian, Abyssine, and Greek Churches did agree with the Church
of Rome against the Church of England? But, though this is a truth, (which the
Reader may see proved at large in the Third Discourse concerning the Guide in
Controversies Chap. 8.) and that very considerable, that the Church of England
in many points of her Reformation opposed the general doctrines and practices
of the Oriental as well as Occidental Churches; and, where a general consent is
in the Church Governors apart, the same we may presume would be in a General
Council; yet N. O. letting this alone, speaks, not of a greater number of
persons, but of a Superior Authority.

England's submission to, or consent with, the Church Primitive and
Apostolical, or the truly Catholic Church of all Ages, which she has always
appealed to and offered to be tried by. But the Catholic Church of all ages
being taken here by Him not distributively, for what the Authority of the
Catholic Church in any age has stated or determined [For, to this he often
declines submission. See in him p. 241.242. Where he says -- That Universality
in any one age of the Church, taken without the consent of Antiquity is no
sufficient Rule to us: And -- That the Church in any one or more ages since the
Apostles times may be deceived]: But only collectively, for what it can be
showed to have held and delivered and agreed-in in all ages, Such a submission,
I say, is not sufficient; For, as our obedience is due to the Decrees and
Definitions of lawful General, or other Superior Councils of the Primitive
Times, so is it as well to those of any latter age, the authority of them in
any age being equal and the same, and an equal necessity of it for deciding the
Controversies in Necessaries that may arise in any age, though these Points,
disputed, do not appear, save in the Traditional Principles from which they are
deduced, in any former. Nor could the Arrians justly decline the Definitions of
Nice, because made in their times; or, in the same expressions, not delivered
in any more primitive age. There also he says, -- that the Church of England
rejected nothing but innovations, and reformed nothing but abuses. But, none
ought to be rejected or reformed by any particular Church as such, which
Superior Councils in any times have declared to be otherwise, especially where
no contradiction of a Body of equal Authority can be showed in times more
ancient.

p. 283.
he urges, that at the time of the Reformation there was no superior
authority to the Church of England extant upon this account, because says he
-- This must either be the authority of the Pope and Councils of the Roman
Church, or a General Council of all the Catholic Church. For the first, we owe
no obedience to them; for the second, there was no such thing th^n in the
world, and therefore could not be opposed. But here first, if by the Councils
of the Roman Church he means Councils assembled by the Western Patriarch, and
consisting of the Metropolitans and Bishops not only of the Roman, but other
Western, Churches, and Nations, these must be confessed, and so are by
Protestant Divines, Superior to a National Synod of England. And then, as for
these, or for other, General Councils, in what former times soever held, they
are an Authority always extant, and their decrees obliging, so long as not by
an equal authority repealed: Otherwise, the Obligation also to the Definitions
of the first General Councils would be long since expired. And also any
particular Church is obliged to a submission to any superior Council following
such Reformation, from the time of its Decrees passed, and a due acceptance of
them, i.e. by a much major part.

he alleges -- That, for the Canons of the Catholic Councils before the
breaches of Christendom, no Church has been more guilty of a violation of
them, than the Church of Rome. But first, if this were granted, another's
faultiness excuses not our's. Next, if he speaks of the Councils that have
been in the Church till the breach made by Luther, methinks this is enough to
confute what he says, that the one Church, the Roman owns, and admits the
Definitions and Canons of these Councils, as true, regular, and obliging; (and
so in its disobeying them condemns it self) which the other, the Reformed,
denies to be so.

That every free Church, enjoying the rights of a Patriarchal See, has
according to the Canons of the Church a sufficient power to reform all abuses
within itself, when a more general consent cannot be obtained. But not, I hope,
when a more general dissent is already declared; (I mean, that the things so
called, are no, abuses.). By all this I think, appears no Answer as yet
returned by this Author to the things objected which affords any reasonable
satisfaction. N. O. then proceeds.

is bound to reject whatsoever is offered to be imposed upon his Faith, which is
certainly known to such Christian to have no foundation in, or to be contrary
to, Gods Word See Dr. Stillingst. Princ. 29. Consid. p. 73*
; Yet learned Protestants do also require from such Christian, that, where not
demonstrably certain of the contrary, he ought to submit to the judgment of
this Authority for the knowing what things are revealed in this Word, and what
are contrary to, or not founded in, it: and (to use the Dr's expression Rat.
Acc. p. 375.59*
) to be guided by the sense of Scripture as it is interpreted by this
Authority. And Dr. St. himself also Rat. Account, p. 539. for preventing the
exorbitancies and capricious humors of any fantastical Spirits, and for the
knowledge of ones errors, when these manifest and intolerable, what sober
enquiry soever their sincere endeavors may pretend to, calls for their
conformity, in interpreting of Scripture, to the concurrent sense of the
Primitive Church, the Common Reason of Mankind (that supposes Scripture the
Rule of Faith), the consent of Wise and Learned Men: Or, on the side of these
sincere endeavourers who shall disbelieve this authority he requires no less
(with the Archbishop, and others) than Demonstration for that, wherein they
dissent. And this Demonstration not some improbable argument, so miscalled, but
which being proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but
inwardly assent thereto; that is, that which every reasonable man,
understanding the terms, assents to.

all those do not stand still obliged to obey the general Doctrines of the
Church before Luthers's Reformation, who can bring no demonstration of the
contrary? and Whether it is upon such a demonstrative certainty, as this, in
the points controverted, that they themselves oppose this Church Authority
teaching them otherwise? Demonstration (as Protestants define it) that does not
convince all rational persons to whom it is proposed, which the Protestants
Demonstrations manifestly do not, therefore the Demonstrations pretended by
them be not even in their own judgment fallacious? the Common Reason of
Christian Mankind, Consid. p. 74*
and the common Consent of Learned and Wise Men, named but now by the Dr for
regulating a private man's belief, ought not to be taken, where all men are not
united in the same judgment, for the most common suffrage and testimony of the
present Universal Church? And then, Whether we ought not to credit this present
Universal Church sooner than any other, touching what is the concurrent
testimony of the Primitive Church, in case this suffers any debate? And then,
if particular Persons are not to depart from this judgment of Authority, till
they have Demonstration, (that is, their own certainty, as to such point), to
show against it; then, Whether, in stead of their calling for Church
Infallibility, that they may believe her, the Church may not rather demand
their Demonstrations, why they believe her not? See such things agitated by N.
O. p. 74, 75. passed over by the Dr in silence.

Plebeian and unlearned, for the understanding of Scriptures, ought to
acquiesce in the judgment of some that are more skilful and studied in them:
and this the more, as the points are more necessary; (wherein is supposed any
difference in Judgments; for, that argues some difficulty in the thing): and
that the Dr's Principle seems to afford a very good Reason of the Submission of
Judgment to the Church, which submission it opposes. Consid. p.17
For, if Scriptures be maintained so clear in Necessaries, that every one using
a right endeavor cannot mistake in them, then shall the Church Governors much
rather, by reason of this clearness obvious to every rustic, not err in them;
and so shall the people, the more clear the Rule of faith is proved to be, the
more securely rely on, and be referred in them to, their direction: and that we
have all reason to presume that the chief Guides of the Church, (even a General
Council of them, or, if it be but a major part of this Council, it is
sufficient) in their Consults concerning a point necessary to Salvation
delivered in Scripture, use at least so much endeavor, (for, more needs not)
as a plain rustic does, to understand the meaning of it. Or here, whatever
other thing is supposed necessary besides a sincere endeavor, or is understood
to be included in it, (as Freedom from Passion, and Secular Interest, or also
a freely professing the truths which their sincere endeavor discovers to
them,) none can rationally imagine but that these Supreme Church Governors
should be as much or more disengaged herein, than private men; as having, in
their already possessed Dignity and Preferment less ambitions or compliances;
and more freedom, and less dependence on, or subordination to, others, in their
actions or fortunes. Then, concerning their integrity and sincerity in their
Judicature, it is said by N. O. that, what they define for others, they define
for themselves also; and that their own salvation is as much concerned, as any
other man's is in their mistakes. [I add; or in their purposely falsifying
Truth in their Decrees, and deceiving others in what they are not mistaken or
deceived themselves; so, as that their subjects, satisfied of their skill, yet
cannot trust their fidelity: If any can be so uncharitable as to credit of them
so great a wickedness, that the Supreme Councils of the Church should with
design decree an error contrary to their faith, and that in matters
necessary; and then enjoin all their Subjects, under Anathema, to believe it:
wherein they most certainly do devote themselves, if not believing such their
Decree, to Eternal Perdition].

N. O. D. St's answer p. 141. is this -- Granting, that the Guides of the
Church, supposing the same sincerity, shall enjoy the same privilege [as any
private man has, of believing rightly in necessaries], which, (says he), I
know none ever denied them: Yet what is this to their Infallibility in teaching
all matters of faith? [supposing them to believe aright, yet what is this to
their teaching right matters of faith] which is the only thing to be proved by
N. O. So that all this discourse (says he afterward) proceeds upon a very
false way of reasoning; from believing to teaching, and from necessaries to
salvation, to all matters of faith, which the Guides of the Church shall
propose to men. Thus he. Where, first, he corrupts N. O's express words and
sense; who argues from particular men's not erring in Necessaries. by using a
sincere endeavor, the Church's not erring in Necessaries, if using the like:
See Consid. p. 17.18.19. The Church-Governour's not-erring, says N.O. not,
their not mis-teaching. But indeed, the first being granted, N. O. thought the
other also must be believed, in the Church's General Councils. Again; in
Necessaries, says N.O.; not in all matters of faith: which word All is put in
by the Dr. several times, perhaps to relieve himself for framing some Answer.
'Next; the Dr. denies not, that these Church Governors may rightly understand
all necessaries upon a sincere endeavor; nor, that a sincere endeavor is used
by them. How can he? since that endeavor which may be used by any Mechanic he
holds sufficient: But is necessitated to pitch upon this: That such Fraud and
malice may be used by the Church Governors even by General Councils, that they
shall teach, and define to and for their Subjects, and exact, upon Anathema,
their assent to, the contrary error, (and that in matters necessary) to what
themselves believe: and hence contends that a private man cannot safely adhere
to their sentence or Decrees. So that the Church's Infallibility, he now
controlls, is not an Infallibility in not erring or in believing aright in
necessaries, here granted to the Church Governors in like manner as to
mechanics, but only their Infallibility in Teaching to others the same
necessary things, which they themselves believe: and by their Infallibility
here is meant not passively their not being deceived, but actively their not
deceiving: and N. O. is required to prove the contrary. Now, I had thought the
Infallibility of the Church or of General Councils, he had quarreled with, had
been a non possibility in them of erring or not believing aright in some
necessaries, as he has expressed himself heretofore frequently in his Rat.
Account. part 3. chapter 1. treating Of the Infallibility of General Councils, and
according to his Description of it passively before in this Answer p. 80. --
Infallible is that which cannot be deceived, where also he cashiers the Notion
he is glad now to take up. And Now, it seems, N. O. in proving these Governors
their believing aright in necessaries, has lost his labor; his discourse
proceeding as the Dr. says, from a very false way of reasoning from believing
to teaching; and that the Teaching of a General Council in necessaries what it
does believe (for, of these General Councils there N. O. speaks, who for this
reason requires obedience and a submission of private men to their judgment in
such necessaries) is the only thing to be proved by N. O.

To prove which, a thing that seems of it self evident, it is enough to say, it
has that moral certainty in it which generally Church-Tradition is said to
have; viz. that so many such persons cannot conspire in such a matter, viz. a
necessary to salvation, to falsify the truth, against their own belief and
conscience, to all their Subjects, and to Posterity; with an Anathema to all
Dissenters; when themselves also are such. And had it not here been much better
for him, if not out of charity or reverence to so Sacred Persons, yet from the
irrationality of such a defense, to have passed over this Objection of N. O's,
as he has done many other, in silence? But, if a further proof yet be exacted
of me, I say; that our Lord's Promises of their not erring in necessaries, and
the commands of our obeying what they teach, do engage to us, as to
Necessaries, their not teaching amiss; as without which their teaching us
right, we have no security or benefit of their not-erring. And so I leave these
things to the Dr's. Reflections.

N. O. further affirms, p. 48. in the behalf of a prudent Obedience; That,
whatever fallibility and liability to mistakes even in necessaries the Church-
Guides are Subject to, Yet that there is much more hazard to the most of
Christians, [their capacities being very little, abstracting from the
directions of a Guide; their mean condition void of learning or Leisure; and a
thing uncertain also, when they have used a due endeavor; and this a prejudice
of it not rightly used, if they do not discern in these Scriptures the pointing
out this Guide, which (says S. Augustine) the Scripture without any ambiguity
does demonstrate; Contra Crescon. l. 1. c. 33.
and which repaired-to may demonstrate to them, what else is necessary]; That
there is much more hazard (he says,) in adhering to their own judgment
(excepting only this, if any shall have a demonstrative certainty of his
private opinion against his Guides) than to that of their Guides, though these
fallible: for, whereas, in following such Guides, such persons may fall into
some errors, and perhaps some of them great ones; in this latter way of
following their own Apprehensions the unlearned may fall into a thousand; and
some of these much greater, and grosser, than any such Christian Society or
Body of Clergy will ever maintain. That God has made no promise to preserve in
truth those who desert his Guides to direct them; nor to reward their diligence
in other ways, who live in disobedience. Witness, here, the unhappy Socinians,
and so many gross Sects of late, much more absurd in their tenants, than those
other who remain in a constant submission to the Ministry and Religion
established by Authority in the Protestant Churches. Consid. p. 100.
And that better it is, in the erring also of these Guides, that all err their
errors; for so at least there will be some Unity and Peace; and, for
Inferiors so misled some excuse, and in probability more verisimilitude in
their mistakes, than that every one should err a several, and his own, error,
both to the utter ruin of Peace, and a greater deviation from Truth. Nay, if
from such Subjects could only be obtained, in a liberty of their Opinion, the
obedience of silence and non contradiction, thus would be secured the Peace of
the Church; and the Propagation of such Sects, (which must be either by Writing
or Discourse) prevented. But, as things stand here 1 from our own being assured
(by the Drs Principle) of our rightly understanding, and not erring in, all
necessaries; and then, we 2 from it rightly collecting, that others, who hold
the contrary to us, do err so; and 3 then, that, such error as in a necessary,
being judged not tolerable, neither may this obedience of Silence be therein
observed: from these, I say, must needs break out daily many new Reformations,
all founding themselves upon the justness of the first: and this a Reforming
too not of themselves only, but of so many others as they can persuade, as it
was in the first: which all of them justify.

N. O. are delivered by him from p. 142. to p. 180. in several Propositions.
Where I find him saying p. 142. That God has entrusted every man with a
faculty of discerning Truth and falsehood, supposing that there were no persons
in the world to direct or Guide him; Which is willingly granted him, in
confidence that this will not take away all Submission of judgment, to our
Superiors; or, to persons more prudent.

That this faculty is not taken away, nor men forbidden the exercise of it in
the choice of their Religion by any principle of the Christian Religion; Which
is granted also; and yet, a Religion being chosen by us, it may well be both an
act of prudence and of duty to submit our judgment to our Superiors in
whatever they shall define, and especially in matters of Necessary Faith.

That the exercise of this Faculty was not to cease as soon as men had embraced
the Christian Doctrine. Granted, as the former: and yet our submission of this
our Judgment, to what doctrines our Superiors shall define, be both our duty,
and a most rational act of this our Judgment; and any persuasion of our
judgment (not rightly used) to the contrary no way excuse our non-submission
from guilt. I say, as the exercise of this faculty does not cease, so it must
be rightly used, which it never is, when, used, it at any time dissents from
the doctrine of our Lord, or his Apostles, or of lawful General Councils,
whereto is required its assent.

That the Authority of Guides in the Church [i.e. for their determining truths
in necessaries.] is not absolute and unlimited, but confined within certain
bounds; [and afterward he says, confined to a Rule] which if they transgress,
they are no longer to be followed. Be it so, when they transgress against their
Rule, if this be certainly and demonstratively known by any, such person is not
to follow them: this is confessed already by N. O. But, Consid. p. 73
who is appointed Judge of these Supreme Judges, when they transgress against
this Rule? or, when their Subjects have Demonstration for this? Their Subjects?
who are from them to learn the sense of the Rule, where difficult and disputed;
and who are bidden to follow their faith? The right exercise of our judgment
will not judge so: but will judge, that, if Demonstration were on his side,
these Supreme Judges, having all the same Evidences, would have discovered it
sooner than he; or at least have discovered it, when related to them by him;
and also the Protestants Definition of it concludes it none, if these Judges do
not discern it such. Who then, since he is not excused from sin and
disobedience by using his judgment, if he judge amiss, will not think it the
safest way still to continue his submission? The Socinian, in judging the
Council of Nice in their Definition of Consubstantiality to have transgressed
the Rule they are confined to, and so not to be followed, is not hereby
released at all from his obedience to this Council, or secured in his
discession from it. That authority is none, that is only to be obeyed, where
the Subjects are to approve first of its sentence.

He allows a very great authority to the Guides of the Catholic Church, in the
best times of Christianity; and looks upon the concurrent sense of Antiquity as
an excellent means to understand the mind of Scripture in places otherwise
doubtful and obscure. First, for the limitation of places doubtful and obscure;
This seems to render such Authority useless as to Necessaries: in which this
Author will have the Scriptures clear and perspicuous. Next; a right judgment
cannot but account all those places so, in the sense whereof either the ancient
or present major part of Christianity are of a contrary judgment from himself.
Lastly; the looking on such a concurrent sense as an excellent means etc. is
short, and will not serve the turn for the unity of faith; it must be looking
on it as a Rule requiring our obedience, when such sense is declared by their
Councils.

That in matters imposed to be believed or practiced, which are repugnant to
plain commands of Scripture, or the evidence of sense, or the grounds of
Christian Religion, we assent that no authority of the present Guides of a
Church is to overrule our faith or practice. But the same thing is here replied
as before. 43. in answer to that in his p. 146. concerning the Guides
transgressing the Rule.

That no absolute submission can be due to those Guides of a Church who have
opposed and contradicted each other; and condemned one another for error and
heresy. True: not to both, but to one part It is: and N. O. has told him that
it is to the Superior; Or, in the Supreme Court, where a party dissents, to
the major part joined with the President. Lawful Supreme Councils contradicting
one another in matters of necessary faith are not by this Author, nor cannot
be, produced.

That in the present divided state of the Christian Church a man that would
satisfy his own mind must make use of his judgment in the choice of his Church,
and those Guides he is to submit to. True? now; and in all former times,
wherein also have been Divisions and Anti-Communions in the Clergy, and Guides
against Guides, that we are to make use of our judgment in the choice of a
Church. But, our Judgment there must be used rightly; and, being so, tells us,
both that we are to obey those, who are found, by this judgment, to be our
lawful Spiritual Superiors; and which, in such divisions, be so. And whenever,
in this, our judgment is not used rightly, but mistakes, we are never a whit
the more, by this so used, released from our Obedience.

Generally in these Answers here is the exercise of our Judgment or liberty to
Judge pleaded against absolute Obedience or Submission of it; as if the proving
of the one annulled the other; when as himself urges, a p. 144.
liberty of Judging may be used also concerning the Apostles Authority, and
their Doctrines; and yet this liberty well consistent with an obligation of
absolute Obedience to such their Doctrins and Authority as infallible: So,
then, is it well consistent also with that to the Supreme Guides of the Church
in their defining necessaries, if they be in these infallible; or, if fallible,
yet with an obligation still of submission of Judgment to them, where any are
not demonstratively certain of the contrary: Which demonstrative certainty of
convincing all those, to whom proposed, no Protestants have, in matters debated
with Catholics.

That we are not to submit to all those who challenge the authority of Guides
over us, though. pretending to never so much power and infallibility. And p.
179, not to submit to those who are lawful Guides in all things they may
require. Both which are most true; and yet well consistent with this, that we
are to submit to our lawful Guides in all their Determinations in matters of
necessary faith, if they Supreme, and Infallible herein: and, if they fallible,
in all things of which we are not demonstratively certain to the contrary. Thus
you see the Dr's Responsory Propositions are admitted, and N. O's Obedience no
whit less established.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Church-Infallibility as to Necessaries.
4ly. AGainst such Principle, and for submission of private men's judgments to
that of the Church, N.O. presses, as the Church's Authority, so yet further
its Infallibility, that is, the Infallibility (not of the Roman Church, or of
Pope, as this Author will needs understand him, though no such thing is once
named in the Considerations, but) of the Church Catholic; of the Catholic
Church in her most Universal Councils and Courts that can be convened for
deciding Controversies, and for declaring the true sense of the Scriptures;
especially, if these Councils and their Decrees have such a general acceptance
with the Church Catholic diffusive, as can be thought necessary to give us Its
judgment, at least as to a major part thereof. And again, Infallibility of such
Councils, (not as to any Questions or Controversies whatever that may be
proposed to them, but) of all such points as are any way necessary to
salvation: (which necessity, if any need to know it, we are to learn from
them). And Necessary, not as this word includes only those Articles without the
explicit belief of which, none can enter into Heaven, but as it includes all
those points also, which either as to our belief or practice, are highly
beneficial thereto (for, in these also the right guidance of our Spiritual
Pastors seems necessary), and as is explained before. 2 etc: the Church also
not undertaking, as N. O. says, Consid. p. 34.
to end all manner of differences, but so many wherein she finds on any side
sufficient evidence of Tradition; and, for the gravity of the matter, a
necessity of decision: The same Divine providence, that preserves his Church
perpetually Infallible in all things necessary to be determined, disposing
also, that, for all Necessaries, there shall be a sufficient evidence of
Tradition, either of the Conclusion it self, or its Principles.

N.O. first presses: That the ordinary practice of General Councils; Consid.
p. 40.
which has been constantly allowed and submitted to by the Church Catholic
Diffusive, necessarily inferrs their Infallibility; viz. their inserting from
time to time (as they thought fit) their Decisions in the Creeds, and their
Anathematizing Dissenters, and the Church Diffusive afterward stiling such
Dissenters Heretics and opposers of the Faith. That such assent and belief and
submission of judgment if justly required by them, Consid. p. 32
inferrs such persons herein not liable to error upon the Dr's own arguing.
For (says he Rat. Acc. p. 506.
) Where Councils challenge an internal Assent by virtue of their Decrees [or,
because their Decrees are in themselves infallible] there must be first proved
an impossibility of error in them, before any can look on themselves as
obliged to give it. That Protestant's allowing only an External Obedience, or
Silence due to Councils fallible, shows, that Councils fallible can justly
require no more; and, consequently, that such Councils are infallible, as do
justly require more; as did the four first Councils, with the voluntary
acknowledgment also and submission of the rest of the Body of the Catholic
Church to such an Authority assumed by them. That subordinate Councils, when
they have also sometimes stated matters of faith, censured Heretics, and
required assent to their Decrees, yet did this still with relation to the same
Infallibility residing in the General Body of Church Governors, and to their
concurrence therein: whilst they did not pass such Acta without consulting the
Tradition and judgment of other Churches, and especially of the Apostolic See.

Infallibility as for necessaries left in the Church-Guides; Consid. p. 38
for that without this the Christian, would otherwise have been no stable or
certain, Religion, at least as to many necessary points thereof, so that all
persons might have a right belief in them; because that Tradition carries not
with it a sufficient evidence as to all points of necessary faith, especially
as to all sorts of people; several Controversies about Necessaries having been
raised, which have not been decided and ended by any then generally current
Tradition; Or, the Clearness of Scripture supplied this deficiency of
Tradition, as to the capacities of all the members of the Church, without the
convening and Consultations of Councils; who have cleared to their subjects the
necessary Deductions from former Traditionals; without which Deductions several
most pernicious Heresies would have undermined the former Christian Faith, that
was, in precedent times, couched in more general Terms.

Scriptures to be Gods Word), Consid. p 5. 7
to use any other testimony than that of these Scriptures, for a sufficiently
clear proof of such Infallibility residing in the Governors of the Church.
Which proofs out of Scripture, every where obvious in Catholic Writers were by
N.O. not thought so necessary to be produced where he made only some short
Reflections on the Dr's Principles, and not a set Discourse of Infallibility,
as this Author would misname it. But, since the Dr. so much misseth them
(though I cannot but wonder why he so earnestly calls for what N.O. has not
said, whenas he so easily omits to speak to what he has said) he may find
several of them put together in the first Discourse Concerning the Guide in
Controversies. 7. etc. and there vindicated also from the glosses put on them
by this Author in his Rational Account: and may find them mentioned also here
below in the Annotation on p. 113. l. 15. And, since the Doctor with other
Protestants grants an Infallibility in Necessaries of the Church diffusive in
all ages, from our Lords Promise, doubtless contained in some of these Texts, I
appeal to any, after he has read what is there alleged, Whether such Promises
in many of these Texts do not relate principally to the Infallibility of the
Church Governors; And again, Whether if the Common Reason of Christianity,
i.e. the Reason that is found in the major part thereof were to be consulted
concerning the true sense of these Texts, the major part of Christendom does
not and has not believed Church-Infallibility, at least in her General
Councils, established by them. A sufficiently clear proof therefore of
Church-Infallibility these Scriptures afford, Consid. p. 57
if that proof may be called so which by the most of the Christian World is
taken to be so, notwithstanding that a Party, engaged by their Reformation in
an apparent contrary interest, do contradict it. Or if, whilst they deny a
sufficient evidence of Church-Infallibility to be found in Scripture, they
would allow a sufficient evidence of Church Authority established there, to
decide Ecclesiastical Controversies with obligation to External Obedience, so
it is that by this Authority they would be cast and silenced for the former; if
a much major part may be admitted (as it ought) to give law to the whole.

de facto the Dr. holds even the Church of Rome ( i.e. in its Councils, and in
the Pope, as President thereof) to have been hitherto so divinely assisted, as
never to have erred in necessaries, neither in believing, nor declaring them;
notwithstanding all the by-ends of interest, and reputation, of which he
accuses them, the Force and Fraud he charge on them. And this I gather from
his words Rat. Account. p. 54. -- That the Church of England makes no Articles
of Faith, but such, as have the testimony, and approbation of the whole
Christian World of all ages, and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self.
Therefore the Roman Church holds all those which the Church of England does;
and so all necessaries; unless that of England also be defective herein. And
all this the Dr. seems necessitated to maintain; for, else, the Roman failing,
and the Oriental Churches being then no whit better than it, there would have
been no Catholic Church, at least as to the Hierarchy thereof, extant
immediately before Luther's time. And hence, though I grant it cogently follows
not, that the Governors of the Church-Catholick shall never err in
necessaries for the future, Yet is there a strong presumption, that by the same
Divine Assistance as they have been hitherto preserved from it, so they shall
be ever: and it is a rational Motive of private men's submitting their judgment
to the Church, that hitherto she never has, but private men by departing from
this obedience, as several Heretics, often have erred in necessaries. This
here for our Lord's promises revealed in Scripture, (Of which a further Account
is given below in Annot. on p. 113. l. 15.) and for the experience the World
has had of their accomplishment hitherto.

N.O. Consid. p. 85. etc. 1.
further presses that noted Plea of S. Austin against the Donatists. 1st.
That, whereas some Divine Revelations may be so obscurely expressed in
Scriptures, or involved only in their Principles, as that some weak capacities
cannot discern them, Yet that in the same Scriptures such persons may always
discover the Church distinctly, which is It amongst never so many pretenders,
by certain Notes and marks belonging to it; I mean not those named by this
Author Rat. Acc. p. 7.
and other Protestant's (though these true Marks also) viz. True Doctrine and a
Right Administration of the Sacraments: a Quest or Trial, by such marks that
can never be made an end of, being a task to know all the truths in
Christianity what they are first, before we can know which is the Church:
whenas the Enquirer seeks after the Church, that by it he may come to know
these Truths: but by these other Tests and marks following, as in several
places he gives account of them Contra Fundament. c. 4. De utilit. Credend. c.
8.16, 17. -- De Vnita. Eccles. c. 25.
-- Successione Episcoporum ab Apostolica Sede [Or, as Contra Fundamentum -- ib
ipsa Sede Petri Apostoli] frustra Haeretic^s circumlatrantibus; Authoritate
vetustate firmata; Conciliorum gravitate; Miraculorum majestate; Sequentium
multitudine; [i.e. as to the coherence in one Communion, no other Society or
Party being ever so great]; Populorum atque Gentium consensu, and fama admodum
celeberrima; Ecclesia ubique diffusa, and non in aliqua part terrarum, sed
ubique notissima. Lastly -- Ipso nomine Catholicae, quod non sine causa inter
tam multas Haereses sola obtinuit. [which being the Marks of the Catholic
Church by the Scripture-description of it in S. Austins time must be so for
ever: for that, Consid. p. 88
if any should apply these Scriptures more to S. Austin's days (as indeed
several Protestants do) than to any other, or than to the present, by the same
reason the Donatists might here have counter applied them to some other, and
not to S. Austin's times.] Thus then S Austin affirms, from the Scriptures such
persons may easily discover the Church which it is.

Judge, in other Controversies which are not so clearly delivered in
Scriptures, Donatists concerning the obscure Point of Rebaptization -- Quoniam
Sacra Scriptura fallere non potest, Consid. p. 85
quisquis falli metuit hujus obscuritate quaestionis, eandem Ecclesiam de illa
consulat, quam sine ulla ambiguitate sacra Scriptura demonstrat. And before --
Proinde quamvis hujus rei certe de Scripturis Canonicis non proferatur
exemplum, earundem tamen Scripturarum etiam in hac re [ i.e. in the point of
Non-rebaptization] a nobis tenetur veritas, cum hoc facimus quod universae
placuit Ecclesiae, [ i.e, which has been stated concerning that Point by the
Church], quam ipsarum Scripturarum commendat authoritas. Vt quoniam, etc. Thus
S. Austin. After which N.O. goes on: that all this said by this Father is
false, and said to no purpose, if the Scripture be not clear in this, That this
Church can determine nothing in such important contests contrary to the verity
of the Scriptures; and so in this that we ought to give credit to what she
decides: for, then, it would not be true what he says -- Earundem Scripturarum
in hac re [in Non-rebaptization] tenetur veritas, when we do in this point what
the Church decides, if the Church may, possibly, decide it amiss. And again --
Quisquis falli metuit hujus obscuritate quaestionis Ecclesiam de illa consulat,
would no way relieve his being deceived still, if the Church consulted might
also be mistaken in it. Nor would the same S. Austin have had any reason to
presume (as he does De Baptismo. 1. l. 4. c.) that S. Cyprian would have
corrected his opinion concerning this Point, and yielded to the Council's
judgment: or any reason to charge the Donatists with Heresy for dissenting from
it after the Determination of such a Council; Nor the 2d. General Council have
had any just ground to put it in the Creed, [Credo unum Baptisma in remissionem
peccatorum], if such Universal Councils, in their stating matters of Faith, are
errable and amendable. Which are N.O's. words Addit. to p. 86. l. 11.
(by prevention) relating to that known passage in S. Austin -- Ipsaque
plenaria Concilia saepe priora posterioribus emendari; and declaring, they can
have no such sense as the Dr. Answ. to N.O. p. 255.
and others impose upon them.

p. 58. he urges, That, in the belief and profession of this
Church-Infallibility and submission of private men's Judgments to her sentence
passed in her Synods, Consid. p. 58
the Tenet of the Greek Church seems no way varying from the Roman. That
Jeremias the Constantinopolitan Patriarch in his Contest with the Lutheran
Protestants is much in this, as a sure Retreat for ending Controversies, and
establishing Peace: Resp. 1. p. 139.
where he tells them -- Quae Synodice (legitima Conciliorumratione) mandata
sunt, ea ab omnibus fidelibus recipiuntur tanquam Scripturis divinitus
inspiratis consonantia. And in the Conclusion of that Answer he says p. 142.
-- Non enim nobis licet, nostrae propriae confidendo explicationi, aliquod
divinae Scripturae dictum aliter intelligere, animadvertere, aut interpretari,
nisi quemadmodum Theologis illis visum est, qui a Sanctis Synodis in S. Spiritu
ad pium scopum probati receptique sunt: ut ne, si a recta Evangelica doctrina
and a vera sapientia and prudentia declinemus, mentis nostra cogitatio instar
Protei huc illue circumforatur. Sed quaerat aliquis, Quomodo ista corrigentur?
Quomodo? Deo adjuvante sic. Nihil praeter illa, que a Sanctis Apostolis, and a
S. Synodis instituta and ordinata sunt, in manus sumendo, and sentiend^. Qui
enim hunc limitem terminumque recte servat Synchorouta nobis erit, sociu^ and
fidei consors. Again, in his Preface to the same Answer he says --
Respondebimus ergo, nihil nostrum afferentes, sed ex Sanctis Septem Occumenic
is Synodis [the last of which is that so befooled by this Dr. in his Book of
Roman Idotatry, p. 78. etc.] and ex sententia Sanctorum Doctorum
Interpretun^que divinitus inspirata Scriptura, quos Catholica Christi Ec^lesia
unanimi consensu recepit, quando oratione and miraculis, tanquam alter Sol,
orbem terraum illustrarunt: cum Spiritus Sanctus in ^is spiraverit, per eosque
locutus fuerit, qua in aeternum immota mano^unt, utpote in Verbo Domini
fundata, Ecclesia enim Christi (ut cum Paulo loquamur) columna est, and
fundamentum, veritatis; cui ne portaequidem inferorum (ut divina Domini
promissio habet) praevalebunt. That here we see in the East the same zeal for
Councils and for Fathers (taken collectively) as an Infallible Guide, as is in
the West; and the like endeavor to reduce Protestants to the same
acknowledgment and humble submission of Judgment.

N. O. insisteth p. 31. etc. That both Dr St. himself and Archbishop Lawd do
seem to hold such General Councils as have an universal acceptance from the
Church Catholic diffusive to be infallible. Consid. p. 31
For, both these admit Archbishop Lawd, 139, 140. compared with p. 160, 195,
258, 346. See also Rat. Account, p. 58, 59, 537.
-- that the Church diffusive is for ever preserved infallible in all
Fundamentals or Points absolutely necessary to falvation; and this, by virtue
of the Divine Promise, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her;
and other Texts* and therefore such Councils whose Decrees are admitted by the
whole Church diffusive must be so too. I say, as to Fundamentals; though as to
other points not Fundamental, they affirm these Councils also liable to error
and fallible, because the Church Catholic diffusive (say they) is so also. Dr.
St. also Rat. Account, p. 537. says of such Councils universally-accepted, --
That both the truth of Gods Promises, the goodness of God to his people, and
his peculiar care of his Church seem highly concerned that such a Council
should not be guilty of any notorious error. Where we see he says, that the
truth of Gods Promises is concerned, that these Councils should not fall into
any notorious error. Now such an error it must needs be, if an error in
Fundamentals or necessaries. And such a notorious error, I suppose, this among
others would be, if they should hold themselves (when they are not) Infallible
in their Decrees, and so should require a general assent (such as that in the
Athanasian Creed) from Christians to them, as to Divine Revelations, and make
them De Fide; thereby, in case any Decree be not true, obliging all the Members
of the Church to an Unity in Error. Thus far, then, as to Fundamental errors,
it seems Gods Providence secures both such Councils, and their Subjects. And
then also; for their erring in non-Fundamentals, Rat. Account. p. 535.
both He and the Archbishop put this among the raro contingentia.

its Being, but Teaching; Consid. p. 34 Archbishop Lawd.. 37. p. 318.
and that must be by its Councils. -- Dr White, says he, had reason to say,
That the Visible Church had in all ages taught that unchanged Faith of Christ
in all points Fundamental. And again Ib.. 21. p. 140.
, It is not possible, the Catholic Church [that is, of any one age] should
teach against the word of God in things absolutely necessary to Salvation.
Where the word [teach] shows that he intends the Governors of the Church in
every age. Likewise in another place, Ib.. 25. n. 4.
-- If we speak (says he) of plain and easy Scripture, the whole Church cannot
at any time be without the knowledge of it. And, If A. C. mean no more, than
that the whole Universal Church of Christ cannot universally err in any one
point of faith simply necessary to men's salvation, he fights against no
adversary that I know, but his own fiction. Where it follows: But if he means,
that the whole Church cannot err in any one point of Divine Truth in general,
if in these the Church shall presume to determine without her Guide, the
Scripture, then perhaps it may be said, that the whole Militant Church has
erred in such a Point. Here then the first, of the whole Church not erring in
fundamentals, as well as the second, are spoken of the Church, as determining.
And so is that saying of his, viz. That, -- Though the Mother Church, Ib. p.
258.
Provincial or National, may err, yet if the Grand Mother the whole Universal
Church [that is, in her General Councils universally accepted controlling the
other Provincial or National] cannot err in these necessary things, all remains
safe; and all occasions of disobedience [that is to the Grand Mother's
commands] taken from the possibility of the Church's erring [namely, as to all
necessaries] are quite taken away. Thus He. But safe, etc. it could not be, if
the Catholic Church the Grand Mother, as she held, so could not also witness,
all the necessary truths against such Mother Churches Provincial, or National.
Here then an Infallibility in teaching, in determining etc, is an Infallibility
of the Church in its Governors, not only believing, but testifying, the Truth.
Consid. p. 36.
[Though N. O. indeed sees not, how these things consist with what is said by
Dr. St. elsewhere Rat. Account, p. 154
-- You much mistake, when you think we resolve our faith of fundamentals into
the Church as the infallible witness of them. For, though the Church may be
infallible in the belief of all things fundamental (for otherwise it were not a
Church, if it did not believe them,) it does not follow thence necessarily,
that the Church must infallibly witness what is fundamental, and what not].

Universal Acceptance, the conditi on of this Infallibility, or of our
assurance thereof; they allow the first four General Councils to have been so
accepted, and therefore profess to them all obedience (and that which these
Councils required, we know, was Assent). And concerning this Obedience and
submission of Judgment to these, Consid. p. 32.
upon such an universal acceptance of the Church Diffusive, Dr. St. writes
thus Rat. Account, p. 375.
-- The Church of England looks upon the keeping the Decrees of the four first
General Councils as her Duty; and professes to be guided by the sense of
Scripture as interpreted by the unanimous consent of the Fathers, and the four
first General Councils. -- that is, she professes to take that, which such
Councils deliver, for the sense of Scripture; Not then to admit that which they
deliver, if she first judges it to be the true sense of Scripture. So also
elsewhere he says; Ib. p. 59.
-- The Church of England does not admit any thing to be delivered as the sense
of Scripture; which is contrary to the consent of the Catholic Church of the
four first Ages [that is, in their Ecumenical Councils, as he expresses it in
the preceding Page]. And here also he gives the ground of such Submission, viz.
-- a strong presumption [he might have said, an absolute necessity, for, what
he urges provesit] that nothing contrary to the necessary Articles of faith
should be held by the Catholic Church, whose very being depends upon the
belief of those things that are necessary to Salvation. These first Councils
therefore being, as they allow, universally accepted, the Universal Acceptance
necessary to render any General Councils infallible can be exacted no greater
or larger, than that which these first Councils actually had; and, upon this
account, the same title of Infallibility must be allowed by them to several
others; yet whose Definitions in matters of Faith they to several others; yet
whose Definitions in matters of Faith they oppose.

Cousiderations, p. 150. Conseq. 4.
and in his Principles, (and frequently elsewhere) See Rat. p. 117.567. -- Romans
Idol. p. 540.
-- That in Opinions absurd and repugnant to the first Principles of Sense and
Reason which any Church obtrudes upon the faith of men, men have the greatest
Reason to reject the pretense of this Infallibility, as a grand Imposture: N.
O. answers clearly to it thus. Consid. p. 92, 93.
1. That, where the Divine Power supernaturally works any thing that is
contrary to our senses (as no doubt it may), here we are not to believe them.
And that this he thinks none can deny. 2. And next; certain Divine Revelation
tells us so [because we have no Divine Revelation herein not to believe them];
and yet we are not to believe the same Senses in the thing wherein they inform
us contrary, to what this Revelation tells us. For, otherwise Lot and his
Daughters or the men of Sodom were not to credit the Divine Revelation
(supposing that Divine History then written and extant) that the seeming Men
who came to Sodom were Angels, because this was against their Senses. Now here
would he argue well, (as Dr. St. See Stillingst. Romans Idol p. 540. -- Rat.
Account, p. 117, 567.
and Dr. Tillotson Rule of Faith, p. 275
do, against Transubstantiation) who, because Lot's sight was actually deceived
upon this supernatural accident, in taking the Angels to be Men, as certainly
it was, from hence would infer; that the Apostles had no sufficient certainty
or ground, from their seeing and handling our Lord, to believe him risen from
the dead? Or, that no belief could ever be certainly grounded upon our Senses?
which Senses are appointed by God the ordinary instruments of conveying faith
and his revelations to us, viz. by our hearing, or reading, them; and do afford
a sufficient certainty whereon to ground our belief in all things subject to
them; excepting only those, wherein we have some Divine-Revelation of the
Divine Power interposing and working something above Nature, and that in such
particular matter we are not to believe them. 3ly. Which Divine Revelation we
are to learn [that is, where the sense of the Scriptures, Gods word, is any way
controverted] from Gods Church infallibly assisted in necessary Faith [I add,
or also by Tradition, evidently from age to age conveying to us such a sense'
of such Scripture to be the true]. Thus N. O. to that obstacle much urged of
late, That no pretense of Church-Infallibility may be admitted in any thing,
that is repugnant to our Senses.

Transubstantiation) is clearly removed from what is the evidence of sense or
seeming Reason in such a matter, to what certainty there is of the Revelation
its being Divine. Neither can we conclude any thing from the former evidence of
our Senses, where Divine Revelation is pretended contrary; till the latter
evidence, that, of the certain truth of the Revelation is first disproved. The
evidence therefore of Tradition, (an evidence sufficient, as for proving the
Scriptures to be Gods Word, so for such or such sense of any part of Scripture
to be Divine Revelation), not of our Senses, is first to be enquired after:
Which Primitive Tradition interpreting Scripture, this Author also I think
elsewhere says, he will stand to.

And,. 62. n. 1.
if these things be so, his arguing in his Rational Account p. 567. (if he
pleases to reflect upon it) cannot stand good; where he says the Testimony of
the Fathers carries not so great an evidence, as that of our Senses. -- The
question (says he there) in short is, Whether there be greater evidence, that
I am bound to believe the Fathers in a matter contrary to sense and reason, or
else to adhere to the judgment of them, though in opposition to the Fathers?
And afterward -- Supposing (says he) the Fathers were as clear for you (as
they are against you) in this subject, yet that would not be enough to persuade
us to believe so many contradictions as Transubstantiation involves in it,
merely because the Fathers [i.e. thus interpreting the Scriptures] delivered it
to us. -- For, nothing but a stronger evidence than that of sense and Reason,
can be judged sufficient to oversway the clear dictates of both -- So that,
suppose Catholics could prove, for example, for the literal sense of Hoc est
Corpus meum, an universal consent of Fathers or of Tradition, yet what shall we
be the nearer in dealing with such men, who say, they must rather believe the
evidence of Sense; as being the foundation of the Christian Faith? But, if the
evidence of our Senses, then, is to be preferred before that of Tradition
concerning the Revelation; hence it follows, that so often as Tradition
delivers God to have done any thing contrary to the evidence of our Senses (as,
in the former Instance, God's sending Angels that appeared to Lot and the men
of Sodom to be Men) so often the Tradition or Revelation is not to be credited
for Divine, or any Text in God's Word concerning this not to be taken in its
literal, (as that Genesis 19 1. implying them to be Angels) but in some
figurative, sense, And is not this cum ratione (or sensu, if you will) insanire?

And,. 62. n. 2.
here, may we not use the same words, (as this Author does in his Roman
Idolatry p. 540 against Transubstantiation,) against such a sense of the 19th.
chapter of Genesis that these to-Sense-appearing Men should be really Angels -- I
desire to know (says he there) how the Sense [he means in the Eucharist
concerning the Bread; suppose we, of Lot and the men of Sodom here concerning
the Angels:] comes to be deceived, supposing a Revelation contrary to it [ Viz.
that those whom they saw to be Men, were indeed Angels]? Does God impose upon
their senses at that time? then he plainly deceives them; Is it by telling them
they ought to believe more, than they see? that they deny not: but they desire
only to believe according to their senses in what they do see; as (says he) in
what they see to be bread, that that is Bread; [so I, in what they see to be
Men, that those are Men.] etc. -- Besides if this Revelation is to be believed
[by them] against sense, then either that revelation is conveyed immediately to
their minds, etc, or mediately by their senses [which we affirm], as in those
words, This is my Body [saith he, and I, as in those words Genesis 19.1. And there
came two Angels to Sodom]: If so, then they are to believe this revelation by
their senses, and believing this revelation they are not to believe their
senses: which is an excellent way of making faith certain.

Try we the same arguing again,. 62. n. 3.
in his Dispute against Transubstantiation, Rat. Account p. 117, by this
Instance, That these Persons being seen to be Men the Divine Revelation was not
to be so understood, as that they were Angels. There he pleads thus -- If this
Principle be true here, that the judgment of the senses [suppose here, of the
men of Sodom, that those persons they saw were really Men, which he speaks of
the Eucharist being really Bread] was not to be relied ^n, in matters which
sense is capable of judging of, it will be impossible for any one to give any
satisfactory account of the grand foundations of Christian Faith. For, if we
carefully examine the grounds of Christianity in Christian Religion, we find
the great appeal made to the judgment of Sense (That which we have seen, and
heard, and handled). If then the judgment of Sense must not be taken in a
proper object, at due distance, and in such a thing whorein all men's Senses are
equally judges, I pray tell me, what assurance the Apostles could have, or any
from them, of any Miracles which Christ wrought, etc. -- In things which are
the continual objects of Sense, if men are not bound to rely on the judgment of
Sense, you must say, that our faculties are so made that they may be imposed
upon in the proper objects of them; and if so, farewell all certainty, not only
in Religion, but in all things else in the world. And so all the rest of his
discourse there, if any please to view that place, will pass as currently
against understanding the Text in Genesis literally, that those persons were
Angels whom Lot and all the inhabitants of Sodom saw to be Men, as against the
General sense of Hoc est Corpus meun, that that is Christ's Body, we see to be
Bread; or rather collect from the Accidents we see, that it is so.

To what is said by N. O. in this matter,. 62. n. 3.
I find no answer returned by him; Nor can I imagine how he can shape any, but
by removing the Controversy from what is the evidence of Sense concerning the
thing, to what is the evidence of Tradition concerning the Revelation: till
which cleared against the truth of any such Revelation, any evidence of or from
Sense, or seeming-Reason, must be laid aside. Several of the other things that
are here pressed by N.O. for Infallibility are also by the Dr in his Answer
passed-over in silence (whether neglected by him for the slightness of them, or
avoided for the difficulty, is left to the Reader's judgment) and some others,
spoken to; with what success is now to be weighed.

Infallibility in the Church-Governors for preserving a stability and Certainty
in the Christian faith; especially supposing there had been no Scriptures (as
for some time there was not, nor, in every place, the presence of an infallible
Apostle) or, supposing the sense of them in several such points doubtful, he
answers p. 124. to this purpose; That men's Faith and Religion may be well
grounded, stable and certain, either without Scriptures, or
Church-Infallibility, viz. by virtue of common and Universal Tradition:
instancing in the Religion of the Patriarchs received by Tradition without any
such Infallibility; and in Christian's receiving the Scriptures, or the Roman
party maintaining Church-Infallibility upon Tradition, as a sufficient ground
thereof. But N.O. speaks of a stability and certainty of the Christian Faith
not as to some one of a few parts or points thereof (which as instanced in by
the Dr, so are here willingly granted by N.O, to receive a sufficient evidence
and firmness from Tradition antecedently to any Infallibility of the Church:
for neither does N.O. require Church-Infallibility for the proof or assurance
of Church Infallibility): but, as to all the necessary parts and Credends
thereof: to the believing of which, being not all of them, especially as to all
sorts of Christians, delivered with the same evidence of Tradition, as the
Canon of Scriptures, or Church-Infallibility are, he affirms this Infallibility
necessary for the establishing a certainty in their faith, when such persons
are left either without Scriptures; or with Scriptures, in such points, of an
ambiguous sense; in which necessary matters surely it is necessary, that all
men believe aright; though not, that they have an infallible certainty, that
they do so. Where (as N. O. observes) such an Infallibility signifies much,
Consid. p. 54.
for men's having a right and saving faith in all these matters proposed by the
Church then, when perhaps it may signify nothing, as to their infallible
assurance of that which it proposes.

Church Catholic diffusive), in their requiring assent to their definition in
matters of faith upon Anathema to all dissenters: in their inserting them as
thought fit in the Church's Creeds, and the Church Catholic upon this having
esteemed all opposers of them Heretics, etc. mentioned before. 50. He answers
thus p. 128. -- That this argument is so weak, that he wonders N.O. had not
considered how often it had been answered by their own Writers. For that it is
certain, that Provincial Councils, as well as General, have Anathematized
dissenters, and pronounced them Heretics; -- and that Bellarmine Council l. 2.
c. 10.
says that this does not imply their Infallibility. And that if it does not in
the case of Provincial Councils, why should N.O, think it does in the case of
General? Thus He. And whereas N.O. who had well pre-considered such Objection,
said to it, Consid. p. 40.
that these subordinate Councils (granted in themselves fallible) did not
denounce such Anathemas, nor require assent to their decrees but with relation
to the same Infallibility residing in the General Body of Church Governors,
and their concurrence therein: that they passed not such Acts without
consulting the Tradition and Judgment of other Churches, and especially of the
Apostolic See: To this he reply, -- That the Anathemas of Provincial Councils
did not relate to the acceptance of their decrees either by the Pope, or the
whols Church, as N. O. supposes, but did proceed upon their own assurance of
the truth of what they decreed, otherwise their Anathemas would have been only
conditional, and not absolute and peremptory, as we see they were. Lastly; That
he needs to give no other answer to this argument, than in the words of Dr.
Field l. 4. c. 4.
-- That Councils denounce Anathema, not because they think every one that
disobeys the decree of the Council to be accursed, but, because they are
persuaded in particular that this is the eternal truth of God which they
propose, therefore they accurse them that obstinatly shall resist, as S. Paul
wills every Christian man to anathematize an Angel coming from heaven, if he
shall teach him any other doctrine that he has already learned: yet is not
every particular Christian free from possibility of erring. Thus the Doctor.

Concession of Catholics and particularly of Bellarmine De Council. l. 2. c.
10. is produced as ruining this weak argument of N.O. that would prove from
anathematizing dissenters Infallibility; First, here consulting Bellarmine I
find him, De Council. l. 2. c. 3. where he maintains the Infallibility of
General Councils, to urge (together with N.O.) this Argument for it, in these
words: -- 2o Docent Patres and Concilia esse Haereticos, and excommunicandos
omnes, qui non acquiescunt Conciliis plenariis. Ex quo manifest sequitur, eos
putasse Concilia non posse errare: atque in primis omnia Concilia Generalia
dicunt anathema contradicentibus, ut Athanasius testatur de Nicaeno, etc. Next;
That, for the Objection concerning Provincial Councils which N.O. well
considered, he thought it sufficiently solved, (and so may think still) by
those words of his before recited; and that Bellarmine also (because the Dr.
quotes him) answers this Objection much-what in the same manner, saying --
Provincial Councils have sometimes used such anathema's to dissenters in such
points -- Quando res est facilis: and this facilis he explains, in qua omnes
fere Doctores [i.e. Ecclesiae Catholicae] convenient. [ Fere: for, it is not
necessary that all should, no more than in the first four Councils they did];
Et quando a Sede Apostolica confirmation^m accipiunt. [Which seems to say the
same with N.O.; namely, when Provincial Councils have such a concurrence of the
whole Church, as is sufficient to render their Act equivalent to that of a
Council General; and so, in all necessaries infallible]. And therefore in the
same place the Cardinal, instancing in the Anathemas passed in the Affrican
Councils against Pelagianisme observes out of Prospers Chronicon A.D. 420. that
Pelagianisme, condemned by them, yet non prius ab Ecclesia totius orbis damnata
est, quam Zosimus Papa decreta illius Concilii firmasset: Prospers words are,
-- Concilio apud Carthaginem habito 217. Episcoporum ad Pentificem Zosimum
synodalia decreta prolata sunt [their Anathemas]; quibus probatis per totum
mundum Haeresis Pelagiana damnata est, [and these Anathemas obtained their just
force]. And that S. Austin in his Retractations l. 2. c. 50.
says [not, postquam Pelagiana haeresis a Conciliis Affricanis, but] postquam
ab Episcopis Ecclesiae Romanae, pr^ies Innccentio, deinde Zosimo, cooperantibus
Conciliorum Affricanorum literis [i.e. relating to those Popes these their
decrees] convict^ atque damnata est: though the Affrican Anathema's were
pronounced before the Pope's confirming their Acts; for which Confirmation we
find them writing to him, after their Council ended in this manner. -- Vt
statutis nostrae mediocritatis (say they Apud. August. Ep. 90.
) etiam Apostolicae Sedis adhibeatur authoritas, etc. who in his Answer to them
also justifies them to consent with whole Body of the Catholic Church. Thus
then were their Anathemas grounded. To the Dr's Reply that follows, that in
such a case their Anathemas would have been made only Conditional, I answer.

Anathemas, though relating always to the general approbation of their Decrees,
yet were penned not Conditional, but Absolute; either because such a sufficient
concurrence with them of the Catholic Church was well known to them before the
composing their Decree; as it may be, when yet the Confirmation of their Act is
only received after it: Or, because such Post-Confirmation and Acceptance
after the penning of the Decree, yet precedes the promulgation and just force
or obligation of it; It being to run absolute upon such a consent presupposed;
as it is the ordinary custom in all Laws, the establishment whereof depends on
many successively, yet in their first style to run absolutely, because such
ratification is presupposed to their having the due force of Laws. And so in
General Councils the Anathemas are penned absolute, though these Councils and
their Decrees have not their full strength till the Confirmation thereof by the Sea Apostolic, and also such an admittance and acceptance of them by the
Church Catholic Dissusive (where the Representatives of a Considerable part of
it are absent,) as is thought necessary. Next, That, See Bellarm. de Council. l.
1. c. 17.. 4. -- l. 2. c. 11.. objiciunt.
by the Dr's words of the Anathemas of such Councils proceeding upon their own
assurance, I know not what he means. Does he allow fallible Councils upon a
persuasion they have of the truth of what they decree, to anathematize
dissenters, and pronounce them Heretics? Then, why may not the Council of
Trent do so? Or, if he means by their assurance, that Provincial Councils are
certain, without relation to any consent of the whole, that they do not err in
such Decrees where they pronounce Anathema, so he seems to give to these
Provincial Councils also an infallibility, more than which Catholics do not
desire to be allowed to General; viz. the certainty that these Fathers met in a
General Councils have, whether by the evidence of Scripture, or of Tradition,
or of a necessary Consequence from something Traditional or at least of our
Lord's promised Assistance, that they do not err in those things they decree,
though in many other things they be fallible.

Dr. Field, mentioned before. ^4.
and perplexed enough, I say, 1. That a Council cannot justly pronounce an
Anathema on any, of whom some are thought by them not to deserve it. 2. That it
is clear, these Councils do not anathematize obstinate Resisters, (whose
obstinacy may ly in contradicting) but any Dissenters; inserting also their
Decrees sometimes into the Creeds. 3. That no Council, only persuaded, i.e. so
as to have no doubt of the truth of what they propose (which full persuasion
may well consist with erring), and not certain and infallible therein, can
justly require from others the belief of it; and anathematize dissenters:
Unless such Judge perhaps knows, that none other can be certain of the contrary
to his persuasion: or, that all others are commanded to follow his Judgment.
Which things cannot be applied to Provincial Councils: and this Author
maintains, that the power exacting an internal assent requires infallibility.
This to Dr. Field, That a full persuasion is no just Ground for an Anathema.

S. Paul, I answer: That S. Paul or a Galatian must be not only persuaded, but
certain of his not erring in that, for the mere dissent in which he can justly
anathematize Angel, or Man; or esteem him as an Anathema. Nor may any one do
this for any particular point in the Gospel, controverted of the truth of which
point he is persuaded only; nor yet in general for the truth of the Gospel it
self, but as he is certain thereof; which all either are, or may be, from the
certainty of Tradition; or the Galatians, to whom S. Paul writ, further, from
Miracles.

Replies. But now the Reader may observe; that that to which the Dr. has
replied is only a piece (divided from the rest) of what N.O. presses; and to a
principal part of his Plea no answer is returned. As, this he omits to speak to
urged, by N.O. That General Councils have not only Anathematized Dissenters,
but sometimes inserted their Decisions in the Church's Creeds; and so required
an internal assent and belief of them, as of matters of necessary Faith. Again;
Omits to answer to N.O's urging against him See before,. 57, 58.
both Archbishop Lawd's, and, sometimes, his own, asserting not only the Church
in its Being, but Teaching, and in its General Councils, if these be
universally accepted, to be infallible in all Necessaries; his asserting also,
See before,. 50.
That none can justly require an internal assent [as, I hope, the sour first
Councils did] but an authority that first proves it self infallible, where N.O.
also objects, That Councils fallible, according to the tenants of Protestants,
can justly require no more than an external obedience, or silence and
non-contradiction. [From which it follows, that such Councils are infallible as
do justly require more; as did the four first Councils with the voluntary
acknowledgment also and submission of their Subjects to such an authority
assumed by them]. To which I add; that therefore Protestants say; that the
Church of England requires no more than this non-Contradiction to her 39.
Articles: [for which Dr. St. Rat. Acc. p. 55.
quotes these works of Bishop Bramhal -- Neither do we oblige any man to
believe them, but only not to contradict them. By which (says Dr. St.) we see
what a vast difference there is between these things which are required by the
Church of England in order to peace [not belief] and those which are imposed by
the Church of Rome, as part of that faith, extra quam non est salus]. And,
Protestants on this account condemn the Council of Trent, that being a Council
fallible yet it required more; and made, as they call it, a new Creed: but so,
say I, must they condemn the first four Councils if not infallible. He omits
this also urged, That the whole Catholic Church has admitted the Decrees of
Councils made in this style; and held the Dissenters from them Heretics: where
we have the judgment of the whole Church agreeing with that of General Councils
concerning their Infallibility in such Decrees.

Anathematizing Dissenters, nor the Councils putting their Decrees in the
Church's Creeds, nor the Church Catholick's afterward esteeming those Heretics
that dissented from these Councils, are a sufficient evidence or proof, that
these Councils (and the Church also in accepting them) accounted them
infallible in these their Decrees: I ask what could the most infallible Judge
do, or exact more? Does not the Dr. below See p. 182, 183.
blame the Roman Church for assuming such an Infallibility to herself [such
then it is in Her, though not in General Councils,] in requiring such a belief
of her additional Articles defined in Trent, as of the most fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith? And here, in what has been urged out of him
but now, does not the Dr grant the just requiring of an internal assent to
infer Infallibility? And so, must he not either hold the first Councils
infallible, or that they injustly required such assent; unjustly put their
Definitions in the Creeds; lastly erroneously the Church diffusive accepted of
their Definitions, as such, and esteemed the contrary Tenants Heresies against
the faith? Must he not either hold, that these Councils knew not this he says,
that, unless infallible, they might not do such things? nor, else, took
themselves for infallible, when they were not? But, whom shall we believe
herein? them, or the Dr rather? And, if holding themselves fallible, why used
they such language, In Spiritu Sancto congregati? and, Hac est Fides Catholica:
relating partly to their own Definition? And, after all, if fallible they were,
what assurance has any Christian, that he has not erred in his Creed? Can any
one prepare a better Plea for the Socinians, than this man has done? Or here,
since, I hope, He will not, with Mr. Chillingworth, and against the judgment of
the whole Catholic Church, deny, that the four first General Councils did
these things justly, will he, deserting his former opinion, justly the
lawfulness of a Council, that grants it self fallible in such its decrees,
notwithstanding to do all these things? And, then, may not the Council of Trent
rightly do so? And, lastly, for what good reason then may the Church of England
be said to forbear the using such authority? I say, a Solution of such
difficulties urged by N.O. I find not in the Dr's Answers.

Austin mentioned before. 54. he returns an answer extended from p. 250. to p.
200.

Where I find him p. 251. urging S. Austins words, that -- In this matter we
follow etc. -- Sequimur sane nos in hac re[i. e, in Non-Rebaptization:] etiam
Canonicarum authoritatem certissimam Scripturarum: and there fore that men
might attain a certainty of the sense of Scripture in this matter without the
Church's Infallibility [to decide it]. Thus the Dr. But, this Father, every
where confessing the difference about Rebaptization to be a most difficult and
obscure Question, and not clearly resolved, as to all apprehensions, in the
Scripture, speaks this Sequimur sane nos in hac re etc. quite in another sense;
namely, as he himself expounds it in the next words, when the Donatists urged
to him there was no proof or example thereof in Scripture. -- Neque enim (says
he) parvi momenti habendum est quod -- hoc per universam Catholicam ecclesiam,
quae toto orb diffunditur, observari placuit, quod tenemus, Explicating
himself yet in the words following much more, thus. -- Quamvis hujus reicerte
de Scripturis non proferatur exemplum ^arundem tamen Scripturarum in hac re a
nobis tenetur veritas cum hoc facimus quod universae jam placuit Ecclesiae,
quam ipsarum Scripturarum commendat authorit as. [ Commendat: i.e. to be the
true Church; and then both S. Austin and the Donat^st were agreed, that the
true Church must, or did, in this matter hold and state the truth.] -- If this
yet satisfy not, see the same said again elsewhere De vnitate Ecclesiae c. 22.
where speaking of the non evidence concerning Rebaptization in Scripture -- Hoc
aperte atque evidenter [i.e. in the Scriptures, says he] nec ego lego, nec tu
-- Nunc vero cum in Scripturis non inveniamus etc. put^, si aliquis Sapiens
extitisset, cui Dominus Jesus Christus testimonium perhibet; and de hac
Quaestione consuleretur a nobis, nullo modo deber mus dubitare id facere quod
ille dixisset; ne non tam ipsi, quam Domino Jesu Christo, cujus testimonio
commendatur, repugnare judicaremur. Perhibet autem testimonium Christus
ecclesiae suae. [ Testimonium, that we should follow its judgment, facere quod
dicit; otherwise a testimony to it concerning something else would have been
nothing to S. Austins pu^pose. Facere, which is more than non-contradicere; and
which implies also assentire verum esse, quod dicit.] By all these passages we
see the certissima authoritas Scripturarum is concerning the Church, which is
it; i.e. the Catholic Church: and then, it discovered, is concerning the
matter in Question also, as unerringly determined by it.

Austin, -- That, where the testimony of Scripture is very plain and clear, we
are not to regard what Donatus, or Parmenianus, or Pontius has said: for
neither, says he, are we to yield to Catholic Bishops themselves: if they be
at any time so much deceived as to hold what is contrary to Canonical
Scriptures. By which it is evident, that he supposed no Infallibility in the
Guides of the Church. All which N.O. grants very true, if understood as the
Father speaks it: of particular Doctors of the Catholic Church, not of its
General Councils. Nor can one rationally plead the sense of Scriptures plain
and clear on his tide, where a General Council understands and expounds them
contrary.

Austins words -- That the [true] Church is to be proved [and so the Dr would
have it understood of other Controversies] by nothing but plain Scriptures;
neither by the authority of Optatus, or S. Ambrose, or innumerable Bishops, nor
Councils, nor Miracles etc. But such words are not S. Austin's; Nor does he
affirm that, which is the true Church, can be proved by nothing but Scriptures;
for, himself says elsewhere, that he came to know the Scriptures from the
Church, first known to him; and the Church by Miracles: Nor speaks he here any
thing derogatory to General Councils, or the authority or infallibility of
them: (of which see more in the Annotation on p. 251. l. 8. from the b^ to.)
But, the Donatists with him allowing the Scriptures. he urges the Church
sufficiently demonstrable by their clear authority; which, if clear, alone also
suffices; and therefore requires of them, that, he waving these other proofs,
viz: of Councils, Miracles, etc on his side, wherein he had much the advantage
of them by Episcopi innumerabiles and Miracula vera, so they would wave the
urging of their Councils far inferior, and their Miracles, Visions, etc
fallaci^us, on their side (which Arguments of theirs he calls morarum
tend^^ul^); and that they should press Scriptures again (...) Scriptures, But,
if the Judgment of General Councils was denied by him to be any proof in
Controversies, why used he it as such, in Rebaptization?

That all the proofs S. Austin brings for the Church, relate to the
Universality of it, not to the Infallibility. Where it is true, that, as to the
Donatist, the Universality of the Church was all the matter in controversy:
both sides b^^^ fully agreed, that that was the Truth in the Controversy of
R^b^^^ization which the true Church, which-soever it were, held and taught.
Otherwise, from the Church determining in its General Council this point of
Rebaptization, S. Austin could not have urged its determining a truth, as he
every where does (see the quotations in Note on p. 251. l. 8. from the bott.
and the Donatists would soon have replied, that his General Council erred, and
that S. Cyprian's was in the right.

Austin -- Concilia plenaria sape priora posterioribus emendari. The Reader may
view the place set down at large there by this Author; which words of S.
Austin, p. 256.
he afterward presses, cannot he understood of unlawful Councils, of matters
of fast or practice, but do refer to the great Question then in debate about
Rebaptizing Heretics; And, -- that hereby S. Austin takes off the great Plea
the Donati^ts made from the authority of S. Cyprian and his Council, which they
continually urged for themselves. But N.O. had already weighed this
Commonplace, and replied to it, Addit. to p. 86. l. 11.
-- That, if such Plenary Councils, as that which determined Non-Rebaptization,
were errable, and amendable, in these Dogmata fidei, neither had S. Austin any
reason, to presume (as he does Ibid. c. 4.) that S. Cyprian would have
corrected his opinion concerning this Point: or, to charge the Donatists with
Heresy, for dissenting from it, after the Determination of such a Council: Nor
had the 2d. General Council any just ground to put it in the Creed [Credo unum
Baptisma in remissionem peccatorum]. No just cause I say to do any such thing,
if Plenaria Concilia, taken in their highest capacity, are in their stating
matters of faith errable and amendable by others following. Thus N. O: to which
the Reader may search what answer he finds returned by this Respondent in so
copious a Reply.

Annotations on p. 255. l. 10. from the bott. it cannot be understood of lawful
General Councils amending one another, as to any matters of necessary faith;
that such Councils, when defining any thing to be by all Christians believed
and assented-to, when declaring Heretics all that dissent, and perhaps
inserting such their Definition into the Creed, yet may be amended afterward in
this by other latter Councils. For, this would overthrow the old foundations of
the Nicene and Athanasian Creed; and whatever can be discovered of one such
Council thus erring may well be applied to any other. This also would overthrow
particularly S. Austins Veritas eliquata and declarata; And -- plenarium
Concilium confirmavit and consolidavit, for Non-Rebaptization (the chief, if
not the only Argument he uses for convincing the Donatist in this point,)
whilst they might here plead, something was still latens and clausum, till more
experience in a latter Council should open and disclose it: and so must all,
before cited out of S. Austin, be also reversed; and all the former Heresies
revive again, which, when pretending Scriptures for their Tenants, have been
quelled by the judgment of such Councils.

emendari is meant not as to dogmata fidei, but in some other matters, wherein
the Highest Councils, by being ignorant of some circumstances etc, are liable
to error: Or, that by Plenaria (which seems the most probable) are meant such
Councils as were, of the Arians, many before S. Austin's time, but these in
several manners irregular and uncanorical, that were amended by others
following, as by the 2d. General Council of Constantinople, and by that of
Sardica, as also S. Austin, elsewhere, particularly instanceth in that of
Ariminum, called a Plenary Council (but wherein the Arian Party unjustly
prevailed with the Emperor and falsified the sense of its Decrees) amended
afterward by the Councils and the Church's Judgment in the times following. See
lib. Contra Maximinum. 3. c. 14. There -- Homousion (says he) mult is paucorum
fraud deceptis, haeretica impietas sub Haeretico Imperatore labefactare
caepit, sed post non longum tempus liberate fidei Catholicae praevalente --
Homousion illud Catholicae fidei sanitate] [ i.e. in the Constan inopoluan and
Sardinican Council.] long lateque defensum est [ defensum not against the
Decree of a former plenary Council, but the misinterpretation and tyranny of a
minor, but then prevalent, Party in it, sub Haeretico Imperatore]; I say in
whichsoever, of the forenamed ways this passage may be understood, (as
probably it is to be so, in the latter) this is certain that it cannot be
understood of Lawful General Councils amending one another, as to any matters
of necessary Faith, for the reasons but now given. Besides the proving of
nothing less to them than that Non-rebaptization was a truth could satisfy the
Donatist; or invalidate the judgment of the Affrican Council under Cyprian, as
to its determining the Truth. The Dr also saying here, that S. Austin urges
this Plenaria priora posterioribus emend^ri to take off the great plea the
Donatists made from the authority of S Cyprian and his Council, which Council
of Cyprian was not Plenariam ex universo orb Christiano, shows, that S. Austin
needed not, for confuting them, to take Plenatium in any higher-sense than that
of S Cyprian's. Whereas taking Plenaria in the largest sense and without any
limitations will make nothing at all for the Father in his present controversy
with the Donatist about Rebaptization: Nay, more against him. For, there were
no two such Councils, that were both General, whereof the latter had amended
the former concerning Rebaptization at all: and, had there, the same
uncertainty of truth would have been in the Decree of the latter, as of the
former; and in this case the Donatist would not have failed to have taken the
advantage of the former Council. These things, I hope, the equal Reader will
consider (though the Dr has not); and will not admit such a sense of this
place as, if true, contradicts what S. Austin says so often elsewhere, and
quite ruins this Father's Plea, and Cause.

Austin preferrs clear Scriptures before humane, though never so learned,
authority varying from them; but find in him no comparison, or opposition,
between these and the Judgment of a General Council as running counter to one
another. How could this be, when in the Controversy, for which he urges
Scripture, he requires the Donatists to submit to the exposition of the
Council?

The utmost by a careful consideration of S. Austin's mind in this matter that
I can find is; that, in a Question of so doubtful and obscure a nature as that
of Rebaptization was, it was a reasonable thing to presume, that what the whole
Christian world did consent in was the truth, not upon the account of
Infallibility but the reasonable supposition, that all the Churches of the
Christian World would not consent in a thing repugnant to any Apostolical
doctrine or Tradition. Consid. p. 86
But N.O. presses that S. Austin's mind was clearly otherwise; not that it was
only a reasonable thing to presume, but a thing most certain, that what the
whole Christian world did consent in, was the Truth, as appears in those places
cited before. 55. and. 71. else it could not be true what he says -- Earundem
Scripturarum etiam in hac re [i.e. in Non-rebaptization] tenetur veritas, cum
id facimus quod universae placuit Ecclesia, if the Church may possibly decide
it amiss. And S. Austin's -- Siquis falli metuit hujus obscuritate quaestionis
Ecclesiam de illa consulat would no way relieve his being deceived still, if
the Church consulted might also be mistaken in it. Nor, especially, such
Article, only upon a reasonable supposition that they erred not in it, be
inserted in the Creed. Before that the Dr therefore should have concluded such
to have been S. Austin's mind, he should, in answering these things alleged by
N.O. have showed such his mind to have agreed with his words.

In such a case as this, I agree to what S. Augustine says, and think a man
very much relieved by following so evident a consent of the Universal Church:
not by virtue of any Infallibility, but the unreasonableness of believing, so
many, so wise, so disinteressed persons should be deceived.

Though N.O. has showed S. Austin requiring submission of the Donatists upon
the General Council's determining a most certain truth; Yet this were somewhat
well, (if this Author or Protestants would generally stand to it), that private
men should follow such an evident consent of the Universal Church on this
account; viz: the unreasonableness of the believing, that so many, so wise, so
disinteressed persons should be deceived. But, I am afraid the Dr, if put to
follow constantly such a consent will relieve himself here with a clause that
lies dormant, and which his Reader perhaps takes little notice of; viz. in such
a case as this; i.e. a case doubtful, and difficult. Yet, one would think, if
we have reason to follow these wise men's judgment in things that are
difficult, and that have little evidence, and light in Scripture, (as
Rebaptization was), much more have we reason to follow it in such things still,
as are more clear in Scripture; since this is more incredible, that so many, so
wise, so disinteressed persons should be deceived in them: Or that, That is
there clear to us, which is not so to them; but the contrary. And so I take
leave of the Dr's Answer, to return again to the progress of N.O's Discourse.

CHAP. V. Concerning Sects and Heresies not suppressible without an
Ecclesiastical Judge.
N.O. much presses against such Principle: 1st. that the remitting thus all
manner of persons, for the understanding of all points necessary to salvation
Scripture, as asserted clear therein, only they using a due endeavor, without
requiring any submission of their judgment, or of assent in such matters to the
Definitions of the Church, as pretended in these not infallible, is a Plea no
more justifying the Reformation, and the dissent from superiors, of the Church
of England, Consid. p. 97
than that of any other Sect whatever, even of those which the same Church of
England most abhorrs: For that all these Sects also, for the Doctrines and
Extravagancies they maintain, and Discessions they make, do equally appeal to
the Clearness of the Infallible Scriptures, in them, sufficiently intelligible
unto their sincere endeavors, and decline as fallible, all other
Ecclesiastical Authority.

Volkelius Volkel. de vera Relig. l. 5. c. 7.
pleads for the Socinians (as the Dr for the Church of England) -- Quae de fide
in Christum statuenda sunt ex Sacris Literis patere. And again -- Deus, qui
religionem, Christianam usque ad mundi finem vigere voluit, curavis etiam tale
aliquid perpetuo extare, unde ea, quatenus omnino ad salutem est necessarium,
cogn^sci indubitate possit. At nihil tale extare, praeter Sacras Lateras.
Crell. de uno Deo Patre in Praesat.
To the same purpose Crellius another Socinian says -- Haec Sententia [by
which Christ's Divinity is denied] plurimis ac clarissimis Sacrarum Literarum
testimoniis nititur. It is needless to cite more. From whence is manifest: That
such Principles, as here appear only in the defense of the Religion established
in the Church of England, make the same Apology also for all those other
Protestant parties, and for the most blasphemous Sects disclaimed by it:
Consid. p. 98
The Dr in the mean while omitting that, by which the former learned Defenders
of his Church usually have justified it against them; namely the Church of
England's adhering to the Traditional Exposition and sense of Scripture
received from the Primitive Church: This, I say, he omitts, perhaps, because it
may be thought to relish a little of Church-Infallibility.

Principle leave any just and sufficient means, in such Church as maintains it,
of suppressing any Sect, Schism or Heresy; Consid. p. 98.
By Sects here I do not mean any Parties, that are of different opinions in
matters not determined or stated on any side by the Church, or those
Ecclesiastical Superiors to whom they owe Obedience; but such, as dissent from
and refuse conformity to her established Doctrines and Injunctions. And, by
suppressing them, I mean preserving the Church perpetually in its integrity and
unity of faith, by excluding all such, if otherwise uncorrigible, from her
Communion; and purging herself from such a leaven and contagion. For which
effect our Lord has left a perpetual Authority to his Church, in her General
Councils, equally taking upon her in all ages to judge what is Heresy, or
Schism and who Sectaries; and requiring a strict assent to her Definitions in
matters of faith; and removing such as do not so submit out of her Society by
Excommunication, according to our Lord's -- Si Ecclesiam non audicrit sit tibi
sicat Ethnicus; Tit. 3.10.
and S. Paul's -- Haereticum hominem, post unam and fecundam correptionem
devita -- (...). And -- Vtinam abscindantur, qui vos conturbant Gal. 5.12. By
which she preserves herself Vnam, Sanctam, Catholicam; one Body, and not only
of one language by the silence and non-contradiction of any of her members;
but, by assent also, of one mind, and one faith; and without any rent or
schism; all the Parts of this Body (as has been said before. 26.) being
placed in an exact subordination; by which it is well known, in any division
and dissent of these Governors, to whom Obedience is due. [By Obedience of
Aff^nt, I say, preserved of one mind: for, though a General Non Contradiction
to any of the Church's professed doctrines may possibly procure the Church's
peace and prevent the spreading and contagion of such Heresies, and Sects,
where such an Obedience is strictly observed; Yet 1st. So long as no submission
of Judgment is required, Heresy is neither at all prevented in, or ejected out
of, the Church, if any of her Members be stained therewith, but only silenced.
2ly Where there is a dissent in Judgment, it is almost impossible that none
also shall appear in discourse or writings: for, out of the abundance of the
heart, the month will be speaking. 3ly. If the obedience of a Non-contradiction
sufficiently secures the Church's Peace, Yet Protestants, upon their ground of
Church-fallibility in Necessaries, cannot Universally allow or admit such an
obedience; because so there could never have been any Reformation of such
Church her Errors, though never so gross and fundamental, where no lawful
gainsaying or contradicting them, either by Laics or especially by the
Clergy.] The Church then, by requiring such submission of Judgment, and
removing dissenters, preserves her subjects for ever, not only of one Language,
but of one Mind, in the common faith. But, according to this Principle of the
Dr's which leaves all persons, (upon the securing them if using a just
diligence they cannot err in necessaries), to their own judgment, as to their
assent to, or dissent from, what the Church determines; (which Assent is
maintained by him not to be justly required, as to matters of Faith, by any
Judges, save the infallible) here can be no just excluding any dissenters from
such Church's communion: and so all Sects, and opinions equally remain, if they
please, in it. Or, in their separating one from another, (as an Union of
Charity and peace lasts not long, where is once a diversity of Opinion, or
Faith) there is no means left here, upon such a ground, for reducing any to the
sentiments of the rest, though in those points which are of the greatest
moment. For, when two contradicting parties, (after both repairing to the
Scriptures and supposing a due endeavor used to understand them,) do contend
Scripture clear for themselves, the clearness of such Scripture how great
soever it be on one side, and how falsely soever pretended or imagined on the
other, cannot be made an instrument of conviction to the other: here then can
be no suppression of any side, nor abscission of them from the Catholic
Communion, how pernicious soever their doctrine be, unless things be
prosecuted, further than Scripture, to their hearing the Church, that is
asserting and submitting to its judgment; or else being esteemed and treated as
Heathens. Matt. 18.17. Now the Church, here referred to by our Lord in case of
differences, is not so proper an Arbitrator, and Judge of any contentions, as
of those that happen in the matter of the Christian Faith; (in which matter
also we see S. Paul, Timothy, and Titus used their Ecclesiastical Authority and
Judicature): and therefore they seem to do much wrong to this Text, who would
limit it especially, if not only, to trespasses in Manners.

3ly. N.O. adds also that the great licentiousness of opinions that follows
upon such a Principle seems very contrary also to the former pretenses and
practice of the Church of England for which he urges,. 84. n. 1.
Consid p. 77. * the Title of the 39. Articles which are said to be -- Agreed
upon for the avoiding of diversities of opinions and the establishing of
Consent touching true Religion: Preface p. 6. -- and Consid. p. 77.
And * 5. Canon Synod 1602. -- Whosoever shall affirm these Articles agreed on
for establishing Consent in true Religion such as he may not with a good
conscience subscribe [i.e. assent] unto, let him be excommunicated, and not
restored, but after repentance, and revocation of such his wicked [not,
gainsaying, or contradiction, but] Error: and * Can. 36. -- Where the Clergy
are obliged -- To allow and acknowledge all the Articles agreeable to God's Word
[i.e. to assent to them]: and the * Statute 13. Eliz. c. 12. Where such as
enter into the Ministry are required -- to declare their assent and subscribe
to the 39. Articles of Religion [this being there added also] which only
concern the confession of the true Christian faith, and doctrine of the
Sacraments: Entitled Articles whereupon it was agreed etc, and shall have from
the Bishop a testimonial of such assent and subscription etc. (Of which matter
the Reader, if he pleases may see much more in the 3d Disc. concerning the
Guide in Controversy chapter 7.).

N.O. also contends Ibid. against the Dr's 26th Principle,. 84. n. 2.
That the Church of England's rejecting in her Articles several points believed
in the Church of Rome as contrary to Scripture (as she does Purgatory,
Adoration of Images, Invocation of Saints, Article of the Church of England 22
Works of Supererogation Art. 14. Sacrifice of the Mass Art. 31.
Transubstantiation. Art. 28.) is as plainly making the Negatives of these
Articles of her Faith, as the Roman Church does the Positives, and using the
same severity herself, which she complains of in others. Because the declaring
any Positive proposition to be contrary to Scripture makes the Negative thereof
to be a thing revealed in Scripture, and therefore this to be believed by all,
who hold it is so. Thus, though, if I profess not to believe Transubstantiation
because neither contained in Scripture, nor deducible thence, I do not hereby
make the denial or Negative thereof an Article of my Faith; Yet, if I profess
not to believe it, because contrary to Scripture, I do.

Now, in all these things, this Church seems to have an aim at the preservation
of an Unity of Faith and opinion amongst her subjects, and a removing from her
Communion of such as shall not assent to her Doctrines, and acquiesce in her
Ceremonies. And, (I know not whether by some later different Comments on the
sense of these her Canons and Laws, but) so it is, that since Chillingworths
^imes, who seems the first that made this Principle more current and authentic
in this Church, Sects have much more multiplied in this Nation, than formerly.
And -- By this way N.O. says, Consid. Pref. p. 7.
our later English Divines seem to have brought the Authority of their Church
into a great disreputation and waning condition, and to have excused, yea
justified all Sects which have or shall separate from her, [i.e. as to the
liberty they take of such a s^pa ation]. For, indeed what fault can it be to
forsake, when they imagine the contrary to be truth, the doctrine of a Church,
whose teaching none is bound to believe or obey out of conscience?

N.O. yet further observes, that, though the Church of England should or also
does require assent and submission of judgment from her Subjects to her Decrees
and Articles of Religion for hindering Sects and divisions from her, yet that
she cannot ju ify to her subjects any such proceedings; nor justly restrain
them from doing toward her that, which she indulged her self, in the
Ref^rmation toward her Superiors. So that if, in some cases, viz. in what not
indeed were, but seemed to her, manifest and intolerable errors, she might
depart from and publicly oppose the doctrine of Church-Councils superior to
her National one, so might others again break off and reform from her on the
like to-them-seeming good grounds and causes. Such submission of assent being,
by no particular Church divided from the more Universal, Pref. p. 5.
with the least pretense of reason to be challenged from her subjects, when she
herself, (and particularly the Church of England,) refused the same to all the
Superior Church Authority that was extant when she departed: as surely there
was and is always an Authority Superior, to a Primate, as to Persons; or, as
for Councils, to a National one.

Now, to consider the Dr's Replies to these things.

N.O's pressing here, that he seems in his Principles to discede from the
intentions of the Church of England, which in several passages See b fore,. 84.
requires an Assent from her Subjects to the verity of her Articles of
Religion, and conformity to her Ceremonies which implies Assent, I do not
remember he has said any thing; Yet a Point that, if it were but for the
Presbyterians sake who boggle much at such a submission, needs some clea^ing.
Nor has he said any thing in Answer to the Church of England's being showed.
84. n. 2.
to make the Negatives, Articles of her faith; whilst she condemns the tyranny
of the Roman Church in making the Positives so.

N.O's, words -- That, by their way, the late English Divines have excused yea
justified all the Sects which have or shall separate from their Church; Prefa.
p. 7.
which N.O. speaks not of their justifying these Sects universally in whatever
they hold or do; or, what being practiced in the Church of England, they take
offense at, but only, of justifying the liberty they take in disceding in their
Opinions, as they see fit, from the Doctrines and Principles of this Church,
(so limited by N.O. both in the precedent and following words); whilst these
Late men also tell them, that they may safely follow their own judgment, at
least as to all necessaries for their salvation; wherein they cannot err, if
using a sincere endeavor to understand the Holy Scripture; which is in all
such points clear. In answer to this, this Author from p. 180. etc. to p. 186.
undertakes to show -- That there is a different case of the separation of
Dissenters from the Church of England, and of Her separation from the Church of
Rome, showing several Reasons or Motives of the Church of Englands departing
from the Roman Church, which the sects (being of the same opinion in them) have
not, of departing from her: But this thing is willingly granted him
beforehand; that differences herein he may show many, that no way concern
N.O's discourse, who charge him and others only with this; that, from their
teaching, that none do owe a submission of judgment to that of their
Ecclesiastical Superiors, every one may rightly collect, that he may follow his
own; Or; that, if You may depart from your Superiors, Persons, or Councils,
upon a just cause; of which cause, you say, it is all reason that you, not your
Superiors, judge: then, so may They from you, upon any cause also they think
just; Or; that, if there be no decisive Judge, for differences between you and
your Superiors, to whose sentence you can be obliged; so neither is there, for
differences between them and you: and that, as you appeal from your
Ecclesiastical Superiors to Evidence of Scripture, so seeming to you, in your
cause; so may they from you, in their's. For, I suppose here, the Dr will both
acknowledge 1 Some Councils to be superior to a National one; and some
Ecclesiastical Persons to a Primate; And 2 that these Ecclesiastical
Superiors, fallible, when proceeding against Evidence of Scriptures, may be
therein relinquished. And This is the thing wherein N.O. affirms you to
countenance and warrant the proceedings of all these Sects.

Differences, he says p. 181. -- Here lies a very considerable difference,
that we appeal and are ready to stand to the judgment of the Primitive Church
for interpreting the letter of Scripture in any difference between us and the
Church of Rome; but those who separate from our Church will allow nothing to be
lawful, but what has an express command in Scripture. To which I say: That,
this difference supposed or granted here (of which see more in the Annotations
On p. 181.
) notwithstanding he will be found still to justify the Sectarists in their
departure from the present Church of England, as she did the present Church
that was before Luther, which, as the Dr maintains, she might do, upon a just
cause, that is appearing so to Her from the evidence of the Scripture; so say
the Sectarists, they may, and do from her, upon a just cause: but I need not
say, the same Cause. And, as he holds, that this Church owed no submission of
judgment to the definitions of that Church's former Councils, being fallible;
so neither, say, the Sects, do they to the National Synods of this. But, if the
judgment of such matters be removed from these latter, to the Primitive times,
and to Antiquity; This, as taken ad libitum in a several latitude, is a
Precedent all Parties pretend to; and is a Judge, the sense of whose sentence
all parties may cispute, as they do that of Scripture, without matters coming
hereby to any strict Decision. Neither will the Presbyterians I believe,
abandon this Hold to the Dr; and his Irenicum perhaps will help them to
maintain it. And, for some such reason it may be, that he here, in comparing
the Church of England and the Sects, declines the direct Antithesis, of their
deserting, or renouncing contrary to Her Owning or adhering to, these Primitive
Times: As the ingenuous Reader may observe.

The Guides of our Church never challenged any infallibility to themselves,
which those of the Church of Rome do. [He should have said -- Which the
Catholic Church in her lawful General Councils doth]. Now from this may well
be gathered, that the Dissenters from the Church of England depart in their
judgment from a pretended, not infallible, but, fallible, Church. And I ask,
What advantage hence, for confuting what is said by N.O? Does not this
fallibility of the Church of England in her Doctrines, confessed, secure any to
depart from them and her, as they shall think fit, without being justly for
this called to an account by her? And are not all Sects hereby justified in
following the persuasion of their own judgment against hers; as she also
following hers against her Superiors, because fallible? He says also there,
-- That the Church of England declares in her Articles, that all the proof of
things to be believed is to be taken from Holy Scripture. She may declare so,
and yet the Sectarists not therefore admit, that all, that Holy Scriptures are
alledged-for by the Church of England, is to be believed; since these differ,
in the sense of several places of Scripture, from this Church, and so, as to
these, may depart from her Judgment.

That the Church of Rome makes the belief of her doctrines necessary to
salvation. -- But nothing of this nature can be objected against the Church of
England by dissenters, that excludes none from a possibility of salvation
merely because not in her Communion. To this I say, as I did to the last; The
lesson cessary the Church of England makes the belief of her Doctrines, the
more liberty still the Sects will think they have of dissenting from them. But,
changing here the Dr's Roman (of which N. O. said nothing) into the Catholic
Church, headed by her General Councils, she freely tells those who dare depart
from her, that there is no Salvation to those out of her Communion; and that
their Conscience mis-perswaded does oblige indeed, but not therefore excuse,
them. And this causes those, who are careful of their salvation, and believe
her in this, to secure themselves in her Communion.

The Guides of the Roman Church pretend to an immediate authority of obliging
the consciences of men [i.e, as I understand him, affirm that their Subjects
are obliged in conscience to yield an assent and submission of judgment to
their definitions and decrees: which is true, changing Roman into Catholic,]
But (says he) ours challenge no more than Teaching men to do, what Christ had
commanded them. Means he not this here of the Church of England in opposition
to the Roman obliging men's consciences; that it only teaches such things; but
challenges not any absolute obedience or belief from its Subjects, that Christ
has commanded such things as it teaches? If so: Does not this still spur on
the Sects to cast about for themselves; since this Church may tell them, Christ
has commanded them, what indeed he has not? and since this Author tells them
moreover, that the Scriptures, read by them with a sincere endeavor to
understand them, will be clear to them in necessaries?

The reasons we plead for separation from the Church of Rome are in themselves
far more considerable than those which are pleaded by such wh^ separate from
our Church. And -- That our Church's imposing of three Ceremonies, declared to
be indifferent by those who require them, cann^t be thought by any men of
common sense so great a burden to their consciences, as all the load of
superstitious fopperies in the Roman Church. To this I say: Be it a less or a
greater load that is laid upon us, both oppress us, where neither can be born.
Ceremonies (he says) declared to be indifference, by those who require them.
But, what if not, by the Dissenters, believed to be indifferent, as a fallible
Church tells them? May these be imposed upon them so as to require conformity
in the practice, which includes assent to the lawfulness, thereof? Or, if the
departure of the Church of England from Rome, for many things imposed, for the
pres^rving her Conscience* otherwise persuaded, is ju^tified; why not the
departure of these Dissenters from the Church of England, though for fewer
things imposed, justified here also? And can this Author blame them therein?
And says he not to this purpose in the beginning of this Answer p. 180.
That the persuasion of conscience equally serves to all Parties?

From all these instances he would collect; that the Sctarists have less reason
to depart from the Church of England than she has, from Rome; which is true as
to these matters whilst the sects are of the same Judgment with her therein;
therefore also for none of these do they depart from her. But yet, for other
matters they may and do, wherein they think her faulty and defective: and do
this, according to the Grounds of a lawful departure, which they have learnt
from her; and the Example, which she has formerly given them in her separation
from her Superiors. [Which matter having been showed at large in the 4th.
Discourse Concerning the Guide in Controversies, I may save this labor, and
referr the Reader to it. Where, for an Instance, the Socinian draws up his
Plea, proceeding on the Protestants Principles and Concessions, and
particularly those of this Dr (which there are frequently cited by him), that
in his Tenants concerning the Trinity he holds nothing either repugnant to the
Holy Scripture, i.e. rightly understood; or to the unanimous sense of
Antiquity, or Definitions of lawful General Councils, so far as these two are
admitted by Protestants to oblige. Nor that he stands guilty either of Heresy;
or of Schism; i.e. according as Protestants state them.] And also, in all
these Replies here of the Dr, let the Reader consider, Whether N. O's Objection
is not rather more fortified by what he pretends to dissolve it?

N O's urging See before,. 83.
, That such Principles leave no just and sufficient means, in such a Church as
maintains them, of suppressing Sects, Schisms, or Heresies, He returns an
answer from p. ^86. to the end of his Discourse to which he gives this Title
^n^ is Contents, The Roman Church's way of suppressing* Sects compared with
our's. Where I find him, (...) ^87. etc, very bitterly inveighing against the
Roman Inquisition, and spending the most of his Reply upon it. Which
Inquisition, as used in some Catholic Churches, so is not admitted in others;
and which, no way mentioned in the Dr's Principles, or in N. O's
Considerations, I wondered how he brought it into his Answer, or why he spent so
many pages upon it; but at last I considered, it might be much to his purpose,
as a thing which to his Protestant Reader would seem odious, though it be
nothing to N. O's discourse; who presses not the Roman Inquisition but the
Catholic Church in her Councils, requiring Assent to her Definitions,
pronouncing the Dissenters Heretics, and expelling them from her Communion,
and so preserving among the Subjects of this Body the same Faith and Unity, at
least proportionable to the extent of her laws and decrees: of which means of
suppressing Sects and Heresies, or any other that can be effectual, the Dr, in
dissallowing such practice, and leaving every one to the liberty of their own
judgment in the matters most necessary to their salvation, seems destitute.

That, setting the Inquisition aside, the Church of England has as many
reasonable means, and I think many more of convicting dissenters, than they can
pretend to in the Roman Church. But, expecting he should name these means, he
says p. 290.
-- We recommend to the people the virtues of Humility, Obedience, due
submission to their Spiritual Pastors and Governors, and that they ought not
to usurp their ^ffice, and become their own Guides -- Yet we do not exact of
them a blind obedience, etc. Thus he. But, if the Church of England does only
this, and no more, it is a means apparently unsufficient for suppressing
Heresies or Sects. For, men are still left to the liberty of their former
tenants or practices, so long as the contraries are (in his style) only
recommended to them, not required of them; and Counsel is no Power of the Keys.
The Recommending of a due submission to our Spiritual Pastors will not serve
the turn, if this due be not stated, and understood to extend to submission of
judgment, (which the Dr will not admit; and therefore in repeating N. O's words
and professing the like endeavor against Sects performed by Protestants as is
by Catholics, he changes them here, and instead of N. O's Submission of
judgment, pu^s in due submission:) For, some submission well consists with the
liberty of enjoying our own opinions, and corrupting by them the Common Faith.
As a submission to the Church's Rules and Canons in matters in their own nature
indifferent, in matters of Order and D^cency, in necessary Religious
Ceremonies, and ancient Rites of the Christian Church; a submission of judgment
conditional in matters of Faith; viz. in what the Church shall determine
according to the Scripture; a submission of Silence or non-publick
contradicting her Doctrines or Decrees; but this not absolute, but only where
her errors herein are not manifest, or intolerable. [For, if Protestants would
admit an absolute obedience of non-contradiction, it is granted, that this
would preserve the Church's peace and her nondisturbance from Heresies, and
consequently the Schisms that ordinarily follow them. But, in conceding such a
submission, Protestants well see, there could have been no justifiable
Reformation in Luther's time, nor can be hereafter in any other, against such
erroneous doctrines of the former Church]. Again, the teaching them that they
ought not to become their own Guides, what sense soever he will put upon it,
yet if not this, that they ought to submit their judgments to the Doctrines of
their Guides, I mean, as to the Decrees of their General Councils, and ought to
follow their faith, a thing his Principles admit not, it must fall short of
suppressing Heresies or Sects, whilst every one retains his own opinion still,
notwithstanding the contrary doctrine of his Guides.

That his Church exacts of none a blind obedience: if it be not meant a blind,
i.e. an obedience which there is no Reason for (which obedience it is granted,
may never be exacted or exhibited), but signifies, the Church not to require of
her subjects an absolute assent (where all either do, or ought to, know they
owe it, though they perhaps do not yet see the Reason or grounds of those
Truths, wherein they give it) so, any less obedience than this exacted can
never crush Heresies and Sects. We see, the Church of England made her Articles
for establishing consent in judgment and for avoiding diversity of opinions;
Yet these Articles are not proved by her to their Reasons, there where they are
delivered. And S. Austin writ a book De Vtilitate Credendi, i.e, of believing
the Church upon some other grounds, before men saw the Reasons of those things
that were proposed by her to be believed: and relates a Story of those, who
first doing this, yielding their obedience to her proposals, said a Gratias Deo
afterward for their understanding the other, viz. a good reason of the things
she proposed; -- Gratias Deo, Qui expertos doeuit, quam vana and inania de
Ecclesia mendax fama jactaverit; S. Augustine, Epist. 48. and, when we see no
Reason of the thing to be believed being not yet cleared to us, we may see
much, to believe and rely on the judgment of the Church proposing it to be
believed, rather than our own.

Author here has returned in his own defense. In which methinks Mr
Chillingworth has dealt somewhat more plainly and openly; Who, seeing that a
diversity of Opinions, according to such Protestant Principles, must be
allowed; and that all Judge, to decide and end them, or declare amongst these
opinions what is Heresy, must be taken away, besides only the Scriptures; the
clearness also of which Scriptures for one side can hardly be maintained as to
such places thereof, (though touching matters of great moment,) where whole
Nations do understand them in a contrary sense one to another; thought of
another way of preserving perpetually the peace of the Church; in ordering
rather, that diversity of opinions might be no hindrance to unity of Communion;
i.e. that men of all opinions should peaceably live to gether in one external
communion. His words to this purpose are chapter 4.. 39, 40.
-- This is most certain, that to reduce Christians to unity of Communion there
are but two ways that may be conceived probable: the one, by taking away
d^versity of opinions touching matters of Religion: the other, by showing that
the d^versity of opinions, which is among the several Sects of Christians,
ought to be no hinderance to their Unity of Communion. Now the former of these
is not to be h^ped f^r without a miracle, -- that is, unless it could be made
evident to all men that God has appointed some visible Judge of Controversies,
to whose judgment all men are to submit themselves. [What can be made more
evident, than, besides the Scriptures, the Laws, and Practice of the Church in
her General Councils have made this? He goes on.]. What then remains, but that
the other w^y must be taken; and Christians must be taught to set a higher
value upon these high points of faith and obedience wherein they agree, than
upon th^se m^t^ers of less moment, wherein they differ; and understand, that
agreement in those ought to be more effectual to join them in one Communion,
then their diff^rence in other things of less moment to divide them? But here I
pray, why must the matters wherein they differ be of less moment, than some of
those wherein they agree? Or, are there not some points wherein those that are
involved within the General Name of Chri^tians do differ of the highest
consequence and concernment; or of much greater than some others are, wherein
they ac^ord? Since then this is a law, that ought, if in any, to be observed in
all, times, men may consider here of what great consequence some of the ancient
Heresies and differences were: And, in some of t^ose points of greater moment
wherein men agree now, may not they differ hereafter?

happen to be also some error in some Fundamental or Essential (as they use to
style it) to the constitution or being of a Church, which is Heresy in their
notion, surely such Errors ought not to be tolerated among the rest; (for
example, Socinianisme); but suppressed; and, if to be suppressed, how may it be
discerned; or by what Judge is it to be declared such? for, knowing it must
precede suppressing it.

Is it to be known by clear Scripture? because in all such points Scripture is
affirmed clear on their side. So Mr. Chillingworth says, being asked this
Question by his Adversary chapter 2.. 127
. For -- If Scripture (says he) be sufficient to inform us what is the faith,
it must of necessity be also sufficient to teach us what is Heresy: seeing
Heresy is nothing but a manifest deviation from, and an opposition to, the
faith. That which is straight will plainly teach us what is crooked; and one
contrary cannot but manifest the other. Thus he. Now, this is very well; If all
men, that read the Scriptures, were all agreed in the same Opinion. But, in our
endeavoring to discover, what, or on which side is Heresy, the Sense of
Scripture is the very Ball of the contention; and the Heretic, suppose a
Socinian, will say for himself as readily as the Catholic, that the Scripture,
the straight Rule for what he holds, plainly shows him the tenent crooked,
which he opposes. This, I say, were a good Answer, if Mr. Chillingworth will
maintain (as I think he does,) and can justify it, that no points are necessary
or essential in the Christian Religion, but what all Christians (or all, except
a very few) in their reading the Scriptures are agreed in To which purpose
Answ. to Pref.. 26.
in requiring the using men's best endeavor to believe the Scripture in the
true sense, he says also, that -- He hopes many on all sides [I understand him
in all Sects of Christians and Divisions of Opinion] do perform this truly and
sincerely; which they doing, he says -- It is impossible but that they should
believe aright in all things necessary to salvation: Seeming thus to make
Necessaries those points only, wherein all sides, or the many on all sides, are
agreed. But then there can be no Heresies; i.e, contradictions of any Christian
Societies or Parties in points necessary; if all sides be thus agreed in them:
Or, at least, all those differences we have hitherto seen will be no Heresies,
if hitherto in necessaries has been no difference. And so, if any necessary
point, now generally agreed on by Christians, shall happen, hereafter, by any
considerable party to be contested, it must be thenceforth cashiered as a
non-necessary.

Chillingworth elsewhere chapter 6.. 48.
answers a like Question methinks with as little satisfaction: the Question, --
How a Protestant, without any Guide save Scripture, may know he holds no
fundamental error against Scripture? To which he answers -- That we believing
all the Bible, are certain enough, that we believe all that is fundamental; and
so maybe certain also that we hold no Heresy. But, so, all Heretics too will
be no Heretics (suppose a Socinian); for, they believe the Bible to be God's
Word as well as others. But, if he means by the Protestants believing all the
Bible his believing the true sense of it all; what he says is very true that
such may be certain, he holds no Heresy. But, Is the Protestant then certain of
this his believing the true sense of it all? Or, if not; but only he believes
he does so, at least in all necessaries; so may the Heretic too and still
remain an Heretic. Since, then, Heretics also do both urge and on their side
pretend the Scripture clear, here the Question returns, who there is to decide
on which part it is clear?

Is this then to be decided by the Common Sense, or Reason, of Christians? For,
I know not what else can be said; our Lord's Dic Ecclesiae being declined: and
this Common Reason the Dr often appeals to. But this also is common to, and
pretended by, Catholic and Heretic. Shall it be then the Common Reason of the
much major part, or the more learned part of the Christian World? But now we
are fallen upon a Judge beside the Scripture to decide what is Heresy in points
necessary; and, it seems, there is need of such a one. But then, if such Common
Reason may decide Controversies for suppressing Heresy, these are so decided
already against the Protestants, as to many points, wherein the major part of
the world does declare the Scriptures to be against them. For which the
inquisitive may see 3d. Discourse Concerning the Guide in Controversy chap. 8.
formerly referred to. But, suppose here it be said, No: But the Common Reason
of Antiquity shall decide this matter; Yet, since both sides pretend also this
Antiquity, (as Roman Catholics and Protestants do in their Controversies),
will not this again return us to the Common Reason of the major part of the
present Christianity (suppose against a Socinian) to judge; what is the
sentiment of Antiquity in such matter?

Chilling worth and his Disciples seems much to sail in one thing more; viz.
that diversities of Opinion will cross one another in the very Service and Form
of that External Communion wherein he would have them all to be joined, so that
in this Public Service what pleases one will dislike another (for which
reason he says often elsewhere, that, though Protestants have no cause to
depart from the Roman Communion because of her other Corruptions, yet have they
for those in her Communion, a concurrence wherein is exacted of them). Here
therefore at last must not the Communion be brought to this, that all
Christians keeping, as they think fit, several external communions, yet should
preserve amongst themselves one Internal? But then, as for remedying such
quarrels also about the Form, he seems to propose, that in such external
communion no manner of Service or Worship of God should be used, but what all
Christians approved: for, so he requires in the following words -- That it
should be a joint Worship of God after such a way, as all esteem lawful. But,
besides that thus scarce any part of the Church's former Public Service would
remain; and the Church of England's Liturgy would no more stand, than the
Roman: thus the Public Service must continually vary hereafter as any
Christians shall dislike something in it; and then, what all agree in to day,
they will not to morrow, for -- Nunquam futurum est, ut idem omnibus placeat [I
add, especially where a thing is established, modo placeat omnibus] sires velut
in medio positae, singulorum arbitrio relictae fuerint, as Calvin Instit. l. 4.
c. 10.. 31.
. The same proposal or design as Mr Chillingworth, for conserving the Church's
Peace, in the declining of an Ecclesiastical Judge, had also Mr Hales of Eaton
in his Tract of schism. There p. 10. his words are these -- Were Liturgies and
public forms of Service so framed, as that they admitted not of particular and
private fancies, but contained only such things, as in which all Christians do
agree, Schisms on [the variety of] opinion were utterly vanished: for,
consider of all the Liturgies that are and ever have been, and remove from them
whatsoever is scandalous to any party; and leave nothing but what all agree on,
and the evil shall be, that the public Service and Hon^ur of God shall no ways
suffer. Whereas to load our public forms with the private fancies upon which
we differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the worlds end.
And a little before, -- I do not see that, opinionum varietas and opinantium
unitas are (...); or that men of different pinions in Christian Religion may
not hold communion in Sacris, and both go to one Church. And, that you may know
what manner of opinions he includes here, he proceeds -- Why may not I go, if
occasion require, to an Arian Church, so there be no Ariams^e expressed in
their Liturgy. We see what a different complexion this man is of from the
Ancient Church and its Governors: from our Lord's si non audierit Ecclesiam,
sit tibi sicut Ethnious: and S. Paul's -- Haereticum hominem devita: against
whom may be repeated the same as has been against Mr. Chillingworth.

to me, no means effectual for crushing Heresies, or diminishing Sects, but
rather countenancing and increasing them, if the toleration of diversity of
opinions may be thought to do so, I reviewed what the Dr had said in some pages
before p. 267.
concerning the Authority that is still left in the Governors of the Church,
though Infallibility be taken away; to see if this Church Authority might be
there, as to this present matter, any further enforced. There I find p. 267.
mentioned -- An authority of inflicting censures upon offenders, or of
receiving into and excluding out of the Communion of the Church. And -- That a
Christian Society cannot be preserved in its purity and peace without it. But
looking further, whether this Authority was extended to excluding from her
Communion persons dissenting in their opinions from the received doctrines of
such Church in matters of Faith; which only serves the turn for curing Heresies
and Sects, of this I sind nothing, but only this Power couched in these general
terms -- To receive into and exclude out of the Church such-persons, which,
according to the Law of a Christian Society, are fit to be taken in or shut out.

Of making Rules and Canons about matters of order and decency in the Church:
Not merely in the necessary circumstances of time and place, and such things,
the contrary to which inply a natural indecency; but in continuing and
establishing those ancient Rites of the Christian Church, which were practiced
in the early times of Christianity, and are in themselves of an indifferent
nature. But, when these Sects deny those things to be of an indifferent nature
which this Church declares such, as he knows the Sects in England ordinarily
do, may the Church here lawfully require their assent and acknowledgment that
they are of an indifferent nature, and so their practice of them, upon penalty,
if nonconforming, of ejecting them out of her Communion? Nothing less than
which can purge her communion of such Sects, and preserve her in purity,
Uniformity, and peace? I do not find him adventuring thus far, as to tell us,
whether the Church may require assent or submission of judgment (which must
necessarily precede that of practice) from those persuaded that the matter, by
the Church declared indifferent, is not so; and may upon the disobedient
inflict her censures; when perhaps she, (as fallible) not they, is mistaken in
it: and, it seems contrary to his Principles. But here he seems to tread
suspensopede, and manage the Church's Authority somewhat timorously; as we may
see by those words of his that follow -- that in such matters required by a
lawful authority there is an advantage on the side of authority [I understand
him, that authority has the advantage for challenging obedience] against a
conscience scrupulous [or doubting; but what for a conscience not doubting but
fully persuaded otherwise? As men may be free from doubting in a thing, whereof
they are not certain] which [authority] ought to overrule the practice of such
who are the members of that Church. overruled the Practice; but what says he
of such Authority its overruling the Judgment? Which standing contrary, it is
certain none may practice, though that which is right, against their judgment.
This wary Conclusion in the 2d Proposition concerning Church Authority is
somewhat like to those general words in the first -- A power of excluding out of
the Church such persons, as are fit to be shut out according to the laws of a
Christian Society. [I suppose he means such laws as are, or else ought to be,
in a Christian Society. Of which ought to be who must judge?]

of proposing matters of faith, and directing men in Religion: directing
several ways; by particular instruction of doubtful persons to whom the help of
their Guides, he says, is the most ready and useful: by a public way of
instructing [viz. in Sermons]: by the representative Clergy meeting together to
reform any abuses in practice, or errors in doctrine; and, when a more General
consent cannot be obtained, to publish and declare what those errors are; and
to do as much as in them lies to reform them, viz. by requiring a consent to
such propositions as are agreed upon for that end, of th^se who are to enjoy
the public offices of teaching and instructing others. Not to the end that all
those propositions should be believed as Articles of Faith; but because no
Reformation can be effected, if persons may be allowed to preach and officiate
in the Church in a way contrary to the design of such a Reformation. Here then
we have an Authority allowed to propose matters of faith [which proposal any
Heresy or Sect can well comply with]: to instruct doubtful persons [but in
points necessary, wherein Scriptures are clear according to him, no such doub^
needs to be]: in which doubting the help of their Guides is said to be the most
ready and useful [but, for some reason or other, this Author declines to say,
Necessary]: an Authority of Synods to declare what errors there are in
doctrine, or abuses in practice, and [in general he saith] to do as much, as in
them lies, to reform them by requiring a consent of its Clergy to such
propositions as the Synod agrees upon.

errors in doctrine, against which this Church declares, may not yet
pea^^ably enjoy her Communion. He says; these ^ynods as much as in them lies
may reform such errors; but he says (...) this lies in their power to require
any one to assent to the contrary truths upon penalty of being expelled from
this Church's communion: By which means only this Church can be purged and
cured of the mixture of Sects and Heresies, and be preserved in its purity and
peace and consent of judgment in matters of Religion: which the Title prefixed
says is the design of the Church of England's 39. Articles. I say, Whereas the
Church has no way for her preservation in unity of says and worship, but that
of our Lord's, and his Apostle's, post unam aut alteram correptionem to shut
such out of her Communion, the Read er may observe, here is no word of this; I
do not say of shutting any at all out of the Church's Communion (this he allows
in his first Proposition); but not shutting any out on this account, viz. their
dissent and nonconformity to the Church's Articles of Faith and Religion.

as for consent said to be required from the Clergy to such propositions as
such Synods shall agree upon, supposing here he means by this Consent, a
profession of the belief of the truth of them, 1. This consent is required of
the Clergy only hypothetically, if they desire to officiate in the Ministry;
not absolutely, that they may enjoy her Communion: Nor will this remedy any
Sect or Heresy as to such, who for this cause decline the Ministry. 2ly. By the
Church's requiring their consent he seems not to mean an assent to the truth of
such Articles, but either with Mr Chillingworth Pref., 39.
a consent to them or to the doctrine of this Church that who believes and
lives according to them undoubtedly shall be saved, and -- that there is no
error in them which may necessitate or warrant any man to disturb the peace or
renounce the communion of this Church; both which fall short of requiring an
assent to the truth of these Articles, or of this doctrine: Or, with Bishop
Bramhal, and himself Ration. Account p. 55. a Consent for peace sake not to
oppose them; for so Dr Stillingfleet quotes the Bishop there saying Reply to
Chalcedon p. 264.
-- We do not oblige any man to believe, but only not to contradict them. And
so the Qualification the Dr adds in the words following here seems to explain
this Clergy Consent: -- Not, says he, to the end that all those propositions
should be believed as Articles of Faith; but that none might preach or
officiate in a way contrary to the design of the Reformation, [i.e. as I
understand him, preach against any of the reformed doctrines]. Not that all
th^se propositions (says he) should be believed as Articles of Faith. Very
perplexed this. For I ask, Are not some of these Articles at least then
required by the Church of England to be believed as Articles of Faith?
Otherwise the English Clergy, as to the whole Body of Christian Faith, is left
to their liberty to disbelieve any part thereof. And, if some be required to be
so believed; yet, so long as no distinction at all is made, any of the Clergy
may leave out of his Faith which Articles he pleases. For example: one
inclined to Socinianisme, leave out that of God the Son's Consubstantiality
with God the Father. But, next, supposing the belief of some Articles expressly
and distinctly required of this Clergy; yet then, what if this Church, as being
fallible, should be mistaken in some of them? But now, considering the Clergy's
consent not required for belief, but on the latter account; viz. that none of
them should teach the people contrary to the Church's Reformation; Yet here
again, since this Church may possibly be faulty in something it reforms, is
this just to stop the mouths of all Gods Ministry in this Church, that none of
them may speak against it? If it be, why is not the same thing as lawful to the
Church of Rome, as that of England? And then, if her Clergy also had been
obliged to observe this, Luther and other Reformers being part of this Clergy,
how could there lawfully have been a Reformation? and why is the modern
practice of the Roman Church in this matter declaimed-against by Protestants,
as the highest Tyranny? as also that of the Church of England is by the
Presbyterians. These perplexities seem to attend the Dr's qualification: But,
as has been said before, whatever consent may be exacted of the Clergy, there
is still left to Heresies and Sects the liberty of this Church's Communion
though not of its Ministry, for any Bar that the Dr has put in here to
hinder it. And so I leave these things here, briefly represented, to the
further Consideration of the Dr, and his Protestant Reader.

THE SECOND PART.
Annotations on Dr Stillingfleet's Answer to N.O's Considerations of his
Principles.
HAving in the former Discourse reviewed the Considerations, and made some
Necessary Reflections on the Drs to me seeming-unsatisfactory Answers, as to
several principal matters urged therein against his Principles, I see not why I
might not take the same liberty, as himself has used toward N.O, to let pass
the rest of his Discourse unreplied-to; especially where it digresseth to many
other by-matters, and neither vindicates his Principles, nor refutes the
Considerations. But, lest that in his Book, which is little pertinent to the
answering of N.O's Discourse, yet be said to be much to the defense of the
Protestant Cause; and such things in it to have most weight, whatever I shall
have omitted, I have drawn up some Annotations upon his whole Book; following
him, whither his matter leads me: Though these Animadversions many times be
very compendious, as supposing an intelligent Reader, and endeavoring to avoid
tediousness in Recapitulations, self-justifications, complaints on the
Adversary, and the like; with which, in multiplied Replies after a Controversy
formerly agitated to and fro, the Reader (as one much more unconcerned in the
Writer's reputation, than themselves are) uses to be much afflicted,
confounded, and tired out; for which cause Writings of this nature are soon
laid aside; and therefore I may be excused if I bestow the less pains, where I
see it likely to be cast away.

For the matters in him which I think fit to speak to; in Epitomizing or
summoning up in brief what he says, the Reader, or perhaps himself, would
complain I wronged his sense; to transcribe every thing at length I have not
the leisure; nor (had I this) a purse well to beat the charge of the
Impression: So, mentioning some words only, and noting the page, I leave the
Reader rather to peruse it in his own Discourse uncontracted and undivided from
the rest; and with all the vigor that the Context and other circumstantials
may afford it; well knowing, that who desires rightly to understand a
Controversy must inform himself what the Disputants say, not in one another's,
but their own, writings: and also chieflly intending these Remarks for such,
who have, and value, his Book: and, where I speak to any passage that which may
seem satisfactory, I desire the judicious Reader to apply it himself to the
consequents, or to the like matter recurring in other places, without my
further trouble herein. Meanwhile I offer my Prayers for him to our Good Lord,
that he would illuminate and direct him, through the many great Controversies
which are now agitated in Christendom concerning the sense of the Holy
Scriptures, in the safest way to his salvation: whether this be, from the
Church's Fallibility in Necessaries, every Christian's liberty to judge and
discern Truth for himself; or, from the Church's In fallibility in Necessaries,
every Christian's duty to obey and learn the Truth, where disputed, from Her:
the main Contest between us. I likewise humbly beseech his Heavenly Majesty to
protect his Truth, and the maintainers of it, whoever they be: and, if in any
thing here I have offended (though unwillingly) against it, to discover at
least to the pious Reader my errors; that, wherein deceived my self, I may not
also deceive others.

The Figure enclosed in the following Discourse between Parentheses thus () is
to be numbered from the bottom of the page.

Annotations on Dr Stillingfleets first Section.
Dr St's Answ. to Consid. p. 75. l. 13. I pass by therefore all those
unhandsome Reflections, etc.
unhandsome restections, if any such there be in N.O's Preface, it is a
commendable charity in the Dr to pass by, and not exaggerate: But, two things
in the same Preface, that seem very considerable, I wonder he passes by also
and speaks not to. The one contained in these words, p. 1. That he accuses the
whole Catholic Church of God both Western and Eastern (for, the same
practices, as to several of his Idolatries, are in both) for so many ages
before Luthers time, of Idolatry; and this Idolatry as gross as that of the
Heathens. See Romans Idol. p. 69, 134. etc. 142, 159, 861.
Which accusation, surely, must unchurch this great Body, and quite divorce
this Adulteress from Christ. For we cannot think but the Dr will maintain the
teaching so manifold an Idolatry in this Church [viz. Teaching the lawfulness
of adoring the Host, of Invocating Saints, of Worshipping Images] to be a
Fundamental Error. Thus N. O there. Now, of this Church Catholic in every age
we say in our Creed -- Credo Vnam Sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam.
But, how is it Sancta (as Archbishop Lawd said concerning Heresy. 21. n. 5.
) if it may fall into, and also teach, so gross and so manifold an Idolatry? as
gross (says this Author) as the Idolatry taught and practiced by the Heathen:
which Idolatry, charged by him on the Church of Rome, must needs be a mortal
sin, and so, unacknowledged, or unrepented of, not only hazard, but destroy,
salvation: and therefore must the teaching also of the lawfulness of such a
practice by any Church, so expressly contrary to the Divine Command, be a
fundamental error; if an error that excludes from salvation may be called so.

I.W. Dr Stilling. against Dr Still.
denying, that the teaching of the Lawfulness, (or also the Duty), of such an
Idolatry as is practiced in the Roman Church is a Fundamental Error, or such
as, held and practiced without any retractation, absolutely excludes from
salvation. So he says there p. 20. -- That some kind of Idolatry is consistent
with the being of a Church. And -- That kind only, which implies more Gods than
one, does unchurch a people. And so p. 22. -- That all sorts of Idolatry do not
necessarily destroy the essentials of a Church; -- Although (says he p. 21.)
That of the Roman Church makes the salvation of persons in her Communion
extremely hazardous. Thus he. Now, by any Society that professes Christianity
its being unchurched, or wanting the being or essentials of a Church, I
suppose, he means its ceasing to be any longer a true member of the Catholic
Church which is mentioned in our Creed.

salvation and the Being of a Church, let us first see, how he represents this
inferior sort of Idolatry, as he calls it here, p. 20.
(opposed to a grosser, which does unchurch men), which is taught and practiced
in the Church of Rome, and which his charity thinks hinders it not from having
still all the essentials of a true Church. In his Roman Idol. p. 69. speaking
there of the Roman Idolatry in Image Worship he says -- It seems much more
reasonable for me to worship God by prostrating my self to the Sun or any of
the Heavenly bodies, nay to an Ant or a Fly, than to a picture or an Image: For
in them I see great evidences of the power and wisdom and goodness of God,
which may suggest venerable apprehensions of God to my mind; whereas these can
have nothing worthy admiration, unless it be the skill of the painter or
Artificer. And I cannot for my heart understand, why I may not as well, nay
better burn Incense, and say my prayers to the Sun, having an intention only to
honor the true God by it, as to do both these to an Image. And afterward p. 70.
-- I should have been tempted to have laughed at their folly and despised
their weakness, who should plead for the worship of God in or by a dull and
rude Image, and condemn me for honoring God in the most noble parts of the
Creation. Where, does not he make the Heathens Idolatry, in their prostrating
themselves, saying their prayers, and burning incense to the Sun (which surely
is a mortal sin in them, though meanwhile they held this fundamental truth that
the honor which is due only to God is not to be given to a mere Creature) more
rational and more excusable than the Roman's committing the same Idolatry to an
Image?

Roman Idolatry in their Adoration of the Host Ibid. p. 134. he compares it
with the Manichees adoration of the Sun, and makes this the worse of the two --
If (says he) a mistake in this case will excuse them, it would excuse the
grossest Idolatry in the world. -- Let us consider two persons equally
persuaded [one] that the Sun is now the tabernacle of Christ, and that he is
really present there -- he being so often in Scripture called the true light,
Jo. 1.8.9. and another, that he is really present by Transubstantiation in the
Sacrament; I would fain understand why the one should not be as free from
Idolatry, as the other. Says he not here again, That, if their mistake [i.e.
of Christ's Corporal Presence in the Eucharist] will excuse the Idolatry of the
Roman Church, it will as much excuse the grossest Idolatry in the world? and,
that therefore this Roman Idolatry is without all excuse? And p. 136. he makes
-- the worshipping false Gods, supposing them to be true, as venial a fault, as
worshipping that for the true God which is not so [supposed by him the Roman
case in Adoration of the Hoast]. Now here, in his Answer to Mr. I.W. p. 24. he
says -- When many false Gods are joined with the true in the same worship, the
true God is rejected: and that this cannot consist with the essentials of a
true Church. I subsume, then, neither can the crime of the Roman Church
equalling it.

Roman Idolatry in the Worship and Invocation of Saints, thus he in Romans Idol.
p. 159. -- Upon the same account that the Heathen did give divine honor to
their inferior Deities, those in the Roman Church do so to Angels and Saints.
For the Heathens made a difference in their sacrifices to the supreme God; and
their inferior Deities and their Heroes: so that if the putting any difference
in the way of Religious Worship does excuse the one, it must do the other also.
Did the Heathen use solemn Ceremonies of making any capable of Divine Worship?
So does the Roman Church. Did they set up their Images in public places of
Worship and there kneel before them, and invocate those represented by them? so
does the Roman Church. Did they consecrate Temples and erect Altars to them,
and keep Festivals and burn incense before them? so does the Roman Church.
Lastly did they offer up sacrifices in those temples to the honor of their
lesser Deities and Heroes? So does the Roman Church. And p. 161. he says -- It
is evident that the Roman Church has reserved no part of Divine worship
peculiar to God himself any more than the Heathen did. And -- That there can be
no material difference, that the Heathen called those they worshipped Gods, but
they do not so in the Roman Church. I say then: Are not all the complaints and
aggravations, made in Scripture of the Heathens Idolatry, as applicable to the
Roman: and they both, as to this Crime, at the same distance from Salvation or
the Divine Mercy: Unless the Roman be at a greater, from having so much more
light? Thus then is the Roman Idolatry, in that Discourse, frequently
represented by Him.

Charity, in maintaining in his Answer to Mr. J. W. such a Church, as in all
these Idolatries equals the heathens, yet to retain still all the essentials of
a true Church; and such Opinions and Practices; without any retractation of
their error, or reforming their fault, to hazard only, and not destroy, men's
Salvation? And must not this his Charity be enlarged further, to the Heathens
also; that they in worshipping and sacrificing to their false Gods and Heroes,
and the Manicheans in worshipping the Sun, offended nothing in this matter
against any essential of Gods true Religion; nor by such a worship forfeited
their salvation? Whilst they also, as well as the Church of Rome, in general
make profession of this fundamental point in Religion; viz. that the Honor,
which is due only to God is not to be given to a mere Creature; and, that, if
given to any Creature, it is Idolatry.

If those of the Roman Church can prove that all sorts of Idolatry do
necessarily destroy the essentials of a Church, the consequence is, we must
have less charity for them than we had before; and such a concession from us
[that they do not] does not show their guilt to be less, but only our charity
to be greater; It may be observed, that N. O. here charged him not of making
the Church of Rome only but the whole Catholic Church, and both the Western
and Eastern, as is showed in the 3d Discourse touching the Guide in Controversy
chapter 8. guilty of such an Idolatry: which if so, and this Idolatry he imputes
should be affirmed by him a fundamental error or mis-practice, then he must,
by his rendering the Church Catholic guilty thereof, unchurch It also for many
ages; and so deny an Article of our Creed. From whence it appears, that he, how
far soever inclined by charity, yet is also upon necessity forced, in his
fastening such an Idolatry on the Roman Church, as extends also to the
Catholic: forced, I say, (in defense of his Creed) to maintain such species of
Idolatry not to unchurch a Body, or diminish any of the Essentials of a Church;
nor to destroy, but only to hazard, salvation; lest he should destroy salvation
in the Catholic Church, and also unchurch It for several Ages. Now (as the
Archbishop p. 141.) -- All Divines Ancient and Modern, Romanists and Reformers,
agree in this, that the whole Militant Church of Christ [i.e. in any age; and
that as to the Religion professed in it] cannot fall away into a General
Apostasy. And so this, if proved against him by Catholics, that such Idolatry
does unchurch any Society that teaches and practices it, must constrain him to
free the Roman Church of such a charge, and so to confess his own arguments
whatever brought to such a purpose to be faulty and unconclusive. And, indeed,
the favor here the Church of Rome, notwithstanding such heavy charges as these
upon her, receives from Protestants, of being affirmed still a true Church,
seems to be on this account, because else they should miss a Catholic Church
for diverse ages before Luther; and derive the succession of their Clergy from a
Body already unchurched. Thus, we see what obligation the Church of Rome has
to his Charity, in maintaining some sorts of Idolatry to consist with a true
Church: Where indeed, it appears both the Catholick's interest to prove the
Idolatry imputed to it not consistent with the being of a true Church; whereby
they free the Roman Church from any such Idolatry; and the Dr's interest, to
show such Idolatry no fundamental error or miscarriage, so to retain still the
Roman Church a true Church, viz. That so also the Catholic of some ages, and
the present also, that is beside the Protestant Churches, may be so.

Reasons he brings for justifying such his Assertion. In that Answer to J. W.
p. 30. he says -- That the very being of a Church does suppose the necessity
of what is required to be believed in order to salvation: [i.e. that all things
necessary to salvation are believed in it; which is granted]. 2ly says -- That
whatever Church ownes those things which are antecedently necessary to the
being of a Church cannot so long cease to be a true Church. Which also is
granted: But what are these things that are necessary to the being of a Church?
For explaining this p. 31. he says -- That these Articles are such as have the
testimony of the whole Christian world of all ages: [and so of the Roman
Church]. Again Ibid. -- That nothing ought to be owned as necessary to
salvation by Christian Societies, but such things which by all those Societies
are acknowledged antecedently necessary to the being of the Catholic Church.
Where, if the belief of nothing is to be accounted necessary to salvation, or
to the being of the Church Catholic, but what has the testimony and
approbation of the whole Christian world of all ages; or, what by all Christian
Societies is acknowledged necessary to such a being, it seems to me to follow,
that all Christian Societies must be true Churches or true members of the
Catholic; and so * that none are or can be Heretical; since all Heretical
Churches are non-Catholick: (See Archbishop Lawd p. 141.): and, * that no such
point can be essential to such Being, wherein any Christian Society has
dissented from the rest; and so, though this dissent be in some Heresy, yet
neither will this render any such Church not to be Catholic still; which it
remains to be by virtue of those points that have also its consenting with all
the rest; (for, it seems, those points only wherein it consents with the rest
constitute the Church Catholic:) and so the Arian, Nestorian, Pelagian, are
true Churches, and parts of the Catholic.

essentials to the being of a true Church? and, Why the contrary to what the
Church of Rome teaches and practices in the matter of Idolatry, as we see our
Author has described it before, is not one of them? To this purpose therefore
he says p. 32. -- That the ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church are the best
measure of those things which were believed to be necessary to salvation [or to
the being of a true Church]: and p. 28. he says -- The main fundamental points
of doctrine are contained in the Apostles Creed: and p. 33. -- When we enquire
into the essentials of a Church, we think it not necessary to go any farther
than the doctrinal points of faith; the reason is because Baptism adn its men
into the Church upon the profession of the true faith in the Father Son and
Holy Ghost: and whatever is sufficient to make a member of the Church, that is
in it self sufficient, being embraced, to make a Church. Thus he. From whence
he collects, that the Roman Church's teaching some kind of Idolatry that
destroys no Article of the Creed professed in Baptism, and so no essential of
the true Church, cannot therefore render it no true Church.

any kind of Idolatry whatever, that it is not against any Article of the
Creed; which speaks only of matters of Belief, not Worship? Yet he grants that
some kind of Idolatry such as this, teaching people to join false Gods with
the true in the same worship is a a fundamental error, p. 24.
and destroying the being of a true Church. Now, If he says this is, by a
clear consequence, against the Creed; must he not say the same of the Roman
Idolatry in adoring the Eucharistical Bread? of which he affirms p. 136. in the
words forecited -- That the worshipping false Gods supposing them to be true is
as venial a fault, as worshipping that for the true God which is not so: [as he
says the Roman Church doth]. Again; will not this also be an error against
the Creed, if any acknowledging one Supreme God, yet reserve no part of Divine
Worship as peculiar to him which they do not teach may be lawfully given to a
mere Creature, which thing he charge also on the Roman Idolatry Romans Idol. p.
161.
in these words -- It is evident they [of the Church of Rome in those Honors
which they teach may be given to Saints and Angels] have reserved no part of
Divine Worship peculiar to God himself, any more than the Heathen did. Here is
a true Church then, without retaining any peculiar worship in it, that is given
to the true God.

Rome to trespass against no Article of the Creed, Can no Doctrine render a
Society no true Church (by no true Church I mean, and so, I suppose, does he,
no true part or member of the Church Catholic, though it should be still a
Church professing Christianity) save only such? The Creed speaks not of matters
belonging to Gods Worship, nor of the Ten Commandments, the First and Second
of which prohibit Idolatry: Yet is the Worshipping of God as essential to a
true Church, as Believing in Him; and the observance of the Tenn Commandments
as necessary to Salvation, as the belief of the matter contained in the Creed;
and Teaching the contrary to them, by any Society, (as for example, to teach it
lawful to commit Murders or Adultery; or Theft) as destructive to the essence
or being of a true Church: and the Dr in his 30th Principle denies, Errors in
Opinion to be more dangerous to men's Souls, than a Vicious life is. Neither are
any in Baptism admitted into the Church simply upon professing of the Creed,
(pressed by the Dr Stillingfl. against Stillingfl. p. 33.
as if nothing else were necessary) but also on the promise of yielding
obedience to God's Commandments. No Heretical Church is any true member of the
Catholic; And would not such doctrines teaching contrary to the 10.
Commandments be great Heresies? as we know, Denying the lawfulness of Marriage
has been anciently condemned as such? And then, will not the Idolatry taught
in the Roman Church be such an Heresy; which expressly opposes (as he will
have it) the Second Commandment? Of which he says Rom Idol. p. 59. -- It
cannot enter into my mind how, God should have forbidden the worship of Images
by more express and emphatical words than he has done in it. Which leaves the
Roman Church void of any excuse of involuntary ignorance, to free her herein
from a mortal sin. The Catholic Church, and all the parts of it are believed
in our Creed to be Holy, as well as Orthodoxe, and the one to be of its
Essence, distinguishing it from other Christian Societies, as well as the
other: To be Holy, at least so far, as to teach the lawfulness of no Mortal
Sin, such as unrepented of destroys Salvation. And, whether the Roman
Idolatry, as he has described it before, contrary to the express words and
sense of the Second Commandment, and no more excusable by any involuntary
ignorance than the Heathens, can be any thing less, I leave to his better
consideration; And this, for his recalling his Charge, upon it, of so great a
Guilt; since, he cannot, his Assertion of its being a true Church. Whilst I
conclude with Mr. Thorndike's Admonition Justweigh. oh. 2. p. 11.
to those Protestants, who charge the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists
Idolaters -- Let not them (says he) lead the people by the nose to believe
that they can prove their supposition, when they cannot; and then expect that
it be maintained by them, that own the Church of Rome for a true Church; and
therefore, that must contradict thomselves if they maintain it, [i.e. their
supposition of Papists being Idolaters].

p. 31. and 23
between the Essentials of a Church, and the Integrity or soundness of it; and
saying -- That a man is a true man, though he have the plague upon him. To this
I answer: 1st. That, if the plague be mortal, the man must necessarily cease
thereby to be a man. And 2ly. That, whatever may be required to the integrity
or soundness of a Church, right Doctrines in Practicals are as necessary to its
essence, as in Speculatives; if Mortal Sin exclude from salvation, as well as
an erroneous Faith. This of N. O's charging him in his Preface -- For accusing
the whole Catholic Church of God, both Western and Eastern (for, the same
practices, as to several of his Idolatries, are in both) for so many Ages
before Luther's time of Idolatry, and this Idolatry as gross as that of
Heathens: and for his thus unchurching this great Body, and quite divorcing
this Adulteress from Christ. From which charge that which he has said in his
Answer to I. W. seems no way to free him.

Preface p. 6.
which he has passed by and said nothing to, is this: That Mr. Chilling-worth,
See chapter 4.. 18.
and, since him, several Divines of the Church of England, (and among these Dr
St.) in their denying Superior Councils to have the just Authority of obliging
their Subjects to the yielding of Assent to their Declarations, are constrained
also to disclaim such a Submission of Assent to the Articles of Religion, and
Book of Common Prayer passed in the National Synods of the Church of England;
Yet which Submission of Assent this Church has formerly challenged in her
Canons; and severely, even with Ecclesiastical Death, punished the Refusers
until they should repent (not their external disobedience or contradiction,
but) their wicked error: The 39. Articles being declared in the same 5th Canon
-- To have been by this Church agreed upon for the avoiding Diversities of
Opinions, and the establishing of Consent touching true Religion. To which I
add; that Consent touching true Religion is Consent, surely, touching matters
of Faith: and again; that establishing of Consent is to be understood, amongst
all the Members of the said Church, (all whom it concerns to be united and
established in the true Religion), as well as amongst the Clergy. Therefore the
Style of the two Canons runs generally: Whosoever shall hereafter affirm the
Articles etc, in any thing erroneous: And the excommunicating of those, who
will not abjure their holding Popery or Socinianisme (see Synod 1640. Can. 3.
and 4.) is not of the Clergy, but any whatever. [Which may be confirmed also by
the practice of the Synods of other Reformed Churches abroad proceeding to the
excommunication of Dissenters from their Doctrine. To this purpose in the
Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France the 31. Article of
the 5th Chapter Du Consistoire runs thus -- Si un ou plusieurs etc. If any one
or more of the people shall raise any debate, to the breach of the Church's
Unity, concerning any point of Doctrine, the Form of the Catechism, Sacraments,
Public Service etc. [if matters cannot be otherwise composed, in the last
place] a National Synod is to be assembled, which shall give them an hearing
with all holy liberty; and in it shall be made a full and final Resolution by
the Word of God, to which resolution, if they refuse to acquiesce in every
particular point, and with an express disavowing their errors recorded [now
surely this disavowing their errors is assenting to the contrary truths] they
shall be cut off from the Church. Here then is required a punctual assent to
what the sentence of the Synod, not the persons convented, shall judge to be
the sense of God's Word, as it is also there cautioned before; sans que la
decision en appartienne a autrez qu' au Synod. And the same course is taken
against the Remonstrants by the Synod of Dort. See Acta Synod. Dordrecht. Sess.
138. -- Synodus haec Dordrechtana, pro authoritate, quam ex Dei verbo in omnia
Ecclesiarum suarum membra obtinet, in Christi nomine injungit omnibus and
singulis in Foederato Belgio Ecclesiarum Pastoribus etc, ut hanc sacram
veritatis salutaris doctrinam [viz. that delivered in the 91. Articles
concerning the five points in controversy] sinceram and inviolatam conservent,
illam populo and juventuti fideliter proponant, and explicent etc. [which
surely includes the requiring their assent to, and belief of, thesh Articles];
excommunicating the disobedient -- donec per seriam resipiscentiam, dictis,
factis, studiis contrariis comprobatam, Ecclesia satisfaciant, atque ad ejus
communionem recipiantur. This I have added, to show the same proceedings of
other foreign Synods of the Reformed with these of England. To which now to
return] Either in the forementioned expressions these English National Synods
do excommunicate all those, whoever affirm, any thing in the former
Common Prayer Book to be repugnant to the Scriptures, (as all those must do,
who affirm, the imposing, something there to be done or used in God's worship
which he has not commanded, to be a thing repugnant to the Scriptures) or who
do affirm any thing in the 39 Articles to be erroneous; and then, what a number
of persons are there at this present in this Kingdom of England that are
excommunicated by the Church of England? Or, if no consent to her Articles is
required in general of all her Subjects, what an indulgence is here for variety
of Sects, every one being left in matters touching true Religion to Liberty of
Opinion? Yet, for the avoiding of which, this Church says, she composed these
Articles. This of the Doctors Passings-by in the Preface.

Page 76. l. 3. The Controversy in short is this; Whether Protestants who
reject the Roman Church's Authority and Infallibility, can have any sufficient
Foundation to build their faith upon? -- There is no such Question proposed by
N. O. And, if there had, it would have been proposed on this manner, in order
especially to the Doctors 13th and 15th Principles; Whether a Protestant, in
refusing the submission of his judgment to the Authority or Infallibility of
the Catholic Church in her Councils, can have, in several Articles of
Necessary Faith, wherein the sense of Scriptures is controverted, as sure a
foundation of his Faith, as he who submits his judgment to the foresaid
Authority, or also Infallibility?

Ibid. l, 11. Those of the Church of Rome charge us; That we can have no
certainty of our faith as Christians without their Infallibility. The Certainty
pretended by this Author in his Principles, and opposed by N. O. is such a
Certainty, from the Clearness of the Sense of Scriptures in all points of
necessary Faith to every person, as that no person whatsoever, what uses his
best endeavor (I suppose he means such endeavor as consists with his
Vocation), to understand them, can mistake therein. And this is denied by
Catholics, and sufficiently confuted by Experience.

Ib. l. (9.) The occasion was my Adversaries calling for Grounds and
Principles, etc. This account that follows nor concerning N. O; and, those
worthy Persons, whom the Doctor opposes, being much better able to return an
answer for themselves, if perhaps they think this worth their pains, I shall
pass on to p. 79.

Annotations on 2. Of the Notion of Infallibility.
PAge 79. l. ult. Sometimes they apply Infallibility to the Object that is
believed. And has not our Author used this language of an Objective
Infallibility himself in his 20th Principle, where he says -- Assent does not
depend upon the objective infallibility of any thing without us? Whereby it
appears, himself has a share in the Jargon. And what thinks he of that of his
Archbishop Lawd? p. 125.
-- We must distinguish of Infallibility. For first a thing may be presented as
an infallible object of belief; when it is true and remains so, etc. Does not
this make the Archbishop also one of the Jugglers he talks of?

P. 80. l. (10.) Infallible is that which cannot be deceived, Now, if no one
will say, that a Proposition cannot be deceived, it is absurd to say; That it
is infallibly true. Infallible is that which cannot be deceived. I add, or, as
applied to things, is that, wherein we cannot be deceived: and so may
Propositions be infallible. And is it then such a great absurdity to say; This
proposition, Homo est an^mal, is infallibly true? Does not himself say: the
Scriptures are writings infallible? See his Princ. 12. And is not this, ^re
infallibly true?

P. 84. l. ult. And being deceived -- In these two or three leaves the Dr has
been ^a^ing and fixing (as he says) the Notion of Infallibility (where leaving
the study of his notions to the under^tanding Reader) I shall only add these
notes after it, (though the same has been said already by N. O. and not taken
notice of,) if they may serve to remedy any of his scruples and difficulties
found herein.

Object of his Faith, and that whereon it formally relies and finally rests,
Divine Revelation, or God's own Word. Which Word of God is most absolutely
infallible: and so to which as infallible (after whatever manner declared to
him) the believer may most firmly adhere.

Church-Infallibility as assisted by the Holy Ghost, and the Canon of
Scripture, both here believed infallible), the Believer is, or may be,
antecedently, as to these, sufficiently assured from the Tradition thus
commonly discribed, viz. the Testimony of a multitude in all ages of
illustrious Persons qualified with the many Motives of Credibility, their
Wisdom, Sanctity, Martyrdomes, their being honored with Miracles, relating
things contrary to carnal appetites and their secular-interests, unanimous
consent in so many ages etc, which Tradition carries a sufficient self-evidence
in it: And that any further external and rational evidence of, or introductive
to, his faith than that Certainty, whatever it be styled, which this Tradition
affords, no Christian needs to have, or also can have antecedently to all the
Articles of his Faith, unless God to attest them should send a Voice from
Heaven, or Miracles; and these so, as to be seen by every particular person.
For, else, Tradition also must witness these Miracles to others. As likewise in
the Apostle's days it is most credible, that the major part believed upon
Tradition, without seeing Miracles. As for the Certainty which such a Tradition
yields us, if it be urged, that it is not such, as the Christian Faith
necessarily requires for the suffering all manner of deaths and Martyrdomes in
attestation of the truth thereof, namely an assurance or certainty cui non
potest subesse falsum, as this is taken in the most rigid sense; we may here
consider, that neither such would our certainty be, if we all had it, like to
that of S. Thomas [quia vidisti credidisti], and believed only that which we
first saw with our eyes. For, the Certainty of our Senses (even when all things
naturally required to a true sensation are present, and where no Divine
Revelation discovers to us their mis-apprehension or mis-arguing collection, as
it has in the Angles their coming to Sodom) is not such, cui non potest
subesse falsum, if taken in the highest sense. For, if not by the ordinary
power of Angels (God's permission supposed), yet by the supernatural effects of
the Divine Power all the senses of the whole world at once possibly may be
deceived, either by thinking they see those colors, or other proper object of
them which they do not; or, by collecting from these truly seen, something to be
joined with, or the subject of, them, that is not so. As the men of Sodom were,
and all the world might have been, deceived in the sight of the truly- Angels
their appearing as Men in their entering Sodom. Since then none desires or needs
a greater evidence of his faith, for example, concerning our Lord crucified, or
risen again, than Sense may afford us, or S. Thomas by his Sense had,
consequently must we not say, either that an evidence cui potest subesse
falsum, as this is taken in the strictest sense, is abundantly sufficient for a
ground or Reason of faith; Or, that a ground of faith cui non potest subesse
falsum ought not to be taken in any higher notion than it is verifiable of our
Senses? And such a Ground is the Tradition we speak of; a ground cui non potest
subesse falsum, considering the Nature of Man; which Nature in such a Tradition
improved with such circumstances cannot have the least inclination or
inducement to deliver or propagate to posterity so general an Untruth.

infallible assent is said, in a Divine Faith, to be yielded to Divine
Revelation or Gods word, as well by Protestants, as Catholics; See Archbishop
Lawd p. 360. where he says -- That A. C. concludes well; that an infallible
certainty is necessary for that one faith which is necessary to salvation. And
of that [faith, says he] amost infallible certainty we have already in the
Scripture, the Creeds etc: And again see p. 330. where he says -- I believe
the entire Scripture infallibly, and by a Divine infallibility am sure of my
object: and below -- that he is infallibly assured of his Creed. So that, if
hence any difficulties press the Catholics in the Resolution of Faith, how
they come to yield an infallible assent thereto, the same do the Protestants.
Now by such infallible assent, asserted by both, I say, may either be meant,

self-evident testimony of a thing past, as, of that which our Lord and his
Apostles did, said, or writ, that can be had, except Miracles. [Of the
infallibility of which Tradition thus the Archbishop p. 124.
-- A man may be assured, nay infallibly assured, by Ecclesiastical and Humane
proof. Men that never saw Rome may be sure and infallibly believe, that such a
City there is by Historical and acquired faith. And in the next page -- Certain
it is (says he) that by humane authority consent and proof a man may be
assured infallibly, that Scripture is the word of God.].

infallible Assent is meant an Assent yielded to an Object that, as being Gods
own word, is believed to be most supremely Infallible and immutable. [As the
Archbishops words seem to explain themselves where he says -- p. 86.
That Faith is an evidence as well as knowledge; and the belief is firmer than
any knowledge can be, because it rests upon Divine authority, which cannot
deceive. And so Dr Potter p. 199.
-- The assent of Faith is more certain (if it be possible) than that of Sense,
or Science, or Demonstration, because it rests on Divine Authority which cannot
possibly deceive. And, as some Catholics also explain themselves; when they
say that no Divine Faith without an infallible assent; i.e. an assent to an
object that is most infallible, Gods Word; not without a Proponent or Expositor
of the sense of this Word, where ambiguous, that is also really infallible. And
thus, they say, the illiterate and vulgar sort among Catholics are infallible
in the assent they give to the Articles of their Faith, not formally, by an
infallible knowledge or certainty that the thing, or person, they believe is so
true or infallible; but materially, by their adherence to that which is a real
truth: who therefore, from the Object of their Faith, Gods Word, and the
Proponent of the sense of it, where disputed, viz. the Church, being both
infallible, are always actually preserved from erring in their Faith, (though
all such persons are not infallibly certain either of the Object of their
faith, that it is Gods Word; or, of the Proponent, that he is not liable to
error): whilst on the other side a Protestant having or believing no such
certain and infallible Guide in the Sense of doubtful Scriptures, and following
his own judgment in the interpretation of them, either actually errs in some
part of his Faith, or casually hits right, and fluctuates to and fro; the same
man, as he meets with several arguments, differing from himself, and one from
another, in those matters, wherein all Subjects to the Church's Authority are
agreed. To which purpose a late Adversary of the Doctor's perceiving him to
mistake the meaning of Catholics in the former proposition, explains himself
in Error Non-plust, p. 133. 139. 143. etc. the same Author mean while
affirming; that all Catholics may be, and that the learned are, formally
infallible in their assent to the object of their faith: i.e. have an
infallible certainty of the Infallibility both of the Scripture and the
Proponent thereof; viz. from Tradition; the evidence of which Tradition is
accounted by him to be impossible to be false, but so also it is (as to this
Author's sense of impossible) by Archbishop Lawd p. 124. but now cited. And
perhaps, Infallible Assent thus taken by Catholics in a various sense
occasions the Dr's apprehending in them contradictions.]

infallible Assent may be meant an Assent in respect of the Subject having a
Certitude of Adhesion to the matters believed exceeding that to a Science,
according to that of Bi^l cited by the Archbishop p. 75.
-- Scientia certior est certitudine evidentiae, fides vero certior firmitate
adhaesionis. Majus lumen in scientia, majus robur in fide.

infallible Assent, and whether these two la^t Notions are not coincident, I
meddle not. But, however it be, by such infallible assent is never meant an
assent grounded on any absolutely-infallible Testimony that the Revelation is
Divine, transcending that of Tradition, and equalling that believed
infallibility of the Church (the Church I mean as assisted by the Holy Ghost,
and as its infallibility as to necessaries is one of the Articles of our
Faith), or equalling that believed infallibility of the Scriptures. Which
Testimony, (were there any such absolutely infallible), must either be proved
by other Testimonies of an equal weight in infinirum; or must rest in some one
that is a per se notum. I say, an infallible assent so grounded Catholics
pretend not; nor need pretend to. The Church in necessaries, the Holy
Scriptures in all things are believed, are affirmed, to be infallible by an
infallibility cui non potest subesse falsum, because believed Divine
Revelation, (and so are adhered-to as such by a firmer and constanter assent
than Sense or science causes:) but are not, need not to be, infallibly known
to be so, as to any rational or demonstrative evidence, by any infallibility
transcending that of the forementioned Tradition, wherever Miracles do not
intervene. Which infallibility or certainty of Tradition is abundantly
sufficient to render and represent the Christian the most rational Religion in
the world.

Tradition. But neither do Catholics affirm it necessary, that every one, for
a Divine or saving Faith, have that certainty of faith that Tradition affords.
And to see that this is no Paradox among Catholics, I referr the Reader to
what F. Bacon has said of it in his Analysis Fidei extracted out of other
Catholic Authors, Disp. 3. c. 7. and 8. Though it is affirmed necessary in the
Catholic Church, that It always have a most rational and certain proof of the
truth of the Christian Faith, and such as no other false or Heretical Religion
can equal.

Tradition; and so in the infallibility of the Scriptures too, as to the most
part of the Canon thereof, sufficiently attested by the same Tradition, Yet
remains there still a great necessity also of the Infallibility in the
Governors of the Church, so assisted by the Holy Ghost as never to err in
Necessaries, upon a manifold account.

all Points of Faith are not, delivered and transferred to Posterity by the
forementioned Tradition in their express and explicit terms; but some have
only descended in their Principles: the necessary Deductions from which are by
this Infallible Church extracted and vindicated from age to age, against those
dangerous errors that may happen to assault them. Again, Because, though this
Tradition is also assisted or improved, with the Infallible Scriptures for a
compleater direction in the Christian Faith, yet are not all Credends and
Agends so clearly delivered in these Scriptures, as that Christians, the
illiterate especially and plebeians, have no need of such an Interpreter
thereof, as may not mistake or misguide them in any such necessary Agends, or
Credends. To which unlearned persons though it is said not to be necessary,
that they be infallibly certain of the truth of that which they believe; and
therefore Church-Infallibility cannot be said necessary as to them upon this
account; yet it is necessary to them, that, in such points where one of the two
contradictories is of necessary faith, it be truth that they believe; and hence
necessary also that the Proponent thereof be infallible, as to all such points.
And it is here observable, that, though in the Descent of Tradition the
Congregatio fidelium, when it first delivers to a person the Infallibility of
Church and of Scripture, appears not to him as yet absolutely infallible; Yet
indeed as to delivering necessaries it then, and always, is so: For, this
Congregatio fidelium in every age that testifies such things, It, or some part
of it, is the very same Body that is promised by our Lord his perpetual
assistance, and is preserved for ever by Gods Spirit and Providence from erring
in Necessaries. 3 Again, Because the same Church-Infallibility is necessary, as
to other Controversies, so also to those, if any happen, concerning the Canon
of Scripture, so far as any part thereof has happened in some times not to have
had in all parts of Christianity so clear a current of Tradition. 4 Because,
after this point of Church-Infallibility is once established and confirmed by
such Tradition, one may hence sooner and easilier learn his faith from her
plain definitions and proposals thereof, than from Tradition much dispersed
abroad, whereby its uniformity is the harder to be discerned; or from the
Scriptures, in several points not so perspicuous, and so the more subject to
misinterpretations; and where, for the through studying the one or the other,
the vocations and employments of most Christians admit not a competent vacancy.
5 Lastly, the Questions that tend to void Church-Infallibility from the
sufficiency of Tradition may as well serve for rendering useless the
Infallibility of Scripture on the same account: and the same Question that
demands, Why the Church is believed more infallible than Tradition, which
Church-Infallibility is proved only by Tradition, may as well be put concerning
the Scriptures; Why these held more infallible than Tradition, the strongest
proof of which Infallibility of Scriptures among Protestants is from it.

Annotations on his. 3. of N.O's Concessions.
PAge 85. l. 14. N.O. yields, That there is no necessity at all of
Infallibility under natural Religion. 1 There are no words so put together in
the Doctor's 2d and 3d Principle conceded by N.O: but by taking his own
Principles in what sense he pleases he may represent N.O's Concessions of them
what he pleases. 2 If by what he says N.O. yields he means this (see his p.
86. l. 5.) That we may have a sufficient certainty of some Principles in
Religion, without, or antecedently to, the Infallibility of the Church, as it
is assisted by Gods Spirit first known to us, it is willingly granted him. But,
meanwhile, from the Beginning, besides the Law of Nature teaching in general
the Worship of a God, there were also Positive Divine Laws concerning his
Service conserved in that Body which constituted his Visible Church. So we
find early in G^nesis, mention of Sacrifice, Firstlings, Holocausts,
Peace Offerings, clean and unclean beasts, birds in Sacrifice not divided, not
eating the blood; mention of Holy Times, Places, Persons, Priests, Prophets; of
Tithes paid to the Priest, Purifyings, Cleansings, changing their garments,
Vows; Prohibition of Polygamy (as we may gather from Matt. 16.4, 8.) of
contracting Marriages with unbelievers, as may be gathered from Genesis 6.2,
compared with 1. Excommunication or expulsion out of the Church, as we may
gather from Genesis 4.12, 14, 16. And these Laws we may presume were received from
an infallible external Proponent; and were preserved by the Ecclesiastical
Superiors and Teachers of these laws in such a manner as those delivered
since: and for the certainty of Religion, there seems an infallibility in these
as necessary, if not more, for solving the great doubts arising therein before,
as after, the times of a Written Law. These laws and statutes are made mention
of, Genesis 26.5. when God promised his blessing upon Isaac and his seed; because
that Abraham had obeyed his voice and kept his Precepts and Commandments,
observed his Ceremonies and Laws: Whose Service had been performed more
publicly and solemnly from the times of Enos Genesis 4.26.
, and after that the days of Adam were half run out. And of these Positive
Laws, and the Tradition of them, and of these Ecclesiastical Superiors, thus S.
Athanasius De Synod. Nicen. Decretis.
, -- Quae Moses docuit eadem ab Abrahamo observata sunt; quae porro Abraham
observavit eadem Noe and Enoch agnoverunt -- Abel quoque hujus rei testis
habendus est, qui ea, quae ab Adam perceperat, Deo obtulit; Adam autem
Magisterio Dei instructus fuit.

Page 86. l. 8. He yields, That Reason is to be Judge concerning Divine
Revelation. i. e. as I understand him, Judge, whether that which is pretended,
be a true, Divine Revelation: or, if such, Judge again, what is the true Sense
of it. To this I say; 1. That, whereas He collects this from N.O's granting his
4th Principle, there is no mention at all of Reason in this 4th Principle, from
which this Author deduceth such a Concession. 2. That N.O. upon the Dr's 5th.
Principle, has delivered the just contrary to this Concession imposed upon
him, in these very words Consid. p. 6.
-- Here, if the Dr means, that every Christian has a faculty in him, which as
to all Revelations whatsoever proposed to him can discern the true and Divine
from others that are not so; and, when a Revelation certainly Divine is capable
of several senses, can discern the true sense from the false, and all this
exclusively to, and independently on, the instruction of Church Authority: This
Proposition is not true. For then, none will need, (as experience shows they
do) to repair to any other Teacher for instructing him in a dubious Revelation,
or the sense of any Divine Revelation controverted, which is the true,
Revelation; or which is the Sense of it. 3. Yet however, this shall be granted
him in relation to that Principle, that nothing ought to be admitted for Divine
Revelation which overthrows the certainty of, or is contradictory to, true
Reason. But, if the Revelation be of something above Reason, Reason may be no
fit Judge of it.

Ibid. l. (12) He yields, That the will of God may be sufficiently declared to
men by writing. This and the following Concession That the written will of God
does contain all things simply necessary to Salvation I have re-considered, and
^^nd no advantage to our Author's cause from N.O's yielding them.

Page 87 l. (9.). But he quarrels etc. Whether the Dr's consequence Princip.
21. drawn by him from what was said Princip. 20. be well deduced, or no (which
is called N.O's quarrel here) I appeal to any judicious Reader, reviewing these
Principles after this our Author's defense.

Page 88. l. 11. As for instance, that the Church is infallible, is in the
first place to be believed upon their principles. Their Principles affirm no
such thing etc. See N.O. Consid. page 37. saying the contrary, in these words
-- A Christians faith may begin either at the infallible Authority of
Scriptures, or of the Church: and this infallible Authority of either of these
be learnt from Tradition, and that of the other from it.

Ibid. l. (10.) The Ground on which a Necessity of some external infallible
Proponent is asserted must rather make every particular person infallible, If
no divine faith can be without an infallible assent; and sorenders any other
Infallibility useless. Any infallible assent, necessary to the right believing
this Artiele of our faith the Church's Infallibility, more than that which
Tradition affords, N.O. affirms not. See what the Dr puts in the next page for
N.O's 6th Concession. As for the Dr's arguing here; The ground on which etc, it
is not good. For, every particular person's being, antecedently, infallibly
assured, i.e. by Tradition, of this particular point of faith that the Church
is Infallible, renders not at all the Church's Infallibility useless as to the
same person his being assured of several other points of faith only by the
Church's Infallibility, which (according as the person's condition needs
instruction) may both ascertain him of many more points of Faith, and more
clearly ascertain them to him than Tradition does.

Ibid. l. (3.) Our only Question is about Infallibility, whether that be
necessary or no? Writing thus in general is full of ambiguities. Whether
infallibility be necessary; means he, Whether Church-Infallibility be necessary
at all? Notwithstanding that a sufficient certainty from Tradition suffices
for our being assured of such Infallibility in the Church? See this Question, I
think, sufficiently solved in the Note on page 84. l. ult. n 4. Or means he,
Whether an absolutely infallible Testimony be antecedently necessary for
knowing or rightly believing the Infallibility of the Church? If so, such
infallible Testimony is affirmed not necessary, unless he will allow Tradition
such.

Ib. l. ult. If sufficiently certain evidence will serve for the Church's
infallibility, why may it not for the Scriptures, or any matters of faith
contained therein? It may, where it can be had. See N.O's Concess. 6. in the
Dr's p. 89.

Page 89. l. 3. If they mean no more by infallibility than sufficient
certainty, etc. Catholics by Church-Infallibility as assisted with Gods Spirit
mean more than a Moral Certainty, such Church-infallibility being affirmed a
Divine Revelation, and so believed to be absolutely infallible: And affirm,
Christians in such Necessary Points of Faith, where neither the sense of
Scripture, nor of Tradition, is clear, and does afford sufficient certainty,
without this Church-Infallibility to be no way secure from error.

Ibid. l. 7. We all say, matters of faith have sufficient certainty. What, that
all matters of faith have sufficient certainty as to us, if
Church-Infallibility be excluded; as it is, by Protestants? I ask, from what
have we this certainty? From the Scripture? How this, where its Sense is
doubtful, and controverted, as in the Text; Hoc est Corpus meum? From
Tradition? But all Necessary Points of Faith are not in such clear and express
terms delivered by It, that no Christian can have any reasonable doubt therein.

Ibid. l. (12.) I only desire to know, why a like right and saving faith may
not be had concerning the Scriptures, without their Church's infallibility? A
Catholic may have a right and saving Faith concerning the Scriptures (I
suppose, their being the Word of God), or concerning any other Article of Faith
clearly delivered in them, without such a person's being infallibly assured of
Church-Infallibility; but without Church-Infallibility cannot have a certain
and unerring faith as to those points that are not so clearly set down in
Scripture, but that some persons may mistake; or also, as to those Books of
Scripture that are not so clearly attested by Tradition; or, this Tradition not
easily knowable to such person.

Ib. l. (9.) From hence it follows, that an infallible assent is not requisite
to saving faith; directly contrary to my former adversary E.W. Whatever
difference may be amongst Catholics concerning What assurance of their faith
in some Catholics is necessary to salvation, yet all agree, that all
Catholics may have a sufficient certainty of their faith from
Church-Infallibility; which sufficient certainty (for, this serves our turn as
to this Author's Principles) Protestants cannot have in many points thereof; as
^elying on their own Judgment in the Sense of dubt us Scriptures, and not on
the Definitions of the Church. See before Note on page 84. l. ult.

Page 90. l. 7. He yields That the utmost assurance, etc. N.O's words p. 56.
that he referrs to, are -- Any person may be, and that antecedently to the
testimony of Scripture, at least with a morally-infallible certainty (or
whatever certainty that may be called, which Universal Tradition can afford)
assured of this Divine Revelation, the Church's Infallibility, from such
Tradition and other Motives of Credibility, as Protestants allow for a
sufficiently or morally infallible and certain means of believing the
Scriptures to be the word of God. Here is no mention of [utmost].

Ib. l. (5.) It [moral Infallibility] is joining two words together which
destroy each other. Surely the Author, in such passages as these, studies some
recreation for his Reader, or some relief of the Stationer in an age given so
much to je^ts, even in the most grave and serious subjects. N O, before he writ
these Considerations on his Principles, found him in this merry Critical
humor, in his Rational Account. Where page 154. the Replier to the Archbishop
saying, that the Church's infallibility must come from the Holy Ghost, and so
be more than humane and moral; He falls on descanting thus upon it -- You tell
us very wisely that this infallibility is not a thing that is not infallible.
And -- It is well you tell us of such a rare distinction of infallibility; for
else, I assure you we had never thought of it, viz. of an infallibility that
may be deceived. Thus He. But forgetting the like language in the Archbishop
whom he defends. The Archbishops words p. 124. are -- If you speak of assurance
only in the general, I must then tell you (and it is the great advantage which
the Church of Christ has against Infidels) a man may be assured, nay
infallibly assured by Ecclesiastical and humane proof. Men that never saw Rome
may be sure, and infallibly believe, that such a City there is, by Historical
and acquired Faith. And if consent of humane Story can assure me this, why
should not consent of Church-Story assure me the other? [Now what is this but
Moral Infallibility?] And so Mr Chillingworth p. 330.
-- We are and may be infallibly certain that we are to believe the Christian
Religion [i.e. from the more reasonable Grounds we have for it, than for any
other]. and I find our author himself in the same Rational Account p. 96. where
this Critical humor was not so violent, and where he had some inducement to
advance the credit of a Moral Certainty, treating this term [Infallible] a
little more gently. -- If by infallible certainty (says he there) you mean
only such as excludes all possibility of reasonable doubting upon the
consideration of the validity and sufficiency of that testimony I am to believe
the Canon of Scripture upon; then I assert etc. And p. 197. -- Thus we see how
impossible it is to avoid a Circle in the supposition of a supernatural
Infallibility in the Church's Tradition. But if no more be meant but a kind of
rational Infallibility (though those terms be not very proper) i.e. so great
evid^nce, as, if I question it, I may, upon equal grounds, question every thing
which mankind yields the firmest assent to, because I cannot imagine, that so
great a part of the wisest, and most considerative part of the world should be
so grossly deceived in a matter of such moment (especially supposing a Divine
Providence) then I freely and heartily assert, We have such a kind of rational
infallibility; or rather the highest degree of actual certainty concerning the
truth of the Canon of Scripture; and that the Catholic Church has not de
facto erred in defining it. But, without all this defense, our Author knowing
N.O's meaning, what needs he quarrel about his words, unless it were to gain
this poor victory, that N.O. has in something spoken improperly? But one
material thing here may be observed by the Reader; that this moral
Infallibility, where mentioned by N.O. is always applied to the said Tradition
viz. the Testimony of so great a multicude of learned and pious men: but never
to Church Infallibility as a Body assisted with the Holy Ghost; which Church is
always believed not non-morally only, but non-possibly, fallible; as also other
Articles of the Christian Faith are, as being all Divine Revelations: but these
certainly known or proved, by a rational evidence, to be Divine Revelations,
only from Tradition. And Lastly that N.O. in his applying Moral Infallibility
to Tradition, leaving every one to express it otherwise, adds; or, whatever
certainty that may be called, which Tradition affords. Consi. p. 56.


Page 91. l. 6. This were well enough, If in the precedent page he had not said
etc. An infallible assent in the former page, and a morally-Infallible assent,
whereby in the latter it is explained, do not contradict.

Ib. l. 7. Had not said, That a particular person may be infallible in his
assent. That is, sufficiently infallible, as N.O. explains himself afterward,
and the Dr confesses it.

Ib. l. 14. I would fain understand, if the Evidence be only sufficiently or
morally infallible, How the assent which is built upon it comes to be more than
so. Any assent that is built only upon a sufficiently or morally infallible
evidence never comes to be more than so. Assensus cognoscitious non excedit
Certitudinem Principii, quo nititur. See Note on p. 84. l. ult. n. 2.

Ib. l. 17. Late Writers of their Church are perplexed about this word
Infallibility. Our Author frames to himself strange Chimera's of Infallibility,
notwithstanding the pains taken by Catholics to undeceive him and others
therein: whenas the Infallibility maintained by Catholics is only that of the
Church Catholic in a General Council in the defining of necessaries. For the
proving of which Infallibility, they urge the Practice of former General
Councils (approved by the whole Catholic Church), defining such points; and
putting them into the Creeds; and anathematizing any Dissenters. Behold now
this terrible monster of Infallibility, which this Author says -- Mr Cr. and
other late Roman Writers retain like a wolf by the ears, cannot tell how to
hold it, and are afraid to let it go; and N.O. at last quitting the thing
contents himself with the sound of it. And yet a few pages hence p. 95. the Dr
tells you, that the first Principle N.O. sets up in opposition to his, is this
Infallibility viz. That God has given an infallible assistance to the Guides
of the Church in all ages of it, for the direction of those who live in it.

Ib. l. (10.) Loath to part with the sound of Infallibility. See Note on p. 90.
l. (5).

Ib. l. (6.) He yields, that moral certainty is a sufficient foundation for
Faith. Such terms neither occur in the Dr's 27th Proposition, here referred to
as conceded by N.O. nor in any words of N.O. nor any thing equivalent to them,
without some qualifications annexed. The proper Foundation of a Christian's
Faith, or that on which it mainly relies is Gods word, or Divine Revelation.
But, if it be asked concerning the rational Certainty that Christians have, or
may have, that such as they believe to be, truly are, Divine Revelations, this
is affirmed to be the Certainty, which the Tradition so often forementioned
affords: call this Certainty by what name any one will. This Tradition, as the
Reader may find in the Dr's next page, is said by N.O. (for which citation N.O.
is obliged to the Dr that his Reader may sometimes at least find N.O.'s tenants
in his own words) to be the first rational introductive of our Faith. And is so
acknowledged not only by N.O. but generally I think by the whole Christian
world, at least by all Catholic Controvertists. And yet our Author gazeth upon
it as a new coined Position; and frequently also calls it yielding the cause.
It is necessary to mistake or misrepresent the Catholics Tenants, thus to have
something to say against them.

Page 93. l. (11.) By which he fairly gives up the cause of Infallibility, as
to the necessity of it in order to faith. I ask, of what Infallibility?
Church-Infallibility? N.O.'s next words following those quoted here by the Dr
out of p. 67. are these -- But, notwithstanding this, Christians may be
deficient in a right belief of several necessary Articles of this Christian
Faith, if destitute of that External Infallible Guide therein. And the
perpetual Divine Assistance, and so Infallibility, in necessaries, of this
Guide being declared in the Scriptures, a Catholic having once learnt this
point of Faith, from its definitions and expositions becomes secure and settled
in the belief of all those controverted Articles of his faith, wherein others,
steered only by themselves, do fluctuate, totter and vary one from another,
whilst the Scriptures in such points (at least to persons unlearned or of
weaker judgments, which are the greatest part of Christians) are ambiguous in
their sense, and drawn with much art to several Interests. See before Note on
p. 84. l. ult. n 4. And I ask, Will it follow from Dr St's holding a moral
certainty of Tradition to be a sufficient introductive to believing the Canon,
or Infallibility, of Scriptures, that he therefore gives up the Canon or the
Infallibility of Scripture, as to any necessity of it in order to matters of
faith? If not; neither does N.O. give up Church-Infallibility. Or means he,
gives up the cause of an absolute Infallibility its being necessary ex part
subjecti to the having a right faith? N.O. does so; yields it up, as not being
the Catholics cause, and stands to it: but so does he also yield up this of a
moral infallibility ex part subjecti its being necessary to every one for
having a right faith.

Page 94. l. (12.) I desire N.O. and E.W. to agree better, etc. Perhaps what is
said before in Note on p. 84. n. 3. may satisfy our Author in this matter. If
not, the Reverend Person E.W. (if it be though fit) is able to give a much
better account of himself, than N.O, to whom therefore with all respect he
leaves it. But this I say (and let the Reader judge) that, if this Author gives
no fairer account of E.W's propositions, than he does of N.O's, his Reader has
little reason to credit other men's Positions upon his Relation: who, by his
first changing N.O's notions, and then confuting them, puts him to the trouble
of these reflections.

Ib. l. (6.) N.O. here makes moral certainty a sufficient ground for Divine
Faith. See Note on p. 91. l. (6.)

Page 95. l. 11. By these Concessions it appears that the Cause of
Infallibility is clearly given up, etc. No. See Note on p. 93. l. (11.)

Annotations on his. 4. Touching N.O's Principles,
Page 95. l. (4.) The Doctor represents N.O.'s Principles thus. 1. That God
has given an infallible assistance to the Guides of the Church in all ages of
it, for the direction of those who live in it. Add here, as to all Necessaries.
For, it is thus frequently limited by N.O; but such limitation every where
omitted by Dr St.

Page 96. l. 1.2. That without this infallible assistance there can be no
certainty of the sense of Scripture. No certainty; add, as to all Christians:
many of whom are unlearned, young, or of small capacity. Of the sense of
Scripture; add, as to several points of faith Necessary; not, as to all. For
N.O. does not deny the sense of Scripture as to several points of faith clear
enough, and amongst rational men not disputed. Add, I say, these; and N.O.
will own the Proposition.

Ibid l. 3.3. That all the arguments which overthrow the Church's Infallibility
do destroy the Church's Authority. There is no such thing said by N.O. Nay; the
contrary is often said by him: that, Church-Infallibility being destroyed, yet
the Church's Authority, though fallible, may upon many reasons justly challenge
submission of judgment to her Decrees from her Subjects. See N.O. p. 18. 26.
48. 50. and in the former Discourse. 35.37.39. But this is said by N.O. and
must be still, till the Dr better clears himself, That some Arguments used by
the Dr against Church Infallibility are as strong, and stronger, against
Church Authority: as namely, that made in his 19th Principle, if any one please
to read there [Authority] instead of [Infallibility.]

Ib. l. 16. If God has not given an infallible assistance to the Guides of the
Church, the Principles laid down by me must hold. No. For, private judgments
ought to submit to Church Authority, though fallible, in all such points
wherein such private persons have not demonstration against it: much more, if
commanded to obey this authority, and to follow its faith. So, where no
infallible assistance, yet we prudently submit our judgment to the advice of a
more knowing friend; and Children to the precepts and injunctions of their
Parents, though these fallible, and that by the Divine command; not enjoining
them hereby to believe a lie or practice things unlawful, but only to believe
that to be most credibly true or just, which their Parents and Superiors, much
wiser than themselves, inform them to be so; And where, if there be some
incertainty in following their Judgments, this is not less, but more, in
following their own. Men rightly submit their Judgments to persons and things
most credible, as well as to the absolutely infallible.

Ib. l. (9) We do not dispute concerning the best helps for a person to make
use of in a matter of this nature. Whereas our Author here calls for the best
helps a man can get, naming these, the directions of his Pastor, the decrees of
Councils, the sense of the Primitive Church, for the right understanding the
Scriptures; if he means in necessaries, I appeal to the candid Reader, whether
the Reason given by him in his Principles, for which he says the sober
enquirer cannot mistake in Necessaries, does not argue such helps needless,
namely this ( Princip. 15.) -- Because the whole will of God is in the
Scriptures so plainly revealed, that no sober enquirer can ^iss of what is
necessary to salvation; so that there can be no necessity supposed of any
infallible [I add, much less of any fallible] society of men either to attest
or explain these writings. So he then. Which argues either no need of such
Helps; or, if these useful, such Scriptures without them not clear. And
therefore, if 1 such Helps are to be repaired-to for the true meaning of such
Scriptures in Necessaries, they ought to have been included in his Principle. 2
But then, the Quality or Profession and Condition of the far greater part of
Christians seems no way capable of using all such Helps: 3 Or, if they were,
yet all these helps being held by him fallible, they will still, after these,
be liable to error in necessary faith. All Christians, then, as to all
necessaries to salvation, are not free from erring, without an infallibility,
in these points, of their Guides; neither the Scriptures being clear in these
without Helps; nor the Helps in them, unliable to mistakes.

Page 97. l. 6. The decrees of Councils, the sense of the primitive Church.
Surely, such are not only helps, for instruction of Christians; but laws, for
Obedience.

Ib. l. 11. The foundation of this person's faith can be nothing else but a
trembling quicksand. The Foundation laid by the Dr, and thus expressed in his
preface by N.O. viz. -- An Errability in Necessaries of the Guides of God's
Church; an Inerrability in the same by him attributed indefinitly to all sober
Christians, who, without any necessary consulting and depending on their
Teachers instituted for th^^ by God, shall use their sincere endeavors to find
out such Truths, is rightly affirmed by N.O. (Pref. p. 4.) to be but a
tottering and trembling foundation of their Faith.

N.O's words. Ib. l. 17. The only certain way not to be misled [I add, where
the sense of Scripture or Tradition is to any ambiguous] will be the submitting
our internal assent and belief to Church Authority. This is asserted.

Ib. l. (9) Here then two Questions necessarily arise. 1. Whether there can be
no certainty of faith [i.e, in several points of Faith, where the sense of
Scripture or Tradition is to any ambiguous and disputed] without this
Church-Infallibility? 2. What certainty there is of this Church Infallibility?
The 1st. is affirmed. The 2d is spoken to below in Annot. on p. 113. l. 14.

Page 89. l. 3. Every man has in him a faculty of discerning truth and
falsehood. What, in all things of faith, by his own sole ability? No. Some
helps, I hope, he must have in several things, as, Directions of his Pastor,
the sense of the Primitive Church, Decrees of Councils, as our Author says, p.
96.

Annotations on his. 5. N.O's Exceptions answered.
Page 98. l. (6) The Question now is: whether a person not relying on the
Infallibility of a Church, may not be certain of those things which are
contained in the Scriptures in order to Salvation? Of some of these he may,
because there contained plainly enough; of others not; where rational Judgments
dispute the sense.

Ib. l. (3) Our enquiry is, not about the sense of the more difficult etc, But
N.O's is. Several points Necessary are difficult to many and controverted:
witness those contained in the Athanasian Creed.

Page 99. l. ult. I desire to know, whether things simply necessary ought not
to be delivered with greater plainness, than things which are not so? No. But
so, as God pleases; so he provide other ways for the explaining of what is
obscure.

Page 100. l. 6. Whether our Saviors own Sermons were capable of being
understood by those, who heard them. How capable soever of being understood,
they were not understood, he said, by all his Auditors, in every thing; nor by
his own Diciples.

Ib. l. (5) Or can we have now no certainty of the meaning of the Levitical
Law, because there is no High Priest or Sunhedrin to explain it? Not all
Persons, in all things, without an Explainer. And there was anciently a Guide
Infallible, or so authorized as that all were to stand to its judgment,
appointed for deciding several doubtful parts of Moses his Law. Of which see in
the former Discourse. 22.

Page 101. l. (8). Yet, after all, he cannot certainly understand the meaning
of them. Not of some of them, exclusively to an Infallible Church Authority,
and his Submission thereto.

Page 102. l. 10. And after all this cannot we understand etc? That every one
cannot without some other helps than only our Lord's and his Apostles
discourses, I think this Author grants before p. 96. 97. And -- Sic,
oportebat, ut diceretur, quod non ab omnibus intelligeretur, says S. Austin In
Joan. tract. 27.
of our Lord's Sermon about the Eucharist in the 6th of S. John.

Ibid. l. (7). Our Question is not about may be's. Therefore N.O. in those
Considerations on Princip. 13. p. 14. etc. contends, that God not only may, but
has so revealed his mind that in many things it is clear to some persons, when
not to others; and for this quotes Dr Field on his side.

Ib. l. (5). It is taken for granted on both sides, that God has revealed his
mind in writing. But not granted, that he has revealed it so clearly in
writing, as none may mistake any part of it. I am afraid I tire out the Reader
with so often repetition of the same limitations and restrictions, applied to a
discourse that renders it self plausible by omitting them. The use of
Indefinite Terms and propositions is a sure way, and a fine art, for
Controvertists to answer one another, and both speak truth. So these two:
Scriptures are clear in points of necessary faith, and Scriptures are not clear
in points of necessary faith, are both very true as to several persons, and in
several matters of necessary faith.

Page 103. l. 14. But when I had expressly said things necessary for salvation,
why does he avoid that which the dispute was about, and only say, many things?
It was an oversight in N.O. but no advantage made by it; who in speaking of the
clearness of Scriptures adds the term as to Necessaries frequently, and that in
the Consideration upon the very same Principle. [See p. 15. -- If these in all
necessaries are clear, -- Of every particular Christian in all points necessary
-- Such a clearness in Necessaries must the Scripture have, etc.] By which the
Reader may see whether his Adversary had cause to complain: but so does not the
Dr, when speaking of Church Infallibility, add this term as to necessaries,
used by N.O.

Ib. l. (10). I never yet saw one difficulty removed by the pretended
infallible Guides of the Church. General Councils are these pretended
Infallible Guides: and the doubted and disputed Sense of many Scriptures in
necessary matters have been cleared by these Councils, and some of them put in
the Church's Creeds.

Page 104. l. 8. Nothing of it [their talent of infallibility] ever appeared
above ground. See the last Note.

Ib. l. 15. Supposing we believe their Infallibility, we are still as far to
seek, for the meaning of many difficult places. The Church is not said to be
infallible in all things whatewer, as the Scriptures are; but, in necessaries.
As these are explained in the former Discourse. 2: and in 2d Discourse
concerning the Guide. 9. etc. viz in all points, that are any way beneficial,
either as to the General Economy or Government of the Church, or, as to the
Salvation of Particulars, to be believed or practiced, by her Subjects; and,
the truth of which the Scripture or Tradition, at least as to the necessary
Principles from which such point is extracted, do sufficiently evidence unto
her: Such from time to time, as they are called in Question, are stated and
determined by her, whilst neither having leisure, nor perhaps light to
determine all other: I mean, such as are no way necessary to be determined. Of
which thing, what points are, and what are not so, the Church her self and not
her Subjects, is the most proper Judge.

Ib. l. (6) So that not making use of this talent of Infallibility gives us
just reason to question, whether God continues it. Then, from the Church's
having well used this talent we may gather the contrary, viz. the Divine
Providence its still preserving it to her.

Page 107. l. 9. Which several expressions [of Dr Field's] amount to no more
than this, that there will be always some true Christians in the world.
Contrary to this; Dr Field holds, that in all ages there is and shall be, not
some true Christians only, but some Visible Society and Church, or other,
consisting of a Ministry or Clergy openly publishing and teaching, and a People
receiving their doctrine, that in such age, does not err in necessaries to
salvation: which tenent of his very well consists with that advice in his
Preface produced by N.O. -- That therefore men, not having time or leisure, or
strength of understanding to examine controversies in Religion of such
consequence, should diligently search out, which, amongst all the Societies of
the world, is that blessed Company of Holy ones, that Household of Faith, that
Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the Pillar and Ground
of Truth; that so he may embrace her Communion, follow her Directions, and rest
in her Judgment. Thus he. Which cannot be spoken only of the being always of
some true Christians in the world, that do not so err, but of a visible society
or Communion; such as gives directions, and delivers her Judgment. And, (to
show him coherent to himself), This Visible Society in all ages, the excellency
of it, and their happiness that are in it, he further thus describes in his 1st
Book 10th Chapter. -- Visible (says he there) in respect of the profession of
supernatural verities revealed in Christ; use of Holy Sacraments; order of
Ministry, and due Obedience yielded thereunto; and they discernable, that do
communicate therein. Such then he allows that Church in my age to be, that he
maintains not to err in necessaries, what Church soever of that age it hapens
to be; as one or more it must be. And, if this be not enough to clear this;
N.O, out of his Commonplace book (for thence our Author says he had his
quotation) can furnish him, with several other places out of Dr Field, that say
the same thing. Such that, Ibid -- That the constant profession of saving truth
is preserved and found amongst men, and the ministry of salvation continued
and known in the world; For how (says he) should there be a Church gathered
without a Ministry? -- And the like l. 2. c. 6. -- That the Ministry of
Pastors and Teachers is absolutely necessary to the being of a Church: For how
should there be a Church gathered, guided, and governed, without a Ministry?
[Therefore he will have in every age a Ministry that in necessaries does not
err]. Such that l. 4. c. 2. where he grants to Bellarmine expounding himself,
to mean -- Ni mine Ecclesiae non unum aut alterum hom inom Christianum; sed
multitudinem congregatam, in qua sunt Praelati and Subditi, he grants to
Bellarmin, I say -- That the visible Church [i.e. such a one as the Cardinal
speaks of, consisting of Prelates and Subjects] never falls into any Heresy:
so that (says he) he is much to be blamed for id^^ and needless busying
himself, improving that which we most willingly grant. Again. l. 1. c. 10. --
Bellarmin labors in vain, in proving that there is, and always has been a
visible Church, and that not consisting of some few scattered Christians
without order of Ministry, or use of Sacraments [add what follows in Bellarmin
sed in qua sunt Praelati and subditi]; for, all this we do most willingly yield
unto. Expressly excepting there against the opinion of those Protestants, that
hold, -- Though, all other falling from the faith, the truth of God should
remain only in some few of the laity, yet the promise of Christ concerning the
perpetuity of his Church might still be verified.

See also l. 2. c. 2. where he speaks thus -- This entire profession of the
truth revealed in Christ, though it distinguish right believers from Heretics,
yet it is not proper to the happy number and blessed company of Catholic
Christians; because Schismatics may, and sometimes do, hold an entire
profession of the truth of God revealed in Christ. It remains therefore that
we seek out those things that are so peculiarly found in the companies of right
believing and Catholic Christians, that they may serve as Notes of difference,
to distinguish them from all, bo^^ Pagans, Jews, Heretics, and Schismatics.
The last of which Notes he says there is this -- An union or connection of men
in this profession, and use of these Sacraments, under lawful Pastors and
Guides, appointed, authorized, and sanctified, to direct and lead them in the
happy ways of eternal salvation. Again l. 4. c. 4. he describes this Church --
That always retains a saving profession of heavenly truth such -- that, by
strength of Reasons, force of persuasions, timeliness of admonitions, comforts
of Sacraments, and other means of saving grace -- it strengthens and stays
the weakness of all them, that depend upon it: [Language not suting to a Church
but such as has in it Pastors and people: and there contends] -- That it does
not only preserve the truth as a hidden treasure, but by public profession; --
publishes it unto the world; and stays the weakness of others by the
knowledge of it; in which respect it is fitly compared to a Pillar, and not [as
Bellarmine accuses his Church] unto an Ark, or Chest.

And so ^l^o Ibid. c. 5. in the words here quoted by the Dr -- Thus then we
think (says he) that particular men and Churches may err damnably, because
notwithstanding [this] others [i.e. particular men and Churches] may worship
God aright; but, that the whole Church, at one time, cannot so err; [i.e. all
particular Churches that are in that time; for, besides these particulars,
there is no whole.] for that then, the Church should cease utterly for a time,
-- and Christ should sometimes be without a Church. [i.e. such as consists of
an united Body of Clergy or Ministers and People, as he had said before]. After
which he begins thus his 6th Chapter -- Thus having spoken of the Church's
assured possession of the Knowledge of truth, in the next place we are to speak
of her Office of Teaching, and, Witnessing the same. [The Church therefore
which he understands to possess this truth, is such also as teaches and
witnesses it.] Thus Dr Field, justifying some such Church always to be not
erring in Necessaries; but, not always the same, or the most eminent; Or those
that possess the greatest places of Office and Dignity in it: and I am sorry,
Dr St's mistaken glosses upon him have occasioned to me and the Reader this
trouble. Meanwhile, since from this alleged here the mistaking of Dr Fields
sense appears not on N.O's but the Dr's side, this his own error might have
been attended with less exulting and triumph and exclaiming, O the mischief of
Common-place-books! which makes men write what they find, etc.

But yet here the Intelligent Reader may discern two great flaws in this
opinion of Dr Field. The one; that, though there is such a Blessed Society of
Clergy in every age that does not err, yet private men cannot be secure, that
this society for a year, or a month longer, shall continue such: since, though
some one or other always does not, yet any particular Church may, err from
Necessary faith, whilst some other retains it. The other, that, for knowing
what particular Clergy does not err in necessaries (for he says, l. 1. c. 10.
that those who passesse great places of office and dignity in the Church of
God may depart from the soundness of Christian faith) the private person mu^^
first know its doctrines to be true (which is one of the essential Notes he
gives to distinguish i^ by from all other Churches in he place before-cited l.
2. c. 2.); from which true Doctrine in Necessaries, retained to day, it may
also vary to morrow. But then how shall they foreknow its Doctrines to be true,
who as he says in his Preface have not leisure or capacity to examine
Controversies; and therefore who are advised there for these doctrines to rest
in its judgment? for these doctrines, meant of points Necessary. For, those
only are the points, in which such a Blessed Society certainly errs not.

Ibid. l. 15. And is it now imaginable after all this, that Dr Field should
make any particular Church infallible? The precedents show Dr Field to make
some Visible Church or other in whatever age not to err in necessaries,
Otherwise, he says, Christ would sometimes be without a Church. But Dr Field
is urged by N.O. only as advising very differently from our Author -- that so
few having time or l^isure or strength of understanding to examine
Controversies in Religion of such consequence, they should diligently search
out watch amongst all the Societies of the world is that blessed Company of
Holy O^^^, that Household of Faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the
living God, which is the Pillar and ground of Truth, that so he may embrace her
Communion, follow her Directions, and rest in her Judgment; contrary to the
Dr's 13th. and 15th Principle -- That Gods will in Necessaries is so clearly
set down in Scripture, as none endeavoring to understand the meaning of them
can mistake in these. And N.O. contends also, though such society should not be
infallible, that yet it is the wisest course for a private man to follow Dr
Fields advice, and rather to acquiesce in their judgment, as more skilled etc
than in his own. As, in a suit of Law, we follow the directions, and rest in
the judgment of an expert Lawyer, though not infallible.

Ibid. l. (6) A man, convinced that the Church of England is a sound and good
Church, ought to rest in her judgment, so as not to forsake her communion for
any cavils that are raised about particular controversies, of which he is not a
capable Judge. Upon being convinced that the Church of England is a sound [or
orthodox] Church to rest in her judgment, is only to rest in her judgment where
such person first knows it right or true; but how then rests he thus in
Controversies, wherein he is no capable Judge; and so does not, foreknow her
soundness in them? The same may be said to that he mentions afterward
concerning a man's foreknowing the Church's integrity, honesty, skill: all
which, sincere and good in one matter, may fail in another. Again, where the Dr
mentions resting in this Church's judgment for people who have not either
leisure or capacity to understand particular controversies, means he, in
Necessaries? Then how will his 13. and 15th Principles stand good, that from
the clear delivery of such points in the Scriptures the diligent cannot
mistake, nor need for their guidance therein any infallible society of men? and
much less then need they a fallible. But, if he makes this Society, Dr Field
speaks of, only useful for private men to submit their judgment to in
non-necessaries; it is clear Dr Field intends it otherwise; who says, such a
Society in non-necessaries may err, but in Necessaries does not: and therefore,
in these, not the other, may safely be relied upon. But lastly; if thus private
men, unseen in Controversies, may and ought to rest in the judgment of a
particular Church so qualified, why are not such much more obliged to rest in
the judgment of N.O's Church, contended to be infallible in all Necessaries,
viz. in the Definitions of a lawful General Council? Or, in matters not so
defined, to rest in the judgment of the supremest Courts of the Church
Catholic that can be had; which Church Catholic is but One, and subordinate
in its members, see-before,. 26? In stead therefore of some particular Church
Orthodox, let this be sought out; and perpetually adhered to, when found.

Page 109. l. 7. Do make all men impeccable if they will. So far as God gives
any man grace not to sin, every one may be impeccable or may not sin, if he
will; i.e, if he uses his best endeavors. That all are sinners, I speak as to
Actual Sin, is from all failing in their will and endeavors.

Ibid. l. 14. Who can believe the Goodness of God, and yet think, that he will
suffer those who sincerely endeavor to know what is necessary to their
salvation not to understand it? They are not to be supposed sincerely to
endeavor to know things Necessary as they ought, who do not repair to the
Church to learn of her Gods Truth, where this is obscure to them in the letter
of Scripture.

Ib. l. 17. How often does the Scripture promise a greater degree of knowledge
to the meek, and humble, and diligent. God teaches the humble and diligent as
well by his Church, as by his Scriptures: and one and a great duty of such
persons is their seeking instructions from, and the submission of their
judgment to, those Spiritual Guides and Pastors, whom God has set over them,
on purpose that they may not be carried away with every wind of doctrines, Ephesians.
4.11, 13.
in matters that are otherwise to them obscure.

Page 110. l. 2. His word so clear in necessary things, that no one who
sincerely endeavors to know them, shall ever miss of salvation. Here,
notwithstanding what was said before by our Author p. 96, 97. and 107, 108. of
using others directions, resting in the judgment of a Church, trusting the
learned so and so qualifyed, we are relapsed again into the 13th and 15th
Principles; and all the weight laid on the Clearness of Scripture, as to all
persons, in all Necessaries: for, in some, none deny it.

Annotations on his. 6. N. O's Proofs of Infallibility examined.
Page 112. l. (12) I come to his particular Arguments which ly scattered up and
down; but to give them the greater strength I shall bring them nearer together.
N.O. writing no set Discourse on a chosen or single subject, but Considerations
on 30 several Principles of the Dr's, and some Consequences also drawn from
them, his Considerations varying so as the Principles, expected the Dr should
in the same order have vindicated his 30 Principles, as he laid them down, and
have discovered the Considerer's mistakes. Instead of this, as if loath to come
to such a trial, close, and perspicuous to the Reader, he finds the Dr adorning
a new Discourse, as an Answer to a former Treatise that had pitched on the same
subject, casting new Methods; gathering together here and there his Adversary's
Concessions; extracting his Principles (and with what fidelity the Reflections
on them have shown), contracting and giving the sum and sense of what N. O.
thought he had writ most compendiously, and not after the manner of an
Harangue, or Sermon (that needed to be epitomized); and telling his Reader here
p. 112. that he will bring nearer together N. O's arguments which ly in him
scattered up and down [that is, are there fitted to the particular Principle
that is discoursed of] to give them the greater strength [a kindness
Controvertists use to do to one another for their own advantage]; and so, after
much pains taken in altering and transforming, and transplacing N. O's
Conceptions, and drawing them off from the Principles they were fixed and
applied to; and omitting them also where he thinks fit, and where they will not
come within his Methods; and so leaving his Principles also, together with
them, abandoned and unguarded (for, of the Thirty Six the Reader will find in
all this Book a very few re-confidered) he in fine confutes a thing of his own
making, not N. O's.

Page 113. l. 14. Is it then to be imagined, that if Christ had intended such
an infallibility as the foundation of the faith and peace of his Church, he
would not have delivered his mind more plainly and clearly in this matter?
Scriptures; and to his Apostles, before them. The knowledge of which Promise of
our Lord concerning such an infallible Assistance to be for ever continued to
his Church and its Guides should always have descended to Posterity by
Tradition, had there been no Scriptures: Delivered this so plainly, as that,
upon all Controversies, concerning the dubious sense of Scriptures, thought
necessary to be decided, the Church's subjects de facto have repaired to these
Guides as believed infallible in all Necessaries upon the account, * of our
Lords assisting them with his Holy Spirit promised in and before these
Scriptures; and * of their being left by our Lord behind him for this end,
amongst others, to keep the Church Catholic always in one Faith and one Body.
And by these unfailing Guides the Church has ever understood the Supreme
Governors and Pastors of the Church assembled in a lawful General Council, or
otherwise unanimously agreeing; Of which Councils the first was that convened
Act. 15. about stating the Controversy concerning Mosaical Ceremonies; when, S.
Austin says Contra Cresconinm l. 1. c. 3.
-- Inter Apostolos de Circumcisione quaestio, sicut postea de Baptismo inter
Episcopos, non parva difficultate nutabat. And these Fathers of the Church also
so assembled, as acknowledging and owning the same their Infallibility in
Necessaries from the same Divine Promises, have accordingly from time to time
determined and stated Controversies even in the highest and most necessary
points concerning the B. Trinity, and concerning the Humanity of our Lord; and
some of these Decisions, that were thought more necessary to be of all men more
explicitly known, they have inserted into the common Creed, and have enjoined
to all the members of Christ the belief of them, as matters of Faith; and as
themselves declaring the true and genuine Sense of the Scriptures therein.
Witness the points inserted by these Councils in the Athanasian Creed, and that
with an -- Haec est fides Catholica, quam nisi quisque fideliter firmiterque
crediderit, salvus esse non poterit. Nay, added this also in the Creed
concerning themselves and the faithful joined with them, that he Catholic
Church continues always Apostolica [preser^ing the Apostles Rules Traditions
and Doctrines], and Vna [ indivisa in se, and divisa ab omnibus aliis; viz.
such Churches or Congregations as are Heretical, or Schismatical] As also
before, in the Apostles Creed it is styled Sancta, i.e. so far, as not to
teach any Doctrine in Faith or Manners destructive to S^lvation; and therefore,
among others, not to teach Idolatry. And accordingly the doctrine of these
Fathers and Councils the Church has generally alleged as certain and
infallible against Heretics.

Diffusive and these her Councils have thus understood our Lords Promises (the
thing we here speak of), as securing for ever the Infallibility as to
Necessaries of these Highest Ecclesiastical Courts; and any obscurity in the
letter of any of these Scriptures (were there any in this matter) this
Tradition has cleared to us as to the Sense of them. And this Practice of
Councils and the Church-Diffusive N. O. has pressed, to any who demand it, as
a most incontrollable Evidence both of the constant Tradition of such
Church-Infallibility (as evident as that of the Canon of Scriptures is; or more
than it for some parts of the Canon; since by these Councils also has this
Canon been settled), and of the true sense of our Lords Promises in the
Scriptures (or at least of some of them), that are urged for this matter.

Promises of our Lord Protestants also extend to the Church after the Apostles
times thus far; that, in general, the Church Diffusive shall never fail or err
in Necessaries in any age. Nay, that some Body of Clergy or other shall never
fail to teach all necessary truths in this Church in any age; as we have seen
but now in Dr Field: See Note on p. 107. l. 9
And yet further, that General Councils, universally accepted, have been and
always shall be infallible in their Determinations concerning matters of
Necessary Faith 1 Of which thus the Archbishop p. 346.
-- A General Council de post facto after it is ended and admitted by the whole
Church is then infallible. 2 And then for an universal acceptance I suppose
none can be justly demanded greater or larger than that of the four first
Councils was. And thus Dr St. Rat. Account. p. 537.
(urged by N. O.) -- That both the truth of Gods promises [surely, that is in
the Scriptures], the goodness of God to his people, and his peculiar care of
his Church seem highly concerned, that such a Council should not be guilty of
any notorious error: [as an error in any Necessary must be].

Scriptures showing these Promises (since the Dr so earnestly calls for them)
which are usually produced by Catholic Writers, (and which are the Church's
old Armor, as the Dr calls it See p. 127.
for this point; Armor very venerable indeed for its Antiquity, but well
preserved from the rust he complains of, by the Church's so frequent use of it
against such as the Dr.) are these and several others -- Matt. 28.19, 20. --
Jo. 14.16, 26. -- 16.15. etc. compared with Act. 15.28. -- 1. Jo. 5.20.27. --
1. Cor. 12.7, 8. -- Mat. 18.20. compared with 17, 18. -- Mat. 16.18, 19. -- Lu.
23.31. -- 1. Tim. 3.15. -- 2. Tim. 2.19. -- Ephesians. 4.11, 13. -- 2. Pet. 3.16. To
which Texts may be added all those enjoining Unity of Opinion: as 1. Cor. 1.10.
-- Phil. 1.27. -- 2.2, 3. -- 3.16. -- Romans 12.16. -- 17.17. -- 1. Cor. 14.32,
33. Which Unity of Opinion I ask how it can be had, unless there be in the
Church some Persons, whose Judgment, Doctrine, Faith, Spirit, all the rest are
to follow and conform to? Which Scriptures forementioned you may see also
briefly vindicated from su^^ glosses as Protestants, and particularly Dr St. in
his Rat. Account, p. 256. etc.
do put upon them, in the 1. Disc. concerning the Guide in Controversies. 78.
etc. But, whatever may be urged (touching the sense of these Scriptures) pro or
con by particular Authors, yet both the foresaid practice of General Councils
built upon such a traditive sense of those Texts, as Catholics contend for,
and the Church's general approving and acceptance of such practice, and
submission to it, is a sufficient prescription of Tradition to warran^ and
secure such a sense against all contradiction, Therefore N. O. p. 57. tells the
Dr, that Catholics are not necessitated, in arguing against Protestants, who
grant the Scriptures to be Gods word, to use any other Testimony than that of
these Scriptures for a sufficiently clear proof of Church-infallibility. For
that he may safely call this a clear proof, even according to the Dr's common
reason of Mankind, which by the most of the Christian world is taken to be so,
notwithstanding that a Party, engaged by their Reformation in an apparent
contrary interest, do contradict it. [And indeed, if we look after the fact it
self and the fulfilling of such a sense of them as applied to S. Peter's
Successor, and to the Roman and other Churches united to it, the Dr I think
grants, that these Churches or their Prelates assembled in their most General
Councils, from the Apostles days to the present de facto never have erred in
points Necessary to the Being of a Church. Of which see what is said in the
former Discourse. 53. and the places cited out of him in Note on p. 75. l. 5.
N. 8. And he seems necessitated thereto for the reason given before Ibid. N. 7.
Now, if this Being of a true Church or a member of the Catholic be stated as
it ought, or as Dr Field l. 2. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 2. has stated it, it must be
affirmed that these Churches, being allowed members of the Catholic, have
hitherto never fallen into any Heresy.]

Plea of N. O. I desire may be applied by the Reader to the Dr's Discourse, so
often as he questions such a sense of these Scriptures and Promises of our
Lord, or such a Tradition, and that the Reader would well examine, what
satisfaction he finds from the Answers the Dr has here returned to it. Which
former practice of Church and Councils, if once allowed, Chillingwor^h p. 200.
saw pressed so far for Church-Infallibility, and a proportionable Obedience to
it, that, as N. O. has observed in his Preface, he plainly declares -- That
what warrant the Fathers of the Church in after times to the Apostles, had to
oblige others to receive their Declarations under pain of damnation [which they
did] he knew not: and that he that can show either that the Church of all ages
was to have this authority, or that it continued in the Church for some ages
and then expired [this, because some Protestants, amongst whom this Dr, would
willingly submit to four or five of the first Councils, for which yet
Chillingworth could see no just reason why such Post-Apostolick Authority for
some time admitted should not be so always], he that can show either of these
things (says he) let him; for my part I cannot. [He goes on] Yet I willingly
confess the Judgment of a Council, though not infallible, yet so far directive
and obliging, that, without apparent reas^n to the contrary, it may be sin to
reject it, at least not to afford is an outward submission for public peace
sake. Where the words though not infallible show that he held, the practice of
former Councils, disallowed by him, clearly inferred Infallibility; the thing
N. O. urges.

Mean while, whatever satisfaction he may find for either opinion here debated,
the Reader may observe; that, both from Scripture and Tradition N. O. contends
for the Infallibility of General Councils in Necessaries, and accordingly
requires Submission of judgment to their Definitions; the Dr opposes it: and
the Reader has also just cause to think there is some reason and interest in
the two Religions, of N. O. and of Dr St. and Mr Chillingworth, for this
defense made by the one, and Opposition by the other: and lastly any plebeian
may discern, what are the two necessary effects, of the submission of private
men's judgments to General Councils, as such; or withdrawing it from them, as
not such: viz. Unity, and Division.

Page 113. l. 19. How easily might all the contentions of the Christian world
have been prevented, if Christ had said, etc. We must not prescribe to God, but
humbly leave to him the way, how he shall be pleased to manife^t his Will to
us, (sure to be, one way or other sufficiently made known), by the clearness of
his Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11.19
or expositions of his Church. For also -- Oportet esse haereses, ut qui
probati sum, manifesti fiant. Would not the Creed of Pius 4. or the 39.
Articles of the Church of England, delivered by our Lord or his Apostles have
prevented many Controversies now extant? See in the former Discourse. 1.

Page 115. l. 5 If this point [viz. of an infallible Judge] be not clearly
proved, we are never the nearer an end of controversies etc. Yes. If such an
unappealable Judge be proved, as none may oppose, or reform against.

Ib. l. 18. Let them if they can produce one clear Text etc. I referr to the
Texts forementioned Note on p. 113. l. 14. numb. 4.
, interpreted by the common practice of Councils, and of the Church in all
ages, grounded upon the traditive understanding them in such a s^nse.

Annotations on his. 7. The Arguments from Scripture for Infallibility.
Page 116. l. 1. When I came thus prepared to find wh^t the Considerator would
produce in a matter of such consequence, I so^n discerned, how little mind he
had etc. N. O. ^s not obliged to say every thing in every place. This Author
will needs transform. N. O's brief Considerations on his Principles into a set
Discourse of Infallibility, and then show its Defectiveness, as such. One would
think, if he had not the reputation of a learned man, done on purpose to divert
his Reader from any other matters that are debated there by N. O, and to
release himself from prosecuting the necessary vindication of his own
Principles from the several deficiencies charged on them, in the Considerations.

Ib. l. 10. But however, this [Deut 17.10.] is thought so considerable as to be
twice produced. Upon our Authors mentioning the clearness of Gods Law given to
Moses, N. O. mentioned these Judges also appointed to expound it: and the one
is twice repeated, because the other twice urged.

Ib. l. 13. It is so unlucky, as it proves the Judges in Westminster Hall to be
infallible. Of this Comparison of the Sanhedrim to the Judges in Westminster
Hall, and how the great causes between Church and Church are fit to be handled
there, See his Epist. Dedicatory.
let our Author, if he can, give a just account. These Judges were appointed by
God to decide the true Sense of the Law not of Princes, but of God, given to
Moses; and all persons obliged to acquiesce in the sense they gave of it; and
to do and forbear to practice as they (fallible, or infallible) stated such
matter to be commanded or prohibited by it; and that upon pain of death. This
Obedience let Protestants yield to lawful General Councils; more is not desired.

Ib. l. (11) Does this imply infallibility? No, that he dares not stand to, but
absolute obedience. I think the Dr grants here, the people yielded absolute
obedience to these Judges: i.e, I suppose, assent to their sentence, deciding
to them what was the true sense of Gods Law; which is all N. O. presses (and
indeed, unless they first yielding this, the people could not lawfully act
whatever these Judges commanded). Do the people then the same to the Judges in
Westminster? i.e. hold themselves obliged to do whatever these tell them is
lawful, or commanded, I mean by God's law? Let him review here what he has
said in his Rational Account, if he pleases, p. 239. to the contrary; allowing
an obligation to submission or acquiescence, but not an obligation in
conscience: and, if he please too, that which Mr Chillingworth c. 2.. 17.
has observed of the difference between a Civil and Ecclesiastical Judge: Viz.
that in civil controversies we are obliged only to external passive obedience,
and not to an internal and active. We are bound to obey the sentence of the
Judge, or not to resist it; but not always to believe it just. But in matters
of Religion such a Judge is required, whom we should be obliged to believe to
have judged right. So that in civil controversies every honest understanding
man is fit to be a Judge; but in Religion none but he that is infallible [at
least in all necessary matters]. Thus he.

Ib. l. (9). Which absolute obedience we are ready to yield, when we see the
like absolute command for Ecclesiastical Judges of controversies of Religion,
as there was among the Jews for their Supreme Judges in matters of law. What
thinks he of our Lords Dic Ecclesiae -- and -- Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit
tibi sicut Ethnicus etc, in the sense wherein Church-Tradition has understood
this Text as applied to the highest Courts of the Church, and to their cutting
off by a spiritual death the disobedient, whether contradicters, or dissenters?
Is there more injustice and tyranny in this, than inflicting a corporal death
on the dissenters or contradicters, under Moses his law? This Discourse of the
Dr, as also what he has said of the same matter, Rat. Account. p. 239. I had
occasion to examine in the former Discourse,. 22. etc, to which I referr the
Reader for what is here omitted.

Page 117. l. 7. Such a pretense, implying an infallible assistance of the
Spirit of God, there were but two ways of proving it, either 1. By such
Miracles as the Apostles wrought to attest their Infallibility; or 2. By those
Scriptures, from whence this Infallibility is derived. What thinks he of a
third way of proving it, viz. By Tradition? But then, If the Church-Guides give
this evidence of their being infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost in
necessaries, namely the clear Testimony of the Scriptures, I ask, is not this
sufficient for the world to credit them to be so, without their doing Miracles?
Does not this Author, of the two ways to prove it named just before, allow
either of them sufficient? Now see this latter proved before in Note on p. 113.
l. 17. and so I hope we may peaceably take leave of Miracles.

Page 118. l. 2. When I speak of infallibility in fundamentals, I there declare
that I mean no more by it, than that there shall be always a number of true
Christians in the world. Now, whence learns he this, that true Christians shall
never fail? I suppose, whence other Protestants do: viz. from the Promise of
our Lord in Scripture, that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against his
Church. See Archbishop Lawd p. 140. -- That the whole Church (says he) cannot
err in doctrines absolutely fundamental seems to me to be clear by the promise
of Christ Mat. 16. That the gates of hell etc. [And it is as clear, that the
Archbishop meant it not only of a number of true Christians, as our Author
does here; but, of true Pastors also and Doctors of the Church.] If this
Promise then be enough for believing of this, the non-failing of Christians
that shall believe all necessary truth without Miracles; will it not, supposing
such a promise made to them, be as sufficient for believing the other, the
indefectibility of the Church-Guides as to teaching all necessary faith,
without their doing Miracles?

Ib. l. 16. But, in case any persons challenge an infallibility to themselves
antecedently to the belief of Scriptures etc, such persons are equally bound to
prove their infallibility by Miracles as the Apostles were. What if they
challenge this Infallibility like wise from the Scriptures; as most certainly
they do? This latter challenge of theirs, surely, will supersede Miracles. But
let us suppose no such challenge. What thinks he, if they produce the evidence
of Tradition for their Infallibility antecedently to Scripture, as also they
do? Is not this (we here suppose there is such a Tradition, which is proved
before Note on p. 113. l. 14.
) a sufficiently clear and self-evident proof of it? If not of their
Infallibility; how then is the same Tradition, without Miracles, a sufficient
proof to Protestants of the Canon or Infallibility of Scriptures? Suppose the
same promises made and no Scriptures written, would not the Catholic Church
have been, what it is? and, must it then have perpetually-shewn Miracles, or no
Infallibility as to Necessaries have been believed in it?

Ib. l. (7) The Sum of which is etc. In the Dr's suming of N.O's Answers still
something is lost: as here, the Reason is omitted, why no such need of Miracles
to be done by the Church Governors, delivering only from age to age that
Doctrine, which by the first Teachers was sufficiently confirmed by Miracles:
viz. this, the Evidence of Tradition, which, received from the Apostles and
from their Ancestors, they unanimously convey unto Posterity. Yet such Miracles
were necessary then to more persons than those Apostles who made the very first
Sermons concerning the Gospel; because the bare Tradition of a few at the first
was not so evidently credible, as that which by many Sermons made, and Miracles
done, in many places, afterward became Universal.

Page 119. l. 12. The necessity of Miracles was to give a sufficient motive to
believe to all those to whom the Gospel was proposed.

Must all then, in the Apostles times, who received the faith see their
Miracles? Or, if their Miracles, only related to them by a creditable
Tradition, would serve the turn, why not the same Miracles related, now?

Page 120. l. 1. Those persons ought to confirm that authority by Miracles, as
the Apostles did. And again l. 20. See Note on p. 118. l. 11.

Ibid. l. (11.) Yet he is very loath to let go the Miracles of their Church done
in latter times as well as formerly. N.O. See Consid. p. 29.
. is loath to let go the Miracles of their Church: i.e. of the Catholic Church,
East or West, (for both have been noted for Miracles). In latter times: i.e.
from the Apostles days to the present: there being the same evidences, in all
ages, of the facts (I say not, of all the facts that are related, but of many
of them, which is sufficient); and the same Reasons, where and when the World
is already Christian, in all times for the doing of them. N.O. loath to let them
go; not as to this, his affirming a Necessity of them now in the Church for the
believing of its Infallibility, or any other part of the Christian Doctrine; or
also, for the Conversion of the yet Infidel and Heathen Nations after such a
plenitude of Tradition appearing in the greatest part of the world already
subdued by the Gospel: Of which non-necessity. N.O. says Princ. Consid. p. 29.
-- That Miracles, having been wrought by the Apostles in confirmation of that
Doctrine, which their Successors deliver from them, are not now alike necessary
to, or reasonably demanded of, these their Successors.

very loath, notwithstanding this, to part with true Miracles still wrought in
the Church since the Apostles times: and these too of the very same kinds, as
were some of those at least, that were done by the Apostles, and our Lord
himself: viz. by which Devils have been cast out, the blind received their
sight, lame have walked, lepers, been cleansed, deaf heard, Dead been raised
up: And this for many good ends, though the Conversion of Infidels or Atheists,
(that in all times, more or fewer, ly hidden within the Church of God) be not
numbered amongst them. As, for the Confirmation of the Catholic Faith against
Heretics and Schismatics; Or, for attestation of the Sanctity of those who
work such Miracles, for others imitation of their mortifications and virtues:
or for the more visible testimony of Gods Presence in the Church, and the
encouragement of Prayer to him, and Faith in him, and expecting help from him
in all manner of occurrences and necessities, and the like. And, for a proof of
the Continuance of such Miracles still in the Church, even when and where
Christianity already was firmly rooted and established, N.O. made choice, for
an Instance, of that Relation in S. Austin De Civ. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8. of the
very many true Miraracles in these kinds he himself had known and seen in his
own days and Diocese. Of which he there says -- Si miracula sanitatum, ut alia
taccam, ea tantummodo velim scribere, quae per hunc Martyrem id est,
gloriosissimum Stephanum, facta sunt in Colonia Calamensi and in nostra,
plurimi conficiendi sunt libri. And -- Nondum est biennium, ex quo apud
Hipponem Regium caepit esse ista memoria, and multis, quod nobis certissimum
est, non datis libellis, de ijs quae mirabiliter facta sunt, illi ipsi qui dati
sunt ad septuaginta ferme numerum pervenerant, quando ista conscripsi; Calamae
vero, ubi and ipsa memoria prius esse caepit and crebrius dantur, incredibili
multitudine superant. Vzalietiam, quae Colonia Vticae vicina est, multa
praeclara per eundem Martyrem facta cognovimus. Many of which Miracles were of
the same kinds as those done by our Lord and his Apostles; many Blind restored
to sight besides him at Millain; the Infirm in all sorts of inveterate and
irrecoverable diseases miraculously cured; evil Spirits ejected both out of
Persons, and Houses; and many Dead also restored to life; the Father mentions
of these last some six, or seven. Which Miracles he has collected in that
Chapter, being first clearly evidenced to him; and of which he caused to be
drawn up public Bills or Records and Memorials to be recited to the people,
imitated in this by the Church-Governors in latter times. -- Id namque fieri
voluimus (says he Ibid.
) cum videremus antiquis similia divinarum signa virtutum etiam nostris
temporibus frequentari. [Where our Author See Dr St. 2. Disc. c. 3. of
Miracles, p. 578.
finds signa or (...), as well as (...); and this long after Julian was
destroyed; and where there were (some Heretics perhaps, but) no Pagans to
behold, or be converted by, them. Which Frequency of so great Miracles, within
the compass of so small a time, if seemed convenient to the Dr in that
Discourse p. 585.
to pass over in silence, and to discover to his Reader no more than the cure
of one blind man at Millan, a Cancer, a Fistula, and two shaking persons in
Africa: and then to conclude that S. Austin confesses, they were neither for
number nor quality to be compared with Christ's, and his Apostles.] N.O had
reason, then, to be loath to part with Miracles in the Church for the times that
followed the Apostles: and to be loath to part with them as well for the latter
as the former times, if these Miracles equally evidenced in both: and
especially also when there is no reason pretendable, after the Christian
Religion formerly planted in such Churches, for these done in the former, that
does not as well suit to the latter, ages.

Miracles, whether Ancient, or Modern, to have been feigned (for, what gains
credit is apt to be so), or also vain and ridiculous, (for; several, when
feigned by the vulgar, are so), which also are both granted, and discovered, to
be so by Catholics, to sway any so much, as from thence to draw a Conclusion,
either that none at all of latter times, related in Saint's Lives, or other
Church History, are true and sufficiently testified; or that, being true, they
do not sufficiently serve the turn, which the rest that are falsified, for all
the Ends forenamed. And thus only, it seems, could this Enquiry into Romans
Miracles.
Author have written to the purpose in that long discourse of his, if he had
showed, none of the Miracles pretended in the Roman Church to have been
sufficiently attested, or equally, to those of Antiquity, which he allows: or,
none to have been of the same kind with our Lord's and his Apostles: and so not
these where frequently done, to have manifestly, testified (as theirs did) the
truth of the Religion that is in such a society professed: And, again, * if he
had showed the many Catholic Authors he cites, to have complained not of some,
but a general falsification of the Miracles occurring in the Records of latter
times: I say, thus this Author had written something to the purpose. But here
the mischief is, that all these Catholic Authors quoted by him do maintain a
continuance of true Miracles, to some degree, and as to some persons, still in
the Church: and as they inveigh against the fraud and forgery of some, so stand
up as much for the truth and certainty of others; and, out of their affection
to the credit of the one, do so much endeavor to sever from them, and crush,
and suppress, the other.

Ib. l. (4.) All the Miracles pretended among them signify nothing to our
present purpose; unless these miracles give evidence of the authority, and
infallibility, of those, by whom they were done. Here I say; First, that there
is no necessity of evidencing now the Church's Authority, or Infallibility by
Miracles. 2ly, That true Miracles, I mean, such, as our Lord and his Apostles
did, the giving sight to the blind, raising the dead, etc, especially if there
be considered a like frequency and proof or evidence of them, are done only in
the Catholic Church (where also the Frequency of them produces that firm
belief, by the satisfaction and conviction of many persons by some or other of
these miracles, that are either seen by them, or by such as were present are
confirmed to them, which belief some single Facts in other false Religions,
that are rarely pretended to be done, and in some remote times, and so are
destitute of any such evidence of attestation, or discovery of their truth,
cannot effect). And that such Miracles as these are not done (for any end
whatever) elsewhere by Heathens, or by Heretics. For, if such Miracles, no way
distinguishable or diversified from those of our Lord or his Apostles, were
seen to be really done by false Religions as well and as usually as in the
Church Catholic, the End, wherefore done, would be a thing of the greatest
uncertainty; and most easily mistaken, or misrelated: and, after the Clear
evidence of such Miracles done there, this end would be represented by every
Religion to their own advantage, as they pleased; and thus all Religions would
come to have an undiscernably equal Plea of their Confirmation by Miracles.
Therefore in the Scripture we find not the End, why the Miracle was done,
chiefly insisted on or proved to the people, (Yet the clearing of which End, in
such case of all Religions doing the same True Miracles, were the thing the
most necessary) but the Fact; and from it presently gathered the Catholickness,
and the Divine approbation, of the Person. See John. 9.16, 17, 30, 31, 33. Such
and so well attested Miracles therefore as our Lord and his Apostles did I
gather never have been, never shall be, done by any persons in false Religion,
or that are no members of the Catholic Church. 3. And then, this granted, I
may hence safely conclude also, that such Miracles do always evidence the
Church wherein they are done to be the Catholic, and so that Church, to which
our Lords Promises of Infallibility, as to all Necessaries, do belong. Add to
this; that, if any True Miracles can be shown in the Roman Church, the Dr's
words following seem to make good its Infallibility: -- For (says he p. 121.
l. 1.
) they would do well to show, where, ever in Scripture God did bestow a gift of
Miracles upon any, but for this end, [i.e. to give evidence of the Authority
and Infallibility, those by whom they were done]; and what reason there is,
that God should alter the method and course of his Providence, in a matter of
so great concernment to the Faith of Mankind. So he. If then God never bestows
a gift of Miracles for any other end, save this; then, if true Miracles such as
our Lord's be proved, Infallibility also is proved, to be in the Roman
Catholic Church.

But, to reflect on these words of his, -- [ They would do well to show, etc.],
a little further. If our Author means here, by the Miracle's showing the
infallibility of the Worker, such an Infallibility as the Apostles had in
delivering nothing by word or writing but Gods word and the Dictates of the
Holy Ghost, I can show him in Scripture many, that were the Instruments of
working miracles and had not this; as those Corinthians and others in the
Apostles times, 1 Cor. 12.10, 28, 30. God bestowing this Gift on several others
there, besides the Apostles, who had not an Apostolical Infallibility. Of all
which holy persons, whom God honors thus with Miracles, though it may be said,
that, what such deliver for Gods Faith, certainly is so, (who otherwise would
never be assisted with Miracles, [which are always a seal of truth] if
delivering falsityes as Divine truths); Yet it cannot be said of them as of the
Apostles; that whatever they deliver is Gods Truth, whilst, in their delivering
it, they do not pretend it so; as the Apostles did so pretend it; and
therefore, upon doing Miracles, were to be believed in such their pretension.
But, if those whom God honors with miracles are to be believed in what they
say, then cannot their Miracles be urged for an infallibility in all they shall
teach or hold, who do themselves say and profess the contrary. Their Miracles
confirm and make good what they pretend to, but not more. I say then, if the Dr
means here: That whoever have the gift of doing Miracles have likewise such an
infallibility in all they say, as was in the Apostles, it holds not true. For,
the Corinthians also had such a Gift who were not in such a manner infallible.
But, if He means here, that none have had this Gift or done any such evident
and frequent Miracles, but such only as have taught or held the infallible
Catholic faith as to all the necessary points thereof; (the faith, I say,
which being entirely delivered by the Apostles there is no further need of
infallibility like to that of theirs, for conveying the same as it was received
from them to posterity), I accord with him; and contend, that none to this day
have had such Gift, save such Orthodox persons: No Pagans, no Heretics: true
Miracles such as our Lord and his Apostles did being distinctive signs that
accompany and follow only true Believers according to our Lord's promise Mar.
16.17. for whatever Ends these Miracles happen to be bestowed; as they may be
for many, besides the Confirmation of the Catholic Faith. Therefore, where a
Frequency of true Miracles is seen in any Communion, we may safely follow the
profession of its Faith: God having provided, that his Catholic Church and
true Miracles shall never be parted; i.e. that, where the latter are, there is
the former. By True Miracles I mean such (though it needs not to be, all such)
as our Lord and his Apostles did; and so clearly testified by Eyewitnesses, as
their's were or might be. And I exclude here all such effects, though
miraculous to us, as evil Spirits, God permitting, have a power to effect by
the instrumency and ^pplication of some natural Agents, though this
transcending any humane Art or Capacity. For, such miracles, I willingly grant
both Magicians and also Heretics and Schismatics may operate by the
assistance of these Angelical powers therein; either Voluntary, or also
constrained as to the inferior sort of these Spirits compelled thereto by
their Superiors. But the former, such as our Lord and his Apostles wrought,
surpassing all the power of Nature do also that of Evil Spirits, or of any
their Instruments, and are by Christians easily distinguishable from these
other.

Page 121. l. 7. Such Miracles as were wrought by Christ and his Apostles we
defy all other Religions in the world to produce any like them, to confirm
their Doctrine. i.e. As one may understand him; Neither Heathens, neither
Heretical Churches can ever do any such Miracles as were wrought by our Lord
and his Apostles, viz. give sight to the blind, cure the sick, raise again the
dead, etc. From which it follows, that whatever Church does such Miracles must
be the Catholic; and from this, that such Miracles wherever they are found in
any age, do show the Church wherein they are done to be Infallible in
Necessaries; for so the Catholic Church is. But, if here he puts in the last
words [ to confirm their doctrine] as limiting the former, and carrying such a
sense, that other Religions, beside the Catholic, may also do all such
Miracles as our Lord and his Apostles did for some other ends; but not for
this, viz. to confirm their doctrine, or Religion, I think he will have an hard
task of it, either * to show, that the Historians, that have related such
miracles have not also applied them to the justifying of the Doctrine and
Religion that such Heathen or Heretical Miracle-workers professed, and of the
Honor of those Gods, they served [suppose those Miracles of Pythagoras or
Aesculapius, or Apollonius Thyanaeus, or of the Arian or Donatist-Bishops; who
urged them against S. Austin for a justification of their sect and orthodoxness
of their doctrine]. Or, on the other side, * to show; that those, who have
related our Lord's and his Apostle's Miracles, have, to give these their just
force and value, expressed always that they were done to this end the Dr
mentions here; and not to some other ends, from which consequently nothing
could be concluded concerning the truth of their doctrine: Of which end of them
therefore it concerned the world chiefly to be informed; not of the fact: Or *
to show, that our Lord or his Apostles always cleared this to be their end, to
their Auditors and spectatours; which was in the first place necessary to be
done. But the people we see, without examining this, argued the men to be from
God from their beholding the Miracles done: And the Pharisees, not dreaming of
the necessity of such a circumstance, never offered to elude any of our Lords
Miracles (as for example that done upon the blind man. Jo. 9.) alleging them
to be done not in confirmation of his doctrine, but upon some other by-account,
and so, as they might possibly be done also in a false Religion; and so his
Doctrine to be rendered no way more creditable thereby.

Ib. l. 10 But such as the Church of Rome pretends, scarce any Religion in the
world but has pretended to the same. 1st Here, that the same Miracles are
pretended by other Religions, that are by the Roman Church, will signify
nothing, if they have not as good ground for, or proof of, what they pretend:
Or, if those, which are not only pretended, but really done in the Roman, be
only pretended in the other. 2ly. The Roman Church pretends many such, as the
whole Catholic Church (if such a Church there was in being) did in many ages
before Luther, and even all along from the Primitive times; as sufficiently
appears in Ecolesiastical History. 3ly. These Miracles pretended both by the
present Roman and by the Ancient Catholic Church were of the very same kind as
those wrought by Christ and his Apostles; i.e. giving sight to the blind,
healing the sick, raising the dead, casting out devils, Fiunt ergo nunc (says
S. Augustine) multa miracula, eodem Deo faciente per quos vult, and quemadmodum
vult; qui and illa, quae legimus [in the Scriptures fecit De Civit. Dei, l. 22.
c. 8.
and which Miracles are such, as this Author here seems to say can never be
done by any other Religions than the true. 4ly, That such Miracles were not
only pretended, but really done in the Church Catholic in the ancienter times,
as in S. Austin's, this Author I suppose will not deny, or also has granted;
See in his 2. Disc c. 3. p. 578.580. and then there seems no reason why he
should deny the like in the Church of latter ages, or in the present, If there
appear first, as no absolute necessity of these Miracles in latter times, so
neither in S. Austin's 2ly, If there be the same ends and benefit of them still
in these, as in his; viz. the greater manifestation of Gods Presence and
Providence in his Church; the Honor he is pleased to do to his more
extraordinary faithful Servants; the rewards of a strong and unwavering Faith
of obtaining what is asked for his better service, and greater glory; and
lastly, that end mentioned by S. Austin, our greater edification in the true
faith. See De Cura pro Mort. c. 16. where he faith, that Miracles are done --
Per Martyrum Memorias, quoniam hot novit expedire nobis ad adificandam fidem
Christi, pro cujus illi confessione sunt paessi; 3ly. Where the Histories of
latter times produce as evident and irrefragable testimonies of the truth of
several of these Miracles done in them (which is sufficient,) as those in S.
Austin's days had.

Ib. l. (7) Who all pretend to Miracles as well as the Church of Rome. Pretend
as well; but, I hope, not so truly; nor 2ly so much: the pretenses of Heathens
or Heretics to Miracles being no way comparable, for number, or greatness. to
those pretended in the Church Catholic, or Roman. No more, than Simon Magus
his are to those of the Apostles: and those few also, that are said to be done
by the Heathens after the Apostles days, seem seigned, in emulation of the
great reputation of those of Christians. But Pretenses on any side signify
nothing. The Catholic and the Roman Church require belief of Miracles not upon
pretense, but a Rational Evidence.

Page 122. l. 15. But, he says, a Christians faith may begin either at the
infallible authority of Scriptures, or of the Church. i.e. That the first
Article that a Christian believes, or that, in his learning the Faith, is by
his Parents or other instructers first made known to him, may be this, that the
Scriptures are Gods word and infallible; or may be this, that the Church is
Infallible: I add, or perhaps neither of these, but some other: As that God
has a Son; and that he became Incarnate for his sake, and the like. Any of
which Articles such Christian may savingly and with a Divine faith believe,
without being made infallibly certain thereof from some other formerly-known
Divine Revelation, on which this Article may be grounded. As, for example, such
person may, with a divine and saving faith, believe the Scriptures to be Gods
word, before he believe the Church to be infallible that has defined the Canon
of Scripture: Or, believe the Church to be infallible, before he knows those
Scriptures to be Gods Word, by which Cnhurch-Infallibillity is proved.

Ib. l. 18. It seems then, there may be sufficient ground for a Christian
faith, as to the Scriptures, without believing any thing of the Church's
Infallibility; and for this we have reason to thank him, whatever they of his
own Church think of it. Yes; there may so. A Christian, not as yet believing,
the Infallibility of the Church as divinely assisted, may both believe, and
have a sufficient ground of believing the Infallibility of Scripture, viz. the
forementioned Tradition. And, as Catholic Writers ordinarily state it, to whom
the Dr owes his thanks, as well as to N. O, It is not necessary, that the first
thing every Catholic believes, or is sufficiently certain of, be
Church-Infallibility. See the Catholic Authors cited in 3d Disc. of the
Guide,. 129. n. 4. etc.

Ib. l. (3). Nay he goes yet farther, and says, That the Infallibility of
Scriptures, as well as the Church, may be proved from its own testimony. And
adds this Reason. For (says he Princ. Consid. p. 37.
) whoever is proved [i.e. by some other medium] or granted once infallible in
what he says, the consequence is clear (without any Circle or Petitio
principii, or identical arguing) that whatever be does witness of himself is
true. And can the Doctor disprove this?

Page 123. l. 5. Not showing at all, how the infallibility of the Church can be
proved from Scripture. And the reason of this was, to show that Catholics have
no necessity, for proving Church-Infallibility, to return to the testimony of
the Scriptures for it; as the Dr and some other Protestants say, they must.

Annotations on his 8.. The Argument from Tradition for Infallibility.
Page l. 11. The method of his discourse is this, etc. Whoever learns the
method of ones discourse from an Adversary is seldom rightly informed: who will
not be deceived must consult the Author. As for example here, in the Dr's
giving an account of N. O's Method concerning Tradition, he has fairly left
out that which N.O. most pressed, viz. these Governors of the Church in their
General Councils inserting from time to time, as they thought fit, their
Decisions in the Church's Creeds; which shows what opinion both General
Councils and the whole Church have had of the Infallibility of their Decisions,
and which by N. O. was named in the first place, and preceded their
Anathematizing of Dissenters.

Page 124. l. 8. What thinks he of the Religion of the Patriarcht, who received
their Religion by Tradition, without any such Infallibility? 1. First, he
thinks it somewhat strange, to see the Dr plead the certainty of Oral Tradition
(elsewhere by him so much decried) to evade Church-Infallibility. 2ly. He
thinks, that in those first times for their Religion people were not left
wholly to Tradition, which as to many points of their Religion, could not have
afforded them, especially such persons as had not much conversation abroad, a
sufficient Certainty therein: but that, then also, they had Priests and
Prophets endued with Gods Spirit; and who, as to the Office of Teaching, were
not only set over them for exhorting thein to a good life, but for directing
them also in all necessary Credends and Truths, and that the traditive doctrine
of these Priests so assisted must be granted much more not to be liable to
error in those points, wherein the Tradition of the people is thought by the
Dr sufficiently certain: so that the more the certainty of Tradition is
established, the more is confirmed their Infallibility also, who were the
principal Conservers of it. 3ly. He thinks also, that the Church of God had
even from the beginning many Positive Divine Laws, besides that of Nature,
prescribing many things in the Worship of God. So we find early in Genesis
mention of several laws committed afterward to writing by Moses, See before
Note on. p. 85. l. 14. Neither can he suppose Oral Tradition such a faithful
and exact Guide in all these laws, and to every one so well known, and that so
free from all controversy in necessary matters, as to supersede the necessity
of any Church-Infallibility in them. But, however it be in the Church under the
Old Testament, the Promises of an infallible guidance by Gods Holy Spirit to
its Governors seem much more necessary in the New for the certainty and
stability of Christian Religion in all its parts, where is such an enlargement
made of the Articles of Faith: and especially, if these should not have been
committed to writing.

Ib. l. (12) No such necessity of infallibility for that purpose. viz. for
receiving the Scriptures or Churches infallibility by virtue of common and
universal Tradition. True: there is no necessity of Church-Infallibility to
prove or assure them of Church-Infallibility, or other points of their faith,
such as are sufficiently evidenced to them by the forementioned Tradition. But
1 there is a necessity of Church-Infallibility still, (that so there may be a
stability and certainty in them even to the unlearned) as to many other points
of Necessary Faith, not so clear in Tradition as Church Infallibility is; nor
so clear as to be, thereby, self-evident to all Christians. As for example, for
this point of faith the Divinity and Consubstantiality of onr Savior, against
the Arian. Unless we may perhaps imagine, that the same or greater
Controversies in Religion that have risen notwithstanding the Scriptures, would
not so, without them, See before Note on p. 84. n. 4. a. Next Observe also.
That Church Infallibility, as it is divinely assisted, being a Divine
Revelation, is, in its delivering to us the other Articles of our faith, much
more relied and rested upon (in the same manner as all other Divine
Revelations, are) than the Evidence of Tradition in its delivering to us the
same Articles; though the Ground and Reason that such Infallibility is believed
to be a Divine Revelation, be Tradition.

Page 125. l. 1. For if the Tradition may be a sufficient ground if faith, how
comes Infallibility to be necessary? Thus: Tradition may be a sufficient ground
of Faith for some points clearly delivered by it, and as to the persons clearly
knowing such Tradition; and yet Church Infallibility be necessary for many
other points not cleared sufficiently to all men by Tradition. For, things of a
sufficiently general Tradition, which Tradition is reposed presently in
writings, cannot be so well known to all Christians, many neither having
learning, nor much conversation abroad, as Definitions of a Council may.

Ib. l. 7. And that therein the will of God is contained etc. Contained, but
not clearly. And this is the reason of putting Church-Infallibility,
notwithstanding these Divine writings; which reason holds also much more for
it, without them.

Ib. l. 17. That the Church would otherwise have failed, if there had been
neither Writings, nor Infallibility. Might have failed, i.e. by erring in such
Necessaries as are not, as to all, clearly delivered by Tradition.

Ib. l. (9). For we see God did furnish the Church with one [the Scriptures],
and left no footsteps of the other [Church-Infallibility]. Yes, the Definitions
of the Church contained in the Athanasian Creed are footsteps of it.

Ib. l. ult. Not left in to the determinations of men liable to be corrupted by
interest and ambition. i.e. Of Lawful General Councils, our pretended
Infallible Church-Guides.

Page 126. l. 2. But has appointed men inspired by himself to set down
whatever is necessary for us to believe and practice. Add: and has appointed
others, divinely-assisted also as to Necessaries, to determine both in belief
and practice what the former, as to all capacities, have not so clearly set
down, as that they may not be therein mistaken, or also by some teachers
misguided. Witness Dr St.'s testimony hereof Rat. Account. p. 58. pressed by
N.O. p. 63. where he grants this here said; and upon it allows, (as far as his
line will let him go) the sense, that the Catholic Church in succeeding ages
gives of the Scriptures, to be a very useful way for them to embrace the true
sense of the Scriptures even in Necessaries. His own words are -- It seems
reasonable, that, because art and subtilty may be used by such who seek to
pervert the Catholic doctrine, and to wrest the plain places of Scripture
which deliver it, so far from their proper meaning, that very few ordinary
capacities may be able to clear themselves of such mists, as are cast before
their eyes; the sense of the Catholic Church in succeeding ages may be a very
useful way for us to embrace the true sense of Scriptures; especially in the
great Articles of the Christian Faith. As, for instance, in the doctrine of the
Deity of Christ, or the Trinity. After which N.O. adds there, that the Dr
instead of saying, the sense of the Catholic Church in succeeding ages may be
a very useful way for us, might have said, is very necessary for us, if his
cause would permit him; and that the Socinian would thank him for this his
mitigation.

Ib. l. 11. The fraud and imposture of the confident pretenders to
infallibility. Viz. Of lawful General Councils.

Ib. l. 12. Which is the reason etc. They speak evil of Dignities Jude. v. 8.

Ib. l. (5) I confess I have seen nothing like the first evidence yet. It is
set down in the precedent page in these words -- Princ. Consid. p. 38
We may learn first this supernatural divine assistance and Infallibility of
these Governors (which is made known by Divine Revelation to those first
persons who communicate it to posterity) from Tradition descending from age to
age in such manner at the Protestant says, he learns his Canon of Scripture
from Tradition. To which Tradition also may be committed by our Lord or his
Apostles, whatever is, to Scripture. Perhaps His falling into a Fit of drollery
here made him oversee it.

Page 127. l. 5. What are its weapons? See before Note on p. 113. l. 14. n. 4.

Page 128. l. 3. It is I suppose agreed on both sides, that the Tradition on
which we receive and believe the Scriptures to be the word of God was universal
as to all ages, and times. No. Not so universal, as to all parts of the Canon.

Ib. l. 14. Let any thing like this be produced for the infallibility of the
Guides of their Church [ i.e. for the Infallibility of lawful General Councils;
for N.O. the Considerator treats of no other, and often mentions this], and we
will yield up the cause to them. See then what is produced concerning this
before, Note on p. 113. l. 14.

Ib.l. (7). The only argument etc. That which our Author alleges here, the
Councils anathematizing dissenters, and the Church's stiling them Heretics
upon it, is only a piece, divided from the rest, of what N.O. pressed. N.O's
words are these (urged by him with application to the Dr's 17. Principle, and
without designing any set Discourse on Church-Infallibility) Prineip. Consid.
p. 39
That the Governors of the Church (who having an apparent succession from our
Lord and his Commission, known by Tradition, their testimony must have been
unquestionably believed by Christians in what they taught, in case there had
been no Scripture) always reputed and held themselves divinely assisted, and
infallible for all necessaries; and, that this was the traditive faith of the
Church (grounded on our Lord's Promise) in all ages, sufficiently appears, by
their inserting from time to time (as they thought fit) their Decisions in the
Creeds, and by their anathematizing dissenters, and the Church's stiling them
Heretics ever after upon it. For that no authority (if we believe the Dr) but
that which proves it self infallible, [and therefore which is infallible], can
justly require our internal assent or submission of judgment. And that the
Protestants their allowing only an external obedience or silence due to
Councils fallible inferrs, that Councils fallible can justly require no more:
and, consequently, that such Councils are infallible, as do justly require
more; as did the four first Councils, with the voluntary acknowledgment also
and submission of their subjects to such an authority assumed by them.

We find indeed subordinate Councils also stating sometimes matte^s of Faith,
censuring Heretics, and requiring assent to their Decrees; but still with
relation to the same Infallibility residing in the General Body of
Church Governors, and their concurrence therein: They not passing such Acts
without consulting the Tradition and Judgment of other Churches, and especially
of the Apostolic See: and a general acceptance rendering such their Decisions
authentic and valid. To which may be added what N.O. said before Consid. p.
32. where the words of the Dr mentioned here are quoted more at large -- We see
(says N.O.) what kind of Obedience it was, that the first four General
Councils exacted in the Athanasian Creed, which contains the sum of their
Decrees, viz. no less than assent, and belief, and submission of judgment, and
all this upon penalty of damnation. And this, if justly required by them
inferrs, upon the Dr's arguing, their Infallibility. For (says he Rat.
Account, p. 506
) where Councils challenge an internal assent by virtue of their Decrees [or,
because their decrees are in themselves infallible] there must be first proved
an impossibility of error in them, before any can look on themselves as
obliged to give it. Here the Dr passes by several things urged by N.O. of
which see the former Disc. 69. and invades only this part; General Councils
their anathematizing dissenters, and pronouncing them Heretics, as he
expresses it; though N.O. spoke of the Church always afterward, stiling such
Dissenters from the Councils Decrees Heretics. The Doctors words here, are --
The only argument he insists upon is so weak, that I wonder he had not
considered how often it had been answered by their own Writers. For it is
certain that Provincial Councils as well as General, have anathematized
dissenters, and pronounced them Heretics, which is his only argument to prove
this Tradition of the Church's Infallibility; and they [the Catholicks] had no
way to answer it, but by saying, this does not imply their Infallibility. Where
he quotes in the margin. Bellarm. de Coucil. l. 2. c. 10.

Disc.. 65. etc. (and I think fit here to repeat, at least some part thereof,
to give the Reader the less trouble, by making frequent References): First in
general, that I do not understand what it is that our Author would maintain
here against N.O. Is it this? that neither anathematizing Dissenters, nor the
Councils putting their Decrees in the Churches Creeds, nor the Church
Catholick's afterward esteeming those Heretics that dissented from these
Councils, are a sufficient evidence or proof that these Councils at least (and
also the Church) accounted themselves Infallible in these their Decrees? What
could the most Infallible Judge do or exact more? Does not he below See p. 113.
blame the Roman Church for assuming such an Infallibility to her self, in
requiring such a belief of her Additional Articles defined in Trent, as of the
most fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith? And here, in what has been
urged out of him but now, does not he grant, the just requiring of an internal
assent to infer Infallibility? Or, will he justify it lawful for a Council,
that grants it self fallible in such its decrees, notwithstanding to do all
these things? And then may not the Council of Trent rightly do so? And lastly,
why does the Church of England, as themselves say, forbear such things? I say,
I see not clearly what here the Dr would have.

2ly, Coming to that which he presses concerning the practice of Provincial
Councils anathematizing Dissenters, and yet these Councils granted by
Catholics not Infallible; which Concession of Catholics, and particularly of
Bellarmine de Council l. 2. c. 10. is produced as ruining this weak argument of
N.O. that would prove, from Anathematizing Dissenters, Infallibility; First
here, N.O. consulting Bellarmin he is found ( De Council. l. 2. c. 3. where he
maintains the Infallibility of General Councils) to urge together with N.O.
this very Argument for it. See his words recited in the former Discourse 65.
Next; for the objection concerning Provincial Councils, N.O. had considered,
and answered it thus. Consid. p. 40.
-- We find indeed subordinate Councils also stating sometimes matters of
faith, censuring heretics, and requiring assent to their decrees; but still
with relation to the same Infallibility residing in the general Body of
Church Governors, and to their concurrence therein: They not passing such Acts
without consulting the Tradition and Judgment of other Churches, and especially
of the Apostolic See: and a general Acceptance rendering such their Decisions
anthentick and valid, so as those of General Councils are. (And Bellarmin's
answer l. 2. c. 16.
is showed to be in substance much-what the same). Dr St. replies to this, p.
125. l. 6.
That the Anathemas of Provincial Councils did not relate to the acceptance of
their Decrees, either by the Pope, or the whole Church, as N.O. supposes, but
did preceed upon their own assurance of the truth of what they decreed;
otherwise their anathemas would have been only conditional, and not absolute
and peremptory, as we see they were. Thus He. To which I Answer, that, though
such Anathemas of Provincial Councils do relate to the general approbation of
their Decrees; yet their Anathemas are rightly made not conditional, but
absolute: either because such a sufficient concurrence with them of the
Catholic Church is known to them before the composing their Decree; as it may
be, when yet the confirmation of their Act is only received after it: Or,
because such post-confirmation and acceptance after the penning of the Decree
yet precedes the promulgation and just force or obligation of it: It being
penned absolute, upon such a consent presupposed, as we see the Affrican
Anathemas were: and as it is the ordinary custom in all laws, the
establishment whereof depends on many successively, yet in their first style to
run absolutely, because such ratification is presupposed to their having the
due force of Laws. And so in General Councils, the Anathemas are penned
absolute, though these Councils and their Decrees have not their full strength
till the Confirmation thereof by the Sea Apostolic, and also such an
admittance and acceptance of them by the Church-Catholick diffusive, as is
thought necessary. Neither is the transaction of these Moral things to be
exacted according to the Rules in Mathematics.

Page 129. l. 10. But did proceed upon their own assurance of the truth of what
they decreed. Here, Does our Author allow fallible Councils, upon a persuasion
they have of the truth of what they decree, to anathe matize dissenters; and
pronounce them heretics? Then why may not the Council of Trent do so? Or, if
he means by their assurance, that Provincial Councils are certain, without
relation to any consent of the whole, that they do not err in such Decrees
where they pronounce Anathema, so he seems to give to these Provincial Councils
also an Infallibility, more than which Catholics do not desire to be allowed
to General; viz. the certainty that these Fathers, met in a General Council,
have, whether by the evidence of Scripture, or of Tradition, or of a necessary
Consequence from something Traditive, or at least, of our Lords promised
Assistance, that they do not err in those things they decree, though in many
other things they be sallible.

Ib. l. 14. He goes on thus -- But I need give no other answer to this argument
than in the words of Dr Field whom N.O. appealed to Fieid of the Church. l. 4.
c. 4.
[but in another matter, not this] before, viz. That Councils denounce anathema
not because they think every one that disobey the decree of the Council to be
accursed, but because they are perswad^^ in particular, that this is the
eternal truth of God which they pro^se, therefore they accurse them that
obstinately shall resist, as S. Paul wills every Christian man to
anathematize an Angel coming from heaven, if he shall teach them any other
doctrine than he has already learned: yet is not every particular Christian
free from possibility of erring. If the argument then were good from
anathematizing dissenters, and calling them heretics, every particular person
must by it be proved infallible who are bound to anathematize even Angel from
heaven in case of delivering any other doctrine from the Gospel.

that these General Councils do not denounce anathema [to dissenters] because
they think every one that disobeys the decree of the Council [i.e. by
dissenting] to be, [or to incurr their] Anathema. I answer to this; that then
they must hold their Anathema, universally pronounced, to be, as to such
persons, unjust: Which I suppose the General Councils did not. It is said
again; that because these General Councils are persuaded in particular that
this is the eternal truth of God that they propose, therefore they anathematize
them, that obstinately shall resist. But 1st, N.O. presses not these General
Councils their anathematizing them, that shall obstinatly resist that which
they propose; but them, that shall dissent from it; and he presses their
putting it also into the Creed, and under anathema requiring from all the
belief of it, and that as a matter of faith. 2. I contend, that no Council that
only is persuaded, but not certain, that that which it proposes (suppose the
Consubstantiality or Divinity of our Lord) is the eternal truth of God, can
justly insert such point in the Creed or anathematize Dissenters. But it is
agreed that the four first Councils did justly these things, and therefore they
were not only persuaded, but certain, that those were truths, and that in them
they were infallible, and then much more did hold themselves so, since one may
think himself to be, and yet not be, infallible.

Paul, It is answered; that S. Paul or a Galatian, must be certain of his not
erring in that, for the mere dissent from which he can justly anathematize
Angel, or Man: and none may anathematize another for his dissent not receiving,
or for his not believing, any thing, of the truth whereof he himself is not
certain; much less, if he does not so much as hold himself so: (which latter
will make the fault the greater): Unless perhaps such were the supreme and
unappealable Ecclesiastical Judge, and knew that none other could be in such
matter certain of the contrary. But this I grant; that who is certain and
infallible in some things, may not be so in all: neither do I contend for an
universal Infallibility even of General Councils in all things whatsoever, but
in all that are any way necessary to be determined. See Note on p. 104. l. 15.

Page l. 130. l. 7. Let the Reader now judge in his Conscience, etc. What thing
is there more public in the Church's Tradition, and of which there has been a
more remarkable Testimony in all ages, than of the repairing, where the
Ecclesiastical affairs required, or times permitted it, (following the
precedent of Acts 15.) to General Councils, or those some way equivalent, for
deciding the more important Controversies in Religion that disturbed the
Church: and than, of these Councils, when met, their requiring a belief and
assent from all Christians to their Definitions: and this assent accordingly
yielded by the Universal Church; which inferrs also a General belief and
acknowledgment of their Infallibility? And Councils are as well known for,
thus, deciding controversies in the Church, as he says the Judges are for
trying causes in Westminster Hall.

Ib. l. (7). I challenge him to produce any one age, wherein the infallibility
of a standing Judge of Controversies, appointed by Christ has been received by
as universal a consent as the authority of Scripture. Review the last Note. 1
This standing Infallible Judge are affirmed to be Lawful General Councils.
Which though as being a Court consisting of many it is not at all times
actually assembled and sitting, Yet the Members of this supreme Ecclesiastical
Court are always existent and in being; and retain their Authority from Christ
for judging matters of Faith equally, whether conjoined, or distant in place
from one another. And, when happens no convenience of assembling such a General
Council, the Consent of the Body of the Catholic Clergy, manifesting a
concurrence in their judgment, whether by several Provincial Councils, or by
any one, that is generally approved; Or, whether by Communicatory and Synodical
Letters; or whether appearing in a general accord in their public Writings,
Catechismes, and Explications of the Christian Doctrine, I say such Consent is
equivalent to a General Council. The Decrees also and Definitions of former
General Councils are always standing in force, and the execution of them
committed to the care of the present Church Governors. This of the standing
Judge. 2 As for the Infallibility thereof, the Universal consent of the Church
has admitted, as the Authority and Infallibility of Scriptures, so of
Councils, as to their defining points of necessary faith: as has been showed
before, Note on p. 113. l. 14. 3 But, in the 3d place, it is not necessary that
every point of Faith, to have a sufficient Attestation or Evidence from
Tradition, have it as ample and Universal as some other point has; no more
than it is for a just ratifying of the Canon of Scripture, that all points of
it be showed to have always had as General an Acceptance, as any other: Or,
that the Definitions of Chalcedon equal, in this, those of Nice.

Page 131. l. 5. The Infallibility of a standing Judge is utterly denied by one
side, and vehemently disputed between several parties on the other. Not the
infallibility of General Councils in all necessaries disputed, save only by
some Protestants: agreed in by all the rest, whether Eastern or Western Church.
And, if the Common Reason, or Body, of Christianity were to decide this contest
between N.O, and Dr St, Dr St. would be cast.

Page 132. l. 15. If the Infallibility of the Church be as liable to doubts and
disputes, as that of the Scriptures, it is against all just laws of reasoning
to make use of the Church's infallibility to prove the Scripture by. It is
true; that the Infallibility of the Scripture cannot be proved from
Infallibility of the Church to any that doubts as much of this as of the other,
till this proof is also proved to them. But then, it is true too, that a
Neophyte may first be taught from Tradition, the Infallibility of the Church,
and from this, so made known to him, have the Infallibility of the Canon of
Scripture proved to him, as this Church has in her Councils declared and
delivered it; for which Church it were to no end to define the Canon, if the
Canon thereby received no more certainty, as to any Christian, than formerly.

Ib. l. (3). N.O. turns my words quite to another meaning. In the meaning the
Dr now explains his words, the sense of the latter part of this Principle
(which I leave the Reader to compare) seems coincident with the former; and so
is granted to him, Princip. 17,
as the former is. And, if N.O. not imagining such a reduplication, mistook the
Drs sense, here, from what he found him to say in another place Rat. Account^p.
512
, the discourse is still pertinent, if not to this, to the other, place; and
N.O. has not lost his labor.

Page 133. l. 13. Men can have no certainty of faith that this was a General
Couneil, that it p^ssed such decrees, that it proceeded lawfully in passing
them, and that this is the certain meaning of them; all which are necessary in
order to the believing those decrees to be infallible with such a faith as they
call divine. Christians have a sufficient certainty, as to all the former
particulars, that the Council of Nice (for example) has delivered (...) to be
the true sense of the Scriptures; which Sense of Scripture we believe with a
divine faith: and this divine faith relies on the word of God, as thus
expounded by this Council. The same to which therefore may be said as to other
points, and other Councils.

Ib. l. (3). But I expressly mention such decrees as are purposely framed in
general terms, and with ambiguous expressions. His words, in Rat. Account, are
-- Suppose (says he p. 510.) we should grant, that you might in general be
certain of the Infallibility of General Councils, when we come to instance in
any one of them, you can have no certainty of faith as to the infallibility of
the decrees of it. For you can have no such certainty, 1 that this wa^ a lawful
General Council; 2 that it passed such decrees; 3 that it proceeded lawfully in
passing them; and 4 that this is the certain meaning of them. Then examining
these four particulars, and coming to the 4th, he proceeds thus -- 4ly. (Says
he) Suppose men could be assured of the proceedings of the Council, yet what
certainty of faith can be had of the meaning of those decrees? for we see they
are as liable to many interpretations as any other writings. If the Scriptures
cannot put an end to controversies on that account, how can General Councils do
it? when their decrees are as liable to a private sense and wrong
interpretation, as the Scriptures are: Nay, much more, for we have many other
places to compare, the help of Original tongues, and the consent of the
primitive Church, to understand Scriptures by: when the decrees of Councils are
many times purposely framed in general terms, and with ambiguous expressions to
give satisfaction to some dissenting parties then in the Council. Which words
limited only, as he says here, to some decrees of some Councils framed in
general terms, and with ambiguous expressions serve nothing to the purpose of
that discourse; and would make his words run thus, for example -- If the
Scriptures cannot put an end to controversies on that account, how can General
Councils do it? when some of their decrees, in some Councils, that are in
general terms and ambiguous expressions, are as liable etc. Yes: very well, say
I; because other decrees, in that, and other Councils, may be clear enough.

Page 134. l. 17. They [Councils] ought never to be liable to the same
ambiguity. True: but, if it mis-happen, that Councils be so in some things,
some of them; are they therefore no more serviceable in any other things for
deciding controversies, where the sense of the Scriptures, to some at least, is
ambiguous, and their Decision clear?

Ibid. l. 18. Upon the account of which obscurity Scripture is rejected from
being a certain Rule of faith. Contrary. Scripture is received by Catholics
for a certain Rule; and also in many things for a clear.

Page 135. l. (8). In answer to my Lord of Canterbury's adversary etc. To the
reason given for the Unity of Catholics, viz. their being ready to submit
their judgments to the determinations of the Church in her Councils, our Author
returns this reason (as good, or better, he says) for the Unity of
Protestants, viz. their being all ready to submit their judgments to Scripture.
Which Reason since it must needs fail on the Protestants side, if the sense of
Scripture which serves to unite them, be more ambiguous in several things than
that of Councils is, which unites the other, Therefore he labors to make this
good, that the sense of Scriptures is not more ambiguous than that of Councils.
For which see his next page p. 136.
where he says -- The meaning of the decrees of Councils, when they are made,
raise as many divisions, as were before them; as it appears by the decrees of
the Council of Trent. Where, (in his using indefinite terms, as frequently he
does) if he means some of its decrees only, such as he says are purposely
framed in general terms etc, this serves not his purpose; for, so there will
still remain a greater union amongst Catholics, because of their union in the
rest of its decrees, which, how true soever they be, are plain enough. But, if
he means all its decrees, then this is apparently false, that there are such
divisions raised about them. Now his addition or reply to this, conceding here
(which had he done in his Rational Account, he had faved N.O. p. 136.
some pains in making it good) that the Roman Church has some advantage in
point of unity; but that all the advantage it has comes from force and fraud
(of which frequent Maledicency to ward his Superiors, and those in so sacred an
Assembly, I could wish this Author would make more Conscience) this Concession,
I say, is deserting his former Answer to my Lord of Canterbury's Adversary as
faulty; and passing to another; viz. That their Union is indeed greater, but is
compassed by force and by fraud; I suppose he means, of these Councils. But
then, since Roman Catholics are united not only in the Definitions of the
Council of Trent, but of all, or be it many of, those that (...) been within
these thousand years; most, if not all of which are (...) b^^ Protestants,
dares he fasten his Force and Fr^^d on^^^^ th^^^ (...) so; why not a Socinian
or Arian extend (...) to the fo^^ (...) those, whom their cause constrains to
disobey (...) speak well of it.

A^^^^^^ions on. 9. The Argument from Parity of Reason.
Ag. 139. l. 9. After N.O's words -- And are we not here again ^^^rrived at
Church-infallibility, [i.e. its not erring in matters of Nicessary Faith] If
not from extruordinary divine assistance, [add, what is left out by the Dr] Yet
from the cl^arness of the Rule? Only we must suppose such sincere endeavor in
the Church, as the Dr allows may be in every private man.

Page 140, l. 12. How does it hence follow; that the Guides of the Church must
be infallible in teaching matters of faith?

From the Guides not erring, or not being deceived in matters of faith, it
follows not, that they must be infallible, or not deceive, in teaching matters
of faith. Nor are any such words, or consequence, in N.O. But it follows well,
from the clearness of the same Scriptures to these Governors, as much as to
private men, and from their endeavors as well as private men's, to understand
them (these two supposed) that the Church-Governors cannot err in all
necessary matters of faith; (of which necessaries only N.O. speaks) if
private men cannot; the thing maintained in the Drs 13th Prineiple. And then, I
hope the Drs charity will allow these Governors in a General Council of them
at least, not to teach contrary to what they know and are certain of. And this
Reason too these Holy Fathers have to do this, because otherwise in their
inserting such things, as they thus falsify, in the Creeds, and in their
anathematizing all dissenters, they shall make a public profession of their
faith just contrary to their Faith, and anathematize themselves.

Page 141. l. 8. The Guides of the Church, supposing the same sincerity, shall
enjoy the same privilege, which I know none ever denied them; but what is this
to their Infallibility in teaching all matters of faith? which is the only
thing to be proved by him. If he can prove this as necessary for the salvation
of mankind as the other is, then he would do something to his purpose, but not
otherwise. So that all this discourse proceeds upon a very false way of
reasoning from believing to teaching; and, from Necessaries to salvation, to
all matters of faith, which the Guides of the Church shall propose to men. Thus
he. Where, [after I have acquainted the Reader, that N.O's express words and
sense are here corrupted; for, he argues, from particular men's not erring in
Necessaries, by using a sincere endeavor, the Church's not erring in
Necessaries, if using the like: in Necessaries, says N.O; not in all matters
of faith, as here the Dr:] It seems, the Infallibility of the Church, he now
opposes, is not an Infallibility in not erring, or in believing aright in
necessaries, here granted to the Church Governors in like manner as to
Mechanics; but only their Infallibility in Teaching to others the same
necessary things, which they themselves believe: and by their Infallibility
here is meant not, passively, their not being deceived; but, actively, their
not deceiving. And that N.O, in proving these Church Governors their believing
aright in necessaries has lost his labor: his discourse proceeding, as the Dr
says, from a very false way of reasoning from believing to teaching. To which
that I may not be here further tedious in repeating the same things, I desire
the Reader to review what has been said to this in the former Discourse,. 38.
p. 26.

Ib. l. (9.) Urged as N.O's arguing -- If God will not be wanting to particular
persons in matters necessary to their salvation, much less will he be wanting
to the Guides of the Church in all matters of faith. N.O. inferrs or urges no
such thing. But this is justly inferred: Not wanting to the Church Guides in
all Necessary matters of faith. See note on p. 104. l. 15. Meanwhile, from what
motive, thinks this Author, comes that profession of Dr Hammond concerning all
matters of faith Of Heresy.. 14. n. 6.
-- We do not believe, that any General Council truly such, ever did or shall
err in any matter of faith [he means in defining it]? And that of Bishop
Bramhal Vindic. e. 2. p. 9.
-- We are most ready, in all our differences, to stand to the judgment of a
free General Council.

Ib. l. (5). He goes on. No certainly, unless it be proved, that their guidance
is the only means whereby men can understand what is necessary to salvation.
The following words infer, the guidance of Church Governors need to be no means
of this at all; God having, as he says in the following words, provided
otherwise for that, by giving so clear a Rule in matters necessary, that no man
who sincerely endeavors to know such things shall fail therein. Unless he
means the Rule to be clear so, as that it needs an Expositor. But then should
not he say, so obscure rather ( i.e. as to some things); and call for a sincere
endeavor in private men to learn the sense of it from their Guides? and, that
they may have the more confidence in their guidance, should not he tell them,
with N.O. at least, that Scriptures, that are so clear to them, rude and
unlearned, cannot but be so to their Guides, more versed and studied in them?

Page 142. l. 13. Besides, that no man that is acquainted with the proceedings
of the Council of Trent will see reason to be overconfident of the sincerity of
Councils, so palpably influenced by the Court of Rome. The sincerity and just
proceedings of the Council of Trent are ill learnt from such persons of a
contrary interest. If all Bishops, rightly, have an influence on Councils, much
more ought the Prime Patriarch and other Bishops that assist him.

Annotations on. 10. Of the Authority of the Guides of the Church.
Page 142. l. (4). God has entrusted every man with a faculty of discerning
truth and fashood, supposing that there were no persons in the world to direct
or guide him. The Reader may be pleased to review the brief Replies, made to
what the Dr urges here till his page 150, in the preceding Discourse, from.
40. to 47. With a faculty of discerning truth and falsehood; Means he, so as
every one to be able to discern truth from falsehood in every thing, without
any Guide or instructor? This is denied. In such indefinite terms lies great
ambiguity and deceit.

Page 143. l. (13). I hope no one will deny this. Nor N.O. does not. In some
truths and falsehoods more easy, ones own judgment or reason may be sufficient;
in others harder, not: as, put the case, in his judging of (...) or, the
Articles of the Trinity.

Page 144. l. 9. All which were to no purpose at all, if men were not to
continue the exercise of their own judgments about these matters: [viz: matters
of Religion.] Exercise of private men's judgments in all things General
Councils, Church Governors, N.O, allow. For, this also is an act of our
judgment when, by it rightly used, we find it our duty to submit these our
judgments (or the particular reasons we have for, or against, such a point in
Religion) to the judgment of our Canonical Superiors in such matters as are
defined by them; and not clear to us.

Ib. l. 11. Accordingly we find the Apostles appealing to the judgments of
private and fallible persons concerning what they said to them. It is true, All
may search all things, and welcome. For all Truths, among right searchers, bear
witness one to another. And, after such search, if rightly made, they may
disobey, or dissent from, the contrary doctrine of an Apostle. Yet this also is
true, that, whenever they shall so dissen^, such judgment is not rightly made:
which the more it is used rightly, the more is one confirmed in the doctrine of
our Lord and his Apostles; and so, of General Councils. And in all matters not
otherwise clear to them this judgment rightly used will still direct them to
obedience of their right and Canonical Pastors. But, by this bidding the people
search and try, our Lord or his Apostles secured none, if after (...) used,
they either dissented from their doctrine, or disobeyed (...) commands:
because, in a right judgment made of th^^ (...) could not do so. And therefore
the Apostles commanded (...) persons (as supposing these two things, belief of
their (...) and the Use of ones Judgment, well consisting together (...) fast
and firm in the doctrines delivered to them by the^^ (...) and not to be
carried away with every doctrine, becau^^ (...) Pastors appointed to guide
them; and to observe those (...) sed any Divisions among them contrary to the
Doctr^^^^ (...) and to reject any person heretical, etc. See Romans 16. (...)
11.2. -- Phil. 4.9. -- Heb. 13.7. -- 1 Timothy 6.10. -- 2 Timothy 3.10.14 -- Tit.
1.9. -- 3.10. -- Ephesians. 4.11, 13.

Page 145. l. (10). They are frequently charged to beware of seducers and false
Guides. I add, and frequently charged to follow their true and Canonical
Church Governors, that they may not be misled by those false Guides. See the
Texts now quoted, to which may be added Jude 4. here quoted by our Author.

Ib. l. (7) They are told, that there should come a falling away, etc. All this
more makes for a most close adherence, especially of the more simple and less
able to examine Controversies, to their Canonical Superiors and for their
rejecting the doctrines of those Spirits, whom upon trial they find to oppose
them: Being assured, from our Lords Promises, of lawful General Councils, the
supreme Church Authority, their never erring in things necessary.

Page 146. l. 9. Both shall fall into the ditch. We have heard the Dr's plea
hitherto. Now, is it any wonder, that Sects so multiply in a Church, where such
Pleas as these are permitted to be urged in such a sense, as to set men at
liberty from the submission of their judgment to the Decisions and definitions
of General Councils, upon pretense that there shall be many seducers and a
falling away and departing from the Faith; and upon pretense of Force and Fraud
used in the most General Counci's that could be convened for many past
Generations. Which falling away and departing from the Faith, etc. why should
they not be rather applied to these New Sects and former Heresies; and, from
them, be inferred a closer adherence and Obedience to their lawful Church
Governors?

Ib. l. (8). The Apostles told them, they had no dominion over their faith.
What, not so far as to oblige them to obey and submit to their Apostolical
Doctrine? What not such dominion as S. Paul urged 1. Tim. 1.20. to the
blasphemers of the Gospel; and, as he commanded Titus to use, Tit. 3.10.?
Consider the Acts of the Apostolical Council. Act. 15. But the Text speaks here
of any unjust dominion or authority, to treat the faithful as he pleased, in
punishing or mulcting those, who walk uprightly in the faith; to alter, change,
censure any thing therein, for his own profit or advantage. See Dr Hammond on
the place.

Ib. l. (4.). No present Guides, whatever names they go by, ought to usurp such
an authority over the minds of men which the Apostles themselves did not
challenge; although there were greater reason for men to yield up their minds
wholly to their guidance. If to yield up their minds be to submit their
judgments, were not Christians obliged in this to the very Apostles and their
Doctrines? See before Note on p. 144. l. 11. See we not the effects here of the
Dr's 13th Principle; in the people's not needing Guides for understanding
necessary Scriptures; but meanwhile, in the Scriptures being needful to them,
for trying by it their Guides?

Page 147. l. 7. Where there is a Rule for them [the Church Governors or
Guides] to proceed by, there is a rule for others to judge of their
proceedings. If here He means by these others, those, who, doubting of the true
sense of the Rule, repair to these Guides to learn from them the true sense of
it (which is only to the purpose), that these are again to judge by the Rule
(doubted of) whether the Guides have given the right sense, what is this but
that these are finally to determine the sense of the Rule, for the determining
of which they consult their Teachers? As if the Consulters concerning the
meaning of a Law, when the Judge has given them the sense of the Law, should
again by this Law examine the truth of the sense of the Judge, and act finally
according to their own, not his, sentence.

Ib. l. 13. Where the rule, by which the Guides of the Church are to proceed,
has determined nothing, there we say the authority of the Guides is to be
submitted unto. For otherwise there would be nothing left, wherein their
authority could be shown. Does not he say here, the Church's Authority is to be
submitted to in nothing, but things left indifferent by the Scriptures? Then it
has no authority in determining Controversies of faith; but why then says the
20th Article of the Church of England, that the Church has authority of
expounding Scriptures in Controversies of faith? and by what authority has the
Council of Nice determined Consubstantiation? But, so often as the sense of the
Scriptures to any is doubtful, may not the Scriptures here be said, as to such
persons, to have dete^mined nothing? and then are they not in these (if in a
Necessary point) to repair to the determination of their Ecclesiastical Guides?
If so, all will be well still; and thus all come to submit to the sentence of
the Judge, but those who are certain before hand of the sense of their Rule.

Ib. l. (11). We plead for the Church is authority in indifferent Rites and
Ceremonies. But suppose the Question be, whether such Rites and Ceremonies are
indeed indifferent? As they are taken by some not to be so; because God will
admit nothing into his worship, but what himself has first expressly commanded,
and prescribed. What authority is to end this? I say for such who hold some
Ceremony unlawful and repugnant to Scripture, are they, or the Church, to
judge of this unlawfulness? and, may the Church lawfully enjoin it, and oblige
them, under excommunication, to practice it? Or, will it not come at last,
according to these Principles, that the Subjects, not the Church, are to decide
the indifferency or non-indifferency of such Ceremonies?

Page 148. l. 7. We allow a very great authority to the Guides of the
Catholic Church in the best times of Christianity; And look upon the
concurrent sense of Antiquity as an excellent means to understand the mind of
Scripture in places otherwise doubtful and obscure. In the best times of
Christianity. But do not you then in all times? Or, is not their authority the
same in all times? If various, who is Judge of this, their Subjects? -- As an
excellent means to understand etc. This will not serve the turn; it must be as
an authorized Expositor of the true sense of Scriptures doubtful and obscure in
Necessary matters, to whose definitions all ought to submit; not only, to make
use of their advice. This Church-Tradition makes good: this such Protestants as
our Author oppose.

Ib. l. 13. We reject the ancient Heresies condemned in them. But does he
acknowledge and reject all that as Heresy, that has been or shall be condemned
by all lawful General Councils for such?

Ib. l. (11). We reject nothing, that can be proved by an Universal Tradition
from the Apostolical times downwards. That can be proved. But who shall judge
of the proof, where any thing is disputed, whether it be Tradition; Apostolic?
Our selves, or the present Church Governors?

Ib. l. (5) We see no reason to have those things forced upon us now, which we
offer to prove to be contrary to their [the primitive times] doctrine and
practice. Offer to prove: To whom? To any whose final judgment you will stand
to? Name them. Shall it be to a General Council? But, this may err you say. It
erring, shall it be to a Second? But, if one err, so may all. And who shall
judge when It does not err? Demonstration shall decide it. And who judge, when
it is a clear demonstration, if any deny it to be so?

Page 149. l. 1. The Controversy is, Whether the Guides of the Apostolical and
Primitive times ought not to have greater authority over us, than those of the
present Church in things wherein they contradict each other? Here again, who
shall judge this difference concerning their contradiction, denied by
Catholics, denied by the latter Councils of the Church; that plead Tradition,
and their agreement with the former.

Ib. l. 8. But we profess to yield greater reverence and submission of mind to
Christ and his Apostles than to any Guides of the Church ever since: we are
sure they spoke by an infallible Spirit, and where they have determined matters
of faith and practice, we look upon it as arrogance and presumption in any
others, to alter what they have declared. Where they have determined matters of
faith or practice. But who is Judge of this, what Christ and his Apostles have
determined? the Church's Councils; or private men, each for himself?

Ib. l. (13). Til ignorance, ambition, private interests, swayed too much among
those, who were called the Guides. These vices in all ages are found in some;
and are justly by others reproved. But does He charge these on the Church's
Supremest Guides or its General Councils? Then, if we declining their judgment
on this account, to what other Courts or Persons will He direct us to apply our
selves, that are more free? what private Person or inferior Court?

Ib. l. (3). In matters imposed upon us to believe or practice, which are
repugnant to plain commands of Scripture or the evidence of sense or the
Grounds of Christian Religion, no Authority of the present Guides of a Church
is to overrule our faith or practice. In things contrary to the plain commands
of Scripture, or grounds of Religion; we join with him, No Church Authority is
to overrule our faith or practice. But, the former Question still returns, Who
shall judge among us what is, or is not so contrary? As for the other thing he
mentions [contrary to the evidence of sense]: If a Divine Revelation be
contrary to such evidence, I hope, our Faith is to be overruled by the
Revelation; and, for this I think I have the Dr's consent in these words in his
Rational Account. Where discoursing of Transubstantiation, whether consistent
with the grounds of Christian Religion, he says p. 567
-- That which I am now upon is not how far reason [I suppose he will allow me
to say, or sense] is to be submitted to Divine authority, in case of certainty
that there is a Divine Revelation for what I am to believe; but how far it is
to be renounced [that is Reason, or Sense] when all evidence that is brought
[i.e. for such a Divine Revelation] is from the authority of the Fathers. So
that that Question in short is, Whether there be greater evidence that I am
bound to believe the Fathers in a matter contrary to Sense and Reason or else
to adhere to the judgment of them, though in opposition to the Father's
authority? Where I understand him to say; that he is to believe a Divine
Revelation, that is certainly such, made known to him by one Sense, the
Hearing; though against the perceptions of another Sense the Seeing: but,
notwithstanding this, that he is still rather to adhere to the judgment of his
Senses, than credit the Fathers concerning the truth of such a Divine
Revelation, as contradicts his Senses. So The certainty of the Divine
Revelation is here the only thing in question; which once any way proved the
evidence Sense gives-in against it is to be neglected. Now, of the certainty of
the Divine Revelation, or of the true sense of Scripture we reckon the
unanimous consent of the Fathers or Primitive Church (if such can be shown) so
expounding it, a sufficient proof. And I think sometimes so does Dr St. in
these words Rat. Account p. 375. -- We profess to be guided by the sense of
Scripture at interpreted by the unanimous consent of the Fathers, and the four
first General Councils. And p. 56. -- It is a sufficient prescription against
any thing that can be alleged out of Scripture, that it ought not to be looked
on as the true meaning of the Scripture, if it appears contrary to the sense of
the Catholic Church from the beginning. And so, laying the evidence of Sense
here aside, what their consent is, is the first thing to be discussed.

Page 150. l. 4. For there are some things so plain that no man will be guided by
another opinion in them. Catholics willingly allow withdrawing obedience
where you have Certainty. But how vainly does any one pretend or promise
himself a certainty of any thing, wherein a General Council, or a much major
part of the Church, having all the same means of certainty as he, judges
contrary: or fancy that such a matter carries the like evidence to persons, as
does the Whiteness of Snow?

Ib. l. 12. I am certain, if I destroy the evidence of Sense, I must overthrow
the grounds of Christian Religion. What, if I disbelieve Sense only in such a
particular thing, where Divine Revelation declares the contrary? Though indeed
the Sense in Transubstantiation is not deceived at all, its Object still
remaining there; out the Person; if, from it, He collect the Substance of Bread
to be under it.

Ib. l. 19. To reject that authority, which overthrows the certainty of Sense.
He must mean with his Exception; unless it be Divine.

Ib. l. (3) We prefer the grounds of our common Christianity before a novel
and monstrous figment. Good reason: but not before a Divine Revelation. This
Controversy therefore must first be decided, before any argument from Sense can
be used. He goes on.

Ib. l. (2) Hutched in the times of ignorance and barbarism, fostered by
faction and imposed by tyranny. Speaking evil of Dignities. Jud. 8. Concerning
the evidence of Sense N.O. Consid. p. 92.
had this Discourse on Dr St's. 4th Consequence charging the Church of Rome as
maintaining opinions repugnant to the principles of Sense and Reason. 1. That
the judgment of our Senses, appointed by God the Instruments (by hearing, or
reading, them) of conveying Faith, and his Divine Revelations to us, affords a
sufficient natural certainty or infallibility, whereon to ground our belief in
all those things subject to our senses, wherein the Divine Power does not
interpose. But 2ly. That, where the Divine Power works any thing
supernaturally, that is, contrary to our sense (as it may, no doubt) here we
are not to believe them. And 3ly. That we are to believe this divine power does
so, so often as certain Divine Revelation tells us so; though by the same
senses it tells us so. We believing our Senses (as our Hearing or Reading) for
this (as we ought, where we have no Divine Revelation or other evidence
concerning their deception) when at the same time we do not believe the same
Senses for some other thing, (as, that that which we see is Bread) when a
Divine Revelation tells us the contrary. The truth of which Divine Revelation,
in any nonevidence and questioning of the Sense of Scripture, we are to learn
from Gods Church infallibly assisted in necessary Faith etc. For which I referr
the Reader to what has been said more at large in. 60.61.62. of the preceding
Discourse. Thus N.O. in his Considerations which the Dr passes over in
silence. For, it is better not to debate or acquaint a Reader with those
Scruples we cannot easily satisfy; Cosa ragionata via va.

P. 151. l. 1. We find no command so plain in Scripture that we must believe
the Guides of the Church in all they deliver, as there is, that we must not
worship Images. See the Scriptures declaring Church-Infallibility as to
Necessaries and commanding obedience to it, cited before in Note on p. 113. l.
14. The Scriptures that prohibit worshipping of Images do so of any Creature in
heaven, earth, or under it: but mean a Divine and Sovereign Worship of them,
not such a Worship as we say is lawfully given to Men; or veneration, as is
given to Sacred Things, Temples, Altars, Gospels, etc. He goes on.

Ib. l. 5. That we must pray with understanding. Therefore are all public
Forms of Prayer that are thought necessary for the vulgar by Catholics
translated and published in the vulgar tongue; and by those who can read
communicated to others.

Ib. l. 6. That we must keep to our Saviors Institution of the Lords Supper.
Surely no Precept obliges us to our Lords Institution or Practice in every
thing; not, in communicating after Supper, Sitting at table, taking it into our
hands, washing of feet before it, nor in communicating always in both kinds; a
thing sufficiently cleared by the practice of Antiquity and purest times; which
on several occasions, and that where no absolute necessity, gave it in one kind
only, (believing our Lord's Body and Blood to be received in any one Species.
Now, where a Divine Precept obliges, the contrary Practice in no time would be
lawful. The Eastern Churches also, for the same reason as the West, viz: to
prevent the many abuses and irreverences that have happened since Christianity so
exceedingly populous, communicate the people, not by their eating our Lord's
Body and drinking his Blood apart, but by giving them both these together taken
out of the Chalice with a little Spoon, and so putting it into their mouths:
and think herein they transgress no Precept. So Jo. 6.53. is not understood as
a precept extending to all; for, so it would to Infants. Nor that Jo. 13.14. Or
Jam. 5.14.15. Or Matt. 6.17. -- 5.34. and such like.

Ib. l. 7. But if any Guides of a Church pretend to an authority to evacuate
the force of these [the Divine] Laws etc. Evacuate, i.e. in the sense you take
them in; standing to no certain Judge concerning this sense.

Ib. l. 15. If they require things contrary to a direct command of God.
Contrary, i.e. in your, mistaken, private judgment.

Ib. l. 18. If they [the Guides] can prove us mistaken, we yield. No, surely.
Your own soberest Writers say; you are to obey and submit your judgment to that
of your Guides, except you can prove, (and that demonstratively; and that
demonstration such as is allowed by all rational persons,) them to be mistaken.

Ib. l. (8). I would gladly know whether there be not some points of faith, and
some parts of our duty so plain, that no Church authority determining the
contrary ought to be obeyed. And will not then those also be so plain, as that
no Church Authority will determine the contrary? This granted then, that there
are points of faith so plain; yet it is contended, that none, wherein General
Councils require our obedience, are contradictory to any such plain point of
faith. How can that be maintained by any a plain truth to the common reason of
mankind, which a General Council, and a major part of the Church accepting this
Council denies, as false? And, if it be said, that passions and interests blind
men; we ought to imagine, they do so private men, or our selves sooner, than
General Councils. In this 7th Proposition p. 149. what has our Author said in
defense of his Religion against Church Authority, that a Socinian or Arian may
not say for his?

Page 152. l. 12. These Guides of the Church have declared each other to be
fallible by condemning their opinions and practices. Lawful General Councils
have not condemned the opinions of one another. And, what former Councils have
been held for lawfully General, where any doubt is made, it is fit private men
should learn from their present supreme Ecclesiastical Guides. Those Councils
urged for this contradiction by Protestants, are either Particular, against
General Councils; or Councils styled General, that are not allowed to be so by
the judgment of the present Church Catholic: Or those definitions of them to
contradict, which do not, in the foresaid judgment: or opinions
commonly-received only in some age urged for such defined.

Ib. l. 18. Suppose a man Living in the times of the prevalency of Arianisme,
when almost all the Guides of the Church declared in favor of it Arianisme at
no time prevailed upon a greater part of the Church or its Governors. That of
S. Jerome -- Ingemuit totus orbis, and miratus est se esse Arianum only
signifies, that the whole Catholic world wondered, that its Decree which passed
in the great Council at Ariminum was interpreted by the Arian party, which was
favored by the Emperor, quite contrary to its meaning. Does the Dr as yet
doubt of this? He goes on.

Ib. l. ult. Must he adhere to the Nicene Council? but there were more numerous
Councils, which condemned it. Yes; he must. Because those Arian Councils, if
any more numerous for the Bishops that were present in them, (Whereas there
were but a very few of the Western Bishops present in the Council of Nice) yet
had not so general an acceptance, especially in the Occidental Churches. As
for any illiterate vulgar, that have not a sufficient means of distinguishing
lawful General Councils from others not so that contradict them, they are
excused, by their invincible ignorance, till further light, for any
nonconformity to their Decrees. And generally, where any dispute concerning
the authority of a Council is, private men may so long suspend their obedience
to their decrees, till a sufficiently general acceptance or reprobation of
such Councils by the Church Governors and the Bishop of the Apostolic See, of
the same, or the succeeding times, have cleared such difficulty. But such a
general Acceptance and confirmation of this Council of Nice was manifest
immediately after the sitting thereof. And of this those who made any doubt
ought to have informed themselves better. But meanwhile, by this Question does
not this Author fairly free a Socinian from any obedience due to the decree of
the Nicene Council concerning Consubstantiality?

Page 153. l. (4.) Liberius went so far, that Hilary denounced an Anathema
against him, and all that joined with him. The Relation in which this passage
is found is none of S. Hilary's. See thereasons given by Baronius A. D. 357.
The Historians of those times differ in their Records concerning Liberius; some
speaking more favorable of him, than others. The Syrmian Confession subscribed
by him may be taken in an orthodox sense, and it is justified as such by S.
Hilary De Synod
. And, if he communicated only with such a party, as those called Semi-Arians
who joined with him in this profession, though understood by them in a sense
different from his, his fault seems hereby much extenuated, as that of some
Catholic Bishops doing the like after the Council of Ariminum, was by S.
Jerome. See his Dialog. adversus Luciferianos. But, however Liberius might
miscarry no prudent Catholics could then deliberate, Whether they were to
follow the judgment of him a single Pope, rather than of a preceding Pope and a
lawful General Council: I mean, that of Nice.

discourse in this Author here for twenty pages together, we see,
notwithstanding what he had said before p. 148. -- That Protestants profess a
great reverence, etc. to General Councils, and reject the ancient heresies
condemned in them; And -- that the controversy between us is not about the
authority of the Guides of the Church, but whether the Guides of the
Apostolical and Primitive times ought not to have greater authority over us;
than those of the present Church in things wherein these contradict them; we
see, I say, what way his Interest chiefly carries him in raking into the same
Antiquity, he so commends, with great diligence, even in the times of the first
four or five General Councils, to expose any Contradictions he can find in
these times so to the common view, as to reduce men, drawn off from obedience
to their Guides, to the use and direction of their own Judgments perusing the
Scriptures (as the Socinians do) for what tenent they shall rather hold in our
Lords Consubstantiality with the Father, after the Decision of Nice; and. in
the Two Natures and One Person of our Lord after the Definitions of Ephesus,
and Chalcedon; telling us, that neither (...) was settled by the one; nor the
Two Natures and One Person by the other, so, but that the Guides of the Church,
after these Councils, contradicted one another. And meanwhile -- What advice
(says he, speaking of the times after the Council of Nice p. 152.
) would N.O. give to a private man, if he must not exercise his own judgment,
and compare both the doctrines by the Rule of Scriptures? And p. 153.
-- What remedy (says he) can be supposed in such a case, but that every
person must search and examine the several doctrines according to his best
ability, and judge what is best for him to believe and practice? Thus he after
the settling of such doctrines by these General Councils. Which if he speaks of
persons suspending their judgments only during such time till there is a
sufficient evidence of the supremacy and Legality of such a Council, is not
denied him: But, if he speaks of all times after the legal authority of such a
Council is cleared (as that of Nice immediately was) which only makes to his
purpose, all then are to yield submission of judgment to its decrees. See Note
on page 144. l. 9. and 11. And this eager agitating and pressing the
differences and contradictions in Antiquity, disclosing their infirmities and
oppositions, whilst Catholics endeavor to unite and to reconcile them, does
it not argue a party, that is much pinched, if, I say not the Decrees and
sanctions of the present, but of the Ancient, Church Authority be maintained?

Roman Writers much differ from him, freeing both Liberius and Honorius from
Heresy, and wherein it is very difficult for any from his or my relations,
without examining many other Authors, to discern the truth, suits not well with
these short Notes; and would be, in discussing so many particularities, very
tedious to the Reader; and lastly seems a needless task. For, 1 for the
Infallibility of Popes, the great Common place of Protestants, (and which he
brings here into the dispute, as one would think, but that more may be expected
from his Ingenuity, that so, in the great dust he raises about it, he might
run away from the direct matter of the Considerations), it is a thing wholly
declined by N.O; nor is there a word of it in all his Considerations; nor is he
necessitated, by any Position of his, to defend it: and I think Bellarmine, in
the discussion of it, grants, that, if no Pope ever yet has been, a Pope
possibly may be, an Heretic.

Councils and Popes oppose and contradict one another, which of these Guides
Christians are to obey? It is answered, That submission of judgment is only
required to such Decrees when these two are first united and agreed; and, I
think, our Author will not be offended at it, if till such time Christians, as
to those points that are in debate between these two, are lest to their
liberty: and, if Protestants will submit to the Decisions of such former
Councils, wherein there has been no such opposition, more is not required.
And, in any contradiction, that may happen between a General Council already
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic and any succeeding Pope, if any such difference
should be, the former Decree of a Pope joined with a General Council will
doubtless prescribe to any contrary one of a Pope single. Lastly, If the
Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon were not generally submitted to; and so, as
to some Party, were ineffectual for the suppression of the heresies they
condemned, yet ought they to have been so admitted and obeyed by all after that
their Decrees have received a sufficient validity from their being accepted by
a much major part of the Church, and confirmed by the Bishop of Rome: and I
hope our Author will not deny this, lest Christians totter still in some of the
Articles of the Athanasian Cr^ied. This said here I hope may save me some
labor in respect of that which follows, trusting the ingenuous Reader with the
application.

P. 156. l. (6) I now desire to know what a person in that time should do, who
was bound to yield an internal assent to the Guides of the Church? He is
obliged to follow the judgment of the Church-Guides in such a Council after a
sufficient Acceptance of it by the Church Catholic diffusive and confirmation
of the Sea Apostolic. As this Fifth Council had after some time by Vigilius
and his Successors and by the Sixth Council Act. 17. and 18. and in after times
both by the Greek and Latin Church in the Council of Florence Sess. 5. at
Ferrara. And, till such Confirmation or Acceptance appeared, a private man
might suspend his judgment, or hold what to him might seem most probable
concerning the Tria-Capitula their agreeing or disagreeing with the Doctrine
and faith of the Council of Calcedon; to the Definition of which both the
differing Parties willingly consented, whilst one endeavored, that the error
of such particular persons here concerned might no way prejudice the doctrine
of that Council: the other, that the persons, whom after some former errors
this Council had approved, might not be afterward condemned.

Page 163. l. 12. And after these to anathematize Honorius, as agreeing in all
things with Sergius, and confirming his wicked doctrines. Here, what should I
trouble my self or the Reader in debating this controversy concerning Honorius
with the Dr? whose cause the Reader may see pleaded very plausibly by Cardinal
Bellarmine i. 4. de Romano Pontifice c. 12. as to this freedom from Heresy;
being condemned hereof after his death, before any Council had defined this
matter, upon some words of his, which, compared with others, are capable of a
sound meaning; as arguing not against two, but two contrary or repugnant, Wills
of our Lord; and whenas there is some matter of fact (in which may be mistakes)
contained in the Council's thus declaring him an heretic, which thing occurs
not in the declaring of Heresy. I say, what need I review this debate, wherein
the Dr only contends, that is; which the common opinion among Catholics
grants, may be. See Bellarm. de. Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 30.. Resp. Sunt -- Pighius
contendit Papam non posse esse Haereticum, proinde nec deponi in ullo casu, qua
sententia probabilis est and facile defendi potest, tamen non est certa: and
communis opinio est in contrarium. Where he quotes also the Canon, Si Papa
Distinct. 40. Papa a nemine judicandus, nisi deprehendatur a fide devius.

Page 167. l. 4. Pope Agatho did himself consent to the condemnation of
Honorius. Suppose this be granted, why may not a Pope and a General Council,
judge a Pope? See for this again Bellarm. de Council. l. 2. c. 19. -- Potest
Concilium discutere causam Pontificis: and, si inveniat revera esse infidelem,
potest declarare eum esse extra Ecclesiam, and sic damnare. And the same he
says: If the Council should discover him an Heretic, De Conc. l. 1. c. 9. --
Quarta causa celebrandi Generalis Concilii est suspicio Haresis in Romano
Pontifice, etc.

Page 168. l. 19. The greatest strength he adds to Baronius is only saying,
without doubt it is so. Let the Reader view Bellarmin de Romans Pont. l. 4. c.
11. whether this has not more drollery in it, than Truth.

Page 170. l. 18. I desire therefore again to know whether he was rightly
condemned, or not. Suppose I answer, rightly; what then? Then the Pope is not
infallible. And what then? What is this to N.O; or his Considerations?

Ib. l. (8). In either case there was no Infallibility in the Guides. Yes, in
one case; if Honorius rightly condemned, there was Infallibility in the Pope
and Council.

Page 171. l. 8. The ingenuous concession of Mr White. A great friend to Popes.
But, by this, (he sees) there are, that confess Popes liable to Heresy.

Ib. l. (6.). Councils against Councils. Not lawful General Councils, one
against another.

Ib. l. (4). Church again Church, especially after the Breach between the
Greek, and the Roman. Not one of these Churches against the other, in most of
those things for which the Reformation has left the Roman. But, supposing in
some points they be so, the Infallibility we contend for here as requiring our
Obedience is only that of a General Council, joined with and confirmed by the
Bishop of the Sea Apostolic. In the intervals of which Councils, to matters
clearly determined formerly by them the present Church Governors, if no way
supposed infallible, may exact from the Church's subjects such an assent as the
Councils have required: Or, in new Controversies arising, and not formerly
determined by any such Councils, yet may justly impose silence, till such
Controversy shall be so decided.

Ib. l. (2). But a man, who is bound to rely only on the authority of his
Guides must suppose them to be agreed; and, in case of difference among them,
he must first choose his Religion; and, by that, his Guide. Bound to rely only.
Who says it? He may rely on the Holy Scripture very safely in all points
wherever it is clear: but, in his application to it, when he meets with
Scriptures, the sense whereof is ambiguous to him, (as surely either it is or
should be, in case he sees a major part of the Church, or of Christianity, to
differ from him in the sense of it) he is to rely on his Guides. And next, in
any difference among them, he is not presently left to our Author's way, to
choose his Religion, or his opinion first, and by that, his Guides, as they sit
it: for so, in some places that our Author knows, there is scarce any opinion
so gross, but some Guides may be found complying with it. But in these Guide's
differing, and their just authority consisting in a most exact Subordination,
he is to rely on the Superior; (as in England on a Provincial, or National
Synod, rather than on the Rector of his Parish, or a single Bishop): and,
wherever its judgment can be had, on the Supreme; a lawful General Council,
confirmed by the Bishop of the Sea Apostolic.

Page 172. l. (8.) Now the Question proposed is, whether it be not fitter for
me to submit to the Guides of the Catholic Church, than to trust my own
judgment? I should make no scruple in all doubtful matters to resolve the
affirmative, supposing that all the Guides of the Catholic Church were agreed.
Will he submit his judgment, then, to lawful General Councils, and the matters
they have or shall agree in? Since he has great reason to doubt in all things,
where they judge contrary to his tenent. He goes on.

Ib. l. ult. For I should think it arrogance and presumpti^n in me to set up my
own private opinion in opposition to the unanimous consent of all the Guides of
the Catholic Church, in such a case.

To the unanimous consent of all the Guides. But will he submit to such a
consent as has been had in former lawful General Councils, I mean such as in
the four first, for deciding Controversies: viz. to that of a much major part?
For, else, if but one Bishop in the world shall oppose all the rest, He is
released from such his submission. And, 2ly, Will he yield this for all matters
whatever such Councils shall define? For (to repeat his words) ought he not to
think it arrogance and presumption in him to set up his own private opinion in
opposition to such Councils in any thing, for which they have the same evidence
as himself? And here observe also, that, in whatever times these Councils be
held; whether in the present or past, ancient or latter, times, (so as not
contradicting one another, in their definitions) their Authority is exactly the
same; and so ought his Obedience to be; and their Definitions also to be, in
all times after, obliging: those of Nice, obliging now.

Page 173. l. 5. We find the Christian world divided into very different
Communions. It is so. But the forementioned Note on p. 172. l. (2.)
subordination of Church Governors is still to be observed. And our obedience,
in any clashing of these Church Governors in several parts, to be performed to
the Superiors. As for example. The African Bishops and their Councils,
differing about Rebaptization from other Christian Churches, were, observing
their subordination, to submit to the judgment of a Council Ecumenical. A
private man then, where are many different Churches and Communions, ought to
consider under what particular Governors he lives, and in what manner they
are subordinate to others; and accordingly (in any differences happening about
points which he is not at leisure to study, or has not capacity to understand,
or, after study, is not certain, on any side) to yield his obedience, and
submit his judgment to the Superiors. As in England a division happening in
the Clergy thereof, I suppose our Author would advise one that thus doubts in a
point controverted, in case the Parson of his Parish opposes the Bishop of the
Diocese, or this Bishop all the other Bishops of the Province; or of the
Nation; to submit to the judgment of the Bishop, or of the Provincial, or
National Synod, rather than to his Parson. And that He would not enjoin such
private person, or tell him he is obliged for the settling of his judgment, to
study the whole Controversy debated between such Parson and his Bishop; to
collate their arguments etc; and then, make himself Judge, at least for
himself, which of them is in the right: wherein also, should it be done, the
incapacity of the man, or also his passion or interest on one side, may easily
misguide him, and he fare much worse by his liberty, than his obedience. And
this thing seems also intended by the National Synod of England in their
drawing up the 39. Articles, (they say), for taking away Diversity of Opinion;
which thing they do not there pretend to effect, * by their confuting, with
arguments satisfactory to their subjects, all those opinions they there
disallow; for, no such satisfaction is offered, no such thing is done by them;
but * by the submitting of their subjects, not skilled in such matters, nor
certain of the contrary, to their Judgment, as the Supreme of this National
Church.

Metropolitan Churches, suppose in the Western Patriarchy wherein he lives. Let
him examine which is the most Universal Body of them, which the most dignified
Persons, and submit to their Guidance; which as it is more safely relied on may
be easilier examined, than the Controversies: and indeed is a case clear and
obvious enough to the most of men. And, as for others, their invincible
ignorance it is hoped, may excuse their error. Where also let such a person
consider; whether such Councils, as are assembled of most of the National
Churches in the West joined with the Patriarch of it, and deciding the many
points disputed in these Western parts, are not to be submitted-to by all
private persons, not certain of the contrary to their Decisions (as how should
they be so?), before a National only of the English Bishops; especially, if
these opposing them in those things, wherein for the most part the Eastern
Churches also agree with them. And, if any here, for standing out against this
major authority, should plead Certainty on his side, as Archbishop Lawd and
others do, then let him consider, how few there are among Christians so well
seen in all these Controversies themselves, as to withdraw their obedience on
this account; whilst it seems agreed that all others ought, leaving these
Certainists by themselves, to conform to the Decrees of the Superior Courts?

Ib. l. (10). What then makes those Churches [the Eastern] to be left out in
our enquiries after the Guides of the Catholic Church? How orthodox and
Catholic soever the Eastern Churches may be, one living in the Western Church
owes no Canonical subjection or obedience to them: whose whole care it ought to
be to pay it where it is due according to the forementioned subordination;
which done, he cannot miscarry as to all necessary Faith. But however, I think,
Dr St. might have spared the Description, and proposal of these to a
Protestants choice, by reason of their many tenants in the Points controverted,
and particularly in those of Transubstantiation, and the Idolatry of Images and
Invocation of Saints, agreeing with, or also some of them more disliked, than
the Roman.

Page 174. l. (9). Now of these five parts four of them [Nestorians,
Eutychians, Greeks, and Protestant Churches] are all agreed, that there is no
necessity of living in subjection to the Guides of the Roman Church. As they
are agreed, so it is granted. For Example, that the Metropolitan Church of
England owes no subjection to the Metropolitan Church, of Rome, nor to the
Pope, as the Metropolitan thereof. And the other three owe him no subjection
neither as he is Patriarch of the West, but the fourth does; and yielded it
together with other Occidental Churches, till of late. But, meanwhile, the
Eastern Churches, are agreed, that they owe all subjection and submission of
judgment to the Definitions of lawful General Councils, (and on this account
render it to the 2d Nicene) and that these Councils are infallible in them;
(for which see what is cited in the precedent Discourse. 56.) And, from the
determination of these Councils, do the same Churches entertain several
Opinions rejected by Protestants.

Ib. l. (3.). Only those of the Church of Rome take upon themselves against all
sense and reason to be the Catholic Church; and so exclude four parts of five
out of a capacity of salvation. The Roman Church confesses it self a
particular Church, and only a part of the Catholic. Nor does it exclude any
other Churches from being true parts thereof, save those which are Heretical,
or Schismatical; both which Heretics and Schismatics, I think, learned
Protestants exclude also from being members of the Catholic Church. See Dr
Field l. 4. c. 2. -- That the Visible Church [he means, Catholick] never
falls into Heresy we most willingly grant. And l. 1. c. 7. -- The name of
Orthodox Church is applied to distinguish right-believing Christians from
Heretics; the name of the Catholic Church, men holding the Faith in unity
from Schismatics. Nor does the Roman Church deny in such Heretical or
Schismatical Churches a capacity or possibility of salvation to all generally;
but only (as I think Protestants also do) to those among them that are formerly
guilty of the crimes of Heresy, or Schism: because indeed either of these is a
mortal sin; and so, unrepented of, excluding from salvation. Lastly, Heretical
the Roman Church, with all Antiquity, takes those to be, that maintain the
contrary to any known Definition, in a matter of faith, of a lawful General
Council: and Schismatical those, that, upon any cause whatever, do separate
from the Communion of the present Church Catholic, and their true Superior
Ecclesiastical Guides.

Page 175. l. 11. When he finds so many [Churches] and those not inferior to
the Roman Church in any thing, save only in pomp, pride, and uncharitableness.
Ephesians. 4.31. And evil-speaking be put away from you. Et blasphemia tollatur a
vobis cum omni malitia.

Ib. l. 13. All (says He) opposing Infallibility in it. In the Church of Rome;
but not in the Church Catholic; which or wherever, it be. He proceeds.

Ib. l. 15. What reason can he have, supposing that he is to submit to any
Guides, that he must submit only to those of the Roman Church? Why not as well
to those of the Eastern, Greek, or Protestant-Churches? Persons, and Churches,
are to submit only to their lawful Canonical Superiors, Persons, or Councils.
And so are to avoid such Persons, or Churches, as these do declare Heretical,
or Schismatical; whom they come to know, or are to believe, to be so, from such
Declaration without a necessity of studying the particular Controversies: the
Supreme Court of which Superiors, a General Council of these Church-Guides,
cannot misguide them in any thing necessary to be known: and the Decrees also
of others inferior, though fallible, yet in all prudence are to be obeyed and
believed, wherever themselves have no Certainty of the contrary. It follows.

Ib. l. (11.) If any one goes about to assign a reason, by charging them with
Heresy or Schism, He unavoidably makes him Judge of some of the greatest
difficulties in Religion, before he can submit to his infallible Guides. No.
For, by other ways forementioned See Note on p. 173. l. 5
a private person comes to know his true Guides and Superiors, and from them
learns what is, and what persons are guilty of, Heresy and Schism. Else all
men must turn Students in Divinity, or know nothing of Heresy, or Schism. He
proceeds.

Ib. l. (7). He must know what Nestorianisme, Eutychianisme, Monothelisme mean.
This being supposed, that all Heresies and Schisms are to be avoided by all
good Christians, I see not, without dependence on our Guides for knowing these,
but that all Protestants are obliged by this Author to take the course he here
sets down through two or three pages. Let him consider better on it. Unless he
will make all Heresy and Schism manifest to all men, learned, or unlearned,
upon the virtue of his 13th Principle.

Page 177. l. 6. All these things a man must fully be satisfied in, before he
can pronounce those Churches guilty of Heresy; and so, not to be followed. See
Note on p. 175. l. (10).

Ib. l. 10. Why must the Greek [Church] which embraces all the Councils which
determined those subtle controversies, [be rejected]? The Greeks embracing
these Councils, may lawfully be rejected for Heresy, if opposing what other
like Councils have defined: and so may the Protestants: or yet either of these,
if guilty of Schism.

Ib. l. (12). Here a man must examine the notes of the Church etc. i.e. Examine
some Indications and marks of it, sufficient to sway and determine his
judgment. Which examination is easy and obvious (See before Note on p. 173. l.
5.) without his studying that particular Note of its Consent with Primitive
Church. Of which thus N.O. had spoken before p. 89. after having recited S.
Austins common Marks -- Where also, (says he) according to the disparity of
several men's capacities, I suppose nothing more to be necessary, than that this
evidence, received either from all, or only some of these Notes (to those who
have not ability to examine others) be such, as that it outweigh any arguments
moving him to the contrary; and such, as the like evidence is thought
sufficient to determine us in other Elections. And then, this Church thus being
found, he may be resolved by it concerning the sense of other Divine
Revelations more dubious, and generally touching all other difficulties to him
in Religion: to wit, so far as this Church, from time to time, sees a
necessity of such Resolution, and the Divine Revelation therein is to her
sufficiently clear; only if such person, not spending so much of his own
Judgment, will afford, in stead of it, a little more of his Obedience. And
thus, p. 81. -- In case these Guides [Persons, or Churches; for, both have a
subordination] shall disagree, yet every Christian may easily know, whose
judgments among them he ought to follow: namely always of that
Church Authority, that is the Superior, which in most cases is indisputable;
this Ecclesiastical Body being placed by the Divine Providence in an exact
Subordination. As here in England it is not doubted, whether we are to pay our
Obedience rather to a National Synod than to a Diocesan; to the Archbishop, or
Primate, than to an ordinary Bishop, or Presbyter: And then, he who has some
experience in Church Affairs, if willing to take such a course, cannot but
discern, what way the major part of Christendom, and its higher and more
comprehensive Councils, that have hitherto been, do guide him. And the more
simple and ignorant, who so can come know nothing better, ought to follow the
example of the more experienced. See below Note on p. 251. l. 8 n. 6.

Page 178. l. (10). He must think me a very easy man to yield [a submission of
my understanding] till I be satisfied first, that God has appointed such to be
may Guides: and in the next place, that he has promised Infallibility to them.
If I am satisfied of the first, that God has appointed such to be my Guides, I
may safely commit my self to their guideship in all things where I want it;
i.e. in all my uncertainties, without enquiring after the next, their
Infallibility.

Ib. l. (2). We desire to know whom they mean by these Guides; and at last we
understand them to be the Biship of Rome, and his Clergy. No. They are the
universal Clergy, Persons, and Synods, that are set over us by Christ: ranked
in a due subordination, in Persons, ascending (here in these Occidental
Churches) to the Patriarch of the West; in Synods, to a Patriarchal, or
General, Council. And, in any dissension among these, the Superior, Persons,
or Synods, are our true Guides.

Page 179. l. 2. Here we demurr; and own no authority the Bishop of Rome has
over us. Then we do not what we ought; He being justly the Patriarch of the
West, and the Prime Patriarch of the Catholic Church, and the President in
General Councils.

Ib. l. 4. We have all the rights of a Patriarchal Church. I suppose, He means
of a Primate -- and Metropolitan Church; Primats having sometimes had the title
of Patriarchs. But these rights are such as are subordinate to other higher
Persons, and Councils: and this of England is but one of the Western Provinces,
the Bishops whereof constitute a Patriarchal Council. And what remedy would
there be of suppressing the Heresies or Schisms that may and often have
infected such Provincial or National Churches, if there were no superior
Church Authority above them?

Ib. l. 12. To these [ viz. the Bishops of our own Church] who are our lawful
Guides, we promise a due obedience. But neither are they our lawful Guides, nor
our obedience to them due, should any or all of them be Heretical,
Schismatical, or opposing their Superiors. In such case those, not they, are
our right: Guides.

Ib. l. 15. For the Bishop and Clergy of Rome we owe none to them. Nor none is
required, save to the Roman Bishop as S. Peter's Successor, and Supreme Pastor
of the Church, and Patriarch of the We^^ more, (as to any submission of the
Metropolitan, English, to the Metropolitan Roman, Church, these being
coordinate,) (...) not desired.

Ib. l. (7). We are not to submit to those who are lawful Guides in al^ things
they may require. Yes, To submit to all their Definitions, if they Supreme.
Yes; though they fallible yet to submit in all things, where we not certain;
say learned Protestants.

Page 180. l. 9. So my adversary N. O. in his Preface says, that by the
principles, we hold, we excuse and justify all Sects which have or shall
separate from our Church. By the Principles we hold: i.e. by the Dr's and some
other's Principles, the followers of Chillingworth. Excuse and justify Sects.
N. O. says not that you excuse or justify them in every thing, but in this one
thing; that every one of them may undertake to be his own Guide in Necessaries
upon such a Principle as the Dr's 13th; since the sense of Scripture in all
these points is said to be so plain, as none well* endeavoring can mistake it:
and then, for non-necessaries, what need they seek for a Guide? * Or; that,
Since none owe submission of their judgment to * their Ecclesiastical
Superiors, every one may follow their own. Or, that, if you may depart from
your Superiors, Persons, or Councils, upon just cause; of which cause you say,
it is all reason that you, not your Superiors, judge then, so may they from
you upon any cause they also think just. * Or, that, if there be no decisive
Judge for differences between you and your Superiors to whom you can be
obliged; so neither is there, for differences between them and you: * and that,
as you appeal from your Ecclesiastical Superiors to Evidence of Scripture,
(so seeming to you), in your cause; so may they, from you, in theirs.
Exemplified at large in the Socinian's Plea, in the 4th Discourse concerning
the Guide in Controversies. Hence, I say, Sects take liberty in this Church, I
think contrary to the intention of the 4th and 5th Canon of the Synod 1603. to
hold and believe what opinions they please, though different from the Church of
England's Articles, since they think, she cannot justly require an Assent from
her Subjects, which she denies to her Superiors. In this thing it is that N.
O. says, you seem to justify these Sects, that daily fall from you upon such a
mistaken Christian liberty from Obedience to their Guides: who also observes p.
98.
that Dr St's Principles that appear in the defense of the Religion established
in the Church of England, for any thing he sees, make the same A pology also
for all those other Protestant parties, and Sects disclaimed by it. But N. O.
is far from saying, that you excuse and justify these Sects in every thing they
do, or differ-in from you; or that you do not dissent from them in many things,
very just on your side, culpable on theirs; which may be granted, and the other
thing still be true: viz: that Dr St's. Principles make an equal Apology for
all dividing Parties as to several other their practices. And therefore much of
that He says in the Consequents here to that purpose, seems no way pertinent
to N. O's Observation.

Ib. l. (12). We appeal to the doctrine and practice of the truly Catholic
Church in the matters of difference between us and the Church of Rome: Compare
p. 182. l. (7.)
we are as ready as they to stand to the unanimous consent of Fathers, and to
Vincentius Lerinensis his Rules of Antiquity, Universality and Consent; we
declare let the things in despute be proved to have been the practice of the
Christian Church in all Ages, we are ready to submit to them. appealing and
standing to the doctrine and practice of the Catholic Church does He mean
submission of his private judgment to the doctrines taught by it? But, what if
the Catholic Church be fallible in such its doctrine (as I think he says it
is; see before. 7. p. 118. -- When I speak of Infallibility [i.e. of the
Catholic Church] in fundamentals, I there declare, that I mean no more by it,
than that there shall be always a number of true Christians in the world. And
Protestants ordinarily affirm, that in non-necessaries the whole Catholic
Church of any age, and consequently the unanimous consent of the Father^, or
Primitive times may err; nor will they here allow the Church Governors of any
Age to be the Judges of the necessity or non-necessity of the doctrines they
teach.). I say then, what if the Catholic Church be fallible in such its
Doctrine? And next, what if he should be Certain of the contrary, as possibly
he may? How therefore he can rightly engage thus, I see not. Again; in this
truly Catholic Church, to whose doctrine and practice he will submit, does he
include all particular Christian, at least Metropolitan, Churches, and so his
own? (which there is no reason for, if Heretical, or Schismatical Churches be
extra-Catholick). And by the consent of these Churches does he require an
unanimous and universal consent of them all, so that if any, suppose his own,
do dissent, he shall be disobliged? But, thus, he makes sure work, and may
safely venture his submission upon these terms; for, if his own Church be but
true to him, or he to himself, he shall not be cast. And an Arian, an
Eutychian, a Quaker, and Heretic or Schismatic, may safely make such an
appeal. Again; by the doctrine of the true Catholic Church means he the
Catholic Church of the present age, which is the only now living Judge to be
appealed-to and to decide any thing concerning former times, if question be
made about it? Or means he not this, but the Church of all ages past, taken
together? and next means he, the universal and unanimous consent of this
Catholic Church also, nemine contradicente? As Bishop Tailour also elsewhere
Dissuasive. c. 1. p. 7.
says, That it is impossible for the Roman Doctors to conclude, from the
sayings of Fathars, their Doctrines to be the Catholic doctrine of the ancient
Church -- Because (says he) any number that is less than all does not prove a
Catholic Consent. If the Dr then mean thus, Here he is as safe or safer from
being refuted, than before: and whereas he requires this consent also to be
proved to him, he that undertakes it would have a fine task. For, it is to be
proved universally as to Persons, Times, Places, none of any age left out; well
suting with Vincentius his Rule, (which therefore he says, he is content to
follow and stand to) -- Quod ab omnibus, quod ubique, quod semper, if it is to
be so rigidly understood. But* as Dr Hammond notes upon this Rule Of Heresy,.
5. n. 8.
-- That for the universality of Time it must be centiously understood; not so,
as to signify it a prejudice to any doctrine, if in some one or more ages it
had not been universally received: for then there could be no heretic as any
time in the would: So must it be observed also for Universality of Place; and,
of Consenters; in that these also must be cautiously understood; not so, as to
signify it a pr^judice to any doctrine, if in some one or more places, or by
some persons, or also Churches dissenting it has not been universally
received: for else there could be so also no Heretics at any time in the
world. This of the just qualifying of Vincentius his Rule.

Catholic Church in present being? since that of former ages after the
Apostles is no more infallible, than the present: or, that of any one age, than
of another; and since, as to not failing in Necessaries, the promises of our
Lord are made to all Ages alike, and General Councils in all ages have equal
power, one as another, of making Definitions in matters of faith, and inserting
them also in the Creeds, if they see fit. And again, in any differences that
may be in this present Catholic Church, will he allow a much major part hereof
to give the law to, and conclude, the whole so as it did in the first four
General Councils; and, as it is used in all Courts consisting of many; and
which thing, unless allowed, no Heresy or Schism in the Catholic Church can
be suppressed by Its Judgment; because all Heresy or Schism has a party* and
the chief and most dangerous Heretics have been Bishops, Primates, and also
Patriarchs (so that the Dr's plea cannot exempt the Church of England from this
trial by his calling it a Patriarchal Church p. 179.
): Or, since it also is controverted, what has been the Common Doctrine of
former ages, or of the Fathers, will he, for the decision of this, submit to
the judgment herein of the much major part of the present Church Catholic, or
of Christianity, or of his Canonical Superiors? i.e. submit to the most common
reason of the Church that reads the Fathers Writings? If he will do this, as
in all reason he should, then, as to many of these points in difference between
Protestants and the Church of Rome, and particularly in these, the so much now
decried, Transubstantiation, and the necessary consequent of it Adoration, and
those other points exclaimed against, Veneration of Images and Relics,
Invocation of Saints, etc; as also in this point what was the judgment of
Antiquity in these, whose doctrine this major part of the Church declares
themselves in these things to follow; I say, in all these, and many others, He
will be cast even by the confession of Protestants; who also acknowledge their
discession at the Reformation to have been made a toto mundo; and as well from
the Greek, as Latin, Church: Or, to be short, will he submit to the judgment of
a lawful General Council, if it has determined any of these differences, or of
what Councils do appear to have had the acceptance both of the East and West,
excepting Protestants? But such Concessions, often used by him in general,
signify nothing: and his true Plea seems contrary to it; viz. his 13th
Principle, which is Clearness of Scripture to all persons in all Necessaries:
which if granted, what needs, herein, the guidance of, and submission to, the
Clergy either of the past, or present age?

Ib. l. (5). Let the things in dispute be proved etc. And who to judge of this
proof? your selves? Or Superior Councils, rather?

Ib. l. (2). But those who separate from the Church of England make etc. This
is nothing to that particular, wherein N. O. said the Dr justified Sects:
mentioned before in Note on p. 180. l. 9.

Page 181. l. 12. We defend the Government of the Church by Bishops to be the
most ancient and Apostolical Government, and that no persons can have
sufficient reason to cast that off, which has been so universally received in
all Ages since the Apostles times: if there have been disputes among us about
the nature of the differences between the two Orders, and the necessity of it
in order to the Being of a Church, such there have been in the Church of Rome
too. Here, if by defending the Government of the Church by Bishops to be the
most Ancient and Apostolical Government he means exclusively to a Government in
other places by a Presbytery without Bishops its being as ancient and
Apostolical, as it; [Whenas (contrary to this) in his Irenicum he says -- par.
2. c. 6.
That, in all probability, the Apostles did not observe any one fixed course of
settling Church Government, but settled it according to the several,
circumstances of time, places, and persons. And, p. 344. -- That the Apostles
did not establish Episcopacy from any unalterable Law of Christ, or from any
such indispensable reasons as will equally hold in all times, places, and
persons: and there c. 2. p. 395. 396.
quotes that incomparable man (as he styles him) Mr Hales in his Tract of
Schism saying -- That Bishops by Christ's institution [I add, or Apostolical
Constitution; for, this also would oblige] have no Superiority over men
further, than of Reverence. And -- making all difference between
Church Officers to arise from consent of Parties: and to the same purpose cites
Archbishop Cranmer; p. 391.
(where perhaps he might have done well to have followed the discretion of the
former times, in not thus publishing and exposing the nakedness of this Father
of the English Reformation). From all which it follows, that the Government by
Bishops as understood contradistinct to, and not the same with, that of
Presbyters is no Constitution Apostolical: and that, if it arise only from
consent of Parties, by consent of Parties also it may be removed.] Again, in
what he says next, That no persons can have sufficient reason to cast that
off, which has been so universally received in all Ages since the Apostles
times, if he means; No Magistrate, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, has any lawful
power to cast off or change the Church Government by Bishops; [whereas he says
the contrary to this in his Irenicum; and, from Bishop Downham, Mason, and some
others their allowing a Presbyterial Government only in case of necessity, viz.
where Bishops cannot be had, argues thus -- part. 2. c. 8. Conclusion.
It remains (says he), that the determining of the form of Gorernment is a
matter of liberty in the Church; and what is so, may be determined (i.e. either
way) by lawful authority; and what is so determined by that anthority, does
bind men to obedience. Thus he. A matter of liberty in the Church: What, where
Bishops may be had, and where is no case of necessity? This follows not: and so
the Design of his Irenicum is evacuated.] Again; in the next words, Which has
been so universally received in all ages since the Apostles times; if he means
universally so received for places, as well as times, [contrary to what he
says in his Irenicum p. 322. -- That it is probable that the Apostles did
settle the Government in the Church in a College of Presbyters, and in a
Bishop and Deacons too, according to the diversity of places and variety of
circumstances: And Ibid. -- That the Succession of Rome [i.e. by Bishops] is as
muddy, as Tiber it self: -- And, That the line of Succession fails us here,
where we most need it]: Again; If, in his words following concerning the
disputes there have been of the necessity of Episcopacy in order to the being
of a Church, he holds Episcopacy so necessary to the Church's being, as that
none have any power in any age or time to alter it; and so, if he will join in
this matter with the belief of Catholics in the Council of Trent Sess. 23. c.
4.
-- Sacrosancta Synodus declarat, praeter caeteros Ecclesiasticos gradus,
Episcopos, qui in Apostolorum locum successerunt, ad hunc Hierarchicum Ordinem
praecipue pertinere; and positos, sicut idem Apostolus ait, a Spiritu Sancto
regere Ecclesiam Dei; eosque Presbyteris superiores esse. [things not
controverted in the Roman Church] And Ib. Can. 6. -- Siquis dixerit in Ecclesia
Catholica non esse Hierarchiam Divina ordinationc institutam, quae constat ex
Episcopic, Presbyteris, and Ministris, Anathema sit: I say, if such be his
meaning here, I have no more to do, but congratulate with him the correction of
his former error. But, in these expressions, he may mean only, what well
consists with his Irenicum; that, as the Government by Bishops is most Ancient
and Apostolical in some places, so the Presbyterial was in some others. And --
That no persons can have sufficient reason to cast off this Episcopal
Government in such places where it has been settled, unless the Supreme
Majestrate from some necessary circumstances think fit to alter it, (as the
Apostles, he says, in some places settled a Presbytery in stead of it): I say,
he may have such a meaning. And, if his former opinion be changed herein,
perhaps he might have done well to have published his present contrary judgment
more fully and clearly, to make an amends for his formerly published mistakes.
Which else, when a future opportunity may serve, and power assist the
inclinations of contrary Sects, may minister arguments afresh for the
Lawfulness of their Abrogating the Episoopal Government, and introducing their
own. And he may see what use the Replyer to Durel Patronus bona fidei.
has made of them already in Defense of Presbyterianism against Episcopacy.

Ib. l. (8). We appeal and are ready to stand to the judgment of the Primitive
Church for interpreting the letter of Scripture in any difference between us
and the Church of Rome. See before Note on p. 180. l. (12.)

Ib. l. (4). But those who separate from our Church will allow n^thing to be
lawful [in the worship of God] but what has an express command in Scripture.
See the former Disc.. 88. These Separatists ground this their tenent upon
Scriptures, as they think, clear: some of whom at least are supposed to have
used their best endeavor rightly to understand them; the sense also they take
these Scriptures in being very contrary to their interest; and having brought
great sufferings upon them. The point seems very necessary to be clear to them
in Scriptures both for the right service of God, and for the peace of the
Church. Must not therefore our Author here either relinguish his 13th
Principle, or say; the Texts are indeed clear on the Separatists side: or that
none knows when he uses his best endeavors; and so neither knows when he
mistakes plain Scriptures? As for the modern Sectarists their appealing to the
Primitive Church in the differences between them and that of England, as the
Church of England, he says, does in her differences with Rome, See Patronus
bonae fidei in Causa Puritanorum, in his Prodromus p. 88. 89. where also he
cites as on his side contra Hierarchicos abeuntes a primaeva praxis Dr
Stillingfleet's Irenicum p. 66. 67. 68. See also in fidei Patrono. p. 4. 5.

Page 182. l. 2. Which [infallibility] those of the Church of Rome do
challenge. They plead only the Infallibility of the Church Catholic, whose
Subjects they are, in her General Councils. Neither is there one word in the
Principles Considered concerning the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, with
which yet the Dr so often relieves himself.

Ib. l. 16. To talk of Accommodation is folly, and to design it madness Viz.
against the Determinations of a lawful General Council; or also a Patriarchal,
by any Ecclesiastical Body inferior and subordinate to it. What terms of
Composition can an Arian expect after the Council of Nice?

Ib. l. (7). But there is no such thing in the least pretended by our Church,
that declares in her Articles, That General Councils may err -- and that all
the proof of things to be believed is to be taken from Holy Scripture. And not
from Church, or Councils, declaring to us the sense of Scripture, because they
fallible herein: then no proof in any matter of faith is admitted from
Primitive times, or consent of Fathers, which He but now appealed to. See Note
on p. 180. l. (12).

Page 183. l. 2. And none of them charge our Church with any error in
doctrine; nor plead that as the reason of their separation.

What then means the Presbyterian Ministers complaint See Reasons showing the
necessity of Reformation of the Public Doctrine, etc. 1660. p. 5, 6.
for the Church of Englands imposing upon them things in the Common Prayer Book
and 39. Articles repugnant to Scripture; and, requiring their assent to them;
citing the 4.5. and 36. Canon of the Synod 1603. and 13. Eliz. 12.? And do they
not hold this an erroneous doctrine, but now named by Him, p. 181. -- That
something may be lawful to be used in the worship of God, besides what he has
expressly commanded? And see the forecited Author in Bon. Fid. Part. p. 4.
requiring of Durell -- Vt purgaret Hierarchicos a Crimine corruptae doctrinae
Anglicanae, and commutatae in Arminianismum, and Papismum in multis.

Ibid. l. 6. The Church of Rome not only requires the belief of her errors,
which is plain by the often objected Creed of Pius, etc. But makes the belief
of them necessary to salvation; If in the Profession required by Pius no
distinction is made between the Definitions of former Councils and other common
Articles of the Creed, so neither is there in the Athanasian Creed between the
said Definitions and former Articles of the Apostle's Creed. As for making the
belief of them necessary to salvation, N. O. has already answered Consid. p.
77. -- That none are obliged to such a necessary belief of them, as that a
person nescient of them cannot be saved; or, that the explicit knowledge of
them is absolutely necessary, (though always in some manner beneficial it is)
to salvation: but that this indeed is necessary to salvation, that any subject
of the Church, when knowing them to be determined by her, obey her definitions,
and not reject or dissent from them: Such disobedience being conceived a
mortal breach of Gods command.

Ib. l. (11). But nothing of this nature can be objected against our Church by
dissenters. But, this is objected by them, that Assent is required to the
Common Prayer Book and 39. Articles, as containing in them nothing erroneous or
repugnant to Scripture, upon Excommunication, if any one affirm it, till such
person repents of such his wicked error; and without any qualification that
such assent be yielded only as far as the same Articles are agreeable to Gods
Word. Here then I ask, Whether such a wicked error, and herein such an
obstinate disobedience to ones lawful Spiritual Superiors, and continuance out
of their communion, unrepented-of, is not held by the Church of England to
exclude such person from being a member of Christ's Body, and from Salvation?
Which Church declares Art. 33. concerning a just excommunication -- That the
person which by open denunciation of the Church is rightly cut off from the
unity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an heathen, and a Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance; and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereunto. Of which matter thus also Calvin Instit. 4. c. 12.. 4.
-- Nequis tale Ecclesiae judicium spernat; aut parvi astimet se fidelium
suffragiis damnatum, testatus est Dominus istud ipsum nihil aliud esse quam
sententiae suae promulgationem; ratumque haberi in coelis, quod illi in terra
egerint. and 10. -- Qui Ecclesiae censura [speaking of a just Excommunication
by a Church Reformed] excommunicantur suae etiam ipsorum perpetuae damnationis,
nisi resipuerint, certi fiunt.

Ib. l. (4). That it was necessary to salvation to be in subjection to the
Bishop of Rome. The words in the Lateran Council under Leo are these -- In
Ecclesia esse non potest, qui Romani Pontificis Cathedram deserit. It is
necessary to salvation that one be in the Church Catholic, be n^ Heretic or
Schismatic; but yield obedience to his lawful Ecclesiastical Superiors; the
Supreme amongst whom is the Bishop of Rome; the Successor of S. Peter in the
Prime Apostolic See, who also presides in and confirms lawful General
Councils; So that Obedience to all lawful General Councils in this sense
involveth also obedience to him, their President.

Page 184. l. 1. The Guides of the Roman Church pretend to as immediate
authority of obliging the consciences of men, as Christ or his Apostles had.
Means he not here requiring Assent to their Decrees upon Anathema? But let him
then urge this against lawful General Councils, which have practiced it, and
declared such matters to oblige men's consciences to obedience, as being Gods
Word. But, if he means here, that the Roman Church pretends such an immediate
authority in obliging men's consciences as to her Injunctions or Con^titutions
in matters indifferent, and no way commanded by God; i.e. as if she enjoined
their obedience also to them as to things necessary and commanded by God, this
is utterly denied, and makes the Church contradict her self; for, if they are
commanded by God, how are they enjoined as things indifferent? But the Church
affirms, men are bound in conscience to obey these, not because they are divine
Commands, but only because the Persons are obliged by the Divine Command (which
binds the Conscience) to obey the Church's Command in all such matters.
Necessary such things are to be observed because the Church commands them; and
men also bound in conscience to observe them, because they are commanded by God
to obey such Commands of the Church. And this obligation of Conscience I think
the Dr admits as well as Catholics, See his Irenieum c. 2. p. 65. where he
says that -- What is left undetermined by the Divine Law, if it be determined
by lawful Authority in the Church of God does bind the Consciences of those,
who are subject to such authority, to obedience to those determinations: and
cites for it Romans 13.5. that we are to be subject to these Governors for
Conscience sake. The Church may pretend to any authority our Lord or his
Apostles have given it, without dishonouring, or degrading, or equalling
themselves to the Donor. He goes on.

Ib. l. 6. But our Guides challenge no more than teaching men to do what Christ
had commanded them; and in other things not commanded or forbidden, to give
rules, which on the account of the General Commands of Scripture they look on
the members of our Church as obliged to observe. Obliged to observe: I hope he
means, as obeying here a just authority; [and not as he explains himself in his
Irenicum cha. 2.. 7.^.46.
-- Thus far I acknowledge a binding power in Ecelesiastical Constitutions, that
though they neither bind by virtue of the matter, nor of the authority
commanding (there being no legislative power lodged in the Church) yet, in
respect of the circumstances and the end, they should be obeyed, unless I judge
the thing unlawful that is commanded, rather than manifest open contempt of the
Pastors of the Church, or bring a scandal to others]. And here, when the Church
of England thus obliges her subjects to the practice of such things as she
holds indifferent, (unless she makes this a condition of her obligation, if
they first hold them lawful), she obliges them also to hold such things
lawful; since none may practice any thing apprehended by his conscience to be
unlawful. Lastly; as the Church of England has authority to give Rules in
things neither commanded nor forbidden by God; so, I ask, Has she no authority
in Controversies of Faith, for the deciding them? See Art. 29th. of the Church
of England.

Ib. l. 17. In the Church of Rome it is accounted as much a mortal sin to
disobey their Guides in the most indifferent things as to disobey God in the
plain commands of Scripture. As much? No. But, as well: for Mortal Sins admit
degrees. And -- Mandata Ecclesiastica non anteponi* sed postponi debere dicimus
Divinis Praceptis: Bellarm. de Romans Pontif l. 4. c. 17.
says the Cardinal; Though all disobeying our Superiors in lawful things is
also disobeying God, when He, in such, commanding obedience to them. Again, As
well a Mortal Sin, in some disobedience of these Governors, but not in all;
not in things of no great consequence, in respect of the benefit or damage that
is received by, the doing or omitting, them. And lastly these things are
extended as well to the Laws of Civil, as Ecclesiastical, Governors. So that,
if the Catholics seem to apply some Consciential obedience to the
Ecclesiastical Judge, disliked and denied to him by Protestants, so do they
also, to the Civil.

Ib. l. (10). They challenge likewise to themselves a power to dispense with
the laws of God, as in matter of Marriages. The Church only dispenses where
antecedently no Divine Law, but only a Church-law, obliges: those about
Marriages being, many of them, Levitical Judicial Laws, obligatory only to the
ancient Commonwealth of the Jews, and not now to Christians, But, in
impedimentis jure Divino naturali conjugium dirimentibus, the Church pretends
no dispensative power.

Ib. l. (8). And with the Institution of Christ, as in Communion in one kind.
See this spoken to before in Note on p. 151. l. 6.

Ib. l. (5). As in the five Sacraments they have added to the two of Christ. As
the Roman Church reckons Seven Sacraments, so the Greek. [ Sacramenta vero
ritusque in hac ipsa Catholica recte sentientium Christianorum Ecclesia sunt
Septem, says Jeremias Patriarch of Constantinople against the Lutherans Resp.
1. c. 7.
]: and so the Catholic Church, before Luther appeared. And this Author cannot
be ignorant, that Protestants also, since that time, as the Word Sacrament is
taken in a more general sense, have willingly admitted more than two; and
acknowledged this conformable to the language of Antiquity. And, in the short
English Catechism, the Answer, (to the Question. How many Sacraments?) Two
only, is made, as Bishop Mountague observes Appeal c. 33.
with this Limitation, as generally necessary to salvation. And on, the other
side, the Council of Trent Sess. 7. c. 3.
pronounces Anathema to those, who shall make them all of an equal dignity. And
Baptism and the Eucharist shall have the preeminency that Protestants desire.

Ib. l. (2). Setting aside these considerations, we dare appeal, etc. For the
extravagancy of the next page, I referr the Reader to the Note on p. 180. l. 9.

Page 185. l. 6. Whether our Church's Imposing of three Ceremonies, declared to
be indifferent by those who required them, But, denied to be so by those they
are imposed-on, who therefore complain of tyranny and of forcing the
Conscience; the enjoining the practice of them involving an assent also that
they are lawful; which they that cannot yield must sin, if they practice them.
And in such a case who must decide this matter between these two? I find him in
his Irenicum c. 2. p. 63. nominating for this Judge the sense of the Primitive
Church in the first four Centuries and the judgment of the other Reformed
Churches. There he proposes -- That nothing be required nor determined [by
Church-Governours] but what is sufficiently known to be indifferent in its own
nature. The only difficulty (says he) is h^w a thing may be sufficiently known
to be indifferent, because one man looks upon that as indifferent which another
does not. The most equal way to decide this Controversy is to make choice of
such Judges as are not interested in the quarrel, and those are the sense of
the Primitive Church in the first four Centuries who were best able to judge,
whether they looked upon themselves as bound by any Command of Scripture, or
no: and withal the judgment of the Reformed Churches. So that, what shall be
made appear to be lef^ indifferent by both the sense of the Primitive Church,
and the Churches of the Reformation, may be a matter determinable by Law and
which all may be required to conform in Obedience to. But here, 1st. What if
when this Judge, the sense of the Primitive Church, is admitted by both parties
yet there happen dispute, What, or on which side this sense is? Is it not so
disputed? and will not the deciding of this need another Judge? 2ly. For the
Judgment of the Reformed Churches (I suppose, he means those abroad concerning
the Controversies about Indifferents here in England) they no way seem such as
he here supposes; i.e. persons not interested in the quarrel, some of them as
to these things intertaining the opinion of the Prclaticks, others of the
Presbyterian party. But, were it not so, their judgment being fallible, It is
contrary I think to this Author's Principles for others to be enjoined or
constrained to conform to them; either in their practice, where their judgment
relucts; or in their judgment, where their's also may err. 3ly. The Judge in
Ecclesiastical matters is not left to any ones arbitrary nomination, but is
always the Superior Prelates or Councils in respect of all others subordinate
to them.

He goes on, Can be thought -- so great a Burden to their Consciences, as all
the Load of superstitious fopperies in the Roman Church. Supposing here, not
granting, the Roman Ceremonies such, (yet some of which at least I hope this
Author will protect, because borrowed from her by the Reformed Church of
England, to the great grief of these Sects;) I ask to what end is it here to
compare the Degrees of Burdens imposed, where the Least, if imposed against
conscience, is unsupportable?

Ib. l. 17. Whether Transubstantiation, Image Worship, etc. be not somewhat
harder things to swallow. Some of these at least, how hard soever they seem to
you, are the Definitions either of the Supreme Councils, or those Superior to
a Provincial or National one of England. And to these Councils therefore you
owe obedience either of assent, or silence; and cannot separate from their
Communion without Schism.

Ib. l. (11). Be not somewhat harder things to swallow than the Church's power
to appoint matters of Order and decency. Is then the appointing matters of
Order and Decency all the power the Church of England does, or may, assume? I
mean; has this Church no power in Matters, and Controversies, of Faith?

Page 186. l. 1. Not for any difficulty objected by N.O. Which, whatever it is,
is omitted here by the Dr. See Note on p. 180. l. 9.

Annotations on. 11. Of the means to attain the sense of Scripture without an
infallible Guide.
Page 186. l. 11. That is the second main Principle in N.O. that without this
infallible assistance of the Guides of the Church there can be no certainty of
the sense of Scripture. There are no such words in N.O. N.O. denies a
sufficient certainty of the sense of Scripture in several points of necessary
says, See the former Discourse,. 2.
but not in all, especially as to some persons and capacities, without the
Church's exposition of them.

Ib. l. 17. He yields that the Church's infallibility is not necessary to the
foundation of faith; for men's faith, he says, may begin at the infallible
authority of Scriptures, No such words are in N.O, neither does he call that a
Foundation of Faith, where Faith begins. Which Faith begins at that particular
Article thereof which is first taught to any by their In^tructer, Parents, or
Pastor; and this happens to be sometimes one Article, sometimes another: N.O's
words there are -- As all Articles of Faith are not by all persons learnt at
once, so neither by all exactly in the same order, as is frequently observed by
Catholic Writers. A Christians faith therefore may begin (i.e. in the order of
his learning it) either at the infallible authority of Scriptures, or of the
Church; and this infallible authority of either of these be learnt from
Tradition; and that of the other from it. Thus N.O. Concerning the Foundation
of Faith I referr the Reader to the former Note on p. 84. l. ult.

Ib. l. (3). He often pleads for necessity of an external infallible Guide;
because God has referred all in the dubious sense of Scripture to the
direction of his Ministers, their Spiritual Guides.

This is by N.O. given for the reason of another thing; not infallibility;
where N.O. in answer to the Dr's 18th Principle says in the immediate words
preceding p. 46.
-- Neither can such Promise (viz. that whosoever uses his best endeavor for
understanding Scripture, [if meant exclusively to his consulting and embracing
the Exposition of the Church] either shall not err, or not be damned for it) be
pretended necessary, since God has referred all men etc. And here the Dr omits
the vindicating of his Principle and applies N.O's words to the proving of
Infallibility.

Page 187. l. (9). Whilst the Scriptures are ambiguous, etc. N.O's words are --
whilst the Scriptures in such points, (at least to persons unlearned, or of
weaker judgments, which are the greatest part of Christians) are ambiguous,
which words are here left out by our Author.

Ib. l. (6). The force of all which comes to this; that we can arrive at no
certainty of the sense of Scripture in controverted places without an external
infallible Guide: and therefore we are bound to submit to him. Nay: comes to
this: that persons unlearned and of weaker judgments can arrive to no certainty
of the sense of Scripture, in some matters of necessary faith, without an
external Infallible Guide; and therefore such a Guide is necessary.

Page 188. l. 1. Point to be Discussed. What necessity there is for the
Salvation of persons to have an infallible interpretation of controverted
places of Scripture? Salvation of persons: he should add, persons unlearned,
and of weaker capacity, and doubting of the sense of such places. Of
controverted places of Scripture, He should add, in points necessary, of which
N.O. every where speaks: (see his words but now quoted by himself) whose Words
one would think, but that the Dr surely is a man of more integrity, that he on
purpose, to make his Answers more plausible almost every where, as to both
these, omitteth. Now, the necessity of such an infallible interpretation is
this, that such person may not err in such Necessaries.

Ib. l. 8. Men may attain a certain sense without an infallible Guide. Here
again want words. Men; all men, the unlearned, those of weakest judgment,
employed in a secular vocation etc. attain to a certain sense, in all places of
Scripture concerning Necessaries.

Ib. l. 13 1st. We are to enquire into the necessity of such an infallible
interpretation of doubtful places of Scripture. Add, in necessaries.

Page 189. l. 1. N.O. Must prove, not that there are doubtful and controverted
places, which no one denies, but that the sense of Scripture is so doubtful and
obscure in the things which are necessary to men's salvation, that persons
without an infallible Guide cannot know the meaning of them. 1 Why it lies more
upon N.O. to prove, that the sense of Scripture is not clear as to some
persons, in some points necessary, than on the Dr to prove, that the Scripture
is clear to them in all points necessary, I see not: since he affirms these
plain to all, N.O. denies it, and Affirmers, as he says p. 193.
ought to prove. 2 Here what thinks He of several of the points of the
Athanasian Creed urged by N.O much controverted in Antiquity, and by the first
Councils inserted in this Creed as thought necessary for men's salvation to be
known? Are the Scriptures so clear in all these, as all capacities, using an
endeavor suitable to their vocations, cannot mistake in them? Then what thinks
he of his own words Ration. Account p. 58. urged by N.O. p. 63. and cited
before in Note on p. 126. l. 2. The Deity of Christ. and the Trinity, are they
not points necessary to be rightly believed for attaining Salvation? And Does
not the guidance of the Church Governors set over the Church by God Ephesians.
4.11.13. relate to Necessaries? Or, where the erring of the unlearned (which
always many Christians must be 2. Pet. 3.16.) tends to men's destruction, is not
the knowing of the right sense necessary to their salvation? What thinks he of
the sense of Hoc est Corpus meum, urged by N.O. p. 20? Is it clear on the
Protestants side to all using a just endeavor, when the much major part of
Christianity, (and, before Luther's time, the wh^le,) understands it in the
contrary? And, if none of this world of men has used a right endeavor, how
shall any be secure of such a right endeavor used by him that he may be
confident in such clear Scripture he is not deceived? Or, is the true sense of
this Text not necessary to be known, where such a gross Idolatry is affirmed by
our Author to be the necessary consequent of an erroneous sense?

But, if he will restrain Necessaries to the Apostles Creed, or perhaps only to
three or four principal Articles thereof, the pure nescience of which excludes
from salvation; then, as he contends these are clear in Scripture, so why will
he not allow, that General Councils are in these infallible, and so the Church
in Necessaries an Infallible Guide?

But then let him consider, in any such restraint of necessaries, yet whether
there are not many other points at least so highly beneficial to salvation, as
that the Divine Providence is engaged to leave the truth of them also either
clear to all sober enquirers in Scripture, or to Guides, that shall not err in
expounding such Scriptures to the people. Indeed, after so much clamor against
the pernicious doctrine of the Church of Rome, our Author seems to have a hard
task of it, and also very unsuitable to so much choler, to maintain that none of
the points agitated between it, and Protestants is so necessary, (for attaining
salvation at least with less difficulty), to be believed on the Protestant
side, that God should either leave Scripture for it clear enough to the sober
enquirer; or else, in the sense of Scripture doubtful, some living Guide
unerrably to determine it. Or, if he shall say, God has left Scriptures clear
to all capacities well-endeavouring in all such points; he seems to have as
hard a task again to maintain this; when the major part of Christianity,
reading these Scriptures, do think, against him, the contrary to be clear in
them. But lastly; if what He over-lavisheth in the plainness of Scripture to
all well endeavoring capacities and conditions, he will make an amends for now
in the restraining of Necessaries; On whose Judgment, I pray, is it fit a
particular person should rely in this Question, which seems of great
concernment, What or how many points are to be called Necessary? On Mr Chilling
worth's or the Dr's? Or on that of the Supreme Guides of the Church, assembled
in her General Councils, who from time to time declare to Christians by their
Decrees, as the Apostles did in the first General Council, Act. 15. what is
Necessary for them to believe, what to practice, against all such erroneous
Tenants as shall arise in the Church, that may any way pervert their Faith, or
Manners?

Ib. l. (7). If a person then by reading and considering those things which are
plain may do what Christ requires [all that which Christ requires] for his
salvation; what necessity has such a one to trouble himself about an
infallible Guide? [I add, or Any Guide at all, as to those?] For either he may
go to heaven without him [without having any such Guide; fallible or
infallible,] or not? If he may, let him [the Dr] show the necessity such Guide
is of to that end. which may be attained without him; if not, then the things
necessary to salvation cannot be known without him: [as the Dr says before,
they may by ones reading and considering those things which are plain, and
doing all those things Christ requires for his salvation]. So easily may his
arguing against an infallible, serve as well against any, Guide at all.
Meanwhile N.O. affirms some Persons cannot Know all Necessaries without a Judge.

Page 190. l. 12. But does S. Peter say [2. Epist c. 3.16.] that the Scriptures
are so hard to be understood, that sober and devout minds cannot learn therein
what is necessary to their salvation? Yes: if the sober and devout be
unlearned, as they may be. Cannot learn therein [all] that is necessary; for
surely, where the erring therein works their destruction, the right sense is
necessary for their salvation.

Ib. l. (11). Which men that wanted-judgment, were ready to pervert to their
own mischief, etc. As some may want, that are sober, devout, and diligent; and
which want of Judgment, as to some, no care or diligence can remove.

Ib. l. (9). But if there be such difficulties [in S. Paul's Epistles,] is
there nothing plain and easy? Yes: many things. But, if many things plain and
easy, are there no such difficulties?

Ib. l. (7). If bad men may pervert them, may not good men make a good use of
them? And, if learned men make good use of them, may not yet the unlearned
mistake them? Or, must all these get learning, that they may not?

Page 191. l. 15. If on so fair and just an occasion offered, S. Peter himself,
whom they believe to have been Head of the Church at that time, and at Rome at
the writing of this Epistle, does wholly omit referring men in the sense of
obscure places to infallible Guides, what can we else infer, but that S. Peter
thought no such thing of necessity for his Church? A Negative argument is often
invalid. Every thing is not every where said. If we find not in S. Peter, it is
sufficient if in S. Paul. -- Whose Faith follow Heb. 13.7. 1 Timothy 3.15.
. And -- The Church [i.e. in its Governours] is the Pillar and Ground of Truth.
But we read in S. Peter such things as these -- That they should submit it
themselves to their Presbyters, such Presbyters as he was, that fed the fl^ck
of God, i.e. with their doctrine; and so, that they should submit to It. 1.
Pet. 5.5. compared with 1, 2. -- We read in him 2.10, 15. That God will surely
punish those that are self-willed and despise Government, and speak evil of
Dignities, which I apply in the first place to Spiritual Gevernours and
Ecclesiastical Dignities. And chap. 3.2. that he writ his second Epistle to
them, that they might be mindful of the Commandments of the or the. Apostles
of our Lord and Savior. [and so, of their Suecessours]. And here, in the next
verse after these unstable wresters, we find S. Peter advising them to take
heed of being led away with the error of these wicked ones, and of falling
from their stedfastness] i.e. in their adhering constantly to the doctrine
learnt from their Spiritual Superiours].

Peter urged by N.O; but what answer returns he to Ephesians. 4.11, 13, 14. and to
the rest mentioned before in Note on p. 189. l. 1. that are cited by N.O.? and
what to his own words, to make himself at least agree with himself? I find
none. I find him often delivering the state of the Question between him and his
adversary in indefinite, and so ambiguous, propositions: and then dividing of
his discourse upon it into several heads, each copiously prosecuted. But, mean
while, N.O's Considerations unconsidered slip through his fingers; and, out of
the memory also of any, save a very watchful, Reader, thus amused with other
things.

Annotations on his. 12. Of the Necessity of a Judge in Controversies.
Page 192. l. 2. Is it that without this [an infallible determination of
doubtful places in necessaries] the Church's peace cannot be preserved? Add;
nor an Unity of Faith, which is requisite in Necessaries, Ephesians. 4.5, 11, 13. One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism [into this Faith].

Ib. l. 6. Unless there be an infallible Judge to determine which is the true
sense of Scripture. He should say, in Necessaries. But, then, his following
Answer would not suit with the Question.

Ib. l. 16. The strength of this argument depends upon the supposition of the
necessity of determining controversies. Add, necessary to be determined,
because in Necessaries.

Ib. l. (8). The weakness of humane understanding, the power of interest and
passion, and the ambiguity of words are as apt to beget disputes in Religion,
as in any other thing. More need still of deciding some of these disputes;
since so many things, even in the most necessary Credends, beget them.

Page 193. l. 8. This Question is plainly about a matter of fact; i. e whether
Christ has appointed such judges in all ages, who are to determine all
emergent controversies about the difficult places of his Law? Here, does not He
question Whether the sitting and authority of lawful General Councils, is held
from Christ or by his appointment? By what authority these Supreme
Ecclesiastical Courts make their Definitions and Decrees? Upon what ground
Christianity appeals to them? This is the influence and fruit of his 13th.
Principle. But, if he allows here these Supreme Judges to hold their Authority
and Commission from Christ for determining all emergent Controversies about the
difficult places of his Law; But denies their infallibility as to all
necessaries, (to which N.O. confines it), then I would know whether they are
constituted such Judges, as that their sentence is to be obeyed in these
matters: (and why else are they Judges)? If to be obeyed; then either they must
be infallible in all necessary controversies; or else the people after, as
before, their judgment are still in these liable to error. Suppose in the
Controversy of the Arians, or Socinians, about the Deity of our Savior.

Ib. l. 13. And in this case we think, it is all the reason in the world, that
they who affirm should prove. May not I here return the proving upon himself,
That Experience shows there is a Necessity of such an Infallible Guide, since
God is not wanting to his Church in Necessaries; and since the Scriptures are
not so clear in all necessary points, as to prevent all doubters and
disputers; and those, that say they are clear, let them prove it: for, they,
that affirm, must prove? But, both for the Commission and Infallibility of such
Guides see before Note on p. 119. l. 17.

Page 194. l. 2. What if Christ, having provided for the necessaries of
salvation by a clear revelation, should leave other things in the dark, to
exercise the wits of some, and the charity of others?

Has not his 13th Principle here unhappily engaged him to maintain with Mr
Chillingw. that, since all necessaries are clear in Scripture, all
Controversies in religion are about non-necessaries; and so no necessity of a
Judge to determine them? Can we think then, that it is not very necessary, that
any of the Controversies that are between Protestants and the Church of Rome
about non-necessaries; and so no necessity of a Judge to determine them? Can we
think then, that it is not very necessary, that any of the Controversies that
are between Protestants and the Church of Rome about Merit of Works, Praying
for the Dead, and Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Eucharist,
Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, in which is said to be Idolatry on the
Roman part, etc. were decided? Had the former Decisions touching such matters,
of these Judges in Controversies of Religion gone on the Protestant side,
surely, we had not had so many What ifs for the non-necessity of them.

Ib. l. 11. What if Christ foresaw this matter of ending controversies [i.e. by
a living Judge] would be an occasion of raising one of the greatest, etc. Does
not this grate upon General Councils? Apply this to the Definitions of the
Athanasian Creed, and see what thanks these Fathers that composed it have
returned to them for so settling the Christian Faith; and not rather leaving
such things in the dark to exercise men's wits, and their charity one to
another; and obliging them to their own greater honesty and integrity in
knowing and doing God's-will. Are there not then too many Controversies yet on
foot, for the serving all these ends? And may not the Sects that have departed
from the Church of England make good use of the Dr's What ifs, in respect of
the things the Church of England requires from them? Whom what if our Lord has
left in all such things to their Christian Liberty?

Ib. l. 16. What if Christ thought it reasonable to leave the failings of men's
understandings and lives upon the same terms; so, as to give sufficient means
to prevent either, but not effectually to hinder men from falling into either
of them? Christ has left both these here on the same terms; i.e. has left an
Infallible Guide for Manners, as well as Faith: but so, as we may possibly
swerve from him in either. He may be pleased to review the Consideration on his
30th Principle p. 82. where it is said -- That God has provided by the same
Church Authority to preserve his Church in Truth, and to restrain it from Sin;
giving an equal Commission to teach the Ignorant, and to correct the Vicious.
And that, since their Doctrine directs our Manners, as well as Faith; their
Infallibility is as necessary for things of practice, as of Speculation. That,
Error in opinion also may be such, as may be much more dangerous to us, than
for the present a vicious life, supposing our persistence in a right Faith:
because we have our Conscience still left uncorrupted to reclaim us in the
latter, but not so in the former; And there is more hope of his recovery, who
as yet does ill with a relucting judgment. That some erroneous opinions or
other also are the ordinary sources and springs of evil practices; and that the
Dr cannot but acknowledge this, who has spent a considerable part of the Book
to which he has annexed his Principles, upon pretending to show, how Roman
errors do induce an evil life, and destroy devotion. This of the special need
of such a Guide for the failing of men's understandings.

Ib. l. (9). What if the nature of Religion will not bear such a determination
of controversies as Civil matters will? because civil matters concern the right
and wrong of particular persons, in which it is not the sentence of the Judge
so much as the civil force whereby it is backed which puts an end to the
dispute; but, in matters of Religion, the ending controversies can be no effect
of force and power, but of Reason and conviction of conscience. Does not He
argue here, that an Infallible Guide or Judge suits not with the nature of
Religion, because ending Controversies can be no effect of force and power, but
of reason and conviction of conscience? But how then did the Infallibility of
our Lords Apostles, and their Laws, their ending the Controversy about the
Mosaical Ceremonies in the Council, Act. 15. and S. Paul's anathematizing or
excommunicating Hymenaeus and Alexander fallen away from, and blaspheming, the
true faith, suit with the Nature of Religion? How the Anathemas of the four
first Councils suit with it? Was there no effect of Force and power, here?
Then, how is there so in the ending controversies by a Judge? Or, if there was
such an effect, was it not just? As for that He says, of the necessity of
reason and Conviction, there needs none as to the proof of the controversy that
is determined, when there is once such a conviction, that such are appointed to
determine it, and we to obey them. And, where this Conviction is not, it ought
to be; and an erroneous conscience, that obliges us to follow it, excuses not
our error from being culpable. Does this Author hold all, not convicted of
their fault or error, to be freed from Ecclesiastical Censures? What thinks he
of the 4th and 5th Canons of the English Synod under King James?

Page 195. l. 9. But in our case this [who is the Judge?] is the main thing in
dispute. But, it ought not to be.

Ib. l. 14. We must therefore allow every one that pretends to it to be such an
infallible Guide. No: but General Councils we must, upon the grounds mentioned
before, Note on p. 113. l. 15.

Ib. l. 17. If we must not first be satisfied, etc. You may be rationally
satisfied. And, if you are not so, must the Judge leave his Seat?

Page 196. l. 18. I say, the places of Scripture which are alleged for such an
infallible Judge are the most doubtful and controverted of any. 1. What then?
If I may be certain of the Infallibility of this Interpreter another way, than
by these Scriptures that are urged for it, viz. by Tradition? Is it any news to
our Author, that Catholics say this? 2ly I may be certain of the Infallibility
of this interpreter from those Scriptures, not as expounded by this
Interpreter, but by Tradition. I say, Tradition both has declared such Judge
Infallible in necessaries, and has also declared the true Sense of these
Scriptures to affirm this; Which Tradition has not, so clearly, delivered the
sense of all other doubtful Scriptures: Nor, if it had, is the sense of
Tradition in all other Scriptures so easily to be known, at least to the meaner
sort of Christians, as this concerning the Infallibility of the Supreme
Church-Guides in necessaries, by reason of the Church's more evident practice
herein. See Note on p. 113. l. 15.

Page 197. l. 7. I come therefore to the 2d enquiry; which is about the means
of attaining the certain sense of Scripture in doubtful places, without the
supposition of an infallible Guide. means used in the Primitive times of
attaining the certain sense of Scripture in doubtful places, without the
supposing of an Infallible Guide. Of these Means he names two. One means he
says See his p. 249.
was by examining and comparing places of Scripture with all the care and
judgment that may be. Where he gathers out of the Ancients such Rules as these.
-- That the Scope and design of Scripture chiefly be regarded, and the
Connection well considered; that nothing be interpreted contrary to the
Coherents: that the sense of no pl^ce is to be so interpreted that it has
repugnancy with others: that plain places be not interpreted by obscure, nor a
many by a few; bat the contrary: that figurative expressions are not to be
understood literally; nor th^se intended in a plain sense, figuratively: that
examples are to be drawn from plain places to illustrate difficult; and, from
those which are certain to clear the doubtful: that in matters of doubt
recourse is to be had to the Original Tongues: that for understanding
Scriptures we are to come with minds duly prepared to it by humility, prayer,
purity of heart, love of God and our Neighbor, etc. and many more.

Means, he says, the Ancients speak of was, the examining the Tradition of the
Apost lical Churches from the beginning concerning the sense of them delivered
from the Apostles p. 213.
-- For that any one's setting up other expositions of Scripture, than the
Christian Church has received from the Apostles times, this without any
further proof discovers their imposture. For (as he gives us it out of
Tertullian p. 212.
) it is unreasonable to suppose that the Apostles should not know the doctrine
of Christ; or that they did not deliver to the Churches planted by them the
things which they knew; or that the Churches misunderstood their doctrine,
because all the Churches were agreed in one common faith [and in an exposition
of Scriptures contrary to theirs]; and therefore there is all the reason to
believe, that so universal consent must arise from some common cause, which can
be supposed to be no other than the common delivery of it by all the Apostles.
Again p. 249. He speaks on this manner -- If after all this [i.e. the examining
and comparing Scriptures] the dispute still continues, then, if it be against
the ancient Rule of Faith universally received [perhaps he means the Apostles
Creed] that is a sufficient prescription against any opinion; if not against
the rule of faith in express words, but about the sense of it, then, if ancient
General Councils have determined it, which had greater opportunities of knowing
the sense of the Apostolical Church than we, it is reasonable, we should yield
to them; but, if there have been none such, then the unanimous consent of
Fathers is to be taken, etc.

first of these means, the attaining the certain sense of Scripture by
comparing Texts, etc. 1. First; the Reader may observe, that, if this proves
the non-necessity of an Infallible Guide, so it does the non-necessity of any
Guide at all, as to teaching us the meaning of the Scriptures. For, in this
first means, no repairing at all to our Spiritual Guides fallible or
infallible, for the sense is mentioned. 2ly. I grant, that there is a means of
attaining a sufficient certainty of the sense of some obscure places of
Scripture from others more clear, without the necessity of any other infallible
Guide therein; and that the Fathers also have laid down many excellent Rules
concerning this and practiced them, in disputing against Heretics. 3ly. The
more, and the more certain these means are for knowing the sense of Scripture,
the more they seem to infer the Infallibility and non-erring of the Supreme
Governors of the Church met in Council herein, and the more security of their
Subject's, as to all necessary faith, relying on their Judgment. Nor do I see
any thing that can be replied here; but, That these Governors well knowing the
right sense of Scriptures, yet by ambition, interest, and several other
passions may be corrupted from teaching it; and also may be induced to define
as an Article of their Faith to all posterity the contrary falsehoods; and
themselves also first take their Oath of their belief of the truth thereof;
which, though a very strange charge, yet might pass for a more tolerable
exception, if those who will judge of this swerving and erring of Councils were
themselves exempt from any such passions or interests, or could well know when
they are biased with them; but otherwise it seems a very poor subterfuge; yet
the only one they can allege for disobedience to Councils. 4ly. It is here to
be remembered, that, if this means by comparing Scriptures etc. (named before)
be not such as all men, those of weaker judgments and secular emploiments, and
void of literature can use and practice, this Infallible Guide for the certain
sense of Scripture will still remain necessary to such, where useless to some
others. 5ly. That, If any others of more liberal education, more leisure for
study, of better capacity, after such means used, shall remain still in doubt
concerning any such Texts in matters necessary, as suppose in the Trinity; or
Deity of our Lord Christ; our Lords Satisfaction; Justification, etc; here also
will be need of an Infallible Guide, or Judge to decide these things to him.
Or, if all well capable by their parts or condition of life of using this
means, yet, otherwise employed, de facto do not use it, to these also this
Infallible Guide is necessary, to supply the effect of such studies.

2d means, viz. The Ancients urging the general Exposition and sense of
Scriptures testified in the Apostolical Churches to be conformed to, Catholics
affirm; that this, viz. the Apostolic Churches their unanimously delivering
such a doctrine or sense of Scripture as received first from the Apostles, was
always held to be infallible and not liable to error; and all Chri tians held
obl^ged to believe or embrace such a doctrine or sense of Scripture so
generally consented in; and the dissenters and opposers thereof always held by
the same united and consenting Apostolical Churches for Heretics in the Faith.
To which Traditive Doctrine, I add here, or any nec^ssary and evident Deduction
made, by them, from such a tradi^ive doctrine. In both which, the Tradition, or
the Deduction, the Church was con tantly believed to be so preserved, by God's
providence over it, and his Holy Spirit abiding with it, as not to err in any
necessaries. And the unanimous consent of these Churches concerning any
doctrine to be Apostolical, however their minds were made known, whether by
Communicatory Letters, or Provinci^l Synods, (for, it could not be, in these
times of persecution, by a Council General) had then the self same authority,
as afterward the Decrees and Definitions of Councils. And thus is the Dr in
urging the 2d means of knowing the true sense of Scripture fallen upon the
Infallibility herein of the Church. And this was the Infallible Guide in the
first times, whose Tradition and Ordination, for matters of our faith, Irenaeus
says, l. 3. c. 4.
Chri^tians mu^t have followed and believed, had the Apostles lest us no
Scriptures: and consequently, Dissenters had been held no less Heretics --
Siquibus (says he speaking of the present Churches) de aliqua modica
quaestione [how much more in greater] disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret in an
iquissinas [i.e. by succession] recurrere ecclesias, in quibus Apostoli
conversati sunt, and ab eis de praesente quaestione su^ere qu^d certum and re
liquidum est [what was the certain and clear truth, to which he was to
adhere.] Quid autem, si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis,
nonne oportebat ordinem sequi traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis quibus
committebant Ecclesias? cui ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes Barbarorum,
little qui in Christum cre^unt, sine charactere vel atramento scriptam habentes
per spiritum in cordibus suis salutem, and veterem traditionem diligenter
custodientes etc.

general Consent of Churches then consulted or repaired-to only concerning
their conserving of the Written Rule of Faith, the Canon of Scripture, or the
Creed, that they received from the Apostles; the perpetual conservation of
which in the Church the Fathers urged against some grosser kind of Heretics
denying the same Creed and some part at least of this Canon; but also was
consulted and repaired-to concerning the sense wherein the Scriptures and this
Creed were understood by these Churches, so often as disputes in those times
were raised about it by other Heretics more refined; and who admitted the
Scriptures and the Creed, but varied concerning the sense of them in several
points. Against both which Heretics the Fathers urged the prescription of the
present testimony of these Churches (to those who would consult them)
concerning the Tradition descending to them from the times of the Apostles. And
Tertullian frequently complains, as of some Heretics not re^eiving the
Scriptures, so of others misinterpreting them. De praescript. adv. haeres. c.
17. etc.
Ista Haeresis non recipit quasdam Scripturas; and siquas recipit, adjectio
ibus and detractionibus ad dispositionem instituti sui intervertit: and si
recipit, non recipit integras: and si aliquatenus integras praest^t,
nihil^minus, ^iversas expositiones commentata, convertit. Tantum veritati
obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum and corruptor stilus. And afterward -- Dicunt
a nobis potius adulteria Scripturarum and expositionum mend^cia inferri. And --
ubi apparu rit esse veritatem disciplinae and fidei Coristianae, illic erit
veritas Scripturarum and omnium traditionum Christianarum. Where I note his
urging the Church's consenting Exposition of Scriptures, as well as reception
of Scriptures, as prescribing against Heretics.

Ib l. 11. It will not I hope be denied, that the Primitive Christian Church
had a cercain way of understanding the sense of doubtful places, as far as it
was necessary to be understood; and that they wanted n^ means which Christ had
appointed for the ending of controversies. This is willingly granted; and it is
contended, that this inerrability in Necessaries accompanied the Clergy, and
preserved the Church in the unity of a true faith in all, even the Primitive,
times; being annexed to the whole Body, or much major part of this Clergy, not
only when met in a General Council, but out of it also, whenever, and however,
they manifested a concurrence in their judgment, and agreement in their
doctrine; whether it were by several Provincial Councils assembled; or perhaps
only by some one convened in the place more infested with some new and
dangerous error, and ratified by the Apostolic See, and other coordinate
Churches; or not opposed and censured but taci^ly admitted by them; Or by their
Communicatory and Synodical Letters; Or whether in their public Liturgies and
Offices: Or in a general Consent in their public Writings, and explications of
Christian Doctrine. In none of which as to the Doctrine Necessary, the whole
Body of the Clergy or that which in any dissent is to be accepted for the
whole, did ever err. Of which times before Constantine, and the first General
Council of Nice, thus Mr Thorndike in his Epilogue l. 1. c. 8. -- The daily
intercourse, intelligence, and correspondence between Churches, without those
Assemblies of Representatives we call Councils, was a thing so visibly
practiced by the Catholic Church from the beginning, that thereupon, I
conceive, it may be called a standing Council, in regard of the continual
settling of troubles, arising in some part and tending to question the peace of
the whole, by the consent of other Churches concerned: [which settlement was]
had and obtained by means of this mutual intelligence and correspondence. The
holding of Councils being a way of far greater dispatch; but the express
consent of Churches, obtained upon the place, being a more certain foundation
of peace. And afterward he affirms -- That the succession of Pastors alleged
by Irenaeus and Tertullian to convince the Heretics of their time; by S.
Augustine, and Optatus to convince the Donatists to be Schismatics, proceeded
wholly upon supposition of daily intercourse and correspondence between
Churches, as of force to conclude particular Churches by consent of the whole.
And this agreement in all times has kept the Faith of the Church steady and
uniform.

Ib. l. (4). If no such thing was then heard of as an infallible Judge, it is a
plain demonstration they thought there was none appointed. Such thing was then
heard of, viz. the consenting Testimony (however had) of the present
Apostolical Churches concerning former Traditive Doctrines, or necessary
Deductions from them, was accepted and submitted-to by all, save Heretics, as
infallible. And, after the Church's liberty obtained of assembling General
Councils, that of Nice was in those times repaired to as an Infallible Judge by
the whole Body of Christianity for deciding that great Controversy concerning
our Lord's Divinity; and the Decision thereof afterward accepted by the whole
Church Catholic, as Infallible.

Annotations on. 13. Of the way used in the Primitive Church for finding the
sense of Scripture.
Page 201. l. 5. What course now does Irenaeus take to clear the sense of
Scripture in these controverted places? Does he tell them that God has
appointed infallible Guides in his Church, to whom appeal was to be made in all
such cases? Nothing like it through his whole Book. Though the Dr here only
urges a Negative Argument, which often fails; and though, as to Heretics,
utterly denying Church-Infallibility, the Fathers had their liberty to choose
rather to convince them upon some other Principles by both sides agreed on; Yet
Irenaus we find against these Heretics frequently pleaded this
Church-Infallibility as not reasonably rejectible by them. viz. Urged the
consenting Testimony of the present Apostolical Churches as no way fallible in
relating and delivering to posterity the former Apostolical Tradition. For
which see his l. 1. c. 3. -- Hanc praedicationem and hanc fidem Ecclesia (velut
dixi) adepta, quanquam per totum mundum dispersa, diligenter conservat, quasi
unam domum inhabitans: and similiter his credit, velut unan animan and idem cor
habens, and consone haec praedicat and docet, ac tradit, velut uno ore
praedita. Nam linguae in mundo dissimiles sunt, verum virtus Traditionis una
and eadem est. Praedicatio veritatis ubique lucet, and illuminat omnes homines
ad cognitionem veritatis venire volentes. And see the four first Chapters of
lib. 3. where he has much to this purpose. There he says in the Preface. --
Resistens eis pro sola and vivifica fide, quam ab Apostolis Ecclesia percepit,
and distribu^t fili^s suis. Ecclesia [i.e. Patres ecclesiae, that instruct the
others]. And Ibid. c. 2. he says -- Ad eam Traditionem, quae est ab Apostolis,
quae per successiones Presbyterorum in Eccleseis cust. ditur, provocamus eos
[i.e. Haereticos]. And afterward accuses them -- Neque Scripturis, neque
Traditioni [of the sense the Church gives to the Scriptures] consentire eos. c.
3. -- Traditionem itaque (says he) Apostolorum in toto mundo manifestatam in
Ecclesia [i.e. in the unanimous consent of the present Church] adest perspicere
omnibus, qui vera velint audire. And then appealing to the preeminent authority
of the Roman Church he thus goes on. -- Maximae and antiquissimae and omnibus
cognitae a gloriosissimis Apostolis Petro and Paulo Romae fundatae and
constitutae Ecclesiae, eam, quam habet ab Apostolis, traditionem, and
annunciatam hominibus fidem, per successiones Episcoporum pervenientem usque ad
nos, indicantes, confundimis omnes cos, qui quoquo modo vel per sui placentiam
malam, vel vanam gloriam, vel per coecitatem and malam sententiam, praeterquam
oportet, colligunt. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam propter pote^tiorem principalitatem
[because a Petro and Paulo fundata, hence frequent Appeals from thither all
parts] necesse est omnibus convenire ecclesiam, be est, eos, qui sunt undique
fideles; in qua senper, ab his qui sunt undique, conservata est ea, quae est ab
Apostolis, Traditio. [somwhat like that of S. Cyprian Ep. 55. -- Post ista
adhue (says he speaking of two Schismatics) navigare andent, and ad Petri
Cathedram atque ad Ecclesiam principalem, unde unitas Sacerdotalis exorta est,
a Schismaticis and profanis literas far; nec cogitare, cos esse Romanos
(quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est), ad quos perfidia habere non
potest accessum]. And c. 4. -- Tantae igitur ostensiones cum sint haec, non
oportet adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatem, quam facile est ab Ecclesia
sumere. And see what was quoted before Note on p. 197. l. 7. -- Quid enim, si
quibus de aliqua modica quaestione disceptatio esset etc. In which places,
suppose a fallibility of the consenting-Testimony of the present
Church Governors, when consulting concerning the Traditive faith that has
descended to them, and all this Father says falls to the ground.

Page 204. l. 13. And surely then he did not imagine, that God had appointed an
infallible Judge on purpose to prevent the being of Heresies by giving an
infallible sense of Scripture. Yes: such an infallible Judge hence the more
necessary, to cure and remedy the Heresies, which, Tertullian says, the
Scriptures were so framed, as not to prevent. Neither has God, in providing
such a Judge, constrained also all men's free wills to believe his Infallibility
and acquiesce in his judgment. And so the -- Oportet esse Haereses may be
verified still

Page 207. l. 4. The sense they [the Hereticks] gave of Scripture was contrary
to the Doctrine of faith etc. Which he [Irenaeus] calls the unmovable rule of
faith received in B. pt. sm; and which the Church dispersed over the earth did
equally receive in all places with a wonderful consent. If the Dr here would
restrain the Father's urging the Testimony of the Apostolical Churches against
Heretics only to the Tradition of the Canon of Scriptures, or the Rule of
Faith the Creed, Prosessed in their Baptism; we must know, that they urged not
the concurrent Testimony of the present Churches only for those against some
gross Heretics, that denied the Text and Letter of them; but also against
others more subtle, perverting such a sense of them, as these consenting
Churches pretend d was Apostolical. See Jrenaeus l. 3. c. 2. -- Cum ex
Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum: where
amongst other their accusations he alleges this -- quia vary sint dictae
[ambiguous in their sense] and quia non possit ex his inventri veritas ab his,
qui nesciant traditionem. -- Cum autem ad eam iterum traditionem [i.e.
concerning the right sense of these Scriptures] quae est ab Apostolis, quae per
successiones presbyterorum in Ecclestis custoditur, provocamus eos, qui
adversantur traditioni [i e. Ecclesiae], dicent se, etc. -- Evenit itaque neque
Scripturis jam, neque tradi^^oni, consentire eos. And the words c. 4. cited
before -- Quid enim (...) si quibus de aliqua modica quaestione, etc. show, he
holds such concurrent Testimony valid concerning any such Tradition, though
there had been no Scriptures: and indeed there seems no reason why these
Churches should be more credited in their testimony, when pretending one thing
Tradition Apostolical, than when another, though these things perhaps be not of
an equal importance.

Page 208. l. 1. Which Tradition they [the Hereticks] accounted the key to
unlock all the difficulties of Scripture. Heretics indeed so accounted their
false tradition; but so the Churches also their true Tradition.

Ib. l. 12. Irenaeus appeals to the most eminent Churches, And especially that
of Rome, because of the great resort of Christians thither, [where he omits the
Necesse est]. No. Propter potentiorem principalitatem (says the Father): which
Pricipalitas potentior, a Petro and Paulo fundata caused the great resort of
Christians thither; propter quam ad hanc necesse est omnem convenire ecclesiam,
etc see the words at large cited before Annot. on p. 201. l. 5.

Ib. l. 17. And knew of no such tradition as the Valentinians pretended to. But
this was not all: the Fathers pleaded also in the Churches an Anti-tradition,
true and Apostolical; witnessed by the unanimous testimony of the present
Apostolical Churches; as the others did a false, and untestifyed.

Ib. l. (9). And supposing no Scriptures, we must then have followed the
Traditien of the most ancient and Apostolical Churches. Thus said Irenaeus. I
add: and this Tradition witnessed by the present Churches must be in
necessaries infallible; else Christian Religion would be liable to error in
such necessaries.

Page 209. l. 14. But Irenaeus knew nothing of any infallible Judge to
determine the sense of Scripture. For the contraty see Note on p. 197. l. 7.
and l. 11.

Page 210. l. 2. There must be a certain unalterable Rule of faith, etc. Now
this Author removes his discourse from Irenaeus to Tertullian. Who also, as
Irenaeus, speaks not only of the Creed professed in Baptism, nor of some chief
Articles but of the whole doctrine of faith, and manners, necessary to
salvation, as also of the right sense of Scriptures controverted, that it was
delivered to, and deposited in, the Christian Churches by our Lord and his
Apostles, and from the unanimous agreement of the same Churches therein, in any
controversy made concerning it, might be certainly learnt and known. What has
been said of Irenaeus needs not be repeated concerning him: both do tread in
the same steps, and Tertullian had perused the works of Irenaeus See contra
Valentin. c. 5.
; both referr Christians to the consentient Testimony of the Apostolical
Churches in any doubting in matters of faith, or disputed sense of Scripture; a
these Churches firmly conserving and rightly delivering the Tradition
Apostolical, and as not liable to error herein. Of these Churches thus he, De
praescript. c. 19. -- Vbi [or, apud quos] apparuerit esse veritatem disciplinae
and fidei Christianae [delivered to them by the Apostles] illic erit veritas
Scripturarum, and expositionum, and omnium traditionum Christianarum. [And how
this, if these consentient Churches not held infallible in rightly delivering
such Tradition]? c. 21.
And -- Quid Apostolis Christus revelaverit, and hic praescribam, non aliter
probari debere, nisi per easdem Ecclesias, -- Proinde constare, omnem
doctrinam, quae cum illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis matricsbus and originalibus
fidei conspiret, veritati deputandam; id sine dubio tenentem, quod ecclesiae ab
Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit. [These Churches
therefore in no age are errable, in conserving or delivering such such
doctrine: for, else, how any certain, that not in Tertnllian's?]. -- Superest
ergo uti demonstremus, an haec nostra doctrina, cujus regulam supra edidimus,
de Apostolorum traditione censeatur. -- Which he demonstrates thus --
Communicamus cum Ecclesiis Apostolicis, quod nulla doctrina diversa [facit].
hoc est testimonium veritatis. And after, c. 36. speaking of the Apostolical
Churches, in any diversity of doctrine, to be consulted, he goes on thus --
Proxima est tibi Achaia? habes Corinthum. Si non long es a Macedonia, habes
Philippos etc. Si autem Italiae adjaces, habes Roman, unde nobis [Affricanis]
authoritas praesto est: where he advances this Church above the rest, as also
Irenaeus. -- Faelix ecclesia, says he, cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum
sanguine suo profuderunt. Videamus quid didicerit [i.e. haec ecclesia], quid
docuerit, cum Affricanis quoque ecclesiis contesserarit. Then, naming some part
of Its Faith and doctrine against the contrary of the Heretics of those days,
adversus hanc institutionem, says he, neminem recipit; [into its communion].
Then concludes -- Si haec ita se habent, ut veritas nobis adjudicetur, etc, non
esse admittendos haereticos ad candem de Scripturis provocationem, quos sine
Scripturis [i.e. by the infallible Testimony of the Church discovering their
faith not right] Probamus ad Scripturas non pertinere. And -- Illic [or apud
cos] igitur and Scripturarum and expositionum adulteratio deputanda est, ubi
diversitas invenitur doctrinae [from the consentient Churches]. This occurrs in
his Book of Prescriptions against Heretics. In his Books against Marcion are
found like things. From which authority also of the Apostolical Churches, he
says there, l. 4. c. 5.
we receive the Canon of Scripture -- Eadem authoritas ecclesi^rum
Apostolicarum cateris quoque patrocinabitur Evangeliis, quae [Evangelia]
proinde per illas, and secundum illas, habemus.

Ib. l. (9). He [Tertullian] shows this Rule of Faith is by repeating the
Articles of the Ancient Creed. See Note on p. 207. l. 4. I hope He will not
confine the consentient Church's authority and testimony only to the express
Articles of the Creed used in Tertullian's time; for, then its testimony will
not or may not have the same verity in those of the Athanasian.

Page 213. l. 11. Discovers their imposture. Let the Reader well consider,
whether the Dr's translation, in this and the precedent page, does not also
make Tertullian clearly enough affirm Church-infallibility; and whether he
brings not witnesses against himself.

Page 214. l. 14. Thus Tertullian lays down the rules of finding out the sense
of controverted places of Scripture without the least insinuation of an
infallibility placed in the Guides of the Church for determining the certain
sense of them. Contrary. If we Review what has been said, Tertullian lays down
a certain Rule of finding out the sense of controverted places of Scripture:
viz. a general Consent of the Apostolical Churches, touching such sense,
traditional, and descending from the Apostles; which Consent ought to determine
such sense unto them.

Ib. l. (5). Prescription, or just exception against their pleading (for so
prescription signifies in him). The Plea Tertullian uses against the novelty
of ancient Heretics, as also Roman Catholics do still against the
Protestants, namely this -- Mea est possessio: olim possideo, prior possideo.
c. 38. And this -- c. 31.
Id est dominicum and verum, quod est prius tradtum: id autem extraneum and
falsum, quod est posterius immissum, I say this plea seems to imply more
iucluded in the word Prescription, than the Dr allows. viz. includes not only a
just exception against their pleadings, but a just plea against their
exeeptions. But this shall make no contention between us.

Page 215. l. ult. And makes that sufficient evidence of the truth of a body,
that it is the object of three senses, of sight, and touch, and hearing. Which
is the same way of arguing we make use of against Transubstantiation. And it is
granted a sufficient evidence, where no Divine Revelation intervenes declaring
such arguing mistaken. Which, in the matter of our Lord's Resurrection, there
does not. And in vain had Marcion made any such pretense herein against these
senses where he could produce no Divine Revelation for it.

Page 216. l. 14. And the universal reception [i.e. by the Churches] of the
true Gospels. Universal Reception. Which Tertullian urges as an infallible
proof of the truth of these Gospels. See his words Contra Marcion. l. 4. before
in Note on p. 210. l 2. As also, Ibid. (contrary to what the Dr says below)
his calling in an infallible Guide, [the same Churches] for giving a certain
sense of Scripture.

Page, 218. l. (6.) Hitherto we find nothing etc. Concerning this let the former
places Note on p. 201.
produced out of them bear witness. Though this has the infirmity of a
Negative argument.

Page 219. l. 1. I now proceed to Clemens of Alexandria. And therefore so must
I; though methinks he has led his Reader and me a great way from the
Consideration of his Principles. He that reads the 7th Book of his Stromata
here cited, as he will find much of studying the Scriptures, and learning
Demonstrations from thence against Heretics, so will he of the Unity of the
Church, contradistinct to Heresies; and of the verity of its Traditions. Of
which he says there -- Number ergo, si quis pacta conventa non obse^vaverit [i.e.
adhaerendo Regulae Ecclesiasticae], and transgressus fuerit eam, quae fit apud
nos, confessionem, propter eum, qui non stet^t suae professioni, abstinebimus
nos quoque a veritate [i.e. hujus confessionis]? And he calls this afterward via
regia and trita -- Non dubit averit quispiam viam ingre^i propter dissensionem
[of some others strayin] sed utetur via regia and trita and sejuncta a
periculo: ita cum alii alia dicant, de veritate [hujus Confessionis and Regulae
Ecclesiasticae] non est discedendum, sed est exactius and diligentius
inquirenda ejus exactissima and accuratissima cognitio. Ibid. he says, -- In
sola veritate and antiqua Ecclesia [i.e. Ecclesia deriving its doctrine from
Antiquity] est perfectissima cognitio, and ea quae estrevera optima haeresis,
id est, electio. And -- Homo Dei esse, and Domino fidelis esse, perdidit, qui
adversus Ecclesiasticam recalcitravit traditionem, and in humanarum haeresum
desiluit ^piniones. There he says -- Qui in ignoratione quidem versantur sunt
gentes: qui autem in scientia, vera ecclesia: qui vero in opinione, ti qui
sectantur haereses. And afterward -- Exciso ostio, and muro Ecclesiae jam
perfosso, veritatem transgredientes efficiuntur principes ac duces myst^riorum
animae impiorum: and then showing, as also Irenaeus and Tertullian, the
Doctrine of the Church ancienter, that of Heretics later, he goes on, -- Exiis
quae dicto sunt manifestum esse ex^stimo, unam esse veram Ecclesiam, eam quae
vere est antiqua -- quam conantur haereses in multas discindere. Et substantia
ergo and cogitatione and principio and excellentia, solam esse dicimus; quam
etiam [dicimus] antiquam and Catholicam Ecclesiam, in unitatem unius fidei,
quae est ex proprus testamentis [i.e. contained in the Scriptures] in quibus
Dei voluntate per unum hominem congregat eos, qui jam sunt ordinati, Act. 13.48.
quos praedestinavit Deus, etc. -- (says he) Ecclesiae quoque eminentia, sicut
principium constructionis, est ex unitate, omnia alia superans, and nihil
habens sibi simile vel aequale. And that -- Fuit una omnium Apostolorum sicut
doctrina, ita etiam traditio. -- Ex haere sibus autem, aliae quidem appellantur
ex nomine, -- aliae ex loco, -- aliae ex gente -- aliae ex propriis dogmatibus,
etc. [A parallel to which, both in his description of the Church and Heresies,
may be observed in our present times]. These things then he has of the Church
there, where he has those things our Author brings of the Scriptures. And, in
all these things, he seems to own and remit us to this Church, antiqua, sola,
una, eminens and omnia alia superans, as a Guide that cannot sail us in
necessary truth. And as he presses the studying of the Scriptures to the
contemplative, so he leaves the unity of the Church and the verity of its
doctrine as a secure refuge for all the rest, that cannot intend such studies.

Page 222. l. (10) Stephen was against rebaptizing any Heretics, and the
others [the Eastern and Affrican Bisho] were for rebaptizing all. Any
Heretics; i.e. such, whose former Baptism was not, for want of a right Form,
nulled; the baptizing of whom, when returning to the Church, was indeed no
Rebaptization; and thus S. Stephen and latter Councils well accord. Of whose
sanctity and orthodoxness thus Vincentius Lerinensis, c. 9.
after these Councils. -- Quo quisque floreret religiosior, eo promptius
novellis adinventionibus co^trairet. Exemplis talibus plena sunt omnia. Sed ne
longum siat, unum aliquod, and hoc ab Apostolica potissimum Sede, sumemus: ut
omnes luce clarius videant, beatorum Apostolorum beata successi qu n^a vi
semper, quanto studio, quanta contentione defenderit susceptae semel rel^gionis
integritatem: speaking of this Stephen. M^an w^^le the affection and Reverence,
this Author pretends to Antiquity and the Holy Fathers, is not unliable to
suspicion, when he upon every or rather no occasion given, endeavors to
uncover their nakedness and lay open their deficiencies, and divisions. Those
that defend their departure from the novelties of the Roman Church by their
retreat to Antiquity, and the doctrine of the Fathers, methinks should have a
greater tenderness of Their Reputation. But here, meanwhile, the more He
aggravates the dissentings about this point, the more he confirms the necessity
of the Infallibility of General Councils for fetling such Truths and allaying
such Contests to which Councils we owe the present peace, that the Church in
latter times enjoys in this matter, once so much agitated.

Page 225 l. (13) What course was taken in this important Controversy [with
Samosatenus concerning the divinity of Christ] to find out the certain sense of
Scripture? Do they appeal to any infallible Guides? Nothing like it. But in
the Councils of Antioch etc. The sense of Scripture may be cleared either by
comparing Scriptures, etc. or, by examining Church-Tradition; for confuting
Heresies both ways are used: but not necessary therefore, that all writings
against them use both: Or that Councils condemning them register the reason of
their condemnation. But so it is, that this Council of Antioch in their Epistle
to Paulus Samosatenus do use both: as they urge the Scriptures, so also the
Church's consentient Tradition in these words -- Decrevimus fidem scripto edere
and exponere, quam a principio aceepimus, and habemus traditam and servatam in
Catholica and Sancta Ecclesita usque in hodiernum diem. And -- Qui Filium Dei
non esse Deum praedicat, hunc alienum esse ab Ecclesiastica regula arbitramur;
and omnes Ecclesiae Catholicae nobiscum consentiunt.

Page 228. l. 1. I would advise them to be conversant in the Divine Oracles.
Athanas. cont. Arian.
S. Athanasius in all th gives very good advice: for, in the Father's confuting
Heresies by Scriptures and by Councils, Scriptures have the prime place; with
Athanasius's limitation there, writing to Bishops, and those, quibus gratia
data est, ut discernant spiritualia; whilst he says there -- Contra Arian.
Orat. 1. simplex and non firmiter institutus, dum solummodo verba [Scripturae]
considerat, statim illorum astutiis seducitur. Especially these
Scripture-proofs are necessary to Bishops, when dealing with Adversaries that
contemn Councils; as now also Scriptures are urged by Catholics to Protestants
declining Church Authority.

Ib. l. 7. But did not the Arians plead Scripture as well as they? how then
could the Scripture end this Controversy which did arise about the sense of
Scripture? This Objection was never so much as thought of in those days. What
thinks He of Tertullian's Prescription, against Heretics quoting Scriptures,
from Church Authority declaring Apostolical Tradition concerning the sense of
such Scriptures? c. 15. -- Scripturas (says he) obtendunt and hac sua audacia
statim quosdam movent: in ipso vero congressu firmos quidem fatigant, infirmos
capiunt, medios cum scrupulo dimittunt. And -- Quid promovebis exercitatissime
Scripturarum, cum si quid defenderis negetur ex diverso, si quid negaveris
defendatur? -- Hunc igitur potissimum gradum obstruimus, non admittendi eos ad
ullam de Scripturis disputationem: i.e. by transferring the Controversy to be
tried by the consentient Doctrine and Tradition of the Church Catholic. Or,
what thinks he of the words of Athanasius in the same Oration that is here
quoted; advising those he writ to thus, -- Zelum Domino zelate, and retenta
Patrum fide, quam Fatres qui Nicaeae convenerant scripto professi sunt, Ne
sustinueritis eos, qui contra eam novis rebus student, etiamsi dictiones ex
sacris literis scribant?

Ib. l. 9. They did not in the least desert the proofs of Scripture, because
their adversaries made use of it too No: why should they, the true sense of
which was on their side, and this also evident enough to some men's reason? But,
to those not by this way convinced, they pressed also the universal Tradition
of the Church and the Definitions of its General Councils, as infallible, and
to be submitted to by all private judgments. For which to view (this Author, he
speaks of,) Athanasius: See the beginning of his Epistle to Epictetus Bishop of
Corinth -- Ego arbitrabar (says he) omnium, quotquot unquam fucre,
haereticorum inanem garrulitatem Nicaeno Concilio sedatam esse. Nam Fides, quae
inibi a Patribus secundum sacras Scripturas tradita, and confessionibus
confirmata est, sat is mihi idonea efficaxque videbatur ad omnem impictatem
evertendam etc. And therefore he says, the Bishops thereof afterward --
divesis Conciliis istos lucifugas, quae Arii sunt sapientes, communi calculo
unius spiritus incitatu anaethemate percusserunt -- Qua igitur audacia fit, ut
post tanti Concilii authoritatem, disceptationes aut quaestiones instituantur?
-- And -- Quae ita manifesto prava perv^rsaque sunt, ea euriosius tractare non
oportet, ne contentiosis hominibus ambigua videantur; sed tantummodo ad ea
respondendum est quod ipsum per se sufficit, ea orthodoxae Ecclesiae non esse,
neque majores nostros ita senfisse. And -- Si vultis filii Patrum esse, non
debetis sentire diversa ab iis quae Patres ipsi conscritserunt. Again, in the
beginning of his Epistle to the Affrican Bishops -- Sufficient ea, quae Niceae
confessa fuere satisque per se virium habent quemadmodum superius diximus, tum
ad subversionem impii dogmatis, tum ad tutelam utilitatemque Ecclesiasticae
doctrinae. And -- Neque Deum metuerunt ita dicentem; Ne transmoveas terminos
aeternos quos posuerunt Patres tui^ and Q^^accusat Patrem aut Matrem morte
moriatur: neque patres nostros quicquam reveriti sunt denunciantes anathema, si
quis contraria suae ipsorum confessioni sentiret. -- Plusquam december Synodos jam
instituerant etc. -- Verbum autem illud Domini per Occumenicam Niceae Synodum
in aeternum manet. And in the close of that Epstile after citing the Apostle 1
Cor. 11.2. -- Laudo vos quod, quemadmodum tradidi vobis traditiones, ita eas
servatis, he goes on -- Ipsa enim Nicaena Synodus revera trophaeum columnaque
est, ubi omnes haereses inscriptae ostentui sunt (alluding to Col. 2. 15.):
then declaring how this Council established the Faith, he says -- Quam Patres
statuissent de fide in Filium, id statim adjectum voluere, Credimus and in
Spiritum Sanctum. And in his Epistle de Synodis he says of these Fathers,
showing their just authority in matters of faith, that -- In negotio Paschatis
placuit ut adderetur, Visum est, ut omnes obtemperarent. De fide vero non
scripserunt Visum est; sed, Ad istum modum credit Catholica Ecclesia; and
statim confessio ipsa credendi adjuncta est, ut ostenderent eam non novam esse
sententiam sed Apostolicam, and quae ipsi scripsissent non esse sua inventa^,
sed Apostolorum documenta.

Page 223. l. (11). So Athanasius saw no necessity at all of calling in the
assistance of any infallible Guides, to give the certain sense of Scripture in
these doubtful places. Of any infallible Guides, or of any Guides at all, he
may say; for here are none mentioned, fallible, or infallible. No necessity
then, of the Council of Nice, in Athanasius's judgment? Review the places but
now mentioned and see more in Note on p. 245. l. 1. This Author has need of
very credulous Readers.

Page 230. l. 15. Yet he no where says, that, without the help of that
Tradition, it had been impossible to have known the certain sense of Scripture.
Nor do Catholics say so. They say only, that the Church Governors, met in a
General Council, are infallible in their decisions of necessary faith by reason
of an evident Tradition of such an Apostolical Doctrine or sense of Scripture
descending to them: Or by some necessary Deduction of theirs, made from such
traditive doctrine in the same necessaries. In the Declaration of both which
they are always preserved from error by the super-intending of the Divine
Providence, and the assistance of the Holy Spirit. And that, supposing the
sense of Scripture, without recurrence to such Tradition, be clear enough to
some, yet that it is not so to all; who therefore, in their faith of such
necessaries must depend on the authority, direction, infallibility, of their
Guides. Unless our Author will say, the Condition of all Christians is well
capable of using all means possible.

Page 232. l. 5. The same course is taken by Epiphanius, etc. S. Hilary, and S.
Epiphanius, it seems, do endeavor to confute Heretics out of the Seriptures
What then?

Ib. l. 18. After the Guides of the Church had in the Council of Nice declared
what was the Catholic faith; yet still the controversy was managed about the
sense of Scripture and no other ways made use of for finding it, than such as
we plead for at this day. Was not the Decree of this Council, after it held,
perpetually by the Catholics urged against them? And, if not submitted to by
them, the more to blame the Heretics of those days [as now also the Pro^estans
after the 2d. Nicene, Laterane, Florentine, and Trent, Councils] who did not
acquiesce in such a just authority, as that of Nice; and (though I think Mr
Chillingworth would not, yet) will not Dr St. as to the Nicene Council say the
same with me? These then, though denying submission to Councils, yet not to
Holy Scriptures, the Fathers did in those days, as Catholic Doctors do now,
out of Principles coneeded by them, and common to both, endeavor to convince
them.

Ib. l. (4). That none of the Catholic Bishops should once suggest this
admirable expedient of Infallibility. Did not these Bishops continually press
to them the consentient Tradition of the Churches and the Definition of the
Council of Nice? To what end this, if it acknowledged by them fallible? Might
an Authority not infallible put their definitions in the Creed? and so it
remains to this day in the Dr's Creed upon that account. Could it exact belief,
and anathematize all Dissenters, and not profess itself Infallible?

Page 233. l. 7. When they so frequently in Councils contradicted each other.
See this great Friend of Councils. Before, p. 149.
the charge was; Ancient Church and Councils contradicting those of latter
times: but now it is grown higher, to the Ancient contradicting Ancient,
without any qualification of Councils held by Hercticks contradicting Councils
Catholic; for, then, the sense had been lost. But, I hope, our Adversary is
not yet gone so far, as to affirm any Council, equal in authority with that of
Nice, contradicting it: but, if unequal, that of Nice only will stand in force.

Ib. l. 13. If the sense of Scripture were in this time to be taken from the
Guides of the Church, what security could any man have against Arianism? since
the Councils which favored it were more numerous than those which opposed and
condemned it. i.e.; If the sense of the Scripture concerning (...) were to be
taken from the Guides of the Church met in the Council of Nice, what security,
from thence, could we have against Arianisme? since the Arian Councils were
more numerous than that of Nice, and therefore more obligatory than it? Does
not our Author here a little too sar unmask himself? Does he hold, then,
Christians to owe no obedience to the Definition of the Council of Nice against
Arianisme? Time was when he said Rat. Account, p. 375.
-- We profess to be guided by the sense of Scripture as interpreted by the
unanimotes consent of the Fathers, and the four first General Councils, [will
he say here, If these Councils interpret the Scriptures in the right sense;
i.e. in his?] And -- That the Church of England looks on it as her duty to keep
to the Decrees of the four General Councils; [and so of Nice, the first of
them]. Then either the Arian Councils must not be more numerous, as here he
affirms, they were: or the more numerous, I mean as to the persons present in
it, not always the more valid; which is true. But, if we are now to defend the
authority of the Council of Nice against the Dr. we mu^t know: that, if he
there speaks of the plurality of the Arian Councils; they many, and that of
Nice only one: this number is no prejudice to any one Council, that is of
greater authority: if he speaks of the plurality of Bishops in some one Arian
Council, then, though there were present in the Nicene Council not above four
or five Bishops from all the West, Yet that the whole West and all its Bishops
accepted it, which they never did any of the Arian Councils. Therefore
Athanasius, Epist. ad Episcop. Affrican.
after those Arian Councils held, speaks thus of that of Nice. -- Huic certe
concilio universus orbis assensum praebuit. And -- Verbum illud Domini per
Occumenicam Niceae Synodum in aeternum manet. Sive enim quis numerum cum numero
comparet, tanto major est Nicena Synodus particularibus Concili^s, quantum
totum sui aliqua part. And 2ly. That, had the Arian Bishops throughout the
whole world at some time outnumbred the Catholic, yet these after once
pronounced Heretical by the lawful General Council of Nice, were invalidated
hereby, (whilst such), from having any lawful Vote in a future Council: the
Catholic Clergy and Bishops remaining a distinct Body from them; to whom, and
not to them, the Christian world owed its obedience.

Ib. l. (9). S. Gregory Nazianzen Epist. 55.
declares he had not seen a good issue of any one of them, etc. He spoke this,
of the many Arian Councils of his time, full of faction and ambition, the chief
leaders being great Favorites to Constantius an Heretical Emperor: Or perhaps,
of some Council also held at Constantinople, wherein he, by such contention
amongst the Bishops there, suffered much: but this he said, exclusively,
doubtless, both to the first General Council, that of Nice: Of which he says
Orat. in laud. Hiero.
that -- Pa^res nostri, pinsque ille hominum mundus qui Nicaeam perrexerunt,
certis finibus ac verbis Divinitatis doctrinam circumscripserunt. And -- Orat.
in laud. Athanas.
Sanctum Concilium Niceae habitum at que illum lectissimorum virorum numerum
Spiritum Sanctum in unum coegisse: and exclusively again to the 2d General
Council that of Constantinople, which he was a member of, and subscribed. What
need I now trouble my self or the Reader with vindicating Bellarmine on this
matter? Meanwhile would not the Dr here have his Reader believe, that this
Father had a mean esteem of the first and second General Councils?

Page 234. l. (7) S. Augustine Cont. Maximin. l. 3. c. 14.
in dealing with Maximin as the Arian expressly sets aside all authority of the
Guides of the Church as to the sense of Scripture in the places controverted
between th^^ (...) Story in brief is this. Maximinus an Arian in the beginning
of their dispute has these words -- Si quid de divinis Scripturis protuleris,
quod commune est cum omnibus, necesse est ut audiamus. Hae vero voces quae
extra Scripturam sunt, [homousion] nullo casu a nobis suscipiuntur. [alluding
to the definition of homousion by the Nicene Council]. S. Augustine takes his
challenge; and, as he waved the Council of Nice, so did S. Augustine that of
Ariminum. Upon which here (lib. 3. c. 14.), after he had said -- Hoc est illud
Homousion, quod in Concilio Nicaeno adversus Haereticos Arrianos a Catholicis
Patribus veritatis [i.e, of the Scriptures] authoritate, and authoritatis [i.e.
by the just authority of a lawful free General Counci] veritate, firmatum est:
quod postea in Concilio Ariminensi, etc. multis paucorum fraud deceptis
Haeretica impietas labef^ctare tentavit. He condescends thus; I say, after this
uttered in Justification of Nice, -- Sed, nunc, nec ego Nicaenum, nec tu debes
Ariminense, tanquam praejudicaturus, proferre Concilium. Nec ego hujus
authoritate, nec tu illius detineris [he says not tu non teneris, but nunc non
detineris]: Scripturarum authoritatibus, non quorumque propriis [as the two
Councils were] sed utrisque communibus testibus, res cum re, causa cum caus^,
ratio cum ratione concenset. [That is, this our conference or dispute shall
only be, as you desire, from Authorities of Scripture]. Of the sense of which
Scripture it is willingly granted, that in many things many persons may be
sufficiently certain without the directions of a Guide; but not therefore all
persons, in all points necessary. See before Note on p. 230. l. 15. Mean while
none more than. S. Austin pleads or vindicates the Authority of the Council of
Nice: needless to be further proved, one would think, to Dr St.

Page 236. l. 1. This is in terms asserted by him De Doctrine. Christian. l. 2.
c. 9
as a fuundamental principle, that in those things which are plainly set down
in Scripture all things are to be found which concern our faith and rule of
life. S. Austin does not mean, that all things containing our faith or manners
are so plainly set down in Scripture as to all capacities, that many do not
need the direction of an infallible Church Authority for settling a certainty
of their faith in them; (a thing affirmed by the Dr). To which infallible
Authority, that this Father referrs such persons for learning the true Faith,
see that excellent Treatise of his, De Vtilitate Credendi, i.e. of believing
Church Authority. Where he says -- Cum res tanta sit, ut Dens tibi ratione
cognoscendus sit, omnes ne putas idoneos? etc. And -- Tu in cos libros qui
Sancti, divinarumque rerum pleni, etc. sine duce irruis? And -- Omnesne putas
idoneos esse percipiendis rationibus quibus, ad divinam intelligentiam, men's
ducitur humana? an plures, an pnucos? paucos, ais, existimo. Quid? caeteris
ergo hominibus, qui ingenio tam screno praediti non sunt, negandum Religionem
putas? Whom therefore he refers to this security of believing Church authority.
For -- In religione quid iniquius fieri potest (says he Ibid
) quam ut Dei Antistites nebis non fictum animum pollicentibus credant, nos eis
praecipientibus nolimus credere? And c. 16. that for such persons -- non esse
desperandum, ab eodem ipso Deo authoritatem aliquam, constitutam, qua, velut
gradu certo, innitetes a^^ollamur in Deum. Hanc autem authoritatem seposu a
rationc (quam sinceram intelligere, ut, diximus, difficillimum stultis est)
dupliciter nos movere, par^^^ miraculis, partim sequentium multitudine. And Ib.
c. 17.
-- Quid est aliud ingratum esse opi atque auxilio divino quam tanto lab^re
[nost] praedictae authoritati velle resistere? And De Baptismo l. 3. c. 14. --
Fieri potest, ut integra teneat verba Symboli [I may say, or of Scripture], and
tamen non recte credat sive de ipsa Trinitate, sive de Resurrectione, vel
aliquid aliud. Neque enim parva res in ipsa intus Catholica tenere integram
fidem, ita ut omnino (non de aliqua creatura, sed) de ipso Deo nihil aliud
credat, quam veritas h^b^t. And in this book de Doctrina Christiana l. 3. c. 2.
he joines these two, the clearer places of Scripture and the authority of the
Church, for our learning the Rule of Faith -- Cum adhibita imentio (says he)
incertum esse providerit, quom^do distinguendum aut pronunci^ndum sit, consulat
Regulam fiaci, quam 1 de Scripturarum planioribus locis, 2 and Ecclesiae
authoritate, percepit. More of this needs not. Many excellent Rules this Father
gives by which to understand the Scriptures, i.e. for the more prudent and
learned; but not this exclusively to those person's submitting their Judgments
to the Church's authority who have no leisure, or parts, by these Rules to
study the Scriptures; or else to other's repairing to it, where any thing in
the Scriptures, after their study, still seems to them obscure.

Page 238. l. 12. S. Austin de Doctrine. Christian. l. 3. c. 16.
Which words Jo. 6.53.
seeming to command something evil must be figuratively understood of
communicating in the Passion of Christ, and calling to mind that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for us. And not imagining, as the words strictly taken
sound, that our Lords Body and Blood, in a carnal or natural and sensible
manner, as other flesh, is to be eaten and drunk by us; as some of our Lords
Auditors grossly mis-understood him and so forsook him; in which sense
[Dominus] flagitium videtur jubere, says S. Austin: Not imagining thus, I say;
but yet believing that his flesh and blood is there really exhibited to us, and
fed on by us. This Real, so as also ineffable, Presence of Christ's Body and
Blood though not to the Symbols, yet in the Eucharist, and so a real
participation thereof, the Church of England and her learned Writers have
much spoken of, and contended for heretofore, as well as Catholics, before
that the Rubric or Declaration about kneeling in receiving the Communion, was
by the importunity of some later Sects, admitted a second time into the
Common Prayer Book, A.D. 1660. Which Rubric, (contrary to the Real Presence in
that it denies that Christ's substance can be both in Heaven [where certainly it
is] and on earth at the same time), was first contrived and published in the
5th year of the Reign of King Edward 6. in the new-moulding and correcting of
the former Common Prayer Book published in the first year, upon the Exceptions
and complaints of some foreign Reformed Divines made against it, and was then
backed also with the 28th. Article of Religion under the same King in these
words -- The Body of Christ cannot be present at one time in many and diverse
places etc. and, because it was taken up into heaven etc. a faithful man ought
not to believe the Real and Bodily presence, as they term it, of Christ's Body
and Blood in the Sacrament of the Lords supper: But, not long after in the
beginning of Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, was thought fit by her Divines, reviewing
this 2d Book, to be ejected thence again, as being prejudicial to the foresaid
Real Presence, (and so also was the foresaid clause cast out of the 28th
Article) of which Real Presence Queen Elizabeth was a great Patroness; And,
such a Presence being confessed by Queen Elizabeth and her Clergy, I hope this
Author here will not make to be denied by S. Austin.]

Page 239. l. (8.) Whatever consequences are charged upon me for making that a
fundament^l Principle must reflect as much upon S. Austin, as me. See the
contrary, Note on p. 236. l. 1.

Page 240. l. 4. Who [Vincentius Lerinensis] seems to attribute more to the
Guides of the Church than S. Aust^n does, yet far enough short of
Infallibility. Now we must follow our Author to Vincentius Lerinensis. As for
this Father, first, he held in all ages the existence and being of a Catholic
Church, distinct from others, if any Heretical, how numerous soever they might
be: in which Catholic Church was preserved entire the Catholic Doctrine,
especially in all Necessaries; and, if so, therefore a Church in whatever age
always consentient with Antiquity: So that Vniversalitas, as to the consent of
the Catholics of any age, and Antiquitas can never be severed. 2ly. He held
the Decrees of the Councils of this Catholic Church in whatever times convened
to be true and never to swerve from the Apostolical doctrine, i.e. to be
infallible, and that all were to receive and obey them; and all dissenters from
them to be Heretics. To this purpose he says. c. 33. on that text 2. Jo. 10.
Si quis venit ad vos and hanc doctrinam non affert nolite recipere cuns in
domum, nec Ave ei dixeritis. Quam doctrinam? says he, nisi Catholicam and
universalem and unam eandemque per singulas aetatum successiones incorrupta
veritatis traditione manentem, and usque in saecula sine fine mansuram? And, c.
24. Prophanas vocum novitates devita, quas recipere atque sectari, nunquam
Catholicorum, semper vero Haereticorum, fuit. And c. 32. he describes the
Catholic Church thus, i.e. the Ecclesiastical Governors and Prelates thereof
-- Christi vero Ecclesia, sedula and cauta depositorum apud se dogmatum custos,
nihil in iis unquam permutat, nihil minuit, nihil addit -- Hoc unum studet, ut,
quae jam expressa and enucleata, cons^lidet, firmet; siqua jam confirmata and
definita, custodiat. Denique quid unquam aliud Concilisrum decretis enisa est,
nisi ut, quid antea simpliciter credebatur, hoc idem postea diligentius
crederetur? -- quod prius a majoribus sola traditione susceperat, hoc deinde
posteris etiam per Scripturae chirographum consignaret. He says c. 35. that
the Heretics, ancient, modern, urged the testimony of Scripture -- Prope
nullam omitti paginam, quae non novi aut veteris Testamenti sententiis fucata
and colorata sit. And c. 2. -- Multum necesse esse, propter tantos tam varii
erroris anfractus, ut Propheticae and Apostolicae interpretationis linea
secundum Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus normam dirigatur. [Where I ask; did
the Father think this fallible?]. And c. 41. he says -- Duo quaedam vehementer
studioseque observanda: -- Primum si quid esset antiquitus ab omnibus Ecclesiae
Catholicae sacerdotibus Vniversalis Concilii auctoritate decretum: Deinde siqua
nova exurgeret quaestio, ubi id minime reperiretur, recurrendum ad Sanctorum
Patrum sententias -- Et quicquid uno sensu atque consensu tenuisse
invenirentur, id Ecclesiae verum and Catholicum absque ullo scrupulo
judicaretur. c. 40. Descanting on 1. Cor. 12.28. He says of the
Church Governors -- Hos ergo in Ecclesia Dei divinitus per tempora and loca
dispensatos quisquis in sensu Catholici dogmatis unum aliquid in Christo
sentientes contempserit, non hominem contemnit, sed D^um: a quorum veridica
unitate nequid discrepet, impensius obtestatur idem Apostolus, d^cens: Obsc^ro
autem vos fratres ut idipsum dicatis omnes, and non sint in vobis schismata:
sitis autem perfecti in eodem sensu, and in eadem senten^ia [i.e. of these
Church-Guides unum aliquid in Christ's sentientium] Quod si quis ab eorum
sententiae communione desciverit audict illud ejusdem Apostoli: Non est Deus
dissensionis, sed Pacis. And c. 4^. after he had made an instance in the 3d
General Council, (but a little before this writing this Commonitorium), its
settling the faith in the points then controverted, he joines to it in the last
place the Authority of the Sea Apostolical -- Nequid, says he, deesse tantae
plenitudini videretur, ad postremum adjecimus geminam Apostolicae Sedis
auctoritatem: unam scilicet Sancti Papae Xysti qui nunc Romanam Ecclesiam
venerandus illustrat: alteram praedecessoris sui beatae memoriae Papae
Caelestini, quam hic quoque interponere necessariam judicavimus. Let the Reader
by this judge now, whether Lerinensis has said nothing for
Church-Infallibility.

Page 241. l. 3. Universality in any one age of the Church being taken without
the consent of Antiquity, is no sufficient rule to interpret Scripture by. It
is true, Universality departing from, or contrary to, Antiquity, is no
sufficient Rule to interpret Scripture by. But Vincentius, as I have showed,
holas the Universality of the Catholic Church in any age never to do so,
especially in any Necessaries. And, if Arians in any time out-numbred
Catholics (which they never did, taking in both East and West) yet still the
whole Body of them was extra-Catholick, being formerly condemned of Heresy by a
General Council: and cap. 6.
-- Tunc quisquis verus Christi amator and cultor extitit, antiquam fidem
novellae perfidiae praeferendo, nulla contagie istius pestis macul^tus est.
Here then was in all Arian times a Catholic Body (suppose lesser) consentient
with Antiquity, and safely to be relied on in its Decrees. But here, whenever
this comes in question; Whether the present Universality dissents from
Antiquity, whose judgment should be sooner taken, than its own; rather than
that of those few who oppose it; for, both are Parties? and, if its own; when
can we think, it will witness its departure from the former Faith?

Ib. l. 15. In some cases the universal consent of the present Church is to be
relied upon, etc. as in that of the Dona its Universal consent of present
Churches in any age, so this be limited to Churches Catholic, contradistinct
to Heretics or those condemned by former Councils, can never falsify former
Church-Tradition. Quod ab omnibus, I mean in any one age understood of the
Catholic Church, and in matters of faith, is always, quod semper too. All
Heretics also at first are only a small number, and their innovation easily
discerned. Therefore the universality of the present age was pleaded by S.
Austin in his age against the Donatists, from Scriptures that prove the same as
much in any age what^ver: Nor is this present Church's consent with Antiquity
mentioned in S. Austins arguing as if it were not to be credited without this
consent also of Antiquity first proved by it; for, the one, as is said, in
matter of faith always involves the other.

Page 242. l. 1. That the Church in any one or more ages since the Ap^stles
times may be deceived. The Church, means he the universality of the Catholic
Church? may be deceived, means he in points of necessary faith, or in the
Tradition of them? This is denied.

Ib. l. 1.5. But since the great divisions of the Christian world, it is both a
very hard matter to know the consent, etc 1. The name of Catholic Church now
is not (as he says) that of one great faction; but contains in it now, as
always, all Christian Churches that are united in obedience to all their lawful
and Canonical Ecclesiastical Superiors, Persons, or Councils; i.e. all that
are not Heretical or Schismatical. 2. The Notion also of Vuiversaluy is not (as
he says) now debauched and corrupted; but taken now, as anciently in the first
4. General Councils, for the much major part, to whom the rest ought to conform
-- Turpis omnis pars non consentiens toti. And, as it is also taken in
Vincentius, whether applied to the present, or ancient, times; see c. 38. -- Si
quando unius vel paucorum errantium dissensio contra omnium vel certe multo
plurium Catholicorum consensionem rebellaverit etc. And c. 4. -- Quod si in
ipsa vetustate duorum vel trium hominum, vel certe Civitatis unius aut etiam
Provinciae error deprehendatur, etc. For, there must be no Heretics; if, no
dissenters. The universal consent of Christendom (Universality thus qualified)
is easily known concerning most of the modern Controversies: suppose,
Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images, Prayer for the
Dead, etc. And to them only the knowledge of this seems difficult, whom, it
favors not.

Ib. l. (2). There are some things wherein we may be certain of such a consent
[viz. of Antiquity], and that was in the Rule of Faith. Vincentius restrains
not that application of his Rule only to the Symbol or Rule of Faith formerly
delivered in Baptism. So it would not extend to the Decrees of the Ephesine
Council, which he instanceth in to have followed this Rule; and little use
would there be of this Rule against Heretics, if extended no further: But
enlarges it to all the Faith wherein General Councils have or shall make any
Decrees. And the evidence of Tradition may be equal in matters as of an
unequal, so all of some, consequence.

Page 243. l. 11. For says he, this consent of Antiquity is not to be sought
for in all questions. It may be sought for wherever it can be found: but in
many Quaestinoul^e, as he calls them, it is not to be found.

Page 244. l. 12. Let the Pope's Supremacy, the Roman [he should say,
Catholick] Church's Infallibility, the doctrines of Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, etc. be proved by as universal consent of Antiquity, as the Articles
of the Creed are, and then let them charge us with Heresy if we reject them.
1st. The former Councils that have defined these points can also prove them by
Antiquity, Universality, Consent, taken in such a latitude, as is necessary and
sufficient. Consent, etc either in the Tradition of the thing defined, or of
the Principles from which it is deduced. But here, it is not necessary that the
same extent or latitude of Consent, etc should be showed for all points of
faith: Not necessary, that there be no more Bishops found dissenting in the
Council of Chalcedon, establishing Two Natures of our Lord, than were in the
Council of Nice, establishing his Divinity. And, of the Ancient Creeds some
points have had a more universal consent, than some others. 2. And next, this
Query, when there is a sufficient universality of such Consent or such
Tradition, I know not whose judgment the most of Christians, who are unlearned,
can better trust and rely on, than that of the Supreme Guides of the present
Church so informing them. 3ly That these Councils should first prove or
evidence such an universal Attestation to every one before they can require a
submission of their judgment to their definitions, as it is an unreasonable
demand, so it is rejected by several learned Protestant Divines (when obedience
has been offered, by other Sects to the Canons and Articles of the Church of
England upon these terms of proving them to them first) who think it enough if
such submission be then released, when private men demonstrate the contrary. 4.
Lastly, What judgment can illiterate persons make of what is thus proved, or
not proved to them? And, if Obedience must pass only upon such proof to their
subjects, these also judging when this rightly made, what confusion and
licentiousness of Opinions and Practice must this introduce necessarily in such
Churches as maintain it?

Ib. l. 18. We say, the measure of Heresy in the ancient Church was the
rejecting the Rule of faith universally received. And such it is still: all
persons learning from General Councils, not only from the definitions of the
ancient, but latter, Councils, what is this Rule universally received. And the
same Plea our Author can make against any latter definitions of Councils in
matters of faith, upon their not being expressed in the former Creeds, Arius,
Nestorius, or Eutyches, might make as justly against those of the 4. first
Councils not expressed in the former Creed or Rule of faith delivered at
Baptism. Which first Rule only Vincentius therefore did not relate to, since
he contends, this Rule is extended to the Deerees also of these Councils.

Page 245. l. 14. And yet he [Petavius] confesses, that most of the writers of
the ancient Church did differ in their explication of the Doctrine of the
Trinity from that which was only allowed by the Council of Nice, and he grants
that Arius did follow the Opinion of many of the Ancients in the main of his
Doctrine Petavius, after the words cited by this Author mulium a nobis diversa
scripserunt, expounds this diversa to be only in modo loquendi. And the next
words in him are -- Paucissimi illi sunt [speaking of the ancient Writets
before Nice] qui in re dissentiunt a communi fide: Dogm. Theel. l. 2.
and si sinceros purosque Catholicos quaerimus, omnino nulli. There, among
those, qui in omnibus re consentientes, loquendi duntaxat modo dissident, he
numbers Irenaeus, Clemens Arexandrinus, Gregory Neocaesariensis, Methodius, and
others: and, of the other, qui substaatiam Dogmatis [of the Trinity] tenentes,
in consectarius quibusdam non nihil a Regula deflectunt, he numbers only three,
Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, and Theophylus Antiochenus Praefat. c. 3. he says
also -- Long plures extiterunt, quibus aut scripto comprehensa, aut sine
scripto praedicata, fidei verit as permanavit ad post^ros. All is represented
here contrary: what trust may his Reader repose upon this Author's Citations?
Or what great regard seems he to have of the Credit of the Fathers, or of the
security of Tradition, (on which the Ancient Writers, cited before, lay so
great weight for conviction of Heretics), even in the Delivering the Doctrine
of the Trinity? Whilst he writes here on this manner to weaken both. -- The
usefulness of Tradition, I am told, is for explaining the sense of Scripture:
But there begins a great Controversy in the Church about the explication of the
Doctrine of the Trinity; I desire to know whether Vincentius his Rules will
help us here? It is pleaded by S. Hierome and others, That the Writers of the
Church might err in this matter, or speak unwarily in it before the matter came
to be thoroughly discussed: if so, how comes the Testimony of erroneous or
unwary Writers to be the certain means of giving the sense of Scripture? And in
most of the Controversies of the Church this way has been used to take off the
testimony of persons, who writ before the Controversy began, and spoke
differently of the matter in debate. I do not deny the truth of the allegation
in behalf of those persons; but to my understanding it plainly shows the
incompetency of Tradition for giving a certain sense of Scripture, when that
Tradition is to be taken from the Writers of the foregoing Ages: and if this
had been the only way of confuting Arius, it is a great Question how he could
ever have been condemned, if Petavius or S. Hierom say true. Thus this Dr.

Ib. l. (2.) It is pleaded by S. Hierome and others, that the Writers of the
Church might err in this matter, or speak unwarily etc.

The Writers: Our Author deals much in indefinite [i.e. doubtfu] terms. S.
Jerome speaks only of those few Ancients quoted by Ruffinus: Of which Ancients
too, Origin is cited by S. Athanasius De Synod. Nicaen. Decret is.
for the orthodox opinion: and apologized for, that -- Quae disputandi
certandique gratia scripsit, ea non quasi ipsius sint verba, aut quasi ipse it
a sentiat, sed little, qui cum eo contentiosius disputarunt, accipienda sunt.
And also, the most considerable of them, Dionysius Alexandrinus, is amply
vindicated by him, writing a Treatise of it. And some of the rest possibly may
be defended on the same account as Dionysius: who, then opposing Sabellianisme
a contrary Heresy to Arianisme, had occasion to speak in vindication of our
Lord's Humanity; and might have their sense mistaken. But, however, the error
of some may well consist with the Notion of Universality as taken by
Vincentius; and, whilst some ancient Writers happen to be either unwary in
their expression; or also faulty in their opinion, the certain sense of the
Scriptures may be learnt from others, more numerous; and not only from the
Writers, which in the three first Ages were but few, but from the general
Doctrine of the other Church-Prelates. And so it was learnt by the Council of
Nice; which pleaded the constant Tradition of the former times for the doctrine
they defined. See Athanasius in his Epistle to the Africans for the very
expressions used by the Council -- Neque (says he) hac in part sibi ista
vocabula finxerunt, sed a Patribus, qui ante fuerunt, ea didicerunt,
quemadmodum diximus; and a little before mentions Eusebius Nicomediensis the
ringleader of the Arians confessing it. Again Ibid -- Sufficit Nicaena, quae
cum veteribus Episcopis consentit. And -- Si, post tot documenta, postque
testimonia veterum Episcoporum etc. Again in his Tract. de Synod. Nic. Decretis
-- Est ibi (says he), ut Patres tradiderunt, verae disciplinae and magisteri^
urgumentum, ubi eadem confitentur, nec a se invicem, nec a majoribus
dissentiunt. -- Qui (says he showing the constancy of Tradition) tametsi
diversis temporibus vixerint, aeque tamen simul eodem tendunt, ut unius Dei
prophetae, and ejusdem sermonis interpretes. Quae enim Moses docuit, eadem ab
Abrahamo observata sunt, quae porro Abraham observavit eadem Noe and Enoch
agnoverunt; urging Gal. 1.8. Si quis vobis evangelizaverit praeter hoc, quod
accopistis, anathema sit. And afterward contends -- Patres, qui Nic^ae
convenerunt, non a se haec vocabula finxisse, sed ab aliis olim accepisse,
quoting there several of the Ancients, and among the rest Origin and Dionysius
Alexandrinus; concluding thus -- Ecce nos demonstramus istiusmodi sententiam a
Patribus ad Patres quasi per manus traditam esse. But lastly; in a Tradition
any way less evident as to the universality thereof in former Writers, yet we
are secure of these Supreme Church-Gover nours assembled their not defining an
error in Faith necessary, both from the light they may have from Scriptures,
always principally consulted by them as the chief of Traditions; and, where
their learning and practice therein may discern that clear, which is obscure to
others; and from our Lords promised assistance of them with his Holy Spirit; of
which we have a most clear and evident Tradition. Meanwhile, is not Vincentius
his Rule by this Authors discourse here made unserviceable in one of the chief
points, wherein Vincentius against the Heretics relied on the evidence of
former Tradition? i.e. in the Divinity of our Lord? And is not the Dr, for
strengthening the Protestant cause, in some manner become an Advocate for the
Arian? Let the Reader review it.

Page, 246. l. 17. And, if this [The Tradition of foregoing ages] had been the
only way of confuting Arius, it is a great question how he could ever have been
condemned, if Petavius or S. Hierome say true. I think the Reader has seen
what little countenance our Author has had from these two; whilst he would
here insinuate to his Reader, that the former written Church Tradition was
either on Arius his side, or not against him. What stone will not a contrary
interest turn, to unfix or dishonor our Holy Mother the Church?

Page 247. l. 5. And in this regard we acknowledge a great reverence due to the
decrees of such General Councils as that was. Acknowledge a great Reverence
due, But Quaere, Whether yield assent and Submission of Judgment to all, that
all such lawful General Councils do, or shall, define? And, if so, upon what
account can this be, save on the evidence that Scripture and Tradition yields
of their perpetual assistance from our Lord in necessaries not to mistake
either the sense of Scripture or truth of Tradition so, as to convey a wrong
one to posterity. If we do not reverence them on this manner, and that our
obedience be yielded only to what they shall first prove to us, the Arian,
where he thinks nothing proved to him (for, of this he is to judge), is as
innocent in dissenting, as we in assenting.

Ib. l. (9) Vincentius Lerinensis his words -- What either all the Fathers or
many of them manifestly frequently and constantly, as it were by a Council of
them, have confirmed by their receiving, holding, and delivering of it, that
ought to be held for undoubted, certain and firm. Undoubted, c^rtain and firm:
Upon what account? Surely, on the Infallibility of something, whatever it is
(...) and this not of Scripture, the sense of which is here contested.

Page 248. l. (7). He says, we have no way to deal with them but either only
by Scripture, or else by plain Decrees of General Councils. By these decrees
then Vincentius, at last, has left us to discern Heresies: I would this
Author would do so too.

Page 249. l. 7. And very far from the least supposition of Infallibility. Not
so surely; if our Author remember Vincentius his former words affirming such
Infallibility to be in General Councils, as that what is delivered by them
ought to be held for undoubted, certain, and firm. And we require no more.

Ib. l. (2). If ancient General Councils have determined it, which had greater
opportunities of knowing the sense of the Apostolical Church than we, it is
reasonable, we should yield to the Which had greater opportunities of knowing
the sense, etc. But, what if latter General Councils of latter ages have
determined any thing, should we not yield to them also? for, these times also
are nearer to the Ap^stles than the present? And if eight hundred or a thousand
years be thought by him too great a distance for deciding such matters, why may
not an Eutychian think so of four hundred It is reasonable we should yield to
them. He says not, what; Means he, yield our Assent? No more is desired, but
that this be yielded to all lawful General Councils in what age soever; which
Councils may be in any age necessary, and in any age are of an equal
authority, and equally Judges of the sense of Scripture and former Tradition.
The Council of Nice was submitted to by the Christians of that age, though a
Council held in their own times. He goes on.

Page 250. l. 3. But if there have been none such, then the unanimous consent
of Fathers is to be taken. Page 197. the enquiry was about the means used by
the Ancients of attaining the certain sense of Scripture in doubtful places
without the supposition of an Infallible Guide; the resolution here is; that
where, after examining and comparing places of Scripture, the dispute still
remains concerning the certain sense thereof, that we are to acquiesce in the
Decree, of a lawful General Council, if any such have been concerning it; or,
if not, in the unanimous Consent of Fathers. I ask; and are not those
recommended by these Ancients as Certain and Infallible in such matter that is
Decreed or Consented in: suppose in the matter of our Lord's Divinity, wherein
the sense of Scripture was disputed by the Arians and Anti-Arians? But then,
concerning this unanimous Consent of the Fathers, since the illiterate cannot
examine this, whom are they to rely on, but on the Consent of the present
Church?

Ib. l. 13. If all these means were sufficient then the^^ is no necessity of
infallibility in the Guides of the Church. One Exception is here to be put in,
Viz. Unless. N. O. will call the Testimony of General Councils delivering a
certain sense of Scripture, or the unanimous Consent of Catholic Churches
(which the Ancient Authors, this Author has quoted, do maintain to be firm,
certain, and free from doubt) an Infallibility in the Guides of the Church; as
he does. So that it seems to follow just contrary to our Author. If these Means
are prescribed by the Fathers, then there is a necessity of an Infallibility in
the Church-Guides. Annotations on. 14. S. Austins Testimony examined.

Annotations on. 14. S. Austins Testimony examined.
Page 250. l. (11). Infallibility in delivering the sense of Scripture in
obscure places. Add, In points necessary.

Page 251. l. (12.) S. Austin does not suppose that man cannot attain to any
certainty of the sense of Scripture in this matter [concerning Rebaptization]
without the Church's Infallibility; for he says in the Chapter preceding, that
in this matter we follow the most certain Authority of Canonical Scriptures.
But S. Austin Cont. Crescon. l. 1. c. 32.
declares his meaning in the next words to be only this. Viz. -- Quia hoc per
universam Catholicam observari placuit, quod tenemus: which N. O. -- Quam vis
hujus rei [i.e. concerning Non-Rebaptization] certe de Scripturis Canonicis non
proferatur exemplum, earundem tamen Scripturarum etiam in hac re a nobis
tenetur veritas, cum hoc facimus quod universae jam placuit Ecclesiae, quam
ipsarum Scripturarum commendat authorit as: ut quoniam Sancta Scriptura fallere
non potest quisquis falli metuit hujus obscuritate quaestionis [not cleared in
Scriptures] eandem Ecclesiam de illa consulat. And, what the Father says here
of our retaining the verity and authority of Scriptures in our obeying the
Decrees and Resolutions of the Church, to which Church we are referred by them;
the same says he elsewhere De Vnita. Eccles. c. 22.
concerning our obeying the authority and verity of Christ, when Christ also
referrs us to the guidance of his Church; in these words -- Dicat mihi nunc
haereticus: Quomodo n^e^suscipis? Cite respondeo: sicut suscipit Ecclesia, cui
Christus perhibet testimonium. Nunquid tu melius potes nosse quomodo
suscipiendus sis, quam Salvator noster medicus vulneris tui? Hic forte dicis:
Lege ergo mihi, quem^d ^odum Christus suscipi jusserit eos, qui ab haereticis
transire ad Ecclesiam vo^unt. Hoc aperte atque evidenter, nec ego lego, nec tu
[i.e. in the Scriptures]. [Here, we see, is neither example, nor any other
plain direction in the Scripture, or from our Lord himself concerning this
matter. He goes on]. -- Nunc vero cum in Scripturis non inveni amus aliquos ad
ecclesiam transisso ab haereticis, and sicut ego dico, aut sicut tu dicis, esse
susceptos, puto si aliquis sapiens extitisset, cui Dominus Jesus Christus
testimonium perhibet, and de hac quaestione consuleretur a nobis, nullo modo
dubitare deberemus id facere quod ille dixisset; ne non tam ipsi, quam Domino
Jesu Christo, cujus testimonio commend ibatur, repugnare judicaremur. Perhibet
autem testimonium Christus Ecclesia suae. -- Quomodo ergo suscipit ista
Ecclesia peromnes gentes incipientibus ab Jerusalem, remotis omnibus ambagibus
and tergiversationibus, sic suscipiendus es. Quod si non vis, non mihi, aut
cuiquam hominum, qui vult ita suscipere, sed ipsi Salvatori contra salutem tuam
perniciosissime reluctaris; cui te sic suscipiendum esse non vic credere,
quemadmodum suscipit illa Ecclesia, quam testimonio suo commendat ille, cui
fateris nefarium esse non eredere. Here this Father plainly says, in believing
and doing as the Church commands and directs us, we believe and do that which
our Lord and the Scriptures command us; which Lord and Scriptures have
commended and given a Testimony to us of his Church.

which, of several pretending to be it, is this Catholic Church: for, indeed
this thing only needed a proof to the Donatists, who allowed the same
Infallibility in this Catholic Church as S. Austin, and so an Infallibility in
themselves, conceiving themselves only to be this Catholic Church, and that
which our Lord and the Scriptures so recommended. Yet this Church, thus
demonstrated which it is, it is manifest S. Austin in the former passages
affirms that in all things we are to follow, and believe to be truth, that
which it tells us is so, as if Christ, or the Scriptures, that recommended this
Church to us, had told us so. Otherwise if this Church, so demonstrated by our
Lord and Scripture, be fallible, after its Resolution we may still be deceived
in our Question about Rebaptization, [whereas the Father says -- Quisquis
falli metuit etc. Ecclesiam consulat: and, -- Scripturarum a nobis tenetur
veritas, cum hoc facimus quod universaeplacuit Ecclesiae], And so, after such
Resolution, we may disbelieve the Church, without disbelieving our Lord. Nor
can S Austin justly say, as he does, to a Donatist refusing to receive
Heretics so as the Church does without Rebaptization -- Nunquid Tu melius
potes nosse quomodo suscipiendus sis, quam Saltor noster? And here it would be
a great mistake to rely on the Church for that which it delivers to us as a
truth upon our Lord's recommending it, which Church our Lord recommends not for
this, but some other thing consistent with that, which it delivers, its being
an error.

Austin did not suppose our Lord and the Scriptures to recommend this Church in
such doubtful cases, as, in its Resolutions of them, Infallible, how comes this
Father to require Assent and belief of what this Church defines, and doing of
what she commands? How makes he all Heretics, that dissent from her
Definitions? even those Donatists to be Heretics, after the Church's Decree,
for holding Rebaptization, who were not so, before it? Now, Haeresis, quae in
vitio est, as he says, De Haeresibus.
sine errore aliquo Haeresis esse non potest. But, if General Councils might
err in such points, something thus might be Heresy in opposing them, that were
no error. If he held not Non- rebaptization defined by the Church as a most
certain truth, how came it to be put in the Creed? May something be a part of
the Christian Faith, that is not truth? S. Austin every where expresses his
belief touching the not erring of General Councils otherwise. See concerning
Non-rebaptization De Baptismo 2. l. 4. c. where he questions not S. Cyprian's
yielding to the consenting authority of the universal Church on this account --
Si jam illo tempore quaestionis hujus veritas eliquatae and declarata per
plenarium Concilium solidaretur; Therefore S. Austin held it was so
consolidated afterward. So he says of him Ib. c. 8. -- Vt, quod postea
plenario Concilio visum est id verum esse perspiceret and doceret. But how this
his discerning it and teaching it for truth, if this Council might err in their
definition of it? He might indeed have expected S. Cyprian's conserving the
Church's peace, but not conforming to its opinion. He calls the Council's Decree
verum and liquidum: eliquatum and sincerum. And 2. l. 1. c. he calls it after
defined regula veritatis, quam tota ecclesia tenuit. L. 1. c. 18. he says --
Restat ut hoc credamus, quod universa ecclesia custodit. And -- Quod in hac re
sentiendum est, plenioris Concilii sententia totius Ecclesiae consensio
confirmat. Lib. de Haeresibus he says of the Donatists -- Audent etiam
rebaptizare Catholicos; ubi se amplius Haereticos esse firmarunt, cum ecclesiae
Catholicae universae placuerit nec in ipsis Haereticis Baptisma communc
rescindere. And Ibid. he says that -- Sufficit Ecclesiam contra aliquid
sentire, ut illud non recipiamus in fidem: Why so, if something in matters of
Faith, contrary to what the Church believes, may be Truth? And, if the Father
says thus of this Church, cui testimonium perhibet Christus and Scriptura, its
not erring in Quaestione obscurissima as he calls it, and having no clear
evidence of Scripture; what would he do, in its defining any other points
wherein the Scriptures afford the same Church more light?

Tim. 3.15, 16. -- Vt scias quomodo oporteat te in domo Dei conversari, quae
est Ecclesia Dei vivi, columna and firmamentum veritatis. De Unit. Eccles. c. 2.
And Magnum est pietatis sacramentum -- praedicatum est in gentibus, creditum
est in mundo. And De Verbis* Apostoli, Sermon. 14.
speaking against the Pelagians concerning another point already defined by the
Church -- Ecclesiae sanctae (says he), pro remissione peccati Orginalis
parvulorum quotidie laboranti, non contradicant. Fundata ista res est [i.e. the
benefit of Baptism to Infants]. Ferendus est disputator errans in alt is
quaestionibus, non diligenter digestis, nondum plena Ecclesiae authoritate
firmatis; ibi ferendus est error: non tantum progredi debet, ut etiam
fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quatere moliatur. So says he Contra Parmenian. l.
2. c. 13. -- De iis, qui ab Ecclesiae unitate separati sunt nulla jam quaestio
est, quin and habeant [verum Baptismum] and dare possint. Hoc enim in ipso
totius orbis unitate discussum, consideratum, perfectum atque firmatum est. And
to this might be added all those Testimonies out of him, wherein he says, that
there can never be any just cause of separating from the Communion of the
Catholic Church; from which I conceive it follows, that she can never commit
such an error in her Decrees, that, to avoid the subscription thereof exacted
by her, any shall be justly necessitated to leave her external Communion.

Church's Authority he says in his Book De Vtilitate Credendi c. 16. -- Homini
non valenti verum intueri -- Authoritas ab ipso Deo constituta praesto est --
quo velut gradu certo innitentes attollamur ad Deum. And c. 17. -- Quid est
aliud ingratum esse opi auxilicque Divino quam praedictae authoritati velle
resistere? In respect of which Authority he says that -- In Catholica Ecclesia
there is sincerissima sapientia, which also he defines adhaesio veri^ati. And
-- Turbam non intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam
facit. Ibid. he says, he believes the Gospel from this Authority of the
Catholic Church -- Qua [authoritate Catholicorum] infirmata, Contra Epist.
Manich. c. 4.
jam nec Evangelio credere potero quia per eos illi credideram. Of which see
more in his 11. l. Cont. Faustum, c. 2. etc.

Motives, he says, that induced him to credit and follow such Authority, are
such as these (urged by N. O. p. 87.
) Ibid. Besides the Wisdom he observed in the Church -- Tenet me (says he)
consensio populorum atque gentium; tenet authoritas miraculis incho^ta, spe
nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata: tenet ab ipsa Sede Petri Apostoli,
cui pascendas oves suas post Resurrectionem D^minus commendavit, usque ad
praesentem Episcopatum successio Sacerdo^um etc. [Where we may observe him, as
also Irenaus, Ter^ullian, and Cyprian, giving a special Principality, amongst
other Churches, to that of Rome; for which likewise he cites that Text Jo.
21.15. of our Lord's giving a special charge to S. Peter of feeding his Sheep
(which special Commission of our Lord to Peter also S. Paul seems to relate-to
Gal. 2.8. where he says the Apostleship of the Circumcision was given [not to
all the Apostles,] but to Peter): and so this Father, in his 162. Epistle
against the Donatists, naming this See amongst others with whom Caecilianus was
joined in communion, he says -- In qua [Ecclesia Romana] semper Apostolicae
Cathedrae viguit Principatus]. Again in his Book De Vtilit. Credendi speaking
of the same Church Authority -- Hac autem (says he) seposita ratione
dupliciter nos movet partim miraculis, partim sequentium multitudine. And --
Hoc ergo credidi famae celebritate, c. 14.
consensione vetustate roboratae. And -- Quae ab ipso Christo per Apostolos ad
nos usque manavit, and abhinc ad posteros manatura est. c. 17.
And yet more fully -- Dubitamus nos ejus ecclesiae condere gremio, quae, usque
ad confessionem generis humani, ab Apostolica Sede per successiones
Episcoporum, frustra haereticis circumlatrantibus, and partim plebis ipsius
judicio, partim Conciliorum gravitate, partim etiam miraculorum majestate [i.e
by Miracles done in this Church after the Apostles times; of several of which
S. Austin himself was an eyewitness, and also of some an Instrume] damnatis,
culmen authoritatis obtinuit. Whereas he observes of the Donatists Epist. 48.
That in their discovery of which is the true Church they declined
Universality, and appealed, as Protestants do, to the Marks of its true
observance of the Divine Precepts, and right administration of the Sacraments;
marks, according to their different persuasions, some men find in one Church,
some in another -- Vos estis says he, qui non ex tetius orbis communione, sed
ex observatione praeceptorum omnium divinorum, atque omnium Sacramentorum,
tenetis Catholicam fidem. And -- Acutum aliquid videris dicere, dum Catholicae
nomen non ex totius orbis communione interpretaris, sed ex observatione
praeceptorum omnium divinorum etc. And I have thus copiously cited him, the
more fully to satisfy the candid Reader in this matter of the greatest
consequence; and that the places in him, that seem more clear, may prevent the
mistaking glosses that may be made on some other. This of S. Augustine's being
no stranger to the Church's Sovereign Authority, and Infallibility in her
Definitions, and that the obeying Her was the obeying the command of our Lord,
and conforming to the verity of Scripture; and the knowing of her easy by the
forementioned marks.

Page 252. l. 14. S. Austin was willing to bring it to that issue, that what
the Catholic Church, after so much discussing the point, had agreed upon
should be received as the truth. As a Truth; So may that, which indeed is an
error. But S. Austin every where contends, as was but now showed, that it must
be a most certain truth which a General Conncil of the Catholic Church agreed
in, and determined so; and in this had the Donatists no way contradicting him.
So Cont. Crescon. l. 1. c. 28. He says to the Donatist -- Vnam fidem esse --
Vnam incorruptam [i.e. not errin] and Catholicam ecclesiam, Haec inter nos
convenient. And De Unit. Eccl. c. 24. -- Doce, huic Communioni tuae -- apertum
aliquod and manifestum testimonium a Scripturis Canonicis perhiberi; and fateor
ad te esse transeundum; nec aliter esse suscipiendos Haereticos quam sicut
suscipit Ecclesia in qua es, quia tali testimonio [Scripturarum] declarata est:
[i.e. to be the true Church; and consequently, that Truth to be maintained in
it, which all are to follow. This then, whether the Catholic Church always
defines a certain Truth, was no Question between them; but, Whether their's, or
his were this Church Catholic; (which Catholic Church these Churches being
divided in Communion, was but one of them). This therefore the Father
endeavored to prove to the Donatist. And, if it be not a certain truth that
such Councils determine, for any thing I know, (...) also (for, Scriptures
concerning it are still eagerly disputed on both sides; and this point of Non
rebaptization found in the Creed as well as it), may be brought in time only to
be received as a truth, but not certainly concluded a Truth. And all this for
avoiding Church-Infallibility, and maintaining an ill-grounded Principle. Which
Church- Infallibility once cashiered, what would become of the Christian Faith,
in so many Sects daily rising up, and after a new mode still interpreting the
Scriptures?

Ibid. l. (9.) S. Austin does not hereby intend to make the Church's Authority
to resolve all doubts concerning Scriptures.

No: but to resolve all doubts in matters necessary.

Page 253. l. 11. For neither ( says S. Austin De Vnita. Eccles. c. 11.
) are we to yield to Catholic Bishops themselves, if they be at any time so
much deceived as to hold what is contrary to Canonical Scriptures. This is most
certain. Certain, I say, though understood of a General Council of these
Catholic Bishops, upon the supposition that these should hold what is contrary
to Canonical Scriptures; but S. Austin is far from supposing (here, or in any
other place) that these may hold so; especially -- In manifestissima Voce
Pastoris, and in voce ejus clara and aperta; in a matter wherein the Scriptures
are very clear of which he there speaks. Or, if these General Councils should
interpret any such Scriptures in a contrary sense to S. Austin, he is far from
calling his sense, vox aperta against them; or, from not believing theirs, and
not his, to be the true sense of this Voice of the Pastor; Concerning whom
united in such a Body he says lib. de Haeres.
-- Sufficit Ecclesiam contra aliquid sentire, ut illud non recipiamus in
fidem. But the Father evidently speaks of some Catholic Bishops, holding
something contrary to Scripture, but also to the other Bishops, as appears by
the words following -- Sed qui custodito Vnitatis and Charitatis Vinculo [i.e.
with the rest from whom they differ in opinion] in hoc incidunt, etc. Nor have
we any so sure Judge when some Catholic Bishops do so, as this whole Body of
them dissenting. He proceeds.

Ib. l. 14. By which it is evident that he supposed no Infallibility in the
Guides of the Church. i.e. single, or a few, contradicted by the more, and
superior.

Ib. l. 16. And in terms he asserts De Vnita. Eccles. c. 19.
, that the Church is to be proved by nothing but plain Scriptures, neither by
the authority of Optatus, or S. Ambrose, or innumcrable Bishops, nor Councils,
nor Miracles. Intermes he asserts? No. These are not S. Austins words truly
translated or quoted. After S. Austin Ib. c. 18. had thus spoken to the
Donatist -- Remotis omnibus talibus, Ecclesiam suam demonstrent, si possunt;
non in sermonibus and rum^ribus Afrorum, non in Conciliis Episcoporum suorum,
non in literis quorumlibet disputatorum, non in signis and prodigiis
fallacibus, etc. sed in praescripto Legis etc. And again Ecclesiam in
Scripturis Canonicis debemus agnoscere, non in vanis hominum rumoribus and
opinionibus, and factis and dictis and visis inquirere [things the Donatists
pleaded against him] I say, After this he proceeds in these words which are
translated by the Dr -- Sed utrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi de divinarum
Scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant: quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis
credi oportere, quod in Ecclesia Christi sumus; quia ipsam, quam tenemus,
commendavit Milevitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alii
innumerabiles nostrae communionis Episcopi, aut quia nostrorum collegarum
Conciliis ipsa praedicata est, aut quia per totum in locis sanctis, quae
frequentat nostra communio, tanta mirabilia vel exauditionum vel sanitatum
fiunt etc. Where S. Austin says not, that the Church can be proved by nothing,
but plain Scripture: Or denies, that General Councils, or true Miracles, or
Universal Tradition are no sufficient proof thereof; Of which General Councils
he speaks nothing here, but of those of the two Parties, Concilia Episcoporum
suorum on one side, and Concilia nostrorum Cellegarum on the other: And we may
see in the quotations before Note on p. 251. l. (12.) S. Austin knowing the
Scriptures from the Church; and the Church from other marks; amongst which true
Miracles surely are the highest proof of any Truth, and so were of the Apostles
their being Gods true Church and Ministers: But the Father, to the Donatists
allowing with him the Scriptures, urges the Church as demonstrable by their
clear testimony; not as the only testimony, but the chief, and such as more
than this needed not: and exacts of them, that he waving these other proofs on
his side, wherein he had much the advantage of them by his innumerabiles
Episcopi (which surely ought to carry it against theirs) and vera Miracula; so
they would the urging of their Councils far inferior, and their Miracles,
fallacious, on their side; and bring, in their defense, Anti-Scriptures to his
Scriptures. In these things I referr my self to the candid Examiner of the
place.

Ib. l. (6.) He endeavors to bring them to a resolution in the other point
[the Church] for the clearing of this [non-Rebaptization]. But, how does
proving such a Society as defines Non-rebaptization to be the true Church clear
Non-rebaptization to be the right practice (which S. Austin inferrs from it) if
this Church, proved, yet may err in defining it so?

Page 255. l. (10). S. Austin de Baptisn^ l. 2. c. 3.
And of these General Councils the former are often an^^nded by the latter. As
this place is often urged by Protestants; so it is answered to by Catholics;
that, taking the Fathers words plenaria Concilia or General Councils as
relating to the words immediately preceding quae fiunt ex universo orb
Christiano (which is not necessary), Dogmata Fidei. For, as Cardinal Bellarmine
De Council. l. 2. c. 12.
-- In Conciliis maxima pars actorum ad fidem non pertinet -- sed tantum ipsa
nuda decreta; and ea non omnia, sed tantum quae proponuntur tanquam de fide.
Interdum enim Concilia aliquid definiunt non ut certum, sed ut probabile. He
grants Ibid. that -- Concilia in judiciis particularibus, i.e. ubi non
affirmatur aliquid generale and toti ecclesiae commune, errare possunt. So he
grants (2. l. 7. c.) -- Quad aliqua praecepta morum, Concilia plenaria priora
emendari per posteriora, upon S. Austin's reason, quando experimento aliquo
aperitur quod clausum erat etc. If S. Austins words mean this, so Catholics
grant it.

Austins words must be understood of such plenary and absolutely General
Councils, without any remitting of the highest sense of the word, (whenas
indeed these words Universal, Generale, Plenarium, were applied to Councils of
a smaller Collection of Bishops, when this from several partss and, a little
after this quotation, the Father says concerning Rebapization, that --
Diutius, per orbis terrarum regiones, multis hinc atque hinc disputationibuus
and collationibus Episcoporum, pertractata est. And several Synods were for it
held in the East, as well as in Afric See Eusebius. l. 7. c. 4.
); thus what the Father says here will make nothing for him as to his present
Controversy with the Donatist about Rebaptization: Nay, more against him. For,
there were no two such Councils, that were both General whereof the latter had
amended the former concerning Rebaptization at all: and, had there, the same
uncertainty of truth would have been in the decree of the latter, as of the
former: and in this case the Donatist would not have failed to have taken the
advantage of the Former General Councils.

Austins words [Ipsa plenaria sape priora posterioribus emendari] as in reason
we ought, to the times preceding his; as also considering those other words he
adds, sine ullo typho sacrilegae superbiae, etc. he seems to speak See contra
Maximinum, l. 3. c. 14.
of the plenary but illegal Arian Councils, that were not plenary in the
largest comprehension, amended by the 2d General Council of Constantinople and
that at Sardica; For, as is said, if we understand saepe here of legal plenary
Councils, we find none at all before his times, either as to Rebaptization, or
any other points of faith, amending one another. These things, then, being left
to the Reader's consideration; which may best fit the place: I add,

necessary faith; that such Councils, when defining any thing to be by all
Christians believed and assented to, when declaring Heretics all that dissent,
and perhaps inserting such their Definitions into the Creed, yet may be amended
after this by latter. For, this would overthrow the old foundations of the
Nicene and Athanasian Creed; and whatever could be shown of one such Council
thus erring, Heretics at their pleasure would apply to any other. This also
would overthrow particularly S. Austin's -- Veritas eliquaata and declarata:
And -- plenarium Concilium confirmavit and consolidavit for Non-rebaptization
(the chief, if not the only, argument he uses for convincing the Donatists);
whilst they might here plead, this was still latens and clausum, till more
experience in a latter Council should open and disclose it: and so must all
before cited out of S. Austin be also reversed; and all the former Heresies
revive again, which, pretending Scriptures for their Tenants, have been quelled
by the judgment of such Councils.

Page 256. l. 4. Would he assert, that all Councils how General soever may be
amended by following Councils, and yet bind men to believe that the decrees of
the former Councils do contain the unalterable will of God? i.e. Supposing S.
Austin here to speak of absolutely General and Legal Conncils, would he assert,
that in some things, as in matters of fact, a Council may possibly err and so
may be amended by others following, which Council in some other things, its
Definitions of faith, delivers the unalterable will of God, and cannot be
amended? Yes. This may well be. But I conceive this Father not to speak here of
absolutely General and legal Councils, their being amended by others. The
Council of Nice preceded the Arian Councils which pretended to amend it, Did
not S. Austin bind men to believe the Decree of Nice, which Decree he says
Contra Maximin. l. 3. c. 13.
-- In Concilio Nicaeno adversus Haereticos Arianos a Catholicis Patribus
veritatis authoritate and authoritatis veritate firmatum est. How is that so
confirmed, that is still liable to amendment? Or, if all decrees are not, how
know we when they are so? Or are those Decrees, that are so liable, universally
to be believed, Dissenters anathematized, the Creeds enlarged with them, till
such time as they be amended?

Ib. l. 11. Which words of his cannot be understood of unlawful Councils, of
matters of fact or practice, but do refer to the great Question then in debate
about rebaptizing Heretics. If S. Austins words touching former General
Councils erring and being amended by latter do reser, as our Author here says,
to the point of Rebaptization, the Father has destroyed his great Argument of
the Donatists their certainly erring in it, because a General Council had
defined the contrary to it; the Decree of which Council might err and be
repealed by another. And this, after that his former words, namely that
Provincial Councils are to yield without dispute to those which are General,
(if he had stopped there), had clearly confuted them. 2ly. S. Austins words
also, as applied to this point, would be false: for never was any former
General Council concerning this point of Rebaptization corrected by a latter;
the first decreeing for it, the latter against it.

Ib. l. (11) He [ S. Austin] grants, that the arguments drawn from the Church's
authority are but humane. Humane authority (says Archbishop Lawd p. 124.
) may be infallible enough, and an argument drawn from it, convincing:
Especially from that of General Councils, which are divinely assisted not to
err in necessaries. But this Authority meanwhile is no hindrance that S. Austin
may not also urge with, and rather than, it (but he never does as contrary to
it) the Divine Authority in Scriptures, where he thinks them to all Rational
men clear and manifest.

Page 257. l. 6. And elsewhere he appeals not to the judgment of men, but to the
Lords balance. None of these instances imply any comparison or opposition made
by S. Austin between the Scriptures and the judgment of a General Council, as
if these Scriptures might be clear, where the Judgment of the Council
contrary; but imply, that these Scriptures, where clear, may be disceded from
by some private, though learned, men's judgments; and, in any such case, are
doubtless to be preferred before them. But whither tend these quotations? To
the liberty of private men to judge of the definitions of General Councils?
That is, of Donatists to judge of that of Nice made against them in
Rebaptization? This destroys S. Austins whole design which was to have them to
acquiesce in the Decree of a General Council.

Ib. l. (12). The utmost by a careful consideration of his mind in this matter
that I can find, is; that in a question of so doubtful and obscure a nature as
that was, which had been so long bandied in the Churches of Africa, and from
thence spread over all the Churches of the Christian world, it was a reasonable
thing to presume that what the whole Christian world did consent in was the
truth, not upon the account of an infallibility, but the reasonable
supposition, that all the Churches of the Christian world would not consent in
a thing repugnant to any Apostolical doctrine or tradition. Here our Author
says, that in a Question of so doubtful and obscure a nature, and that had
been first so much discussed, it is a reasonable thing to presume, and a
reasonable supposition [not then a certain Position], that all the Churches in
the world will not consent in a thing repugnant to any Apostolical Doctrine, or
Tradition: and so Non-rebaptization [put in the Creed] may be a presumed Truth;
and the Donatist's a presumed Heresy: Where, I think he will not say, we do
presume things that we are certain of. Is then S. Austin's -- In hac re tenetur
a nobis veritas Scripturarum -- and -- Christus perhibet testimonium Ecclesiae
suae and -- Columna and firmamentum veritatis, And -- veritas eliquata and
consolidata -- come to this? a reasonable supposition, and a fair presumption
of Truth? But yet, will He stand to this? that whatever the Church in her
General Councils shall consent to, it is a reasonable supposition, that she
consents to nothing repugnant to any Apostolical Doctrine or Tradition? and
that such may be presumed a Truth? If so: will not this infer a duty of Assent
also to all her Decrees at least as presumed truths? And, if in a Question of
so doubtful and obscure a nature as Rebaptization is, our Author allows this
presumtion on the Church's side, ought he not much more in a clearer?

Page 258. l. ult S. Austins words. -- The custom of the Church having been
confirmed by a General Council, etc. It may now (...) now said, that we follow,
what Truth has declared. Does not S. Austin here, from Non-Rebaptization being
confirmed by a General Council, which examined Custom and Scriptures, declare
himself secure of this truth not to be amended by latter Councils?

Page 259. l. 13. That in a matter of so doubtful and obscure a nature, etc. we
are to believe that to be the truth which the Church of Christ agreed in, etc.
And afterward he faith -- In such a case as this [and so he says before, p.
257.
in a question so doubtful] he agrees to what S. Austin says; and thinks a man
very much relieved by following so evident a consent of the Universal Church,
[but the not so relieved S. Austin declares Hereticks] not by virtue of any
Infallibility, but the unreasonableness of believing, that so many so wise so
disinteressed persons should be deceived. That in a matter of so doubtful and
obscure a Nature. What means this limitation? Are we to believe that to be
truth which Councils determine in matters obscure (I suppose he means,
generally obscure); but not so in matters more clear? One would think the
contrary rather. But, who is to judge, when the Question or matter is obscure;
since on this depends our assent to the Council? The Donatist, for example, in
this matter of Rebaptization? But, he will say, This matter is clear enough on
his side. And so this Author promising as to present Controversies the same
submission, in case of obscurity, to a General Council, this case, here, of
obscurity will not be found; because these points, they say, are clear on their
side; and they offer demonstration of them. But, if Protestants will affirm,
that we are to believe that to be the truth which General Councils resolve,
without limiting it to certain cases; because it is, as he says, unreasonable
to believe, so many so wise so disinteressed persons should be deceived, and
then grant, that consequently in necessaries these Councils must not err; (for,
so we should be obliged to believe in necessaries something wrong and false),
this would be as much as we desire.

Ib. l. (3). Let the same evidences be produced for the consent of the
Universal Church from the Apostolical times in the matters in dispute between
our Church and that of Rome; and the controversy of Infallibility may be laid
aside. What was the Consent of the universal Church from the Apostolical times,
was the Question between S. Austin and the Donatists. For, the Donatists also
pleaded a contrary Tradition against the Catholics. See Firmilian Ep. 75. ^pud
Cyprian -- Caeterum nos veritati and consuetudinem jungimus, etc. as also the
same Consent is controverted now concerning Now, for a sufficient and certain
decision of the truth in this Question, viz. what the former Tradition was, or
what was our Lords will in this matter, S. Austin urges the consent of the
present Church met in a General Council and there discussing the matter. Where
S. Austin does not require the Donatists submission to the Consent of the
universal Church from the Apostolical times first proved to them (i.e. they
confessing it so; for, this, if proved to them, Donatists did not, nor could
not decline (as now neither does the Dr. -- Let the Pope's Supremacy etc be
proved by an universal consent of Antiquity etc. p. 244. and here -- Let the
same evidence be produced for the consent of the universal Church from the
Apostolical times etc. that is, as I understand him, Let such a consent be
evidenced to us): But S. Austin requires their submission and belief to the
latter General Council (of Nice or Arles, or both, it matters not), declaring
what was the former Apostolical Tradition. Which, if the Infallibility of this
Council needs not be stood on as to the Donatist's obedience, yet it is, in the
Council's determination of any necessaries, as to Christians believing in such
necessaries a Truth (of which necessaries also this Council, not their
Subjects, is to judge): And the Father's words would have weighed little with
these Affricans, persuading them to obey the Councils Sentence, though an
error, Therefore he fortifies the Councils Decree with the former expressions
-- Christus perhibet testimonium; And In hac re tenetur Scripturarum veritas.

Page 260. l. 9. Let them never think to fob us off with the consent of some
latter ages for a tradition from Apostolical times. But He ought to admit and
submit to any universal consent of the Apostolical Churches of any latter age
concerning what is the Tradition from Apostolical times; as S. Austin admitted
it; and declared the Donatists Heretics for not admitting it. He goes on.

Ib. l. 10. Nor of a packed company of Bishops for a truly General Council. He
has reason. But surely there will need no packing of Bishops for their voting
such a matter in Council, which all the Bishops of the Christian world, (or, if
it be but the much major part of them) have abetted, and maintained, taught and
practiced, before such Council. And so it was in the Councils held before
Luther's appearance, and also afterward in that of Trent, that for the greatest
part of the Western Bishops, who could only be convened in it, (but the same
may be said as truly of the Eastern too), were, in most of the controversies
there decided against the Protestants, so persuaded in their judgment before
their meeting in that Council, as they, or others afterward, voted in it.

Annotations on his. 15. Of Church Authority, said not to be destroyed by the
Dr's Principles.
Page 260. l. 15. The last thing to be considered is, whether the same
arguments which overthrow Infallibility, do likewise destroy all
Church Authority? N.O. shows, some reasonings in the Dr's Principles, with
which he endeavored to destroy Church. Infallibility, to ruin also as much or
more Church Authority; viz. as to their office of Teaching Christ's flock and
expounding to them the Scriptures. These particular reasonings of the Dr
questioned for this, N.O. expected, should in an Answer to him, have been
resumed by the Dr, and justified. But, in the first of these quotations, that
follow, out of N.O. p. 50. he finds our Author mentioning N O's Consequence
indeed, but omitting the Argument immediately preceding, from which he inferred
it; viz. First Observe, that whatever Divine assistance is advanced here [viz.
in the Dr's 19. Principle] against the assurance that can be received from
Church-Infallibility the same is more advanced against any assurance that may
be had from Church Authority; And so Church Authority as to this matter is
thrown off by him as well as Church-Infallibility. To this Observation the Dr
says nothing. In the 2d Quotation out of p. 70. he finds him mentioning the
Charge N.O. lays upon him of justly incurring the displeasure of his
Ecclesiastical Saperiours (as indeed all Chillingworths followers seem to do,
corrupting something which formerly remained good in the Church of England; and,
which being good, all good men have reason to wish well to, and that it may be
preserved there; for, that which is good, still preparing the way to something
better, may end at last in an happy reunion of the divided Church: hes and this
may serve to answer this Author's Ironical descant here p. 261.262.); but finds
him omitting here to take any notice of N.O's Reason for it immediately
preceding viz. -- Here [i.e. in his 29th Principle] first observe: That what no
Christian is obliged to believe under any pretense of Church-Infallibility, he
is much rather not obliged to believe under any pretense of Church Authority:
and that the Dr's freeing the Church's subjects here [i.e. as to their
believing what these Governors teach them] from the former, does so from the
latter. Thus N.O. Neither replies he any thing to this. The 3d Quotation out of
p. 84. is applied to one particular Consequence of the Dr's, Conseq. 1.
In which he says -- There is no necessity at all or use of an Infallible
Society of men to assure men of the truth of those things of which they may be
certain without, and cannot have any greater assurance, supposing such
Infallibility to be in them. Which Consequence of his, N.O. says, -- concludes
the uselesness as well of any Ecclesiastical Authority to teach men, as of an
Infallible, to assure men of, the truth of those things, which, by using only
their own sincere endeavor (according to the Dr's pretense, Principle 13.)
they may know without them. To this likewise the Dr answers nothing. And here
also, Whereas N.O. speaks in particular. This Consequence concludes, etc; he
puts instead thereof, that N.O. says, his Principles against Infallibility
conclude, etc. In the 4th quoted out of p. 98. where N.O. after the words cited
by the Dr, [viz.: That the Principles laid down by him do not afford any
effectual way or means in this Church of suppressing or convicting any Schism,
Sect, or Heresy, or reducing them either to submission of judgment or silence:]
proceeds to give the reason of this -- F^r, where both sides contend Scripture
clear from then selves, the clearness of such Scripture, how great soever it be
on one side, can be made no instrument of conviction to the other: the Dr
mentions not this Reason, nor speaks he to it. In the 5th Quotation out of p.
99. where, after the words quoted by the Dr, [ that the Authority of the Church
of England is much debilitated, etc, by this new way taken up of its defence]
N.O. thus gives the Reason of them in what follows: viz. where he thinks
himself its best Advocate and defender of its cause, who does most endeavor to
set forth the defects and faili^gs of all such Ecclesiastical Societies;
Prelates, and Councils, and best proves no Scripture-Promises made to them:
Neither from this does he clear himself, or others; But, instead of taking
notice of these particulars urged against him, he extracts from the foresaid
Assertions in N.O, stripped of the particular Reasons and Arguments annexed, this
Universal Proposition, that N.O. maintains, that the same Arguments (i.e. all
the same arguments; for, I suppose he would here have his indefinite term
understood universally by his Reader) which overthrow Infallibility, do
likewise destroy all Church Authority: all Church Authority says he; i.e. all
parts of it, not that only of their Office, as they are the Preachers and
Expounders of Christ's Gospel to the People, of which only N.O. speaks; and
then, on this, he frames a new Discourse, first divided into Heads. But, any
such proposition N.O. disclaimes; Yet, this He affirms, that some of the Dr's
arguings in his Principles, which he brings for destroying
Church-Infallibility, do also destroy Church Authority as to one part of it;
and also names those arguings of his: and wishes, that this Author, in
pretending an Answer, had cleared them from this charge.

Page 262. l. 8. If they thought they could not sow mischief, etc A rent,
already too wide, is by our Author's new Principles still made wider, and so
less hopes of quite closing it. And this is justly resented by N.O. as contrary
to his chiefest Interest.

Ib. l. 10. It is a pretty plot, etc. True designs of defending may possibly
undermine; and those may be the truest Friends, who are taken for professed
Enemies. This the Future Judgment will show.

Ib. l. 15. (3.) Undermine all Church Authority; and authority wholly useless:
All and wholly are none of N.O's expressions; his words must be added-to, that
they may be refuted.

Page 263. l. 1. Such malignant influence must be from one of these things.
Either because I deny infallibility in the Guides of the Church, You deny
Infallibility as to necessaries; whereby none can securely yield assent to any
thing that the Church defines.

Ib. l. 2. Or because I say, that the Scriptures are plain in things necessary
to salvation. You say Plain to all so far, as that none, using his own
endeavor ( i.e. according to his condition), can mistake in them; which makes
men, being confident of the plainness of Scripture and of their own diligence
and judgment, neglect repairing to the Church's direction and guidance in
matters that most concern them. And hence grow such an infinite number of
Sects, (after the direction of their Spiritual Guides cast off,) Independants.
Quakers, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Solifidians, Socinians, and I
know not what. But note here, that N.O. no where says, which our Author here
seems to impose, that One, to make use of another's guidance or direction, must
have him infallible: But says only this, which no way infers the other, that,
where all things necessary are affirmed plain to a man only using his own
endeavor to understand them, One, wherein he thinks he uses his own just
endeavor, may justly think also therein, another guidance (whether this
fallible, or infallible) to be unnecessary. Unless the Dr will here relieve
himself by one of these two ways: Either that, though a sufficient
self-endeavour suffices, yet none can know certainly when he has used it. Or
that, in mentioning a man's using his endeavor, this Author involves
principally the repairing to his Guides for their instruction. But then, this
latter argues the Scriptures, wherein he consults them, not plain, but obscure
rather, as has been often said; and so defeats what he would chiefly maintain.

Ibid. l. 4. Or, Because I deny the Authority of the Church of Rome. You deny
not only the authority of the Church of Rome, as contradistinct to other
Catholic Churches, but the Authority of the Church Catholic as to its justly
requiring submission of private men's judgments to its Definitions in matters of
Necessary Faith.

Ib. l. 6. Or, because I am not for such an effectual way of suppressing Sects
and Heresies, as is in use in the Roman Church. No: But because you are not for
any effectual way at all.

Ib. l. (10). But I pray, Sir, are Authority and Infallibility all one in your
account? No. N.O. his affirming some of this Authors Principles to take away
the Church's Authority, as to some part of it, as well as its Infallibility,
makes not these two one. And therefore the pains here to prove these different,
and that one takes not away the other, is lost.

Ib. l. (8). We suppose that Magistrates and Parents and Masters have all of
them an unquestionable authority, but I never heard yet of any man that said
they were infallible. Some part of the Church's authority is greater than that
of Civil Magistrases, Masters, or Parents; viz. the deciding of Truth and
Error lawful and unlawful, in Divine matters; or the defining of points
Controverted in Gods Word, and in matters of necessary faith; and, the power of
obliging Subjects to belief and assent thereto: and this part of their
authority must also be joined with Infallibility as to Necessaries, that their
Subjects therein may not err. For, other our Superiors, Civil magistrates,
Parents, Masters etc, as they have no Infallibility, so they are deficient in
one branch of Authority: whose proposals we only admit, when we believe them to
be truth; and practice their commands, when we believe them first to be lawful;
lawful, I mean, by the Divinc law; but, where there is any doubt herein, we
repair to the Ecclesiastical Count for the resolution of them, and so proceed
to obey, or disobey, the other's commands: and for this reason, see before, in
Note on p. 116. l. 11. Mr Chillingworth heartily granting infallibility
necessary to an Ecclesiastical Judge, though not so to a Civil; but, still to
save his phanomena, denying such an Ecclesiastical Judge necessary. Lastly, I
ask; will this Author yield no more submission at all to the Authority of the
Church defining Controversies in Religion, than to his Prince, or Parents,
defining them?

Ib. l. (3). Why may we not allow any Authority belonging to the Governors of
the Church, and yet think it possible for them to be deceived? Some Authority
which they, I mean General Councils, have claimed, we cannot allow, if they may
be deceived; viz: not that of enjoining a certain Assent to their definitions
in matters of necessary Faith. For, a Church fallible in necessaries can, in
nothing at all which she proposes, justly oblige her subjects to any absolute
and certain belief.

Page 264. l. 7. These are strange ways of arguing etc. Strange, indeed; but
not these, or any like ways of arguing to be showed in N.O.

Ib. l. (6). But it may be said etc. But no such thing is said by N.O.

Page 266. l. 6. The meaning of all this is etc. I willingly grant to our
Author, without the demonstration of his many instances, that if one using a
Guide afterward by experience finds he has guided him wrong, (as he may find
this, when he misseth of his end), he has reason for the future to desert him.
And thus, upon this supposition, may any reject N.O's Guide, a lawful General
Council. But, I hope, this Author is a man of more modesty than to say, * that
such Councils, or universal consent of the Church any other way known, do
misguide men in the Principles of Religion, or common precepts, which are so
plain, that every Christian may know their misguiding; and meanwhile the
Councils themselves either not know it, or, knowing, yet impose such falsities;
and that in the profession of their own faith, as well as others: Or, say *
that they command them, to believe against their eyesight; in any thing, but
what themselves also do believe upon the Divine Revelation, more infallible
than sense: or, to break the plain Commands of God etc. Or, if he will say they
do so; I know, N.O. will say the contrary.

Ib. l. (2). And this is not to destroy all authority etc. That a
Church Authority fallible may be of great use for its direction, as it is said
here by Dr St, so it is granted by N.O. who also requires submission of
judgment to it, though fallible, especially from the illiterate, for many good
reasons; See the former Dif^^^ course,. 37 etc,
but will He allow as much?

Page 267. l. 1. For they may be of great use for the direction of unskilful
persons in matters that are doubtful. But he will not say here, in any
necessaries doubtful: since he contends that these are plain also to the
unskilful.

Ib^l. 12. I shall now show what real authority is still left in the Governors
of the Church, though Infallibility be taken away. That a real authority is
still left in the Governors of the Church, though Infallibility be taken away,
is granted to him without his proof: but this is also maintained as well
consistent with it; that these Governors, united in Council, have an
Infallibility in all their Definitions concerning Necessaries; and this given
them from our Lord; and that this by any other Authority, he can show given
them, is not taken away.

Ibl. (12). An authority left in the Church Governors of receiving into, and
excluding out of, the Communion of the Church.

I add; and an Authority the Church has of excluding, amongst other things,
for Heresy, against the infallible definitions of the Church.

Ib. l. (7). Which authority [viz. of inflicting Censures upon offenders, and
of receiving into, and excluding out of the Communion of the Church] belongs to
the Governors of the Church; and however the Church in some respects be
incorporated with the Commonwealth in a Christian State, yet its fundamental
rights remain distinct from it. 1 Here means he, that the Church (as this being
a fundamental right of it) may inflict such Censures and exclude from its
communion such persons as justly incurr them, (to which I may add its
declarative power of what is God's will or truth in particular doctrines of
faith, mentioned by him below p. 269.) without or against the consent of the
Civil State, or the Supreme Governor thereof: viz. when he prohibites the
Exercise of such Censures, or Declaration of such a particular Doctrine, to his
Subjects? Which Power if our Lord has given his Church, and then has given
also to the Civil Magistrate, if Christian, another power of prohibiting to the
Church the Exercise of this Power, will not this be, to use the Dr's expression
Irenicum. Disc. of Excommunication. 9. p. 423.
, to give it a power with one hand, and take it away with the other? And, since
the Church exercised this power given by our Lord before it was incorporated
into the Civil State, and then when the Civil State also prohibited exercise of
such a power, it seems most reasonable, as the Dr says elsewhere p. 446.
that no accession to the Church [of the Civil State] can invalidate its former
Title, or Right. But then, how will all this consist with the Oath of
Supremacy, which Supremacy is therein given to the Civil Magistrate without any
exception of these, the Church's fundamental Rights? unless the Dr with Bishop
Bramhal holds the sense of this Oath to maintain only an external coactive
power, in such spiritual matters, belonging to the Civil Magistrate: which I
suppose no Catholic will deny to him: Or, unless he will say, that the Oath
excludes a foreign Church-Supremacy distinct from that of the State, but not
so a domestic one as to some fundamental Church-Rights. But then, how can the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of a General Council, though foreign, be excluded,
where the Supremacy of an inferior and subordinate Church Authority is
admitted? 2 Or 2ly. means he, that the Church has such fundamental Rights
given her by our Lord; but so, that she may not actually exercise them in these
things, whenever the Civil Power, if Christian, does oppose and prohibit them?
But then, what if such Civil Power should happen to be (as possibly it may)
Heretical? Here may the Church in such a State neither declare still such
Truths, nor inflict any Censures; I mean of Excommunication on such as are
real Delinquents? And, to use the Dr's words Irenicum. p. 422.
-- Can we imagine our Blessed Savior should institute a Society, and leave it
destitute of means to uphold it self, unless it be sustained by the Civil
Power? -- Whenas (says he before) the Church flourished in its greatest
purity, not only when not upheld, but when most violently opposed, by the Civil
Power.

Ib. l. ult. Of which Rights this is one of the chief to receive into and
exclude out of the Church such persons, which, according to the laws of a
Christian Society, are fit to be taken in, or shut out. Then, I hope, that this
Society may also keep Assemblies as a fundamental Right, though these
prohibited by the Commonwealth: and that the highest Courts thereof may
exercise the foresaid Jurisdiction over its members, into whatever
Commonwealth, (though opposing this Church,) these members be incorporated.

Page 268. l. 12. And in establishing those ancient Rites, of the Christian
Church, which are in themselves of an indifferent nature.

But, what if this Authority, being fallible, judge something indifferent that
is not? May any be forced to obedience and the practice thereof (which he calls
below overruling the practice), and consequently, first to assenting to the
lawfulness of a thing, wherein this Authority is fallible? And, if such
Authority execute its Censures on such persons disobeying it, is not this
Tyranny? Or, if not, why is that of the Roman Church so?

Ib. l. (5). The Church has an authority of proposing matters of faith and
directing men in Religion. But so may any one, more learned than others,
propose and direct them. But what thinks he of the Church s defining, or
imposing, any such matter of faith to be believed? Surely either the Church
has by Right such an Authority, or the first four General Councils usurped it.
And does not such an Authority, if justifiable, infer an Infallibility? But
then, this directing and proposing is, as to Necessaries, needless, where all
is clear, and plainly proposed in Scripture for every ones capacity without
repairing to this Authority. But, if he means so plain in Scripture, that men
following these their Guides cannot mistake in it, the plainness lies not in
the Text, but in their Exposition.

Page 269. l. 15. Authority to declare what the mind and will of God is
contained in Scripture. etc. And are the people to receive what they declare as
such? Or have they authority to declare, what they think the mind of God is,
and their Auditors to judge whether it be contained in Scripture, every one for
themselves? But, this latter must multiply Sects; and the former includes
Infallibility in Necessaries.

Ib. l. (6). Especially having all the ancient rights of a Patriarchal Church.
I suppose He here by the word Patriarchal claims no other rights or privileges
for the Church of England than those of a Primatical Church; such as those of
the Churches of France, Spain, or Afric; and that the Primate of Canterbury
is no higher elevated by him than the Primate of Carthage or Toledo; and that,
notwithstanding any such Primateship, the Church of England and the Prelates
thereof are subject, as also those of Spain France or Africa, to any
Reformation of errors made by Superior Councils, whether Patriarchal of the
West, or General of the whole Church Catholic: both which Councils also are
acknowledged Superior to National, or Provincial, by learned Protestants.

Ib. l. ult. To do as much as in them lies to reform them, viz. by requiring a
consent to such Propositions as are agreed upon for that end, of those who are
to enjoy the public offices of teaching and instructing others. Anglican
National Synods to agree upon, declare and publish, any propositions for
reforming or correcting of errors in the Doctrine of Religion; i.e. as I
understand him, only, or chiefly, in matters of faith, (though he does not name
it); the care of the preservation of which faith in their several precincts is
committed to the Bishops of the Church; To publish and declare, he says, what
those errors are, and to reform them; and it is said also in the 20th Article
of the Church of England, that the Church has authority in Controversies of
faith: but not so, as to ordain any thing contrary to God's written Word: i.e.
as I imagine, has authority in deciding of such Controversies. For, what
authority else can be showed in matters of Controversy? since teaching must
follow the deciding what is to be taught: and the Article requiring that they
do not ordain or decree any thing contrary to Gods written word, or enforce the
same to be believed for necessity of salvation seems to imply; they may decree,
what they think is his Word. This Author also says; such Synod may require
consent to, (which, I suppose, is the same as assent or belief of the truth
of), such propositions as such Synod has agreed on from those who are to enjoy
the public offices of teaching and iustructing others: i.e. from all the
Clergy. Now to this I have these things to reply.

to do as much as in them lies to reform errors in Religion, or Faith, here is
no restraint of any who live in its Communion, save only of the Clergy, from
erring their former errors: No consent to its Decrees required of the rest,
but that they may be Arian, Socinian, Nestorian, and what not, yet enjoy her
Communion: may be partly compounded of Orthodox, partly Heretics, as to the
Laics; in whom all opinions are tolerated. This, I say, follows; according to
his stating this Authority here (for, the Canons of this Church seem contrary,
and to require assent from all); and according to what this Dr has said also
elsewhere, Ration. Account. p. 133. where he describes the Church -- a Society
of such persons, who all firmly believe that doctrine infallible which Christ
delivered; but yet judge themselves all fallible, and dare not usurp that
royal prerogative of heaven in prescribing infallibly in matters questioned;
but leave all [men] to judge according to the Pandects of the Divine Laws,
because each member of this Society is bound to take care of his soul, and of
all things, that tend thereto. A very true and just representative, says he,
of that society of men, which our Blessed Savior instituted as a Church in the
world. Now, there, the Clergy also as well as Laity seem left to their liberty;
so that (to reconcile him to himself) perhaps the consent here required of the
Clergy is only conditional: this consent not meddling with their faith, wherein
they are left to their Christian liberty to hold what they think best; but only
in order to such an employment; that, if they do not testify their Tenants in
Religion to be such as suit with the Synod's Decrees, they must not be admitted
to bear such an Office. For his following words are -- Not to the end that all
those Propositions [to which a consent is required of the Clergy] should be
believed as Artlcles of Faith: But because no Reformation can be effected, if
persons may be allowed to preach and officiate in the Church in a way contrary
to the Design of such a Reformation. Thus He. But then, in the same way, why
may not this Church exact assent of all persons whatever, i.e. a conditional
one, if they desire to live in her reformed communion; yet not forcing their
conscience therein, but leaving them the liberty to stay out of it. And, since
the design or effects of the Reformation may be hindered also by learned Laics
their spreading abroad such errors, why not, in order to this, such assent
required of them, as he says is required, in Order to this, of the Clergy?

fallible, this Authority given to it, I mean of requiring assent of all its
Clergy to all its doctrines or Articles of Religion seems very unjust, and
servs equally as for the reformation of a former error, so for the corruption
of a former truth. For thus, supposing this Church Arian or Socinian (as it may
be) here all its Clergy, receiving Holy Orders for the teaching of Gods word,
are engaged to believe, and preach, a most impious Heresy; or to be
dis-clergied, than which what can be a greater tyranny? Neither is there any
remedy left in such a Church for rectifying such corruption or error; since
none are admitted into the Clergy, who do not assent to such error; and are
removed out of it, so soon as they recant it. And this is it the Presbyterian
Ministers have so much complained of, that they might not be admitted to
subscribe the 39. Articles with such a clause added [so far forth as the same
Articles are agreeable to Gods word]. And indeed the forbidding a ttuth in this
Church to be taught to the Laity is, in effect, the forbidding it to be
assented-to also, by them.

Authority rightly exercised in the Church of England as to requiring assent
from all the Clergy to her 39. A ticles; so must he, that the same authority is
so, in the Church of Rome. And thus, Pope Pius's Creed, so far as its requiring
assent from all the Roman Clergy, by which this Clergy may only preach those
errors (as he accounts them), and cannot declare the contrary Truths, is
justified by himself; and the Roman Church maintained herein to exercise a
lawful power.

England has such a lawful authority in the reformation of errors over its
subjects, the same have superior Councils (suppose, a General, or a
Patriarchal in the West,) over it, and all other Primaticael Churches: viz. of
requiring assent from all the Clergy, whether Archbishops, Bishops, or
inferiors, to all their Decrees; and, not to teach any thing contrary to them;
and that, if not for imposing them as Articles of Faith, yet for the reason
given by the Dr. viz. -- because no Reformation can be effected by these
Councils, if persons may be allowed to preach and officiate in these Churches
in a way contrary to the design of such a Reformation made by the Council. And
then, supposing here, under that pretended reformation of an error by such
Council or Synod, a corruption of a Truth; and, that of moment, (a thing this
Author allows possible); How can there be a reforming afterward of such a
Corruption, unless done by Laics? Or, may the Council lawfully require an
assent to such corruption from all its subjects that are admitted into sacred
Orders; and those that are so admitted, afterward when they discern truth, as
lawfully renounce and reverse such their former assent? These seem to be the
consequences of the Dr's stating such an authority in his Church; consequences
contrary to what he allows; and these arguings seem of force, especially
against one that both accuses the Roman Church, because fallible, for
requiring assent to her Decrees; and refuses assent to the Decrees of
Superior Councils, because these fallible.

Demonstration against her judgment, as I suppose Divine matters are not:
neither do I know any wiser or securer course (though, abstracting from the
Church's Infallibility) that any Christian can take, as to attaining all
necessary divine truth, than by his firm adhering to her judgment in all
things, that is set over him by God himself to guide him in the way of
salvation, of which much has been said elsewhere. And 2ly. far also from
affirming, that the Church of England, or any other National or Provincial
Synod may not require Assent not only from her Clergy, but all her subjects to
her Doctrines of Religion or matters of Faith, and that upon Anathema to all
Dissenters: but then it must be for such doctrines wherein such Church or Synod
does not oppose, but agree with, the whole Body of the present Catholic
Church, and so also with that of former times, according to the judgment of
these times made by this present Church. Taking here this whole Body I speak of
as contradistinct to Heretical and Schismatical Churches, or Societies; and
taking the consent of this whole in such an universality, as is necessary for
concluding the whole, according to the proceedings we have seen in the first
General Councils. Now, in these matters wherein a Provincial Council agrees
with the whole as it demands assent to them from its subjects, so is it
infallible in them, if the whole be so. It follows.

Page 270. l. 3. Not to the end, that all those propositions should be believed
as articles of faith. Not that all; but does the Church of England then
require, that some of her propositions in the 39. Articles should be believed
and assented to by them as Articles of her Faith? His saying not all seems to
imply as much; and see Art. 8. which says -- the three Creeds ought thoroughly
to be received and believed. This [and believed] being added by Queen
Elizabeth's Divines to the former Article as it was penned in King Edwards
days; And several of the other Articles are required to be assented to as
things contained in Scripture, and so as infallible; and these things such, as
the Church of Rome's error in them is called erring in matter of faith; See
Art. 19. and, since the principal reformation of errors, that belongs to
Church Authority, is of those that are contrary to the doctrine of faith (the
preservation of which faith is chiefly entrusted to the Church's care), surely
it would seem a piece of strange subtilty to ty her Clergy to assent to that,
which is matter of faith, (in which faith also the Roman Church has erred),
and yet not to oblige them to assent to it, as a matter of faith. If then she
does require Assent to some of her Articles at least, as of faith, upon what
ground may a fallible Authority do this? and why may not other Churches do this
as inculpably, as that of England? Or, if she does not require an assent to any
of her Articles as of faith, of which Bishop Bramhall Reply to Chalcedon, p.
350.
speaks thus diminutively -- We do use to subscribe to them [the 39. Articles]
indeed, not as Articles of faith, but as Theological Verities for the
preservation of unity among our selves; then the Clergy of England, as to
faith, receiving the words of the Creeds, are, as for all other things,
permitted to believe what, or how little, they please.

Ib. l. 17. We cannot help the weakness of those men's understanding who cannot
apprehend that any such thing as authority should be left in a Church, if we
deny Infallibility; other diseases may be cured, but natural incapacity cannot.
Non prudentes apud vosmetipsos, Romans 12.16. See Note on p. 263. l. (10). and on
p. ^60. l. 15.

Ib. l. (4) As that it were the foundation of all the Heresies and Sects in the
world. See before Note on p. 263. l. 2. -- and on p. 271. l. (2) n. 2.

Ib. l. (3). This Principle, he says, makes all Ecclesiastical Authority
useless. All Ecclesiastical Authority? N. O. says not this; frequently imposed
upon him by the Dr (See before p. 262. 267.) thereby to shape a thing like an
answer to him, in showing the Church's Authority useful or necessary as to
several other things. And the words following here, that are truly cited out of
N. O. do limit this uselesness of Ecclesiastical Authority to the Office of
Teaching, and that in matter necessary, according to Dr St's. limitation, in
his Principle, of the Scriptures being as to these necessaries clear: and the
words [are clear to all persons] have a limitation also in N. O. which he is
pleased to leave out, and conceal from his Reader; viz. this: I mean
exclusively to their repairing to these Pastors for the learning of the meaning
of such Scriptures.

Ses Fanaticism fanatically imputed, p. 99.
Page 271. l. (2.) For since that Train of my Principles has been laid,
nothing like the old Church of England has been seen.

Mr. S. C. professes himself to think more honorably of the Church of
England, than to follow or maintain these Principles of the Dr; and that the
regard Its Governors have both to the King's and Kingdome's safety, and their
own Character, will not permit them to yield to an Anarchy first in the Church,
and presently after in the Kingdom. He says not, that, since the Dr's laying
his train etc. nothing like the old Church of England has been seen: but that,
upon his ground, if received and practiced in this Church, all would be reduced
into mere Fanaticisme: for, says he,. 91. -- To make every Christian soberly
enquiring into Scripture to be his own Teacher in all necessary points of faith
(and it is no matter what becomes of unnecessary points) and to be a competent
Judge of the true sense of Scripture in them: all this without any regard to
all External Authority infallible, or fallible either, (for, an infallible one
being unnecessary, what necessity can there be of a fallible authority, which
none is, or can be, bound to believe?) can be nothing but Fanaticisme in the
height of its Notion: Thus he.

Sects of late have much more multiplied in the Church of England, than in
former times. 2ly. Manifest also, that, since Chillingworth's taking this way
of answering Church Authority when much pressed on him, these Principles have
been more in vogue, and more openly maintained; viz. -- 1. That, For points
necessary (and, for others, no matter if controversy still remains) Scriptures
are clear to all capacities using a due diligence therein: without any
expressing or explaining of themselves in this manner; that they mean, using a
due diligence to be instructed by their Spiritual Pastor in the right sense
thereof; which limitation, should it be added, would seem to make more for
Church-Infallibility, than against it. Again; -- 2. That every Christian is
bound to reject whatever is offered to be imposed upon his faith, which has no
foundation in Scripture; or is contrary thereto, (as Dr St. in his 29th
Principle:) i.e. (if we make any sense of it), which he, and such persons, do
think has no foundation in Scripture, etc. for, if he means here, which the
Church judges to have no foundation in, or to be contrary to, Scripture; so
say Catholics: but, when will the Church judge thus, and impose the contrary?
Again; That in the Church all men are left to judge according to the Pandects
of the Divine Laws, because each member of this Society is bound to take care
of his soul, and of all things that tend thereto Rat. Account. p. 133.
. -- That men are to try the Doctrines of their Guides, for that many false
ones are gone out into the world, etc. See before the Texts urged to this
purpose by the Dr p. 144. etc. Manifest, I say, that, more of late, such
propositions and Principles as these have been much divulged and propagated.
But, whether such Principles, or some other things, have actually caused such a
licentiousness in opinions, as has been of late, I cannot determine, only this
I may affirm, and do appeal to the candid Reader's judgment therein, that such
Principles do much invite and encourage such a Self-guidance in Spiritual
matters, and diffidence in, and independence on, our Lord's Clergy: whilst
Chillingworth freely acknowledges; c. 2.. 17.
if no infallible, then no Ecclesiastical, Judge.

Page 273. l. 3. I no where in the least exclude the use of all means and due
helps of Guides and others for the understanding the sense of Scripture. Yes:
for the understanding the sense of Scripture in all necessary Faith. For you
both in your Principles and in this Book ground the sober Enquirer's not erring
in necessaries upon the plainness of the delivery of (not some, or many; for,
this will be granted to you, at least for persons of a good capacity, but) all
such points in Scripture; which plainness in Scripture, where it is, renders an
Expositor of such Scripture needless, upon such diligence used. Or, if you mean
a plainness by using the help of the Clergy, the plainness now is had not in
the Text, but from the Clergy, the mentioning therefore of which by you would
have prejudiced such plainness in the Text.

Ib. l. 14. To what purpose in an account of the Principles of Faith should I
mention those things which we do not build our faith upon, I mean the Authority
of our Guides? I hope; in your Principles, or Foundations of Faith, that you
intended to set down all things necess^ry to a Christian's having a true Faith;
as in your 13th Principle that you intended to set down all things that were
necessary, that a sober requirer might not err in necessary Faith, without
leaving any of them out Now, a most exact and perfect Rule of our Faith, if it
be not also clear to us, requires something besides for our belief of its true
sense, namely an Expositor, where this Rule is obscure: and then, that we may
not err in this our belief, an Infallible One. For, the Scripture or Principle
here, when obscure, abstracted from this Expositor, is of it self indifferent
between the sense which we receive, and which we reject. In obscure Scripture
we resolve our faith into God's Word indeed; but, as this is related or
expounded to us by the Church. And this Church therefore is necessary to be
mentioned, where we speak of the Resolution of any such part of our Faith.

Page 274. l. (2). Does this make the whole Profession of Physic useless? No.
But, If Hippocrates his Aphorisms are set down so plainly, as that every one,
that will take the pains to read and compare them, may understand them, I may
safely say, an Expositor of these is useless to so many, as will take this
pains. The same is said of Expositors as to plain Scriptures. What follows
here in him is very true, but nothing to our business.

Page 276. l. 11. How comes it now to pass etc. Mr. S. C. pitcheth here, that,
as to the knowledge of all necessary faith, the guidance of Church Governors
is by Dr St. rendered useless. For other matters, how great soever Dr St. may
make or prove the authority of these Church Governors to be, he troubles not
himself.

Page 277. l. 7. S. Austin in his books of Christian Doctrine already
mentioned. See before Note on p. 236. l. 1.

Ib. l. 9. And S. Chrysostom in as plain words as may be, etc. Hom. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
S. Chrysostom's words in that place reprehending the peoples neglect in the
hearing the Scriptures read, if there were no Sermon, (a great fault, which the
present times are still subject-to) are these -- Cur, inquit ingredior, si non
audio aliquem verba facientem? [saith he that stays from Church] Hoc [saith
the Father] omnia perdidit, and corrupit. Quid enim opus est aliquo qui verba
faciat and sermonem habeat? Ex nostra socordia hoc usu venit. Quid enim opus
est sermon? Omnia sunt dilucida and recta quae sunt in divinis Scripturis:
manifesta sunt, quaecunque sunt necessaria. Sed quoniam estis auditores
delectationis, propterea haec etiam quaeritis. [i.e. Sermons]. Which words,
taken in a rigid sense, prove more than Dr St. does pretend to make good out of
them; making such a plainness in the Scriptures, as that there is no need of
any Sermons. But the Eather seems here, as Sixtus Senensis on this place has
observed, not to speak so much of Dogmata fidei, (wherein it were strange, if,
in all the things that are controverted, and Scriptures urged on both sides,
nothing should be a necessary, or that any simple person needed therein no
teacher) as of praecepta Morum, and historiae sacrae formandis moribus utiles
(his Sermons chiefly aiming at the forming of Manners, not stating points of
Faith). And so in another place, where the Father speaks much what the same
things, he seems to explain himself, in Concio 3. de Lazaro Luc. 16. -- Cui
enim (says he there) non sunt manifesta, quaecunque in Evangelio scripta sunt?
Quis autem audiens beatos esse mites, beatos misericordes, beatos mundicordes,
caeteraque hujusmodi, desiderabit praeceptorem, ut aliquid eorum discat, quae
dicuntur? Quinetiam signa, miracula, historiae, nonne cuivis nota manifestaque
sunt? Praetextus iste est and causatio, pigritiaeque velamentum. Yet there he
supposes they may meet with difficulties, such wherein it is necessary they
should be instructed also; and so advises them to repair to a Doctor -- Quod
si non peteris (says he) assiduitato lecti^nis invenire quod dicitur, accede
ad sapientiorem; vade ad doctor^^, co^^unica cum his ea quae scripta sunt:
giving them the example of the Ethiopian Eunuch. Nay, in this very place cited
by the Dr the Father seems to explain himself chiefly of the clearness of
Scripture-Stories, from whence they might learn instruction of manners, in the
words following; where, replying to those who pretended obscurity in the
Scriptures read to them. -- Quaenam ea obscu^itus? says he. Dic, quaeso, annon
sunt historiae? Nostine [i.e. have you already sufficiently learnt those
things] quae sunt clara and dilucida [i.e. that you cannot deny to be so]; ut
de iis, quae sunt obscura, perconteris [i.e. afterward]? Historiae
innumerabiles sunt in Scripturis [i.e. very plain]. Dic mihi unam ex illis. etc.

Ib. l. ult. And, for the finding out the sense of Scripture without the help
of Infallibility, I have produced more out of Antiquity in this Discourse. He
might also as truly say; or without the help of Church Authority, He proceeds.

Page 278. l. 2. Than he, or his whole party will be able to answer. Of this
let the Reader judge. Mean while let us remember the Apostle's advice Phil.
2.3. Nihil per inanem gloriam.

Page 279. l. 10. I dare appeal to any person, whether the Bishops deriving
their authority from Christ or from the Pope, be the better way of defending
their power. These two do well consist; as also does an English Bishop's
deriving his authority from Christ, and from the Metropolitan, and his Synod.

Page 280. l. 1. If there be any other Power beside the Pope's in the Church,
the denying the Pope's Authority cannot in the least diminish the just
authority of Bishops. To this, (nothing to N. O's Considerations) I say: Let
him perform his duty to Superior Councils, and to the Pope so far, as he is
obliged by the Church-Canons; and, concerning any Controversy of other usurped
Authority, let him acquiesce, as a regular Son of the Church, in the Council's
Decisions, those as well of any of its latter Councils, (so lawful), as of the
former; and all is well.

Ib. l. 14. N. O's words. Which more Comprehensive Body in any dissent and
division of the Clergy according to the Church Canons ought to be obeyed. It
follows in N. O. and which has hitherto in her supremest and most generally
accepted Councils in all ages from the beginning required such submission under
penalty of Anathema. Which words, expressing more plainly what N. O. means by
the more comprehensive or universal Body of the Church's Hierarchy, the Dr
omits here; And it seems was willing to mistake his meaning by what he says
below, p. 283. -- That by the more universal Church N. O. fairly understands no
more, but the Church of Rome.

Ib. l. (8). I answer, that the Church of England in reforming herself did not
oppose any just authority then extant in the world.

Yes. The Church of England then reformed and changed several matters of
Doctrine against the Definitions of many former Superior Councils, which were
accepted and unanimously obeyed by the whole Body of the other Churches, viz.
by all those, that were free from the Mohammedan yoke, and, among those, by the
Church of England also till Luthers appearance; to which Definition, and
unanimous consent of these Churches in them, she stood obliged, as a part to
the judgment of the Whole: But many of which Doctrines also reformed by her
were and are still to this day believed and practiced by the Eastern Churches
also under the Mohammedan servitude, which he, who is curious to inform himself,
may see sufficiently cleared in the 3d Discourse Concerning the Guide in
Controversies, chapter 8.

This then, the departing, in their doctrine, of the two Metropolitan Churches
of England from the greater Body of these many Co-Metropolitan Churches, all
accepting and submittingto, the Decisions and Determinations of many former
superior Councils, even all those from the 2d Nicene, called the 7th General
Council, to that of Trent, to which Councils the Church of England was, and
still is, obliged, as well as the rest, and did also submit till the times of
Luther, is the Discession from the more Comprehensive and universal Authority,
and from the Holy Catholic Apostolic Church, (if any then extant), which
Catholics charge upon them. And perhaps it is the consciousness of the truth
of this discession, that makes this Author, in several places before, maintain
p. 242.
-- That the Church [he means Catholick] in any one or more ages since the
Apostles times may be deceived: and p. 241.
-- that, Universality in any one age of the Church, being taken without the
consent of Antiquity, is no sufficient Rule to interpret Scripture by: and
that, when he speaks of standing to the judgment of the Church, he declines
that of the present Catholic Church, unless joined with the judgment of the
Catholic Church of all ages past till that of the Apostles; to the constant
doctrine of all which, first proved to him, he is content to yield. See for
this what he says by and by p. 282.
-- But the Church thought otherwise of them. What Church, I pray? The
Primitive and Apostolical? that we have always appealed to, and offered to be
tried by. The truly Catholic Church of all ages? that we utterly deny to have
agreed in any one thing against the Church of England. And before p. 244. Let
(says he) the Popes Supremacy, etc be proved by as universal consent of
Antiquity as the Articles of the Creed are, and then let them charge us with
Heresy, if we reject them. And p. 259. Let the same evidences be produced for
the consent of the Vniversul Church from the Apostolicat times in the matters
in dispute between our Church and that of Rome, and that controversy of
Infallibility may be laid aside. Where, still, a proof not of the decision of
the Catholic Church in some latter age, but of the Consent of the Universal
Church from the Apostolical times is demanded for his yielding a submission to
it. Nor will the Judgment of the present Church be current with him for
deciding what was the Consent of the former: the judgment of this he reserves
to himself.

Page 281. l. 1. The dispute was then concerning the Pope's Supremacy over our
Church. The reforming Articles of the Church of England not only opposed this,
but many other Definitions of the former Church. But neither could they justly
reject this Supremacy, so far as it was by the Canons of former superior
Councils established. That only could be ejected that was unjustly usurped.

Ib. l. 11. Which is sufficiently known to have been the beginning of the
breach between the two Churches. The breach of the Church of England in the
Reformation was not only from the Communion of the Roman concerning the Popes
supremacy, but of the Gallican, Spanish, and all the other Occidental or
Oriental Churches in matters wherein they were united in the Resolutions and
Decrees of several former Councils. Where, or at what point, the Breach began
matters not so much, as where it ended; Or, the full charge, that the whole
breach contains.

Ib. l. 15. What should hinder our Church from proceeding in the best way it
could for the Reformation of it self? The Canons and Definitions of former
Superior Councils should hinder the Church from reforming any thing contrary
to them; as this Church did. It follows.

Ib. l. 17. For the Pope's Supremacy being cast out as an usurpation, our
Church was thereby declared to be a free Church. The Pope's Supremacy,
established by the Canons of the Church in Superior Councils, cast off? by
whom? It can by none lawfully, unless by Church-Councils of equal authority to
those that allowed it. The Church of England was thereby declared to be free.
Free: what, from the authority of superior Councils, and the Bishop of the
Prime Apostolic See presiding in them? By whom so freed? 1 By Itself, or by
the Governors of this particular Church; i.e. by one member, declaring against
the whole? or, 2 by the Secular Magistrate abrogating Church-Canons and
Constitutions, and Decisions made in Ecclesiastical and spiritual affairs?
Neither valid.

Ib. l. (6). Authority, to publish Rules and Articles. But, not contrary to the
Rules and Articles of Superior Councils.

Page 282. l. 3. His unjust power was cast off, and that first by Bishops, who
in other things adhered to the Roman Church. Their adhering in other things
justifyes not the Catholic Bishops for their breach in this. This Author well
knows, the first casting off the Pope's power began not at the Bishops; and he
has heard I suppose of their great Reluctance and Cromwell's negociations with
them, terrifyed upon the charge of having generally incurred a Praemunire; and
of their clause, to have saved themselves -- Quartum per legem Christi licet.

Ib. l. 17. We reject nothing but innovations, and reformed nothing but abuses.
By Innovations he means innovations established by the consent of the Universal
Church; from which he raifed his objection. And the same appears, by these his
words following. But the Church [i.e. the Universal Church then extant at the
Reformation] thought otherwise of them; those called Innovations: for if they
did not; why did the Reformers depart from the former Communion? To which he
answers thus -- What Church I pray? The Primitive and Apostolical? that we have
always appealed to and offered to be aried by. The truly Catholic Church of
all ages? That we utterly deny to have agreed in any one thing against the
Church of England, Here then, we see, his Appeal and retreat is from the
present Church Universal or its Councils, to the Primitive and Apostolical; and
to the truly Catholic Church of all ages. Well. If we ask now the Question,
Who shall judge, Whether the points which the Church of England reformed were
Innovatitions and Abuses, as these Reformers say; or Tradition Apostolical and
of the Primitive times, as the present Universal Church says; must not the
present Universal Church judge of it? As, who should judge between S. Austin
and the Donatists, whether Rebaptization or Non-rebaptization was Tradition
Apostolical (for, Tradition Apostolical both willingly admitted) but the then
present Universal Church? and that to be held for liquidum and eliquatum, which
it concurred in; and It held to have just authority to conclude all its
members; and those to be Heretical, that dissented from it? Might the Donatist
say still after this Council, as he here? What Church thought otherwise? or
thought Rebaptitization unnecessary? The Primitive and Apostolical, etc? That
we deny to have agreed against us in Non-Rebaptization. Meanwhile this Author
must either say the Church of England, in her Reformation opposing the then
present Universal Church, opposed a just authority then extant; contrary to
what he said but now p. 232.
: or; that the Authority of this present universal Church over England is not
just.

Ib. l. (6). The plain English of all is, the Church of Rome was against the
Church of England. If the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Reformation
was only opposed by the Roman Church; and between these two is all the quarrel;
why declines He, as the Reader may see he does, See Note on p. 280. l. (8).
the then present universal Church, viz.: the other Metropolitan Churches (not
only Western, but Eastern), distinct from the Roman? Namely the Metropolitan
Churches of France, Spain, Germany, etc and those of Italy also, that are under
other States than the Pope's all these as well as the Roman being against the
Tenants of the Reformation; and so the English Church too, till the time? If a
much major part of such Metropolitan Churches consenting in some doctrines
cannot conclude herein one or two dissenting from them, How could the
Donatist-Churches in Africa be concluded by the rest? Or, Dioscorus the
Patriarch of Alexandria and the Egyptian Churches by the Council of Chalcedon?
Had not the Donatists as fair a pretense to call all those that opposed them
the Roman Church, as this Author has? For, all these that agreed against them
were united under the Presidency of the Bishop of Rome; and with Stephen Bishop
of Rome, at first, was their main contest.

Page 283. l. 5. But does he undertake to make this good, etc. See Note on p.
280. l. (8). to avoid so frequent Repetitions.

Ib. l. 12. By the more universal Church he fairly understands no more but the
Church of Rome. This he will say, Whereas the words, he leaves out in his
quotation of N.O. name expressly the Church's most supreme and most generally
accepted Councils; and the Church of Rome is not there mentioned at all.

Ib. l. (4). For the first, [the Pope and the Councils of the Roman Church] we
owe no obedience to them. See Note on p. 281. l. 17. and l. (6). I hope, if the
Church of England owes no obedience to a Council of the Roman Church, yet it
does to a Patriarchal Council of the Occidental Churches.

Ib. l. (3). For the second [a General Council], there was no such thing then
in the world [at the coming of Luther] and therefore could not be opposed. No
more was that of Nice, or the other Three first Councils then extant in the
world; and yet I hope the Church of England then owed obedience to them. But,
their Definitions were then extant contrary to the Doctrine of the Reformation:
But, the unanimous consent of all the other Churches conforming in their belief
and practice to the decisions of former Councils was then extant. Which Consent
of other Western Churches was also testified in those very times in the Council
of Trent without the least pretended force used upon those Churches, as to the
most of the Protestant Tenants condemned there; as may appear to any one in
Soave's History of that Council: for, indeed, these Bishops voted in it what
things were their common practice before it: and the Definitions thereof as to
these points are Generally accepted and held in these Churches.

Page 284. l. 2. No Church has been more guilty of a violation of them, than
the Church of Rome. Were it so, How does this excuse you, that another is
faulty besides you?

Ib. l. 6. We are no enemies to the ancient Patriarchal Government of the
Christian Church. No enemies, is not enough, where we ought to be Subjects.

Ib. l. 12. And all Christendom would consent to a truly free and General
Council. If such Council were called, will you submit your judgment to its
definitions? I trow not. Let your obedience be showed to former lawful
Superior Councils, and it may be hoped, to the future. He goes on.

Ib. l. 14. Which we look on as the best expedient on earth, for composing the
differences of the Christian world, if it might be had.

You look upon it as the best expedient etc; but, take care to clog it with
such unpracticable conditions to be a right and current General one, as you
will be sure never to meet with any such expedient to compose your differences,
or to have your approbation for such. And from the complaints you make (such as
these which follow here) concerning those Councils that have been held, we may
expect, for these hereafter, defects abundant in those that are not for your
turn: Titular Patriarchs, or Popes Pensioners, or at the least Combinations of
interested Parties [ i. e. of an interest, in Controversies of Religion,
contrary to yours; as these judging, when met in Council, what they believed
and practiced before them]. And would not one think that the first four
Councils do hardly pass through your Sieve, when you speak thus to your
Adversary, Rational Account. p. 253. Have Pastors and Doctors met in
Ecumenical Councils in all ages? I would you could prove a truly Ecumenical
Council in any age? He proceeds.

Ib. l. 17. But we cannot endure to be abused by mere names of Titular
Prtriarchs with Combinations of interested Parties instead of General Councils.
You do well in this. But, not so, if you charge any such things on those former
Councils, whereof the more universal judgment of other Metropolitan Churches
clears them, in their accepting them for lawful and obliging; and conforming
in their belief and practice to their Decrees which general acknowledgment of
them supplies also any defect, that might have been in the management of them.

Ib. l. (3). If we then oppose so general a consent of the Christian Church let
them charge us with not submitting to all the Authority extant of the world.
And what then; when you are so charged? Then you will say, as you have said p.
241, 242
-- That the Church in any one or more ages since the Apostles times may be
deceived. And -- That universality in any one age without the Consent of
Antiquity [which Consent you, not It, shall judge of] is no sufficient Rule to
interpret Scripture by, nor consequently to decide the Controversies arising
therein.

Page 285. l. 6. And every free Church etc. See Note on p. 281. l. 1. It
follows.

Ib. l. 9. Has a sufficient power to reform all abuses within it self when a
more general consent cannot be obtained. But, not to reform any thing contrary
to such doctrines etc, to which a more general consent has already been
obtained in several Councils, that, before the Church was divided, were
generally received. A Metropolitan Church may have a sufficient power to reform
something without, but nothing contrary to, the Decisions or Canons of a
Superior Authority.

Ib. l. 14. How very pitiful an advantage can from hence be made by the
dissenting parties among us? For the advantages dissenting parties make hence,
see before Note on p. 180. l. 9. -- p. 263. l. 2. -- p. 271. l. (2). It follows.

Ib. l. (12). Who decry that Patriarchal, and ancient Government as
Antichristian which we allow as prudent and Christian.

But does this Author allow it as of Divine Institution, and necessary? I mean,
the Government of the Church by Bishops.

Ib. l. (9). N. O. says, my Principles afford no effectual way or means in
this Church of suppressing or convicting any Schism, Sect, or Heresy, or
reducing them either to submission of judgment or sil^nce: Therefore my
Principles are destructive to all Church Authority. Destructive to all
authority: N. O. makes no such Consequence. But the immediate words following
those cited by our Author are these. Princip. Consid. p. 98.
For, where both sides contend Scripture clear for themselves, the clearness of
such Scripture, how great soever on one side, can be made no instrument of
conviction to the other. Here therefore things must be prosecuted further than
Scripture, to a Dic Ecclesiae. And then, for the convicting and suppressing
such Heresies and Schisms this Church, appealed and complained to, must have
authority and infallibility, at least as to necessaries, to decide truly such
contests about the sense of Scripture, (which may happen to be in them); and
justly to punish with her censures, as the uses to do, those that are
Heretics, i. e. dissenters from her definitions; and so preserve the Church in
the unity of the true Faith; things denied to it by the Dr.

Ib. l. (2). The design of my Principles was to lay down the Foundations of
faith, and not the means of suppressing heresies.

But his Principles, laying down the foundations of Faith, if good, must be
such as consist with the foundations of Peace also, and with the means of
suppressing Heresies. And, to his Instances I say, Aristotle may be justly
blamed for his Logic; or Hippocrates for his Aphorisms; if the one be found
to contain any thing contrary to Civil Government; or the other to the College
of Physicians.

Page 286. l. (2). We are sure the mere authority of their Church has been no
more effectual means [of suppressing sects] than that of ours has been. p.
136. where, being pressed, that the subjects of the Roman Church, however their
other private opinions may differ, do all submit their judgments to the
determinations of her Councils, which takes away all Divisions in her as to
such matters, this being not so in the Church of England, he has these words
-- I do not say, that the Church of Rome has no advantage at all in point of
Unity; but, that all the advantage it has comes from force and fraud [viz.
such force as the Council of Niee used to its subjects viz. Anathemas to
Dissenters]. And -- We do not envy them the effects of tyranny and deceit. It
is the Union of Christians we contend for, and not of Slaves or Fools. And -- I
freely yield that they have a juster pretense to Unity without Truth, than we.
Where, this effect, a greater Unity, is granted by him; but, that this is
without Truth; is denied by us. But, Scriptures are so clear in all
necessaries, that none, of what condition soever, using their right endeavor
to understand them, can mistake: 2. And again; that there is no other
Infallible Judge to determine certainly any sense of Scripture in such
necessaries where it is controverted; nor, which may require submission of
judgment from their subjects to their sentence; and so, the people left to
their own judgment; one man, upon using, as he thinks, a just endeavor, being
confident of one sense of Scripture plain to him, another of the contrary,
which judgment of particulars the Church, fallible, has no power to sway or
correct; Nor, on the other hand the Scripture does decide to them at all, on
which side it is clear; Here, we say, is left no effectual way (which yet
always the Church must have; one, or other for clearing and purging itself of
Heresies and Schisms), by which the opinion of either of these, and so of any
Sect of them erring in some necessary points, or by which any Heresy, may be
suppressed, or the persons so persuaded severed from the Church's Communion;
and so the Principles must be unsound, that infer such Consequences.

Apostolicalness of a former Tradition, or the legitimacy of a former Council,)
what doctrine is true and Apostolical; and to Anathematize all Dissenters;
whereby she either reduces Sectarists, if submitting to her judgment, or
separateth them from the Church, if opposing it. And such way accords very well
with our Lords -- Sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and. Publicanus: Mat. 18.17 2 Cor.
10.6. Tit. 3.10.
and with S. Paul's -- In promptu habens ulcisci omnem inobedientiam; and --
Haereticum hominem devita, because (...) self-condemned. [i.e. as Dr Hammond on
the place, his very (...). being a spontaneous (...) excision from, and
disobedience to, 1 Timothy 1.23. 2 Timothy 2.17. Jo. 2.10, 11. 1 Co. 5.13, 6 Tit.
1.11.
the Church]. And -- Tradidi Satanae, ut discant non blasphemare -- quorum
sermo, says he serpit ut cancer. And with his -- Auferte malum ex vobis ipsis,
Because Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit. And -- Quos [inobedientes and
seductores] oportet (...), because else universas domos subvertunt. [And
indeed, where liberty is unrestrained, it is a folly to think any will hold,
that will not also speak of, an opinion]. And again accords well with S. John's
-- Non Ave ei dixeritis: And -- Vt non communicetis operibus ejus malignis. The
like to which we find in the law of Moses; Deuteronomy. 17.12. etc. -- Qui autem
superbierit, nolens obedire sacerdotis imperio etc. ex decreto judicis morietur
homo ille. And -- Cunctus populus audiens timebit, ut nullus deinceps
intumescat superbia [in his own opinion and judgment.] By such means it is,
that both the Unity of the Church's Faith is always preserved; and no Sects or
Heresies permitted within her to disturb her Peace, or further infect her
Children. See before, Note on p. 263. l. 2.

Page 287. l. 2. There is another means they use which is far more effectual,
viz. the Inquisition. An effectual (however justifiable) means Catholics have
besides, and without, the Inquisition, confessed, I think, by this Author's
former words quoted before Note on p. 286. l. (2.)
. And this means of the Inquisition, however effective, the most of the
Catholic Churches do not, or have never used. But here the Reader may observe,
How this Author in stead of refuting, or mentioning here N.O's effectual means
so often inculcated in his Considerations on his Principles, and but now
repeated, hooks in the Inquisition, as a more plausible subject wherewith to
entertain and amuse his Protestant Reader.

Ib. l. 5. God keep us from so barbarous and diabolical a means of suppressing
Schisms. Barbarous, and diabolical? If this Author's judgment should happen not
to be right here, let him consider what an account he is to give for these
words and his following Raillery so liberally inveighing against Church
Authority. There will always many be offended (because many faulty, and all,
lovers of liberty) with a strict Government, and such as executes the laws, in
Church or State. And so did the High-Commission-Court here displease especially
the Sectarists. It concerns not N.O. to abett the Inquisition; yet, barring
here particular personal Acts, all which no Religion undertakes to justify, in
its subjects, I see no great cause why this Author should be so incensed
against it, so long as the delegated power to these extraordinary Officers in
proceeding against Heretics does not transcend that, which by the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church belongs to the ordinary Judges thereof: and, if
what these act according to these Canons be not just, the Canons, not they, are
therein culpable. Of the Equity of which Canons surely the Councils that made
them are more proper and abler Judges, than this Author, or my self. All the
severity of this extraordinary Office lies in putting these Canons in execution
when the ordinary Curators thereof neglect it; and that in such a Church or
State where an endeavor is used rather to prevent Heresy thereby (which, as
the Apostle says, serpit ut cancer, and, corrumpit ut fermentum) when a few
only as yet are infected therewith, and may happen to suffer; than to pluck it
up, where it has taken any deep and long root, and is grown very numerous. As
for the fire and faggots our Author brings in by and by; what temporal
punishments are inflicted on such offenders, are so by the order and authority
of the Prince, to whom in such place belongs the temporal sword. And, for the
Justice that may be showed in such punishments (if it may not be called Mercy
rather to Christianity in General; especially, where the Heresy is discovered
pernicious to Godliness, or also blasphemous against the Deity, and when by it
greater mischief is thought done to men's Souls, than by Thieves or robbers to
their estates or lives), the example herein of Protestant Princes also may be
produced to warrant it: and several such Heretics here in England have been
put to death; and more condemned to be so, both in King Edwards, Queen
Elizabeth's, and King James his days.

Page 288. l. (4). It is truly said of Pope Paul 4. etc. Men's Words are not to
be put upon the rack. If Paul 4. said this, we see the contrary: viz. the
Authority of the Roman See maintained where is no Inquisition. It is true that
Paul the 4th, as also Philip the 2d King of Spain relied much on the diligence
of these extraordinary Officers as an effective way of suppressing Heresy; but
it must be in a Church not much infected herewith; and where the delinquents
are as yet not numerous.

Page 289. l. (2). Which made one of the Inquisitours in Italy complain, etc.
This Busdragus his letter to I know not what Cardinal of Pisa my small skill in
books knows not where to find. But the Inquisition in Italy being only in the
Popes Dominions, never noted to have abounded much with Lutherans, and that
only executed on Natives, who having been sometimes Catholics are revolted,
the matter which our Author has taken out of it, viz. that in forty years,
there, an hundred thousand persons had been destroyed for Heresy, i.e. 2500 per
annum, which is a number more suitable to the justice of a Battle, than of a
Court of Inquisition, (whereas in that small state, the execution of the tenth
part thereof for what crimes soever will hardly pass for a truth); and, again,
that since this depopulation (if I may so call it) Heresy, there, is extremely
strengthened and increased, are things so notoriously incredible, as, though
some person might have the imprudence to write it (which I will not question,
because the Dr says it) yet He might have chosen some currenter matter
elsewhere, than quoted it.

Page 290. l. 10. But we recommend, as much as they can do, to the people the
virtues of Humility, Obedience, due submission to their spiritual Pastors and
Governors. N.O. complains to be neglected, by Protestants, and which is
necessary for curing sects and schisms, is more than this Author here mentions
or will allow, viz; (to give you it in N.O's own words) -- That it is necessary
to recommend (especially to the illiterate and less intelligent common sort of
people) Humility, Princip. Consid. p. 99
Obedience, and submission of Judgment to their spiritual Pastors and
Governors, whom our Lord has ordained by due succession to continue to the
end of the world on purpose to expound the Scriptures, and out of these to
teach them all Necessaries for their salvation, and to keep them stable and
fixed from being tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, that
capricious fancies may imagine there, or malicious pretend; Necessary, to
inform them that are to learn of these Pastors the true sense of Gods Word,
according to former Church-Tradition; and that they are to rest in their
judgment [as Dr Field hath] and follow their faith ( as the Apostle Heb. 13.7.
); that they may not usurp their Office, etc. Lastly, that, supposing these
Guides also should err, yet it is better for them still that all err one
error, which is the error of their Guides; because there will be at least
some unity and peace in that, and some excuse for the error of Inferiors; yea
also in probability, more verisimilitude; than that every one should err a
several, and his own error, to the utter ruin of Peace, and a greater
deviation from Truth. But that which our Author has changed here, and in
stead of submission of judgment put only in general terms due obedience and
submission, and this due to be stated, as I apprehend, not by these Governors,
but those that owe it, leaves all Sects still to enjoy their own tenants, how
absurd or impious soever, and with these also to enjoy the Communion of the
Church, notwithstanding a due submission called for by it. So that its subjects
are still left to be tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine that blows,
though, the Apostle says, God has appointed Governors to prevent it; nor are
tied to follow the Faith of their Guides, as the Apostle requires; nor to learn
the sense of Scripture, where this is disputed, from those whom our Lord has
appointed to teach it them. So that, notwithstanding this latter defense made
here by this Author, I see no reason but that I may conclude these Notes on his
Reply, as N.O. does his Considerations on his Principles.

That, since it is the Church's Authority that must rectify such diversity of
Opinions, for the attaining unity and peace in the points controverted, this
Authority is necessary in the first place to be established, in stead of
leaving every fancy to perspicuity of Scripture. And that the prudent may
consider, whether the authority of a Church must not necessarily be much
debilitated and brought into contempt, and daily like to wane more and more,
where such a new way is taken up of its Defense, that he thinks himself its
best Advocate and Pleader of its cause, who does most endeavor to set forth
the defects and failings of all Ecclesiastical Societies, Prelates, and
Councils, [in which office I appeal to the candid and equal Reader whether
this Author has not in this Discourse vigorously employed his Pen]; and who
best proves no Scripture-Promises made to them: Nay, where, to the end to
evacuate the Infallibility of any Society or Church in Necessaries, is set up a
Counter-Lay-Infallibility of private men, if only sincere endeavourers, for
understanding Holy Writ, in all the same Necessaries. Where therefore such new
Maxims are still spread abroad and received with applause (which were first
made more current and common by Mr Chillingworth, forced to it as the last
refuge left to shelter him from Obedience to a just Church Authority) it is no
great wonder if the broachers of new Sects. and extravagant fancies in
Religion, the Contemners of Church Authority, and of the Clergy, (who first
contemned and vilified themselves) do daily in such parts so exceedingly
multiply and increase. Sed Tu, Pastor Bone,, adduc istas oves perditas in Ovile
tuum; ut vocem tuaem audiant: and fiat unum Ovile, and unus Pastor. Amen.

Page 290 l. ult; Dr St's Conclusion. I have thus far considered the main
Foundations, upon which N.O. proceeds in opposition to my Principles, there is
now very little remaining which deserves any notice: and that which seems to do
it, as about Negative Articles of Faith, and the Marks of the true Church, I
shall have occasion to handle them at large in the following Discourse. I have
perused his following Discourse in Vindication of the Protestants Grounds of
faith and find nothing answered to what N.O. has objected p. 76. concerning
the Protestants Negative Articles of Faith; or has urged p. 86. concerning the
Marks or evidences by which among many pretenders, that Church may be known;
from which known we are to learn Truth. But I wonder not at it, since in this
Discourse pretending to answer N.O's Considerations; no reply is returned to a
greater part of them: Nor the arguings in his Principles justified, where they
are by N.O. questioned. Which perhaps may be the reason, why he says here
only, that he has thus far considered the main Foundations upon which N.O.
proceeds: the Structure it self remains yet unconsidered: and, as for his
digging here at the Foundation, it has been but lost labor; If the Church be
a sure Foundation, N.O's must stand.

FINIS.

