CONSIDERATIONS ON THE COUNCIL OF TRENT: BEING The Fifth Discourse, CONCERNING
The GVIDE in CONTROVERSIES

By R. H.

1 Pet. 3.15. -- Parati semper ad satisfactionem omni poscenti vos Rationem.

2 Cor. 6.8. -- Per infamiam, and bonam famam; Ut seductores, and Vcraces.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXI.

The Preface.
IN the former Discourses concerning the Guide in Controversies, as also, in
the Beginning and Conclusion of this present, I have endeavored to persuade a
necessicy of Obedience to a lawful Church Authority from these weighty
Considerations, whereon seem to be built the Unity, and the Peace of Christian
Religion. 1 First, That, However the Holy Scriptures are a Rule sufficient; yet
not, in respect of all capacities, a Rule so clear, but that the true sense of
them is by several Parties much disputed; and that in points of Faith necessary
to be known; And therefore, as to these, need of some other Guide for the
direction of Christians in this true Sense. 2 That there is contained in these
Scriptures a Divine Promise, and that not Conditional, but Absolute, of
Indefectibility, or not erring in Necessaries, made to the Church-Catholick of
all Ages: To It, not only Diffusive, (some or other, Persons, or Churches,
always not to err in necessaries;) but, as a Guide; or, to the Guides
thereof. 3 Again; That the Catholic Church throughout ^he whole World is but
One, ever contradistinct to all other Communions Heretical, or Schismatical:
And, its Governors and Clergy, however dispersed through several Nations,
regulated by the same Laws; and straightly linked together in a due
subordination; whereby the Inferiors are subjected to the Superiors, and a Part
to the Whole, in such manner; as that these Laws, observed, admit of, or
consist with, no Schisms, Divisions, or contradicting Parties, after any past
Declaration of the Church. 4 That, in this Subordination, no inferior Clergy (
Person, Church, or Council,) when standing in any opposition to their
Superiors, can be this Guide to Christians: But only the Superior, whether
Person, or Council: and, in a Council not wholly unanimous, the major Part,
joined with the Sea Apostolic. The major part; whether those present in the
Council, and decreeing matters in debate, or those absent, and accepting their
Decrees: A regular obedience, in any contradiction, thus ascending to, and
acquiescing in, the sentence of the most supreme in present actual being. That
also, these subordinations of Church Governors are so commonly known; and by
the learned on all sides acknowledged, that even a Plebeian, following this
line, though amidst so many Sects calling him hither, and thither, and all
offering to show him the right way, cannot mistake his true Guide. 5 That, from
this present Guide thus discovered, All are to learn, both as to the true sense
of Holy Scriptures; and, of Antiquity, or former Church-Tradition, and also the
legalness of former Councils, etc. (when any of these are controverted and
questioned,) the Resolution of that, which they ought to believe, and adhere
to, so far as its Determinations have prescribed to their Faith. And, the more
important any point is, that they are hence the more strictly obliged to the
Declarations of this Authority, because here more danger in their mistake. That
here; if we grant an Infallibility of this Guide in Necessaries (which is amply
proved) this binds its Subjects to an universal acceptance of its Decrees,
lest, perhaps in some Necessary, their Faith should miscarry. Or, this Guide
supposed Fallible, (which presupposes in such matters some obscurity in the
Rule) yet neither thus, are the bonds of their obedience any way relaxed, since
their own fallibility is much grearer: And if, in following such a learned and
prudent Conduct, they are exposed to some error, yet so, to much more, and more
gross, by following their own. Of the mischief of which Self-conduct the many
modern, most absurd Sects, and especially the Socinians, are a dreadful
Example. Who very inquisitive, and laborious, and critical, as to the Holy
Scriptures, yet, by throwing off the yoke of a legal Church Authority, are, by
the Divine just judgment, delivered up to most Capital, and Desperate errors,
and those running through the whole Body of Divinity. 6 That none, in the
resistance of Authority, can be secured by following his Conscience; (though
always obliged to follow it,) when It, culpably, misguiding him; and in the
information whereof he has not used necessary diligence. 7 That, where such a
weighty Church Authority (I speak of the most supreme, to which the Churches
Subjects may apply themselves) so highly authorized, and recommended to us by
our Lord, sways on the one side, and only Arguments and Reasons, relating to
the matter in Agitation, but all these short of certainty, on the other, here a
sober and disinteressed Judgment cannot but pass sentence; that it is safer to
submit to the first of these, than rely on the second. And then; so often, the
following our reasons and private opinion, and deserting Authority, becomes
acting against our Judgment and Conscience, and the forsaking our private
Reason, acting according to it. 8 That thus; at least, all those, who have a
contrary persuasion to Authority, but short of certainty; ( i. e. all
illiterat, and plebeians, unable to examine Controversies; or also learned,
that after examining them, are left still in some doubt, which two sorts will
comprehend the most Christians) are engaged, in Conscience, to yield their
assent to the Decisions of this Authority. 9 That an absolute and Demonstrative
Certainty indeed, wherever it is, is exempted from all such obedience to
Authority, as shall require submission of Judgment, and Assent: But, that such
a Certainty is very difficultly attained, in matters Intellectual, and
abstracted from sense; more difficultly yet, in those Spiritual, and Divine;
especially, such Divine and Spiritual matters, where Church Authority, i. e. so
numerous a Body of learned and prudent men, discern little reason for that we
pretend Certainty of, and so much against it, as that they declare the contrary
for certain. To which may be added the frequent experience of our own weakness,
when, by more study, and better weighting, and comparing contrary Reasons, we
come to doubt of the truth of several things, wherein, formerly, we thought our
selves most fully satisfied. 10 That, supposing such a Certainty attained; and
so obedience of Assent justly repealed; yet, if this be of a Truth of no great
importance or consequence (of which great importance too, as well as of the
truth it self, they are to be certain,) here still, another Obedience, viz.
that of silence, or Non-contradiction, ties us fast, and rests still due, and
payable to Church Authority: And so, these Certainists, or Demonstrators,
become, at least, tonguetied, and constrained to stand single; and disinabled
to father, or beget, Sects. 11 Or, in the last place, if this also Certain,
that it is a Truth of great concernment, and the Error of the Church-Guides
therein not only manifest, but Intolerable, and so they here obliged also, to
break this second obedience, silence, and to publish such truth: Yet remain
they still fettered with the Bonds of a third Obedience; I mean Passive, in a
meek submittance to the Church's Censures. And, if they shall happen to be
excommunicated by the Church, and externally disjoined from its Society, yet is
it by no means lawful for them, after their publishing new Doctrines, to
proceed also to erect a new Altar, or Anti-Communion, against it: But,
patiently undergoing its sentence, and longing for their peaceable restorement
to the former Catholic Communion (which is always but One, and may not be
divided,) they are to expect, from God, the vindication, of his Truth; and
their Innocence: Which so long as any suffers for, he remains still internally
a member of this former Society, from which externally he is excluded. Now by
this third Obedience, if the Churches Faith in some manner suffers, yet its
Unity at least will remain unviolated, and not divided, or torn, by Schisms.
These things I have endeavored to represent, and persuade to the pious Reader
in the former Discourses; as also, in the beginning and conclusion of this
present Work, have further pressed them. Now, from such a submission to a legal
Church Authority once gained, the same is rightly demanded to that of Trent, if
this Council proved Legal: And then, by this Council, once received and
submitted to, is an end put to the most, and chiefest, of the modern
Theological Controversies, and present Church-distractions. This, then, is the
Task of the following Discourse: Of which I implore the Divine Majesty for a
prosperous success, only so far, as it maintains a right, and just, Cause; and
so commit the Reader to the gracious Illuminations of his Holy Spirit.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
Protestant-Objections against this Council. OBjected by Protestants, 1. That
the Council of Trent was not a General Council,. 3. 2. That, not Patriarchal,.
4. 3. That, not Free and Legal, in its Proceedings,. 5. 4. That, Several of its
Decisions are without, or contrary to, Scripture, to Primitive Tradition; and
Tyrannically Imposed,. 6. 5. That the Decrees of this Council touching
Reformation were merely Delusory,. 6. n. 2.


CHAP. II.
Some General Considerations pre-posed. 1. Of Inferior Councils. The due
Subordination, and other Regulations, of them.. 9. 1. The several Councils, at
least so high as the Patriarchal, to be called, and moderated, by their
respective Ecclesiastical Superiors, or Presidents; and nothing to be passed by
them, without his; or by Him without their, consent,. 10. 2. No Introduction,
or Ordination, of Inferior Clergy to be made without Approbation, or
Confirmation of the Superior,. 11. 3. Differences between Inferiors, upon
Appeal, to be decided by Superiors; and those of higher persons, and in greater
Causes, by the Bishop of the first See.. 12. (where, concerning his contest,
about this, with the Africans.. 13. n. 2.) Yet; that no persons, or Synods,
coordinate might usurp authority, one over another: Nor all Causes ascend to
the Highest Courts; and, many, without troubling the Synod, in its Interval, to
be decided by its President,. 14.
4. Obedience, in any dissent happening amongst Superiors, to be yielded to the
Superior of them. The Concessions of Learned Protestants, touching the
Precedents,. 16.
5. No Addresses, or Appeals, permitted, from the Superior Ecclesiastical, to
any secular, Judge, or Court,. 20. Where, That the Church, from the beginning,
was constituted a distinct Body from the Civil State,. 21. And, what seem to be
her Rights and Privileges, (as so distinct.). 22.



CHAP. III.
2. Of Councils General. 1. The necessary Composition of them considered with
relation to the Acceptance of them Absents,. 35. This Acceptance in what
measure requisite,. 39.
2. To whom belongs the Presidentship in these Councils,. 45. 3. And Calling of
them,. 47.

CHAP. IV.
I. Head. Of the Generality, and just Authority of the Council of Trent. 1.
That the Western Churches, and particularly, that of England, are not freed
from the subjection to this Council, though it were not General; if,
Patriarchal,. 53. 2. Or, if only so General, as those times were capable of,.
65. 3. That it is not hindered from being General, by reason of the absence of
the Greek Churches,. 66. 4. Nor by reason of the absence of the
Protestant-Clergy.. 67.

CHAP. V.
5. That this Council is not hindered from being General, by the absence of the
Roman Catholic Bishops of some Province, or Nation,. 69. Where, 1. Of the
reason of the Paucity of Bishops in some Sessions. 70. 2. Of the Ratification
of the Acts of those Sessions by the fuller Council under Pius,. 75. 3. Of the
Acceptance of the whole Council by the absent Prelacy,. 77. And particularly;
Concerning the Acceptance thereof by the French Church. Ib.

CHAP. VI.
6. That the Generality of this Council is not prejudiced, by its being called
by the Pope,. 80. 7. Nor by reason of, 1. The pretended Non-generality of the
Summons,. 82. 2. Or, Non-freedom of the Place,. 83. 3. Or, the want of
Safe Conduct,. 92. Where concerning the Doctrine imputed to the Roman Church,
That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics,. 93. And of the practice of the
Council of Constance.. 101.


CHAP. VII.
8. That this Council is not rendered illegal, by the Oath of Bishops taken to
the Pope,. 105. 9. Nor yet by the Bishop's, or Pope's, being a Party, and
Judges in their own Cause. 113. 1. Not by the Bishops their being Judges, Ib.
Where, Of several ways of judging Ecclesiastical Controversies, justly
rejected. 118.
2. Nor, by the Pope's being Judge.. 122.

CHAP. VIII.
II Head. The Invalidity of such a Council, as Protestants demanded. The
Protestant-Demands,. 127. The unreasonablness of these Demands,. 132. Where, Of
the fruitlesness of many Diets (framed according to Protestant-Proposals) to
decide their Controversies.


CHAP. IX.
III Head. Of the Legalness of the proceeding of this Council. 1. That a
Council may be Legal, and Obligatory, in some of its Acts, 2. That no Decree
concerning Faith was passed in this Council, where any considerable party
contradicted,. 128. 3. That there was no need of using any violence upon this
Council for the condemning of the Protestant Opinions; in condemning which, the
Fathers of this Council unanimously agreed,. 150. 4 That no violence was used
upon the Council, for defining of Points debated between the Catholics
themselves,. 152. Where, Of the Councils proceedings, touching the chief points
in debate. Touching, 1. Episcopal Residency, Jure Divino,. 153. 2. Episcopal
Jurisdiction, Jure Divino,. 154. 3. The Popes Superiority to Councils.. 155.
That these three Points of Controversy, however stated, are of no great
advantage to the Reformed,. 156.
5. That no violence was used upon the Council, for hindering any just
Reformations.. 157.

CHAP. X.
6. That no violence was inferred upon the liberty of the Council, as to the
defining any thing therein, contrary to the General Approbation, By, 1. The
Popes Legates proposing the things to be handled there,. 160. 2. The
Consultation made, in every thing, with the Pope,. 164. 3. The excessive number
of Italian Bishops,. 167. And, the not voting, by Nations, but by the Present
Prelates, 169. 4. The Popes giving Pensions,. 170. 5. And admitting Titular
Bishops.,. 171. 6. The Prohibition of Bishops Proxies to give Definitive votes.
172.

CHAP. XI.
IV. Head. Of the Councils many Definitions and Anathemas. 1. That all
Anathemas are not inflicted, for holding something against Faith,. 173. 2. That
matters of Faith have a great latitude: and so consequently, the errors, that
oppose Faith, and, are liable to be Anathematized,, 175. Where; Of the several
ways, wherein things are said to be of Faith,. 176.
3, That all general Councils to the worlds end have equal Authority in
defining matters of Faith: And, by the more Definitions, the Christian Faith is
still more perfected, 177. Where, Of the true meaning of the Ephesin Canon,
restraining Additions to the Faith,. 178.
4. That the Council of Trent prudently abstained from the determining of many
Controversies, moved there,. 184. 5. That the Lutherans many erroneous opinions
in matters of Faith engaged the Council to so many contrary Definitions,. 185.
6. That all the Anathemas of this Council extend not to mere Dissenters,. 186.
7. That this Council, in her Definitions, decreed no new divine Truth, or new
matter of Faith, which was not formerly such, at least in its necessary
Principles. Where, In what sense Councils may be said to make new Articles of
Faith, and in what, not. 192.
8. That the chief Protestant-Controversies; defined in this Council of Trent,
were so in former Councils, 198. 9 That the Protestant-Churches have made new
Counter-Definitions as particular as the Roman; and obliged their Subjects to
believe, and subscribe them,. 199. 10 That a discession from the Church, and
declaration against it^ Doctrines, was made by Protestants, before they were
any way straightened, or provoked, by the Trent Decrees, or Pius his Creed,. 202.

CHAP. XII.
V. Head. Of the Decrees of this Council concerning Reformation. 1. In matters,
concerning the Pope and Court of Rome. 1. Appeals,. 212. and Dispensations,.
215. 2. Collation of Benefices,. 218. 3. Pensions.. 218. Commenda's,. 219. and
uniting of Benefices, 220 4. Exemptions,. 221. 5. Abuses concerning
Indulgences, and Charities given to pious uses,. 223.
2. In matters concerning the Clergy. 1. Unfit persons many times admitted into
H. Orders, and Benefices,. 225. 2. Pluralities,. 232. 3. Non-Residence,. 235.
4. Neglect of Preaching and Catechizing,. 236. n. 2. 5. Their restraint from
Marriage; and Incontinency in Celibacy,. 238, 239. 6. Their withholding from
the people the Communion of the Cup,. 241. 7. Too frequent use of
Excommunication,. 243. n. 1. 8. The many disorders in Regulars and Monasticks,.
243. n. 2. 9. Several defects in the Missals, and Breviaries, 243. n. 3.


CHAP. XIII.
Solutions of the Protestant Objections. Brief Answers to the
Protestant-Objections, made before,. 3. etc. -- 247. etc. Where, Of the
Councils joining Apostolical Tradition with the Holy Scriptures as a Ground of
Church-Definitions,. 264.


CHAP XIV.
Considerations concerning a Limited Obedience to Church Authority. 1. Of the
pretense of following Conscience against Church Authority. Two Defenses against
obeying, or yielding assent to, Church Authority,. 271. 1. The necessity of
following our Conscience. 2. The certainty of a Truth, that is opposed by the
Church.
Reply to the first, That following our Conscience, when misinformed, excuses
not from fault,. 272. Three ways, whereby the Will usually corrupts the
Judgment or Conscience, and misleads it, as it pleases, in matters of
Religion. 1. Diverting the intellect to other employments, and not permitting
it at all to study and examine, matters of Religion. 274. 2. Permitting an
inquiry, or search, into matters of Religion: but this not impartial, and
universal, 275. 3. Admitting a free, and universal, search as to other points
controverted in Religion, but not as to Church Authority,. 277. Where, That the
Judgment may, and often does, oblige men to go against their own Opinions, and
seeming Reason,. 278.





CHAP. XV.
Consideration; For remedying the first Deceit,. 281. Where. Whether Salvation
may be had in any Christian Profession, retaining the Fundamentals of Faith,.
282.
For remedying the second Deceit,. 289. Where; That persons, not wholly resigned
to Church Authority, ought to be very jealous of their present opinions: and
indifferent, as Reasons may move, to change their Religion, Ib.
For remedying the third, 291. Where, 1. That the Illiterat, or other persons
unsatisfied, ought to submit, and adhere, to Church Authority,. 294. That
apparent mischiefs follow the Contrary,. 296.
2. That, in present Church Governors divided, and guiding a contrary way,
such persons ought to adhere to the Superiors, and those, who by their
Authority conclude the whole.. 298. 3. As for Church Authority past, such
persons to take the testimony, concerning it, of the Church Authority present,.
301. Yet, That it may be easily discerned by the Modern Writings, what present
Churches most dissent from the Primitive.. 302. Where; of the aspersion of
Antiquity with Antichristianisme,. 311



CHAP. XVI.
2. Of the pretense of Certainty, against Church Authority. Reply to the 2d
Defense, The pretended certainty of a Truth, against Church Authority,. 318. 1.
That it is a very difficult thing to arrive to a rational, and demonstrative
certainty, in matters intellectual; more, in matters Divine, and Spiritual; and
especially, in such Divine matters, where Church Authority delivers the
contrary for a certain Truth, Ibid. Instances made in four principal points of
modern Controversy: For which Church Authority is, by many Protestants,
charged with Idolatry, and Sacrilege,. 320. 1. The Corporal presence, and
consequently Adoration, of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist,. 321. 2.
Invocation of Saints, 322. 3. Veneration of Images, 323. 4. Communion in one
kind,. 324.

2 That such certainty, if in a Truth of small importance, though it cannot
yield an obedience of Assent to Church Authority, yet stands obliged still to
an obedience of silence.. 330, Conceded by Protestants,. 331. 3. That such
Certainty of a Truth, never so important, and necessary, (where also one is to
be certain, that it is so,) though it be supposed free from the obedience, of
Assent; and of silence; yet stands obliged to a third, a passive obedience, to
Church Authority, a peaceable undergoing the Churches Censures (though this be
the heaviest, Excommunication; and that unjust;) without erecting, or joining
to, any other external Communion, divided from it. Which third obedience only
yielded, preserves the Church from schism,. 332, 333.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE Council of Trent.
CHAP. I.
Protestant-Objections against this Council.
Objected by Protestants, 1. That the Council of Trent was not a General
Council.. 3. 2. That, not Patriarchal.. 4. 3. That, not Free and Legal, in its
Proceedings.. 5. 4 That, Several of its Decisions are without; or contrary to,
Scripture, to Primitive Tradition; and Tyrannically Imposed,. 6. 5. That the
Decrees of the Council touching Reformation were merely Delusory.. 6.


THE most General Councils that can be procured joined also with S. Peter's
Chair, Discourses Of the Guide in Controversies.
as the Supreme, and Final, Judge, and Decider, of Ecclesiastical
Controversies; And (of these Councils) That of Trent being, as the last, so,
particularly applied to the Examining and Determination of all those Points of
Difference, which have lateliest afflicted these Western Churches; so that, if
the Protestant Party could be induced to accept, and acquiesce in, its
Judgment, all modern Controversies of moment were ended; it seems necessary,
for perfecting the Design of the former Discourses, in the last place so far to
vindicate the Supreme, Legal, and Obliging Authority of this Council, from the
many Objections, which Protestants bring against it; as that the more moderate
among them may clearly see, that, if they are willing to submit either their
Judgment, or their Silence, to any such Council, as the present times of the
Church can afford, they have no just reason to deny it to this of Trent.

To manifest which, I will first set you down the chief Particulars, that are
ordinarily urged by the later Reformed Writers against It: And then, show you,
what, in the same Particulars, may be said for it: leaving both to your sober
Arbitrament; as in a matter which is of no less concernment to you, than the
settling of your Faith in so many weighty Points of Religion, as this Learned
and Wise Assembly has determined: About which Points others still remain
questioning, and disputing; Divided, as from the Church, so among themselves;
and incapable of a Remedy.

I wish you, in the Reading of this, accompanied with Soave's History, on the
one hand, and that of Pallavicino, on the other; to whom, for avoiding
tediousness; I shall often refer you. To the first, as an Author of much
Reputation with Protestants; and one, who, it seems, would let no Falficy pass,
prejudicial to their Interest. To the second, as One, who, though of an
opposite side, yet, contrary to Soave's practice, is careful, in matters of
Weight, to signify the Writings, from which he extracts his Intelligence; Nor
do I, herein, exact from a Protestant Reader more credit to him, that his
Margin, or other known History secures. Yet, if that be true, that Caesar
Aquilino, a Roman Catholic, and quoted for this by a late Protestant Writer
Stillingst. Rat. Account p. 481.
says of him. -- That he has done more disservice to the Church of Rome by
his Answer, than ever Father Paul [the unmasked Pietro Soave] did with his
History, I have reason from this also to hope, that what I shall have occasion
to cite out of him, will pass with the more credit, and better acceptance to a
Protestant Reader, since both the first, and second, of these Histories are
still pretended to advance their Cause. And, yet further, since the things,
wherein Aquilino says Aquilino, p. 95.
this disservice consists, are these -- Quod in illa Historia offendatur
Romanorum Pontificum fama: -- Haereticorum dictae enumerantur, and
amplificantur: -- Rixae, Contentiones and Scandala inter Catholicos, quae in
Concilio acciderunt, sigillatim referuntur [out of the Vatican Archives he
perused] -- Quae bona and recta [he means, advantageous to the Catholic Cause]
a Petro Soave enarrata, vel minuuntur, vol praetermittuntur, vel in
contradictionem vocantur; in all which Pallavicino seems only censured, for not
writing more cautiously, and partially, on the Roman side; 2 and for not
drawing the Council, and the Actions of it much fairer, and smoother, than the
Truth, in those secret Papers, and Records he consulted, did discover them; 3
lastly, for imprudently publishing, what the greatest Patrons of this Council
are said Soave, 7. l. Init.
to have hitherto, with the greatest Art, concealed, I shall, I say, the more
confidently for this make use of his Testimony, without any further Vindication
of his Veracity; desiring Protestants to make their advantages of an Author
reported so much assisting their Pretensions; and partaking so little of the
Arts of a Politician; and, that valued more the fidelity of an Historian, than
the promoting of the Roman, or his own, Interest; which Himself also sometimes
as freely professes, as they say, truly; observing -- That History is like a
Picture, then better, and more commendable, when it represents, not what is
fairest; but, what likest to the Original.

Luther's Reformation, and purposely disallowing, and condemning it, very
solicitous, and diligent have the Reformed likewise been in multiplying
Arguments against it. Especially, they being assisted with the History thereof
delivered by Petro Soave Polano, i. e. as is supposed by Protestants, Father
Paul, a Venetian Friar. Yet, indeed, against whose sincerity in composing this
work, there seem not wanting many real Exceptions; if you please to consider
with me,

Venice, and the Pope; and then also, was engaged in Writings against the
Pope's Proceedings; whence he may be suspected, in this work also, to have been
too much biassed by a contrary Interest.

Pallavicino, referring, herein, to the Records of this Council, extant in
several places, and to many other Writings sufficiently common, of such
Persons, as were Members of the Council, or publicly employed in its Affairs,
(the Names of which he sets down in his l. 18. c. 10. n. 14. and out of which,
he says, he compiled a good part of his own work): yet, none of which
Writings, (as he collects from several passages of his History) had come to
Soave's view.

Author lies under no suspicion of Error, as to the matter related; yet seems
he frequently very culpable as to the Colors, he lays upon it. For, whereas no
action can be for its substance so good, but that it may be vitiated, and
change its nature from several Circumstances, so often as it is done out of an
ill intention, or for some impious end, of Policy, Ambition, Covetousness, or
the like; Nor, again, scarce any Truth can be, in its own light, so clear, and
evident, but that some Very similities may be ranged on the other side, to
obscure, and cloud it; this Author, for the first of these, through the course
of his History, may be observed (contrary to the Modesty which is particularly
proper to H^storians) to asperse, and blemish the most specious, and candid
actions of those (though the most sacred Persons) whose interests he
disfavours, with some or other uncharitable Gloss upon them; and to represent
the fairest fruit they bear, still worm-eaten with some corrupt Design, or
malignant Intention; for which a bare possibility thereof seems his sufficient
warrant to affirm it. And again, for the second; constantly after each Session
of this Council, He, under the Mask of the vulgar talk, and common Fame, takes
liberty to sum together all that, which he apprehends may any way disparage the
precedent Decrees; and that which perhaps never entered into any ones, save his
own, fancy.

Spalato had an intimate Acquaintance; and of whom also he gives this Character
(in the Preface to the first Edition of this History, London, 1619. which
Preface is omitted in the latter, as some think, because it too manifestly
discovers the Historians Dis-affection to those, whose actions he relates):
That he lived so in the Roman Captivity, as to guide himself by a right
Conscience rather, than the common Customs: That he had a great Zeal to the
purity of Religion, against such unexcusable [ i. e. Roman] depravations
thereof; That he abhorred those, who defended the Church of Rome's abuses, as
holy Institutions; and professed, Truth, wherever found, was to be embraced;
That this his work was only known to him, and some others, his great
Confidents. From which, as also from some Extracts out of his Letters holding
correspondence with some French Hugonots (mentioned in Casoni's Preface to the
Second Volume of Pallavicino) may easily be gathered, that his Religion was
much-what of the same temper and complexion, with that of Spalatensis: Unless
perhaps we may think, that, after his writing this Book, he returned to a
better mind; and that, from this change, came that reluctance of his,
Spalatensis mentions Prefat. to Soave's History.
, for communicating this work; Nay, (as the same Bishop relates it) a Purpose,
to have quite suppressed, and made it away; Destinato ad essere sommerso dal
suo Genitore. Which thing as he imputes to his fear of some danger from it; so
Charity will rather judge, that it proceeded from remorse of Conscience; when,
in a pious reflection upon his former Conceptions, he discerned, that, in stead
of an History, he had brought forth a Satyr, against Gods Truth, and his
Church, and the most Supreme, and Sacred of those Governors, whom our Lord
himself had appointed over It, and Him. However, This his History has not so
far corrupted the truth of Affairs, as not to contain in it many Evidences,
very advantageous to the Catholic Cause; and so much remains sound in it, as
may serve very well to confute that which is vitiated; and in the main things,
that are charged against the Pope, and Council, (especially concerning the
Councils Liberty), this History is found as it were, to destroy it self, by its
own Contradictions. A thing, which, observed by Phil. Quorlius an Italian
Doctor, produced his Book entitled;, Historia Petri Soavis ex Authorismet
assertionibus consutata. This account, in my entrance, I thought fit to give
you of this Author, that you may see what just credit, on such a Subject he
deserves, out of whose Quiver the Reformed have taken most of those arrows,
with which they seek to wound this Council. The chief of which I shall first
summarily relate to you, and so proceed to its intended Defense.

Trent can no way truly be called a General Council, as it is styled by the
Romanists. 1.
a.
a Because it is necessary to the Generalness of a Council, that some be there,
and those Authorized, from all particular Churches. [See Archbishop Lawd, 27.
n. 3. where he quotes Bellarmine De Council. l. 1. c. 17.
for it,. 4. ut saltem.
] But none from the Eastern Churches were present in this of Trent, or so much
as summoned; or, afterward, approved, or consented unto, its Acts: And ^ the
number of the Bishops, b.
who were present from other Churches, was frequently so small, that in many
Sessions it had scarce 10. Archbishops, or 40, or 50 Bishops, present [Bishop
Lawd,. 27. n. 2.] And, That it had not so many Biships present at the
Determination of the weightiest Controversies concerning the Rule of Faith, as
the King of England could have called together in his own Dominions at any one
time upon a Months warning (B. Brambal, Vindic. c. 9. p. 247. And see what
Soave says to the same purpose, l. 2. p. 163.) Add to this, g.
g. That it was not lawfully called, so as General Councils ought, and used to
be; namely, by the Emperor, and other Christian Princes; but only by the Pope
[this was one of Henry the 8th's Pleas in his Manifesto's against it.] Lastly,
d.
d. That the Popes themselves, as many as lived in the time thereof, would never
consent, that this Council should be affirmed to represent the Universal
Church; prudently foreseeing, that if this were granted (as in the Council of
Constance it was) the Council, as being the whole, would put off its
subjection, and depend no longer on the Pope, that was but a part of it; nor
would need his confirmation to render it what it was before; viz. the
Representative of the whole Church [thus Dr. Hammond. Her. 11.. n 8, 9.] This
against its being a General Coucil.

Patriarchal Council, 2.
for the West. e
e Because from some Churches in the West, as from the Britannick, and some
other Reformed Churches, there were no Bishops present there; who also had just
cause for their not coming thither (B. Lawd, ib. n. 2.): neither can it justly
be pleaded, that they were Heretical, or Schismatical Churches, being never
condemned by any former Council (B. Brambal, Answer to Chalced. p. 351.) z. z.
And, of other Western Churches, (save only Italy) present very few; in all the
Sessions under Paul the 3d. but two Frenchmen; and sometimes, none; as, in the
sixth Session under Julius the 3d. (B. Lawd, ib. n. 2. ^.
) And Twice so many Bishops out of Italy present, as there were out of all
other Christian Nations put together, (B. Bramb. Vind. p. 247.) as appears at
the end of the Coucil; where the Italians are set down 187. and all the rest
make but 83. (B. Lawd,. 29. n. 2.) ^. ^
Neither was this Council, after its rising, fully acknowledged, or received,
by the Western Churches; nor, by the Britannick, and other Reformed Churches;
Nor, by the Gallican Church of the Roman Communion: And, Let no man say (says
B. Bramb. Vind. p. 248.) that they rejected the Determinations thereof only in
point of Discipline, not of Doctrine; for the same Canonical Obedience is
equally due to an acknowledged General, [I add, or other Superior] Council in
point of Discipline, as in point of Doctrine.

Free, and Lawful Council. 3.


1. l. Where the accusers, or the accused (take, l. 1.
whether you please) namely, the Pope, and the Bishops, persons of the same
persuasion, and communion with him, sat as Judges in their own cause; namely,
in a Question, of the Popes Supremacy, and of the corruptions of that Church
(see B. L.. 27, n. 1. and Henry 8. Manifesto's) m. m.
Especially Pope Leo in his Bull having declared and pronounced the Appellants
Heretics, before they were condemned by the Council.

2. n. Where was no security in the place of Meeting, n. 2.
for the Reformed party to come thither; nor where no form of Safe Conduct
could be trusted, since the cruel Decrees, and behavior of the Council of
Constance toward John Huss, though armed with a safe Conduct. x. Whither also,
x.
notwithstanding this, some of the Protestant party being come, yet they were
not suffered to propose, and dispute their cause: And again, p. Where, after
dispute, p.
(had it been granted them) yet they, if no Bishops, could not have been
permitted to have had any decisive vote with the rest; but must, after the
Disputation, have been judged, and censured by their Adversaries. 3.. Where all
the Members of the Council,. 3.
that had a vote, had takan an Oath of Fidelity to the Papacy; and none had
suffrage, but such as were sworn to the Church of Rome, and were professed
enemies to all that called for Reformation, or a free Council; (B. Lawd,. 27.
n. 1.) 4. s. s.1 4.
* Where nothing might be voted or debated in Council, but only what the Popes
Legates proposed; the Popes Commission running, Proponentibus Legatis; and s 2
* where nothing was determined, s2
till the Popes judgment thereof was brought from Rome, (himself not
vouchsafing to be present therein); and therefore, it was commonly said, that
this Council was guided by the Holy Ghost sent from Rome in a Male. 5. t. t. 5.
Where many Bishops had Pensions from the Pope; and many Bishops were
introduced, who were only titular; and B. Bramb. Vindic. of Chapter of Engl. p. 248.
diverse new Bishoprics also erected by the Pope, during the Council; all this
to enable therein the Papalines to over-vote the Tramontanes: and hence, such
an unproportionable number, there, of Italian Bishops.

v. Suppose the Council, in all these Objections, cleared; v. 4.
suppose it never so Ecumenical, and Legal; yet have the Reformed this
Reserve, after all, wherefore they cannot justly entertain it; * Because some
of the Decrees, and Definitions, are repugnant to the Holy Scriptures; or, at
least, not warranted by them, ph
ph This Council not regulating its proceedings wholly by the Scriptures, as
the Nicene, and other primitive Councils did; but holding Tradition extra
Scripturam a sufficient Ground of making Definitions in matter of Faith.
[Concerning which, thus Archbishop Lawd,. 28. -- The Scripture must not be
departed from in Letter, or in necessary sense, or the Council is not Lawful.
For the consent and confirmation of Scripture is of far greater authority, to
make the Council Authentical, and the Decisions of it, de fide, than any
confirmation of the Pope can be. -- Now the Council of Trent, we are able to
prove, had not the first, [but have departed from the Letter, and sense of
Scripture] and so we have no reason to respect the second. See likewise,. 27.
n. 1.] Where he asks -- How that Council is Legal, which maintains it lawful to
conclude a Controversy, and make it to be de fide, though it has not the
written word of God for warrant, either in express Letter, or necessary sense,
and deduction; but is quite extra, without, the Scripture? -- See also Mr
Stillingfl. p. 477, and 478.] -- ch, chapter
Or * Because some of its Decrees are repugnant to, or at least not warranted
by, Primitive and Apostolical Tradition Soave, p. 228.
. ^ And, in the last place, ^ Dr. Hammond of Her.. 11. n. 3, 7.
Because this Council has imposed Anathema's, in these, and in many other
slight matters (if truths,) upon all those, who shall dissent from, or at
least, who shall contradict, their Judgment in them; (this one Council having
made near hand as many Canons, as all the preceding Councils of the Church put
together:) Soave, p. 228.
and among these has added 12 new Articles to the former Creeds; * drawn up bp
Pius the 4th. according to the order of the Council Sess. 24. c. 12. de Refor.
and * imposed to be believed by all, who would enter into the communion of the
Church; contrary to the 7th. Can. of the Third General Council at Ephesus. All
these Articles Imposed too, as Fundamental; and to be assented to, as
absolutely, and explicitly, for attaining salvation, as the Articles of the
Creed; and so, that, in disbelieving any of them, it profits nothing to have
held all the rest of the Catholic Faith entire; which Articles are concluded,
there, as the Athanasian Creed, with an -- Haec vera Catholica Fides, extra
quam nemo Salvus See Archbishop Lawd, p. 51. -- Bishop Bramh. Vindie. of Church
of England, p. 23^.231. -- Reply to Chal^ed. p. 322. -- Dr. Hammond, Ars. to
Cath. Gent. p. 138. -- and to Schism Disarmed, p. 241. -- Dr. Fern,
Considerations touching Reformation, p. 45. -- Stillingfl. Rat. Accc^nt, p. 48,
etc.
So that (says Mr. Thorndyke Fpilog. Conclusion, p. 413.
) it was the Acts of this Council, that framed the Schism; because when as the
Reformation might have been provisional, till a better understanding between
the Parties might have produced a tolerable agreement, this proceeding of Trent
cut off all hopes of Peace, but by yielding to all their Decrees.

5. This for the Articles touching Doctrine. And next,. 6. n. 2.
For those of Reformation, which also are very numerous; and, 5
one would think, the more, the better: yet, these also are not free from their
complaints. o.
o. That these Decrees are mere Illusions; many of them of small weight; taking
Motes out of the eye, and leaving Beams. That the Council, in framing them,
imitated the Physician, who, in an Hectical Body, labored to kill the Itch:
That the Diseases in the Church are still preserved, and some Symptoms only,
cured. That; in some of more consequence, the Exceptions are larger, than the
Rule: And aa. aa.
That the Popes Dispensative power may null and qualify them, as he pleases.
(Thus Soave frequently.) That nothing of Reformation followed upon them, and
the most important things to that end could never pass the Council; and, it
ended, bb. bb.
great rejoicing in Rome, that they had cheated the world so, that that, which
was intended to clip the wings of the Court of Rome, had confirmed and advanced
the Interest of it Stillingfl. Rat. Acc. p. 480, 482.


Most of these Objections you may find, after Soave, urged; by Archbishop
Lawd,. 27, etc. and reinforced, in his Defense, by Mr. Stillingfl. p. 2. c. 8.
-- By B. Bramh. Vind. c. 9. -- By Dr. Hammond, of Her.. 11. and many others;
whether with more force, and advantage, than is here set down, I must desire
you to consult the Authors.

Exceptions, occurring in later Protestant-Writers against the Council of
Trent. Now I desire your patience to hear on the other side, what may be said
for it. Which Council, being, by reason of the subjection of the Clergy to so
many supreme and independent Princes, with so much difficulty convened; not
finally concluded till 18 years after its first sitting; interrupted by
sickness; interrupted by wars; managed under several Popes of several
inclinations; and under often-changed interests of most warlike, and rival
Princes, according to their several advantages or disgusts, who now sent, now
withdrew their Bishops, and desired to model its Decrees to the content of
their Subjects, and secular Peace in their Dominions; It must needs encounter
great diversity of Accidents, and not always retain the same face, security,
frequency, splendour, and reputation, nor the same purity, and dis-engagement
from secular affairs, and national obligations.

Again, * Sitting in the time, and for the composing, of the greatest, and the
most powerful (considering the engagement of the common people, as well as of
Princes) separation and division, that ever was in the Christian Church, which
departed also, from the former unity, in so many points of Doctrine and
Discipline, as never did any before; and * driving two main designs at once,
the reformation of manners in the Church, and its Governors; and the
confutation of errors in the Sectaries, It must needs be liable to many
Intestine, as well as External, affronts and hindrances from all sides; and,
in so many decisions, seem to some, to commit not a few oversights. But yet,
notwithstanding all these Intrigues, and all, that is produced against it, I
see not, but that both its Authority, and Integrity may be rationally and
justly vindicated.

Considerations upon it, for the more orderly proceeding in them, I shall
reduce to these Heads 1. Concerning the Generality, 1.
Liberty, and just Authority, of this Council, or of the persons constituting
it, to oblige the Churches Subjects; 2.
or especially, those of the West. 2. Concerning the Invalidity; and also,
probably, the uneffectiveness of such a General Council, as the Protestants, in
stead thereof; demanded;, and, as should be limited with all the conditions
they proposed. 3. Concerning the Legal Proceedings of this Council of Trent, 3.
especially as to those matters, which respect the Protestants. 4.
4. The many Definitions and Anathema's of this Council, and its pretended-new
Articles of Faith. 5.
5. Concerning the many Constitutions, and Acts of great consequence, passed in
this Council, and confirmed by the Pope, for the Reformation of several corrupt
practices, and disorders, observed in the Churches Government, or Discipline.

CHAP. II.
Of Councils inferior to General.
The due Subordinations, and other Regulations, of them,. 9.

1. The several Councils, at least so high as the Patriarchal, to be called,
and moderated, by their respective Ecclesiastical Superiors, or Presidents; and
nothing to be passed by them, without his; or by Him, without their, consent..
10. 2. No Introduction, or Ordination, of Inferior Clergy to be made without
Approbation, or Confirmation of the Superior.. 11. 3. Differences between
Inferiors, upon Appeal, to be decided by Superiors; and those of higher
persons, and in greater Causes, by the Bishop of the first See.. 12. (where,
concerning his contest, about this, with the Africans,. 13. n. 2.) Yet; that no
persons, or Synods, coordinate might usurp authority one over another: Nor,
all Causes ascend to the Highest Courts; and, many, without troubling the
Synod, in its Interval to be decided by its President,. 14.
4. Obedience, in any dissent happening amongst Superiors, to be yielded to the
Superior of them. The Concessions of Learned Protestants, touching the
Precidents,. 16.
5. No Addresses, or Appeals, permitted, from the Superior Ecclesiastical, to
any secular, Judge, or Court.. 20. Where, That the Church, from the beginning,
was constituted a distinct Body from the Civil State,. 21. And, what seem to be
Her Rights and Privileges, (as so distinct.). 22.

Council, assembled at Trent, It seems necessary, that I, first, give you a
brief account of some things more generally appertaining to these
Ecclesiastical Courts.

Of Councils then assembled, as need required, for deciding Controversies,
enacting Laws, and preserving the Peace of the Church Catholic, (which is but
one, throughout the world); there have been always used in the Church these
several Kinds, or Compositions, subordinate in Dignity, and Authority, one to
another, 1 Episcopal, or Diocesan; 2 Provincial, 3 National, 4 Patriarchal, and
5 Ecumenical, or General. Of which Councils the first Pattern, under the
Gospel, was that held at Jerusalem, Act. 15. A. D. 51.

Amongst these, the lowest Synod, or Ecclesiastical Council, for governing the
Church, was Episcopal, or Diocesan. (taking the word in its modern sense):
consisting of the Bishop of any particular Diocese, and his Presbyters; the
Bishop calling them together, and moderating the Assembly, the Actions and
Decrees, of which Synod were appealable from, and liable to the Judgment, and
Censure, of an higher Council.

The next Council was Provincial; consisting of all the Bishops of a Province
(in which were many Diocesses): called, and moderated, and its Decrees
executed, by the Metropolitan.

The next Synod (to whom also the Actions, and Decrees, of this Provincial were
subject) was National; consisting of the Metropolitans of several Provinces
with their Bishops; called, and moderated, by the chief Primate in such a
Nation; such were several of the Affrican Councils, and particularly, that held
under S. Cyprian, de Baptizandis Haereticis; there being of these Provinces or
greater Circuits, six in Afric; and so many Primates, or primae Sedis
Episcopi, of whom the Chief was the Bishop of Carthage.

The next, a Council Patriarchal; consisting of the Metropolitans, etc. of
diverse Kingdoms, and Countries, which were contained under the same Patriarchy;
this called, and moderated by the Patriarch.

The last, and supremest, is a Council Ecumenical, or General; to which I
should proceed next; to show you, of what persons it is to consist: who is to
call, who is to preside in, to regulate, and ratify it, etc. But this I shall
defer till. 34. And, because the Regulation, and Government that is, for the
necessary preserving of the Churches firmer Peace and Unity, established, and
observed in these lower Councils, is, by their being more frequently held, much
better known, and also freely acknowledged by Learned Protestants, I will first
give you some further Account of this; that, so, you may make a better Judgment
of the Nature; and Condition of General Councils, and of that, which is
requisite in them, (at last to be applied to that of Trent): which General
Councils, by reason of the Difficulty, Charge, and many other Inconveniences,
of so universal an Assembly, have been much more rarely convened in the Church.

etc.) without the Superiors, or Presidents, consent; nor He, without theirs,
i. e. of the major part of them: For example; The Presbyters nothing, without
their Bishop; nor the Bishops, without their Metropolitan; nor Metropolitans,
without the Primate, or Patriarch; and e contra. Of which thus the 35. Can.
Apostol. -- Episcopos Gentium singularum scire convenit; quis inter eos primus
[this ascends so high as Primats] habeatur; quem; velut Caput existiment; and
nihil amplius, praeter ejus confcientiam, gerant, quam illa sola singuli, quae
paraeciae propriae and villis, quae sub ea sunt, competunt. Sed nec Ille,
praeter omnium conscientiam, faciat aliquid in eorum paraeciis. Sic enim
Unanimitas erit, and glorificabitur Deus, per Christum, in Spiritu Sancto.

And see the same repeated in Conc. Antioch. Can. 9. And, this Apostol. Can.
there referred to; In which by (...), praeter sententiam illus qui primus est,
must be understood, (not the Councils doing nothing without this Primate first
consulted; and then, if He, and they, or a major part of them, do differ in
opinion, He obliged to follow this major part, as some Protestants would have
it See Dr. Field, of the Church, p. 511.
quoting Conc. Antiochen. c. 19. as favoring such a sense: but) the Council's
doing nothing without this Primates consent; the Council, or major part of it,
and he the President, having both of them, a negative voice in respect of one
another; and, so, such matters, as both do not concur in, being to remain
undecided, till their agreement; or, till such Cause is by some party devolved
to a Superior Court, (if such difference does not happen in the Supreme).
Otherwise, if, by ((...)) be meant, only Knowledge, or Advice, the one parties
consulting, or acquainting the other with such a matter; then, since that Canon
runs also, that the Primate shall do nothing praeter Episcoporum [(...)]
sententiam, yet this will not hinder, but that he, alone, may make such Decrees
also, without the consent of the Council, or of the major part of them; and on
neither side must the word signify any more, than their Counsel, and Advice.

As for that passage of the 19th. Antiochtan Canon urged -- 'Obtineat Sententia
plurimorum (the like to which see Conc. Nice, Can. 6) it means only, That the
unanimous suffrage of all the Provincial Bishops, joined with the Metropolitan,
will not be necessary for the Ordination of a new Bishop; whenas perhaps some,
propter suum contentionis studium, may contradict; and not; That such major
part may pass such Acts without, or against, the Metropolitan: The consent of
which Metropolitan, for the Ordination, or Confirmation of such a Bishop, is
expressly required by the 4th. and 6th. Canon of the first General Council of
Nice.

Can. Apost. 35. -- Conc, Nic. Can. 4, 6. -- Con c. Antioch. c. 9.19. -- Conc.
Laodic. c. 12. -- 2. Conc. Carthag. c. 12. -- Conc. Constantinop. c. 2. --
Conc. Ephesians. c. 8, [Where note; That, not the Confirmation of the Cyprian
Metropolitan, but the Election and Ordination of him (of which the Cyprian
Bishops complained, that they were deprived), is denied in this Canon to the
Antiochian Patriarch, as Res nova, and contrary to former Customs; this thing
properly belonging to the Provincial Synod] -- Conc. Chalced. 28. -- And here
note, that these later Canons maintain the Mos antiquus obtineat, of the 6th.
Nicene Canon, and so preserve unviolated the ancient preeminencies of the Chief
Patriarchs, as well as those of inferior Primates, or Metropolitans. After all
which, the 8th. General Council, Can. 17, Reciting the foresaid 6th. Canon of
Nice, thus explains it -- Qua pro causa, and haec magna and sancta Synodus, tam
in seniori, and nova Roma [Constantinopoli] quam in Sede Antiochiaes and
Hierosolymorum, priscam consuetudinem decernit in omnibus conservari; ita, ut
earum Praesules, universorum Metropolitanorum, qui ab ipsis promoventur, and
sive per manus impositionem, sive per Pallii dationem, Episcopalis dignitatis
firmitatem accipiunt, habeant potestatem; viz. ad convocandam eos, urgente
necessit ate, ad Synodalem Conventum; vel etiam ad coercendum illos, and
corrigendum, cum fama eos super quibusdam d^lictis forsitan accusaverit. Of
which Canon, thus Dr. Field, p 5.8. -- Patriarchs were, by the Order of the
8th. General Council Can. 17.
to confirm the Metropolitans subject unto them, either by Imposition of Hands,
or giving the Pall. -- And l. 5. c. 37. p. 551. -- Without the Patriarchs
consent, none of the Metropolitans, subject unto them, might be Ordained. --
And -- What they bring (says he) proves nothing that we ever doubted of; For
we know, the Bishop of Rome had the Right of confirming the Metropolitans
within the Precincts of his own Patriarchship, as likewise every other
Patriarch had. And thus B. Bramhal, (Vindic. c. 9. p. 259. etc.) -- What power
the Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province; the same had a
Patriarch over the Metropolitans, and Bishops of sundry Provinces, within his
own Patriarchate. And afterward -- Wherein, then, consisted Patriarchal
Authority? In Ordaining their Metropolitans, or Confirming them, etc.

3ly. Again so ordered: That, any difference arising between any inferior,
persons, or Councils, either of an equal degree; Conc. Nic. Can, 4; 5, 6. --
Conc. Sard. Can. 7. -- Conc. Chalced. Can. 9. -- 8. General Council, c. 10. and
26. compared with the 17. expounding the 6th. Can. of the Nicene Council.

Thus then, all inferior Conciliar differences of much consequence were
terminated if not sooner, ultimately in a General Council, when it could be
had; and personal appeals, in the Interval of Councils, (which, whether
Episcopal, Provincial, or Patriarchal, cannot be, upon every cause, without
great trouble, and charge, convened), were, as for greater causes, and persons,
(as those of the other Patriarchs, or eminent Bishops) ended by the Prime
Patriarch, the Bishop of Rome; who made use of such Bishops for his Assessors,
and Council, as could with convenience, upon such appeals, be brought together.
See the Council of Sardica. can. 4, 5. Concerning the just Authority of which
Council, I refer the Protestant-Reader to Mr. Thorndikes Defense thereof, Epil.
l. 3. c. 21. p. 181. and just weights, p. 40.

But see this practice of Appeals to the First See much more ancient; not only,
as to the West;. 13. n. 1.
in the Provinces subject to this Patriarch: where we meet with the appeal of
Basilides, and Martialis, two Spanish Bishops, desiring by him to be restored
to their Bishoprics, of which they pretended they were unjustly deprived
Cyprian, Ep 38.
; (in which matter S. Cyprian Ep. 68.
indeed blames the Pope, for receiving them rashly into his Communion, when he
bad not well examined their Cause, nor the justice of the former Sentence
passed in Spain on them; but not at all, for his admitting, as Patriarch, their
appeal): and find * the Request of the said S. Cyprian Ep. 67.
, made to the Pope for his Letter to the Bishops of France, to depose Marcianus
a French Bishop, for siding with the Novatians; again *, the appeal of Caeci,
lianus, Primate of Carthage, who was wronged by a Council held in Afric, to
the Pope, and his Council; related, and justified against the Donatists, by S.
Austin, Ep. 162. But, as to the East also; where we find the appeal of
Athanasius, Patriarch of Alexandria, and of Paulus Bishop of Constantinople,
wronged by the Arrian, Eastern, Synods: And, long before these, the appeal of
Dionysius Alexandrinus, accused to the Pope by some of Pentapolis Athanas. de
Sententia Dionys. Alexandrin.
and so making his Defense to Him, and cleared by him and his Council.

All these, before the Decree of Sardica; as for the times after it, I suppose
it needless to mention the appeals of S Chrysostom Ep. ad Innocent.
, Theodoret Ep. ad Leonem.
, Flavianus, and other Eastern Bishops.

As for the famous Contest, that was had about these Appeals,. 13. n. 2.
between Sozimus, and Bonifacius, Popes, and the Affrican Bishops, after A. D.
400, and after so many eminent former allowed Examples of such Appeals, 1st.
The Constitution of those Affrican Prelates in a Council, held about the same
time (whether it were the Milevitan, or rather another at Carthage, as some
think, it much matters not), prohibits such Appeals beyond Sea only to the
inferior Clergy, in these words Conc. Melevit. c. 22.
-- Placuit, ut Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel caeteri inferiores Clerici, in causis,
quas habuerint, etc. non provocent, nifi ad Affricana Concilia, vel ad Primates
Provinciarum suarum. But it enjoins nothing concerning Bishops 2ly. In their
dispute with Boniface, they handled the matter so gently, that, as Baronius
observes A. D. 412.
they seemed to debate rather de modo, than de Re; bespeaking him on this
manner Ep. ad Bon^ifac,
-- Impendio deprecamur, ut ad vestras aures hinc venientes non facilius
admittatis. -- [Upon which words Spalatensis comments thus l. 4. c. 8. n. 32.
-- Rogant ut Episcopi non tam facile audiantur [i. e. a Romans Pontifice], nisi
viz. notoria, and manisesta adsit suspicio in propriae Provinciae Episcopis
omnibus, aut maxima eorum part. For he grants there -- Vbi gravis and notoria
est suspicio erga proprios and primarios Judices, Episcopos reos potuisse ad
aliena, [or extera], judicia, praesertim vero ad seeds Apostolicas, recurrere;
and quotes, for it, S. Austin, Ep. 162. in Cacilian's case.] And -- Concilium
Nicenum voluit observari, ne in sua Provincia Communione suspensi, a sua
sanctitate, vel festinato, vel praepropere, vel indebite videantur communioni
restitui. For, the common practice of such Appeals in former times, by
Athanasius, and others, shows; that the Roman Bishop was not prohibited by
these Canons of Nice to admit into his Communion any such Bishop, as was
excommunicated by his Province, if the Roman Bishop found him wrongfully
suspended. And therefore it is true also, that the 6th. Nicene Canon --
Episcopos suis Metropolitanis apertissime commisit (which the Affricans urged)
but not this in every case unappealable to Superiors, as appears by their
former Qualification, -- Ne festinato, ne praepropere, etc. And, particularly
for this Province of Afric, -- S. Austin undertakes, against the Donatists, a
Justification of the Appeal made formerly to a Transmarine Judgment (the
Donatists much opposing it) by Cacilianus Bishop of Carthage, when injured by
an Affrican Council of 70 Bishops: The Father giving there his reason also for
the Equity of such Appeal; because such Ecclesia transmarina was a privatis
inimicitiis, and ab utraque part dissensionis, aliena. Where also he justifies
Melchiades Bishop of Rome his admission of this Appeal -- An forte non debuit
(says he) Romanae Ecclesiae, Melchiades, Episcopus cum Collegis, transmarinis
Episcopis, illud sibi usurpare judicium, quod ab Afris septuaginta, ubi Primus
[Numidae], Tigisitanus praesedit, fuerat terminatum? Quid, quod nec usurparit?
Rogatus Imperator Judices misit Episcopos, qui cum eo sederent, and de tot a
ill a causa, quid justum videretur, statuerent. And, a little after the
foresaid Contest, in an Appeal made to Rome by one Antonius, constituted
formerly Bishop of Fussala by S. Austin, This Father, writing an Epistle to
Pope Celestin about it, there no way declines his Sentence, but only
supplicates his favor, in it -- Collabora nobiscum, obsecro -- and Jube, tibi,
quae directa sunt, omnia recitari -- Existat exemplo, ipsa Apostolica sede
judicante, vel aliorum judicia firmante, quosdam, etc. And the same Father
relating to the forecited Affrican Canon Conc. Melevit. c. 22.
argues thus, against the Donatists, the lawfulness of Cecilian's Transmarine
Appeal Ep. 162.
-- Neque enim (says he) de Presbyteris, aut Diaconis, aut inferioris Ordinis
clericis, sed de collegis [Episcopis] agebatur; Qui possunt aliorum Collegarum,
and praesertim Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum, judicio causam suam integram
reservare. Upon which passage, joined with some other Reasons, some See Ant.
Capellus de Appel lationibus, c. 4.
have contended, that the Acts, and Epistles of the 6th. Council of Carthage to
the Pope, quarrelling about Appeals, are forged and counterfeit: These Acts
arguing just contrary to S. Austin, thus; -- If an Appeal not permitted to
inferior Clergy, much less to Bishops. Epist. Celest.
-- Etsi (say they) de inferioribus Clericis, vel Laicis videtur ibi, [in the
Nicene Canon], praecaveri, quanto magis de Episcopis voluit observari? etc. And
Dr. Field, touching this matter, has these words Of the Church, p. 563.
-- The Affricans, though within the Patriarchship of Rome, disliked the Appeal
of their Bishops to Rome, because they might have right against their
Metropolitans in a General Synod of Afric, wherein the Primate sat, as
President. For, otherwise, Bishops wronged by their Metropolitans, might, by
the Canons, appeal to their own Patriarch. Thus he. For otherwise, here means
he not; when such Councils do not sit? (For, surely he would not have a
Provincial Council purposely new called upon every personal contention): But
this overthrows the arguments of the Affrican Bishops; who also are said to
have denied such Appeals, not when Affrican Councils sit only, but altogether.
Again, S. Austin clearly justifies Appeals from Affrican Councils also. This of
the Affrican Controversy about Appeals, of as little advantage to
non-Appealants, as it is of great noise, if the matter be, on both sides,
equally weighed.

Again,. 13. n. 3.
Touching another ancient Contest, that happened, (and is also urged by
Protestants) between the Cyprian Bishops, and the Patriarch of Antioch, decided
in the 3d. General Council. Can. 8. you may observe: That, whatever privilege,
or exemption, any Church, or Province may have had, from any Patriarch or his
Council, as to Elections, or Ordinations; yet no Church, or Person, has been
freed from a submittance thereto, in point of Appeals; or of Decision of
Controverfies in matter of Faith. Neither here can the Cyprian Bishops by
virtue of any such Canon of Ephesus plead their particular exemption from the
7th. Canon of Sardica, or 9th. of Chalcedon, (which Canon is also seconded by
the Imperial Law, in Cod. Tit. 4. c. 29.) or from the 17th. or 26th. Canon of
the 8th. General Council; which Canons command such submittance, and allow such
Appeals; in which Appeals also the Inferior Patriarchs were subject to the
Superior (See before. 12, 13, and below, the Concession of Dr. Field,. 16 n,
5); And of the Jurisdiction of the Antiochian Patriarch over Cypras, as to
these matters still remaining after the Canon of Ephesus, see S. Jerome Epist.
ad Pamachium,
in his controversy with John, Bishop of Jerusalem -- Ni fallor, hoc ibi [i.
e. in Concilio Niceno], ut Palestinae Metropolis Caesarea sit; and totius
Orientis, Antiochia. Aut igitur ad Caesariensem Archiepiscopum refer
debueras, cui, spreta communione tua, communicare nos noveras; aut, si procul
expetendum judicium erat, Antiochiam potius literae dirigendae. [ Totius
Orientis; and so, Cypri.]

Mean while, in this necessary Subordination of the lower Clergy, or their
Synods, to the higher,

1st. Care was taken; That Coordinate Churches, 1.
or Provinces, or their Synods, ( i. e. such, whereof the one could claim no
Jurisdiction over the other, neither by ancient Custom, nor Conciliar
Constitution), should usurp no authority over one another: For which, see Can
Apostol. 36. -- Conc Nicen. c. 6. -- Conc. Ephesians. c. 8. -- Conc. Constantinop.
c. 2, 3, 5. Compared with Conc. Chalced. Act 16. Which Canons, and particularly
the second and third of the Second General Council at Constantinop. (do not
prove, what some would infer; That all Provinces are, for all power, absolute,
supreme, and independent, from whom might be no further appeal; nor any other
Person or Council, as Superior, take account of their Acts; for the contrary
known practice in antiquity shows this to be otherwise See. 12, 13.
: and thus, Provincial Councils would have no subjection to General; but) only
signify these two things; 1st. That neither Patriarch, nor Primate,
coordinate, and over which he had no Jurisdiction in such affairs: (i.e.) over
which, neither by ancient custom, nor constitutions of Councils, he could claim
any such superiority. (See the limitation, Conc. Ephesians. c. 8. -- Quae non
prius, atque ab initio, etc. And Can. Apostol, 36. -- Quae illi nullo jure
subjectae sunt; a clause, that is still retained in these Canons to preserve
the prerogatives Patriarchal: As for example. Not the Bishops of Alexandria
therefore to meddle with the affairs of Antioch -- Solius Aegypti curam gerant,
servatis honoribus Ecclesiae Antiochenae. Servatis, i. e. without encroaching
upon them; Nor the Patriarch of Alexandria, or Antioch, to meddle with the
Ordination of the Bishops in the several Provinces subjected to them: Nor those
of Asia with those of Thrace; to whom Thrace owed no subjection. 2ly. That, in
every Province, the Provincial Synod be the Supreme, and last, Court, in that
Province; and exclusively to the judgment of the Bishops of any neighboring
Provinces, which are only coordinate with it. (See them below. 28. called by
Gregory, Episcopi alieni Concilii). For observe, that some of those Diocesses
that are urged, in the former Canon Conc. Ephesians. c. 8.
to be independent, viz. the Diocese of Thrace, Pontus, and Asia, are, in the
16th Act of the Council Chalced. where this very Canon was recited, mentioned
to be subjected to the Patriarch of Constantinople; subjected; i. e. as to
confirmation of their Metropolitans, and as to Appeals, see Conc. Chalced. Can.
9. and 16. Though still their privilege stood firm -- Vt Episcopi Thraciae
gubernent quae Thraciae; namely, unusquisque Metropolita praefatarum Diocesium
ordinet sua Regionis Episcopos, sicut Divinia Canonibus [ (i. e.) the Canons of
Nice, and these of Constantinople] est praeceptum. And, as these Diocesses were
subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople; so were others to those of
Alexandria, and Antioch.

The second necessary provision made by the Church,. 15. n. 1.
was, That in the Intervals of Synods, the respective Presidents thereof should
be authorized, 2.
as standing Church Officers, always extant, and accessible, to end
controversies, interpret, and execute their Canons; since these greater Bodies
could not be, so frequently as occasions might require, without much trouble,
assembled See, below,. 16. n. 6, and 8.
.

As also lesser causes were ordered to be finally terminated in some inferior
Court, without liberty of appeal, in all Causes, by whatever persons, (which
was the chief matter stood upon by the Affricans against Pope Bonifacius, in
the case of a Presbyter) from one superior Court to a further; or also, from
the standing Ecclesiastical Officers, to a future Council; that so Contentions
might not be unnecessarily prolonged; nor the supreme Courts overcharged with
business; nor Justice deferred. See Conc. Milevit. c. 22. And Card. Bellarmin.
De Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 24 -- Quastio de Appellationibus ad Romanum Pontificem
non est de appellationibus Presbyterorum, and minorum Clericorum, sed de
appellationibus Episcoporum, etc. See, below,. 16. n. 6, 8.

This in the third place (from. 12.) of the Churches subjecting both
Ecclesiastical Persons, and Councils, One to Another, the less to the greater,
in point of Judicature and Authority, for preventing of Schisms.

. 15. n. 2.
do dissent, the obedience of the Subjects of both, in such case being once
apparent, was to be rendered to the Superior. So, if a Diocesan, or Provincial,
Council ought to yield to a National, the Subjects of such Province, or
Diocese, when these two Councils clash, ought to conform, in their Obedience,
to the National, not to a Diocesan, or Provincial, Council, against it.

Now,. 16. n. 1.
for such a subordination of the several Church Officers, and Synods forenamed;
and for Obedience, when these dissent, due to the Superior; (the two points
last mentioned). I will, to save the labor of further proof, give you the
Concessions of Learned Protestants. (though this be done with some limitations,
accomodated to the better legitimating of their Reformation; of which
limitations, see below,. 16. n. 4. -- and n. 7. and again,. 28.); desiring you
also to peruse those set down already to the same purpose, in the second
Discourse.. 24. n. 1. etc.

Of this matter, then, thus Dr. Fern. in the Case between the Church of
England, and Rome, p. 48. -- The Church of Christ is a society, or company,
under a Regiment, Discipline, Government; and the Members, constituting that
Society, are either Persons taught, guided, governed, or Persons teaching,
guiding, governing; and this, in order to preserve all in unity, and to advance
every Member of this visible Society, to an effectual, and real participation
of Grace, and Union with Christ the Head; and therefore, and upon no less
account, is obedience due unto them, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 16. and, Heb. 13.17.
And he, that will not hear the Church, is to be as a Heathen, and a Publican,
Mat. 16. And, applying this to the Presbyterians, and other Sects, dividing
from the English Bishops; and Synods p. 46.
-- They have incurred (says he) by leaving us (and I wish they would sadly
consider it) no less, than the guilt of Schism; which lies heavily on as many,
as have (of what persuasion, or Sect, soever) wilfully divided themselves from
the communion of the Church of England; whether they do this by a bare
separation; or by adding violence, and Sacrilege unto it.

And thus Dr. Hammond,. 16. n. 2.
somewhat more distinctly in his Book of Schism, c. 8. p. 157. -- The way
(says he) provided by Christ, and his Apostles, for preserving the Unity of
the Faith, etc. in the Church, is fully acknowledged by us -- made up of two
Acts of Apostolical Providence; 1st. Their resolving, etc. 2. Their
establishing an excellent subordination of all inferior Officers of the Church
to the Bishops in every City; of the Bishops in every Province to their
Metropolitans; of the Metropolitans in every Region or (...), to Patriarchs, or
Primates; allowing also, among these, such a primacy of Order, or Dignity, as
might be proportionable to the (...) in Scripture and greeable to what is, by
the ancient Canons, allowed to the Bishop of Rome, and this standing
subordination sufficient for all ordinary uses. And when there should be need
of extraordinary remedies, there was, then, a supply to be had by congregating
Councils Provincial, Patriarchal, General. Again, Ib. c. 3. he declares Schism
in withdrawing obedience from any of these; beginning at the lowest, and so
ascending to the highest -- Those Brethren, or People (says he 7.
) which reject the Ministry of the Deacons, or Presbyters, in any thing wherein
they are ordained, or appointed by the Bishop, (and as long as they continue in
obedience to him); and of their own accord break off, and separate from them,
refuse to live regularly under them, they are, by the ancient Church of Christ,
adjudged, and looked on as Schismatics -- 8.
In like manner; if we ascend to the next higher Link; that of the Bishop, to
whom both Presbyters, and Deacons, as well as the Brethren, or People, are
obliged to live in obedience, the withdrawing, or denying this obedience, in
any of these, will certainly fall under this guilt.

Next, For the higher Ranks of Church-Prelates, 16. n. 3.
. 20. he goes on thus. It is manifest, That as the several Bishops had
prefecture over their several Churches, and over the Presbyters, Deacons, and
People, under them, such as could not be cast off by any, without the guilt,
and brand of Schism; so the Bishops themselves of the ordinary inferior Cities
(for the preserving of unity, and many other good uses), were subjected to the
higher power of Archbishops or Metropolitans [he having showed, in. 11.12, the
first Institution thereof Apostolical, in Titus, and Timothy] nay, we must yet
ascend (says he) one degree higher: from this of Archbishops, or
Metropolitans, to that supreme of Primates or Patriarchs, [Concerning whose
authority, having produced several Canons of Councils,. 25. he concludes thus]
-- All these Canons, or Councils, deduce this power of Primates over their own
Bishops, from the Apostles, and first Planters of the Churches; wherein that
which is pertinent to this place is only this; that there may be a
disobedience, and irregularity, and so, a Schism, even in the Bishops in
respect of their Metropolitans, and of the authority, which these have by
Canon, and Primitive Custom, over them. And the obedience due to these several
ranks of Ecclesiastical Superiors, he affirms also due, on the same account, to
their several Synods Answ. to Catholic Gent. c. 3. p. 29.
-- It is evident (says he), That the power, which severally belongs to the
Bishops is united in that of a Council, where these Bishops are assembled; and
the despising of that [Council] is an offense under the first sort of Schism --
and a despising of all ranks of our Ecclesiastical Superiors, whereof it is
compounded. Thus Dr. Hammond: ascending in these subordinations as high, as
Primates.

But Dr. Field, Bishop Bramhal, and others,. 16. n. 4.
rise one step higher, to the Proto-primates, or Patriarchs, (...) so called,
and their Councils. And strange it is (if it were not from an engagement to the
present English Interest) that Dr. Hammond could pass by these, in his speaking
of the remedies of Schism, with so much silence, (not mentioning Patriarchs,
but only as taken for Primates; or their Councils. See * Answ. to Cathol. Gent.
c. 3. n. 9, 10, 11. Where he speaks of the authority of Provincial, National,
Ecumenical, Councils, but passes by Patriarchal; and, * Schism; p. 158, where
he names Provincial, Patriarchal, General, but uses Patriarchal there for
National, or the Council presided-in by the Primate, to which Primate sometimes
was applied the name of Patriarch) Strange, I say, considering not only the
clear evidence of ancient Constitutions, and practice, relating to these
Patriarchs, and their Synods; but the great necessity thereof, as to the Unity
of the Churches Faith, and Conservation of her Peace; and that much more, since
the division of the Empire into so many Kingdoms; by reason of which secular
contrary Interests, the several parts, and members of the Catholic Church,
dispersed amongst them, are more subject to be disjointed, and separated, from
one another. Which unity and peace, (if we reflect on * the great rarity of
General Councils (not above 5, or 6, in the Protestant account, in 1600. years)
and * the multiplicity of Primates that are in Christendom, all left by Dr.
Hammond Supreme, and independent, of one another; or of any other person, or
Council, when a General one not in being; and * the experience of their
frequent Lapses into gross Errors: (For almost what great Heresy, or Schism,
has there been in the Church, whereof some Primate was not a chief Abettor);
and * The Rents in the Church, made by these, apt to be much greater, as the
person is higher, and more powerful), is not sufficiently provided for, though
much pretended, in Dr. Hammonds Scheme.

Come we then to Dr. Fields Model yet more enlarged -- The actions (says he Of
the Chur. p. 513.
) of the Bishop of each particular Church of a City,. 16. n. 5.
and places adjoining, were subject to the censure, and judgment of the rest of
the Bishops of the same Province; amongst whom, for order sake, there was one
Chief; to whom it pertained to call them together; to sit as Moderator in the
midst of them, being assembled; and to execute what by joint consent they
resolved on. The actions of the Bishops of a Province, and of a Provincial
Synod consising of those Bishops, were subject to a Synod consisting of the
Metropolitans, and other Bishops of diverse Provinces. This Synod was of two
sorts. For either it consisted of the Metropolitans, and Bishops of one
Kingdom, and Nation only, as did the Councils of Africa; or of the
Metropolitans, and Bishops of many Kingdoms. If of the Metropolitans, and
Bishops of one Kingdom, and State only, the chief Primate was Moderator: If of
many, one of the Patriarchs, and chief Bishop of the whole world [was
Moderator]: every Church being subordinate to some one of of the Patriarchal
Churches, and incorporate into the Unity of it. Here you see that roundly
confessed, which Dr. Hammond concea'ld, Again, Ib. p. 668. -- It is evident, That
there is a power in Bishops, Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs, to call
Episcopal, Provincial, National and Patriarchal Synods; [Synods Patriarchal
answering to Patriarchs: National to Primates] and that neither so depending
of, nor subject to, the power of Princes; but that, when they are enemies to
the Faith, they may exercise the same without their consent, and privity, and
subject them, that refuse to obey their Summons, to such punishments, as the
Canons of the Church do prescribe in cases of such contempt, or wilful
negligence. -- And, Ib. p. 557. -- That the Decrees of Popes, made with the
consent, and joint concurrence of the other Western Bishops, did bind the
Western Provinces, that were subject to him, as Patriarch of the West. Bind
them so, as that these had no liberty to contradict the judgment of the
Patriarch, and this Council: for which see Ib. c. 39. p. 563. where he quotes
the Emperors Law, ( Novel. 123. c. 22. -- Patriarcha Dioceseos illius huic
causae praebeat finem, nulla part ejus sententiae contradicere valente),
confirming the 9th. Canon of Conc. Chalced. Again, p. 567. 568. he says --
That it is a Rule in Church Government; that the lesser, and inferior, may not
judge the greater, and superior. -- That, if any Bishop have ought against his
Metropolitan, he must go (as I showed before) to the Patriarch, and his Synod,
to complain; as to fit, and competent Judges. -- That the great Patriarchs of
the Christian Church are to be judged by some other of their own rank in order
before them, assisted by inferior Bishops; that the Bishop of Rome, as first in
order among the Patriarchs, assisted with his own Bishops, and the Bishops of
him, that is thought faulty, [though these later are not found always
necessary, or present at such judgments; nor, more of his own Bishops, than
those whom he can at such time conveniently assemble, and consult with, as
appears in the Appeals of those persons named before,. 13. n. 1.] may judge any
of the other Patriarchs; That such as have complaints against them, may fly to
him, and the Synod of Bishops subject to him, and that the Patriarchs
themselves, in their distresses, may fly to him, and such Synods, for relief,
and help. (See the same,. 16. n. 6.
p 668) Nor does he acknowledge such an authority of Judicature in these Church
Prelates, only as joined w th their Synods, but also in them single, and
without them. For, since it is manifest; that the constant meeting of the
Provincial Synods twice, as it was ordered at the first, or once, in the year,
as afterward, did very early cease, either by the Clergies neglect, or the
great trouble, and charge of such Assemblies, and so later Councils accordingly
appointed such Synods to be held in stead of twice yearly, once in 3. years
(nor yet are in this well obeyed), Hence either all such Causes, and Appeals to
their Superious (still multiplied, as Christianity is increased,) must be for
so long a time suspended, and depending, which would be intolerable; and a
quick dispatch, though less equitable, rather to be wished; or, the hearing of
them must be devolved to these single standing Judges, as directed by former
Church-Canons. Concerning this therefore thus the same Doctor goes on, l. 5. p.
514.
quoting the Canons of the 6th. and 7th. Council. -- At the first (says he
there was a Synod of Bishops in every Province, twice in the year: But for the
misery, and poverty of such, as should travel to Synods, the Fathers of the
6th. Council Can. 8.
decreed it should be once in the year; and then things amiss to be redressed,
which Canon was renewed by the 7th. General Council Can. 6.
: But afterward, many things falling out to hinder their happy Meetings, we
shall find; that they met not so often [and very early may this be found] and
therefore the Council of Basil appointed Episcopal Synods to be holden once
every year, and Provincial at the least once in three years: And so, in time,
Causes growing many, and the difficulties intolerable, in coming together, and
in staying, to hear these Causes thus multiplied, and increased, it was thought
fitter to refer the hearing of complaints, and appeals, to Metropolitans, and
such like Ecclesiastical Judges, limited, and directed by Canons, and Imperial
Laws, than to trouble the Pastors of whole Provinces, and to wrong the people
by the absence of their Pastors, and Guides. Thus He. And, if this rarer
meeting of Provincial Synods transferred many Causes on the Metropolitans sole
Judicature, much more did that rarer assembling of a Patriarchal, or General,
Council, leave appeals in greater Causes to the single Arbitrament of the
Patriarch, assisted with his ordinary Council, or Consistory.

Here, 16. n. 7.
then, you see, in Dr. Field, the ground of a through Union in Christ's Church:
whereas that of Dr. Fern, and Dr Hamond, though it served their turn for the
remedy of a Presbyterian defection, or the extravagancies of some particular
Bishop, yet afforded no standing cure (as it did concern them, it should not,)
for those of a Primate, or for any National Division. Only one Reservation Dr.
Field has in this place, perhaps with an eye to protect the Reformation
thereby, which Dr. Hamond, I conceive thought it not safe to trust to -- That
the Bishops of a Province, subject to a Metropolitan, or the Metropolitan, and
his Bishops, subject to a Patriarch, may declare in what cases he incurreth the
sentence of Suspension, Excommunication, Deposition, or Degradation, pronounced
by the very Law, and Canon it self; and so may withdraw themselves from his
Obedience. Thus he. Where, suppose this, ^e would have, should be granted him,
concerning a General Council, all of ^t united, and declaring such a thing (if
such a thing may be) of the Supreme Prelate of the Church, and President of
this Council, because there is no Superior Person, or Court of Judicature,
whereby this President may be tried: And also granted, concerning such
proceeding against any Subordinate Superior, (as against the Metropolitan, or
Primate) whenever he freely confesses that transgression of the Canons, which
they charge him with; for, in such a case, their obedience is due not to him
any longer, but to the Canons, and to his Superiors, that maintain them. But,
most presumptuous; and unreasonable it seems, for Subjects to make any such
Declaration, and withdraw Obedience, whenever such matter is in contest between
them and him; and a superior person, or Court, provided to decide it; and yet
more unreasonable; if a part only of the Subjects, suppose, of a Primate, or
Patriarch, should declare so, when another part withstands them, and declares
the contrary. And see Can. 10. of the 8. General Council punctual against any
such Delaration, or Discession, before a Judgment -- Nullus Clericus, ante
Synodicam Sententiam, a communione proprti Patriarchae se separet, etc. Idem de
Episcopis statuimus, erga proprios Metropolitanos; similiter and de
Metropolitis, circa Patriarchum suum. This of Dr. Field. See the places quoted
out of B. Bramhal to the same purpose, Disc. 2.. 24. n. 1. -- And Disc. 1.. 27.

The like is acknowledged at large, 16. n. 8.
by the Archbishop of Spalato; and amongst these Patriarchs, the supereminent
Privileges of the first, or Roman, Patriarch, (the evidences of Antiquity
producing such a consent in these Learned men) are displayed by him, in his
Repub. Eccles. l. 3, c. 2, and 10. There, c. 2, n. 1. having named the other
lower subordinations of Church-Governors, ad vitanda Schismata; he goes on --
Ac demum and Primatibus, and Metropolitanis, and Episcopis unus Patriarcha in
tota integra aliqua Provincia, in certis similiter causis, praeside ret -- Et
quia non semper adeo facile est Episcopos comprovinciales [or compatriarchales
much more] in vnum convenire, expedien, fuit, ut Metropolitant, and Primates
[and Patriarchae] multa, soli, absolverent, qua Synedi absolvere debuissent;
essentque quasi totius Synodi Vicarii and Commissarii Further of these
Patriarchs he says l. 3. c. 10. n. 26.
-- Si^ut Metropolitanus Episcopus suffraganeos suos errantes corripere, and
corrigere debeat; and emen dare; ita, si Metropolitanus erret, sive in moribus,
sive in judiciis, and actis suis, ne etiam in hoc Synodus etiam semper, cum
incommedo, conveniat, a Patriar^his voluit Ecclesiastica consuetudo, and lex,
M^tropolitanos emendari; nisi tam gravis sit causa, and publica, praesertim
fidet, ut totius regionis Synodus, sive and Oecumenica, debeat convenire:
Quoting the words of the 8. General Council, Can. 17. say^ng the same --
Senioris and novae Romae Praesules, etc. Metropolitanorum habeant potestatem,
ad convocandum eos [not this in t mes of Heathenism, but when Christian
Religion flourished under secular Princes, already subjected to it], urgente
necessitate, ad Syn^dalem conventum, vel etiam ad coercendum illos, and
corrigendum, cum fama cos, super quibusdam delictis, forsan accusaverit.
Further, ascending to the Roman Patriarch, he thus goes on to declare his
priv^ledges l. 4. c. 9. n. 1.
-- Habebat etiam Romrnus Pontisex Patriarchalia privilegia. palliu^^, sibi
subjectis Metropolitanis illud petentibus, concedere, etc; eosd^m a lege
divina, velsacris Canonibus* deviantes corripere, and in officio continere;
controversias inter cosdem exortas componere, causasque eorundem interdum [ (i.
e.) in causis gravioribus] audire, and decidere; totius Patriarchatus Concilia
convocare -- n. 14. -- Ex lo^o sui primi Patriarehatu, sSacrorum Canonum primus
habebatur, and praecipuus, observator, custos, ac vindex; quos si alicubi
violari cognosceret, ac^r monitor insurgebat. n. 15. -- Ad ipsum quicunque
Episcopi cujuscunque provinciae, and regionis, [not only of his Patriarchy] qui
se ab Episcopis propriae provinciae gravari sentinent, and in judicits
Ecclesiasticis tanquam ad sacram anchoram, consugerent, apud ipsum innocentiam
suam probaturi -- Romani Pontifices de facto eos sedibus suis restituebant, and
ab objectis criminibus, tanquam si essent supremi judices, absolvebant [and
this so anciently as Cyprians time, and before the first General Council of
Nice] n. 16. -- Ille, propter summam ipsius existimationem, commune quasi
vinculum, and nodus erat praecipuus Catholicae Communionis in tota Ecclesia --
Catholicae Communionis dux, and arbiter, ut cui ipse suam communionem vel
daret, vel adimeret, caeterae quaeque Ecclesiae omnes ordinary darent pariter,
vel adimerent. So Spalatensis. 16. n. 9.


Mr. Thorndike, first in general, says fast wa^gnte, p. 41.
-- That the Soul of the Visible Unity of the Church, consists in the resort
of inferior Churches to superior [of which he discourses more largely, in
Right of the Church, c. 2] and in the correspondence of Parallel-Churches. --
That the Church, so stated is a standing Synod, able, by consent of the chief
Churches containing the consent of their resorts, [ i. e. of the inferior
Churches resorting to them] to conclude the whole. -- That Rome, Alexandria,
Antiochia, were from the beginning of Christianity, visible Heads of these
great Resorts in Church Government; which the Council of N^ce made subject to
them, by Canon Law, for the future p. 39.
, our British Church not excepted p. 40.
. And, more particularly, in justifying the Authority of the Roman Patriarch,
and the Canons of Sardica, concerning Appeals to him. -- Shall I not ask (says
he) what pretense there could be to settle from other parts Appeals to Rome,
rather than from Rome to other parts, had not a preeminence of power, and not
only a precedence of Rank been acknowledged originally in the Church of Rome?
And, before, speaking of the Eastern Arrians desiring to be heard at Rome, by
Julius: -- Shall I believe (says he) as some Learned men [ i. e. Protestant]
conjecture; That Pope Julius is merely an Arbitrator, named by one party, whom
the other could not resuse; and that any Bishop, or at least any Primate, might
have been named, and must have been admitted, as well as he? Truly I cannot.
Thus Mr. Thorndike. I fear I have tired you with the same things so often
repeated by several Authors, but this may serve the more to confirm the verity
of that, wherein they agree. As for the Obedience acknowledged by them due to
the Church, according to these Subordinations, I shall have occasion to give
you a further account of it hereafter.

Presbyters, and Bishops, of the same, but of these higher, Primates, and
Patriarchs, of several, Nations, ending its ascent in a Primacy, not of order
(ineffective), but also of Power, placed in the Prime Patriarch, especially
conduces to the necessary coherence of the always one-only-Communion of the
Church Ca-National, and to the suppression of Heresies, and Schisms, oftener
tholick, than Diocesan only, or Provincial.

Grotius well observed, and spared not often to speak of -- Quae ver^ est
causa, (says he in his first Reply to Rivet Ad Art. 7.
) cur, qui opinionibus dissident inter Catholices, maneant in eodem corpore,
non rupta Communione; contra, qui inter Protestants dissident, idem sacere
nequeant, utcunque multa de dilectione fraterna loquuntur? Hoc qui recte
expenderit, inveniet, quanta sit vis Primatus. [which brings to mind that of S.
Jerome Adversus Jovin. l. 1. c. 14.
concerning S. Peter's Primacy -- Propterea inter duodecim unus eligitur, ut,
capite constitute, Schismatum tollatur occasio. Capite constituto; but Pr^macy
of Order, without power, helps no schisms.] And again, the same Grotius in the
close of the last Reply to Rivet Apol. Discussio, p. 255.
written not long before his death -- Restitutionem Christianorum in unum
idemque Corpus, semper optatam a Grotio, sciunt, qui eum norunt. Existimavit
autem aliquando, incipi posse a Protestantium inter se conjunctione. Postea
vidit, id plana fieri nequire; quia, praeterquam quod Calvinistarum ingenia
serme omnium ab omni pace sunt alienissima, Protestants nullo inter se communi
ecclesiastico regimine sociantur; quae causae sunt, cur sactae parts in unum
Protestantium corpus colligi nequeant; immo and cur parts aliae atque aliae
sint exsurrecturae. Quare nunc plane ita sentit Grotius, and multi cum ipso,
non posse Protestants inter se jungi, nisi simul jungantur cum iis, qui Sedi
Romanae cohaerent; sine qua nullum sperari potest in Ecclesia commune Regimen:
Ideo optat, ut ea divulsio, quae evenit, and causae divulsionis tollantur.
Inter eas causas non est Primatus Episcopi Romani secundum Canonas, fatente
Melancthone; qui eum Primatum etiam necessarium putat ad retimendam unitatem.
Thus Grotius. Which passageis taken notice of by Dr. Hammond, in Schism, p.
158, and seemingly allowed: the D^ctor, there seeming to admit the Popes
authority so far, as it is justifiable by the ancient Canons; which authority,
you have seen how far it is, by other Protestants, out of the same Canons,
advanced. And indeed, to exclude this supreme Patriarchal authority, and
constitute such an Aristocratical, or rather, so many several Monarchical,
absolute, equal, independent, Covernments (in regard of any spiritual Superior)
as there are Primates, ( several Monarchical Governments, I say; for the
Aristocratical Government consists in one Council or Court, having its
constant, and set Meetings, such as are not those Meetings of the Highest
Ecclesiastical Synods, and therefore they cannot bear this Style) seems most
destructive of the Churches Unity, and Peace; And then, to make amends for
this, the subjecting all these distinct Monarchical Governments to a General
Council, proves no sufficient Remedy; when we reflect, how many and frequent
are Clergy-differences; how few such Councils have hitherto been; how difficult
such a Council, since the Division of the Empire, to be convened; or rather,
how impossible, according to the Protestants Composition of it; who, as they
frequently appeal to it; so load it with such conditions, as they may be sure,
such Court can never meet to hear their Cause. Thus much is contributed by
Learned Protestants toward the confirmation of the two last, the 3d. and 4th.
Constitutions.

Regular, and well-compacted Government. thus settled in the Church. Next, it
was strictly ordered, by the Church-Laws, and by her greatest Censures imposed
on Delinquents; That no Clergy, in any ma^ters of merely Spiritual Concernment,
should decline the Authority, or Judgment, of these their Ecclesiastical
Superiors, or their subjection to the Church-Canons; by repairing, or
appealing, to any secular Tribunal; (from which Tribunals some in those days
sought relief); either that of other inferior Lay Magistrates, or, of the
Emperor himself; Nor should seek new Ecclesiastical D^gnities erected by the
Emperors Pragmatick, contrary to the Canons. Decreed also it was; that, in such
case, any Church Authority, or privileges, attempted to be so alienated,
should still continue to the former Possessors. For which, see Conc. Antioch.
c. 11, 12. -- Conc. Sardic. c. 8. -- Conc. Chalced. c. 9, and 12. -- Conc.
Milevit. c. 19. -- Conc. T^let. 3, c. 13. -- 8 Genesis Conc. c. 17, and 21.

Ecclesiastical Constitutions, that they may appear no way unjust; or
infringing the Rights of Temporal Soveragnty; It is to be noted, (and therefore
give me leave to spend a few lines in the hand); That the Church, from the
beginning, was constituted by our Lord, a distinct Body from the Civil State:
and is, in all such States, but one visible Society, (Credo unam Catholicam
Ecclesiam); all the parts of it having one, and the same interest, through
those several Dominions* and regulated, within these Territories, by its own
Laws (without which Laws no Communion can consist) independently, as to matters
purely spiritual, on the State* and the exercise of these not lawfully to be
inhibited, or altered by it; whilst all the Civil Rights of such States, mean
while, doremain unviolated, by these Church-Laws; and the secular Sword is
left, where it was before, in the hand of the Secular Governors; so that, the
Church, in any difference, cannot be the invading, but only the Suffering,
party.

Rights are, which the Church has, from the beginning, practiced. and
vindicated, as belonging to her independently, and notwithstanding any
opposition, of the Secular Powers, These are some, if not the chief of them: *
Namely, The entrance of these Ministers of Christ, without Arms, into whatever
Princes Dominions; and their preaching there the Gospel of Christ, and
administering the Sacraments to his Subjects, though against his Prohibition. *
Determining Controversies arising in matters of Faith, and Religion; and
publishing such their Determinations to all the Churches Subjects within any
Princes Realms. * Making Ecclesiastical Laws for Government, and Discipline, as
need requires. * Receiving Accusations, examining Witnesses, correcting
Offenders, against the Laws of Christ, or of the Church: [I do not name here,
the Churches judging of Civil Causes between Christians, (though this a thing
most usual, when the Princes, and their Courts were Heathen); because this is a
Right of the Prince to judge all such Causes, when brought before him: and, on
that account, the practice thereof did return to the Prince, when Christian;
when it had been disused before, only because Christians, in any contest, chose
rather, or also were enjoined, (it being a thing not only lawful, but in those
times, very expedient, for them) to stand to the Arbitration of their
Ecclesiastical Governors, than to go to the trial of the Civil Law, and Secular
Magistrate.] * Declaring Heresy; Suspending criminous sinners from the
Sacrament: Imposing Penances; Reconciling Penitents; and Excommunicating, and
casting out of the Church the incorrigible, and obstinate: * Ordaining
Church Officers in a due Subordination, with a strict dependence of the lower,
upon the higher, Clergy; so that an Ecclesiastical Function is unlawfully
exercised by the one, if he enter upon it without the consent, or confirmation,
of the other; (and that, not only of Presbyters without the Bishops; and of
Bishops, without the Metropolitans, or Primates; but of Primates themselves
also, without the Patriarchs: (as has been showed). * Holding Religious
Assemblies, both for the Public Service of God, and for the forementioned
Church Affairs. * And, for this again, the respective Superiors Calling, and
appointing these Meetings in certain places, and times; which also must be
within the Territories of some secular Prince: only all these things done by
Lawful, and Canonical, Ecclesiastical Superiors, without Arms (unless it be
those of the Prince for their protection) and in order to ends purely
spiritual: In which proceedings therefore they remain questionable, and to be
restrained by the same Temporal Authority, when, in any exceeding of such
limits, found to transgress.

Tim. 5.19, 20, 21. -- Tit. 1.10, 11, 13. -- 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 12, 13. -- 4.19,
21. -- 3 John 9.10. -- Mat. 18.17, 18, 20. and their holding a Council at
Jerusalem, Act. 15) and in the primitive times, before Constantine, though the
secular Powers (as yet Heathen), opposed, prohibited, executed, the chief
Actors of them; and therefore much more, they may be continued, and acted by
the same Authority, when Princes, for the gaining of eternal Crowns, have
subjected their mortal ones to Christian^ty, and are become Sons of the Church;
who, surely, by bringing in their persons under her obedience, do not gain any
such new Sovereignty over her, as by this to take away those former Rights,
which Heathen Potentates could not justly deny, or withhold from her. For note
here, That whatever Prerogative, or Privilege, is challenged by a Christian
Prince, as naturally belonging to the Civil Power, cannot be denied also to an
Infidel, or Heathen, Prince, when possessed of the same power; [For example, If
a Christian Prince may lawfully restrain the Bishops, his Subjects, from
meeting in Synods, from executing the Church-Canons, or publishing their
definitions in matter of Doctrine, (I mean such as no way concern the State)
within his Realm, without his leave, upon this account, because he is the
Politic Supreme; so may a Heathen, as having the very same Title to do it.]
And therefore, none such must be hastily challenged by the one, which, if
exercised by the other, would both have ruined the Government of the Primitive
Church, and rendered its ordinary practice guilty of a most high Rebellion. If
these Christian Princes, therefore, now assist the Church to call her Councils,
if they adopt her Canons amongst their Laws, and use their secular sword (much
more effective, and dreaded by many, for the present, than her Spiritual one)
to force their Subjects, and hers, to a more ready obedience to her Laws; we
may not therefore argue her former power is now lost, for calling Councils; or,
for executing her Canons, unless these first be made also their Laws, because a
secularly-stronger Power is joined with hers, for the more advancing the same
effect; and hence perhaps, to some, may seem to eclipse Hers. But, though, in
such a Conjunction, the Princes Authority seems to have the stronger influence
on Church Affairs; yet, so often as any such Prince, in Profession, Christian,
but addicted to some Faction apart, withdraws such assistance from his true
Mother, and leaves Her again, as the Heathen Princes did, destitute of his aid,
or also restrained with his Interdicts; so often she is forced to renew the
Church's former behavior in the Heathen times; and goes on acting the same
things singly by her self, armed only with that sword of Justice, which Christ
has put into her hands, of shutting the Rebellious out of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Else, if we suppose any one Branch of the former Church Authority, in
such a case as this, to be lost by the Princes being Christian; any Heretical
Prince will now have the same power to ruin the Orthodox, and Catholic
Religion within his Territories, as a Heathen Prince would then have had, to
destroy the Christian,

Constantius, one that professes Arrianisme, to claim, as being a Christian
Prince, the exercising of some of those Powers forementioned, which were
managed by the Church her self before the times of Constantine. Namely; a
Power. To change the Subordinations of the Ecclesiastical Authority,
established by the Church; to translate Patriarchs, or erect new ones, and to
free the Primates (such as are Arrian) from obedience to Them, and their
Synods; to introduce new Clergy, or depose the former, as to the Function of
their Office in any place of his Dominions; when yet these no way obnoxious to
secular Justice for transgressing his Civil Laws (in which case, should the
Prince deprive any such Clergy of life, or liberty, as Solomon did Abiathar,
yet the Clergy, not the Prince, is to supply another): and all this, without
their respective Ecclesiastical Superiors consent, and allowance. -- * To
hinder the Calling of Ecclesiastical Synods, without his Consent, as a thing
rightly appertaining to him, and other Christian Princes, not them, the Church
men. -- * Or, these called, at least to hinder his Clergy from assisting there;
and to deny their Decrees obligatory, at least, within the Circuit of his
Government. -- * When Synods are assembled in his own Territories, and with his
leave; To hinder their making any definitions, in spiritual matters, or,
publishing them within his Dominions, without their being first evidenced to
him, to be in nothing repugnant to Gods Word, (a thing he is to learn of them),
and without his consent first obtained; whereby he assumes to himself, in the
Churches Consults, a negative voice. -- * To hinder also the execution of the
Churches former Canons in his Territories, so long as these not admitted
amongst his Laws. -- * Again, when some former Church-Doctrine seems to Him to
vary from Gods Truth; or some Canon of the Church to restrain the just liberty
of his Subjects, I mean, as to spiritual matters, then either Himself, and
Council of State, against all the Clergy; or joined with some smaller part of
the Clergy of his own Kingdom, against a much major part; or joined with the
whole Clergy of his own Dominions against a Superior Council; to make
Reformations herein, as is by them thought fit. -- * Lastly, To prohibit the
entrance of any Clergy, save such as is Arrian; into his Kingdom, under a
Capital punishment; who sees not, that such an Arrian Prince, justified in the
exercise of any such power, and, so the Church obliged to submit to it, must
needs, within the circuit of his Command, overthrow the Catholic Religion; and
that the necessary means of continuing, there, the truth of the Gospel is
withdrawn from the Church, And the same it would be here, if the Clergy, within
such a Dominion, should, upon any pretended cause, declare themselves freed
from obedience to their Ecclesiastical Superiors; or, by I know not what
privilege, translate their Superiors Authority to the Prince.

Jurisdictions, vindicated by the Church, are so clearly due to her, for the
subsistence of true Religion, as that several passages in many Learned
Protestants seem to join with Catholics in the defense of them, of which I
shall give you a large view in another Discourse. Mean while see that of Dr.
Field, quoted below, 49. and, at your leisure, Mr. Thorndikes Treatise of the
Rights of the Church, in a Christian State; and B. Carleton's, of Jurisdiction
Regal, and Episcopal. In the last place, then, this Bar was set by the Church,
against any Clergies making use of the Secular Power, for remitting their
Subjection to the Laws and Constitutions of their Ecclesiastical Superiors; or
for possessing themselves of any Ecclesiastical Dignities, or Jurisdictions,
contrary to the Churches Canons.

Subordinations of Clergy, Persons, and Councils (so high as the Patriarchal),
for preserving a perpetual unity in the Church; 1 First, No Introduction, or
Ordination, of inferior Clergy could any where be made without the approbation,
or confirmation of the Superior. Councils, were to be called, when need
required, and to be moderated, by their respective Ecclesiastical Superiors,
and matters of more general concernment, there, not to be passed by the
Council, without his consent: nor by him, differences about Doctrine, Manners,
or Discipline, arising amongst inferior persons, or Councils, were to be
decided by their Superiors, till we come to the highest of these, the
Patriarchal Council. And, in the Intervals of Councils, the respective
Prelates; and Presidents thereof, were to take care of the Execution of their
Canons; as also, to receive and decide appeals in such matters, for which it
was thought not so necessary to convene a Synod, amongst which, the differences
with, or between, Primates, were to be decided by the Patriarch; those with, or
between, Patriarchs, by the Proto-Patriarch; assisted with such a Council, as
might with convenience be procured. Superior. 5 All these things were to be
transacted in the Church, concerning causes purely Ecclesiastical, and
Spiritual, without the controulment of, or appeal to, any secular Judges, or
Courts, under penalty of excommunication to the Clergy, so appealing.

Now in such a well, and close-woven Series of dependence, what entrance can
there be for pretended Reformations by Inferiors against the higher
Ecclesiastical Powers, Schism? Whether of I know not what, Independents,
Fanatics, and Quakers, against Presbyters; or, of Presbyters against Bishops
(Reformations which the Church of England has a long time deplored); or, of
Bishops against the Metropolitan; and so up to the Prime Patriarch, the supreme
Governor in the Church of Christ? And next: What degree of obedience can be
devised less (I speak, as to the determinations of matters of Doctrine), than a
non-contradicting of these Superiors? Which obedience only had it been yielded
by the first Reformers, whatever more perhaps might have been demanded of them
by the Church, yet thus had the door been shut against all entering in of
Controversy in matters of Religion once defined: And, though some still might
themselves wander out of its Pale; yet, in their forbearing Disputes, the rest
of the Churches Subjects would have slept quietly in her bosom, unassaulted,
and so unswayed, with their new Tenants. And perhaps those others also in time
have been made ashamed of their own singularity, when they were debarred of
this means of gaining Followers, and making themselves Captains of a Sect.

CHAP. III.
Of Councils General.
1. The necessary Composition of them, considered with relation to the
acceptance of them by Absents.. 35. This Acceptance in what measure
requisite.. 39.
2. To whom belongs the Presidentship in these Councils.. 47. 3. And, Calling
of them.. 47.
Ecumenical, or General; (the Rules and Laws of which may be partly collected
from the former). Wherein the chief Considerables are; 1 The Composition; of
what, or what number of persons it must necessarily consist: 2 The
President-ship in it; and the Calling of it; to whom they belong.

Composition, It is necessary, that it be such, either wherein all the
Patriarchs, (or at least, so many of them as are Catholic) with many of their
Bishops, do meet in person, or where, after All called to It, and the Bishops
of so many Provinces, as can well be convened, sitting in Council, headed by
the Prime Patriarch, or his Legates, Delegates are sent by the rest; or, at
least, the Acts, and Decrees thereof, in their necessary absence, are accepted,
and approved by them, and by the several Provinces under them; or, by the major
part of those Provinces.

General, or Ecumenical, Council, such as does consist of all the Bishops of
the Catholic Universe, met together, there never has been any; but, in those
which are generally, by Protestants, as well as Catholics, reputed, and
admitted for such, sometimes we find a greater, sometimes a smaller number,
according to the propinquity of the place, the peace of the times, the
numerosity of Sects, etc. So the four first General Councils, all held in the
East, by reason of the Heresies, they opposed, chiefly reigning in that Coast,
consisted mostly of Oriental Bishops. The first General Council, of Nice, had
present in it only. 2. Presbyters (the Bishop of Rome's Legates), and 3.
Bishops of the Occidental Churches. The 2d General Council, of Constantinople,
had in it no Occidental Bishop at all; but only was confirmed by the Bishop of
Rome, and his Occidental Council assembled in Rome, not long after it. The 3d.
General Council of Ephesus, had only 3. Delegates sent to it from the Bishop of
Rome, and his Occidental Synod. The 4th. of Chalcedon, had only 4. Legates,
sent thither from the Bishop of Rome; after that the Western Bishops, assembled
in several Provincial Synods, had communicated their judgment to them, in the
Controversy then agitated; and besides these, 2. Affrican Bishops, and one
Sicilian. Where note; That the 3d. also, of these Councils transacted most of
their business, and condemned Nestorius the Bishop of Constantinople, without
the presence of the Antiochian Patriarch, and his Bishops, who retarded his
journey in favor of Nestorius, (though afterward he, and his, consented also
to his Condemnation): And that the 4th. Council acted all things, without
Dioscorus, the Alexandrian Patriarch; whom also they deposed, for his favoring
the Heretical Party; and for his Contumacy against the Sea of Rome. See Conc.
Chalced. Act 4.

Yet all these Councils, whether the Bishops personally present, were fewer, or
more, were accounted equally valid; After-acceptation. and admittance of their
Decrees by the Prelates absent; i. e. the acceptance of such persons, as, if
present, had had a Vote in them. All which Prelates, were they personally
present in the Council, or the much major part of them, there would be no
further need of any approbation of the Church Catholic, or, of any other
Members thereof, to confirm its acts; nor are they any way capable thereof;
because the remainder of the Church diffusive (I mean of those, who have any
decisive vote in Ecclesiastical affairs) must be concluded, in their Judgment,
and Sentence, by this supposed much-major part thereof, that are personally
present in the Council. But this wanting, the other compleatsits defect. And
upon such Acceptance it is, that the 2d. and the 5th. of the Councils called
General; held at Constantinople, without the Pope, or his Legat's presence
therein, yet bear the name of General, because the Decrees of the former of
them were accepted by Damasus, and his Occidental Council, convened not long
after it; and the latter, after some time, accepted by Vigilius, and his
Successors, with the Western Bishops; as, on the contrary, for want of such
Acceptance, the 2d. Eph^sin Council, though for its meeting as entire and
full, as most of the other called Ecumenical, yet was never esteemed such,
because its Decrees, though passed by a major part of the present Bishops, were
opposed by the Popes Legates in the Council; and by Him, and the main Body of
the Occidental Prelates, out of it.

Acceptance also, inferior Councils may become, in their Obligation,
equivalent to General: since, however the Churches Testimony is received;
whether conjunctly, De Council. l. 2. c. 28.
or by parts; yet -- Ecclesia universa errare non potest in necessariis. So
Bellarmine observes, ancient Councils, less than General, very frequently to
have determined matters of Faith. -- Haeresin Pauli Samosateni damnavit
Concilium Antiochenum paucorum Episcoporum (Eusebius l. 7. c. 24.) nec alii, multo
plures in toto mundo, conquesti sunt; sed ratum habuerunt: -- Haeresin Mace
donii damnavit Concilium Constantinopolitanum; in quo nullus fuit Latinorum;
Latini probaverunt. Haeresim Pelagii damnaverunt Concilia Provincialia;
Milevitanum, and Carthaginense. -- Haeresim Nestorii damnavit Concilium
Ephesinum, antequam adessent Latini; Latini voluerunt cognoscere rem gestam,
and cognitam approbaverunt. All which Determinations of lesser Councils
received their strength from the General Body of the Church owning them.
Neither did, or ought, such inferior Councils, when necessitated by
contentions, and disputes, define any such thing, hastily, or rashly; but as
they well knew, before any such Resolution, the common Sentiments of the Church
Catholic herein. Thus the Paucity of Church-Prelates in Councils is showed to
infer a necessity of an after-Acceptation by absents to ratify its Acts.

after-Acceptation, several things are to be well observed. 1.
1st. That it is not to be extended, (in a Latitude of Christianity much
greater), beyond the bounds of the Church Catholic. Which Catholic Church is
many times of a narrower compass, than the Christian Profession; all Heretical,
and Schismatical Churches* I mean, such as have made a former discession, in
Doctrine* or external Communion, from their lawful Ecclesiastical Superiors,
and, being but a part, have separated from the former whole, standing
contradistinct to it. So, after the Nicene Council, in Constantines time, the
Arrians, and in S. Austins time, the Donatists, were esteemed, though
Christians, yet no Catholics; and the Catholic Church was named still as a
part of Christianity, opposite to them. Of which thus S. Austin Contra Episc.
Fu^d. c. 4.
-- Tenerme, justissime, in Ecclesiae gremio ipsum Catholicae nomen, quod
[nomen], non sine causa, inter tam multas haereses, sic ista Ecclesia sola
obtinuit. Therefore, upon the growth of many Heresies, after the Heathen
persecutions ceased, instead of these words of the Apostles Creed, [ I believe
the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, (i.e.) in it] we read in
this Creed, as explained by Councils, [I believe One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church:] 1. One, to distinguish it from many, varying, Sects,
pretending also to be true Churches of Christ. 2. Holy; i. e. as to the
external maintaining the true and holy Faith, Manners, Sacraments, Government,
Discipline, delivered by our Lord, and his Apostles; and, in particular, Holy,
as maintaining no Doctrine contrary to Holiness; but not Holy; so as that some
external Members thereof may not be, by their own default, internally, unholy
and unsanctified, and no true Members of Christ. 3. Apostolic; i. e,
Succeeding them by un-interrupted Ordinations; and preserving their Traditions,
for Doctrine, Government, and Discipline, And therefore here the other Clause,
[the Communion of Saints] is omitted, as sufficiently included in the former
Explication; which is observed also by Dr. Hammond, (of Fundamentals, p. 69,
and 83.) So, in the yet more enlarged, Athanasian Creed, we find the Catholic
Faith used in a restrained sense, opposed to all those Heresies, that are
rejected by that Creed. And to this notion of Church Catholic, See, in Disc.
1.. 37. and 44. Learned Protestants willingly consenting.

Catholic Church, ( i e. of those Prelates, that be not formerly, by any
Herefie, or Schism, shut out of it,) cannot rationally be required, absolutely
universal of all, but only of the considerably Major part of them; for in a
Government not simply Monarchical, whether Ecclesiastical, or Civil, no Laws
can be promulgated, nor Unity preserved, if of their Governors the fewer be not
regulated by a major part: and it has been showed at large, Disc. 2.. 25.
(which I desire the Reader to review, and consider well, because much weight is
laid upon it) that the Decrees of the first. 4* General Councils were none of
them established with such a plenary acceptance: the practice of which
Councils is a sufficient Rule, and Warrant to posterity: Nor, otherwise, can
any new Heresy, patronized by any Bishops formerly Catholic, (as the most
pernicious Heresies have ever been), he ever legally suppressed, so long as
such Prelates persist in their dissent from the rest. See what has been said
of this in Disc. 1.. 28, 38, 39. -- and Disc. 3.. 11, and 37. That strict
condition therefore, which Dr. Hammond requires to authentize, and ratify the
Definitions, and Canons of General Councils in respect of Acceptance, seems
not reasonable; Namely, That after their promulgation [at least, if not before]
they should be accepted by each Provincial Council, and acknowledged to agree
with that Faith, which they had originally received (of Her.. 6. n. 8, 12.). --
Or, That such Conciliar Declarations should be universally received by all
Churches, (Her.. 14. n. 4.): because such are (says he) Christians, and
Bishops, as well as the Bishop of Rome; and consequently their Negatives, as
evident prejudices to, and as utterly unreconcileable with, an universal
affirmative, as the Popes can be, etc. Like to which (. 12. n. 6.) he argues
thus, concerning the absence, or dissent, of any Bishops from a Council -- That
the promise, of the Gates of Hell not prevailing against the Church, can no way
belong to a Council, unless all the Members of a Church were met together in a
Council; [I add, or, when met, do consent] for if there be any left out, why
may not the promise be good in them, though the Gates of Hell should be
affirmed to prevail against the Council. And,. 5. n. 3. -- That, if the matter
delivered by a Council be not testified from all places, it is not qualified
for our belief, as Catholic, in respect of place; because the Faith being one,
and the same, and by all, and every of the Apostles, deposited in all their
Plantations, what was ever really thus taught, by any of them, in any Church,
will also be found to have been taught. and received, in all other Apostolical
Churches. And,. 10 n. 2, 3. He concludes the Canon of the 7th. General Council
not obliging; -- because the contrary Doctrine being delivered before in a
Provincial Council, that of Eliberis, [which is not true], yields (says he) an
irrefragable proof, that the Doctrine of the 2d. Nicene Council, was not
testified, by all the Churches, of all ages, to be of Tradition Apostolical. I
say, such an universal acceptance as this, of every Church, or Province, seems
upon any such pretense, unreasonably exacted.

1st. Because all Conciliary Definitions are not (as he says there they are)
only Declarations, and Testifications of such Apostolical Traditions, as were
left by them evident, and conspicuous, in all Christian Churches planted by
them; but are, many times, Determinations of points deduced from, and
necessarily consequential to, such clear Traditionals, whether written, or
unwritten.

2ly. Because, if the Acts of General Councils were only such Declarations of
Apostolical Tradition, yet, it is possible, that some particular Church may, in
time, depart from such a Tradition, entrusted unto them: (else how can any
Church become Heretical, against any such Tradition?) and so, when their
acceptance is asked, may refuse to acknowledge, what all the rest justisie. And
all this clearly appears in those Bishops, or Churches, that made some
opposition to the Decrees of the 4. first General Councils; and in the
opposition of S. Cyprian, and his Bishops, concerning Rebaptization.

Approbation of such major part; It is thought sufficient, if it be a tacit,
and interpretative, Approbation only (and not positive, or express; 3.
for who can show this, to most allowed Councils?) Namely, when, such Decrees
being promulgated, they signify no opposition thereto. Of which thus
Franciscus a Sancta Clara (System. fidei, c. 23. p. 262) -- Neque tamen
dubitandum est, quin statim obligare incipiant actus Conciliares, si non
appareat Ecclesiarum (non dico hujus, vel illius, vel aliquorum protervorum
hominum) reclamatio; nam praesumendum est, omnes consensisse, si non constet
oppositum: ut etiam acute observavit Mirandula, ubi post alia dicit -- Quoad
dum universalis Ecclesia non reclamarit, necessario credendum est. And thus Dr.
Hammond, of Here Is.. 6. n. 15.16. -- When a Doctrine is conciliarly agreed on,
it is then promulgated to all; and the universal, though but tacit,
approbation, and reception thereof, the no considerable contradiction given to
it in the Church, is a competent evidence, that this is the judgment, and
concordant Tradition of the whole Church, though no resolution of Provincial
Synods [which was used before some General Councils] has preceded. -- But if
their Acts are contradicted, and protested against, this evidently prejudiceth
the Authority of that Council. And Archbishop Lawd,. 26. p. 195. says, -- It
is a sufficient confirmation to a General Council -- if, after it is ended, the
whole Church admit it, though never so tacitly. The whole Church admit it,
says he. And, the whole, say we, or, such a major part of the whole, as ought
to conclude the rest. Which admission also is sufficiently discerned in the
most general Conformity, to such Decrees, in men's profession, and practice* For
it is all reason, that where we cannot have, Quod creditum est ubique; ab
omnibus; semper; by reason of some divisions in the Church, we hold to what is
nearest it, quod creditum est in pluribus locis; and a pluribus; and diutius or
antiquius; For the plures, pluribus locis, joined in one Communion with the
Ecclesiastical Head of the Church here on earth, are the securest Expositors to
us, of quod antiquius; or, quod creditum semper. See Disc. 3.. 11.

4ly. For the applying of this Acceptance to all the Decrees of a Council, or
only to some, 4.
so far as a due Acceptance is extended, so far is our Obligation; nor can any
reasonably argue, that, if some Acts of a Council are, by some
after-opposition, rendered invalid, therefore no other things p^ssed in that
Council, and generally approved, have force.

non-approbation of some Prelates, or Churches (as frequently happens) its not
invalidating a Council, 5.
or its Decrees, must be said also of the absence of some Prelates from the
Council, or of their non-concurrence, when sitting in it; their absence, 1.
Either voluntary; as, of those, who, heterodox in opinion, and fewer in number,
foresee, that probably they shall be over voted by the rest: (as the Arrian
Prelates did absent themselves from the Council of Sardica; and so, might also
have absented themselves from that of Nice; or again, the Eutychian Prelates,
from Chalce^on) notwithstanding whose absence, or non-concurrence, the Council
will not cease to bear the just title of General (provided, that it consist of
a major part of the Christian Churches, and have the concurrence of the Prime
Patriarch; without whom nihil finiendum): Otherwise an Heretical, or
Schismatical, Church can secure themselves, as they please, from being
condemned by any General Council; which, as long as they are absent, will be
called not General, and so its force cannot extend to them. Nay; otherwise,
after any defection from the Orthodox Faith, or after any considerable Schism
in the Church, now, there can never be any more Ecumenical Councils; because,
forsooth, that party fallen away will give no meeting to the other, too
prevalent; and thus General Councils cease to have any being, when there first
begins to be any need of them. Of this thus a Learned Protestant Dr. Field, p.
651.
with intention to make the 5th. Council a General one without the presence of
the Pope, and his Occidental Bishops. -- The Presidence, and Presence (says
he) of the Bishop of Rome is not so necessary in General Councils; but that, in
case of his wilsul refusal, a Council may proceed, and be holden for lawful,
without his consenting to it. And, -- As a Council may be holden in such a case
[i.e. they refusing to come], without the presence, and concurrence of the
Roman Bishop, and those that are subject to him; so, being present, if be
refuse to concur in judgment with the rest, they may proceed without him, and
their sentence may be of force, though he consent not to it. What, then, they
presume to affirm, thus, of the Roman, they must not deny, of their own
Bishops. This, that the voluntary absence of some Prelates does not invalidate
a Council, or its Acts. 2. Neither yet does the absence forced of some others;
if such as being formerly justly e^communicated, or anathematized, have now no
right to any voting in such Councils, though perhaps, if admitted, these might
equal the Orthodox in number, Thus Gelasius Bishop of Rome Epist. ad Episcopos
Dardaniae.
concerning the Eutychians (when very numerous in the East) and also of the
Favorers of them, not to be admitted to a Council -- Ecclesiastici moris non
est, cuni his, qui pollutam habent communionem, permixtamque cum perfidis,
miscere Concilium. -- And, Merito ab Apostolica sede, caeterisque Catholicis,
non jam consulendi erant, sed potius notandi, etc.

6ly. What has been here said of the necessary Constitution, or Composition of
a General Council, Ratification of its Acts, must be said exactly, on the same
ground, 6.
concerning a Patriarchal or other inferior Council: that it is not necessary,
that all the Bishops of such Patriarchy, be assembled; or, absent, do accept,
and ratify it, to make it Legal, or Obligatory.

Composition of a General Council; come we next to the Presidency, and
Moderatorship therein.

1. Where, 1st. As it has been already showed, in all the other Synods,. 9, etc
Protestants consenting. 16.
, that the Presidentship in them, without any new election made by the Council,
or yet by the secular power, belong^ to him, who has the prime place, and
dignity; the presiding in the Provincial Council, to the Metropolitan: in the
National Council, where be may Metropolitans, to the Primate of them, etc.
which President, also, had in these Councils a negative voice See, before,. 10.
: so it seems all reason, that, i^ a General Council also, that Prelate should
preside, who is the Bishop of the chief See; and, to whom, in all ages, all
other Churches, and Prelates, have allowed the Primacy; i. e. the Bishop of
Rome (See 2. Genesis Counc. c. 5.) All reason, I say, That the Primate of the
Patriarchs Preside in a General Council, as the Primate of the Metropolitans,
in a National. And, that, what other Privileges these other Presidents enjoyed
in those Councils, the same at least (though we set aside here his universal
Pastorship) He should enjoy in This* agreeable to that ancient Canon, and
Custom, in the universal Church, (mentioned by Socrates, l. 2. c. 13. -- And
Sozamen, l. 2. c. 13. -- And, vindicated, by Pope Innocent, apud August. Epist.
91. -- And, yet more anciently, by Pope Julius, against some Oriental Bishops,
apud Athanas. Apol. 2.) -- Sin^ Romans P^^tifice nihil finiendum.

Prescription may be of any force; de facto, the Prime Patriarch, the Bishop of
^ome, in the ancient Council^ General has always bean allowed this
Presidentship. As will appear to any reviewing the Church History for the first
8. General Councils: In 4. of which Councils, namely, the 4th. 6th. 7th* and
8th, the Protestant grant it without dispute. Next; For his Presidency in the
3d. General Council; it seems evident enough, l. 1. c. 4. and Conc. Ephesians. pars
2. Act. 1.
from the testimony of Evagrius, that Cyril Bishop of Alexandria was deputed by
him to execute this Office; who says, That the Bishops meeting in that Council
-- Cyrillo locum Celestini, Episcopatum antiquae Romae gerentis, obtinente,
accersunt Nestorium, etc. whose Deputy also Cyril was made before, for the
excommunication of Nestorius by the Authority of the Apostolical See; as
appears in the Pope's Letter to Cyril Act. Council. Ephesians. Tom. 1.
-- Nostra vice, and loco, cum potestate, usus, ejusmodi sententiam exequeris,
etc.

For the 2d. and 5th. General Council, both held at Constantinople; as it is
true, that the Pope presided not in them, because indeed neither He, nor his
Legates were present in them; so it is true, that these Councils were not
General, till they were, after their Session, accepted by him, and the other
Western Churches. But yet both these Councils, apparently enough, yield the
Presidency to him in general Councils: the 5th. (which much courted his
presence) in express terms, in Eutychi^^ the Patriarch of Constantinople his
Letter to him -- Petinius, Conc. Constan Collat. 1.
presidente nobis vestra Beatitudine, communi tractatu, eadem capitula in medio
proponenda quari, etc. And the 2d. in that which infers his presidency, whilst
the Bishop of Constantinople, who in the absence of him, and his Legates,
presided in it, challenges Primatus honorem only post Romanum Episcopum. Conc.
Constant. c. 5.
-- And that Council, in their Epistle to Damasus the Roman Bishop, acknowledge
their meeting in that Council by order of his Letters. -- Concurreramus
Constantinopolim ad vestrae Reverentiae literas. Now for the first Council,
That of Nice, which only remains: Here also the Popes Legates are found to
subscribe the first, before all the other Patriarchs: only Hosius bearing no
title, save Bishop of Corduba, gives his Vote, and attests the Nicene Creed,
before these Legates; which has caused much dispute. Act. Conc. Nic. l. 2. c.
5.
Gelazius Cyzicenus and some other Ancients, say; Hosius presided in it, as
Sylvestri Episcopi Maximae Romae locum obtinens (And indeed, the Popes Primacy
before the other Patriarchs, and so, much more, before a Bishop of his own
Patriarchy, being granted; and no mention being made of any such Presidentship
conferred on Hosius, either by election of the Council, or of the Emperor, what
can be said, but that he held such Presidency only in this capacity, viz. the
Popes, Deputation (as Cyr^l also did in the 3d. General Council)? unless any
will say; that his voting in the first place, was a pure Indulgence of honor
to him, as being, (...) a Confessor in Divelesian's days, and narrowly missing
Martyrdom; * the Emperor's especial Favorite, sent by him formerly ^o compose
the differences in Egypt; * a person, as Athanasius ^aith of him, Apolog. 2.
Epist. ad Solit. vitam agentes.
Ob^tantos labores omni Reverentia dignus: and now, Euscb. de vita Constable. l. 2.
c. 62. Socrat. l. 1. c. 4.
(...) the Compiler of the new Form of the Nicene Creed. To which Creed
therefore himself gives the first testimony in this form -- Hosius Episcopus
Civitatis Cordubensis, Provinciae Hispaniae dixit; ^ta credo, sicut superius
scriptum est, after which consent of his, follows in the first place, the
Pope's Legates Subscripsimus; and then that of the other Patriarchs, and
Bishop, Where it may also be confidered, what Dr. Field has observed That the
Subscriptions, p. 652.
in the first Councils. were more irregular; and no such certain, and uniform
course kept in giving preeminences to the chief Bishops, as was afterward; For,
in this Council, the third Patriarch of Antioch subscribes not only after the
Bishops of Egypt, but of Palestine, and several others subject to his own
Patriarchate. And thu^ far the same Dr. Field proceeds in deferring this
Presidentship to the Bishop of Rome; All Antiquity (says he p. 653:
) yielded to the Bishop of Rome a Presidentship of honor to have preeminence
in place, to propose things to be, debated, to direct the Actions, and to give
definitive Sentence according to the Voices and Judgment of the Council. [He
might have added: And in matters concerning Faith. to render the Act of it
invalid, and unconclusive to the Church, without his consent, according to the
ancient Canon; Sine Romano Pontifice nibil finiendum, etc. as appears in his
nulling the Act of the second Ephesine Council voting Eutychianisme]: but not a
Presidentship of power, to have the power not only of directing, but of ruling
their doings also that are assembled in Council, and to conclude of matters
after his own judgment, though the greater part of the Council like it not, yea
though no part like it. [But such a Presidentship of power in the Pope, as to
conclude matters after his own judgment, either against the whole, or major
part of a General Council, is denied as well by modern Catholics, as by
Protestants, or Antiquity.]

Presiding in, the same is to be said of the Calling of, General Councils. 1.
Where, 1.
1st. It seems all reason; that, such Meetings being Consultations for the
better managing of affairs purely Ecclesiastical, and for the better feeling
and preserving of the Churches.Unity, and Peace, (of the necessity of which
meetings the Clergy can best judge), All reason, I say, it seems, that the
Calling of them should belong to the Clergy; especially, when the secular
powers are not Christian. And this also we find in the Church's practice; that
both that first Council, Act. 15. and all those following, till Constantine's
days, were assembled by the Church's sole Authority, without the Prince's
concurrence, or leave; and, if amongst these Councils, none save the first,
were absolutely General, yet this was not from a defect of power in the Church
to convene such a Council, but that she thought, in such a secular opposition,
her affairs might be, by many divided Councils Provincial more privately, and
securely dispatched, as the Controversy about Easter was in the second Century.

This Right therefore, formerly possessed by the Church, Princes, by their
submitting unto it, and becoming Christian, cannot justly take away: nor may be
thought to do so, by their accumulative power in assisting the Church from time
to time for procuring the more effectual concurrence. (which much depends on
their temporal penalties), of such great Assemblies. But whatever privilege of
calling General Councils should be allowed to Princes so long as Catholic, yet
at least that Right, which in this matter is conceded to belong to the Church,
in case the Emperor, or Prince, be Infidel, must also be resumed in case the
Prince Christian be an enemy to the Orthodox Faith: ( i. e.) be either
Heretical, or Schismatical (of which likewise it belongs to the Supreme
Governors of the Church to judge*) For* What mischief may the Church suffer
from unbelieving, that she may not also suffer from Heretical, Princes? And
again must also be resumed, in case the secular Princes, through whose
Dominions the Catholic Church is dispersed, be many; of many several temporal
Interests; and, in respect of these, not facil to concur in the calling such
Council, where the Church apprehends need.

2.
in all the inferior Synods, Protestants consenting, 1. That the Right of
calling them, though the Prince be Christian, belongs to such an Ecclesiastical
person, as has either a superiority of Power over the Members of such Synod,
(as, in a Provincial Synod, the Metropolitan has); or at least, the
superiority of Order, and Place, (es in a National Synod, the Primate has, in
respect of the other Metropolitans, whereof it consists): 2. And Belongs to
such Ecclesiastical persons, without their first consulting any other
preparatory Synod, about calling such Synods: 3. And again, belongs to some of
them (as the calling of Patriarchal Synods, to the Patriarch) when the Bishops,
so called together by him, do live under many several secular Governments; Yet
-- which Patriarchs (says Dr. Field p. 653.
) are neither so depending of, nor subject to, the power of Princes, but that
when they are enemies to the Faith [I add Faith, either Christian, or
Catholick] they may exercise the same without their consent, and privity, and
subject them, that refuse to obey their Summons, to such punishments, as the
Canons of the Church do prescribe in cases of such contempt, or wilful
negligence. And the 8th. General Council, ( Can. 17.) upon occasion of some
Metropolitans, qui, ne secundum vocationem Apostolici Praesulis accurrant, a
mundi Principibus se detineri, sine ratione, causantur, declares also thus
against such Princes -- Cum Princeps pro suis causis conventum frequenter agat,
impium esse, ut summos Praesules ad Synodos pro Ecclesiasticis negotiis
celebrandum impediant, vel quosdam ab eorum Conciliis prohibeant: And all these
things are justified, and allowed by Protestants: Sutably then to all the rest
it seems all reason, That the calling of a General Council, i.e. a Synod
consisting of many Patriarchs, and their Patriarchies, should belong to the
Primate of the Patriarchs, or Bishop of the chief See; though we suppose, that
he claim no more, than a preeminency of order, as Primates do over
Metropolitans.

Thorndike concerning the Right of Calling Councils its belonging to the
Church. Epil. p. 33. -- I must (says he) here not omit to allege the
Authority of Councils; and to maintain, the Right, and Power of holding them,
and the obligation, which the Decrees of them, regularly made, is able to
create, to stand by the same Authority of the Apostles: He accounting that
Assembly ( Act. 1.) at the election of Matthias, a General Council; and again,
that, Act. 15.

And then, thus B. Bramhal, concerning the Prime Patriarch's calling such
Council, Schism-guarded, p. 356. -- If the Pope, (says he) has any right,
either to convocate General Councils himself, or to represent to Christian
Sovereigns the fit Seasons for convocation of them, either in respect of his
beginning of Unity, or of his Protopatriarchate, we do not envy it him, since
there may be a good use of it in respect of the division of the Empire, so good
caution be observed. Bellarmine De Council. l. 1. c. 12.
confesses that power which we acknowledge; that is, that, though the Pope be
no Ecclesiastical Monarch, but only Chief of the principal Patriarchs, yet the
Right to convocate General Councils should pertain unto him. So B. Bramhal.

Dr. Field speaks yet more distinctly, and copiously Of the Chur. p. 697.
-- The State of the Christian Church (says he) being spiritual, is such, that
it may stand, though not only forsaken, but grievously oppressed, by the great
men of the world: and therefore it is by all resolved on; that the Church has
her Guides and Rulers distinct from them that bear the Sword: and that there
is, in the Church, a power of convocating these her spiritual Pastors, to
consult of things concerning her we^fare, though none of the Princes of the
world do favor her. -- And there is no question, but that this power [of
convocating these Pastors] is in them that are first, and before other, in each
company of spiritual Pastors, and Ministers -- Hereupon we shall find, that the
calling of Diocesan Synods pertains to the Bishop; of Provincial, to the
Metropolitan; of National, to the Primate; and of Patriarchal, to the
Patriarch. And of these he says -- That they neither are so depending, etc.
quoted before.. 48. Lastly, Concerning the Calling of General Councils -- In
times of persecution (says he) and when there are no Christian Princes [ i. e.
to assist the Church, as he says afterward] -- If there be any matter of
Faith, or any thing concerning the whole State of the Christian Church, wherein
a common deliberation of all the Pastors of the Church is necessary, he that is
in order the first among the Patriarchs, with the Synods of Bishops subject to
him, may call the rest together, as being the principal part of the Church,
whence all actions of this nature do take beginning. Instancing in Julius, and
Damasus, Bishops of Rome, with their Councils, practicing this. So Dr. Field.

In times of persecution, or, when the Church has not Princes to assist her,
then, the power of Calling General Councils to belong to the Clergy. The other,
(That then it belongs, in the Clergy, to the prime Patriarch; yet not singly;
but, joined with his Council; for (says he p. 668.
) the first Patriarch has not power, singly, to call together the other
Patriarchs, and their Bishops, because none of them is superior to another in
degree, as Bishops are to Presbyters, nor so, in Order, Honor, and Place, as
Metropolitans are to Bishops; or Patriarchs, to Metropolitans. Now to the first
of these, his limiting this Ecclesiastical power only to times of persecution,
see what has been said already; and his own instances prove against it; for
Julius, Dama^us, summoned the Oriental Bishops to such a Council. the one of
them in the Reign of Constans, the other, of Theodosius, both of these being
Christian, Orthodox, Catholic. Emperors. Though, if this be allowed, that in
any non-assistance of the secular powers (Heathen, or Christian, it matters
not) the Church has power, when she judges it requisite, to assemble such
Councils, more needs not be desired. Concerning his second Limitation; In the
reason he gives for it, he omits one Superiority among the rest, which would
have fitted the purpose; namely, the Superiority, that Primates have to the
other Meropolitans, in their calling a National Synod, and that without any
Assembly of the Primate's own Bishops, first consulted: I ask therefore, why
not the Primate of the Patriarchs, do the like? 2ly. If the first Patriarch
singly have no authority for calling together the other Patriarchs, neither
has he, joined with his Synod; his Synod having no more power over other
Patriarchs, then himself. As for the Instances: Julius sent to the Orientals,
singly, concerning a Council, to be joined of both the East and West. Damasus
indeed sent, when a Western Council was sitting; but this called for other
matters, and not for this, to give him a Commission for such a Summons, or to
join with him in it; as if the first Patriarch cannot, when need requires, call
a General Council without first Summoning, and convening a Patriarchal Council,
to give their consent to the calling of this General: A thing, to which the
Churches practice is known to be contrary; and also the convening of a
Patriarchal Council, a matter of so great trouble, and delay, as it seems most
unreasonable to require the assembling of such a Council, either for this, or
for much other Church-business (as hearing Appeals of less account. etc.) which
come to the Patriarchs hands. And the same Dr. Field elsewhere grants so much;
where he says p. 513.
, -- That in time, causes growing many, and the difficulties intolerable, in
coming together, and in staying to hear these Causes thus multiplied, and
increased [which he confesses before, to be just considerations] it was
thought fitter to refer the hearing of Complaints, and Appeals, to
Metropolitans, and such like Ecclesiastical Judges, limited, and directed by
Canons, and Imperial Laws, than to trouble the Pastors of whole Provinces, and
to wrong the people by the absence of their Pastors, and Guides. Thus Dr.
Field. -- And the Protestant-Primates (says Bishop Bramhal Vind. c. 1. p. 257.
) use the same customs of judging Church-Causes, without calling Synods. Now
what is, in this kind, conceded to Metropolitans, much more ought to be to
Patriarchs; whose Councils are not so easily collected as Provincial; nor ever
was a set time appointed for these, as for the other. This said, concerning the
Calling of General Councils, its belonging, of right, to the Church; and, in
it; to the Supremest Prelate.

3.
still have a lawful power of convocating a General Assembly of the same
Prelates, as being their Subjects; of calling these, both in assistance to the
Church in her necessities; and also in order to their own Civil affairs, when
any way disturbed by contentions in the Church; Provided, this be with the
Prime Patriarch's consent; consent, either before, or, at least after, the
Indiction of them. Of which thus Bellarmine De Council. l. 1. c. 12.
-- Catholici munus convocandi Concilia Generalia ad Romanum Pontificem proprie
pertinere volunt; fic tainen, ut possit etiam alius, Pontifice consentiente,
Concili^m indicere; quinetiam satis sit, si indictionem factam ipse postea
ratam habeat, and confirmet, at si, nec ipse indicat Concilium, nec aliquis
alius de ejus mandato vel consensu, nec ipse saltem approbat indicationem,
illud non Concilium, sed Conciliabulum fore.

Emperors, being, by their secular power, much more effectual promoters
thereof, were prevailed with to call the first General Councils, so this was
not done, but either from the first Motion, or with the consent, of the Bishop
of Rome, the Supreme Head of the Church; as appears concerning all the first 6.
General Councils, in the acclamatory speech of the 6th. Council, at the
conclusion thereof, to the Emperor -- Arius Divisor, etc. They naming 1
Sylvester, 2 Damasus, 3 Caelestinus, 4 Leo, 5 Vigilius, 6 Agatho, Bishops of
Rome, joined with the Emperor, in the promoting all these Councils. And, to
come to some particulars, Concerning the Second General Council of
Constantinople; thus says that Council in their Letter to Damasus, and to the
Council assembled with him at Rome -- Concurreramus Constantinopolim, ad
vestrae Reverentiae [ i. e. of Damasus singly, this Council not then sitting,
when the Orientals met first in Council, though it did, when they writ,]
literas, missas Theodosio, summa pietate Imperatori. Concerning the 3d. Council
thus Prosper (in Chronico) -- Synodum Ephesinam factam esse Cyrilli industria,
and Coelestini authoritate. Concerning the 4th. Thus the Emperor to Leo, (in
the Epistles pertaining to that Council) -- Superest, ut si placuerit tuae
Beatitudini in has parts advenire, etc. Synodum celebrare, hoc facere
Religionis affectu dignetur, nostris utique desideriis vestra Sanctitas
satisfaciet, and Sacrae Religioni, quae utilia sunt decernet. Si ver^ hoc
onerosum est, ut tu ad has parts advenias, hoc ipsum nobis pr^priis Literis
tua Sanctitas manifestet, quatenus in omnem Orientem, and in ipsam Thraciam and
Illyricum sacrae nostrae Literae dirigantur, ut ad quendam definitum locum, ubi
nobis placuerit, omues sanctissimi Episcopi debeant convenire; and quae
Christianorum Religioni, atque Catholicae Fidei, prosint, sicut Sanctitas tua
secundum Eccesiasticas Regulas definiverit, sua dispositione declarent. To
which add, * that of Pulcherta the Emperor's Sister, to the same Pope. --
Propterea tua Reverentia, quocunque modo prospexerit, significare dignetur, ut
omnes etiam totius Orientis Episcopi, Thraciae atque Illyrici (sicut etian
nostro Domin pi^ssimo Imperatori placuit) in unani Civitatem velociter ab
Orientalibus partibus valiant convenire; and illic facto Concilio, de Catholica
confessione, etc. te authore, decernant. And, * the Accusation of Dioscorus
Patriarch of Alexandria, in the first Act of that Council -- Quod Synodum ausus
est facere fine authoritate Sedis Apostolicae, quod nunquam factum est, nec
fieri licuit; The like to which see in the Epistle of Pope Pelagius. 2. to the
Oriental Bishops, against John Bishop of Constantinople: And that of Gelasius,
who lived about some 40. years after, in his Epistle ad Episcopos Dardaniae. --
Seeds Apostolicae impiam Synodum [ i. e. the second Ephesin] non consentiendo,
sola summovit; and authoritate, ut Synodus Chalcedonensis fieret, sola
decrevit. Lastly, If the ancient Canon, that in such Councils Sine Romano
Pontifice nihil finiendum, stand good, the calling such Councils by Emperors,
without the Mandate, or confent also of this Bishop, will be to no purpose;
because nothing can be established therein, without his concurrence. Thus much
of the power of Calling General Councils.

CHAP. IV.
I. Head. Of the Generality, and just Authority of the Council of Trent.
1. That the Western Churches, and particularly, that of England, are not freed
from subjection to this Council, though it were not General; if, Patriarchal..
53.

2. Or, if only so General, as those times were capable of.. 65.

3. That it is not hindered from being General, by reason of the absence of the
Greek Churches.. 66.

4. Nor by reason of the absence of the Protestant Clergy.. 67.

Trent, as occasion requires,) I proceed to a more particular consideration of
the first Head proposed before. 8.
, concerning the Generality, and just Authority, of this Council, to oblige all
the Churches Subjects; especially, those of the West.

Trent, no legal, and free, General, yet if it be a free, and legal,
Patriarchal, Council, thus it will stand obligatory (at least for the obedience
of non-contrad ction) to the Reformed; and particularly, to the English Church.

For 1st. It has been formerly cleared, both by the Church-Canons See,
before,. 11, 12. etc.
, and the Concessions of Protestants. 16. n. 4. etc.
; That, as a Diocesan Synod is subject to that composed of many Diocesses, or
to a Provincial, where the Metropolitan presides; and again a Provincial, or
Metropolitan Synod, to a National, or that composed of many Provinces, wherein
the Primate of the Metropolitans presides; so again is this National Synod.
(the Catholic Church, in many Nations, being but One) subject to that composed
of several Nations, and their Primates, called, and presided-in, by one of the
principal Patriarchs. Neither, whatever Superiority such Patriarch, really,
has, needs he, for the subjection of such Primates, and their respective
Churches, to this Patriarchal Council, any other power over these Primates,
save what these Primates are granted to have over the Metropolitans; whose
Proyincial Synods, we see, are subjected to a National, or the Primate's Synod.
Neither, if it could be proved, that the chief Patriarchs have over National
Primates, no superiority of power; or at least, that some particular Provinces,
as to Ordinations, or some other Jurisdictions, are utterly exempt from
Patriarchal authority, may therefore such Provinces pretend freedom from any
obedience to the Decrees of a Council Patriarchal, wherein some one of these
Patriarchs presides; no more, than they can justly pretend freedom from a
Council Ecumenical on the same account; in which Council Ecumenical, or
General, though the same Primates should acknowledge no Ecclesiastical Person
their Superior, yet could they not deny the Council to be so. Subject, then,
are National Synods, and Churches, to Patriarchal; and to this end every
Church, (as Dr. Field observes, p. 513. cited before,. 16. n. 5.) is
subordinate to some one of the Patriarchal Churches, and incorporated into the
Unity of it. Of the necessity of which Union of Churches in Patriarchal Synods,
in the so much more difficult, and chargeable, assembling of such, as are
absolutely Universal, see before,. 16. n. 4.

Church of England; one of those the most anciently professing Christianity, 2,
which it is clear it did, before Tertullian's time See Tertullian Apol. and ad
versus Judaeos c. 7. -- Origin in Ezech. Hom. 4, -- Bid Hist. Angl. l. 1. c. 4.
, never pretended subjection to any other Patriarch, or his Council, than this
of the West; to whom also it ascribes its Conversion, without dispute, as for
the Saxons, or English; if not also, as for the Britains. And accordingly, both
in ancient, and latter times, (if the mos antiquus obtineat, in the 6th. Canon
of Nice. be of any force) it has always ranged it self, and appeared, in the
Western Councils, as a Member of this Patriarchy, and of the Latin Church;
and, from time to time, concurred in the passing of those Canons, which have
established the Authority of the Roman Patriarch, and of these Patriarchal
Councils.

Dioclesian's time; In the Council at Arles in France, 10. years before that of
Nice, assembled by Constantine, (who, being born in England, and his Mother an
English woman, and a Christian, and, being after his Father's death, here also
first declared Emperor by his Army, may be presumed to have had some particular
respects for the British Clergy,) we find the presence, and subscription of
several British Bishops acknowledged by Dr. Hammond Schism p. 110.
, and B. Bramhal Vindic. of the Church if England, p. 98.
, and of which thus Sir Henry Spelm. A. D* 314. -- Aderant e Britannia
celebriores (ut videtur) tres Episcopi [Surely, in dignity much preceding, and
much ancienter than the Bishop of Caerleon], nempe Eboracensis, Londinensis,
and de Civitate Coloniae Lodunensium (quae alias dicitur Camelodunum) una cum
Sacerdote, Presbytero, and Diacono, qui and Canones assensu suo approbabant,
and, in Britanniam redeuntes, secum deferebant observandos. The first Canon
whereof setleth the matter of Easter to be kept, through all the Churches, on
the same day; and the divulgation of this through all Churches, was committed
to the Bishop of Rome, the Western, and Prime Patriarch, secundum
consuetudinem, says the Canon. Again, at the Council held at Ariminum, and
before this, in that of Sardica, assembled, A. D. 347. some 20. years after
that of Nice, is found the presence of the Britain, amongst other Western,
Bishops, witnessed by Athanasius, who was present there himself, in his second
Apology: And, therefore, may the Canons of that Council be presumed, among the
rest, to be ratified by them; or, at least, being passed by the major part of
that Occidental Council, to oblige them. Now what honor these Canons give to
the Roman Bishop, how they allow and ratify his supreme Decision of Appeals,
etc. Protestants are not ignorant; and therefore; to evade it, make such
exceptions as these B. Bramhal, Reply to S. W, p. 24.
-- 1. That it does not appear, That the British Bishops did assent to that
Canon. But this matters not, the major part, in Councils, concluding the rest;
and neither does it appear on the other side, but that they did approve it;
which also is to be presumed, where appears no contradiction; 2 Again urged;
That it was no General Council. But it suffices for the Britains, if it were,
at least, a complete Occidental Council. 3. Pleaded; That these Canons of
Sardica were never incorperated into the English Laws, and therefore did not
bind English Subjects. But Church-Canons, and Decrees, in matters
Ecclesiastical, do oblige all the Members of the Church, though Princes oppose;
Oblige Princes also, if Christian, and so the Churches Subjects. And the Author
that requires this incorporation of Church Canons into the Princes Laws,
explains himself elsewhere Schism guarded, p. 160.
, to mean only, that Church-Decrees oblige not, as to the using any coactive
power in his Realms for the execution of them, without the Princes leave,
because (says he) such external coactive Jurisdiction is originally Political;
a thing granted him; so that, before such leave, or enrolment, the Churches
Decrees oblige both Prince, and People, if Christian, in foro Conscientiae, the
disobedient justly incurring the Churches censures; the thing we, here, contend
for. Lastly, The 9th. Canon of Chalced. [a subsequent General Council] is
pretended to contradict these of Sardica, in giving the Supremacy in Appeals to
the Patriarch of Constantinople. But I need not tell him, that this
Constantinople Supremacy is not for the West, but East, which is, for the
Controversies of those Provinces there, subject to that Patriarch.

Britain Bishops in these ancient Councils (if I may make here a little
digression) appears the ignorance of the Abbot of Bangor (if the Relation be
true) in being such a stranger to the Popes Person, Authority, or Titles, after
A. D. 600. after all that power exercised by him, for so many Ages, in the
Western Provinces, conceded by Protestants (see Dr. Field, of the Church, l. 5.
from c. 32. to c. 40.); after so many missions, of several holy Bishops from
the Pope of Rome, either to plant, and propagate, Christianity in these Islands
of Britain, and Ireland; or, to reform it. -- * Of Fugatius, and Damianus, very
early sent by Pope Eleutherius, in King Lucius his days; which King, in the
greater nearness of several Christian Bishops in France, yet addressed himself
to the Pope, as the common Father of the Western Church -- Afterward, * Of S
Germanus, about A. D. 430. sent by Pope Celestine (says Prosper In Chronico.
one who lived also in these times) accompanied with Lupus another French
Bishop, who also consecrated Dubritius, that was the first Archbishop of
Caer-Leon -- * of Palladius, and Nenius, and Patricius, all made Bishops at
Rome, and sent thence to the Picts, Scots, and Irish: (Concerning which, see
the Church History, in Bid, Baronius, Spelman) -- And, besides this, * when
the Irish Bishops yielded all obedience to this Roman Bishop at this very time
that the British are said to deny it; as appears, both for that they are said
by Bid l. 3. c. 3.
(the South- Irish at least) to have returned very early to a right observation
of Easter, * ad admonitionem Apostolicae Sedis Antistitis: and also, for that,
about this time, they sent Letters to S. Gregory, then Bishop of Rome, to know,
after what manner they ought to receive into the Church such as were converted
from Nestorianisme, to whom he sends his Orders concerning it, directed --
Quirino Episcopo, and caeteris Episcopis in Hibernia Catholicis, (l. 9. Epist.
61.)

Abbot's denial of his obedience to the Pope; or, pleading subjection only to
the Archbishop of Caerleon, exclusive to any other superior whatever. For,
waving here the Question; whether the Pope, by his single authority, could
subject the Archbishop of Caerleon, and his Province, to S. Austin Archbishop
of Canterbury, (done afterward in Henry the first his time, with the
approbation of Protestants; and therefore, which might have been done in S.
Austin's): yet subjected was this Britain-Clergy to the Canons of Arles, and
Sardica, of which Councils their Representatives were Members, and so subjected
to the Western Patriarch also, for any authority which these Canons peclare to
be invested in him; and from the same obligation of obedience, was their
Conformity, in the celebration of Easter, with the rest of the Western
Churches, which was required by the first Canon of the Council of Arles, in
this Abbot's time, most unjustly refused.

independence can be showed to have been challenged, or Unconformity practiced,
by the Abbot of Bangor, and others, within the Province of the Archbishop of
Caerle^n; yet there is no reason, that the same should be extended, or applied
to the N^tional Church of the Britans in General, For the first Archbishop of
Caerleon is Dubritius; who, being a Disciple of S. German, sent from Rome; and
being consecrated Archbishop of this City by him, and Lupus, it is probable,
was, for his time* conformable to the Customs of the Roman See; and contrary to
those owned in Austin's t me by these Britains: But however; This of Caerleon
was but an Archbishopric of a late erection: the 3d. or 4th. from which
Du^ritius* probably must possess that Chair, when Austin came: But the Britains
had, long before Dubritius his time, other Bishops much preeminent to Caerleon:
* The Archbishop of York (the chief Bishop of the whole Nation (as that City
then was the principal City, the Roman Praetorium being there; see Spelm.
Appar. p. 22.) ^a Bishop of London, and Bishops of some other places, appearing
formerly in several Councils. Of which Bishops, Todiacus Archbishop of York,
and Theonus Bishop of London, being persecuted by the Saxons, fled into Wales
with their Clergy, A. D. 586. within eleven years after whose flight thither,
Augustine came into England; and, upon it, their persecution in part ceased.
Now there being no mention of any opposition made, by any of these Bishops, or
their Clergy (which, in eleven years space, could not all be deceased) to
Austin; but only by the Welsh under Caerleon, what can be imagined here more
reasonable, than, * That they conformed to the rest of the West in such
submission to its Patriarch, as was due to him by the Canons of those Councils,
which their Predecessors had allowed; and as was rendered to him by their
neighbour-Prelacy of Ireland, (see Greg. l. 9. Epist. 61.) as likewise. * That
they celebrated Easter according to those Conciliary Canons, and the Roman
manner; and lastly, * That returning into some of those parts of Britain from
whence they fled, they assisted Augustine in the conversion of the Saxons.

Britain Bishop in these ancient Councils also appears the insufficiency of
that Argument, which would prove the ancient Britains former non-subjection to,
or conversion by, the Western Patriarch, or his Missives, from their having at
Austin's arrival a different observation of Easter from the rest of the West.

For 1st. It is manifest, 1.
that they followed not the practice of their Forefathers herein: manifest,
both, from the presence of the former Britain Bishops in the Council of Arles,
which Council determined this matter; of whom Sir Henry Spelman says A.D. 314.
, -- Qui and Canones assensu suo approbabant; and in Britanniam redeuntes secum
deferebant observandos. And also, from Constantine's Letter Socrat. Hist. l. 1.
c. 6.
to persuade the Asian Churches to uniformity with the rest of the world in the
observation of it; He naming there, among other Churches, particularly this of
Britain; unless any will say; that, whilst the most eminent Provinces of
Britain kept it after the Roman manner, yet the Welsh, and Scots, then kept it
otherwise. But since S. German, and Lupus, who came hither two several times,
and from whom Dubritius, their first Archbishop of Caerleon, received his
education, solemnly kept their Easter here with the Britain Clergy (See Bid,
l. 1. c. 20.) it follows, either that their observation of Easter was then
altogether Catholic; or, that if it was otherwise, yet, by reason that the
difference happens not in every year, it was that year by these Bishops not
taken notice of.

Britains varied from the Roman Custom in this, so did they from the Easter
Quartodecimans in Asia; and therefore, may not, for this, 2.
be thought to have derived their Christianity from thence; The Britains
keeping their Pasch constantly on the Lord's Day; only, when the Lord's Day
happened on the 14th. day of the Moon, they kept it with the Jews, and
Quartodecimans, contrary to the Roman Custom, that observed it, in such year,
on the Sunday following: for which, see Bid, l. 3. c. 4. and 25. 3. Lastly,
Bid Hist. l. 2. c. 19.
speaks of this Error, in the Scotch Nation (and the same may be presumed, in
the British) Nuperrime, temporibus illis, hanc apud eos haeresin exortam; 3.
and non totam little gentem, sed quosdam ex iis, hac fuisse implicitos. Which
Honorius, and other Roman Bisheps with their Letters (Se Bid Ib.) endeavored
(as soon as might be) to suppress. And judge you, by these things, how
justifiable those proceedings of the Britain Clergy, or Councils of that time,
(mentioned by Bishop Bramhal, Vindic. p. 104.) were, in opposition to Austin
the Monk: who only required of them in this thing to follow the Tradition of
the Church; and objected against them. -- Quod in multis, Romanae consuetudini,
immo Vniversalis Ecclesiae, contraria gererent; and quod suas Traditiones
universis, quae per orbem sibi invicem concordant, Ecclesiis praeferrent. All
which was true; and the Proponent also confirmed this truth before them with a
Miracle, restoring sight to a blind man. See Sir Hen. Spelman, A. D. 601.

Pardon this Digression, made to abate a little the Confidence of those, who
would collect some extraordinary liberty of the Britannick Church from the
superintendency of the Western Patriarch, from this Declaration of the Abbot of
Bangor; and the different observation of Easter. Of which matter Mr. Thorndike,
in maintaining the visible unity of the Church Catholic to consist in the
resort of inferior Churches to superior; (the visible Heads of which Resort, he
says, were Rome, Alexandria, and Antiochia) speaks thus, more moderately --.
They that would except Britain out of this Rule, Just weights, p. 40.
[of subjection] upon the act of the Welsh Bishop's refusing Austin the Monk
for their Head, should consider that S. Gregory, setting him over the Saxon
Church, which he had founded, according to Rule, transgressed the Rule, in
setting him over the Welsh Church. -- Setting this case aside, the rest of that
little remembrance, that remains concerning the British Church, testifies the
like respect from it to the Church of Rome: as appears, from the Churches of
Gaul, Spain, and Afric, of which there is no cause to doubt, that they first
received their Christianity from the Church of Rome.]

Council of Arles, and Sardica, and Ariminum spoken of before. 55.
, to come to later times; we find the English Bishops either concurring, and
presenting themselves as members, with the rest, in those Occidental Councils
of a later Date, the several Lateran Councils, that of Constance, Basil, and
Florence; or, in absence, acquiessing in, and conforming to, the Votes, and
Acts thereof; which Acts have confirmed to the Bishop of Rome those
Jurisdictions over the whole Church, (excepting the question of his Superiority
to General Councils), or, at least, over the Western part thereof, which the
present Reformation denies him. For which see the Council of Constance, (much
urged by Protestants, as no Flatterer of the Pope, and wherein, the Council
voting by Nations, the English were one of the 4.) Sess. 8. and 15. condemning,
against Wickleff, and Hus, such Propositions as these, -- Papa non est
immediatus Vicarius Christi, and Apostolorum -- Summus Pontifex Ecclesiae
Romanae non habet Primatum super alias Ecclesias particulares -- Petrus non
fuit, neque est, Caput Ecclesiae Sanctae Catholicae. -- Papae Praefectio, and
Institutio, a Caesaris potentia emanavit. -- Papa non est manifestus, and verus
Successor, Apostolorum -- Principis, Petri, si vivit moribus contrariis Petro.
-- Non est scintilla apparentiae, quod opporteat esse unum Caput in
Spiritualibus regens Ecclesiam, quod [Caput] semper cum ipsa militanti Ecclesia
conservetur, and conservatur. Now the contrary Propositions to these,
authorized by a Council supposed not General, but Patriarchal only, are
obligatory at least to the members thereof; and consequently to their
Posterity, until a Council of equal authority shall reverse them: As in Civil
Governments, the same Laws which bind the Parents, bind the Children, without
the Legislative power, de novo, asking their consent.

Not many years after the Council of Chalcedon, in the Patriarchy of
Alexandria, there succeeded to Proterius, a Catholic Bishop, Timotheus an
Eutychian (since which time also the Churches of Egypt, and Ethiopia, remain
still Eutychian, or at least, Dioscorists): And, in the Patriarchy of Antioch,
to Martyrius* a Catholic Bishop, succeeded Petrus Fullo, an Eutychian: And in
the Empire, to Leo, an Orrhodox Emperor, succeeded Zeno, an Eutychian: And all
these declared their non-acceptance of the Council of Chalcedon: Yet this did
no way unfix, with posterity, the stability of its Authority, or Decrees.
Neither can the modern Eutychians justify their non-submission to that Council
hence, because they can produce some persons, and those Patriarchs too, that
have, in succeeding times, but after a former more general Acceptance, opposed
it.

English, and before them, the British, Bishops, thus showed. 54. to have been
subject to a Patriarchal Council; upon what pretense, 3.
or new privilege fince the Reformation, these Bishops should plead any
exemption from submitting to the Decrees thereof when accepted by a much major
part of the Church-Prelacy (an acceptance sufficient See before,. 40.
) I see not.

For 1st. The Pope's calling it no way renders such a Council irregular; for it
is granted by Protestants, 1.
that the Calling of a Patriarchal Council (though not of a General) of right
belongs to Him; neither may the Bishops of such Patriarchy justly disobey his
Summons; or secular Prince hinder their journey See before,. 16. n. 5, 2.


2ly. Neither can the absence of the Eastern Bishops, here, be stood upon:
because their presence, not necessary in such a Council.

3ly. Nor can the secular power, under which such Protestant Bishops live
(especially whenas no Heathen, 3.
but himself also a Subject of the Church), opposing, or not-accepting such a
Council's Decrees, free the Church's Subjects in his Dominions from
observation thereof; (I mean, if such Decrees be in a atters purely
Ecclesiastical, and spiritual, and no way intrenching upon his Civil Rights, of
which enough has been said formerly.)

Bramhal's Plea, That such Decrees oblige not any Prince's Subjects, till by
him incorporated into his Laws, as if Christians were to obey no Church-Laws,
unless first made the King's, has been spoken to before. 55.
: Dr. Hammond's grand Plea, on which he lays the greatest weight for securing
the Reformation (See his Treatise of Schism, c. 6, 7 p. 115, 132, 137, 138,
142.) viz. the Prince's power and right to translate Patriarchies; to remove
that of Rome to Canterbury; helps not, at least in this matter; (nor perhaps
did he ever mean it should extend so far, as to exempt any Western Nation from
all subjection to a free Occidental Council). For 1st. He grants; That the
Prince can do no such thing, so far as it thwarts the Canons of the Church: See
Answ. to Schism Disarmed, p. 164. -- A Power (says he) Princes have to erect
Metropoles, [and hence he collects, new Patriarchs]; but, if it be exercised
so, as to thwart known Canons, and Customs of the Church, this certainly is an
abuse. Which he has the more reason to maintain in this particular, because he
is in some doubt (as appears in his Answer to S.W Answ. to Schism Disarmed, p.
174.
.) whether Princes do not hold such power of translating, or erecting
Patriarchs from the Church's Grant. Now surely this will be confessed contrary
to the Church's Canons for a Prince to make such a removal of the Patriarchs
former Jurisdiction, as thereby to null, as to his Subjects, the authority of a
Patriarchal Council. And, if, indeed, the erecting, and removing Patriarchs did
originally belong to Princes, yet, since the Civil Governments that are
contained within the Precincts of one Patriarchy, are now in the hands of many
several Sovereigns, the repeal of any Patriarch's former authority, as it
relates to the convening of such Councils, must be an act at least of the Major
part of these Princes; as being a thing, which equally concerns them all; Nor
can the Doctor produce an instance of a former fact in this kind. And, if the
Prince can thus free his National Clergy from a Patriarch, and his Synod; why
not also from a General Council; that neither it shall oblige his Subjects
without his consent? Again; Doctor Heylin's Plea Reformation justified, p. 84.
touching the English Clergy, in their Reformation, their conferring all their
power on the Prince, which they formerly enjoyed in their own Capacity; A power
(says he) not only of confirming their Synodical acts, not to be put in
execution without his consent; but in effect, to devolve on him all that power,
which formerly they enjoyed in their own capacity [comparing it there to the
Roman Senat's transferring all their power on Caesar], I say, this Plea, as it
contains very strange Doctrine; so it reaches not our present matter; for, if
a National Clergy can, at pleasure, transfer their own spiritual authority over
others, and that authority too for reforming Errors in matters of Religion, to
a Lay person, or also to his Delegates; which authority was entrusted to them,
by our Lord, in a Personal Ordination; yet can they not hence transfer to the
same Lay-person, their Superiors whether persons or Councils, spiritual
authority over them, so that this superior's authority, for the future, shall
not oblige, but when such Lay-person first admits it.

England, to the Council of Trent, if this were only a free, and Legal,
Patriarchal Council. The true Rights of which also it may not be thought to
forfeit by its further pretensions to be a Council Ecumenical; As we may not
withdraw our due obedience from our Prince, when he exacts some other not due;
or withhold a just debt, where more is unjustly demanded: But not to stay here;

2.
as General: if it shall be proved, though not so General, as several formerly
have been; yet, so General, as now, in such an alteration of States, can be
had; and it being such, the same divine assistance, as to ampler formerly, may
be presumed to be afforded to it, for such Controversies as are necessary to be
decided. And a submission to a Council only so comprehensive several Protestant
Divines think reasonable. Thus B. Bramhal, in Preface to Reply to Chalced. -- I
submit my self to the Representative Church, a free General Council, or so
General, as can be procured. And Schism-guarded, p. 136. -- There is nothing
(says he) that we long after more, than a General Council rightly called,
rightly proceeding; or, in defect of that, a free Occidental Council, as
General as may be. And p. 351. -- I shall be ever ready to acquiesce in the
determination of a Council so General, as is possible to be had. See more, in
Disc. 1.. 35. Dr. Field freely confesses Of the Church p. 557.
-- That the Decrees of Popes, made with the consent and joint concurrence of
the other Western Bishops, do bind the Western Provinces that are subject to
him, as Patriarch of the West. [Bind them so, as that these have no liberty to
contradict the judgment of the Patriarch, and his Council, as appears, Ib. d.
39. p. 563. Where he quotes the Emperor's Law, ( Novel. 223. c. 22.) confirming
the 9th. Canon of Council Chalced. -- Nulla part ejus sententiae contradicere
valente: Consequently, these Councils bind so the Church of England. Dr.
Hammond says Answ. to Catholic Gent. p. 30.
-- That General Councils are now morally impossible to be had, the Christian
world being under so many Empires, and divided into so many Communions, that it
is not visible to the eye of man, how they should be regularly assembled. But
mean while he says Of Schism, c. 9. p. 163.
-- We acknowledge the due authority of our Ecclesiastical Superiors, profess
Canonical obedience to them, submit to their Censures, and Decrees; and give
our selves up to be ruled by them in all things, secundum Deum. And, (Answ, to
Cathol. Gentleman, p. 17.) -- A Congregation (says he) that is fallible may
yet have authority to make decisions, and to require Inferiors so far to
acquiesce to their Determinations, as not to disquiet the peace of that Church
with their contrary opinions. [All which seems to amount to his acknowledging
an external obedience of non-contradiction at least, and such, as Protestants
contend for to their National Synods, to be due to a Patriarchal, or the
highest, Assembly of Church-Governors which the present, or future times, in
the moral impossibility of having General Councils, are capable of.

3.
(the thing principally urged) seems no just hinderance why this council of
Trent may not be styled General. For evidencing which, I desire you to consider
with me these Reasons, in part cleared before.

1st. That a Council may be styled General without the presence in it of some
considerable Churches See, before,. 36, and 43.
; either, 1. When these, called by a lawful Authority, by reason of poverty,
and distance of place, 1.
or persecution, etc. cannot come; and afterward, acquainted with the Councils
proceedings, express no dissent to the Acts thereof. See before, 36. the four
first Councils, as convened for the suppressing of Heresies that chiefly
afflicted the Eastern parts, so mostly confisting of Oriental Bishops, scarce
any of the West being present in some of them. Or 2. When invited, and no way
justly let, they refuse to come; Or 3. When, by some former General Council
condemned of Heresy, and Schism, they are not invited at all to come; or,
coming, are repelled. For the Church Catholic may be much narrower than
Christianity See before, 39.
: and Councils are General, and obligatory as such, if they consist of the
Church Catholic, though it should be reduced only to one Patriarchate. 2.
2ly. Concerning the Calling of the Eastern Churches (not entering here into
that Controversy, whether these Churches do not maintain an Heresy in the
Procession of the H. Ghost, and become by this disenabled, and deprived, of a
Vote in Councils, See before,. 43.
or, are not guilty of a Schism, at least since the accord made in the Council
of Florence) it appears; that both in the first assembling of this Council at
Trent, by Paul the Third, and again, at the renewing of it by Pius the Fourth,
in general, all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. who by Law, or
privilege, have voice in General Councils, were invited and called to it; for
so ran the Bulls of the Indiction of it: (See Soave's History of the Council of
Trent, l. 1. p. 101. and l. 5. p. 435.) 3ly. There was an actual war, for a
great part of the time of this Council, 3.
between the Christians, and the Turks; wherein Charles the Fifth twice invaded
Afric; once victorious, and once beaten; during which War, we may guess how
hard, and dangerous a thing it would have been for these Eastern Bishops, or
Patriarchs, in the Turkish Territory, to have resorted to any Assembly, either
in his, or in his Enemies, Dominions; It is not credible (says B. Bramhal
Schism Guarded, p. 352.
) that the Turk will send his Subjects, that is, four of the Proto-Patriarchs,
with their Clergy, to a General Council; or allow them to meet openly with the
rest of Christendom in a General Council; it being so much against his own
Interest. But had there been peace; yet, in so great distance, and so great
poverty of those Churches, their assistance, in any great number, could not
have been expected; neither is it probable, in the differences they have with
the Roman Church (though the chief points concluded in Trent against
Protestants are none of these) that they would have trusted the negotiation of
their affairs to a few. And, upon such considerations as these, I suppose it
was, That the Reformed, in the Articles they proposed to the Emperor, Soave, l.
7. p. 642. and 367.
concerning a free Council to which they would submit, require not this
presence of the Eastern Churches, or Patriarchs in it, as a condition of their
submission to it; for indeed, in such a conjunction of affairs, as was then,
this would have discovered in them a plain tergiversation. But 4ly. Since the
Division, that caused the convening of this Assembly, arose only in the West, 4.
and did not disturb at all the peace of the Eastern Churches, who were, for
the most of the points controverted in this Council, against the new
Separatists, united in opinion, amongst themselves, and with the Western
Churches; there is also, from this, a fairer apology to be made for their
absence, and little reason to put them to so great a trouble, and charge. 5ly.
Though these absent, their judgment concerning the matters decided in this
Council against the Reformed, excepting a very few, 5.
though not delivered in any Provincial Synods, then called for that purpose,
which Synods in such a desolation of that Church could then hardly be convened,
yet is sufficiently manifested, both in their public Liturgies, and other
modern Writings, and also, for several points, in former Western Councils,
wherein the Representatives of these Western Churches have appeared to have
agreed with it. Of which, see what is said in Disc. 1.. 34. -- and Disc. 3..
158, etc. Especially see the Answer of Jeremias Patriarch of Constantinople,
returned about some ten years after this Council of Trent was ended (I think, I
may say, by God's special Providence) to the Wiremberg Divines (where the
Reformation first began): who sent to him the Augustan Confession; and invited
him to an union of their two Churches; and, to induce him the easilier to it;
professed their acceptance, together with the Greek Church, of the seven first
General Councils. [their words are Acta Theol. Wirtemb. Epist.
-- Illam, quae a Sanctis Apostolis, and Prophetis, and Spiritum Sanctum
habentibus Patribus, ac Patriarchis, and super divinas Literas aedificatis
septem Synodis, traditae est, fidem amplectentes. To whom He 1. Respons.
-- Respondebimus ergo, nihil nostrum afferentes; sed ex Sanctis septem
Oecumenicis Synodis (quas and vobis probari recte scribitis), and ex sententia
Sanctorum, etc.] Unto every Article of which Augustane Confession, the
Patriarch returned his Judgment, as consonant to other modern Greek Writers, so
scarce in any thing differing from the Tridentine Decrees.

After this first assault made upon the Greek Church by the new Reformation,
thus repulsed by the Patriarch Jeremy; In later times, by the diligent
Negotiations of some Protestant Agents there, the Reformed Tenants made a
second fair appearance in the East, and solicited an Acceptance of them in
the Greek Churches, and had prospered so far, as that in A. D. 1629, Cyril
Lucar, first, Patriarch of Alexandria, and then, of Constantinople, published a
Confession of Faith, in several points, though somewhat obscurely, favoring
Calvinism, and opposite to the Decrees of Trent; which Confession he set forth,
as owned, not only by Himself, but the whole Greek Church. But, upon this
second Alarm, as it were, given unto the Greeks, no sooner was this Cyril, by a
violent death, removed out of the Chair, but his immediate Successor, Cyril ab
Iberia, in the same year 1639, assembled such a Synod, as, in such a posture of
things, could well be procured, at Constantinople; wherein were also present
the Patriarch of Alexandria, and of Jerusalem, and 23. Bishops: and again, his
Successor Parthenius, A. D. 1642. convened another, wherein were 25. Bishops;
and amongst these, the Metropolitan of Moscovy, both which Synods pronounced
Anathema to Cyril Lucar; declared his Confession Calvinistical, and
excommunicated all those, who by word, or writing, should own, or defend it: In
which Synods also, against the Articles of this Confession are justified
several of those Tenants, which were before decreed, against the Reformed, by
this Council of Trent: and namely these; Transubstantiation, or a Corporal
Presence of Christ's Body and Blood with the Symboles; Invocation of Saints;
Veneration of Sacred Images; Prayer, and Alms, for the Faithful Deceased with
Repentance, as betterable in their present Condition, by them; Free Will; the
Seven Sacraments; Church-Infallibility, etc. See Leo Allatius, de perpetuo
consensu, l. 3. -- Arhould's Ans. to Claud. l. 4. c. 7.
. Again, by occasion of a late Controversy happening in France between Anton.
Arnauld a Sorbon Doctor, and Mr. Claude, a French Minister on this Subject,
many more Testimonies, bearing a very late Date, of several Prelates, and other
Clergy have been, (upon solicitation,) received out of the East, all
conspiring with the Decrees of this Council, as to the Points, they had
occasion to speak of, such as be those forenamed; to which may be added,
Adoration of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, Evangelical Councils,
Monastic Vows, the Churches Hierarchy, etc. See a diligent Collection of them
in D. Arnauld's Answer to Claude, l. 4. -- and in the Appendix to his Book, l.
12. And indeed such an Eye to, and Reverence of, the Orientals had the Council
of Trent, that, in several passages, it seems to take great care, * of
Anathematizing any such Doctrines, as were in those parts commonly received,
(Of which, see something besow,. 186.,) or, of giving them any occasion to
protest against it. This said of the absence of the Greeks;*

absence of the Protestant-Clergy hinder this of Trent from being a Lawful and
obliging, Patriarchal, 4.
or also General, Council, 1. First; Not the absence of so many of them, as
were no Bishops; because they had no right to sit, 1.
or vote there; if we may be suffered to model that of Trent according to
former General, and approved, Councils. 2.
2. Nor the voluntary, and un-necessitated absence of such of them as were
Bishops; though those of a whole Province, or Nation, be so absent; if invited;
if secured (as the Protestants were: See below,. 92, etc.) and yet not coming.
For (as has been showed) in Councils, as the Vote, so the Presence, of some
Bishops from a major part of Christian Provinces, and a like Acceptance of its
Acts after the Council concluded, is sufficient to nominate the Council
General, and render its Acts obliging; or else farewell General Councils, and
their power. For, these being ordinarily assembled for the rectifying of some
part peccant, when will not such Bishops as are heterodox, fearing some
censure, or ill success, from the rest out-numbring them, purposely absent
themselves? or, such Princes, as are any way obnoxious (as Hen. 8. was, having
assumed a new Church-Supremacy) not prohibit them? Of this, thus Archbishop
Lawd,. 27. n. 4. -- Such a promulgation, as is morally sufficient to give
notice, that such a Council is called, is sufficient in case of Contumacy; and,
where they, who are called and refuse to come, have no just cause for their not
coming, And D. Field p. 651.
forbears not to pronounce the 5th. Council held at Constantinople under the
Emperor Justinian, A. D. 553, General: when as yet the Prime Patriarch, and his
Western Bishops, were neither present in it, at least any considerable number
of them; nor, in absence, had approved it; General; i. e. in case (says he) of
their wilful refusal. See his words set down before,. 43. Some other cause
therefore must be urged, and not this barely of their absence, why the Council
is not without them Legally General, or obliging. 3. Nor does the involuntary
absence of some Bishops, if hindered by some secular power, or also, if not
admitted, 3.
or excluded, by the Council, hinder it from being Legitimate; if the excluded
be proved such, as profess, and own, those Opinions, that have been condemned,
and the defenders thereof anathematized, by former lawful Councils. Now whether
the Protestant party might justly have been excluded upon this Title, see
below,. 198. Nay further; For those Bishops, who are not yet condemned by any
former Church-Decree; yet, if they be accused, or suspected of some new
dangerous Error, it has not been unusual, in former allowed Councils (the
major part thereof so agreeing) to deny them the liberty of sitting, or giving
their vote, therein, till first, by the judgment of the Council, they be
cleared of it. For which see the Proceedings against Dioscoruus Bishop of
Alexandria, and his chief Adherents in the 4th. General Council, Act. 1.

Yet,. 86. n. 1.
notwithstanding such just pretensions of excluding the Protestant Divines from
the Council of Trent, de facto they were not so. But had granted to them, --
Plenissimam securitatem (as their Safe Conduct, Sess. 18, expresses it)
Veniendi, proponendi, loquendi, -- Articulos quoslibet tam scripto, quam verbo
libere offerendi, cosque Scripturis Sacris, and Beatorum Patrum Sententiis, and
rationibus, astruendi -- ad objecta Concilii Generalis respondendi, etc. (See
also that Safe Conduct, before this, Sess. 13.) And some Protestant Divines
appeared in this Council upon such security, See Soave, p. 374, 375.
. But behold, within three Weeks after their arrival there, the Protestant
Princes, that had sent these to treat, here, an Union of Religion, and the
Peace of Christendom, appear in Arms; on a sudden, invade the Emperor, secure,
and wholly unprovided; and narrowly saving himself from their Hands, by flight
from Ispruck, at midnight. And their victorious Arms, now not far distant from
Trent, and a rumor spread, that they would suddenly possess themselves of the
Alps, to hinder the entrance of foreign Forces, struck the Council with such
a terror, that they were necessitated to suspend it, for some time, and seek
their safety by a dispersion of their Members: Nor did the Council, by reason
of the tumults in Germany, and wars in Italy, and France Conc. Trid. Bulla cel
brat. Come. Sess. 17.
, meet again, till ten years after this, in the beginning of Pius the fourth;
after that the Reformed Religion had received an incredible growth in those
troublesome, and distracted, times; wherein, by the Emperor's being constrained
to grant a Toleration, the Evil One had much more advantage to sow his Tares
(as also, at its first birth, Protestantism was cherished with a like
Toleration, by reason of the Invasions of the Turk, and the Aids, against Him,
necessary from the Protestant party). No sooner had Pius renewed the Council,
but there was another Safe Conduct, for Protestants published, like that under
Julius, but not made use of.

But let us, now, suppose the Council undisturbed in the manner before
related,. 68. n. 2.
and these Protestant Divines that came to the Council, still continuing there,
and indulged not only 1 the freedom of Disputing, but 2 their Decisire Vote,
[Touching which thing see the Caution premised by the Council Apud Binnium,
Conc. Trid. Sess. 15.
; That, if, for that time, the Protestants were permitted to give a Placet, it
should be no prejudice to the Rights, or Honor of the present, or future,
Councils; which shows the Council not resolved to deny this to them, if much
stood upon]; Yet what least advantage (to repeat here again something said
already in the first Disc.. 36. n. 3.) could Protestants have extracted from
these? For the first; their Freedom of Disputing and persuading: What could
they now have said, after a thirty years Crowth of their Doctrine, that they
had not formerly written, and the Council perused? And with what face could
they have declined the exposition of Scriptures, by former Ecclesiastical
Tradition, Councils, and Fathers, by which they were cast? For the latter;
their power of Voting: What signified their number to that of Catholic
Bishops? Or, if the Votes were changed from Personal, to National, still less
relief to them from hence; especially, if such Nations be considered, in a due
proportion, according to the multitude of their Clergy. Which the Protestants
well discerned, when waving any such trial, i. e. of Ecclesiastical matters by
Ecclesiastical Judges, they proposed rather a Decision by Laics indifferently
chosen in an equal number, on both sides, See Soave, p. 369.
By which bargain, they were sure not to lose their Cause, if only those
nominated by them, did not vote against them. Was it not then a much wiser
course to forbear coming to this Council at all, and to plead it non General by
their absence, when as the proceedings thereof could no way have been defeated,
or changed, by their presence? This, for the Absence of the Protestant Clergy.

CHAP. V.
5. That this Council is not hindered from being General, by the absence of the
Roman Catholic Bishops of some Province, or Nations,. 69.

Where 1. Of the reason of the Paucity of Bishops in some Sessions,. 70. 2. Of
the Ratification of the Acts of those Sessions by the fuller Council under
Pius,. 75. 3. Of the Acceptance of the whole Council by the absent Prelacy,.
77. And particularly: Concerning the Acceptance thereof by the French Church,
Ib.


Absence of many of the Roman Catholic Bishops, or of the Bishops of some one
Roman-Cathol. Prince (provided, there be a personal presence of some Bishops,
authorized from a major part of Cathol. Princes), hinder this Council from
being lawfully Patriarchal, or General, for some of the Reasons given but now,
(. 67.) To which may be added these further Considerations to remove any
prejudice raised to this Council from the paucity of the number of Bishops in
it (especially in some Sessions) in comparison of some former General Councils.

Consideration is, That, this Council, beyond any former, 1.
having so many Points of Doctrine and Discipline to examine, wherein the
Reformed contradicted the immediate-former common tradition, and practice; and
being drawn out for so long a time; beginning in 1545, and ending in in 1563;
actually fitting for some four years, it cannot rationally be expected; that
such a frequency of Bishops should continually attend it, as if it had been
convened for deciding some single Controversy, and suddenly concluded. But, in
so long a Service, much complaint there was (especially amongst the poorer
sort) of their great expenses; more, of the neglect of their several Churches;
and after a while, great longing after their own Country, Relations, Houses;
and therefore, frequently, some stealing away from the Council, without the
leave, and consent, of the rest.

2.
and sixth Sessions) and intended to proceed to Censures, against the Bishops
that were absent, (in which Council the greatest scarcity was of the Bishops of
France, and Germany,) at several times both the French King's, and Emperor's,
Ambassadors excused their absence to the Council, for some time at least, from
the necessity there was to retain them at home, for the defense of the
Catholic Religion, against the endeavors and tumults, of the Calvinists in
France, and of the Lutherans in Germany. See Pallav. l. 5. c. 15. n. 5. -- l.
6. c. 16. Soave, p. 509. 552.

French Bishops; it is true, that three of them only attended the beginning of
the Council, the Archbishop of Renes, the Archbishop of Aix, and another. One
of which (Renes) returned upon the King's Summons, before the first Session of
the Council; but more Bishops from time to time were promised to be sent from
thence, (see Soave, p. 143); and, after some time, were sent, when the Council,
for fear of the Plague, was removed from Trent to Bologna Spendan. A.D. 1545.
n. 17. -- Pallavic. l. 6. c. 1. n. 10. -- l. 10. c. 7. n. 2. -- c. 2. n. 6.
, And in the time of the Council's fitting afterward at Trent, under Pius the
Fourth, the King of France sent thither the Card. of Lorraine, and 14. Bishops,
who sat in Council, and 18. select Divines, most of them Sorbon-Doctors,
maintained there at the King's charge Pallav. l. 18. c. 17. n. 21.
.

2 As for the German Bishops; because in the beginning of the Council it was
thought necessary, that they should be detained at home, at least many of them,
to defend the Roman Catholic Cause, in the frequent Diets there; and because,
in Pius his time, they were partly terrified with the threats of Hostility upon
their Estates from the Protestants, then very powerful, if they should offer to
go to Trent (as the Emperor's Ambassadors in the Council pleaded for them),
therefore there was not so great an appearance at any time of them in the
Council, though nearer than many others; and they were dispensed with to appear
by Proxies; though indeed it was, for some Reasons, denied to all Proxies,
(non-Bishops), to have in the Council any definitive Vote Pallav. l. 5. c. 15.
n. 5. l. 7. c. 13. -- l. 20. c. 17. n. 7. -- l. 23. c. 5. n. 4.
. But mean while, these German Prelates, in their several Treaties with the
Protestants in these Diets, without yielding any thing to them, that was
contrary to the Conciliar Acts (for which see the Relation made by Soave of
these Diets) do show a concurrence, in all* points, of their judgments with the
others, who sat in Council.

wars breaking out, several times, between several Princes, during the sitting
of this Council, especially between the Pope, 3.
and the Emperor, and King of France; as likewise Civil Wars between the
Lutherans, and Catholics, in the same Prince's Dominions, hindered, sometimes
the Bishops of one Nation, sometimes of another, from attending the Council.
The Princes also upon another account sent not, or recalled their Bishops, as
they had some Differences with the Pope; or feared, that their secular interest
might any way suffer in the Council.

See the Emperor restraining his Prelates from the Council when translated from
Trent to Bologna, upon pretense of the place too remote, for settling the
affairs of Germany, and for the convenience of the German Bishops, (who had so
great Charges,) their repairing thither. ( Soave, p. 274.) But see the true
cause ( Soave p. 261,) if we may believe him; where he says, -- The Emperor
[Charles. 5.] was much displeased at this Translation of the Council, because
he saw a weapon [ i. e. the Council] taken out of his hand [ i. e. from Trent,
which City was in his power]; by managing whereof, according to opportunity he
thought to s^ Religion at peace in Germany, and so to put it under his
obedience.

So, see the King of France, Hen. 2. in Julius his time, with whom he had a
contest about Parma, protesting against the Council in Trent, and refusing to
send his Bishops thither, upon pretense, that they could not pass safely,
neither through the Pope's Territories, with whom he had war; nor through the
Emperor's, a Confederate with the Pope ( Soave, p. 319, 320.) But see the true
Cause ( Soave, p. 315.) -- The King hoping, that such Protestation against the
Council would remove the Pope [from his resolutions concerning Parma]: and the
fear of such disturbance to the proceedings of the Council make him yield the
controversy about Parma. Which Controversy lasting for some time longer, and
the Council at Trent being dissolved within a year, by reason of the
Profestants in Germany taking Arms, hence no French Bishops were present in the
Council for its Sessions under Julius. But this protestation of the King, and
absence of the French Bishops, the Imperialists ( says Soave, p. 320.)
esteemed a vanity: because the Act of the major part of the Universality is
ever esteemed lawful, when the lesser, being called either cannot, or will not
be present. Yet, he says, that the Parliament of Paris was of a contrary
judgment, viz. that in Ecclesiastical Assemblies, where the whole belongs to
all, and every one has his part, the assent of every one is necessary; Et,
prohibentis conditio potior, and the absent, not giving their voices, are not
bound to receive such a Council. In answer to whom, Pallavicino l. 11. c. 18.
n. 7.
as easily denies, that Parliament to have said, or held any such thing, as
applied to Ecclesiastical affairs: (else in a possession, wherein there are
many partners, or sharers, this rule is very true): But whatever that
Lay-Parliament held; it is so exploded a conceit, this, [that the assent of
every one is necessary, or else the major part of the Council does not oblige
him; by which no Arrian Bishop is obliged to obey the Council of Nice] that I
count it lost time to confute it.

See again, the French King; in Pius the Fourth's time, upon the Council's
beginning to agitate the Reformation of Secular Princes, as to their infringing
the privileges of the Church, giving order, that his Bishops should absent
themselves from the Council; but the King, being better informed by the Card.
of Lorraine's Letters to him, and those Articles of Reformation of Princes;
because so offensive, being no further proceeded in, the French Bishops
withdrew not themselves; save some few, upon their private occasions; but
continued in it, till the end of the Council Pallavic. l. 23 c. 1. -- Soave, p.
783, 784, 798.
.

4. That in those Sessions, wherein there were but few Bishops, Paul the Third,
yet there was besides them a choice Collection of other Divines; some of the
most famous for Learning, and Writings, which that age afforded; which Divines,
though they had no decisive Votes in the Session; yet were they constantly
consulted with, in the preparatory Congregations, and nothing ordinarily passed
without their preceding Conferences, and long, and diligent disquisitions, such
I believe, as cannot be matched in the Records of any former Council. See * the
manner of their proceeding in Soave, p 198. and * the testimony he gives them,
p. 150. -- That, though, at the first, they seemed in the Council only to make
Sermons, etc. yet, when that controverted. Doctrines were to be decided, and
the abuse of Learned men, rather than of others, to be reformed, their worth
began to appear. Likewise, beside these Bishops, and other Divines in Trent,
there was also, in the time of the forenamed Sessions, a great number of
Cardinals, Bishops, and choice Divines, and Canonists, at Rome, assisting the
Pope* and consulted by him, upon all new occasions of informing his Legates in
Trent. So that, even in the meanest attendance of the Bishops in this place, it
was not so contemptible a Conventicle, as many would make believe. Nor are the
persons, their Res^^e^t, and acting in the Council, so much vilified by one
side, but that they are as much exalted by another.

Thus Soave falls upon that part of the Council, which seems most weakly
guarded, the Fourth Session, in his p. 163. -- That some thought it strange;
that five Cardinals, and forty eight Bishops, should so easily define the most
principal and important Points of Religion, never decided before. -- Neither
was there amongst those Prelates any one remarkable for Learning, some of them
Lawyers, perhaps Learned in their Profession, but of little understanding in
Religion; few Divines, but of less than ordinary, sufficiency; the greater
number Gentlemen, or Courtiers; and, for their Dignities, some only titular;
and the major part, Bishops of small Cities: particularly of Germany not so
much as one Bishop, or Divine. So Soave.

And Pallavicino gives him this repulse, l. 6. c. 17. n. 12, etc. -- That what
the Bishops then said in the Congregations, which is to be seen in many other
Libraries besides the Vatican, sufficiently shows their great Learning. That
there were only 48. Bishops indeed, but these not of small Churches, as Soave
supposes. Besides that every one of the Cardinals ( besides Poole) had noble
Bishoprics; and most of them, more than one, as was usual in those days. But,
which is more, that these Prelates were choice persons out of Italy, Sicily,
Sardinia, France, and Spain, sent thither by the Supreme Authority. Besides
whom there were some from Dalmatia, Greece, Sweden, Scotland. That the three
Legates were all excelle* persons, and two of them greatly skilled in the
Learned Languages [to the ignorance of which Tongues Soave imputes the passing
of the Determination made in that Session, in behalf of the vulgar Translation]
Cervini especially; who then, from time to time, communicated his doubts with
Sirletus, then Keeper of the Vatican Library, afterward Cardinal; besides the
Legates, Madruccius, and Pacecus, were of the greatest, and most renowned
persons, that were in Germany, or Spain. To these Bishops were adjoined three
Abbots to represent the Benedictine Order, and the five Generals of the
Mendicant Orders, all men of great Learning, as Soave frequently, though
against his will, confesses, in his recitations of their Discourses; and (if
we make any account of the persons represented by them), it was no small
matter, that, in this Council, besides others, were, then, the Heads of almost
all the encloystered Families, who are so considerable a part of the Church,
and, in fine, the chief Conservatory, and Receptacle of Theology. -- There
assisted this Synod at that time, for Counselors, at least forty Divines See
Soave, p. 194.
of the ablest that were then in Christendom, and many of whom have illustrated
that Age with their Writings, and much exalted it, for Theological Learning,
above many preceding. [Such were Sot^, Oleastro, Caterino, Castro, vega, etc.]
It is true; that there were no Germans there: But what marvel, if these
Prelates came not to the Council, who were then in a fight; at that very time a
Diet being held; and, a little before it, the Colloquy at Ratisbone. For whose
sakes therefore it was, that Madruccius, and Toledo, Caesar 's Ambassadors,
opposed the Accusation, in the Council, of the contumacy of the Absents. Yet
were the matters of the Council conferred with these German Prelates by
Letters; and their Answers read, and the aids of their Pen, though not of their
Tongue, afforded to the Council. Thus the one exalts, as the other depresseth.
The Discourses, which are set down in these two Historians, as likewise the
Writings of several of them now extant, may best inform you of their Abilities.
As for the matters decided in this 4th. Session, though Soave represents here
the people of Germany as much aggravating them; yet, as if he had forgotten
himself, in the next page p 164.
he brings in the Pope as much sleighting them, and admonishing his Legates --
That they should not spend time in matters not controverted, as they had done
in those handled the last Session, [i. e. the Fourth] wherein all agree, that
they are undoubted Principles. The Decision, therefore, only of points amongst
Catholics universally received, as it had not, so needed not, the confluence
of so great a Body.

5. But, 5ly. Let the paucity of the Bishops there, or the absence of the
Representatives of some whole Nation Catholic, Sessions of this Council under
Paul, or Julius; yet an amends is made for it in the times of Pius; when a much
fuller body of Fathers (in all, of those who subscribed in the end of the
Council, 255. the Seven Generals of the Religious Orders and the Seven Abbots,
being included) and amongst them, a Mission of Bishops from those Catholic
Princes, who were formerly deficient (and these Bishops assisted with a very
great number of the most Learned Divines, selected out of all Christian
Countries, and Religious Orders, the Catalogue of whom is printed at the end of
the Council.) did review and ratify all, that those fewer had formerly
enacted; and by their reading first, and then subscribing-to, the Acts of the
whole Council from the beginning thereof, 1545, added that strength to those
Acts, which they may be thought, from such a paucity, formerly to have wanted.
Of which Ratification, even by the French among the rest, thus Soave, p. 804.
-- Afterward a Proposition was made for the Reading, in Session, [the last
Session] of all the Decrees made under Paul, and Julius, to be approved; which
Modena opposed, saying; it would be a derogation to the authority of the
Council of those times, if it should seem that the things then done had need of
a new confirmation of the Fathers; and would show, that this and that was not
all one, because none can confirm his own things. Others said, it was necessary
to do it, for that cause, that authority might not be taken from them, by
saying they were not of the same Council. And the same Frenchmen, who before
did so earnestly desire, that it might be declared, that the Council was new,
and not continuated with that under Paul and Julius, did now labor more than
others, that there might be taken away all cause of any doubting, that all the
Acts from the year 1545. until the end, were not of the same Synod. Thus i^
happens, as in humane Affairs, so in Religion also; that one's credulity is
changed with his interest. Therefore now all aiming at one mark, it was
determined, simply to read them and say no more; for so the unity of the
Council was most plainly declared; and all difficulties removed, which the word
[Confirmation] might bring, leaving every one to think what he listed, whether
the reading of them did consequently import a Confirmation, or Declaration of
their validity; or an inference, that it was one Synod, which made, with that,
which read, them; [and therefore, being owned as Acts of the same Body, they
needed no more confirmation in the 25th. Session thereof, than the Acts of the
23d. or 24th. Session did.] Here then we see, either confirmed, or owned, those
Acts were by all, none opposing any of them as erroneous, or faulty; and then;
the controversy, whether they were thus approved and acknowledged, as the acts
of one, and the same Council; or, as the Acts of several; (as the Emperor
signified to his Ambassadors, apud Pallav. l. 24, c 8. n. 7.) is not much
material. [And indeed, the former endeavors of the French, not Prelates, but
Ministers of State, as also, of the Emperor's, at the first opening of the
Council under Pius, That this Council then might not be declared a Continuation
of the former Council, was not at all from any Dislike of the former Decrees:
But partly; that by this the Protestants (whose reduction these Princes much
intended) might not be discouraged from appearing in this Council under Pius
Soave, p. 434. -- Pallav. l. 15. c. 1. n. 6.
; and the French also partly, for maintaining the honor of the Protestation of
the French King, Henry 2. against the sitting of this Council under Julius:
though this also out of no quarrel to any thing done in the Council, then, but
the pretense of no security in sending his Bishops to it, by reason of the
Pope's warring upon Parma, which he endeavored by all means to divert. Soave,
p. 315, 321, 819.
] After this [saith Soave. p. 813] the Secretary going into the midst did
interrogate, whether in the name of the Council a Confirmation should be
demanded of Pius of all things decreed under Paul, Julius, and His Holiness.
And they answered, not one by one, but all together, Placet. So says Soave.
But Pallav. (l. 24. c. 8. n 8.) proves by several veral testimonies, that the
Votes were here given, as usually; one by one: One only, the Archbishop of
Granata, a Spaniard, dissenting, as holding the Acts of the Council valid
without any further confirmation. And the great unanimity of the Council, when
drawing toward an end, is elsewhere suffic^ently intimated by Soave, p. 782. a
little before the 24th. Session, where he says -- Here I must make a great
mutation of style. For whereas in the former Narration I have used that which
is proper to describe variety of minds and opinions, one crossing the design
of another, etc. hereafter I must make relation of one aim only and uniform
operations, which seem rather to fly, than run* to one only end, etc.

numerous Body of Bishops (exceeding that, which has been convened in several
former Councils, confessedly General) 1 Rehearsing, 2 Subscribing-to, 3
Requesting from the Chief Pastor of the Church Catholic a Confirmation of the
Decrees of the Council; not only those last, under Pius; but the former, under
Paul, and Julius, from the beginning; they not particularly re-voting indeed
those former Decrees, lest so those should seem the Acts of another Body (the
reason given for it); but acknowledging them rather, as their own Acts; and
themselves, the same continued Body with those, that made them: and in this,
the French Bishops as forward, as any: and all this testified by Soave; no
friend to the Council. And, after all this, is it not strange, that any one
should attempt to persuade his Reader See Mr. Still. linfl. R^t. Acc. p. 496.
, that these Bishops indeed, using some Artifice, caused the former Decrees to
be read, but did not ratify, or accept, them? But something was necessary here
to be said for those inconsidering persons, with whom speaking last serves for
an Answer; since this Ratification clears that main Objection made by
Protestants against the paucity of Bishops in some of the former Sessions;
clears it, I say, by that common Rule owned also by Protestants themselves
Stillingfl. p. 536.
That in case, some Bishops be not present from some Churches, whether Eastern,
or Western [at the making of the Decrees]; yet if, upon the publishing those
Decrees, they be universally accepted, that does, ex^post-facto, make the
Council [I add, or any Session thereof] truly Ecumenical. Yet, in the last
place I need not tell you, that, the Articles made under Pius alone, from
Session 17-to its Conclusion, the ratification of which is here not questioned,
are so many, and so principal, as that these utterly ruin the Reformation,
though the rest of the Council, for the paucity of the Representatives, were
cassated. Amongst these Decrees are, The lawfulness of communicating only in
one kind; Coelibacy of Priests; Invocation of Saints; Veneration of Images;
Celebration of the Divine Service in a more generally-unknown Tongue; the
Assertion of, Purgatory; the Sacrifice of the Mass; and several others.

Pius also seem not sufficiently numerous; 6.
because more than half of them were Italian Bishops; yet the full Acceptance
of this Council afterward, by the Bishops of those Nations, who had sometimes
none, and other times but few, Representatives in it, sufficiently repairs this
defect also. See before,. 36, 37. Now amongst all those Catholic Churches, the
Acceptance of the French, is only that which can be doubted of. And,
concerning this, you may observe.

1st. That the Council was approved by the whole Roman Catholic Clergy of
France, 1.
as well those absent, as those present in the Council. See for this the many
Petitions, made at several times, by the whole Clergy assembled, to the King,
that he would receive it, like the rest of Catholic Princes; set down in
Review of Council Trent, l. 1. c. 2. There, 1576. the Archbishop of Lions, in a
General Assembly of the States holden at Blois, does, in the name of the State
Ecclesiastical of France, speak thus unto the King; -- They most humbly desire
you, that, according to their more particular Requests* exhibited in their
Remonstrances, you would authorize, and cause to be published the holy and
sacred Council of Trent, which by the advice of so many Learned men, has
diligently sought out all that is necessary to restore the Church to her
primitive splendour. Wherein (Sir) they hope and expect from you, as a most
Christian Ring -- the assistance of your authority, to put this Reformation in
execution. [where you see the Clergy approved the Articles of Reformation, as
well as Doctrine.]: Again, 1579, in a like Assembly of the Clergy at Melun, the
Bishop of Bazas in their name, speaks thus to the King. -- The Clergy
entreats your Majesty, that it may be lawful for them by your authority to
reduce Ecclesiastical Discipline, and reform themselves in good earnest.
Amongst all the Rules of Reformation and Discipline they have pitched upon
those which were dictated by the Holy Ghost, and written by the Holy Council of
Trent, in as much as they cannot find any more austere and rigorous, nor more
proper for the present malady, and indisposition of all the members of the Body
Ecclesiastical: but chiefly because they are tied and bound to all Laws so made
by the Catholic Church, upon pain of being reputed Schismatical against the
Catholic Apostolic Church of Rome, and of incurring the Curse of God, and
eternal damnation. Wherefore the Clergy does most humbly beseech, etc. A. D.
1582. The Archbishop of Bourges, Dolegate for the Clergy in this cause, spoke
at Fountain^leau, in this fort. The Council of Trent is received, kept, and
observed by all Christian Catholic Kings and Potentates, this Kingdom only
excepted: which has hitherto deferred the publication and receiving of it, to
the the great scandal of the French Nation, and of the title of Most Christian,
wherewith your Majesty and your Predecessors have been honored. So that under
color of some Articles touching the liberty of the Gallican Church (which
might be mildly allayed by the permission of our H. Father the Pope) the stain
and reproach of the crime of schism rests upon your Kingdom amongst other
Countries. And this is the cause why the Clergy does now again most humbly
desire, etc. A. D. 1585 the same request was renewed in the name of the Clergy
assembled in the Abbey of St. German, in Paris. Not the Gallican only, but the
whole Church Catholic does summon, entreat and pray you to receive it [the
Council of Trent] No good Christian can or ought ever to make any question, but
that the H. Ghost did preside in that company, etc. There intervening the
authority and command of the holy See, the consent of all Christian Princes,
who sent their Ambassadors thither, who staid there till the very upshot,
without the least dissenting from the Canons and Decrees there published: There
being such a number of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and learned men from all
parts; yea, not a sew Prelates of your own Kingdom, sent thither by the late
King your Brother, who having delivered, consulted and spoken their opinion
freely, did consent and agree to what was there determined. And (since the
writing of the Review) A. D. 1614. in a General Assembly of the States at
Paris, Cardinal Perron, and Cardinal Richlieu, then Bishop of Lusson,
prosecuted again the same request: And though this without success; yet, of the
solemn Acceptance of this Council the next year after, at least by the
Representatives of the Clergy, thus Spondanus In A. D: 1615 n 7
-- In Generali conventu Cleri Gallicani Lutetiae habito, quod ille nunquam
hactenus a Regibus obtinere potuisset frequentissimis precibus, neque etiam in
ultimis Comitiis [1614) quanivis and nobilitas vota sua junxisset, viz. Vt
sacrum Concilium Tridentinum Regia authoritate promulgaretur in R^gn^,
praestitum, a Cardinalibus, Archiepiscopis, Abbatibus, ac caeteris, qui aderant
ex cunctis Regni provinciis Delegatis viris Ecclesiasticis, extitit, quantum in
ipsis suit; dum scilicet unanimi (...) ^mnium consensu illud recipientes, suis
se functionibus observaturos promiserunt, ac jurarun^. After the same Author
had said before in the vindication of his own Country A D 1546 n 4
-- Non solum non in Decretis Fidei, ac doctrinae ab Haereticis controversae,
ullum unquam fuisse objectum dubium: Sed and ipsa Dicreta Reformationis, tam ab
ecclesiasticis susceptafuisse, quam etiam, paucis quibusdam exceptis [chiefly
those Decrees hindering the gratifying Ministers of State with ecclesiastical
commendams] Singillatim Regiis Constitutionibus recepta, and per Ministros
Regios executioni mandata. These I have transcribed, to show you the French
Clergies, conformity to this Council, high esteem of it, and reiterated
intercessions for it to the King, and to the State; who in Ecclesiastical
matters, I think, ought to take them for their Guides, and for their Judges.

France, not for any Decrees concerning the matters of faith, 2.
or doctrine, but of Reformation, as containing in them something contrary to
the Liberties of the Gallican Church, or rather of the King in, or over, the
Gallican Church; Whilst (I say) there was no exception taken at any point of
doctrine; [For that point of the Popes superiority to a Council, opposed by the
French, was not decreed at all in Trent; whatever Ferieres (in Soave p. 8^8)
says to the contrary; nor do the words there urged by Ferieres imply so much;
nor those, most add^cted to the Pope, pretend so much. Nay, Pallav. 24 l. 14.
c. 12. (...). says, that Pope Pius, having nine parts of ten in the Council
ready to vote this superiority, yet suffered this controv^rsie to rest
undetermined, because of the dissent of the Cardinal of Lorraine, and the
French Bishops] Here, then, the reformed cannot plead any disobligation to the
Council for these things, wherein the Council is generally accepted by so great
a part of the Church, See. below,. 147.
because that in some other things, it is, by some particular State, refused.

reformation of secular Princes, 3.
set down by Soave, p. 769. which, upon his Ambassadors complaint, occasioned
the French Kings Protestation, Soave, p. 760.
but gave offense likewise to the Emperor, and the Kingdom of Spain, etc.
were, upon this resentment of Princes, laid aside; and all that was enacted by
the Council, in stead of these, concerning Princes, is contained in the 20 cap.
of Reformation, in the last Session. -- Cupiens Sancta Synodus, etc. Where you
may see, with what great modesty and respect the Council treateh these Secular
Suprems -- Admonendos esse censuit, confidens, eos, etc. -- Proptereaque
admonet Imperatorem, etc. -- But so it is, that had they prosecuted the former
13. Articles that were drawn up, such thing seems not deprived of a plausible
excuse; for that there was nothing proposed in them, but what was formerly
contained in the Imperial Laws, as Cardinal Morone, the Popes Legate in the
Council, assured the Emperor (See Pall. l. 23. c. 4. n. 6.) and as is
ex^ressed in the Preface to those Articles (See Soave, p. 769) and, for that
they only admonished suprem Princes to cause their inferior Magistrates
(against whom was their chief complaint, for their infringing the Churches
Immunities Pallav. l. 22. c. 6. n. 1.
) to observe the former grants of the Secular Powers, made to the Church; which
Grants some conceive, after a free donation of them, cannot be at pleasure
resumed; especially when confirmed to the Church, many of them, by a decurrent
practice from the times of the first Christian Emperors. What passages, in the
Council, especially in the two last Sessions, as infringing the rights of
Princes, were excepted against by the Kingdom, or Parliaments of France, you
may see (for it would be too tedious to recount them here) in Soave p. 819.
etc. and you may see the defenses, in behalf of the Council, returned to them
by Palavacin in l. 24. c. 10. and, concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
temporal matters, l. 12 c. 3. As for that particular, urged by Soave and
others, Sess. 25. c. 19. de Reform.
of the Councils depriving those Princes of their States, who shall allow
Duels; That clause in it [Quod ab Ecclesia obtinent.] -- Jurisdictione, and
Dominio civitatis, castri, aut loci, in quo, vel apud quem, duellum fieri
permiserint quod ab ecclesia obtinent, privati intelligantur, shows this
privation limited to those places, where the Church has the Temporal Dominion.
But, mean while, where ever is supposed either a public concurrence, and
consent of the secular powers to such an Act of the Church, or a former grant
made by them of such Privileges, and Rights to the Church, here such Act of
the Church cannot be justly censured, and (to use Spalatensis De Repub. Eccles.
l. 6. c. 10. n.
his words concerning the third Capitulation in the Lateran Council under
Innocent 3. which is also much agitated) -- Legitimum erit, si supremorum
Principum concessione tacita, vel expressa, editum fuerit. Lastly, since many
of those regal rights, mentioned in Soave, and pretended to be violated by the
Council, were not peculiar to France, but common to i^ with all other Princes,
it is most probable; that, had the Council bin faulty therein, other Princes
would have resented such wrongs, and remonstrated against them, as well as
France; For they did so against those 13. Articles, which were afterward laid
aside; but yet, nor they, nor their Ambassadors (vigilant, and exceptions,
enough in other matters) who then attended the Council, and unanimously
assented to these Acts, discerned in them any such violation; and we may much
rather conclude them just, because the Emperor, King of Spain, and many other
Princes, accepted them; than unjust, because one King or State, refused them;
And from finding the causes of the French State, rejecting the Council so
slight, perhaps it was, that Hen. 4. at his reconcilement, promised with an
oath to Pope Clement 8. to use all his endeavor, that this Council might be in
his Kingdom entirely received Sponda. A.D. 1595. n. 9. Pallavi^. 24. ^. 10. n.
15.
and Cardinal D'. Ossat, his great Councellor, and manager of his affairs at
Rome, often writ in behalf of the Council, both to Secretary Villeroi, and to
the King himself. -- That he found nothing in the Council opposite to the Kings
Authority. -- Many things beneficial, none contrary to the Gallican Church;
unless some one perhaps may think Simonies, and other abuses, and faults, to be
privileges of the Church Gallican. -- That it displeased the great ones in
France, because thereby they were not permitted to enjoy Benefices,
incompatible, and with such other abuses, as were prohibited by the Council.
See his Letters to Villeroi, Feb. 15. 1597. -- And -- Mar. 31. 1599. -- And --
May 16. 1600. quoted in Paull l. 24. c. 10. To which I may add what Caterina de
Medicis, Q. Regent of France had urged before this, to the Pope's Nuncio
Pallavic. Ib. c. 11. n. 2.4.
-- That the Council could not be admitted; because by the Councils decrees,
the King could not thereafter gratify such Ministers of State, as had done him
singular service with the means of Religious Houses, or other. Benefices of the
Church, holden in Commendam.

CHAP. VI.
6. That the Generality of this Council is not prejudiced, by its being called
by the Pope,. 80.

7. Nor by Reason of, 1. The pretended Non generality of the Summons,. 82. 2.
Or, Non-freedom of the Place,. 83. 3. Or, the want of Safe conduct.. 92. Where,
concerning the Doctrine imputed to the Roman Church, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics,. 93. And of the practice of the Council of Constance.. 101.



6ly. THis said (from,.66.) That there is no prejudice done this Council, 6.
for its bearing the Title of General, and its obliging as such, Oriental, or
Occidental, Protestant or Catholic; or also from the very small numbers of the
Bishops present in some Sessions; considering so plenary a post-acceptation of
it, as has been showed.

Next; Neither seems this any just exception against it, that it was called by
an Ecclesiastical Person, the Prime Patriarch, the Bishop of Rome. leftblank;
In defense of which perhaps that may suffice, that is said before at large..
47. etc. But here it is to be added: That this Council was called by him,
after, First, having had the consent (both as to the place, and time) of the
Emperor, and all the other Christian Princes, except those, that were
Protestants, and Henry the Eighth; who, being a much minor part of these
Princes, were either to be concluded by the contrary vote of the rest; or I see
not, since that Christianity is divided amongst so many Sovereign, and
Independent, States; and no Heresy, or Schism, can be so molestful to the
Church, as to need the Remedy of a General Council, save such, as first finds
patronage from some Christian Prince, I say, I see not, how any such Counc l
can ever be lawfully convened; because, if every such Prince be allowed a
negative voice herein against the rest, there will never be wanting some
Prince, or other, extravagant in matters of Religion, (as Henry 8th was, then,
obnoxious for his new assumed Title of Supreme in Spirituals; and the
Protestant Princes, for many other Innovations) and so such Prince also averse
from the meeting of such a Council, wherein he foresees, that his party will be
much the weaker, and over-voted.

Called then, this Council was by the Pope, but not without the consent of the
Emperor, and the most of Christian Princes; (nay, if we may believe Soave) not
without their great solicitation, and importunity, necessitating him to call
it, against his own inclinations; as if he much dreaded some ^ff^ct thereof
prejud cial to his present greatness. Especially, for the later p^rt of it,
h^ld under Pius, and confirm^ng all the rest that had pass^d before, Soave
says -- that the actions of this Coun^il were th^n in a greater expectation
than in the fo^mer ti^es, in en^gard all Princes had agreed in demanding it,
and sent Em^^ss^dours to it; and also, that the m^mber of Prelates then
ass^mbled were f^i^r times as many as before. Called also by him it was; but
after the Protestant Princes had declared a great necessity thereof; and after
that both Luther himself, and his followers, had of en, from the j^stice of the
present Church Governors, appealed to it. Soave, p. 8. 12.
All which considered, and supposing that all other things stand right; That
neither the necessity of such a Convention at this time can be denied; nor the
place, we weighing a general convenience, justly excepted against: Nor, that
any persons are called to this Council, save such, and also all such called to
it, as have been the usual constitutive Members of all other former allowed
General Councils: nor any new rule, or way, proposed to be observed in this
Council, but that which has been formerly from the very beginning of the first
General Councils (which proposal made to the Protestants by the Pope, then
calling it, See in Palavic. l. 3. c. 13. -- And in Soave p. 65: Nor the Pope,
or the Bishops constituting it, become any other way a party in this, than they
have been formerly, in them; nor the law^ul, and Canonical freedom of its
Members appear any way abridged by any precede^t Oath, or Engagements made to
the Pope, or others; nor the want of a safe conduct, and freedom of access, and
recess, can be justly complained of; I say, all these offenses voided, and
their circumstances abstracted from, I suppose, the simple allegation of th^s
Council its being called by the Pope will not be thought by Protestants the
just subject of any quarrel; and therefore leaving this spoken of before 47.
etc.
I proceed to the considering of the other particulars, so many of them as
shall need any Disc^ssion.

7. Next then, as this Council is not hence to be esteemed as any way
defective, 7.
from its being called by the Pope; especially, when this done with the
concurring consent of the much-major part of Christian Princes; sect. 82.
So neither are any of these, The non-generality of the Summons; or the
non-freedom of the Place; or the want of safe conduct; justly pretended, for
the condemning of this Council as illegal, and non-obliging.

For first, 1.
1. For the summons and invitation, see in Soave p. 101. how universal it was
in Paul the thirds time, who began the Council; and again, how punctual it was
in Pius the Fourths time, who renewed the Council; * In his sending several
Nuncio's (inviting them to it) to all Protestant Princes, and States, and,
amongst the rest, to Elizabeth, the Queen of England, which made B. Bramh.
(Reply. to Chalc. p. 352.) say -- As we have in horror the treacherous, and
tyrannical, proceedings of Paul the Third -- So we acknowledge, with gratitude,
the civilities of Pius the Fourth; * In his sending also an invitation to the
Greek Church under the Christian Emperor of Moscovy; and Baptist Romanus a
Jesuit to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to invite him to the Council See the
Preface to the Acta Council. Ni, caen.
(which Jesuit brought from thence the Arabian copy of the Nicene Canons, in
number 80.) and Soave acknowlegeth, p 482.
that some deliberation there was of sending, and granting a safe conduct, unto
the Greek Churches under the Turk. -- But it was presently seen (says he) that
these poor men, afflicted in servitude, could not, without danger, and
assistance of money, think of Councils.

See the part cular persons sent to these Princes, and the success of their
Embassies; in Soave, l. 5. p. 435, 439.440. Where also he says, that --
Although the Pope was put in mind, that to send Nuncii into England, and to
Princes elsewhere, who do profess open separation from the Sea of Rome, would be
a disreputation to him; yet he answered, that he would humble himself to
Heresy, in regard that whatsoever was done to gain souls to Christ did become
that See. For the same reason also [saith he] he sent Canobius into Polonia,
with design to make him to go into Moscovy, to invite that Prince and Nation to
the Council, though they have never acknowledged the Pope of Rome. Now here
note one thing, which I shall have reason to apply to many other particulars,
and shall often remember you of, That, if the Acts of Pius the Fourth, if the
proceedings of that Council in his time, be justifiable, though those of, and
under, Paul, and Julius, should be proved some way faulty, the number of
Prelates insufficient, their decisions factiously carried, etc. yet this
Tridentine Council will stand universally in force, as to all the decrees
thereof; because this Council under Pius reviewed, and ratified, and made their
act, all the Decrees made before (with what supposed defect or culpableness of
their proceedings you please, for that may be right, that is not done rightly)
under Paul and Julius. So that who so justifies this Council, save only for
Pius his times, does somewhat more than what is necessary

2ly. For the place, I desire these things may be considered.

place can be chosen any where so absolutely free, but that he, under whose
temporal Dominion it is, 1.
may infer some violence to the Council, or to some party therein, with whom he
is offended; and so, whereas the Church and the Pope, as well as Temporal
Princes, have their rights and privileges which may be violated, the place of
the Council, in any Secular State, may seem not free enough for the Pope, and
the Church; and again, since the Secular Princes have often differences, and
several interests (as it happened frequently in the time of the Council of
Trent) the place of the Council in ones Dominions will not seem free enough to
another. Unless it may be thought a sufficient remedy for such (unavoidable)
inconvenience, that, when such violence appears, the Council may cease acting,
or be suspended, or d^ssolved; or injured States withdrraw from it their
Bishops.

Rome. or in some other City in Italy (as it was in the Roman, Lateran,
Florentine, Pisan, Councils) was not accounted therefore to render them not
free, because of the nearer influence from Pope, though in all those Councils,
there was something to be decided, wherein the Popes judgment stood not in
aequilibrio, but was inclined more to one side, than another; and wherein one
side might pretend him a Party; as in the controversies of the Waldenses, of
Be^engarius, of the Grecians, etc.

Imperour took sufficient care, that th^s Council should not be co^v^^ed in any
place of Italy, 3.
which was under the Temporal Domin^on of the Pope or, where himself had not
the c^^ef command. He consented indeed, that the Council should be kept in
Mantua; but see what he declared first to the Protestants concerning this place
(in Soave l. 1. p 80.) -- That the Duke thereof was vass^l to the Empire, so
that the Pope had no power there; and that, if they desired any further
caution, himself was ready to give it them. To which they answered; how
rationally, I leave it to you. -- That no safe conduct could there free them
from danger, for the Pope having adherents throughout all Italy, who bitterly
hated them, there was great danger of treachery, and s^cret plots. S^^ Soav^ p.
77.
And, as little reason, as these, had Henry the Eight, to protest against the
Council at Mantua for fear of the Pope.

Germany, 4
that was near the Protestants; not, to avoid their pleas, but, * for fear of
their Arms (of which fear whether he had any just cause, we shall see more by
and by, (as likewise * for the too great distance from Rome, whereby he could
not so easily, from time to t^me, give directions to his Legates in those many
controversies, which were likely to be agitated in that Council; and, in all
which, it was impossible for him to give them a precedent information, with a
sufficient foresight.

5.
gave their consent, and sent (some sooner, some later) their Bishops and
Ambassadors too, which was enough to legitimate it, though perhaps they would
rather have chosen another; and not all, the same.

[See Soave p. 101 -- and p. 702. Where, the King of France desiring a
transl^tion of the Council form Trent to Constance, Wormers, etc. for the more
convenience of the Dutch, English, and part of the French, Prelates, Soave
reports the King of Spain returning this answer. -- That the Council was
assembled in Trent (...) all the solemnities, with consent of all Kings,
Princes, and at (...) ^^nce of Francis the French King; that the Emperor had
superiority in that City, as in the others, that were named, and might give
full security to all, in case the former safe conduct were not sufficient.]

Germany; and nearer to the Protestants there, than it was to the Catholics of
France or Spain; and of which the Emperor was the ch^ef Lord.

Soave (p. 309.) represents the Emperor d^scoursing th^s to the Protestants
concerning this City. -- That they should leave all to his care, who knew how
to handle the business; that they should suffer other Nations to m^et, and that
himself would go in person* if not thither, yet to some near place, and would
take ord^r, not by words, but d^eds, that all should pass with go^d term^. And
(below) that he, as Advocate to the holy Church, and D^fender of the Councils
will do what ^elongeth to his charge, as he has promis d. And ( p. 669)
re^^t^s -- How the Cardinal of Lorraine sent a Gentleman to the Empercur to
desire him, that he would not remove further from the Council in regard of the
fruit which they hoped forby means ^f his vicinity, which will k^ep every one
in his duty, and hinder the attempts of thos^, who would translate it into
another place etc. And ( p. 30^.) relates the Popes fears -- That he could not
take all suspicion from the King of France, if the Council should be celebrated
in Frent, a place subject to the Emperor, and near unto his Army.]

Again, a place it was, * not accessible by the Popes Forces, unless marching
first through another Dominions, and trespassing on the Emperor, who was in
Italy it self a Prince much more powerful than he; and, a place, which either
the Emperors or Protestant Forces might at any time surprise with a much
shorter march. And therefore was not the Pope free from fears, concerning it
(though he had more of Germany) as may be seen in Soave, l. 5. p. 436., where
he says. -- That the Pope was troubled, because the Protestants of Germany,
unto whom a great part of France was united, would demand exorbitant things
which he could not grant them, -- and doubted they might be able to disturb the
Council with Arms, -- that He confessed, that the dangers were great, and the
remedies small, and was perplexed and troubled in mind. Thus Soave.

Pallavic. Hist. l. 8. c. ^. and in Soave p. 203.) what fright the Council was
put in, A. D. 1546. under Paul, 3. by the Protestant army, h^ving taken Chiusa,
and ^rawing near to Tirol; and again yet more, A. D. 1552. under Julius The
third. The more particular relation of which, though mentioned before, is
worthy your knowledge.

See Spondan. A. D. 1562. -- Soave, p. 374. etc -- Pallavicin. l. 13. c. 3.
At this time several Ambassadors from Protestant Princes came to Trent,
desiring a safe conduct for their Divines; being very serious in this business,
as the Council supposed, who suspected nothing of a War intended: of which
safe-conducts, one, and a second drawn up (how full and punctual I desire you
but to peruse it, as set down in Soave, p 370 or in Conc. Trid. Sess. 15.) yet
pleased them not, because not containing also in it those conditions which they
required to be observed in treating their controversies, one of which
conditions was, that the holy Scriptures only should be judge. Yet upon this
Conduct, about the middle of March, came some Protestant Divines to Trent: four
from Wirtenberg, and two from Argentina, who exhibited a Confession of their
Faith, and then earnestly desired a conference with the Divines of the Council
about those controversies; which conference was, for a little while, delayed,
by reason of the sickness of the Popes Legate (of which sickness he died within
a few weeks) and, for that the Council had not as yet determined the manner,
and form, of their treating with them. Now this being the only appearance, that
ever the Protestants made in the Council By this (says Soave, p. 362) both the
Emperor, and the Electors, were assured, that Maurice the Duke of Saxony,
though there were great levies made of Soldiers, did not attempt any thing of
war. But, whilst this was acting at Trent, the Protestant Princes, having
secretly made a League with the French King, were preparing a sudden invasion
upon the Emperor secure, and suspecting nothing; and when the time came to
play their mine -- The Saxon Ambassadors (says Soave, p. 374.) went secretly
out of Trent, and returned home diverse ways: but when their Divines departed,
he mentions not.

The Protestants arms prosper, the surprised Emperor being able to make
little, or no, resistance; they take Ausburg: and afterward Ispruck, some three
days journey from Trent, the Emperor with his Court flying out of it at
midnight in great confusion; and thus, the danger drawing so nigh Trent, the
Bishops fly away, and the Council is dissolved the 28 of April, not daring to
stay till the appointed time of the Session, the first of May; and the sick
Legate carried thence to Verona, where, within three days, he died.

Now from the coming of the Protestant Divines, which was about the middle of
March, till the Protestants appearing in arms, and besieging Ausburg which was
on the first of April, and so putting the Council in a fright, was not above a
fortnight; and yet see what a complaint Soar (p. 375.) makes. -- How these
Protestant Divines were delayed from time to time, not admitted to dispute, not
to be heard, glad to divulge printed copies of their Confession, because the
Legate concealed it. By this you may see, how unfree this place was to the
Protestants, and how secure for the Catholics, by virtue of the Popes great
power there. See again in Soave, p. 779 the fears of the Council. A. D. 1563.
upon the Emperors being sick; as from whom they had their Protection, and
whose safe cond^ct expired with his life.

6.
and their great unanimity in their condemning most of the Protestant tenets,
show the place sufficiently free; for, where there is compulsion used there
would appear some reluctance.

Safe conduct* It was granted, when desired, to the Protestants, for the
security of their persons, as full, as could be demanded. 3.
The clause put in the first Safe Conduct (which you may see in the Council,
Trid. Sess. 13.) [quantum ad ipsam sanctam Synodum spectat,] is excepted
against, in Soave p. 344.
as if not involving the Pope; but, besides that the Protestants might have had
the Popes Safe Conduct if they pleased, but they omitted, and probably
disdained, to ask any such thing: besides this, I say, this Safe Conduct was
subscribed by his Legate in his stead; and what could the Protestants fear, when
the Pope had there no secular Power, and when the Council, for any other
spiritual power of his, should side with them (according to the obligation of
the Safe Conduct) against him? But yet to give content, this clause, in the two
following Safe-conducts (which see in Council of Trent, Sess. 15. under Julius,
and again, Sess. 18. under Pius) was omitted.

Rome, that fides non est servanda Haereticis; and 2ly the practice of the
Council of Constance, according to it; in their putting to death Jo. Husse, are
brought as arguments that there can be no security in Safe-conducts, how full
soever, for men once accounted Heretics. Of which Council of Constance it is
urged as a Constitution (in Soave, p. 368 and elsewhere) -- That says, or
Safe Conduct, given by the Emperor, Kings or others, to Heretics, or persons
suspected, ought not to be observed, and if the Emperor's not to be observed,
we may also infer, not the Council's.

doctrine of those learned men in the Church of Rome, who have written of this
subject, is much wronged, or mistaken. This question; Whether says given, be
to be kept, to Heretics; as also, Whether to Infidels, and Heathens, to
Enemies, to Subjects in Rebe^^ion, (Princes at such time parting with their
Rights) etc. being always stated by them affirmatively; and Faith, maintained
to be kept as much to any of these, as to Catholics themselves: And, if this
be the public Faith; of the i. c. Prince, or s^prem temporal Magistrate, this
Faith is declared to be jure Gentium, unviolable, as without which no peace,
nor society, could be maintained in the world; and by no person whatever, not
the Pope himself, to be dispensible, or relax^ble.

[ Nullum scio Theologum, (says Molanus sometime Divinity. Professor at ^ovain
De sid. Haeret. servand. l 3 c. 10
) neque etiam clari n^minis Jurisconsultum qu^n conformiter d^ceant, fidem
pullicam Haeretico servandam esse. Fateor quidem, esse aliquo numero
Jurisconsultos, qui doceant, Fidem privatam haeretico servandam non ^sse, quia
hosits est publicus* [But this is upon supposing the law of a Superior,
prohibiting to private men the ^ngagement of any such faith to such public
Enemies, being a thing contra publicum bon^m, or, contra salutem animarum,
declared by such Super^ours. El^e, the public faith (suppose, of a General
Council, cedentis de suo jure, and enga^ing exemption, and impunity, to some
Heretic in a matter belonging to its Jurisdiction) or also private Faith,
where is not such prohibition, once given to a public Enemy, are affirmed to
remain, afterward inviolable] P Layman Theol. Moral l. 2. tract. 3. c. 12. --
Faedera publica Gen^^um jure intr^ducta sunct -- Idq, propter neces^itatem --
Quia, nisi faedera pub^^ca, sen inter dive sos principes, aut re^publicas s^n
inter Principem, and su^ditos ejus, v.g. rebellantes [to whom he adds Heretics
upon the same ground,. Di^e 4^. -- Nec hac it a magnum (^^th he) vid^ri d^bet,
sperantibus in D^o and Christo summo Ecclesiae ^^fensore, qui aux^^tum f^rt in
tempore opport^no] inita, omnim de servanda ess^nt, nulla pax* aut so^i^tas,
inter humanum Genus cons^stere p^ssit. And more partic^larly conc^rning
Heretics thus Becanus de side Haeret. servand. c. 12. -- Quaestio est; an.
quando Catholi^us Prin^eps, sive saecularis sit* sive Ecclesiast^^^^, c^n^edit
Haeret^^is sal^um conductum li^e^e venien^i, and r^deundi ^sive id saciat jure
communt, sive specia^i (i. e. this later way) debeat illis servare fidem,
neene? Affirmant (says ^e) uno consensu emnes Catholici [where he instanceth
also in the practice of the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, to Luther; and goes
on] Hic vald^ mirer adre^s^rios, qui, els^ hac audiant a nobis, tamen el^mant,
no^ c^ntrarium do^ere. But see the same prosessed jointly by the Council of
Basil, and the Emperor, in their Safe Conduct to the Bohemians, securing them
not only from the hand of violence, but also, of justice; whose words, in the
close of it, are these. -- Promittimus sine fraud, and quolibet dolo, quod
nolumus, neque debemus, quacunque occasion praetensa, uti authoritate, vel
potentia, jure, statuto, vel privilegio legum, vel Canonum, and quorumque
Conciliorum specialiter Constantiensis, and Senensis, quacunque forma verborum
expressa, in aliquod praejudicium salvo Conductui per nos concesso. [What more
clear than this for the lawfulness, and undispensableness, of such public
faith, though given in the largest form, and most derogatory to the Engagers
rights?]

Cases there are, wherein (all judicious Protestants, I suppose, consenting)
Faith given may not be kept to any person whatsoever; and so neither to
Heretics; such as these. 1st. If the faith be given not absolutely, but
conditionally, the Condition wanting, or failing, the faith, or promise, given
with, and limited by, it, is voided. 2. So also, if the matter of the faith,
oath, or promise, be a thing unlawful to be done, neither, here, may such faith
either lawfully be given; or, given, be observed. If the matter be unlawful, I
say; either by the divine law, if, and though, it be the public faith given by
a suprem Authority: or also, by any humane law, if it be a faith given by
Inferiors, and Subjects to such laws. Among which unlawful things, and that
jure divino, is to be numbered, if Faith be given, either by Prince or Subject,
in any thing, which invades another right, or assumes to our selves, what only
is in another lawful disposal; and so involves doing wrong to a third person,
which it is never lawful to do; (though cedere de nostro jure is a thing very
lawful) So, for Example, in the particular matter of Heretics. If the supreme
Temporal Magistrate should pass his faith to one suspected of Heresy, to free
him from any Trial thereof by the Ecclesiastical Tribunal; or to free him,
found guilty thereof, from the sentence of Excommunication, a right belonging
to the Church, and independent of secular Powers; or to introduce, or continue,
him, excommunicated, in the Catholic Church Assemblies, such faith, as it is
unlawfully given, so neither, given, can it lawfully be observed. Again, when
the law of a Prince, or State, restrains to professed Heretics the public
Exercise of their Religion, or imposes some mulct upon them, and this law is
here supposed just, if a Subordinate Officer, or private person, engage his
faith to some Heretics to the contrary, such faith to them is not to be kept,
as promising a thing not in his, but rather another, lawful power, and
disposal; And the same it were in a private man's faith given to conceal an
Heretic, or a Robber, or the like, where the law of the State obliges all
persons to detect them.

Mean while, where none of the forenamed cases happen; where the matter of the
pact is no sin (and no sin it is, that offends against no law) nor only
conditional, Faith given to whomsoever, by what person soever, is affirmed no
way dispensable, or remittible, (unless the party, to whom it is given, relax
it) neither upon the plea of Fear in making it (I say, no superior law voiding
such pacts) nor upon any damage, temporal, or spiritual, coming by it. For some
spiritual damage to be sustained thereby, affords no sufficient ground to
pretend an action unlawful. Since the damage, both spiritual, and temporal, to
the world would be far the greater, when none, by reason of these, and the like
Exceptions, could have any security of another faith: since such Pacts, and
Oaths, most what, are made, from some temporal necessity constraining men
thereto, and frequently do infer some spiritual, or temporal damage; or do some
otherwise hinder some public, or private good.

Molanus says l. 3. c. 14.
concerning the public faith, when given to another, where the matter of it is
not unlawful; That it is undispensable, or unrelaxable, by any, even the Pope
himself; arguing thus, from the ill Consequences thereof. -- Si Romanus
Pontifex, semel, in fidei publicae transgressione dispensaret, haec non foret
legitima dispensatio, sed potius dissipatio; quia deinceps nemo posset securus
esse, habito a rege, aut alterius Tituli Principe, salvo Conductu, solenni
juramento, eo quod semper periculum foret, ne Regia Potestas id, via
dispensationis [a Pontifice] extorqueat, quod semel concessum esse novit. Where
he urges, Heb. 6 16. -- [Omnis Controversiae eorum finis, ad confirmationem
est juramentum] and Soto; who faith De Jure l. 8. q. 1. c. 9.
-- Pontificem non posse relaxare juramentum cum praejudicio ejus, cujus
interest. And thus Layman on the same subject l. 2. Tract. 3.^.12.
-- Si a Christiano, v. g. Rege cum Infidelibus (and the same he repeateth
afterward, cum Haereticis; and before, cum Subditis Rebellantibus] publicum
soedus fiat, nulla unquam ratione, seu direct, seu indirecte, Summus Pontifex
relaxare potest. Ratio est; Quia cederet in maximum detrimentum, ac contemptum
ipsiusmet etiam Ecclesiae. -- Quamobrem, si quando foedus, a Catholico Rege cum
Infidelibus legitima potestate constitutum, cedere postea videatur in Ecclesia
Catholicae detrimentum, a Concilio supremo ejus Rectore, and Desensore,
auxilium sperandum -- Neque vero (says he) tergiversationis locus est; * quod
pars altera, ad faedus ineundum, per vim injustam adacta sit, cum paciscentes
superiorem Judicem non habeaut, qui causa cognita, ipsis jus dicat. * Nor --
Quod soedus, publica authoritate initum, Principi, aut Reipublicae paciscenti,
perniciesum esse appareat. Nor -- * Quodcunque incommodum, sen detrimentum
Ecclesiae Catholicae, ex faederis observatione, inferendum; and his reason is;
because if such prejudices to Church, or State, be once admitted as just causes
for voiding the public Faith -- Nulla pax, aut Societas, inter humanum Genus
consistere possit. This concerning the public Faith given to Infidels,
Heretics, Rebels, or others, in matters, where no common Superior is
acknowledged to have Right of disposing them otherwise.]

private Contracts, Faith, or Oaths, where there is a common Superior to both
parties, who may restrain, or moderate these upon all occasions according to
the public and private good, here several Laws and Constitutions, and common
Customs, grounded on a moral equity, and necessity, do give him a power, in
several cases which may happen [such as these: where such Contract, or Oath, is
extorted by some injury first done to the party; as, by force, fraud, fear; or,
where such engagement made in some great perturbation, and transport of mind;
or, where the contract, though in a matter lawful, yet brings some great,
unexpected, and unforeseen, damage, to the public, or private good, Spiritual,
or Civil; or also, is a hinderance of some considerable greater good of the
Church, or State, which the Contractors ought to prefer before their private:
when these are judged, not by the party, but by the Superior, to be such] the
laws, I say, do give Him power, in such cases, to relax such pacts, or Faith:
and to oblige the party, to whom they are made, being subject to him, and such
laws, to remit them: And the parties, in making any such pact, may and ought to
know this superintendent power; or also, all such Oaths and Contracts, when
they are made, are supposed to include a tacit Exception of such cases, to be
stated by the Arbitrament of such Superiors. And indeed: what thing better can
be contrived, within the limits of a settled Government, than, that such
engagements should be transacted with such a reserve of capability of
relaxation by the Superior, where, otherwise, either by the difficulty of the
observance of them, the circumstances being changed, they will probably be
broken: or some great damage by them, public, or private, inferred. But, in
the public, or private, Faith, passed between persons that are joined together
in no such society, no such thing can be admitted; but the matter of such oath,
or promise being jure Divino lawful, and diminishing no third Persons legal
Rights, all damages whatever are to be sustained in a strict, and undispensable
observance thereof, so far as the party to whom such engagement is made, shall
exact it: And so, in some sense, Faith is maintained, to be kept by Catholics
to Enemies, Heretick^* Infidels, etc. when not so, by one Catholic to another;
because the constitutions, or customs, of the Government Ecclesiastiacal, or
Civil, under which Catholics live, do not extend to these other Covenants; and
the excuse of damage, fear, force, etc. has here no place, or consideration,
where is to be had no common umpire, and Judge of such matters.

Secular Princes are made by Roman Divines, inferior and subordinate to the
Ecclesiastical suprem (the Pope, or General Council) and so, that the
Sanctions, and laws of the Church, by what is said before, 97. will void at
pleasure the Oath and engagement of Princes to what ever Confederat, in
whatever matter, as this being contrary to the law of a Superior, whose
Constitutions they are obliged to observe. It is answered, that the Roman
Church owns no such Doctrine; nor do the Ecclesiastical Governors claim any
Supremacy, or Legislative power, save in Spiritual matters. Contrary to which,
therefore, if any of the Churches Subjects, though a Prince, make any oath, or
promise, such Faith given is not to be kept, by virtue of the former subjection
of such person to the Churches Laws. But, as for any Oaths, or engagements of
Princes in other matters Secular; or also, any use of the Secular Sword,
whether in matters Temporal or Spiritual, the Church claims no Superiority
herein. The Secular and Ecclesiastical Magistrate have their distinct and
independent Rights and Jurisdictions, freely confessed, by Cardinal Bellarmine,
to be, both held from Christ, and nor from one another -- Ex Scripturis (says
he De Romans Pontis. l. 5. c. 3.
nihil habemus, nisi datas Pontifici claves regni caelorum: de clavibus Regni
Terrarum nulla mentio fit, Traditio Apostolica nulla. -- Quando Rex fit
Christianus, non perdit Regnum Terrarum, quod jam obtinebat. -- And, quoting a
passage out of an Epistle of Pope Nicolaus. -- Quicquid. (says he) Imperatores
habent, dicit Nicolaus, a Christo eos habere. Peto igitur; rel potest summus
Pontifex auferre a Regibus, and Imperatoribus hoc, tanquam summus ipse Rex, and
Imperator; aut non potest; si potest, ergo est major Christo; Si non potest,
ergo non habet vere potestatem Regiam. Neither is any such Power in Temporals
absolutely necessary to the Church, in order to Spirituals, without the
exercise of which power the Primitive Church, though most grievously oppressed
by Secular States, yet enjoyed this Government in Spirituals, perfect and
entire, as to all things essentially necessary thereto. Their proper and
distinct Rights, then, both these supremes have. And their oaths and engagement
(passed in matters of their proper right) to what persons soever are denied
generally, by Catholic Divines, to be dissolvable by one another.

Heretics, in such matters, thus, P. Layman a learned Jesuit. Theol. Moral.
l. 2. Tract. 3. c. 12.
-- Dico 4to -- Si Catholici cum Haereticis publicum foedus ineant, non potest
per authoritatem Pontificiam solvi, aut relaxari; where he quotes also Molanus,
saying, De fid. Haeret, servand. l. 5. c. 14.
-- Neque ullum hactenus extitit, aut unquam extabit hujus rei exemplum. And
thus Becanus. (...) de fid. Haeret. servand. c. 7. -- Virtutes illae, ex quibus
oritur obligatio servandae fidei in promissis, aeque nos obligant, sive apud
Catholicos, sive apud Haereticos, versemur: Nusquam enim licet mentiri; nusquam
jus alterius violare, nusquam injustitiam committere nunquam perjurum esse. --
Quando fidel^^ paciscuntur cum Gentilibus, and Idolatris, debent issi servare
fidem in rebus licitis and honestis; ergo etiam, quando paciscuntur cum
Haereticis. An oath of fidelity, therefore, taken by a Subject to an- Heretical
Prince, to aid him against all invaders of, his Dominions; or other temporal
Rights, to pay him such, and such taxes, for the preserving of Justice, and
protecting of his Subjects from violence, and injuries, is, to be observed, and
undispensable, without the Princes consent, because the matter of it lawful:
But an oath taken to serve him in sight, or to perform any other act, for the
ruin of the Christian, or the Catholic, Religion, is not to be kept, because
the matter of such oath is contra jus Divinum.]

Stillingfl. Rational Account. pt. 2. c. 3. p. 352. and 350.
-- That it follows from this proposition maintained by Catholics; [ viz. That
faith given to Heretics, contrae jus Divinum, is not to be kept]: that
therefore faith given to Heretics is in no case to be kept; because all
Heresy is contra jus Divinum, his words are. -- Simanca concludes, that faith
given, against the Divine law, is not to be kept; and it is well known; that
all Heresies are accounted so by you; and therefore in no case faith is to be
kept with Hereticks] 1st. If he argue well; Protestants are to maintain his
Conclusion, as well as Catholics; for Protestants also grant the two
premises. 2ly. The arguing is like this: that faith in no case is to be kept
to a drunkard: because drunkenness is held, contra jus Divinum; and it is
unsyllogistical, and very faulty: Because, though Heresy, or Drunkenness, be a
thing contra jus Divinum, yet that thing, wherein faith is given to such
Heretic, or Drunkard, may not be so. But if faith were given to an Heretic,
concerning his Heresy: As, to maintain it with him; to aid or assist, him in
it; such faith indeed were not to be kept; for the reason given; because
Heresy, and all defense of it, are, contra jus Divinum.t But further: suppose
the faith given to a Heretic be for the toleration of his Heresy; neither do
Catholics hold this (due circumstances put) to be contra jus Divinum. For even
a moral Evil may be lawfully tolerated, when there is just fear of far more
evil, and that moral too, by not tolerating it. For supposing, the toleration
of any false religion by a Catholic Prince, without inflicting due punishment
upon the Professors thereof within his Dominions is not lawful, jure divino,
yet is it so, only to those, in whose absolute, and free power it is, to
prohibit such Religion; And then; whether this, rebus sic stantibus, be for
such time, and place, in a Princes free power, must be left wholly to his
arbitrament, who doubtless is the suprem Judge of his own Secular strength. And
whom soever he cannot master as to force, however legally his Subject, neither
may he reckon him under his Government, as to coaction to his duty; in such a
case then toleration of Heresy is not contra jus Dirinum. And, there is the
same ground of keeping faith with such, as there is, with a foreign Enemy; for
the Common weales-sake. Becan. Ib. c. 10. -- Si Princeps Catholicus paciscatur
cum Haereticis de toleranda liberate religionis, quam sine majori detrimento
impedire non potest, sine dubio fides servanda est.

decree, and fact, in the Council of Constance.

For its Constitution. Sess. 19. It is only this. -- Praesens Sancta Synodus
declarat, nullum fidei Catholicae, vel jurisdictionis Ecclesiasticae,
praejudicium generari, vel impedimentum praestari posse, vel debere, ex quovis
salvo conductu per Imperatorem etc. Haereticis, vel de Haeresi diffamatis,
concesso, quocunque vinculo se adstrinxerit, quo minus, dicto salvo conductu
non obstante; liceat Judici competenti, and Ecclesiastico de hujusmodi
personatum erroribus inquirere, and alias contra eos debite procedere, eosdem*
punire, quantum justitia suadebit, etc. [ i. e. so far as their jurisdiction
extends.] Nec sic promittentem [i. e. Imperatorem, etc.] cum fecerit, quod in
ipso est [ i e. quod jure facere potest] ex hoc [salvo conductu] in aliquo
remansisse obligatum [as to any further observance of his promises.] Which
Constitution, in all the parts of it, must needs be justified, unless one man's
promise, or oath, takes away another man's Right. But such a promise, as takes
away another man's right, is unlawful, and therefore void; and he who thus
engages very faulty in making it, but obliged to break it.

Again, for matter of fact; that the Council contained it self within the
limits of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, leaving, after this executed, Jo.
Husse, as to any further temporal punishment, to the justice of the imperial
laws, appears sufficiently in the conclusion of its Sentence against him, Sess.
15. ending thus. -- Haec Sancta Synodus Joannem Huss, attento, quod Ecclesia
Dei non habeat ultra quid gerere valeat, judicio saeculari relinquere, and
ipsum Curiae saeculari relinquendum fore, decernit. Thus much clear.

Safe Conduct, granted to Husse; whether it run after the common manner, for
securing his coming and returning from any unjust violence, that might be
offered; or yet further; for securing him also from any execution of Secular
Justice upon him, if found criminal, [for this later also, as to those
punishments belonging to the Jurisdiction of the civil Magistrate, is granted
to be in his lawful power, and he obliged to keep his faith, made either of
these ways] I say, this is not so easy to resolve; nor what jealousy the
Emperor might have at first, before he was better satisfied concerning their
distinct Jurisdictions, least the Councils proceedings upon the trial of Huss
for Heresy might some way infringe his Safe Conduct. Now for any evidence in
these things: 1st. The Safe conduct it self is no where extant. 2ly. Molanus,
with many other Catholic Writers, with great probabllity, contend; that this
Safe Conduct was drawn only in the common form of such writs, and to be
understood in their ordinary sense; namely, to secure such person from any
violence, that shall be offered toward him, but not from justice, for which
the aforenamed Author l. 2. c, 3.
quotes Mynsinger, Obs. 82. -- Quando datur alicui securitas, vel salvus
conductus [ i. e. in the common form] tunc intelligitur solum de violentia,
quae de facto contra jus infertur; and produces an usual form of the
Emperors. -- Damus tibi fidem publicam, causam dicendi in Judicio contra vim,
non tamen contra juris Executionem. And this is rendered much the more
creditable, in that we find a Safe Conduct in this very sense granted by this
Council of Constance. Sess. 6. to Hierom of Prague (for Huss desired none from
the Council) upon which he also thought fit to venture himself, and appear
before it. The form thereof is this. -- Citamus, etc. quatenus compareas, etc.
recepturus in omnibus justitiae complementum, ad quod a violentia (justitia
semper salva) omnem salvum conductum nostrum, quantum in nobis est, and fides
exigit orthodoxa, presentium tenore offerimus. Now, since Hierom, after Huss
his having been some time at Constance, ventured to appear there upon such a
Safe Conduct, why may we not reasonably imagine (notwithstanding the
declarations of some Protestants of the extreme folly of such an action) that
Jo. Huss might have the same confidence, or commit the like over-sights, as the
other; as, much mistaking at first both the strict justice of the Council, and
the weakness of his cause. The same thing may be probably gathered from his
flight, after some time, out of Constance, hidden in a Cart laden with goods;
which argues the little confidence he had in the Form of his Safe Conduct to
protect him from justice; as this also does; that neither at his trial, nor his
Death, he is mentioned, in his followers relating his story, either to have
claimed the the privilege of such a Safe Conduct, or accused any of the breach
thereof.

But now, suppose it a Safe Conduct, securing him not only from violence, but
also from execution of justice; yet is it related to have been so conditioned,
as that, if he should attempt any flight (which he did) he should forfeit all
the benesit of it; and, thus free, Justice Ecclesiastical, and Civil, proceed
against him. Now, that, by one of these ways, the Emperor was discharged from
his faith given to him, may justly be presumed, in that, after his condemnation
for Heresy, he made no scruple to put him to death; and that, before any
Conciliar decree was passed by the Council in this matter, as it were to relax,
or dissolve his former engagement; Huss his Execution being in July; and the
aforementioned decree passed in September following.

the Safe Conduct to free him totally from the Secular Justice; and some
miscarriages also to have been in the proceedings of the Emperor or Council
(which is not impossible:) yet, not the least error can be found in the Decree
or Constitution or Doctrine of the Council, which is so much blamed, as which
expressly declares; That the Prince, once his faith given, debet facere, quod in
ipso est [i. e quod est in ipsius legitima potestate] and then: This also is
granted (See Becan. c. 12. quoted before,. 94.) That it is a thing in the
Princes lawful power, to suspend the execution of his own laws; and upon such
suppositions, if the Emperor through the importunities of some others did not
this, I see not how he can be therein excused: But still the Councils Decree
has no hand in such guilt. But lastly, The Delegats from Bohemia, who where
Hussites, their repairing, some sixteen years after, to the Council of Basil,
upon the security of the Council, and the same Emperor Sigismund's
Safe Conduct, shows sufficiently that the Safe-conducts of Huss, and Hierom of
Prague, were too narrow to shield them from justice, as well as from injury;
and not such faith of the Emperor, or Council, as was promised to them, to
have been afterward broken: For to the same Faith, only the form of of the
Safe Conduct changed, these Commissioners from Bohemiae freely trusted
themselves. Thus much of the Council of Constance, in which, for that which is
related here out of the Story, I must refer you to, -- Molanus de Fide Haeret,
servand. l. 3. -- Spondanus, and the Authors mentioned by him, in A. D. 14 ^5.
n. 44, and 45. especially Cocleus, in his Histor. Hussit. l. 2. and 3. who
takes his matter out of the Stories delivered by some of Huss his followers.

Council of Trent, in their Safe Conduct, did expressly, huic constitutioni
Constantiensi, in hac part, pro hac vice, derogare.

The Trent Conduct thus qualified for their satisfaction; yet another exception
the Protestants had against it; That whereas they chiefly desired two things [
viz. 1. That the Scripture alone might be the judge or rule to try the
Controversies by; and, 2. That the Protestants joined in an equal number with
the Catholics, might have decisive votes; or, the Controversies be decided by
an equal number of Lay-Judges, chosen on both sides] The form of this
Trent-safe conduct, for the Protestants, did not as to these exactly follow
that of Basil, for the Bohemians; whereby (had it been granted) says Soave)
the Protestants would have obtained one great point; that is, p. 344.
that the Controversies should be decided by the Holy Scripture; and afterward
( Soave, p. 366.) It is pretended, That such a Safe Conduct would have given
them a decisive voice. But in answer to these: For this last point, there
appears no such thing in that conduct of Basil: For the former point; the words
of the Safe Conduct in Council. Basil. 4. Sess. are these. -- In causa quatuor
Articulorum per eos attentorum lex divina, praxis Christi Apostolica, and
Ecclesiae primitiva, una cum Conciliis, Doctoribus, fundantibus se veraciter in
eadem, pro verissimo, and indifferenti Judice, in hoc Basiliensi Concilio
admittentur. Whereas the words of the Safe Conduct in the Council of Trent are
these -- S. Trident. Synodus concedit, quod causae controversae, secundum
sacram Scripturam, and Apostolorum traditiones, probata Concilia, Catholicae
Ecclesiae consensum, and Sanctorum Patrum authoritates, in praedicto Concilio
Tridentino, tractentur, where we see both the Conducts do agree in [ praxis, or
Traditio Apostolorum] in [ Concilia, and Doctores, or Patres] only the later
omits the clause [fundantes se veraciter in Scriptura.] The reason of which
omission, see in Pallav. l. 12. c. 15 n 9. And it is clear at first sight;
because this clause was capable (though. contrary to the intention of the
Council of Basil) of such a false Gloss (namely, if it be thus understood;
that when any Authority was produced out of Councils or Fathers, the
Protestants might accept, or reject it, as they judged it to be founded, or not
founded in the Scriptures) as would void the sense of the words, that went
before it, and make them needlessly added to [lex divinae.] the Protestants,
when any such authority out of Councils or Fathers is urged, answering;
Ostende, quod illa Conciliae, etc. se veraciter fundarunt in Scriptura: which
is the same with; Proba hoc quod Concilium dicit ex Scripturis. For, suppose
those Councils quote some Scriptures for what they say, yet will not
Protestants therefore yield, that what they shall say is founded there; because
they may say, they quote them in a wrong sense: and now you may see the reason
of what Soave said above, and the great point the Protestants had gained, if
the Safe Conduct had run in the Form of Basil, though that Form names, with the
Scriptures, Concilia, and Doctores, and praxin Apostolicam, and primitivae
Ecclesiae, for the judge of Controversies. But why is the Tridentine Council so
averse, you will say, that Scripture only should be the Judge, or the ground of
their judgment in matters of Religion? For this reason; because, when there is
controversy of the meaning of Scripture (as mostly it is) it is fit, the
Councils and Fathers should terminate the dispute therein; or else what end can
be of such Controversy, when those, against whom the Councils declare, shall
so often say, the Councils declare against the Scriptures, i. e. their sense of
them? But here it is sufficient; that though the Safe Conduct, as to the way,
which the Protestants demanded, of the trial of their Doctrines, was excepted
against (of which more by and by) yet, as to the security of their persons, it
was unquestioned. Thus much from. 82. that no deficiency in the Summons, place,
or Safe Conduct, has rendered this Council illegal, or nonobliging.

CHAP. VII.
8. That this Council is not rendered illegal, by the Oath of Bishops taken to
the Pope,. 105.

9. Nor yet, by the Bishops, or Popes, being a Party, and Judges in their own
Cause,. 113. 1. Not, by the Bishops their being Judges, Ib. Where, Of several
other ways of judging Ecclesiatical Controversies, justly rejected,. 118.
2. Nor, by the Popes being Judge,. 122.


Oath, 8.
that was taken by the Bishops to the Pope, hinder this Council, consisting of
those Bishops, from being a free, legal, and obliging Council. The sum of which
Oath is, -- Ego N. Episcopus fidelis ero Sancto Petro, Sanctae Apostolicae
Romanae Ecclesiae, Domino meo Papae N. ejusque Successoribus Canonice
intrantibus -- Papatum Romanae Ecclesiae, and Regulas Sanctorum Patrum, adjutor
ero ad defendendum, and retinendum contra omnem Hominem [Regulas Sanctorum
Patrum; or Regalia Sancti Petri, as it is in later Pontificals; which Regalia,
I suppose relates to the Popes temporal Dominions, and is more properly sitted
to the Bishops living in, or near them; as also non ero in Consilio, ut vitam
perdat, and several other Passages in the Oath, seem to be] -- Jura, honores,
privilegia, and authoritatem Romanae Ecclesiae, Domini nostri Papae, and
successorum praedictorum, conservare, defendere, angere, and promovere. curabo.
Nec ero in Consilio, in facto, seu tractatu, in quibus contra Dominum nostrum,
vel Romanam Ecclesiam, aliquae sinistra, sive praejudicialia personarum, juris,
honoris, status, and potestatis eorum, machinentur.

1
and customary Oath taken by all Bishops at their Consecration, not an oath
imposed on them with any particular Relation to this Council; and that it is,
for substance, the same oath, as has been usually sworn in former ages,
precedent to many other Councils, without being complained of, or conceived any
way to abridge their Liberties: Nor is it now a grievance, save to such, as
deny to this Prime-Patriarch his ancient and Canonical rights.

obedience and fidelity to Ecclesiastical Superiors, 2.
is required by the Reformed themselves: and every Bishop in the Church of
England, at his Consecration, takes an oath to perform all due reverence and
obedience to his Archbishop; and the Metropolitan Church, and their Successors.
And, though, in a thing, so far as it is granted lawful, it matters not, how
new is the practice; yet such an oath particularly to this Prime Patriarch,
especially for the Bishops subjected to his Patriarchy, has been also
anciently used [See the order in Conce Tol^t. 11. can. 10. -- Omnes Pontifices,
Rectoresque Ecclesiarum, tempore, quo ordinandi sunt, sub cautione promittant,
ut fidem Catholicam custodiant -- atque obsequii reverentiam praeeminenti sibi
dependant: [where why, omnes Pontifices, praeeminenti sibi, may not as lawfully
be extended to the pre-eminency of the Patriarch, as of the Metropolitan, I see
nothing to hinder.] And see apud Baron A. D. 722. the form of the oath of
fidelity to the Pope taken by Winfrid our Countryman, and other Bishops of
those times, at their Ordination -- Promitto Ego N. Episcopus tibi, B. Petre
Apostolorum Princeps, vicarioque tuo B. Gregorio Papae, and successori ejus --
me omnem fidem and puritatem Sanctae fidei Catholieae exhibere, and in unitate
ejusdem fidei persistere. Again, -- Fidem, and puritatem meam atque concursum
tibi, and utilitatibus Ecclesiae tuae, [i e. Petri] (cui a Domino Deo potestas
ligandi, solvendique data est) and praedicto vicario tuo, atque Successoribus
ejus per omnia exhibere, etc. And see much what the like form in Greg. Epist.
l. 10. ep. 31. -- Ego Civitatis illius Episcopus, sub anathematis Obligatione,
promitto sancto Petro Apostolorum Principi, atque ejus vicario Beato Gregorio,
vel successoribus ipsius -- semper me in unitate sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae,
and Communione Romani Pontificis, per omnia, permansurum. Vnde jurans dico per
Deum Omnipotentem, and haec Sancta 4or. Evangelia, etc.] where, though the
occasion of the Oath is a returning from Heresy as one confines it, See
Stillinsl. p. 490.
yet the word, promitto sancti Petri Apostolorum Principis vicario, me in
Communione Romani Pontificis, per omnia, permansurum (in this; as also, me
fidem atque concursum tibi and utilitatibus Ecclesiae tuae per omnia
exhibiturum^, in the precedent Form) include a fidelity, and subjection to St.
Peter's Chair; and that the Bishops, in those ancient days, swear no less, to
continue in the Communion of the Bishop of Rome, than in the unity of the
Catholic Church; Indeed these two were then conceived inseparable; and
therefore, in the same Form, it is called unitas sedis Apostolicae; and those,
who desert it, are said to depart a radice unitatis. Now, this Oath being taken
lawfully in such a case; why may it not be so, at another time? And if this
Council of Trent, by reason of such modern Oath taken by the Bishops to the
Pope, may not be thought Free to proceed against any disorders in this See;
neither may any of those Councils which have been celebrated since the use of
the like Oaths, since that Toletan Council, since Gregory's, or Winfrids,
times, be thought so

Canonical Obedience; only, to yield such obedience to the Bishop of Rome, 3.
as the Canons of former Councils do require, -- Donec Pontifex est; and dum
jubet ea, quae secundum Deum; and sacros Canones jubere potest; sed non jurant,
se non dicturos, quod sentiunt, in Concilio; vel, se non deposituros eum, si
haereticum esse couvincant, as Bellarmin answered long since to this scruple:
only they swear to defend, and promote, all, De Council. l. 1. c. 21.
not to be in any action, or plot against, any of, his legal, and Canonical
(for this is always understood in oaths) Rights, Authority, Privileges, etc
Now what offense here, what restraint of any lawful liberty? For an Oath taken
in general to all the Canonical rights of the Pope, and not specifying any in
particular, leaves the Bishops, and the Council, in perfect liberty to dispute,
examine, and determine what are his Canonical, and rightful privileges, what
not; leaves them liberty, to question his Supremacy, so far as he seems to them
to claim any such in causes, or over persons, Ecclesiastical, not appearing by
divine right, or Church-Constitution, due unto him: and generally, in liberty,
to question, as Bellarmin observes, his commanding, or practicing, things they
think unlawful. And indeed the Bishops in Trent, sworn to maintain all his
lawful, yet did dispute some of his pretended, Rights, and Privileges; and
after much debate, left them unstated. Nor did the Pope, or his Legates, though
willing enough to have prevented such agitations, yet plead any obligation in
the Episcopal Oath, against them. This Oath therefore, obliging only to the
observation of the former Divine, and Church-Laws, concerning the Papal
Dignities, can be no more prejudicial to the liberty of Councils, than the
former Laws and Canons are prejudicial thereto.

not sworn, yet still remain obliged to the observance of all such Canons; so
that such Oath is not the addition of a new, but the confirmation of a former
obligation, which, 4.
when our Superiors, for their greater security, call for, we cannot justly
deny.

5ly. Yet neither do such obligation, nor such Oath, laid on Bishops taken
singly, restrain their liberty, 5.
may then altor, and change those Canons; and so, their obligation to them: No
more than a Princes, or his Subjects swearing to the observance of the civil
laws of a Nation, hinders these, when met in Parliament, to abrogate any law,
or enact the contrary; all oaths to laws have this tacit limitation: viz. till
those, who have the authority, shall think fit to repeal them, And, in the
consecration of the Reformed Bishops in England, the Oath, imposed upon them,
of obedience to the Archbishop, is conceived to be unprejudicial to the liberty
of their Synods.

6.
so soon as this unlawfulness appeared to them, from that moment, without any
dispensation, were discharged from the observance thereof; as Luther, and
Bucer, so soon as it seemed to them unlawful, thought themselves quitted from
the same, or the like, Oath, formerly taken, when they first entered into a
religious Order; but if nothing was sworn in it but what was lawful, why
complain the Reformed of this Oath?

7.
that concerning the Popes Supremacy, but would leave it free as to all, or
most of the rest. Neither see I what influence their swearing to maintain the
Popes just Privileges could have upon their votes, in the points of
Justification, Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, and the like. For if
this be named one of his privileges, that their decrees in these points are
invalid, unless by him confirmed, yet there is no reason, that this should
incline them at all to vote, in these, contrary to their own judgment. 1st.
Because (omitting here the obligation they have to promote Truth upon whatever
resistance) they have no cause to presume his Judgment in such points
(especially after their Consultations) would be different from theirs. Or, 2ly.
Because, if they knew it would differ, yet they understood also, that without
the Concurrence of their Judgments, his likewise is rendered invalid, and not
able to establish any thing, wherein they dissent: As in some affairs of this
Council it so happened. This, for the Oath; to pass on to others.

Bishop of Rome, who presided, and those Bishops, who sat in the Council, were
a party and Judges in their own cause: 9.
As, for instance, the controversies that were to be decided being between
these two parties, Protestants and Roman Catholics, that those of the Council
were all Roman Catholics, and the Protestants not permitted to have with the
rest any decisive vote: Again; the Protestants accusing the Roman, and other
Western, Churches; of many corruptions both in their doctrine, and in their
discipline, yet that this Council was made up of the Bishops of those Churches
which were thus accused: Again; one controversy being against the superiority
of the Order of Bishops to the Presbytery, that therefore in this the Bishops
were clearly a party: Another controversy being against the Popes Supremacy,
and particularly against his authority of calling and presiding in Councils,
that therefore in this the Pope was a party: Besides, that his stiling the
Protestants heretics before the Council renders him in it no impartial, nor
unprejudiced Judge in their cause: I say, neither do these pretenses hinder
this Council (supposing it composed of so many Bishops of the Catholic Church,
as are necessary to the constitution of a General Council, or of so many
Bishops of the Western Churches, as are necessary to the constitution of a
Patriarchal) from being a lawful Judge in these controversies; and the acts
thereof, obligatory to all; nor hinder not the Pope from presiding there.

Where, 1st. To consider the legality of the Synod, as it consists of such
Bishops.

Heresies and Schisms have had the same plea against the former Councils, 1.
as the Reformed against this of Trent: namely, that the contrary party, the
accuser, or the accused, was their Judge. All the Christian Clergy was once
divided into Arrians and Anti-Arrians, or Nestorians, and Anti-Nestorians; as,
in the times of the Council of Trent, it was into the Protestants and
Roman Catholics: and the Arrians then accused the Catholic Bishops of their
corruption of the doctrine of the Trinity, as the Protestants did now the Roman
Catholics of several corruptions in doctrine, and discipline: Yet so it was,
that the Arrians were condemned by the Anti-Arrian Bishops, as being the major
part; neither were they allowed any other Judge, save these; and this, a
Judgment approved by the Protestants. Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, on
the one side, and Celestine Bishop of Rome, and Cyril of Alexandria on the
other side, counter-accuse one another of Her^sie; yet was Nestorius sentenced,
and condemned, in the 3d. G. Council, by Celestine presiding there by Cyril,
his Substitute.

Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria and the Eutychian party had great contest with
the rest of Christian Bishops, Anti-Eutychians; proceeding so far, that
Dioscorus with his party presumed to excommunicate Leo; yet was he and his
party judged, and condemned by the Anti-Eutychian party, being a major part in
the 4th. G. Council; the same Leo presiding there by his Legates, and Dioscorus,
though the 2d. Patriarch, being not permitted to sit, or vote in the Council.
And these Judgments approved by the Protestants. Arius, an Alexandrian
Presbyter, and Alexander the Bishop, there had much controversy between them,
and accused one another, before the Council of Nice; yet Alexander, in that
Council, sat as Arius his Judge amongst the rest, and gave his definitive vote
against him. And doubtless, had Arius been a Bishop, and the major part of that
Council Arian, Arius should have judged Alexander in the same manner. Allowed
examples in this kind might be alleged, infinite.

2ly. Now to show,. 125. n. 1.
that such judgments are lawful and obligatory, notwithstanding that the Judges
are a Party, 2.
formerly accusing and accused by, the other, of corruptions, errors,
usurpations, etc. I beg these three things to be granted me, having elsewhere
sufficiently secured them. 1 That the Church is delegated; by Christ, as the
supreme Judge on earth for all ^heological, and Spiritual matters, secure for
ever not to err in necessaries; and that as a Guide. 2ly. That the judgment of
the Bishops, and chief Pastors of the Church, as being, at least by
Ecclesiastical Constitution, and common practice of former Councils (as appears
by the subscriptions to them) established the Representative thereof, is to be
taken for that of the Church; or else, the judgment of all former Councils,
even of the four first, may be questioned. 3ly. That the vote of the major
part, where all consent not in the same judgment, must conclude the whole;
both, for those Bishops sitting in the Council, and those Bishops absent, that
accept it.

Which Judge,. 115. n. 2.
that has been, of all former ages, by whom Christians have been settled in
truth against all former Heresies, Arianism, Nestorianism, Pelagianism, etc. if
any, because he finds it not to suit with the late Reformation, will now
reject; let him tell us what other Judge he can put in their place? For if this
ancient and former Judge must be supposed (contrary to our Lords Promise)
deficient in necessaries, and incident into Heresy, Blasphemy, Idolatry: and
then, if a few of these ecclesiastical Governors (surmising this) against
many, a few Interiors against many their Superiors, only after they have first
made their complaints to them, and propounded their reasons, and been rejected,
may then apply themselves to procure the assistance, and power, of the temporal
Magistrate (one, who may be seduced also, and assist in a wrong cause;) and so
may, first, sit down in the Chair, and judge of the wilfulness, and obstinacy,
of these others in defense of their supposed errors and crimes: and then, may
proceed to a reforming of the Church, or some part thereof, against them;
(things which a late opposer of this Council Mr. Stillings. p. 478.479.
is necessitated to maintain) will not thus, the revolution of judging and
governing in ecclesiastical affairs, proceed in infinitum; and necessarily
bring in a confusion of Religion's, (as some Countries have had late
experience?) For, This second Judge, and Reformer, and this Secular Magistrate
are liable also to Heresies, Blasphemies, Idolatries: And then, how is there
any remedy of these crimes and errors, unless there may be also a third Judge
allowed to reform against them? and then, may not the Superiors, and major
part, again, take their turn, to reform these Reformers? And, where will be an
end of this Controversy, who shall last decide Controversies? Every Judge,
that we can set up, being also a party, and so to leave his Chair, after that
there appears another to question his judgment? But, if we are to stay in some
judgment, to avoid such confusion, where, more reasonably can we rest, than in
the three former Proposals?

Bishops, must be content not to be Judges, or to have definitive votes, in
Councils, and if any such have a controversy with, or against, Bishops, must
be content, after their best informations preferred to the Order, to be judged
by the same Bishops; who, it is probable, upon some new evidence, may alter
their former sentences. But yet, suppose the Inferior Clergy admitted to have
Definitive votes, I see not, what the Protestants can advantage themselves
thereby, as long as, if any inferior Clergy, all, must have so; and the greater
number, give law to the fewer: For the inferior Catholick-Clergy, in the time
of the Council of Trent, far out-numbred the Reformed.

Honor, another to their Profit, another to their Peace, in some sense they
may almost always be said to judge in their own cause; or, on their own side.
So, when ever they are divided into two opinions, or parties, who ever of them
judges here, and none may judge beside them, judges in his own cause. And so
it is, when any one opposes the Church in any of her Traditions, or Doctrines,
formerly owned by her: For instance, when one opposes the Order of Bishops;
the just obligation of the Churches Decrees; questioneth, * whether the
Church Governors, succeeding the Apostles, hold such or such their authority
immediately from Christ, independent on secular Princes? * Whether the receiving
of Holy Orders be necessary for administering the Sacraments? * Whether Tithes
be due, jure divino? In all these we must say, that the Church is appointed by
God Judge in her own cause. Or if, in some of these things, not the Clergy, but
the Laity, be the right Judge; yet so we still make him, who judges, to judge
in his own cause, and in a matter, wherein he is interessed; whilst he so much
againeth in those things; as the other loses. Of this matter, thus Mr.
Chellingw. p. 60.
-- In controversies of Religion, it is in a manner impossible to be avoided,
but the Judge must be a party. For this must be the first [Controversie]
whether he be a Judge or no: and, in that he must be a party.

equal number of Clergy with full authority to determine it? But these, having
equal votes, will counterpoise one another, and so decide nothing. Or, suppose
one or two should, as it were, betray their trust, and pass over to the other
side (for truth, and error, are not capable of moderating the point, and
compounding the middle doctrine between both, as many other litigious matters
are) yet I think no party, especially the major, will ever yield to commit the
future profession of their Religion to such a chance. 2. Or, shall the Clergy
on both sides, first pleading their cause before them, cast the judgment and
decision thereof upon the Laity? But are not the Laity, in matter of Religion
(which concerns all) all parties, as well as the Churchmen, and ranged, with
the several divisions of the Churchmen, in distinct communions? Will the
Protestant be judged by the Emperor; or the Roman Catholic by the Duke of
Saexony, because a Layman? But if an equal number of Laics, because there also
are parties, shall be chosen on both sides, whether Princes or others, the same
accidents recur, as in taking an equal number of Clergy. Blessed be God, who
has established a firmer course for the perpetual settlement of the peace of
his Church.

supreme, power. I say, supreme: For, as for inferior Judicatures, exclusion
of parties from being Judges is easy, by reason of many both collateral, and
superior, Courts, which may be repaired to, For the supreme power then; when
any difference happens between a Prince and his Subjects, part of his people
adhering to him, part divided from him, when a part of his Kingdom rebelleth
against him, opposes some part of his Royal Prerogatives, or the equity and
justice of some of his Laws. Here, 1. Either such offense must not be judged;
2. Or, the supreme Magistrate, hearing the Plea of his Subjects, must judge in
his own cause, either by Himself, or by his Substitute; which is all one, as if
by himself: For he can give this Substitute no such power to judge this cause,
unless he have such power himself: Again, it is to be presumed, that such
Substitute shall be one of his own persuasions: and who will think themselves
any whit relieved by having their adversary to nominate the person that shall
judge the cause between him, and them? But if such Substitute, by receiving new
informations, may change his former judgment, so may the Prince, (hearing the
cause himself, and being better informed) so much the sooner he hoped to change
his, as he has no other above him, whom he is bound to observe 3. or, 3ly. The
matter must be referred to the arbitrament of an equal number of both parties,
so many loyal Subjects, and so many Rebels; but what good issue can be hoped of
this? 4. or, lastly, to the arbitrament of some neighboring State: But neither
may this State, being never without some Interest of its own, be thought an
impartial Judge. Here then I conceive, that the concession of the Statist will
be, that the supreme Governor is to judge in his own cause, upon the penalty
of the divine revenge, and public infamy, if he judge amiss; and then how is
the same thing unjust in the Superior Governors of the Church? especially,
when as such judgment of their is not valid, unless it be of a major part of
them.

the major part of Christian Bishops are already, or will, when met and arguing
the case, be of their persuasion. And, for the Appellants, when they see the
other party, in such Council, far outnumbers theirs, to request or caution,
this General Council may be composed of an equal number of both sides, is, in
effect, to appeal from it, and to desire that the Council should not be
General.

Trent were.

2. Next, 2.
to the Protestants Articles, and Exceptions made more particularly, against
the Pope, and his Court; in respect of which, they would have had him at least
excluded from being a Judge in in this Council of Trent: I answer.

sole Judge in these matters; but only to have presided in that Court, which
was so: 1.
which he has done often in former allowed Councils, when also he was a Person
accused by a Party. See. 114.
For every unweighty accusation is not enough to remove the Judge from the
Bench, or alter the usual course of Justice.

Declaration, Sentence, or Censure, of a Council, this supreme Bishop, and
President thereof, in some extraordinary Delinquencies (if possible these
should happen) may be liable to, as in case of Heresy, or some other
incorrigible tyranny, or heinous Crimes, or also in his neglect, when, so
obnoxious, to call a Council, etc. in which cases some Roman Divines, that seem
no diminishers of the Popes privileges, do freely allow as much, as can
rationally be required [As, if you have the curiosity, you may see in these
places of Bellarmin; both, in case of his neglect in calling a Council. -- De
Council. l. 1. c. 14.. Ad secundum: and; when the Council is called, in case of
Heresy, or other incorrigible Crime -- Ib. c. 9.. Quarta causa; (where also
the Cardinal urges the 21. Canon of the 8th General Council. -- Debent
Generalia Concilia cognoscere controversias circa Romans Pontificem exortas.) --
De Council. l. 2. c. 19. Primum exemplum -- De Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 30. Tertia
Opinio.] Or, whether it be stated rather; that, He having no Superior Judge,
such Enormities are for a time to be suffered in this Ecclesiastical Supreme
(as the like misdemeanors in Socular matters, are tolerated in the Civil) till
God, whose vigilant providence never deserts his Church, either converts Him,
or removes Him; I say, however these things be stated; yet as to our present
business of Trent, neither did the Pope, out of any such private guilt of
Heresy, or other Crime, forbear to call this Council; nor, when it was
assembled, and the Protestants complaints against the Pope well known, did this
supreme Court find any ground, or cause of such extraordinary proceedings
against him. For 1st. For his Presidentship in the Council, which was excepted
against, how could the Council deprive him of this right, which was no new
tyranny, or device, but that office, which his Predecessors had anciently
exercised in the most unblemished Councils, which the Church ever had: Of
which, see what is said before,. 46. etc. And, as for any false doctrines,
crimes, or corruptions, charged on Him, this Council found none valid, as to
his own person, either, for removal of Him from such Presidentship, or
Deposition from his Dignity Pontifical.

Rome, as the Protestants complained of, so the Council, and also the Pope
himself, acknowledged. And, in the remedying of these, the Council spent the
longer part of their Acts; which have been not merely delusory, as a late
Writer would blast them Stillingf. Rat. Account. p 482.
(who must one day give account to the celestial Majesty of his speaking evil
of so sacred and Authority:) but very effective, as to the having produced a
vigorous, and during Reformation in the Roman Church; and that, of the chiefest
disorders complained of; as is showed more particularly below,. 203. etc. And
this real effect it was, which with an holy envy, the Clergy of France,
discovered in other Catholic Countries, and which made them so importunate
with the King, and State of France, to give them there the like force; and,
that this Kingdom alone might not be deprived of so great a benefit. See. 77.
etc.
And so much were these severe Decrees resented, and dreaded in the Court of
Rome, that Soave p. 8, 6.
reports -- That this Reformation was opposed by almost all the Officers of
this Court, representing their losses, and prejudices, and showing how all
would redound to the offense of his Holiness, and of the Apostolic See, and
diminution of his Revenues. Of which, see much more below,. 204. This, in the
second place, that the Council, who is only proper Judge of this Head of the
Church (if any so be) and of these matters, found no such weighty accusation
against the Popes person, as might justly abridge any of his privileges
therein: nor, that any Reformation, in the Church, or Court, was obstructed by
his Authority.

Lutherans, 3.
Heretics, before the sitting of this Council, render him incapable of being
one of their Judges in it: For this prime Governor in the Church is not a
Judge of heresy only in the Council; and other Popes, as the forementioned
Celestine and Leo, having formerly declared against the errors of Nestorius and
Dioseorus, yet afterward, approvedly, presided in Councils; and there again
condemned them. But much more might the Pope call the Lutherans, Heretics,
without show of wrong, if so be that their tenants, or some of them, had been
determined against, and condemned, in former lawful Councils: as Pope Leo 10 in
Bull. 8. Jun. 1520. pretended they were: For, if the opinion be formerly
concluded heresy, those who own it, without a new process, may be pronounced
Heretics. Now it is clear, that some of the Protestant tenants were condemned,
in the 2d. Nicene, in the 8. G. Council, in the Lateran, under Innocent 3. in
that of Florence, in that of Constance See below. 198.
Add to this, * that Leo the 10th, who sent forth a formal Decree against
Luther, and his followers, to be proceeded against as Heretics, was deceased
before this Council, and presided not in it; * that Paul the 3d. who first
presided in this Council, did not formerly pass any formal sentence against the
Lutherans, or Heretics; but only, in his Bull concerning Reformation of the
Court of Rome, Obiter named them so, which cannot have the virtue of a
judicatory Decree; yet, in his last Bull of the Indiction of the Council in
Trent, forbears also to name them so: * That Pius the 4th, who renewed the
Council, and concluded it, was absolutely free from giving them this offense,
therefore the Acts, at least under him (enough to condemn them) are not, upon
this pretense, to be invalidated. But here it must not be forgotten; that not
only the Pope, but the Emperor, the King of France, and, sometime, the King of
England, Henry the 8th, before the Council, pronounced them Heretics;
published Edicts, and denounced heavy punishments, against them; and yet,
afterward they did not, for this, utterly decline these Princes judgments, as
hoping that such proceedings might be, upon better informations and second
considerations, reversible.

Mr. Stil^ingf. R^t. Account. p. 492.
-- If the Protestant opinions were condemned for Heresies before, by General
Councils, why was the Council of* Trent at all summoned? It is easily answered,
1st. That though many of the Protestant tenants had been considered, and
condemned in former Councils, yet not all, because some of them not then
appearing. 2ly. Had all been so: yet, that it is not unusual both to
Ecclesiastical, and Civil Courts, to reiterate their sentence; and by new
Declarations (and perhaps new reasons too) to enforce their former Laws, and
Decrees, so long as a considerable party continues to gainsay, and disobey,
them; whereby is yielded also a Testimony to the world, that the present Church
Governors persevere both in the faith of their Predecessors, and in their
Resolution, for the maintenance thereof. So Arianism, after the Nicen, was
condemned again, by way of a continued Testimony to the truth of
Consubstantiality, by the Council of Sardica; and Berengarius, and his party
being condemned by five several Councils, before the great Lateran, and that of
Florence, yet did not these forbear to reiterate the condemnation, so long as
others continued to maintain the Heresy.

CHAP. VIII.
II. Head. The Invalidity of such a Council, as Protestants demanded.
The Protestant-Demands,. 127.

The unreasonableness of these Demands,. 132.

Where, Of the fruitlesness of many Diets (framed according to the
Protestant-Proposals) to decide their Controversies.

first General Head I proposed (. 8.) concerning the sufficient generality of
this Council, to render it obligatory. Now I pass to the second; concerning the
novelty, canonical invalidity; and probably, ineffectiveness (as to their
carrying the cause) of such a General Council, as the Protestants demanded in
stead of that of Trent, and as should be regulated with all their Conditions.

Luther, the first Parent of this new Sect, being questioned for his Doctrines,
and upon this cited to Rome, first made Friends to have his cause tried in
Germany; having been heard and condemned in Germany (by Cardinal Cajetan, for
one, a moderat and learned Prelat) he now appealed to Rome, and to the Pope.
But well perceiving, that his Doctrine would also be most certainly condemned
there, as it was: he suddenly intercepted this Appeal with another, See Adam
vitae Lutheri.
made from the Pope to a Council; having some ground to imagine, that such a
Body would never be convened to hear his cause, nor the Pope call them
together, from whom was expected a severe Reformation of Him, and his Court.
But afterward; seeing that in good earnest such a Council there would be (for a
Bull was published for one to be held at Vicenza, in 1^37.) and well
discerning, that neither thus (the usual former laws of Councils being
observed: or only this law of all Assemblies; that the much major part shall
conclude the whole) his Doctrine could stand (as indeed it did not) He began
now to vilify Councils, and put out a book De Conciliis, in, 1^39. wherein he
declares, no good, but much hurt to have come to the Church by those that had
been held formerly; not sparing the very First, reverenced by the whole
Christian world; not that of Nice; not that of the Apostles, Act. c. 15. Some
of his Invectives I have set down already, in Disc. 3.. 78. n. 3. and so here
forbear to repeat them. Upon this therefore his last Appeal was from Councils
to the Holy Scriptures (defending himself with a -- Si Angelus de Coelo, Gal.
18. -- Attendite a falsis Prophetis Matt. 17.15.
-- Oves meae vocem meam audiunt. Jo. 10.
-- Omnia probantes, 1 Teess. 5.21.
etc.) And here he knew himself safe (as any Heresy, though never so absurd,
would be) in choosing that to be the Judge, or decider of the Controversy,
which could never deliver any new sentence on any side; and where the meaning
of its former Sentence delivered already, which all will stand to were it
known, is the controversy to be decided.

But his followers, rather than utterly to decline a Council, which they had
formerly, to avoid the standing Church-authorities, often called for, thought
sit to change the ancient form thereof, and to clog it with such Conditions,
as, if accepted, should perfectly secure them from any danger from it. Now the
Conditions, as they are most fully set down in Soave, p. 642. though often
mentioned elsewhere, See Soave, p. 18, 65, 80. 1. -- 2 -- 3.
are these. 1. That it should not be called by the Pope. 2. That it should be
celebrated in Germany, according to the Canon, ut illic lites terminentur, ubi,
exortae sunt. 3. That the Pope should not preside in, but only be part of, the
Council, and subject to the determinations thereof. That the Bishops should be
free from their Oath given to the Pope, that so they may freely, and without
impediment, deliver their opinions. 5. That the Protestant Divines, sent to the
Council, might have a deciding voice with the rest. That the Holy Scriptures
might be judge in the Council, end all humane authority excluded.

Apostolorum traditiones, Concilia, and authoritates S. Patrum: Which, together
with the Holy Scriptures (as necessary to know the true meaning of them, where
it is disputed) was the Rule that the Council entertained, to decide present
controversies by. Of which see Soave, l. 4. p. 344. and 323. where he says;
the Council prescribed this Rule to the Divines, in their disputations about
the Articles proposed to them, That they ought to confirm their opinions with
the Holy Scriptures, Traditions of the Apostles, sacred and approved Councils,
and by the Constitutions and Authorities of the Holy Fathers; to avoid
superfluous and unprofitable questions, and perverse contentions. Which rule to
judge controversies by, was also mentioned in the Safe Conduct. -- Quod causae
controversae secundum Scripturam, and Apostolorum traditiones, probata
Concilia, Catholicae Ecclesiae consensum, and S. Patrum authoritates tractentur
in praedicto Concilio: and which also long before this, was mentioned, in the
beginning of the Council, Sess. 4. where a Decree was made. -- Ad coercenda
petulantia ingenia; ut nemo, suae prudentiae innixus in rebus fidei, etc.
scripturam sacram interpretari audeat contra eum sensum, quem tenuit, and
tenet, sancta matter ecclesia, aut etiam contra unanimem consensum Patrum. And
such an advice and rule as this, we find given, not long after the second
General Council, to Theodosius the Emperor in a time much overrun with diverse
Heresies: which Emperor thinking, that all Sects might easily be united in the
Truth, by convocating them all together, and permitting a free Disputation;
Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, with others, rather persuaded him to take
this course. -- Vt fugeret [to give you it in Sozomen's words Sozom. l. 7. c
12. Socrat. l. 5. c. 10.
] institutas cum sectariis disputationes, utpote rixarum atque pugnarum
fomites: Sed ex ipsis quaereret, reciperent ne eos, qui, ante ecclesiae
distractionem, interpretes, ac Doctores fuissent Scripturae sacrae? Etenim, si
borum Testimonia rejecerint, a suis ipsorum consortibus explodentur, sin autem
sufficere eos ad controversias decidendas arbitrabuntur, produci oportet eorum
libros, etc. By which books they would soon be convinced of their error; which
advice the Pious Emperor commending, and proposing this way of ending
Controversy to the Heads of the Sectaries, they soon discovered to him their
Tergiversation; and He there upon authorizing only the Catholic Religion,
vigorously undertook the suppression of the rest. Suitable to this; among those
General Proposals, made by the Pope's Nuncio's in Germany, and elsewhere,
before the sitting of this Council, this was the first. Pallavic. l. 3. c. 13.
n. 2.^ -- Soave p. 64.
-- That the Council might be free, and be celebrated in the manner used by the
Church, even from the beginning of the first General Councils, and the second.
That all those, who met in the Council, should engage to submit to the Decrees
thereof. Things to which the Protestants would no way consent. The clause
contained in the Safe Conduct of deciding controversies, per probata Concilia,
etc. they excepted against (see Soave. p. 344, and 372, and before,. 104.) and
they refused also to stand to any Council, that should proceed as the use had
been for 800 years before. Soave, p. 18.
Here, then, at that time thus the case stood, The Pope, and the Tridentine
Fathers were for admitting; the Protestants for excluding, the Form a of
Council agreeable with the former: and again, the one for admitting; the other
for excluding, a trial in this Council, as formerly, by Church-Tradition,
Councils, and Fathers, interpreting Scriptures controverted. But, now the
Learned amongst the Reformed, perhaps like the ancient Sectarists, but now
mentioned, ne a suis ipsorum consortibus explodantur, think fit to take another
way, and do profess their doctrines to be confirmed, as the Roman, overthrown,
by those same ancient Councils and Fathers. Whereby we are now made believe,
that these their Forefathers mainly declined that Authority, which clearly
established their opinions; and, on the otherside, the Roman Catholics,
together with the Pope, vehemently contended for that Authority, that
manifestly ruined theirs.]

That the decisions in Council should not be made by plurality of voices, but
that the more sound opinions should be preferred; 7.
i. e. those opinions, which were regulated by the word of God. 8.
8. That if a concord in Religion cannot be concluded in the Council [ i. e. if
the Protestants do not consent to what the rest of the Council approve] the
conditions of Passau may remain inviolable; and the peace of Religion made in
Ausburg, A. D. 1555. continue in force. [Now the conditions agreed on in Passau
and Ausburg between the Emperor and Protestants, were, A toleration of all
sects; that every one might follow what religion pleases them best: as you may
see in Soave, p. 378. and 393.]

Protestants shall vote in the Council definitively together with the
Catholics; but this, the Protestants must needs see, by the Catholics
over-numbring them, would signify little: Therefore the seventh condition
cautioneth; that, if there be more votes against the Protestant-tenents, than
for them; yet this plurality may not carry the business; but, that their
opinion, if the more sound, though it have fewer Suffrages, shall be preferred.
But again, this they saw was very unlikely; either that the others, who voted
against their opinion, should judge it the more sound; or, themselves only
judging it more sound, that the others upon this should prefer it. Therefore
the 8th. condition makes sure work: that, if the rest of the Council will not
prefer the Protestant-opinions, yet they shall not condemn, but allow every
one, that pleases, still to retain, them: and on these conditions they will
submit to a Council

Soave, p. 369. -- That the Protestant doctrines being repugnant to those of
the Pope, 9.
and of the Bishops his adherents; and it being unjust, that either the
Plaintiff, or the Defendent, should be the judge, therefore that, the Divines
on one part and on the other arguing for their tenets, there might be Judges
indifferently chosen by both sides, to take knowledge of the controversies.



To the second, what is said. 83. etc. To the Canon urged, See Bellarmins
answer, de Council. l. 1. c. 21. The Canon intends criminal matters, where
witnesses are necessary; not matters of faith. The controversy arising in
Antioch was judged at Jerusalem; Arianism arising in Alexandria, judged at Nice
in Bithynia.

To the third, see what is said before,. 114. and 122. And me thinks the
Emperors answer returned to it (in Soave, p. 80.) is sufficient. -- That in
case the Protestants had any complaint against the Pope they might modestly
prosecute it in the Council [to which it belongs, according to the 21. Canon of
the 8th. General Council, recited before, cognoscere controversias circa
Romanum Pontificem exortas] And, that for the manner and Form, it was not
convenient, that they should prescribe it to all Nations, nor think their
Devines only inspired by God, etc.

To the fourth, what is said,. 105. etc. And; that, de facto, such Oath
restrained not the Councils freedom, was seen in several controversies, that
were hotly agitated in the Council between the Popes, and a contrary, party,
about Episcopal Jurisdiction, etc.

To the fifth, what is said,. 68. n. 2. -- 115. etc. -- and 118. where it is
also showed, by the suppositions there made, that had such decisive vote been
granted to the Protestants, it would have nothing promoted their cause; unless
perhaps they think, that the evident arguments, which the reformed would there
have manifested for the truth of their tenants, would have converted so many of
their adversaries, as, joined with them, would have made a major part in the
Council. But, besides these arguments seen, and diligently examined by diverse
of the Council, in their books (who also gathered out of these books the
dangerous doctrines fit to be condemned) without working any such effect upon
them, what success their disputations would have had in the Council, may be
gathered, * from that which they had in the German Diets; from which their
Catholic Antagonists departed still as constant, and inflexible in their
former persuasions, as themselves: and * from that effect which they have in
Christendom, ever since that Council, to this day; the major part undeniably,
remaining still Catholic; and the other of late much decreasing.

Holy Scriptures between two opposite parties is the thing questioned and
doubted of, than that the litigants, for what is either said in the Scriptures,
or necessarily deduced from them, stand to the judgment and the expositions of
the former Fathers and Councils of the Church: and he, that disclaims to be
tried by these concerning the controverted sense of Scriptures, does me thinks
sufficiently acknowledge, that these Fathers, and Councils, are against him;
and this again seems a sufficient autocatacrisie. -- When you and I differ upon
the interpretation of Scripture (says King Charles 3d. Paper.
of blessed memory, to his weak Antagonist, Mr. Henderson) and I appeal to the
practice of the primitive Church, and the universal consent of Fathers to be
judge between us; me thinks you should either find a fitter, or submit to what
I offer. Neither have you shown how, waving those Judges I appeal unto, the
mischief of the interpretation by private spirits can be prevented -- and
again. 4th Paper.
-- When we differ about the meaning of the Scripture, certainly there ought to
be for this, as well as other things, a rule, or a Judge between us to
determine our differences. Thus, against Puritans, against Socinians, etc. the
Church of England sees most clearly those things, wherein her eyes are shut,
against Catholics. But, set this humane Authority quite aside, the same words
of Scripture being diversely interpreted by two sides, the Scripture can no more
judge on the Protestant side, than on the other, because it says only the same
words to, or for, both; and thus, as by other humane authority allowed, the
Catholics will have the victory; so, Scripture being the sole Judge, the
Protestant can have no conquest, but the contention will still be depending.
(So the King, Ibid.) -- We must find some Rule to judge betwixt us, when you
and I differ upon the interpretation of the self-same Text, or it can never
determine our question. As we see amongst the reformed also of those days,
that, the Scriptures being made sole judge or rule to try their doctrines by,
yet by it could they not, then, accord the differences amongst themselves; how
then might they hope by it solely to decide the differences between them, and
the Roman Catholics? 2. Again; * It is yet more unreasonable and unjust; so to
bind over the Council, or the Church, to the test of Scripture, as that all
their Constitutions, or Injunctions, shall be cassated, and rejected, if not
showed to be commanded also in Scripture. It is sufficient, that such
Injunctions cannot be shown, by the adverse party, to be against Scripture. For
the Church has power in things indifferent: And so much, as is not prohibited,
is lawful.

more sound opinion be preferred, but, taking away plurality of votes in the
Council, the supreme Judge in these matters, To 7.
and what course shall be used to judge, or decide, which opinion is the more
sound? See the unsufficiency of those ways proposed,. 115. n. 2. and 118. etc.

To the Eighth, What is this, but saying, To 8.
that they will be judged by a Council, upon condition, that the Council will
judge either for, or not against them? And what a ridiculous thing would it
seem even to a Protestant, if any opinion, which they dislike (suppose the
Arrian, or Nestorian) should have thus capitulated before hand with Councils,
and yielded to be examined by them, after it has first tied their hands, to
decree nothing against it?

To 9.
see what is said above,. 118. And besides, that this seems not appealing to
the judgment of a General Council, but rather, from it, to a private Committee;
and that it is no more reasonable to propose this, than that an equal number of
Arrians, and Anti-Arrians, should judge of Arrianisme; the experiment of this
device in so many Diets of Germany, still fruitless, shows, it would have been
so also in Trent.

And here, It Is worth your diversion to view a little with me the unsatisfying
issue of those many Diets.

Germany, to the great growth of Protestancy) sometimes for fear of civil; or,
from some discords arising with neighboring Princes, exceedingly desirous to
settle a peace in Germany, had many Conferences and Diets, in several places,
for composing the differences in Religion.

A. D. 1530. Was held a Diet at Ausburg; Diet, 1530.
where the Protestants exhibited the Confession of their faith, called the
Augustan Confession, and here seven Catholics, and seven Protestants (on
either side, two Princes, two Lawyers, and three Divines) were chosen to confer
together, and find out a means of composition: and, these not being able to
agree, afterward the number was restrained to three a piece. But (says Soave,
l. 1. p. 56.) though some few small points of doctrine, and other petty things
belonging to some rites, were agreed on; yet, in conclusion, it was perceived,
that the Conference could produce no concord at all; because neither party was
willing to grant to the other any thing of importance. Or, if any thing of
importance was there yielded, it was by the Protestant party, for which see,
Pall: l. 3. c. 4.

Ratisbon, where, the Emperor himself being present, and two Presidents, of
the Colloquy appointed, Diet, 1541.
three Catholic, and three Protestant Divines were chosen to determine and
compose the differences; and Calvin was present at it, though not yet much
noted: 22. Articles were drawn up by some Catholics, and proposed by the
Emperor, as an argument and subject of what they ought to treat: and in these
Articles, and in those afterward, of the Interim, was the nearest approach made
to any agreement, since the Reformation: and the accord here made concerning
Justification, is worth your reading, the Catholic party purposely omitting
the word [Merit] that they might not give an offense in the expression; where
both agreed in the sense. See Pall. l. 4. c. 14. n. 8. Yet of these 22. those
Articles, which contained the things most controverted, could not be agreed on:
[Amongst which, these: De sum venerando sacramento very corporis, and
sanguinis Christi: and de hujus adoratione and reservatione. De
transubstantiatione panis and vini. De missa. De conjugio sacerdotum. De
communione sacramenti sub utraque specie. De paenitentia, Confessione, and
Satisfactione. De invocatione sanctorum. De ecclesiae Hierarchico ordine. De
ecclesiae and Conciliorum authoritate, and several others.] And the other few
that were agreed on; as, De libero Arbitrio. De Originali peccato. De
justificatione hominis. De paenitentia post lapsum, etc. were by both parties
afterward diversely expounded, and equally complained of, as perplexed and
ambiguous, and not clearly expressing the Truth; and particularly, by the
Catholic party; as changing the former Church-language; and also stating such
evident matters, as were no way formerly controverted amongst the learned. (See
Responsum Principum Protestantium, penned by P. Melanthon -- and Responsum
Principum, qui Romans Pontificem agnoscunt.) And so this meeting ended without
effecting a peace. See Soave, l. 1. p 95.

Trent. Afterward, in the time of the Council, Diet, 1546.
1546. was another Colloquy appointed at Ratisbone, four Divines on a side, and
two Judges, But no good fruit grew thereof (says Soave, l. 2. p. 148.) by
reason of the suspicions, which one part conceived against the other; and
because the Catholics omitted no occasions to give greater jealousies to the
other side, and to fain them of their own, which finally made the Colloquy to
dissolve. Thus Soave, blaming the Catholics; but see Spondanus A. D. 1546. n.
10.
and the Authors he cites, charging the fault on the Protestant side, deserting
the Colloquy, recalled by the Princes that sent them.

After this,. 139.1.
A. D. 1547. upon the Emperors great victory obtained over the Protestants,
Diet, 1547.
and no hopes of the Councils return from Bologna, (whither it was removed by
reason of the Plague) to Trent, a Diet was held at Ausburg, where the Emperor,
resolving; before he disarmed, to set Germany at peace in matters of Religion,
elected three, two of them Catholics, the third, Joannes Agricola Islebius, a
moderate Protestant; or one, that had been so, but who was now turned to the
Catholic Profession, Spondan. A. D. 1558. n. 4.
to compose or peruse a new moderated form of Religion, commonly called the
Interim, which was afterward also reviewed, and changed by many others, some
of the principal Ministers of the Protestants being also called, that they
might approve it, Soave, p. 288.
amongst whom, Bucer. It contained 25. heads, besides other heads of
Reformation; prescribing what men were to believe, until all should be
established by a General Council. If you would know the temper of this famous
draught; Pallavacin (in l. 10. c. 17. n. 1.) gives this account of it, -- That
in many of the Articles, and especially in those concerning the Sacraments,
this writing contradicted the Lutheran errors; but, that, in the rest, it was a
contexture of ambiguous forms, such as each party might interpret to his own
liking. Whence the three supervisers of it gave in this relation; that, rightly
understood, it did in nothing oppose the Catholic doctrines, excepting that
Marriage of Priests, and the Communion of the cup were therein permitted; yet
so, as not there approved for lawful, but tolerated till a General Council
should decree, what was most fit to be done therein.

In this Instrument chiefly was experimented,. 139. n. 2.
both what Union and Peace, a Confession of Faith, composed in general, and
ambiguous terms for men of contrary persuasions, was able to produce: And what
satisfaction a Toleration of the Cup, and of Priests marriage, might give to
the Protestants, to induce them happily to a compliance with Catholics in
other Points. And it was found, that nothing was promoted hereby. Many
Exceptions Catholics took at several of these Articles (which see collected by
Soave, p. 289.) and Protestants, more: who also pleaded Soave, p. 306.
-- That it was a matter concerning their Conscience, and that therein they
might not be forced. Generally, all sides contended to have the Profession of
their Faith more clear, distinct, and particular. And -- In a short time (says
Soave p. 295.
) there was, as it were, a whole Squadron of Writers against it: Catholics and
Protestants [amongst whom Calvin] And that did follow, which does ordinarily
happen to him, that will reconcile contrary Opinions, that he makes them both
agree to oppugn his; and every one more obstinate in defending his own. And the
Composers thereof (says Spondanus A.D. 1548. n. 5.
) Illud suis commixtionibus ac palpationibus assecuti sunt, ut neque
Protestantibus, Lutheranis, neque ullis aliis Haereticis, neq, Catholicis
probatum fuerit ipsorum opus. Only from this Interim the^e arose two Sects
amongst the Protestants; one (being more under Cesar's power) embracing, and so
justifying the use of some old Ceremonies required by him, called therefore,
Adiaphorists; which the others, that were free from Cesar's power disallowed.
See, Soave, Ibid.

But so it was; That, after the yoke of this State-composition of Religion had
been for three or four years,. 139. n 3.
impatiently born by both parties; As, upon the Emperors victory over the
Protestants, A. D. 1547, it was set up and imposed: so by another victory of
the Protestants over Him, in 1552. when also the Council was dispersed, it was
quite thrown off: And, the Emperors former prosperous fortune, from this very
time of his setting up the Interim, more and more declining, some stick not to
impute it to this his usurping, being a Laick, such a supreme Arbitration in
matters of Religion.

viz. the Catholic, and that of the Augustan Confession, or the Lutheran: all
other Protestant new Sects, as more distant from the Catholic, being excluded:
With which Sects, Germany, and other parts were now much afflicted, these still
removing further, and further, from the former Catholic Faith. Some of which
new Sects, at least it was hoped, by this means also might the easilyer be
suppressed. And this Concord was made, till a further settlement of Religion,
and union of Opinions could be procured by one of these four means: 1. A
General Council (for the sitting of that of Trent was now broken up) Or, 2. A
National: or, 3. a Colloquy: or, 4. an Universal Diet of the Empire.

Trent, a renewed Attempt, 1555.
in another Diet at Ausburg, to put some of the forementioned ways for
accommodating matters of Religion in execution. But (says Soave p. 393. 389.
) two proposals being made: One, to treat of the means of Reforming Religion:
the other, to leave every one to his Liberty, not knowing, how to root out the
evil humors, which did still move, all inclined to the second proposition [the
continuation of a toleration] Of which Toleration, see the Articles set down in
Pallavicin l. 13. c. 13. n. 4.

four ways, 1557.
named before, the third was pitched upon, a Colloquy, to be held at Worms.
Wherein was appointed a Conference of twelve Catholic, and twelve Protestant
Divines on a side, the Bishop of Naumburg being President. The Collocutors met,
here first a Disputation was set on foot, De Norma Judicii: Spondan. A. D.
1557. n. 15.
The Catholics, besides the Scriptures, requiring, for Decision of
Controversies, the Interpretation of the Fathers, and Ancient Church; the
Protestants admitting only the Scriptures. Next, it was proposed, That, since
all other Protestant Sects were excluded from a Toleration, save only those of
the Augustan Confession, the Collocutors should first declare themselves, as to
the condemning and rejecting those other Sects, the Zuinglians, Osiandrians,
etc. in many things, and particularly in the main doctrine touching the
Eucharist, much more distant from the Roman Catholic Religion, than those of
the Augustan Confession were. To this motion five of the Protestant Divines
willingly agreed, and gave up their Declaration herein to the President. But
the other seven, amongst whom was Melancshton, opposed it. And the difference
between them, and the other five, grew so high, that these later departed from
the Colloquy, and so it was dissolved. And this was the last Colloquy, or
Composition of Religion, that was assayed in Germany, I mean, between the
Protestant and Catholic Party: The Protestant-differences among themselves,
which still grew more, and could never since be healed, hindering any further
Treaties of their accord with Catholics (who expected their fall, at least by
their own hands.) And all these assayes of settling Religion by the State, and
not by the Ecclesiastical Authority, that is the ordinary Judge thereof, thus
proved vain and fruitless.

After this A. D. 1561. a little before the renewing of the Council of Trent,
Pius the Fourth's time, there was held a Colloquy at Poissy in France: 1561.
the King and Queen of France being present thereat, and fourteen Protestant
Divines selected for it with Safe Conduct: and here, after much disputing at
large, five of a side were chosen, to see if they could compose differences. --
These assayed (says Soar, p. 454) to frame an Article concerning the
Eucharist [the chief point of controversie] in general terms taken out of the
Fathers, which might give satisfaction to both parties; which because they
could not do, they concluded the Colloquy.

Princes of the Augustan Confession in Germany (which Confessionists also were
at variance among themselves) assembled at Neumburg, where, -- Being ashamed,
(says Soave, p. 439) that their Religion should be esteemed a confusion for
the variety of doctrines amongst them, they did propose, that they might first
agree in one; and then resolve, whether they ought to refuse, or accept, the
Synod [that under Pius 4. now ready to be opened.] And here, after some things
had been proposed for a covering at least of their differences, which could not
be closed (for though here they had sole Scripture for their Rule, and
themselves for their Judges, yet it seems they could not agree them.) -- The
Duke of Saxony (says the same Author) answered; that they could not stop the
eyes and ears of the world* that they should not see and hear their
differences; and that, if they would make show of union, where they were at
variance, they should be convinced of vanity and lying: and so (says Soave)
after many contentions, they remained without agreement in this matter.

fair hearing of their cause in the Council of Trent, a major part would have
consented to them: whereas we see many a free, and fair, hearing of them here,
was, in so many Conferences; and yet none of their Antagonists of the Catholic
party removed thereby from their former principles. * And partly to show you,
what is most likely to have been the issue of such a General Council, as the
Protestants called for; i e. where an equal number, chosen on both sides
(suppose Lay-persons) should have sitten the Presidents, and Judges; and to
make appear, that, if once we take away the authority of Councils, as
constituted, and composed in the manner always formerly used, there is no hope
of settling Divinity controversies by Arbitrators. For men will submit to
nothing against their private, reasons, or judgment; i. e. against their
Conscience, as many call it; unless it be, when such persons have detided such
a point, whose authority they are obliged, in conscience, to obey.

Conditions of a General Council which the Protestants of those times demanded.
But, if those conditions only were required, which Archbishop Lawd mentions,.
30. (though,. 27. he seems to exact much more,) who there says -- That any
General Council shall satisfy him, that is lawfully called, continued, and
ended, according to the same course, and under the same conditions, which
General Councils observed in the primitive Church. Where he refers, in the
margent, to Bellarmins four Conditions, -- de Council. l. 1. c. 17. [namely, --
1. Vt Evocatio sit generalis, ita ut innotescat omnibus majoribus Christianis
provinciis. 2. Vt ex episcopis non excommunicatis nullus excludatur. 3. Vt
adsint, per se, vel per alios, quatuor praecipui Patriarchae praeter summum
Pontificem, quia istis subsunt omnes alii Episcopi (but to this Bellarmin adds
some limitations) 4. Vt saltem ex majori part Christianarum Provinciarum
aliqui adveniant.] then, I say, as these conditions are most reasonable, so, I
think, they have been already showed to agree to the Council of Trent;
excepting the third; of the dispensableness of which, in several cases, see
both what Bellarmin there says; and what is said above,. 65.66.; Neither, if
men would be content, with Bishop Bramhal (in prefac. to Repl. to Chalc.) to
submit themselves to so General a Council, as can be procured, as things now
are, can there be any debate about this Condition.

CHAP. IX.
III. Head. Of the Legalness of the proceedings of this Council.
1. That a Council may be Legal, and Obligatory, in some of its Acts, when not
in others,. 147. 2. That no Decree concerning Faith was passed in this Council,
where any considerable party contradicted,. 148. 3. That there was no need of
using any violence upon the Council for the condemning of the
Protestant-Opinions; in condemning which, the Fathers of this Council
unanimously agreed,. 150. 4. That no violence was used upon the Council, for
defining of Points debated between the Catholics themselves,. 152. Where, Of
the Councils proceedings, touching the chief points in debate. Touching, 1.
Episcopal Residency, Jure Divino,. 153. 2. Episcopal Jurisdiction, Jure
Divino,. 154. 3. The Popes Superiority to Councils,. 155.
That these three Points of Controversies, however stated, are of no great
advantage to the Reformed,. 156.
5. That no violence was used upon the Council, for hindering any just
Reformations.. 157.
Conditions of a General Council, which the Protestants required. Now let us
consider the third, concerning the legal proceedings of the Council of Trent.

Council proved illegal, or not free, in some of its proceedings, cannot
therefore justly be rejected in all other its acts whatsoever; but only in
those, that are first proved to be illegal, and not free, and to be reputed as
such, or at least not accepted as the contrary, by that Ecclesiastical
Authority, which legally concludes the whole. For, the same Council may become
obligatory in some of its Acts, when not in others, as those shall consent to
some Act, dissent from others, without whose acceptance none are ratified. And
so it was in the fourth General Council of Chalcedon; Whose Decrees, though for
other matters, confirmed; yet its 27th Canon, in the preference of the Bishop
of Constantinople, before the 2d. Patriatch of Alexandria, being disallowed by
the Roman, and the other Western Bishops, doubtless, hence, was of no force,
till afterward this was also by them consented to. Neither, if we can show in
some Council, that the Prime Patriarch, presiding in it, or the major part of
Church Governors (who were absent) have rejected some particular Canons
thereof, can we, here, plead our selves free from obedience for all the rest
(see such arguing in Dr Hammond, of Heresy,. 9. n. 6. and. 11. n. 3, 7.) which
both he, and the major part of the Church, have allowed, and conform to. For
thus, the Eutychian might plead his freedom from any obligation to those Canons
of Chalcedon that were universally agreed on by East and West, because the
27th. Canon forementioned, touching another matter, was refused to be ratified
by the Pope, and Western Bishops. Or Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, there
condemned, might justly plead: That, because, without the consent of the Bishop
of Rome, and all those of the West, the Constitutions of the second Ephesin
Council were of no force, therefore neither those of Chalcedon were so, without
his. Or, an ordinary Bishop, in a Provincial Council, might plead; that,
because, the Metropolitan, by the Canon, exercises a negative power and voice,
for matters voted therein, therefore he also, where he thinks fit, will use,
and claim the like. Neither will the Illegalness, or non-freedom of any
Conciliary Act, pretended by a few, signify any thing, when the contrary is
declared, or such Act is accepted, by so great and dignified a part of the
Church besides, as does lawfully conclude the whole. For, suppose whatever
irregularity in the making of such a Decree, yet this Acceptance and
acknowledgment clears it of such former blemish, and gives it a just force.

Soave confesses, p. 576. -- That it was a general maxim in this Council;
that, to establish a Decree of Reformation, a major part of voices was
sufficient; but, that a Decree of Faith could not be made, if a considerable
part did contradict. Where also he says, -- * That, because hardly more than
half of the Fathers would consent, that the allowance of the Cup should be
referred to the Pope's pleasure [namely, those Fathers refusing this reference,
who thought it not fit to be allowed at all] therefore the Legates made it one
of the Articles of Reformation, -- and * that some said, that the point, that
Christ offered himself in the supper, was not lawfully decided, because it had
23 contradictors: [But, Pallav. ( l. 18, c. 9. n. 9.) shows, Soave to be
mistaken in this instance, this point having had only two contradictors, as
appears in the acts of the Council.] And observe again, what Soave very often
inculcateth; That it was the Custom in in this Council, to mould and change the
Articles, and matter of their Decrees, till there was nothing contained in
them, that displeased any considerable party. So he says, p. 215. That S.
Croce the Legate, took incredible pains, in avoiding to insert any thing in the
Decrees, controverted among the Schoolmen; and in so handling those, which
could not be omitted, as that every one might be contented; In every
congregation observed what was disliked by any, and took it away, or corrected
it, as he was advised. Now what is this, but to say: that all, or almost all;
were pleased with whatever was passed or voted, since he says, that whatever
displeased, was taken away; and that the Proponents did not force the Council
to their propositions, but fitted their propositions to the mind of the
Council: and then I ask, what violence or indirect means needed here to be
used, to overbear a party?

many controversies undecided. To which may be replied, 1. That, if the
Protestant may Judge, the Councils greatest fault was in making so many
decisions; not, in making no more: and see Soave elsewhere censuring the
Council on this side, p. 227. and 228. where he makes some to say, -- That in
all the Councils held in the Church from the Apostles time till then, there
were never so many Articles decided, as in one Session only of Trent [ viz. the
sixth Session.] And p. 822. -- that in this Council matters were minced; and an
article of faith made of every question which could be moved in any matter,
(yet (Ibid) are the same people angry; That in Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
Indulgences, the Council was not more particular in her decisions. Defining, or
not defining, how shall the Council please him, or his counterfeit German
Chorus?) 2. That nothing more than this showed the great wisdom of the Council;
which forbear such decisions, either when it esteemed the controversy subtle,
nice, inconsiderable, and needless to be determined; or, very difficult, and
doubtful, and not having sufficient evidence from Scriptures, and former
Tradition, to be determined: The Council for the things it states depending
more on Church History, than Logic. Nor hence may any, when the Council
thought fit to express something only in general terms, justly charge the
Council with ambiguity, or equivocation, because it answers not in its decree
to every question proposed; but rather commend it for a judicious refusal to
decide such matter more specifically, for the reason mentioned above, that it
might stand confirmed with a more general Acceptance; whilst, mean while, the
more generical decision is not made in vain, these more universal terms
deciding such point against some other sects of religion more grossly erring,
when they do not decide it also for all parties of the Schools. And this, I
think, may satisfy Soave's sad complaints concerning the contradictings of
Soto and Vega, p. 216. -- and of Soto and Catharinus, p. 229. both perhaps
faultily endeavoring to make the determination of the Council more specifical,
than it was, that so it might speak on his side.

3.
wherein the Protestants opposed the Roman Church no violence or tyranny, used,
either by the Pope over the Council, or by a more powerful party in the Council
over the rest, in these points. Which appears by the great unanimity and
concord of the Tridentine Fathers, even according to Soaves relations, for that
part of their Decrees, and Canons, wherein are condemned any of the Protestant
tenants. To instance in some of the chief. See their unanimity, in what opposed
the Protestants, Concerning Original sin. Soave, p. 175. -- No man resisted the
condemnation of the [Protestant] Articles. -- and, p. 184. In the Council there
being no more difference amongst the Fathers, concerning the things discussed,
etc. Concerning Justification (excepting the most difficult Arminian, and
Jansenian, controversies) Soave, p. 223. -- The two next congregations (says
he) were spent in reading again the decrees as well of of faith, as of
reformation: the which (some small matters being corrected by the advice of
those, who were not present at the first) pleased them all. Concerning the
necessity of confession to the Priest of mortal sins committed after Baptism,
See Soave, p. 348. where no opposition at all was made amongst them, to the 6,
7, and 8, Canons of the 14th Session. Concerning Transubstantiation and
Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, See Soave, p. 324. and 326. where in the
second and sixth Canons of the 13 Session none dissented, and many desired to
have them more full and enlarged. Concerning the Mass, that it is a
propitiatory sacrifice, There was no disagreement neither amongst the Divines,
Soave, p. 544. nor amongst the Prelates, p. 554. and 738. Concerning the
lawfulness, and sufficiency, of communicating only in one kind: and, that,
under every kind, and every part of it separated, all Christ is contained, See
Soave, p. 324, 325. -- Upon the 8th [Article] (says he) all made use of long
discourses, though all to the same purpose, Their principal reasons to condemn
it were, etc. -- That as much is not contained under one species [by
concomitancy] as under both, was thought to be heretical. and p. 519. -- They
all agreed, that there was no necessity, or precept, of the Cup. Though, this
was not so unanimously agreed upon, and therefore left undecided, whether some
greater measure of grace was not received by communicating in both, than in
one, kind. See Pall. l. 12. c. 2. -- and l. 17. c. 7. n. 10. Again, Concerning
the permission of the use of the Cup, when as the Pope and his Legates, upon the
earnest solicitation of the Emperor, and many other Princes, were all
inclined to a discreet indulging thereof, yet the major part of the Council
went against them for the negative. See Soave, p. 459, 519, 567. And chiefly
the Bishops of those Countries, where were no Protestants, because all the
Council having agreed, that the cup was not necessary, all Christ being in both
the kinds, they imagined, that diversities of rites in several. Nations,
especially in the most principal ceremonies, which end in schism and hatred (
Soave, p. 459.) And with much ado was it procured at last, that the judgment of
this permission should be remitted to the Pope; but this, without any
recommendation to him at all (though by some desired) of such a permission; and
this remitting it to the Pope not conceded by all, or most, but only by so
many, as made the major part: and therefore says Soave ( p. 576.) this
concession was put amongst the Articles of Reformation. Concerning the being of
a Purgatory, the lawfulness of the Invocation of Saints, and veneration of
Images. Soave, p. 799. In matter of Saints, they easily agreed to condemn
particularly all the opinions contrary to the uses of the Roman Church, and p.
803. -- The Legates held a congregation the next morning, in which the decrees
of Purgatory and of the Saints, were read, and afterward the Reformation of
Friars read, and all approved with very great brevity, and little
contradiction. See the same in Pall. l. 24. c. 5. n. 5. Concerning the Holy
Scriptures, or the Divine service not to be used in the vulgar tongue, I find
nothing decreed in the Council, save only concerning one part of the service,
the Mass: and of it only this. -- Visum est Patribus, non expedire, ut vulgari
passim lingua Missa, celebraretur. Quamobrem retento antiquo, and probato ritu,
etc and Can. 9. -- Si quis dixerit, lingua tantum vulgari Missam celebrari
debere, etc. Anathema sit. [where you may observe that Soave (I am afraid) to
make these decrees of the Council the more odious; or to have something more to
say against them, in relating the one Canon, leaves out passim: and in the
other leaves out tantum, p. 573, 574.] And to these all unanimously consented
(Ibid.) The Fathers (says he) assented to the decrees; except only to that
particular, that Christ did offer himself. Concerning Priests non-marriage, and
the universal capability of the gift of chastity, and lawfulness of the vow of
continency, the 9th Canon of the 24th Session, the words of which are these Si
quis dixerit, Clericos in sacris ordinibus constitutos, vel Regulares,
castitatem solemniter professos, posse matrimonium contrahere, contractumque
validum osse, nono bstante lege Ecclesiasticavel voto; -- posseque omnes
contrahere matrimonium, qui non sentiunt se castitatis, etiamsi eam voverint,
habere donum, Anathema sit; cum Deus id recte petentibus non deneget, nec
patiatur nos supra id quod possumus tentari.] This Canon, I say, was generally
assented to by all the Council. See Soave, p. 783. The doctrine and the
anathematismes of Matrimony were read, to which all consented, and p. 747 --
The Article of the promotion of of married persons to Holy Orders being
proposed, the Fathers did uniformly, and without difficulty, agree on the
negative. See likewise, p. 678, 679. Concerning Episcopacy: Any thing therein
opposite to Lutheranisme, as the Superiority of Bishops to Priests, etc Sess.
23. c. 7. was unanimously defined. See Soave, p. 599 and 738.

Thus, you see, I have run through the chief differences;. 151. n. 1.
to add more is easy, but needless; giving you in the close the general
observation of Soave, p. 230. That, which has been related (says he) in this
particular [the Controversy concerning the certainty of Grace] and perhaps did
happen in many matters [ i. e. the members of the Council to differ in their
judgment] occurred not in condemning the Luther an opinions; where all did
agree with an exquisit unity. To which words may be added what Archbishop Lawd
confesses,. 27. n. 1. -- That none had suffrage in the Council, but such as
were professed enemies to all, that called for reformation. Therefore no
Bishops, that were present in that Council (for all such had suffrages) but
were enemies to all, that called for reformation. And, this being so, surely
there needed to be used no tyranny over such persons for so much as concerned
the Protestant controversies. What will be said here, I know not. shall we
pretend, that this unanimity of the Council against the Lutheran tenants, rose
out of ignorance of the grounds of their doctrine? But they read their works,
and diligently collected out of these what doctrines were fit to be condemned;
which they could not do, without seeing also in them the reasons and
foundations of such doctrines. Or arose it out of fear, which some of the
Council, well inclined, had of the rest? The Archbishop (. 29. n. 4.) seems to
say some such thing. -- For ought A. C. knows, many might agree with the
Protestants in heart, that in such a Council durst not open themselves. But so,
in the Council of Nice, for ought we know, many might agree with the Arrians.
How can we have any judgment or sentence from Councils, if we appeal from
their mouths to their hearts, inscrutable by us? But, if the Archbishops many
were an inconsiderable part of the Council, then still it is confessed, that the
main body of the Council were against the Protestants; which we were here to
demonstrate: If his many were a great and considerable part of the Council, so
as the act of the rest without them would have been invalid, then why they
should so fear, as not to open their mouth, I see not. Or lastly arose it out
of that fear, which all the Council had of the Pope? But then why did they, in
matters which more nearly concerned the Pope, so freely vote against what he,
and what his Legates approved, even some of the Italians with the rest? See
below. 153, 168.
For if the were twice so many Italians as others, a major part of the Council
could not vote against the Popes inclinations, without some of the Italian
Bishops concurring.

But to dispel clearly these doubts,. 151." n. 2.
you may understand, that the Bishops voted nothing against the Protestants, in
the chief points at least, but what was their own belief and practice before
they came to the Council; and what had been the practice and belief of many
former ages, even the reformed being Judges: And that the chief question to be
decided in the Council, was; whether such, and such practices lawful, viz.
whether Communion in one kind only: Adoration of Christ's corporal Presence in
the Eucharist; offering the sacrifice of the Mass; veneration of Images; Prayer
to Saints; Prayer for the Dead, as better able, thereby, in their present
condition before the day of Judgment; Indulgences; Monastic Vows; enjoining
Celibacy; enjoining Sacerdotal Confession, in case of mortal sin, etc. be
lawful. And, seeing the chief question, in opposition to the new Lutheran
Doctrines, was; whether these things lawful, which were then, and in many
former generations (Protestants not denying it) daily practiced, what need, of
force, of new Mandats from Rome, of hiring Suffrages, creating more, titular,
Bishops, Oaths of strict obedience to the Pope, such a multitude of Italians,
to procure a prevalent vote, or, to invite the Prelates in the Council to
establish those things, several of which are found in their Missals and
Breviaries. As: the Sacrifice of the Mass; Adoration of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Eucharist, Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the Dead.] But yet, if these
Fathers of the Council decided these things in such a manner, by compulsion,
how came both the Catholic Bishops, in the German Diets, where free from such
fears, or force, in the time of the Council, to vote the same things, and also
after the Council the many more absent Fathers of the Western Churches (and of
France with the rest) so freely, and voluntarily, to accept them, and to
continue till their death in the constant observance of them.

But if it be said, that, though such things were generally believed, and
practiced before, yet, by Art and violence, were now the Fathers brought to
advance them into matters of Faith; I ask, concerning many of these Points,
what Faith required, save of those Truths, which are necessary to render them
lawful, beneficial, etc. All practice lawful being grounded on some speculative
Proposition, that must be true. Or, if more be required: yet more than this,
viz. the lawfulness of such practice, wherein these Fathers voluntarily
concurred, was no way necessary for overthrowing the Protestants contrary
Doctrine.

violence was used upon the Council for other points debated between the
Catholics themselves; no violence, so far, as that any thing favorable or
advantageous to the Pope was at any time passed in the Council, when any small
number thereof opposed it, Concerning which Pallavicino in the close of his
History, l. 24. c. 14. n. 9 has these words. -- There was not in this Council
established, one point of faith, nor one canon of discipline for the advantage
of Popes; but, amongst the second [the canons of discipline] very many, to
their detriment, -- and of such a thing indeed, Soave himself brings not so
much as one example; so much is there wanting to him any sign, or shadow
thereof. But, not to rest in the testimony of a partisan. The chief points
agitated in the Council, wherein the Popes pre-eminence and privileges are
said to be much concerned, were, besides the matters of Reformation, these
three -- 1. Whether residency of Bishops at their Bishoprics, was jure divino?
which, if established, it was conceived, that it would take away from the Pope
the power of giving Dispensations, Administrations, and Commenda^^^s,
Pluralities, etc. by which, amongst other things, the Popes Attendents, and the
dignity of his Court, would be much lessened. See Soave, p. 647. 2. Whether the
Jurisdiction of Bishops was jure divino? Peter only; that all Bishops were
equal to the Pope; and the Council above him, etc. see Soave, p. 609. 3.
Whether the Pope was superior to Councils;

Residency of Bishops, it was not determined according to what was conceived to
be the Popes inclination, viz. that Residency was not jure divino; but, 1.
that which was determined (being, Sess. 23. de reform. cap. 1.) seeemed rather
to favor jure divino; upon a jealousy of which ( Pall. l. 21.6.12. says)
some few excepted against the decree. Pope Pius, though he desired the question
were omitted, yet showed much moderation in it. -- ( He did not condemn, says
Soave, p. 503. the opinion of those who said that Residency was de jure divino,
yea he commended them for speaking according to their conscience; and sometimes
he added; that perhaps, that opinion was the better.) and ordered, that the
Council might have its free course in it. As you may see in Pall. l. 24. c. 14.
n. 11. and l. 16. c. 7. n. 19. (where he quotes the French Ambassadors
testimony) and partly, in Soave, p. 504, 505. where he says, -- That the Pope
having well discussed the reasons [conc^^^ing Residency] settled his opinion to
approve it, and cause i^^^^ (...) executed, upon what law soever it were
grounded, whether Canonical, or evangelical. And 2. of his Legates were thought
to favor the determining of it, jure divino: Pall. l. 24. c. 14. -- Soave p.
496, 623.
and when it was put to the vote; whether this controversy should be stated by
the Council, or no; a major part were for the affirmative ( Soave, p. 496)
which, being supposed contrary to the Popes desire, shows, that, amongst the
rest, some Italians also (who made the greater part of the Council) took
liberty to relinquish his interest. Though, in fine, this point [whether Jure
divino] was left undecided, because taking in those, who referred to the Pope,
almost an equal part (as Soave, but Pallavi. l. 16. c. 4. ^^. 21.
correcting him, says, a major part) drew the contrary ^way; and to what else
was stated about residence ( Sess. 23. Refer. cap. 1.) In the Session all
agreed, save only eleven. See Pall. l. 21. c 12. n. 9. -- and Soave, p. 742.
And, in the General Congregation held before the Session, all, save 28. says
Soave, p. 737 -- and Pallav. l. 21. c. 11. n. 4.
i. e. some of the Spanish Bishops.

2. Concerning Episcopacy, jure Divino [of which the 6. Can. de Sacram.
Ordinis; Sess. 23. speaks thus. -- Si Quis dixerit, in Ecclesia Catholic a non
esse Hierarchiant divina ordinatione institutam, quae constat ex Episcopis,
Presbyteris, and Ministris, Anathema sit; where the Spanish Bishops would have
had, 2.
Divina Ordinatione, changed into, per institutionem Christ.] The great dispute
in the Council was not whether the Order or Bishops, as superior to Priests,
and as including the power of ordination and confirmation, but whether the
Jurisdiction of all Bishops, especially as to some points thereof, was jure
divino, [ viz. as to the just extent, and subject matter, of such Jurisdiction,
and the exterior and forensick exercise thereof, wherein some Bishops enjoy a
much larger power, and compass; which extent of power seems to depend on
superiors (as does also the exercise of Absolution in Priests) and is liable to
be suspended, taken away, transferred, diminished: and this necessary, for
avoiding confusion. See Soave, p. 623, 734.
] And here, as nothing was determined against the Pope, in this matter, so
nothing for him. And, that no more in it should be decided, than was decided,
all the Council consented in the Session; and in the Congregation, held before
it, all save the Spanish Bishops, and therefore more consented to this, than
only the Italians, and the Popes party: see what Soave says, p. 737, 738, 725,
735. where he relates, -- That the Cardinal of Lorraine, and the other French
Prelates did not hold the ^^^itution and Superiority of Bishops, de sure divino,
to be necessary to (...) mined in Council, but rather that it ought to be
omitted. Now (...) the Pope (if he had a major part of the Council on his (...)
hinder the rest for carrying any thing against him, by their votes, yet could
he not over-aw the rest, thus, to vote for him, who having much more
dependence, for their Estates, on their* Temporal, than their Spiritual,
Supreme, and backed by their Princes, and their Ambassadors, in the Council
(these also generally much more favoring the Bishops than the Popes, rights)
were secure enough against his power; even the Italian Prelates also, except
that much smaller part of them, whose preferments lay in the Popes Dominions.

Popes Supremacy in the Church, or Superiority to Councils, though the
Spaniards, 3.
and all the rest of the Council consented, in as full terms, as the Council of
Florence had expressed it, to decree, and insert, it in this Council also; and
though only the French Bishops, who were not above the tenth part of the
Council, resisted, yet the Pope, for peace sake, because there was not a full
accord, ceased to prosecute the determination thereof; and the Article, drawn,
was laid aside. See these things more fully related in Pallavic. History, l.
19. and l. 24. c. 14. n. 12 and see there l. 19. c. 15. n. 3.
the contents of Carlo Borrhomeo's Letters to this purpose. But the same thing,
of the Spanish consenting with the Italians, for declaring the Popes authority
according to the form of the Council of Florence, appears in Soave, p. 737,
738. (though he much more compendious than Pallavicin in this part of the
History perhaps for want of intelligence; of which he complains in the
beginning of his seventh book, p. 583) And the same Author says elsewhere, p.
732. -- That an order came from the Emperor to his Ambassadors, to use all
means, that the authority of the Pope should not be discussed in Council,
because he saw the major part was inclined to enlarge it. Yet, we see, the Pope
did not prosecute such advantage. Neither does that phrase accidentally used in
Sess. 25. Reform. 1. cap. -- [ Sed and ad S. Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinales
pertinere decernit, quorum consilio apud Sanctum Romanum Pontificem cum
universalis Ecclesiae administratio nitatur, etc. which the French Ambassador
Ferrieres so highly aggravated, that it yielded to the Pope superiority over
Councils Sorve p. 818.
] truly prove any such thing; neither passed it from the Council as any Decree;
neither, in the reading (in the Congregation) of this, 1 cap. of Reform wherein
were some things corrected, did the French Bishops except at this, Soave p. 803.
which certainly they would have done, had they apprehended such danger in it.
For also the French were not such opposites to the Popes pre-eminency of
authority, but that their Leader, the Cardinal of Lorraine proposed in the
Council this Article for it ( Pallav. l. 19. c. 6.) condemning any that should
say; -- That Peter, by the institution of Christ, was not the Prime amongst the
Apostles, and his supreme Vicar. -- Or that it was not necessary, that there
should be in the Church a chief Bishop. Peter's Successor, and equal to him, in
the authority of Government, -- and that his lawful Successors in the Sea of
Rome have not the right of Primacy in the Church. And the French Bishops,
though they disallowed this form, -- [ Datam esse a Concilio Pontifici Romano
potestatem pascendi, and regendi universalem] because Ecclesia universalis
here, if taken collectively, would prejudice the French Churches opinion of the
Councils superiority to the Pope, Pall. l. 19. c. 13. n. 6. -- c. 12. n. 11. --
l. 21. c. 14. n. 12. Soave, p. 657.
yet they yielded to this form, -- [ potestatem regendi omnes fideles, and
omnes Ecclesias, -- or, pascendi omnes Christi oves,] if omnes be not taken
conjunctionl. And for that Supremacy of the Pope over the Church, that is
denied by Protestants, Soave, giving reasons, why Henry the 8th prudently
declined a Council, thus secures this Supremacy Papal from any censure of the
Bishops, saying,. (...) 70.
-- That it was impossible, that a Council, composed of Ecclesiastical Persons,
should not maintain this his power, which is the main pillar of their Order:
Because this Order (says he) by the Papacy, is above all Kings, and the
Emperor: but, without it, is subject to them, there being no Ecclesiastical
Person that has superiority, but the Pope. Thus he, usually exstracting the
Original of all men's actions not out of Conscience, but Policy. Yet in these
points we see the Popes supposed major party in the Council carried nothing for
his advantage. But, how much the former bounds of the Episcopal Authority were
enlarged by several Decrees of this Council that were confirmed, and ratified
by the Pope, wherein at least they are substituted his perpetual and standing
Delegats for transacting many things of great consequence, formerly dispatched
by Himself, and his Officers, See below, 205, 211. etc.

Mean while, whether, or how much the Pope, or his party, when stronger there,
might be faulty, in hindering any points to be determined. which the rest of
the Fathers in the Council desired should be so, I cannot say; because I cannot
judge, whether such things are necessary to be determined, as some of the
Council said they were, a few: or better not, as others, the most. But, if the
Pope be culpable, for having (abstracting here from Protestant-Controversies,
as has been showed) hindered by his Italian adherents something, passed, He
seems to make an amends for it, in the not passing in Council several other
matters, which would have served much for his adadvantage, when but a few
seemed discontented therewith.

Protestantisme thereby, as some boast of. You may see the consequences,
endamaging the Pope, set down by Soave, p. 609, 645. some of which are of no
great moment, and others not truly consequent. Certainly the Bishops, who
contended for their Jurisdiction, jure divino, intended no such thing, as to
equal, every one himself with the Pope in the Government of the Church; or to
overthrow thereby, * the former Church Discipline; * the pre-eminent authority
of Primats, and Patriarchs, conceded by former Councils; and * all the jus
Ecclesiasticum. This may be seen in their argumentations; wherein some pleaded
a Jurisdiction belonging to all Bishops, jure divino, and received immediately
from Christ, but this not equal with the Popes; others, their Jurisdiction
received jure divino, but the use,, application, and matter thereof received
from the Pope ( Soave, p. 597, 607. 618. 637. -- Pall. l. 19. c. 6. n. 3.) The
French allowing from Christ the Popes superiority, as was showed but now;. 155.
only confining his authority within the Canons ( Soave, p. 640.) and the
Spaniards, who most stickled for Episcopal Jurisdiction, jure divino, yet
willingly conceding to the Pope all the power, that was acknowledged by the
Council of Florence, and desiring that both these might be established
together, as has been showed above; insomuch, as Pall. l. 19. c. 6. n. 6.
says, -- It seemed to some, that the contention was reduced to mere words;
whilst the one would have the Jurisdiction of Bishops to be immediately from the
Pope; the others, from Christ; yet so that the use and matter of such
Jurisdiction depended on the Pope. And therefore I see no weight in those words
of B. Bramh. ( schis. guarded, 10. Sect. p. 474.) who to S. Ws. asking,
whether, if the Catholic Bishops out of their Provinces had been present in
the Council to counterpoise the Italians, he would pretend, that they would
have voted against their Fellow-Catholicks in behalf of Luther, and Calvin,
answers thus, -- I see clearly, that if the Bishops of other Countries had
been proportioned to those of Italy, they had carried the debate about
Residence [yet is not Residence even amongst Protestants voted, jure divino.]
the divine Right of Episcopacy; and that had done the business of the Western
Church, and undone the Court of Rome. Done the business of the Western Church?
what means he? So, as the Pope would have ceased to have had any Supremacy
over them? why, those also allow and submit to it, who still hold Episcopal
Jurisdiction, jure divino; as none in the Roman Church are obliged to hold the
contrary. But suppose the Pope disarmed of Supremacy, are thus all the other
main differences in points of faith, between Protestants, and these Western
Bishops, stated on the Protestant side? Or will the Reformed now declare them
controversies of small moment (as Bishop Bramh. in a vehement assaulting of the
Court of Rome, seems to relax other quarrels with that Church) and yield them
to their Adversaries? But had any the art first to accord these speculative
points of difference, which the Protestants have with the Western Churches, he
need not fear, that the Popes supremacy could put any bar between the two
Religions. Which supremacy those Catholic Bishops, or Churches, that do most
abridge, and have their free liberty to maintain, what in the Council they
would have voted, concerning this matter, do yet continue in the other points
as violent, and st^ff, against the reformed, as any.

Reformation, 5.
wherein he is so much accused to have made unjust obstructions. Pallavicino,
in vindication of Pius the 4th. in whose times these Reformations were most
agitated, and proceeded in, has these words) l. 24. c. 12, n. 13.) -- Pius the
4th frequently enjoined his Legates, that a Reformation should be made of his
Court, and of his Tribunals [and especially of the Cardinals, which reformation
he attempting first at Rome in vain, remitted it the more earnestly to the
Council, as may be seen in C. Borrom. letters. Pall. l. 22. c. 1. n. 5. -- l.
21. c. 6. n. 6, 7.] without any acquainting him first with it; frequently
grieved and complained that it was not done; commended whatever was determined
in the Sessions concerning it, though unlooked for, contrary to his
expectation, and most damageful to his treasury, and to his Court. Which words
of his are verified, both by the frequent Letters to this purpose written to
the Council by Carlo Borrhomeo, according to the Popes order, Apud Pallav. l.
20. c. 5. n. 5. -- l. 21. c. 6. n. 1, 2, 6, 7. -- l. 22. c. 1. n. 5, 12, 13.
which you may read at your leisure: and by the testimony of Lorraine, and
others, in the Council. And indeed how could this be otherwise? since Carlo
Borromeo, that holy man, was his chief Adviser, and chief Minister, to the
Council in this, and all other affairs, who was himself one of the severest
Reformers (yet not besides the Canons) that ever the Church of Christ has
known, as the history of his life, written by Giussano, shows.

Rome much rectified, the Popes Revenue much diminished, the Jurisdiction of
Bishops (whether held immediately, or mediatly, from Christ, here it matters
not) much enlarged, Residency of Bishops (whether it be jure divino, or
Ecclesiastico) strictly enjoined; former dispensations and appeals much
restrained, I refer you to what the Articles themselves especially in the five
last Sessions under Pius, make appear; and to what is said below in the five
Head concerning them;. 207. etc.
and * to the testimony of the French Bishops, set down above,. 77. with whom
it was a chief motive, to request of the King the accepting this Council,
because the French Church stood in so much need of the reformations established
therein; than which (say they) they could find none more austere and rigorous;
nor more proper for the present malady, and indisposition of all the members of
the body Ecclesiastical: and * to the testimony of Soave himself recited
above,. 124. and below,. 204. touching the heavy complaint of the Roman Court,
concerning this reformation, and their endeavors with the Pope to hinder, for
this cause, the confirmation of the Council. If its laws are not, since, every
where so well observed, I desire that the Council, or the then Pope may not be
indicted for this fault. Neither are we (for trying the benefit of that
Council) so much to examine, whether there be not still some distempers left
unprovided therein of a cure; as, whether many, which were before, are not
remedied thereby; and whether the times preceding this Council were not much
more depraved, than the present. Which I think you will not doubt of, if you
read, both in the narrations of Catholics and Protestants, the gross
corruptions of those days. So that I may say, the unhappy reformation from
that Church occasioned a happy one in it; and a schism, by divine providence
bringing good out of evil, served much to purify the Catholic Religion. But
of this Reformation; as to the particulars; I shall speak more fully in the
fifth Head,. 203. etc.

CHAP. X.
6. That no violence was inferred upon the liberty of the Council, as to the
defining any thing therein contrary to the General, Approbation, By, 1. The
Popes Legates proposing the things to be handled there,. 160. 2. The
Consultation made, in every thing, with the Pope,. 164. 3. The excessive number
of Italian Bishops,. 167. And the not ^oting by Nations, but the present
Prelates,. 169. 4. The Popes giving Pensions,. 170. 5. And admitting Titular
Bishops,. 171. 6. The Prohibition of Bishops Proxies to give Definitive votes.
172.


6.
upon the liberty of the Council, as to the defining any thing therein contrary
to its general Approbation; or, Popes Legates proposing in public the things to
be handled in the Council. consulting in all matters, and receiving directions
from, the Bishop of Rome, and his entertaining also a Council at Rome to advise
with. 3. The presence in the Council of such a multitude of Italian Bishops;
pensions to several Bishops. titular ones in the Council. proxies to give
definitive votes.

To the first: To 1.
The Popes Legates proposing the things to be handled there. things shall be
handled, what order in them observed, etc. in such great. Assemblies, I desire
you to read Soave's discourse, p. 135. where speaking of Councils, he goes on
thus, -- After a certain time, passions of men and charity being mingled
together, and there being a necessity to govern them with some order, the
chiefest man, amongst those that were assembled in the Council, either for
learning, or for greatness of the City, or Church, whereof he was, etc. took
upon him the charge to propose, and guide the action, and collect the voices.
-- After that it pleased God to give peace to Christians, etc. the action was
guided by those Princes which did call them together; proposing, and governing
the treaty and decreeing, interlocutorily, the occurring differences; but
leaving the decision of the principal point, for which the Council was
congregated, to the common opinion of the assembly [as also it cannot be denied
the Legates did, themselves giving their vote last. Soave, p. 138.
] This was done * in the first Council of Ephesus before the Earl Candidianus
sent President by the Emperor; and more clearly * in that of Chalcedon before
Marcianus, and the Judges by him appointed; * in that of Constantinople in
Trullo, before Constantine Pogonatus; where the Prince, or Magistrate that was
President, commanded what should be handled, what order observed, who should
speak, and who be silent [so much not practiced in the Council of Trent,] and
so did decide, and accommodate the differences in these things. Yet closer, p.
330. -- The judgment of the Church, says he (as was necessary in every
multitude) was fit, that it should be conducted by one, who should preside and
guide the actions, propose the matters, and collect the points to be consulted
on. This care, due to the most principal, and worthy person, was always
committed to the Bishop [and then by consequence in a multitude of Prelates, to
the most Principal Bishop among them.] Thus Soave. In this matter therefore you
see the same things were done in former Councils, as in Trent; and when this
done by a Bishop, the doing justified; can the same practice, then, in both
leave those Councils free, and render this inslaved?

Soave, see the Popes defense, in his Letters written to the Emperor, and King
of Spain, upon their complaint of it, Apud Pallav. l. 20. c. 8, n. 4. -- and c.
10. n. 17. -- That the words [proponentibus Legatis] were composed by the Synod
it self without his knowledge; approved first unanimously in a general
congregation; and afterward in the first Session Sess. 17. Decret. de
Celebrand. Conc.
[ i. e. under Pius, which is the 17.th Session of the Council] with the
opposition of two only [ Soave says of four; two more desiring a qualification
of it.] That, since Princes desired the Councils freedom from this, he was
content it should be so: though he well foresaw the unbridled licentiousness
that would come thereof. See the Legates defense likewise, in answer to the King
of Spain: Pall. l. 16. c. 6. n. 5. -- and Pallavicino's, in answer to Soave --
l. 23. c. 12. n. 7. Lastly, if you desire more satisfaction, see the unanimous
explication of this clause, proponentibus legatis, both by the Legates, and
Council (importuned thereto by the King of Spains Letters, to whom the
Proposals of Princes to the Council, as well as of other Prelates in it, seemed
by this clause to receive some obstruction) Sess. 24. c. 21. de Reform. -- S.
Synodum explicando declarare, mentis suae non fuisse, ut in praedictis verbis
solita ratio tractandi negocia in Generalibus Conciliis ulla ex part
immutaretur; neque novi quidquam, praeter id, quod sacris canonibus, vel
generalium Synodorum forma hactenus statutum est, cuiquam adderetur, vel
detraheretur. By which Declaration (says Soave p. 781.
) that difficulty, so much agitated, received an end, with satisfaction of all
And a Comment on this Decree may be the free practice of the Fathers of this
Council, and also of the Agents of Princes, not less after it, than before it.

proposal of matters to be considered in the Council were necessary for
order-sake to be committed to the care, and super-intendence of some particular
members; and of whom rather, than the more dignified; yet it may be observed,
through Soaves whole relation of the actions of this Council; that no matter,
whereof the proposal was desired, or prosecuted by the major, or a
considerable, part of the Bishops (unless, perhaps, the Councils proceeding in
the reformation of Secular Princes, the Articles whereof are set down in Soave,
p. 760 which, though advanced by the Clergy, all the Ambassadors, and Orators
unanimously opposed See Soave, p. 760, 766, 769.
) was stopped by the Legates power (though I grant, several times diverted, or
dissuaded, by their advice,) and that proposals also were not unusually made in
the Council by others (if we may believe Soave) proposals both most contrary to
the Popes interest, and most displeasing to his Legates. To name some: Such
were, * those concerning the two great questions about the Institution, and
residency of Bishops; whether jure divino. * Articles of Reformation to be
joined, in their consultations, with those of Doctrine and Religion. * The
abrogating, or moderating, of the privileges, and exemptions, of Regulars,
from the Episcopal power; * the abrogation, or moderating of Commendams,
Dispensations, Union of Benefices, -- Of pensions, and reservations of profits,
out of Ecclesiastical Benefices. * Ordination of Titular Bishops. -- Appeals
to the Pope. * The Councils representing the universal Church. All which, and
many more were agitated in the Council, the Legates (as Soave represents them)
relucting: yet, not offering to infringe the liberty of the Council, where they
saw the inclinations of a considerable part bent that way.

[So, concerning residency, and exemptions Soave tells us (the truth of the
History frequently constraining him to contradict those maxims, which are
elsewhere laid down by him, to infer the slavery of the Council.) -- That the
Legates were enforced to consent that both should be considered of, and that
every one speak his opinion of them, and that some Fathers should be deputed to
frame the Decree, that it might be examined. Concerning the Articles handling
Reformation, p. 144, 145. he says: The number contending for them was so
great, that the Legates were confounded. And that they yielded to their desire,
being constrained thereunto by mere necessity. Concerning abrogating the
exemption of Regulars, p. 761, and 167, 170. he says. It was a thing moved by
the Bishops: -- and that the Pope, and Legates desired to maintain the Regulars
Privileges. Concerning admission of the Protestant Divines to disputation, p.
365. he says, -- That, this opinion being embraced frist by the Germans, then
by the Spanish Prelates, and at last somewhat coldly by the Italian, the Legate
remained immovable; and showed plainly, that he stood quiet, being forced by
necessity. And concerning the reformation of Princes, p. 769. he says. -- That
the Legates gave forth this Article being forced thereunto by the mutiny of the
Prelates. If you would see more instances in Soave of the Councils bridling, and
overruling the Legates, I refer you to Quorlius, l. 2. first and second
Chapters, a diligent Collector of them. So, p. 656. concerning the several
Articles of Reformation presented by the Emperor, and by the French, Soave, p.
513, 652.
which were thought to entrench too much upon the Popes privileges, Soave
brings him in giving such instructions to his Legates. -- That they should defer
to speak of them, as long as was possible, -- That, when there was necessity to
peruse them, they should begin with those that were least prejudicial, etc. --
That, in case they were forced to propose them, imparting their objections to
the Prelates their adherents, they should put them in discussion, and
controversy. So, very frequently in his History, you shall find him (as if he
had forgot himself, concerning what he affirms elsewhere of the domineering,
and tyranny of the Pope, and his party) revealing the distractions, the fears,
the complaints, and, upon this, the subtle Artifices, of the Pope, and of his
Legates (probably, such as his own wit could contrive, who with his fancy
presumes to enter into all their secrets, and speaks, as if he had the Art of
discerning thoughts and intentions as clearly, as others do actions and
Records,) and many times, as you have seen, after all these, he represents the
Legates yielding, and going along with the stream, because they could with no
Art withstand it. But if indeed the proponentibus Legatis, was intended, or
executed in such a manner, as Protestants affirm, so as that nothing could be
moved in the Council, but what they pleased, though a major part desiring it;
nor any thing pleased them, that it should be moved, which was prejudicial to
the Popes interest, or Grandeur; this surely would have remedied, and prevented
all these fears, and jealousies of the Pope, and Court of Rome; supposing his
Legates, as Soave always represents them, still true, and faithful to him.] But
I ask, what matter of moment was there, how much soever distastful to the Pope,
or Court of Rome, that, being presented once in Trent, was strangled, before it
came to be proposed, and agitated in the Council. The Articles of Reformation,
that were exhibited by the Imperial and French Ambassadors, were, after some
delay, taken into consideration in the 24. and 25. Sessions Soave, p. 751, 759.
And here, when some Ambassadors proposed, that Deputies might be elected for
each Nation, to take care in the Council, of the special interest of it. -- The
Cardinal of Lorraine, and the other Ambassadors, both the French and Emperors,
contradicted it (says Soave) alleging that every one [ i. e. in the Council]
might speak his opinion concerning the Articles proposed; and propose others,
if there were cause; so that there was no need to give this distaste to the
Pope, and the Legates. Such a Liberty, then, de facto there was used in the
Council: But, I say not, whether always with that discretion that was needful;
or, whether not with some Contradiction of some persons of a sounder judgment,
than the rest. Or, whether the Legates did not well, in putting such bounds to
this liberty, as they well could, either by using persuasions to the contrary,
or by interposing delays, till the first fervor was a little cooled, as to
many points which they saw unprofitable, difficult, and apt to divide the
Council into parties, and not tending to those end, for which this Council was
chiefly assembled: Especially, whilst they endeavored to win the relucting
party, though this were not very numerous, with reason and treating, rather
than force, or overvoting them in Council.

proposal, to be appropriated to the Legates of the Apostolic See, further than
for order sake, seems needless to be contended for: For if (as Soave often
says) the major part of the Council, being Italians, were at the Popes
devotion for deciding all matters, what mattered it, who, or what was, proposed?

5ly. You may observe: That no such prescription, as proponentibus legatis, was
made to the Councils proceedings, till Pius his time; and yet that all things,
there, run in the same course before, as after, it: Neither do any Protestants
esteem the Council more free, or equitable, unto them, under Paul's, or
Julius's, than under Pius's, conduct.

6. Lastly, which must be often said: as to the most, or all the Protestant
Controversies concerning doctrine, the Legates proposal could be no
disadvantage; in condemning which doctrines the whole Council has been showed
to be so unanimous.

Consultation in every thing made with the Pope. 1st. Whereas it is usually
urged by Protestants, out of Soave, Seep. 481* 507.
That as none could propose any thing in the Council save the Legates, so the
Legates might propose nothing, till they had received a Commission from Rome. --
That nothing was resolved by the Fathers, but all in Rome; and the Council
guided by the Holy Ghost, sent thither from time to time in a Cloak-bag from
Rome, p. 497.
much more is charged, than is true. For a proposal of the matter^, from time
to time to be discussed in Council, was made, and digested in Trent by a
general agreement of the Fathers, unknown to the Pope, as appears throughout
this History. After which resolved, 1st. some Congregations of Divines disputed
the point, and considered the matters proposed, at which any of the Fathers,
that would, might be present. 2. After this arguing, followed the Congregations
of the Prelates, for framing the heads of Doctrine, and Reformation, according
to the most common opinion. 3. Then a General Congregation of the same Prelates,
for giving their votes concerning them; and, 4 lastly the Session; when they
were voted again, and so published (See Soave, p. 167.) Now all or most part of
these, saving the last (the Session) were usually passed without the Popes
knowledge, or concurrence; and the Legates themselves are sometimes found
differing from one another in their votes (as they were in that of residence,
Sav. p. 518. and, 496
) at which time also some other Bishops gave their vote, with reservation to
consulting of the Pope: which shows the Popes mind (though in a matter so much
concerning the Apostolic See) was not then known. But after these General
Congregations was usually notice of such Decree, as was passed therein, sent to
Rome, before its being voted again, and published in the General Session: And
of this a charge is also given to his Legates by Pope Paul the Third, in Soave,
p. 164. though I find not, that Pius required it: Nay, if we may believe this
Historian, he seems in some places to decline it (as appears in the
quotations here following:) The Decree, thus sent to Rome, was there also by
the Popes Council examined; and his judgment returned to the Legates, concerning
it: which, when differing from that of the Council (which thing seldom
happened, except in the questions between the Episcopal and Papal, Rights) the
Legates endeavored to procure by common consent either some alterations, or at
least, an omission of such Decree, in the following Session; but this with all
freedom of the Council still observed (a good part of whom was also still
animated against the Popes interests by the Ambassadors of Secular Princes)
nothing being done against the satisfaction of any considerable part of the
Council; the uttermost of the Legates attempts, then, extended to procure an
omission of that, to which the Pope would not consent; not any determining of
what he approved, when thereby was feared the alienating of some Nation from
the Roman Faith; and if, thus, something was hindered, by their intermise, from
being passed by the Council, which otherwise would have been so, yet nothing
was advanced to be passed, which otherwise would not have been: and so the
Conciliary Acts have suffered no prejudice by it. Nor any hurt done, save that
thus men are left to their former Liberty still in some points, wherein the
Council would have restrained it; a thing, I hope, the Reformed will not
complain of; you may at your leisure particularly view in Soave the liberty the
Council took to examine the Popes proposals in the Institution of Bishops, p
657. and 723.
and Papal Supremacy; and the alterations, which were made in them.

Pope's plea for himself, against those, 2.
who accused him for thus abridging the freedom of the Council. To this matter,
then, friendlily complained of by the Emperor in a letter to him, thus answered
Pius the 4th in another (See Pall. l. 20. c. 8. n. 7.) -- That he never gave
any such command, as that nothing should be decreed in the Council, without
consulting him first. That in things more difficult, the Delegats demanded his
advice; nor could, or ought, he to deny it them. That it crossed not their
liberty, was not undecent, or unusual, that the Council it self should desire
the judgment of the Apostolic See. -- Nor was it unfitting, that the Pope,
being to give Counsel to his Legates, should first take it with the Cardinals,
men of great judgment, and learning; especially be not intending, that his
advices should impose any necessity on the Council to follow them. Thus Pius;
me thinks, with much reason. And it is manifest, that the Council in many
things did not follow them. And though little was decreed by the Council
against that which came from Rome; yet both all, that came from Rome, was not
decreed; and much decreed, that came not from Rome; the Pope often desiring
them, especially for reformations, to proceed without consulting him: and (in
Soave, p. 503.) -- complaining to his Cardinals, of those [in the Council] who
referred themselves unto him; because (says he) the Council was assembled,
that every one may deliver his own opinion, and not lay the things of
difficulty upon the back of another [ i. e. the Pope] that themselves might
avoid hatred, and envy. As also the same Author p. 723.
relates; That, his Legates sending to Rome the Articles, that were drawn up in
the Council, of the Institution, and residence of Bishops, the Pope reprehended
the Legates for sending them. -- Because he knew, that the major part in the
Council were good Catholics, and devoted to the Church of Rome, and in
confidence hereof he was content, that the proposition, and resolution should
be determined in Trent without his knowledge. The same Author p. 684.
makes him further, in defense of his Instruction, from time to time, sent to
his Legates, and to the Council, answering the same letter of the Emperor on
this manner: plausibly enough, though, as Pallavicino taxes him, misrelating
in several things the contents of the letter. l. 20. c. 8. n. 9.
-- That no Council was ever celebrated in absence of the Pope, but that he
has sent instructions; which the Fathers have also followed: That the
Instructions do still remain, which Pope Celestine sent to the Ephesin Council;
Pope Leo, to that of Chalcedon; Pope Agatho, to that in Trullo, Pope Adrian the
first, to the second of Nice; Pope Adrian the second, to the eighth General
Council of Constantinople. And, thus also he makes him to plead his cause at
Rome before the Cardinals. p. 503.
-- That he could not choose but be troubled with that which was spoken
concerning the liberty of the Council; and that to consult of the matters at
Rome, was to violate it; saying, that it was a strange thing, that he, who was
head of the Church, and the Cardinals, who were principal members, and the
other Prelates in Rome, who have voice in the Council, should be accounted
strangers, and might not be informed of what is handled therein, and speak
their opinion; when as those, who have no lawful part in it, hold it lawful to
intermedle, and that in an ill sort. That it is plain, that the Prelates went to
Trent with commission from their Princes, according to which they proceed; and
that the Ambassadors by letters, and persuasions, do compel them to follow the
interest of their Masters; and yet for all this, no man says (which should be
said) that the Council is not free. Thus Pius in the Consistory. And indeed,
had not only the Pope, but also all the absent Bishops in the world assembled a
Council of their Clergy, and sent their judgment from time to time to Trent (so
long as the Council was not obliged to follow it) this would have brought no
subjection, or dishonor, but have added more reverence, to its Decrees,
enacted after they had first been sifted by so many several Examinations. Nor
do I see, how the Popes, Paul, or Pius, their Consultations with their Council
of Bishops at Rome before every Session of Trent concerning the points to be
determined therein; and upon it, declaring their judgment to the Legates, or to
the Council (provided they use no unlawful practices for the corrupting of any
ones judgment) should be more thought to prescribe to, or to diminish, the
freedom thereof, than the precedent consultations used anciently in Provincial
Councils, concerning some point afterward to be defined in a General, was held
prejudicial to it: or than Pope Celestines, or Leo's, precedent Letters to the
third and fourth General Council, declaring their judgment concerning what was
to be discu^sed there, may be thought an unlawful prescription to them; though
the Heretics, condemned by these Councils, excepted against it. And, de facto,
what Secular Prince was there, whose Orators in the Council acquainted him not
continually with the actions thereof, and accordingly received new instructions
for their negotiations?

Apostolic See was unusual in many former Councils, so there was not thereof,
in them, the same necessity: because such Councils being assembled for the
determining some one, or a few, points of Controversy, the Popes Legates
received full Instructions concerning the faith of the Roman See therein,
before their first coming: but in so many controversies of all sorts, as here
came to be agitated, it was impossible for that Bishop, either fully to
pre-inform his Missioners, or to foresee the questions: As Canus, who was one
of this Council, long since observed, in Com. loci, l. 5. c. 5. And if it be
said, that the Popes presence in the Council might have prevented all such
trouble, and offense, his absence seems rather eligible for this, that so he
might do all things with more mature advice, and less precipitancy, on whose
judgment the affairs of the Council did chiefly depend; to which may be added,
what himself urges to the Emperor: Pallav. l. 2. c. 8. n. 4.
that his personal presence there then would have seemed to tend much more to
the overawing and oppressing of the Councils liberty.

3d. 1 The great number of Italian Bishops: and, To 3.
2 the not voting by Nations. Of the first of these, the thing being confessed,
these things may be said; * That such a thing, without the Popes particular
design, would have happened; these Bishops being much nearer, than those of
Spain and France, and not having the like impediments, of Lutheranisme, and
National Colloquies, as the Germans; * that, suppose the Pope had sent them
all, the charitable may clearly see another cause thereof, than only their
driving there of the Popes interest: namely, the sometimes great scarcity of
Bishops in the Council; especially, at the first opening of it. * That, if
other Bishops were hindered to be present, the frequency of the Italians, how
numerous soever, if of such as had lawful Suffrages, cannot be blamed, though
the absence of others be excused. That as the Pope was diligent to send in
these, so was he very solicitous, by writing to their Princes; to procure a
fuller Representative from other Nations: as appears frequently in the History;
and so also was the Council it self (and the Italians therein) which Council
also had proceeded to lay heavy mulcts upon the Absents, had not the
Ambassadors interceded, and in part excused them. Of which see before,. 71. *
That, though the Italian Bishops in general are confessed to be inclined more
than others, to maintain the Popes honor, and greatness; yet so many of them,
as were not beneficed in the Popes state, and subject to his temporal Dominion
(which was very inconsiderable in respect of the rest of Italy) if we may
believe Soave, were addicted much more to their own Princes, in things wherein
their Ambassadors craved their assistance, than to the Pope; as on which
Princes they had a greater dependence in respect of their Estates, their
Parentage, etc. than on the Pope. Therefore we find not only those of the
Imperial, or Spanish States of Italy, but the Venetians, and Florentines in
several things to have divided from those of the Papacy. See Soave, p. 504.
559, 558. * That nothing could be passed in the Council, as to matters of
doctrine, if a considerable part contradicted, though a major part favored it;
and that the non-Italians were never but accounted (in respect of the Nations
represented by them) a considerable part; so that, to hinder something from
being voted, such a number of Italians was, or might be, made use of; but to
vote any thing they alone were esteemed uneffective; and the omissions of the
Council may be sometimes charged upon them, but not the Acts. * That, whether
the Pope had the Suffrages of the Italian Bishops at his beck, or no, he had no
need of any such assistance for the Protestant-Controversies: in condemning of
which, Soave confesses the votes of the whole Council to concur; as has been
showed before as to many particulars,. 150, and see Soave, p. 182, 183. saying.
That as to those points, like a City beleagred, the factions among them ceased,
and all joined against the common enemy.

Controversies, wherein the Council was more divided, and the Popes single
interests were more nearly concerned; * That, de facto, he had no such
assistance of the greatest part of the Italian Bishops; nor the major part of
the Council at his command, to vote what he pleased. This also frequently
appears from Soave's own relations. In these he makes often mention of the
Bishops of Naples, and Lombardy (the greatest part of Italy) their conforming
to the Emperor, their Sovereigns, inclinations, and their being steered by his
Ambassador; and speaks several times of the Imperial Italian Bishops their
opposing the Papalins. (See Soave, p. 166, 172, 223, 259, 267, 375.) And what
motive these Prelates had in the former time of the Council to follow the
Emperors interests, the same had they, in the later end thereof, to follow the
King of Spaines, to whom, and not the Emperor (after the Kingdom of Spain, and
the Empire disunited) belonged these Dominions in Italy; See Soar, p. 694.
and therefore in this time we find many of them siding with the Spanish
Prelates: See Soave, p. 558, 609. * He mentions also ( p. 558.) an aversion, and
envy, which the other Italian Bishops had against those, favored, and
preferred by the Court of Rome: Besides this, * He represents elsewhere the
Venetian, and Florentine Prelates also to comply with the Interests of those
States, importuned hereunto by the Ambassadors: See p. 559.
and therefore ( p. 504.) brings in the Pope applying himself to these
Ambassadors. -- That their Princes would recommend the cause of the Papacy to
their Ambassadors in Trent, and command them to cause the Prelates of their
States not to be present in the Parlies against the Apostolic See: Again: * He
relates their joining (all, or a great part of them) with the other Bishops,
against the endeavors of the Pope, and his Legates, in all those controversies
moved concerning the Episcopal duties, and rights, Institution, Residence;
Exemption of Regulars, etc. named formerly; See Soave, p. 231.468. 496, 551,
559. 609, 711.
as likewise concerning the non-remitting of Reformations to his Holiness. 254,
144, 145.
The Permission of the Cup, carried negatively against the Legates, p. 559, 567.
and several other matters; p. 699, 769.
all which things the Council could not have done, contrary to the Popes mind
(as Soave will have it) without a considerable number of Italian Prelates
opposing him, since these were the major part of the Council. So (p. 660.) He
brings in the French Ambassadors complaining of the Secretary of the Council,
as not faithfully setting down the votes, which shows, that they apprehended a
major part, opposite to that which prevailed. Lastly, (which may confirm all
this,) * He is every where discovering the Legates, and the Popes fears and
jealousies, and various cunnings, and divertions, to compass their ends; often
brings in his Holiness, making grievous complaints against the Council's
proceedings, and against his own Legates too,; several times, thinking to
dissolve the Council, sometimes, to secure himself by Arms; p. 551.
often soliciting the secular Princes to move their Bishops in his behalf, p.
504.
sometimes relying on the help of some eminent persons in the Council; as on
the Cardinal of Lorraine, Soave, p. 766.
and others, * So ( p. 258.) He brings in Pope Paul the Third, resenting. --
How little he was esteemed of the Council; in that It, having given hope to
refer the Reformation to him, whereof he had framed a Bull, and recalled the
whole matter to Rome, they had after treated thereof more sharply, without any
respect to his Authority: That he saw, that all was in the Emperors power, --
and was assured, that the Prelates, who did also then adhere to the Court of
Rome, when ever the Emperor should unmask himself, would profess to be on his
side, either for fear of greater power, or for emulation at the Popes
Greatness; which they would discover, when they should see a secure way laid
open to moderate it. * And ( p. 515, and, 516) upon occasion of Residency, he
represents, -- The Court of Rome exclaiming, that a Schism was plotted in the
Council, and an Apostasy from the Apostolic See; and Pius the 4th complaining
both of the Prelates, and of his own Legates; that all were united against him,
etc. Yet this, after that the same Soave had related p. 504.
the Popes sending so many pensioners of his to carry all things by a major
number of votes on his side. And, p. 628, Again, he makes the same Pope to
break out into this exclamation, occasioned by the points of Institution, and
Residency of Bishops: -- That all the Bishops, beneficed by him, were his
opposites; and that he maintained an Army of Enemies in Trent; wishing that by
any means the Council were dissolved. * ( p. 260.) He makes one Legate,
consulting, how to mollify the combined Prelates, by his granting some of their
petitions: Another saying; -- That, to condescend to an Inferior (especially to
a multitude) was to make them to demand a greater satisfaction; that, first, he
would try his Friends, and, when he found himself fortified with the greater
number, would not retire and Inch: but, if he found it otherwise, he would use
Art. p. 171. He makes, * the same Legates negotiating with the Italian Bishops
by those Prelates, who were their assured Friends, to wish them to consider, how
much they were bound, for the Honor of their Nation, to uphold the Dignity of
the Papacy: And, p. 754, * the Legates to be accused by the Spanish Ambassador,
for soliciting the Italians for their Suffrages. What means this great Politian
thus, amongst their impregnable Italian Guards, and Votaries. in the Council,
to torture the Pope, and his Legates on this manner, about procuring their aid;
and to put them into so many sudden frights; and, so often as the pleases,
entering into their Cabinet-Councils, to bring them upon his Stage, full of new
Projects. And yet, no sooner are their backs turned; and the Princes Orators,
or the Spanish Prelates, entered upon it, and it come to their turn to speak,
but the scene is quite changed; and we find these on the same rack: Now, the
Council is kept in servitude by the Italians their plurality of voices, all of
them sure to the Pope, for Country, or Pensions, or Promises, or Fears. Now the
proponentibus legatis strikes all the Council speechless, as to the matters
Fundamental, and of greatest concernment: And sometimes the Prelates of one
Nation sometimes of another, are ready to protest. Writing contrary things, as
they seem best to humor and adorn his present subject; and, as they do, also,
some way, or other, serve his sinister ends, many times contrary, one to
another. For, the more of the Council he can make, in one place, to oppose the
Pope, and his Ministers in some point, the more here, he makes to appear the
Popes tyranny in hindering, with diverse arts, such things to be defined. And,
in another place, the more powerful, and numerous he can show the Popes
Dependents in the Council to be, the more he represents the Council enslaved,
and the Pope carrying all things therein, as he pleases. This is replied to
the number of Italian Bishops.

Nations (and not by the number of persons present) a way, proposed to remedy
the predominancy in the Council of some one Nation, the inconvenience but now
complained of. 1st. It is a new way, never used in any Council, save two late
ones, Constance, and Basil: and in Constance upon an extraordinary occasion,
the election of a lawful Pope, * when they were afraid, this Election would
receive some disturbance from the multitude of Italians, brought to the Council
by Pope John 23th. and when several Nations also, adhering to several persons
(for there were then no fewer than three Anti-Popes residing in several places)
probably would not have united in any new choice, that would be made without
their particular consent. Therefore also, in the Council of Constance, for the
Election of a new Pope, Martin 5th. there were joined, with the Cardinals, some
other chosen Prelates out of each Nation. (See Sess. 41.) And this extraordinary
way was then used, not as the best for condemning of Heresies, but as, pro
tempore, the most expedient, for curing a Schism. Mean while, see in Spondanus,
A.D. 1415. n. 14 and 16.
taken out of the Acts of this Council conserved in the Library of St. Victors
at Paris, the complaint, and exceptions made by Pope John against this new
course. -- Vna natione (says he) alteri aequiparata, abs; ulla meriti, vel
numeri, ratione, -- cum de Anglicana essent tres tantum Praelati, and coeteri
Cleriri novem numero. And then, see the Council thus clearing it self. --
Formam, a Synodo, majoris causa ordinis and Compendii, statutam, comprehendere
utrumque modum deliberandi; per Nationis, and per singula Suffragia: Cum Viz
per Deputatos, sive Delectos Nationum, primo, separatim post ad invicem,
communicato Consilio; Dehinc, per ipsas Nationes, ubi singuli liberi erant:
tandem, collectis omnibus in unum Nationibus, ac Cardinalibus, in Sessione
publica quaerebatur palam de singulis praemeditatis, and examinatis, Articulis,
utrum placerent; permissa cuililet, ex prisca Conciliorum forma, faclutate
dicendi, quae vellet. We have the manner of it more clearly described in
Spondanus out of Patricius, in the beginning of the Council of Basil A. D.
1431. 11.
thus. Out of the four Nations was a certain number chosen, to sit by
themselves, and prepare matters, the four Nations having four Convents or
meetings: Again, out of every one of these Convents were chosen three; twelve
in all, called Deputati, who sat together, and better digested, what any of
the other four meetings represented to them: afterward their Judgment was
returned to the several Convents; and then, when all, or any three of these
Convents consented in any thing, it was sent to the President of the Council,
and by Him proposed to all the members of it in a General Congregation; where
all had their free, nnd personal vote; and what was in this Congregation
generally agreed on, was at last reduced into the Form of a Decree, and
afterward recited, and confirmed in a Public Session. Where we see in the
General Congregation all things are passed by personal votes: (which proceeding
also, the former words of the Council intimate, and justify,.) Only the other
National Consultations are premised for the more expedition, and better
examination of things: and nothing could be proposed to the General
Congregation, but which the Deputies of three of the four Nations had first
stated, and agreed to. Now, setting aside such a distinction of, and prevoting
by, Nations, the preparation and examination of matters before every public
Session by certain select Congregations, or meetings, seems not much different
from that afterward used in this Council of Trent. 2. But this, whether
previous, or final, Decision by the number of Nations, how few soever the
Representatives of some of them be, as it is new, so, 2ly. seems very dangerous
for raising emulations, and factions between Nations (to the rending of the
Churches peace) and leaves not the Prelates of every Nation so much at their
own liberty to join their vote with aliens; nor permits the same scope for men
of more spirit, learning, or judgment, of whatsoever Nation to guide the rest.
3ly. It would render the Councils deserted, and unfrequented, and consequently
the affairs thereof not so well discussed: whilst one Representative, sent from
one Nation will suffice; and equal in vote, and authority, an hundred sent from
another; as here, only three Prelates sent from England did. 4, Again, either
all Nations shall be allowed to have an equal vote in the Council, or unequal;
if equal; then, since the Bishops of three or four lesser Kingdoms, or States,
do not equal the Bishops of one greater; thus a much smaller part of the Church
may overvote, and conclude the greater; if unequal, how shall a just proportion
be prescribed? 5. Add to this, that the multitude in Council of the Prelates of
some Nation more than of another, is, without this new device, already
remedied; for this being once agreed on, that the decrees of the Prelates
present in a Council oblige not, unless accepted by the major part of Nations,
and by their Prelates, that are absent, the greater number of one Nation in the
Council than of another, cannot oblige the absents, if more, to the observance
of their decrees. 6ly. Such an Innovation could not be made in Trent without
the consent of the Council; and those Nations, of which the Council mostly
consisted, would never have consented to have the vote of one, or two Bishops
from some other Countries, perhaps much inferior in their natural, or
spiritual, parts, and their Co-Patriots unconsulted, to counterpoise all theirs.

7. Lastly, as to the points of doctrine; the same thing in effect was observed
in the Conncil, or something more; For nothing can be showed to have been
passed in the Council, as to matter of doctrine, from which the Bishops, how
few soever they were, of any one Nation, esteemed Catholic, and so rightly
challenging a vote, declared their dissent; and, though perhaps few, yet they
were looked upon, as the representative of a Body considerable, against which
(as has been said) the Council concluded no Article of faith; as in stating
which Articles they guided themselves by former evident Tradition, or most
clear Consequences thereof.

Popes giving Pensions. The thing is confessed, but has two handles, To 4.
by which, as it is taken, it is rendered commendable, or culpable. On the one
side it might be a great charity, and argue a desire only, that the Council
might be numerous, and full, and assisted with many able persons, some of which
(not minding these so much) are not unoften low in their estates. On the other
side, it might be a great policy, and argue a desire to have many in the
Council his Dependents. Whether out of one, or both of these respects, such
pensions were allowed, I cannot say: but by an act, that may be lawfully done,
and justified, none can prove the Council illegal: And also in favor of the
former pretense, we may consider: * That poorer Bishops in former Councils have
had their charges born, at least, by the Emperor, one not without Designs: *
That the Council of Trent sat extraordinary long in comparison of other
Synods; the charges of continuing there great; not a few Bishops, and other
Divines, poor: great scarcity of Bishops attending the Council, especially in
its first beginning; the more necessitous, without some maintenance of their
charges, threatening to depart: as Soavo himself acknowledges, p. 124: and
therefore the Legates themselves were forced to open the Popes purse for the
support of some of them, before they had his leave; and (says Pallav. l. 24.
c. 14. n. 7.) these pensions were so small, being but 25 Crowns a month, that
the Bishops so relieved, staid not without murmuring, that, thus, they were
deprived of a just pretense to go away; and the Pope had more ill will from
them for their so long necessitated attendance, than thanks for his allowance;
and, often complaining of their want, some of them (says he) in the
consultations, gave more molestation, than some others, both to the Legates, and
to the Pope. But, if these pensions were so advantageous to the Popes service,
it had been easy for Christian Princes, by the like allowances to so many poor
Bishops of their own Dominions, to have countermined such policies.

admitting Titular Bishops. It Is true, that some Titular Bishops were in the
Council, To 5.
but they are justified, by their, allowed, ordination of Priests, to be true
Bishops; and therefore might lawfully repair to the Council, and vote therein
without asking any ones leave. I find not any said to be in the Council, who
were not made Bishops before it. Neither do I find Soave charging the Pope, as
some others do, either of erecting any new Bishoprics, or creating Titular
Bishops, during the sitting of the Council; nor yet any mentioned to be sent
thither by the Pope, save two, and those at the first beginning of the Council,
nor these merely Titular, laus Magnus, and Robert Venants waucap; One
Archbishop of Vpsali in Sweden, the other of Armagh in Ireland. both excluded
from their Sees by Princes, enemies to the Catholic Faith. Of whom, as you may
read what is said in Soave, p. 140. to their disparagement; so you may see what
is said in Pall. l. 6. c. 5. and in Spondanus A. D. 1546. n. 3.
to their commendation: The Pope sending them thither as for their great parts,
so chiefly for their Country, one being a Swede, the other a Scot, that most
Nations might have some persons in the Council relating to them. Lastly, if
there were any such Titulars sent by the Pope, the same may be said of them, as
has been. 167.
of the Italians in general: * That the Pope found but little assistance from
them, where he most needed them; nor was any advantageous thing done for Him in
the Council by their help: * That the Council was a great enemy to several
practices of theirs, and passed several Acts against Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 4.
de Deform. -- Sesss. 14. c. 2
them (when probably had there been any consider able number of them in the
Council, some of them would have spoken, there, in their own defense)
especially, that they should exercise no Pontifical Act on the Subjects of
another Bishop without his license. But yet the Council thought not fit to
suppress, for the future, the creating any such Bishops, for the reasons given
in Soave, p. 717. Because these necessary to supply the places of unable
Bishops; or, of those, who have a lawful cause to be absent from their
Churches; or of Prelates, employed in greater affairs.

Proxies to give definitive votes: To 6.
Proxies were admitted in all Consulations, and had, in them, a vote with the
rest, but were not admitted to have a definitive vote in the Council for this
reason: least so, whilst many Bishops pretended necessary cause of absence,
these their Substitutes, coming abundantly from all parts, might overbear the
Bishops in the Council; these being men, of whose abilities the Council could
not have the same presumption, as they might of the Bishops themselves: and
this being a thing, which those Prelates, who afforded their own personal
attendance, would be much offended with. Yet was it attempted, to have allowed
a definitive vote to the Proxies of some Bishops necessarily absent, as to some
of the German Bishops, but that this could not be easily done, exclusively to
others See Pall. l. 20. c. 17. n. 8. -- l. 21. c. 1. n. 3.
. Whether their definitive vote also was opposed for another reason (alleged
by Protestants) viz. least the Italian Bishops should so be over-voted, I
cannot judge: But those Bishops, who sent Proxies, themselves afterward,
accepting the Council, did what was equivalent to their own, or their Proxies,
definitive voting in it. But, to conclude this matter, suppose that these fix
things objected were confessed to have been used unjustly, and to the prejudice
of the Council, in some things; yet it appears from the second and third
Consideration above,. 148, 150. that they could cast no blemish upon its
authority in those things, which were therein, actually, and unanimously,
established; which is enough to overthrow the Reformation.

CHAP. XI.
IV. Head. Of the Councils many Definitions, and Anathemas.
1. That all Anathemas are not inflicted, for holding something against Faith,.
173. 2. That matters of Faith have a great latitude: and so consequently, the
errors, that oppose Faith, and are liable to be Anathematized,. 175. Where; Of
the several ways, wherein things are said to be of Faith,. 176.
3. That all General Councils to the worlds end have equal Authority in
defining matters of Faith: And, by the more Definitions, the Christian Faith
still more perfected,. 177. Where, Of the true meaning of the Ephesin Canon,
restraining Additions to the Faith,. 178.
4. That the Council of Trent prudently abstained from the determining of many
Controversies, moved there,. 184. 5. That the Lutheran's many erroneous
opinions in matters of Faith engaged the Council to so many contrary
Definitions,. 185. 6. That all the Anathemas of this Council extend not to mere
Dissenters.. 186. 7. That this Council, in her Definitions, decreed no new
Divine Truth, or new matter of Faith, which was not formerly such, at least in
its necessary Principles. Where, In what sense Councils may be said to make new
Articles of Faith, and in what, not,. 192.
8. That the chief Protestant-Controversies, defined in this Council of Trent,
were so in some former Councils,. 198. 9. That the Protestant-Churches have
made new Counter-Definitions as particular as the Roman; and obliged their
Subjects to believe, and subscribe them, 199. 10. That a Discession from the
Church, and declaration against its Doctrines, was made by Protestants before
they were any way straightened, or provoked, by the Trent- Decrees, or Pius his
Creed,. 202.
third Head; the legal proceedings of this Council. Now we come to the Fourth:
Touching the many Decrees and Canons, Definitions, and Anathema's, of this
Council, much exceeding those of former; and some of them said to be in very
slight matters; by which this Council is charged to have multiplied, and
imposed on all Christians, so many new Articles of Faith; and Pius his Bull,
that followed it, to have added twelve new ones, to the Creed. Thus when as the
Reformation [as Mr. Thorndike complains, in Conclusion to his Epilog.] might
have been only Provisional, till a better understanding between the parties
might have produced a tolerable agreement, this Council cut^^^^ off all hopes
of Peace, except by yielding to all their Decrees. In this matter therefore,
for the Councils Defense, I shall propose to you these ten Considerations
following.

The 1st. That all Anathemas in Councils are not passed, 1.
for holding something against matter of Faith, but for other misdemeanors,
and Trespasses against Obedience, and good manners; Amongst which this may be
reckoned one; If any one raises Factions, and Sects, and disturbeth the
Churches peace, in contradicting her common Doctrines, of how small consequence
soever these Doctrines be; or spreads abroad propositions schismatical, and
scandalous, and apt to corrupt good manners, or, be made ill use of by the
simple, though the matter of them be not properly Heretical, or opposing an
Article, that is De fide.

Again, Anathemas, that are inflicted by the Church for holding something
contrary to the Faith, are not always, or most usually denounced, for those
more fundamental and necessary points of Faith, an error in which ruins
Salvation; but also, and more commonly (because these are more) for some lesser
matters of faith; viz, any, whereby some damage, smaller, or greater, comes, as
to the Author from holding them, so to others, from his maintaining, and
divulging them abroad: The Church being very vigilant (contrary to Sects) to
eradicate the least deviations from the Faith; which are observed by the
Apostle to be of the nature of a Cancer, 1 Timothy 2.17.
still eating further into the bowels of Truth; she not knowing, how far they
may enlarge themselves, and by little and little invade higher Points, and lay
the Foundation for more pernicious errors. Nor does the punishment of Anathema,
in these, eye so much the greatness, and malignity of the error, as the
pertinacy, and obstinacy of its Abettor, refusing submittance to the Churches
authority; the violating of which Authority may be a great fault, and of very
ill consequence, though in a small matter. If he will not hear the Church
(says our Lord) let him be to thee, Mat. 18, 17.
as an Heathen [an excommunicated, ^rn anathematized, person] where the censure
lies upon his not hearing the Church; be the matter in which, small, or great.

obstinacy against the Definitions of Superiors, though in the maintaining only
of some small errors in the Faith, some Protestants seem to acknowledge: and
confess it well to merit so high a Censure. Of which thus Dr. Fearn,
Considerations on the Church of Engl. Preface.
-- We acknowledge, that he who shall pertinaciously, and turbulently speak,
and teach, against the Doctrines of the Church in points of less moment, may
deserve to be Anathematized, or put out of the Church, for such a one, though
he deny not the Faith, yet makes a breach of Charity: whereby he goes out of
the Church, against which he so sets himself. Thus this Doctor. [Only he would
have the Church to distinguish between pertinacious and modest, gainsaying,
(which is to know Hearts:) and this latter he would have to pass free from this
censure; and such he would have that of the Reformers to be. Was that of
Luther, then, so modest? Or does not the weight and venerableness of the
Churches Authority render all known contradiction whatever truly guilty of
Pertinacy, and Pride?]

Again: Thus Bishop Brambal. Vindic. of Church of Eng. p. 27.
-- When inferior questions, not fundamental, are once defined by a lawful
General Council, all Christians, though they cannot assent in their judgments,
are obliged to passive obedience, to possess their souls in patience. And they
who shall oppose the Authority, and disturb the peace of the Church [for such a
point non-fundamental] deserve to be punished as Heretics [ i. e.
Anathematized.] And Cardinal Bellarmin says De Council. l. 2. c. 10.
of Provincial Councils: That -- Judicium non-infallibile tamen sufficit ad
excommunicandum. And -- Debent privati homines acquiescere ejusmodi judicio,
donec non judicaverit aliter Apostolica seeds, vel Concilium Universale, [these
two, it seems, only do set at liberty our tongues from the obligations of
Inferior Councills] si secus egerint, merito excommunicantur. Notwithstanding,
though an Anathema, in such cases in well deserved from the wilful adherence of
such persons to their own fancies, against their Superiors, yet it is never
inflicted merely for this; but always for some danger also in such a Tenent,
if spread abroad to others; the remedy of which danger of infecting others,
seems chiefly to be intended in the Churches using ordinarily in such Canons:
Si quis dixerit, rather than, senserit.

Extent of matter of Faith, You must know: That all Divine Revelations
whatever, 2.
and all necessary Deductions from any Article of Faith, could they proceed in
infinitum, are also, when known, the matter or objects, or Articles, of our
faith, as well as the more chief, necessary, points thereof; (unless we may
dis-believe something, that we grant to be God's Word:) And are all Traditional
from the Apostles times, either in their own express terms, or in their
necessary Principles, since new Divine Revelations none pretend: And,
consequently, the contrary error to any of these Deductions, when ever it seems
very hurtful, may be Anathematized.

Divine Revelations, and matter of our Faith, are to be reckoned these two
Propositions of no little consequence; viz. the Doctrine of Christian liberty;
namely; That all things are lawful unto us, which God's Word has not
prohibited. And, again, this; That the Church has authority committed to Her
by our Lord, in such lawful things, to make Constitutions, and Decrees obliging
all her subjects to obedience. So that one, that affirms something to be
prohibited in God's Word, or unlawful, that is not so prohibited; or one, that
denies obedience to the Precepts of the Church, made in things not contrary to
God's Word, offends against the Faith; and, on this account, is liable to an
Anathema. And, in these things, our Belief, according to the several objects
thereof, is required of us in a several manner.

1. In pure speculatives; If it be a thing made known to us to be revealed by
God, the Faith, that is required of us upon such Revelation, is to believe it a
certain Truth. 2. In practicals, if it be a thing, by God commanded, or
prohibited, the faith required of us, upon such Divine Revelation, is to
believe, that it is our necessary Duty to do, or to abstain from, it. 3. But,
if it be a thing of which we have no Divine Precept; a thing neither enjoined,
nor prohibited by God; in all which sort of things Divine Revelation has
declared our liberty, the faith required of us, according to such Revelation,
is, to believe it lawful (I mean as to God's law) to be done, or to be omitted,
as we please. 4. Lastly, Among these lawful things also; if it be a thing
concerning which we have a Precept of the Church to do it; or, where the
lawfulness is doubted of, a Declaration of the Church, that it is lawful to be
done (which Church God in his Word has commanded, in such her judgment, to be
submitted to; and, in such her Precepts, to be obeyed) the Faith, required of
us from such Divine Revelation, is: That it is both lawful to be observed; and,
the observation thereof our Duty. And consequently, he who denies the
lawfulness thereof, or obedience thereto, opposes a Divine Revelation: Though
the thing, we do, is not commanded by any Divine Revelation; nor the particular
lawfulness of it declared in Gods Word. Such a point of Faith is the lawfulness
of communicating only in one kind: Of which thus the Council of Trent, Sess.
21. c. 1. -- Si quis dixerit, ex Dei praecepto, vel necessitate salutis, omnes,
singulos and Christo fideles utramque speciem sanctissimi Eucharistiae
sacramenti sumere debere, Anathema sit. Such the Duty of communicating once a
year, Sess. 13. c. ^9. -- Si quis negaverit, omnes, and singulos Christi
Fideles utriusque sexus, cum ad annos discretionis pervenerint, teneri,
singulis annis, saltem Paschate, ad communicandum, juxta praeceptum Sancta
matris Ecclesiae; Anathema sit. And, so the seventh and tenth Canon. -- Si quis
dixerit, non licere, etc.. And such that, Sess. 24. c. 4. De matrimon. -- Si
quis dixerit, Ecclesiam non posse constituere, etc. Anathema sit: and so, Can.
9. And such is the Duty in general of observing the Churches Traditions. Of
which thus the seventh General Council (Act. 7.) -- Si quis Traditiones
Ecclesiae, sive scriptas, sive consuetudine valentes, non curaverit; Anathema
sit.

Councils to the worlds end, and not only the four, or three, first, 3.
before the passing of the Ephesin Canon Conc. Ephesians. c. 7.
(which Canon is said to restrain it) may define and determine not only the
greater; but these smaller matters of Faith; and may make new Points to be, de
fide, or creditu necessaria (in such a sense, as is explained below,. 192)
which were not formerly, when they see occasion thereof; and, when contrary
errors do arise, which they apprehend dangerous to Divine Truth; or to god
life; or to the Churches peace. And there seems no reason against it, but that
a Council may be as ample in the protection and asserting of Truth, not only in
gross, and in some general, and principal matters, but by retail, as it were,
in every part, and parcel thereof; as Innovations are, in invading it, that
every poison may have its Antidote; Especially, when little-seeming errors, not
crushed at their first appearance, do insensibly ascend, from the overthrow of
some conclusion, to that of the Premises; till they undermine, at last, some
Truths more principal. Who blames a Parent for binding his Children to abstain
from things hurtful, because such things are, in a less degree, and not
exceedingly, hurtful; or, for prohibiting them something, which is not
downright poison, and immediately mortal; but yet, which by little and little
may alter, and corrupt the healthful constitution of their Body: Of which
noxious things the Parents, not the Children, are fittest Judges.

Neither are the Churches Subjects any way disobliged in her thus, from age to
age, multiplying their Credends; but much indebted, for this her motherly care
of them: who before, whilst they had more liberty of opinion, so also had less
light, in their progress toward Heaven; and more bypath open to stray in, and
more liableness to err; or, by the Heretical, to be seduced in those things,
in the truth of which they are now, by that Judgment, which Gods wisdom has
deputed to direct them, and by the best which the world can afford,
established. Unless here, with the Heretics, we will blame, after the
Foundation laid of the Apostles Creed, the explications of the Nicen, or
Athanasian: Or, after this, the many Articles passed in later Synods,
concerning Grace, and Freewill, and the Anathemas annexed against the Pelagian
errors herein: Or also complain of the obligation we now have to a great Roll
of Credends under the Gospel, from which those, in the darker times of the Law,
stood free. Add to this, that the suppression of any new error must necessarily
increase the Faith: and, in immediate contraries, who is to renounce the
Negative, must bel^eve and hold the Affirmative: Neither is it possible, that
the Church, in such points, can make any fence to keep out her enemies, but she
must also at the same time, within it, enclose her Friends.

Hammond in answer to the C. Gentleman 8. cap.. 2. and repeated in Here Is.. 7.
p. 100.) and by Bishop Bramhal, and others, see before,. 6. (a) -- That the
Ephesin, the third General, Council, made a Decree: That it should not be
lawful, for any man to produce, write, or compose, any belief, besides that
which not established by the Fathers at Nice, etc. (b) That the Greeks in the
Council of Florence pressed this authority to the Latins; and said that no man
would accuse that faith [or Creed] of imperfection, unless he were mad. (g)
That the Latins in their reply, acknowledged that this Decree did forbid all
difference os of faith from this Creed, as well as contrariety: And. (d) That
Celestines Epistle (quoted in that Council) affirms; That the belief
delivered by the Apostles [ i. e. the Apostles Creed] requires that there be
neither addition, nor diminution. These things are urged, to show; that the
Council of Trent had no just authority to make any new Articles of Faith. But I
imagine; that, after you have but a little with me considered this Ephesin
Canon with the due circumstances, you will discern a strange mis-application.

1. It is meet, that I first set you down the words thereof, with what
immediately precedes them. -- Sermocinatio ejusdem Sancti Concili, postquam, and
Canones editi a. 318. Sanctis, beatisque Patribus, qui Niceae convenerant, and
impium Symbolum a Theodoro Mopsuestino Episcopo [a ringleader of the Nestorian
Heresie] confictum, and eidem Ephesino Concilio traditum a Clarisio Presbytero
Philadelphiensi, recitata fuissent. -- His igitur recitatis constituit sanctum
Concilium, ut nemini liceat aliam fidem vel proferre, vel conscribere, vel
componere, quam eam, quae praestituta, ac praescripta est a Sanctis Patribus,
qui in Nicenorum urbe [in which Creed the additions also of the
Constantinopolitan Council are here supposed to be included] cum auxilio
spiritus sancti coacti suerunt. Qui autem audeat aliam fidem vel componere vel
proferre, volentibus converti ad agnitionem veritatis sive ex Gentilitate, sive
Judaismo, etc. [to be professed by them at their admission into the Church,] ut
hi, si quidem Episcopi sint, ab Episcopatu removeantur; sin autem Laici sint,
ut extroma detestatione, and execratione percellantur. This being the Canon.

To (a) I say. 1st. That, 179. n. 2. R. To a.
this Canon being pressed by the Greeks against the Latins in the Florentine
Synod to prove the unlawfulness of the Latins addition to the Creed of
[Filioque] either the Reformed must approve the sense the Latins gave of that
Decree [namely, R. To a.
that the Ephesin Council prohibited only, that none should compose any model
of faith disagreeing, or contrary in any thing to, the doctrine of the Nicene
Creed (as Theodorus his wicked Creed was, which occasioned this Decree)] or
must confess, that the Latins unjustly retain, and mention [Filioque] in their
Creeds; which was added to the Creeds, after the Ephesin, and the four first
Councils; See Conc. Florent. 7. Sess.
being first mentioned, and found in the Creed, in the fourth Toletan Council,
about, A D. 680. as the Roman Writers themselves confess.

2ly. That. supposing the Council prohibits not only the composing, or addition
of any thing contrary to the Nicene Creed (as Theodorus his Nestorian Creed,
the occasion thereof, may persuade, it did) but the addition thereto, or
alteration in expression, of any thing whatsoever, though never so conformable
to the Nicen Creed; yet this prohibition extends not to Councils, but only to
private persons, and Church Governors; according to that. [Hi, si quidem
Episcopi sunt, ab Episcopatu removeantur:] for who shall execute this sentence
upon a General Council? Or, how can one General Council justly limit, or
prescribe to another of equal authority? 3ly. Supposing that they extend this
Act to Councils also; either they prohibit to them not the making new
definitions in matters of Faith, but only the adding of such definitions made
to the body of the Nicene Creeed; but then, this act concerns none, who
afterward make new Definitions, so they add them not to the Creed. Now no
additions at all have been made to that Creed, since the fourth General
Council, save [Filioque] which the Protestants also allow of, and use. Or, 4ly.
If the Ephesin Fathers prohibit to the Councils any such Definitions also, as
well as Additions to the Creed after Nice, they condemn themselves in the first
place; who though they added not to the Creed, yet defined [Maria (...)] And if
the Ephesin Canon be taken in either of these senses, thus it will be found not
to be observed by the very next General Council, that of Chalcedon; who made
another new definition, or Creed, against Eutyches; in which also they altered
some expressions of the Nicene Creed (as is noted by the Latins Council.
Florent.. 6.) altered [ natum ex Patre (1.) ex Substantia Patris] into
[Consubstantialem Patri secundum Divinitatem, nobis autem secundum
humanitatem:] and added many other things, as appears in their Confession of
faith ( Sess. 5.) which Confession they conclude, and seal up, just after the
same manner, as the Ephesin Council before them did: -- Decrevit sancta atque
universalis haec Synodus aliam fidem nemini licere proferre, sive conscribere,
aut exponere, vel sentire. Sed eos, qui audent vel componere, vel tradere aliud
Symbolum volentibus se convertere, etc. si Episcopi sunt, alienos esse ab
Episcopatu, etc. si Laici, Anathematizari. 5ly. That both Leo Bishop of Rome,
and Flavianus, and Eusebius, being charged by the Eutychian faction, as
offending against this Decree of Ephesus, in their asserting as a part of their
Faith: Christum ex duabus, and in duabus simul naturis esse, an Article not
contained in the Nicene Creed, were cleared by the Council of Chalcedon, as not
guilty thereof, who (some of them probably the same, who sat in the Ephesin
Council; that being only twenty years before this) understood it in the sense
of the Latins, and urged the necessity of additions; as appears in the speech
of that Council to Flavianus the Emperor. See below, 183. n. 1.
6ly. Taken in such a sense, as to forbid to Councils not only the adding to
the Nicen Creed, but also the defining, any new thing in matter of faith, it is
(as was said before) not only null, by an equal authority reversing it in this
sense, but most irrational; since the like occasions of making such new
definitions may happen at any time after this Ephesin Council, as it did
before, and also in, it.

To ^
If the Grecians meant [imperfection] in respect of the express Confutation of
any error against faith, then both the authority of the Latin Church, and all
the reasons given above, may be produced against them; but if they mean
[imperfection] in respect of containing all Credends in respect of salvation
necessary to be explicitly known, its granted; that so is the Apostles Creed
not imperfect; yet were additions to it lawfully made by Nice.

See Conc. Florent. Sess. 1.
To g.
The Latins join [contrary] also to it, when they name [different,] and mean
only such difference, as is also contrary: as is clear every where by their
words, in that Synod Sess. 11. Julianus Cardinalis thus. -- Quae quidein verba
[(i. e) Concilii Ephesini] nos credimus hoc solum significare, ut fas sit
nulle, Nicaenorum Patrum fidei contrarium proferre Is the addition [filioque]
which Protestants justify, nothing diverse? then neither shall any other new
definitions of Councils be so?

To d.
Celestines words, which are spoken of the Apostles Creed, either do not
prohibit other Councils making some sort of additions; or do condemn Nice for
it. But see this testimony explained by the Latins ( Sess. 10.) that he meant
only, denying any thing, delivered in the Apostles Creed, or asserting or
adding any thing, contrary to it.

To conclude this matter:. 183. n. 1.
see the defense, which the Fathers of the fourth General Council, following
the Ephesin, made to Marcianus the Emperor, in the Conclusion of that Synod,
Allocut. ad Marcianum
concerning the necessity of making, from time to time, new Definitions, and
Additions, to explicate, and corroborate the former Faith, as new errors arise
to debilitate, or pervert it; returned in answer to the Eutychians, and others,
who, to obtain liberty to their own opinions, accused Leo's Epistle, and also
the Council, of Innovations in matters of Faith, after the Churches Doctrine
sufficiently established in the Nicen Creed. There -- Credentibus quident
(says the Council, apologizing for it self) sufficit, ad utilitatem, Fidei [
i. e Nicenae] in discussa [ i. e. without further consequences multiplied from
it] prospectio -- His autem, qui doctrinam rectam pervertere moliuntur, ad
singula, quae male pariunt, oportet occurrere; and eorum objectis propria
quaeque providere. Nam si omnes contenti, essent fidei [Nicenae] constituto
[which, indeed, may also be said of the Apostles Creed] and pietatis semitam
nulla innovatione turbarent, deceret Ecclesiae Filios [in Councils] nihil
amplius excogitare: Sed quia multi a recta linea per anfractus erroris
exorbitant, -- necesse nobis est, veritatis eos inventione convertere,
commentaque eorum devia salutaribus adjectionibus refutare; non, ut novum ad
pietatem (quasi fides desit) semper aliquid exquirentes: sed ut, contra ea,
quae ab illis innovata sunt, excogitantes, quae salubria judicantur. Thus that
Council apologizeth for its new Definitions. Where Excogitare, and veritatis
inventione, and the adversaries object ng to them Innovation, etc, show, that
Councils may define not only express Traditionals in matters of faith, but any
new conclusions, extracted from such Traditionals.

Neither seems it to be much material. 183. n. 2.
1. Whether the Definitions of latter Councils, when inserted into former
Creeds, be called explanations and Declarations of, or Additions to, the former
faith (which was a great contest between the Greek and the Latin Church in the
Council of Florence:) provided, they be only such things, as are granted to be
necessarily educed out of former Principles of faith. 2. Nor, 2ly, much matters
it, as to the assent, that ought to be yielded to them, when known to be the
Churches Definitions; whether they be not inserted into former Creeds; but
delivered apart. For an obligation we have to the one sort, as well as to the
other. For example: There is no less an obedience due to [ Maria (...) or, Dei
Genetrix: intimating the unity of Christ's person, though compounded of two
distinct Natures] defined by the third General Council, though not interposed
in the Creed; than to [one Baptism,] or, [Filioque] which were, so,
interposed. Only, it seems, that an Insertion into the Creed is purposely made
of those points of faith, which among the rest, are conceived more necessary
(not only, to be assented to, when known, but) to be explicitly known, by every
Christian; or in infected times, fit to be distinctly confessed by every
Catholic. Though yet so indifferent was this matter, as to principal points;
That Maria (...) which, the Greeks urged in the Council of Florence, Sess. 5.
that it was forborne to be added to the Nicen Creed by the Ephesin Fathers, yet
is found, in terms equivalent, to be put in the Athanasian Creed [Not two, but
one Christ by unity of Person:] and this allowed of by the Reformed: and,
again, found, in express terms, to be put, in the Definition of their Faith
(according to some Copies) made shortly after, by the Council of Chalcedon (See
Sess, 5.) where also, before the passing of this Definition, the Fathers cried
out against the Nestorians -- Ista fides Orthodoxorum. Sancta Maria (...)
scribatur -- In Symbolo sic addatur. Sess. 5.
As likewise afterward, found to be put, in express terms, in the Creed of the
fourth Toletan Council. The like may be said of [One Baptism for Remission of
sins] defined indeed against the Novatians by the Nicen Council, but by the
second General Council of Constantinople, first mentioned in the enlarged
Creed. The like of that clause [they that have done evil into everlasting fire]
omitted in the Constantinopolitan, but put in the Athanasian, Creed, perhaps
against the Origenists, who held the fire temporary; and, malos, post
purgationem malorum, regna Dei, lucique restituendos Austin de Hares.
Nay; In the now-receiv'd Apostles Creed it self there seems something to be
additional, inserted by latter times ( propter nonnullos Haereticos, says
Ruffinus, in Expositione Symboli) not found in the prime Copies thereof; at
least, not in those anciently used in the Roman Church, [as Descendit ad
inferos] and [vitam aeternam.] See the Authorities quoted by Archbishop Usher,
De Symbolo Apostolico vetere Romans Ecclesiae. This, in Explication of the much
mis-understood Ephesin Canon, urged as prohibiting, any future additions to the
Nicen Creed; or, the following ages enlarging the Articles of the former
Catholic Faith. Now to proceed.

Controversies, and Questions, started in this Council of Trent, yet, 4.
because they had not sufficient evidence in Scripture, or Tradition, to decide
them, were left unstated by it. For which see what has been said formerly,.
149. And great prudence, and care was used, that nothing should pass there,
from which any considerable number dissented. And Pallavicino observes, l. 12.
c. 1. n. 4.
out of several Registers of the Councils Acts, whereof he had the perusal,
that Soave, perhaps the more to trouble, and muddy the clearness of the
Catholic Doctrine, as it opposed that of the Innovators; or to show his own
Reading, in points, where there happens to be any difference among the
Schoolmen, does many times bring-in the skirmishing of the Theologs, one with
another, concerning them, when as, in Reality, there was no such contest
amongst them in the Council. Though, on the other side, this is not denied
several times to have happened: and perhaps some of the Disputants desirous,
that their own tenants might pass for the common Doctrine of the Church; but,
as I said, the Legates, and others, not engaged in such a quarrel, by their
great judgment composed such strifes, without giving in the Session, and the
Decree, the victory to either side; a moderation much complained of by the
Protestants, the Spectators, who from thence might have hoped some schism, and
the rise of a civil war in the Catholic Communion.

Lutherans broaching so many erroneous positions, and joining together the
tenants of so many several Sects that had been before them, innovating
something in every part of Divinity, caused the Council of Trent to multiply so
many Anathemas against them, and join together also the results of many former
Councils; This being the course observed in the Council; first, for some
selected persons to read the Lutheran writings on the subject in hand; and to
collect out of them the erroneous and noxious propositions; and then, for the
whole Council, when such propositions upon examination, were unanimously
disallowed, to anathematize (though some among these of much less malignity
than others) especially, all those errors, which were destitute of the
patronage of some reverend Father, or other writer, of the Church; for where
the Council found any such Patronage, they used them more gently, and
prosecuted them not with the like vehemence. And, seeing that, in the
proceeding against Sects, some former Councils were wont only to condemn the
Sect in general, and make mention only of the chief heads of their doctrine;
other Councils again, more punctual, descended to the condemning of all the
particulars; this latter way was rather taken by the Council of Trent, not
without mature consideration had in the beginning of the Council, concerning
it; which is related by Soave, p. 192. where he says, -- That one part
desired, that four, or six fundamental Articles of the new doctrine might be
chosen and condemned, -- following the example of the ancient Councils, which
having declared the principal Article, condemned the heresy, never descending
to particular propositions, but condemning [in general] the books of the
Heretics; That, in that universal, they comprehended all the pernicious
doctrine; and that the honor of the Council so required. But the other part
(says he) aimed to put under censure all the propositions, which might receive
a bad construction, that those [amongst them] might be condemned, which in
reason did deserve it; saying, that it was the office of a Pastor to discern
entirely the wholesome grass from the hurtful; and not to suffer the flock to
taste of this. And if the example of ancient Councils ought to be imitated they
should imitate * that of Ephesus, which made so many, and so famous,
anathematisms against the doctrine of Nestorius, that these did contain
whatsoever the heretic had said; * and the Councils of Africa, which
descended to the condemnation of all the propositions of the Sects [see Conc.
Milevitan. against the Pelagian doctrines: Conc. Gangrense: Syrmiense: 2.
Nicaen Act. 7 and lastly the Council of Constance, condemning forty five
propositions of Wickleff, and thirty of Jo. Huss.] the first opinion, did
undoubtedly propose a more easy way, and would have left a chink open for an
agreement, which future times might produce: yet the second was embraced, etc.
Thus Soave. As for the former way leaving a chink open for agreement, It may be
more easily credited, when we shall see an agreement advanced in those points,
handled in the 25th Session; where the Councils determinations are so brief,
and general, as the Council escaped not, for this generality also, the censure
of Soaves Chorus: p. 822.
as elsewhere it incurs their displeasure for mincing matters too much, and
making every thing, moved, an Article of Faith.

all the Canons in the Council of Trent, that have Anathema affixed (all which,
except a very few, See Sess. 4. and Sess. 5. c. 1.
run only in the form: -- Si quis dixeril (...) ^njoyn assent, under Anathema,
to the contradictory proposition, nor make it an Article of Faith necessary to
be believed, under the penalty of being reputed an Heretic, unless (says
Canus Com. leci. l. 5. c. 5.
) the decree, to which such Canon relates, bind to assent, with a -- Firma fide
credendum: -- Hoc est dogma fidei catholicae. -- Contrarium asserentes [or
tenentes] judicentur pro hareticis: Or some other equivalent expression; or
unless the Canon run, Si quis hoc senserit. And Cardinal Bellarmin says much
what the same De Council. l. 2. c. 12.
Quando autem Decretum proponatur tanquam de Fide, facile cognoscitur ex verbis
Concilii, Semper enim dicere solent, 1 se explicare fidem Catholicam: -- 2 vel,
(quod est communissimum) dicunt Anathema, and ab Ecclesia excludunt eos, qui
contrarium sentiunt. [But then, what, if it be only Anathema iis, qui
contrarium dicunt, or docent?] Quando autem nihil horum dicunt, non est certum,
rem esse de Fide Thus Bellarmin. For this Council does sometimes expressly
anathematize, or excommunicate, for teaching, or publicly defending, of some
error; or, for accusing the Church of error in her teaching the contrary; when
it does not anathematize the holding of such an error; An example of which *
see, Sess. 24. c. 7. -- Si quis dixerit Ecclesiam errare, cum docuit, and
docet, juxta Evangelicam, and Apostolicam doctrinam propter adulterium alterius
conjugum Matrimonti vinculum non posse dissolvi, etc. Anathema sit. Where the
Council anathematizeth those, who condemn the Church of erring in teaching such
a doctrine (as Luther did condemn the Church;) but does not anathematize those,
who hold the contrary doctrine; as the Greek Church does, to whom the Council
in this decree was favorable, in passing the Anathema not on the holding such
an error, but only on any ones censuring the Church of error, for holding
otherwise. Now one, who holds an opinion for truth, may be highly culpable in
accusing those, who hold the contrary, of error; either, because himself may be
mistaken in what he holds; or because he may be uncharitable, or also
disobedient, in divulging all that he knows. (I add this in respect of what
Soave objects, about this matter, p. 755. and 799.) See the like, can. 8. and
4. -- and Sess. 21. c. 2. * See likewise, Sess. 13. c. 11. where in respect
that some approved Writers, See Pallav. l. 12. c 2. n. 7. n. 12.
both ancient, and modern, (amongst whom Cajetan) had held, concerning
Sacerdotal Confession to precede Communion, the contrary tenent to that which
the Council approved, it does not anathematize, or excommunicate those, who
held the contrary doctrine, as Heretics; but excommunicates those, qui
contrarium docere, prudicare, vel pertinaciter assetere, seu etiam public
disputando defendere, praesumpserint [ i. e. for the future] is perturbers of
the Churches peace, as Canus, one present in the Council, observes. Com. loc.
l. 5. c. 5.


Canon about the canonical books of Scripture, Sess. 4. [Si quis pro sacris,
and canonicis non susceperit] being only expressed in this Canon, and
[parireverentia venerandis] omitted (which had some opposers) Pall. l. 6. c.
14. n. 3. (whilst of the three draughts that were proposed, See Soave, p. 155.
-- and Bishop Cousin. Hist. of Canon, c. 18.. 192.
every one had some maintainers) no person seems, under Anathema, to be any
further obliged, than only to hold these books sacred, and canonical: A thing
observed by Mr. Thorndike, de Ratione finiend. Controversias, c. 28. p. 565.
Neither yet is there any Injunction in this Council concerning the books called
Apocryphal, pari reverentia venerandos esse; but only this said: Synodus part
reverentia veneratur: which has not the Form of a Decree. Where also
parireverentia may be understood so, as that, whilst in some respect, it equals
these Apocryphal books, with some of the others, (as the Protestants call them)
generally held Canonical; as perhaps, with Esther, Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah.
Proverbs, Ecclesiasties, etc. yet does it not therefore, in every respect,
equal them with all; as namely Tobit, or, the book of Wisdom, with the five
Books of Moses; or the four Gospels. Some parts of the Canon being much more,
necessary, and dignified, than some others

And then; as for this expression, equalling at least those Books, called
Apocryphal with some Canonical forenamed, and its accepting them all, as
equally penned by the direction of the H. Spirit, I ask; What new Discerner of
Spirits will assume to himself so much skill, as clearly to discover the
language, and character, of the Spirit in the one sort of these Books, that is
not in the other. For Example in Proverbs, or Ecclesiastes, that is not in
Ecclesiastions: Especially; 1. When as, the Churches ancient reading them all
promiscuously in her public service for the Instruction of her children,
shows; that she held the doctrine of them all sound. 2. And, again, when as, in
those Books, which all sides allow canonical, yet the II. Spirit pens them in
so many various and unlike styles; and some of these much more rude and
unpolished, than others; and speaks sometimes in a much higher, sometimes in a
much lower, key; as if it condescended to receive a mixture with, or tincture
from, the natural parts, and Elocution of its Scribe: and, only the Truth being
entirely preserved, admitted also sometimes his Infirmities as to Language,
Method, Perspicuity, etc. In which Canon also, some of the Historical books
(though preserved from error) seem not penned from immedint Divine Revelation,
so, as the Prophetical; but, by using such humane industry, and diligence, as
other Histories are compiled with. For which, see St. Lukes Preface to his
Gospel. 3. And lastly, when, as there are some seeming Antilogies, and
incongruities produced in the one sort of these books, called Apocryphal; so
are there others, as many, as great, urged, in those received by all for
canonical; especially, in the Historical.

Cousin (writing so large a Treatise on this subject,) Where he says c. 7.. 81.
-- That this Council commanded all the Books recited in their Canon to be
equally accepted, and taken with the self same veneration, as having all a like
absolute, and divine authority annexed to them, without preferring one before
another: and damned all the Churches of the world besides, that will not, thus,
receive that Canon [of Scripture] upon their own terms. Quoting in the same
place, for justifying this charge, these words, as the words of the Council. --
Council. Trid. Sess. 4. -- Omnes libros pari pietatis affectu, reverentia, and
veneratione, pro Canonicis, receperit. -- Ibid. Si quis autem non susceperit,
etc. Anathema sit; whereas there are no such words, in the Council, so put
together. -- Si quis non susceperit, or, receperit, omnes [hos] libros pari
pietatis affectu reverentia, and veneratione, pro canonicis, Anathema sit
[which words will only serve the design of his Book;] But only these words
there used with relation to Anathema, -- Si quis hos libros integros, etc. pro
sacris and canonicis non susceperit, Anathema sit. And I hope in this Decree,
(as to any words or expressions used therein) stiling them only Sacri and
Canonici, the Council proceeds no further in affirming any thing concerning
them, than, the Bishop will concede, the Affrican Council, Conc. Carthag. 3. c.
47.
Innocentius, Austin, and other Fathers, to have done: and than himself also in
a large sense will acknowledge them to be. For, he, in giving answer to the
Fathers,. 82. writes thus of them. -- In a large and common sense, as they be
books appointed to be read in the Church for the more ample direction, and
instruction of the people, etc. -- ( in which sense that Council [viz. of
Carthage] took them) or, as they are to be preferred before all other
Ecclesiastical Books ( in which sense St. Austin took them) and as they are
opposed to suppositions, Apocryphal and rejected Books ( in which sense both
St. Austin. and this Council, besides diverse others of the Fathers, took them)
all these ways they may be called Canonical. Thus he. And then, for the sense
of these words; since he also advances thus far toward the Councils, pari
pietatis affectu, ac reverentia suscipit, as to acknowledge -- these books to
have been [as read in the Church, like as other parts of Scripture, so] cited,
and termed by sundry of the Fathers, Sacred, and Divine, and Holy Scriptures,
and Prophetical writings, Ibid.. 77.
(Epithites common to these with other Scriptures) Why may not these infer
also, in a large and common sense, a parity; If the Bishop will be pleased to
mollify the Councils expressions so, as he does those Fathers? By which
Tradition and testimony of the Fathers [ Orthodoxorum Patrum exempla secuta
Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. Decret. de ca^e^ script.
] the Council, as it says, was guided in making this Decree.

A 2d. inadvertency of the same Reverend Bishop seems to be, See in him,. 194.
of the small, and inconsiderable number [which that Council had] to give a
suffrage to this their Synodical Decree: and that forty Bishops of Italy,
assisted, peradventure, with half a score others should make up a General
Council for all Christendom, etc. Whilst he takes no notice, * that by how few
soever this Decree was passed at the first, yet it was afterward, by the great
Body of this Council under Pius, confirmed, and ratified; and this Ratification
again by the most of Christian Churches accepted: of which see before,. 72, 75,
77. And again, * That not one Book more was voted sacred and canonical by these
Fathers in Trent, than had been voted before, as high as St. Austins times, by
the third Council of Carthage: to which St. Austin, amongst others, subscribed;
and, than were, in those times also, generally received for such, in the
Western Church; and lastly, * that, as several of these books are declared
Canonical by this Council after some doubt, formerly, had concerning them, so
are others not only declared Canonical by Protestants, but as fully believed as
the rest, and in every respect equalled with them, as the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of St. James, the second of St. Peter, the second and
third of S. John, the Apocalypse, which were formerly, viz. till fourth age,
See Chemnie, Exam. conc. Trid. 4. Sess.
subject to the like disputes: De viris illustribus in Jacobo.
and, as St. Jerome De viris illustribus in Jacobo.
says of one of them, -- Paulatim, procedente tempore authoritatem
obtinuerunt. Paulatim, viz. as the conformity of these books with the rest of
the Canon, and the slightness of the objections made against them, and the
former Tradition, was clearlier discovered, after the vanishing of those Sects,
that chiefly opposed them. As therefore several pieces of the new Testament,
once disputed, have since been declared, and generally received into, the
Canon, so may those pieces of the old Testament be, by the following Christian
Church, admitted for such, though formerly rejected by the Jewish. For though
the Churches Declaration in these matters always depends on Tradition, yet,
not on the (...) ^^^dition, enemies to any writings that favor Christianity
(as these Books, we speak of here, do; and so let them shut up the Canon of
their Books prophetical, strictly so taken, where, and when they please; but,
on that Tradition and testimony, which the primitive times received from the
Apostles (who had the gift of discerning spirits) concerning their Books: nor
need we, for any Scripture, ascend higher than Tradition Apostolical. In which
Apostles times Mr. Thorndike ( de ration. finiend. Controvers. p. 545. 546.)
grants, that the Greek copies of these books were read and perused together
with the rest of the old Testament-Canon, and were alluded to in several
passages of the Apostles writings; some of which he there quotes: and so were
delivered by them, with the rest of the Canon, to posterity. -- Eas Apostolis
lectas, and ad eas allusum ab Apostolis, non est, cur dubium sit, p. 545. And
-- Non potest dubium videri, Hellenistarum codicibus scripturas, de quibus nunc
disputamus, contineri solitas fuisse; Adeo ab ipsis Apostolis (quos eis usos
fuisse, posita jam sunt, quae argumento esse debeant) certatim eas scriptores
ecclesiae, Scripturarum nomine appellant. And, Ibid. p. 561. he grants of these
Books. -- Quod, probati Apostolis and Ecclesiae, ab initio legerentur, propter
doctrinam, Prophetarum successione acceptam, non Pharisaeorum (...) in novatam.
Thus He. And, Ruffinus, in his second Invective Apud Hieron. ^om. 9.
proving the canonicalness and verity of some Books called Apocrppha, the
History of Susanna, and Hymn of the three children, from the Apostles
delivering them to the Church, against St. Jerome as one, after almost four
hundred years, denying this, and Judaizing in his opinion, St. Jerome, in his
latter days ( impar invidiae, quam sibi conflare Ruffinum videbat; as Mr.
Thorndike will have it Ibid. p. 561
) returned this answer, Apolog. 2. -- Quod autem refero, quid adversum Susannae
historiam, and Hymnum trium puerorum, and Belis Draconis fabulas, quae in
volumine Hebraico non habentur, Hebraeias soleant dicere, qui me criminatur
stultum se sycophantam probat: Non enim, quid ipse sentirem, sed quid illi
contra nos dicere soleant, explicavi. And see something said by this Father to
the same purpose (opposing the Churches judgment to that of the Jews) in his
Preface to Tobit. -- Librum utiq: Tobiae Hebraei de Catalogo divinarum
scripturarum secantes, his, quae Hagiographa [or Apocrypha, if you will]
memorant, manciparunt. Feci satis desiderio vestro (in transtating it) non
tamen meo studio. Arguunt enim nos Hebraeorum studia, and imputant nobis contra
suum (he says not, nostrum) Canonem, latinis auribus ista transfer. Sed
melius esse judicans Pharisaeorum displicere judicio, and Episcoporum
jussionibus deservire, institi, ut potui, etc. And, again, in his preface to
Judith. -- Apud Hebraeos liber Judith inter Hagiographa (or if you will
Apocrypha) legitur, etc. -- Sed quia, hunc librum Synodus Nicena in numero S.
Scripturarum, legitur, computasse, acquievi postulationi vestrae, etc. To all
these I grant Bishop Cousin makes replies; See p. 81. etc.
but I think such, as will appear to the Reader; that well weighs them,
unsatisfactory, as to the making St. Jerome constantly maintain, all these Books
to be in the same manner excluded from the Canon by the Church, as they were by
the Jews.

Anathema joined to their Decree, and from Pius his declaration, touching the
new Creed he imposed; -- Haec est Fides, extra quam non est salus, the Bishop
argues often, See in him,. 198.
-- That this Decree is made by this Council no less a necessary Article of the
Christian Faith, than that God is the Creator of Heaven, and Earth; or, that
Christ was born of the Blessed Virgin, etc. Contrary to which see what is said
below,. 192, and 194. etc.

rule given by St. Austin, De Doctr. Christ. l. 1 c. 8.
for knowing what books are by us to be held Canonical, set down in his Sect.
81. viz. -- In Canonicis Scripturis Ecclesiarum Catholicarum quamplurium [but
the Bishop sets it down, quamplurimum] authoritatem sequatur. Which Rule the
Bishop seems there to approve, and commend, and yet, since this Rule is no
more proper, or applicable, to the Churches Authority, or Guidance of its
Subjects, in S. Austins age, than in any other, precedent, or subsequent; from
hence it will follow, that the Bishop is to receive these Books now as
Canonical, because they are by the most, and most dignified Churches of God,
received as such; and he knows, that no book is therefore justly excluded from
the Canon, because it has been sometimes heretofore doubted of. Excuse this
digression, by which perhaps you may perceive, that this Bishop had no just
cause to raise so great a quarrel, against so great a Council, out of this
matter.]

contrary to such Propositions, the maintainers whereof are Anathematized, 7.
as Heretics, is not hereby made by the Council an Article of Faith in such a
sense, 1 As if it were made a Divine Truth, or a matter, or object, of our
Faith; or the contrary Doctrine to it, made against Faith, or the matter of
Heresy, now, which was not so formerly. 2 Or, as if such Divine Truth were not
also revealed, and declared to be so formerly, either in the same Expression,
and conclusion, or in its necessary Principles. 3 Or, as if any such thing were
now necessary explicitly to be known, or believed absolutely, Ratione Medii,
for attaining Salvation, which was not so formerly: 4 Or yet, as if there might
not be such a sufficient proposal made to us of such Point formerly, as that,
from this, we had then an obligation to believe it:

5 Or yet, as if the ignorance of such point, before the Definition of a
Council, might not be some loss in order to our salvation, and this our
ignorance of it, then also, culpable. But, That such Point is made, by the
Councils defining it, an Article; or object of our Faith, now necessary to be
believed in some degree of necessity (wherein it was not before) by reason of a
more Evident proposal thereof, when the Council (whose judgment we are bound to
believe, and submit to) declares it a Divine Truth; or also now first delivers
that point of faith more expressly in the Conclusion, which was before involved,
and known only to the Christian World, in its Principles. By which evident
Definition of the Council (though the Doctrine opposing such point of faith was
before Heretical, or matter of Heresy, yet) the maintainer thereof now first
by his pertinacy against the Churches Authority, begins to be an Heretic See
Disc. 3.. 18.
And though the ignorance of such point of faith before might bring some damage
as to our salvation, yet now does it more, when a contrary error begins to
corrupt our practice. I say, such Point begins to be necessary, in a new Degree
of necessity, to be believed or assented to; or, not to be dissented from, or
denied; or, not the contrary of it to be believed, so soon, as we have had a
sufficient proposal of the Councils defining it. And necessary it is then to be
believed, not out of an obligation, or duty of belief we owe to such a Credend,
as that, without believing it, we cannot attain salvation; but out of the duty
of obedience we owe to the Church, when defining it, as that, without yielding
this obedience to Her, we become guilty of such a sin, as, unrepented of, ruins
salvation. Especially, when as this our Holy Mother does not enjoin to us the
belief of such a Divine Truth, but upon some considerable Motive: for the
repelling and suppressing of some error, that is, (less, or more) dangerous;
and for the preservation of some part of necessary truth, or good life.
Concerning which Proposals, the Churches pronouncing Anathema to the
non-Submitters seems secured as by ancient practice, so by our Lord's order,
Matt. 18, 17. He that will not hear the Church, let him be to us as an Heathen;
though, otherwise, the pure nescience of such a Doctrine, abstracting from such
Proposal, harms no man, as to exclusion from salvation, any more after the
Churches Definition; than, before it. See what has been said of this matter in
the third Disc.. 18. -- and 85. n. 6.

Article of Faith, as to a more universal Proposal of it, and general
obligation to believe it so sufficiently proposed, may be said new: and then,
in respect of this new Declaration, and Obligation, a Divine Truth may be an
Article, or object of my Faith, to day, which was not yesterday: So he, who,
(by what means so ever) knows now, that something is said in Scripture, which
he knew not yesterday, may be said to have to day a new Article of his Faith;
or a new point, no way to be opposed, or condemn but assented to, and
believed, by him.

1 When, therefore, a thing is said to be no Dogma Fidei before, and at such a
time to begin to be so, the meaning is,; either, that in such express terms it
is so now, as it was not formerly (by some fuller explication, or new
Deduction:) Or, that it is now rendered necessary to be believed by all persons,
by whom it was not so formerly, for want, then, of so evident a proposal. 2
Again, when a Point is said thus to be rendered by the Definition of a Council
necessary to be believed, which was not so formerly: It is meant; necessary to
be believed; not, for the matter thereof. Either, 1st, As if the actual
knowledge, and faith thereof were absolutely necessary to salvation, at all; or
now, more then formerly. For thus a few points only (some think, not all those
of the Apostles Creed) are necessary; and nothing is, thus, necessary at any
time, that is not so always. Or, 2ly, As if the actual knowledge thereof is
beneficial to our salvation now, and was not so at all formerly. For, as it is
now perhaps beneficial in more respects; so, in some respects, was it always;
and therefore if we knew it not before, so much imperfection there was then in
our faith, as to something revealed; though, not a deficiency thereof in
absolutely necessaries. But, necessary to be believed now more, than formerly,
ex accidenti; because, 1st, we have a sufficient Proposal thereof, by the
Church-Definition, now, that it is a divine Truth: which Proposal perhaps we
had not before in so express terms, and so universally discovered by the former
Tradition: and, 2ly. Because we have also a sufficient proposal, or notice,
that such a Definition has been made by the Church. And so, in not believing
it, we are now defective in our obedience, and acceptance of some divine Truth,
which is made known to us by the Church, as some way profitable to our
salvation; some way advangious to God's Glory; some way conducible to Christian
Edification, to the peace of the Church, and suppression of Heresy, or, to
some other good end. By whose Definitions from time to time the Rule of our
faith is made still more complete, and conspicuous, both as to the registring,
and solemn inrolling of her former Traditions: and as to the express knowledge
of several Consequences necessarily issuing from the former Principles of the
Christian Belief: more complete, I say, to the end of the world, as to several
points, in some respect, or other, beneficial to be known: Though, from the
first, the Christian Faith was ever perfect, as to any knowledge simply
necessary; or also, as to all that were fundamentally useful. And therefore the
chief Duty, that the Church now requires to many of her Decisions made from
time to time, as counter-works against Heretics, and extracted always out of
the former Materials of Original Traditions, is not so much an actual knowing
of them for every Christian (though this also-she desires, as esteeming the
knowledge of them some way contributing to Christian perfection;) but, that
they be not dissented from, or opposed, when made known to him; and that the
Contradictory of them be not believed by Him.

profession of the Roman faith required in the Bull of Pius, wherein are said
to be 12. new Articles added to the Apostolical: I wonder why they say not 12.
score, or a 1200. rather, for if it adds any, it adds omnia a S. Tridentina
Synodo. and ab Oecumenicis Conciliis, and a sacris Canonibus tradita, definita
and declarata, as it runs in the same Bull, though it expresses only some few
of them.

Trent gave concerning this Profession of Faith, was; -- Sess 24. de Refor.
cap. 12. -- Provisi etiam de beneficiis, teneantur Orthodoxae suae fidei,
publicam facere professionem; and in Romanae Ecclesiae Obedientia se
permansuros spondeant. So that, Haec est Catholica fides, extra quam nemo
salvus, is a Declaration of the Pope, not of the Council; not can it have any
more authority, than other Papal Decrees.

Canons of the Councils do bind; yet it concerns not any persons, save those
who enter into religious Orders, or into some Ecclesiastical Benefice, as
appears in the Preface.

3. These persons are not therein obliged to believe the Articles,. 195. n. 1^.
or Canons of Trent, or, of other Councils in any other sense, 3.
than that, which we have but now mentioned.. 192.
For that Clause in the Bull which follows the whole profession. -- Haec vera
Catholica fides, extra quam-nemo salvus esse potest, cannot be understood
distributively, in such a manner, as if every Canon of every lawful Council is
necessary explicitly to be known, and assented to, that any one may attain
Salvation; which few Roman Doctors will affirm of all the Articles of the
Apostles Creed; much less do they say it of every point whatever of their
faith. (See Bellarmin de Ecclesia l. 3. c. 14. -- Multa sunt de fide, quae non
sunt absolute necessaria ad salutem; I add, nor yet is the ignorance or
mistaking in some of them such an error, ex quo magnum aliquod malum oriatur.)
But either * it is to be understood collectively, In hac Professione continetur
vera Catholica Fides, etc. that all the fides, extra quam nemo salvus, is
contained in that profession: (which expression respects chiefly the Apostles,
or Nicen, Creed, set in the front of the profession; as appears by a like
expression [Fundamentum firmum and unicum] applied to that Creed alone, in
Conc. Trident. 3d. Sess.) For, if only some part of that profession of faith,
which is made in that Bull, be absolutely necessary to attaining Salvation,
this phrase is sufficiently justified, extra quam [ i. e. totam, i. e. if all
parts of it be disbelieved] non est salus. As saying; [that the Holy Scriptures
are the word of God, without believing which there is no Salvation,] argues
not, that every thing delivered in these Scriptures, is necessary to be
believed for Salvation, but that some things are. Or, * It is to be understood
distributively, but this conditionally; in such a sense, as, extra quam nemo
salvus esse potest. i. e. if such person opposes, or denies assent to, any
point therein, when sufficiently evidenced to him to be a Definition of the
Church infallibly assisted, and appointed his Guide in Divine Truths. See before
For in so doing, though the error should be in a smaller matter of faith,
mortal sin: which unrepented of, exlcudes from Salvation. Where also, since the
Church makes Definitions in points absolutely necessary; hence though all her
Definitions are not in such, yet his obstinacy, in not yielding assent to all
matters defined, runs a hazard of failing in something necessary.

[And well may Protestants admit such a sense of these words in Pius his Bull,
195. n. 2
when themselves make use of a much larger upon the like words in the
Athanasian Creed: [Haec est Fides Catholica, quam nisi quisque fideliter
crediderit, salvus esse non poterit.] which words being urged by a Catholic
against Archbishop Lawd to show: That some Points may become necessary, for
salvation, to be believed, when once defined by the Church, that yet are not
absolutely so necessary, or fundamental, according to the Importance of the
matter: All the points contained in the Creed being not held in this latter
sense so fundamental, or necessary, ratione Medii, to Salvation, that none can
possibly attain it without an explicit belief of them: Here a late Protestant
Writer, Stillingf. p. 70, 71.
in answer to this, can find out a sense of those words yet more remiss, than
that we have now given, viz. That, as to some of the Athanasian Articles, [
Haec est fides Cathol. etc.] neither infers, that they are necessary to be
believed from the matter; nor yet from Church-Definition: but necessary only,
if there be first a clear conviction ( i. e. not from Church Authority, but
from Scripture) that they are Divine Revelation. Where the authority of the
Church, in defining these matters of the Athanasian Creed, as to any obligation
of her Subjects to conform to it, seems quite laid aside: since upon a clear
conviction, that those Articles are Divine Revelation, from whatever Proponent,
one stands obliged to believe them; and, without such conviction, neither
stands he so obliged by the Church. Upon which account the Socinian is freed
here by his exposition, from the -- Quam nisi quisque fideliter, etc. because
he is not yet convinced of the Truth of this faith by Scripture. Since
Protestants, then, take such liberty in expounding the sense of this conclusion
of the Athanasian Articles, it is but reason, that they should allow the same
to the same words used by Pius.]

Pius should be taken in such a sense, as Protestants fetter them with: Namely,
4.
-- That the Roman Church hereby obtrudes her new-coined Articles, as
absolutely necessary to salvation: As Bishop Bramhal. Rep. to Chalced. p. 322.
Which, whether true or false, one is to swear to, as much as to his Creed: As
Mr. Thorndike. Epilog. Conclus. p. 410.
That, whereas the Church of England only excommunicates such, as shall affirm,
that her Articles are in any part erroneous, the saine Church never declaring,
that every one of her Articles are fundamental in the Faith, by the Church of
Rome every one of them, if that Church has once determined them, is made
fundamental, and that in every part of it, to all men's belief: As Bishop Laud;.
15. p. 51.
That supposing the Churches Definition [one passed] that thing so propounded
becomes as necessary to salvation [ i. e. by this Proposal, or Definition] as
what is necessary from the matter; And -- That an equal explicit faith is
required to the Definitions of the Church, as to the Articles of the Creed: and
that there is an equal necessity, in order to salvation, of believing both of
them: As Mr. Stillingf. Rat. Account, p. 48.
If, I say, Pius his [Haec, est Bides Catholica] must be taken in such a sense:
and then, it be considered also; that, by the Bull, this clause is applied not
only to the Articles expressly mentioned in it, but to all other Definitions
also of all other former allowed Councils, the Consequent is; that in this Bull
the Pope has excluded from salvation, and that for want of necessary faith,
the far greater part not only of Christians, but of Roman Catholics; viz. all,
that do not explicitly believe, and therefore, that do not actually know, every
particular Definition of any precedent Council; when as, who is there among the
vulgar, that is not ignorant of the most of them? who amongst the learned, that
knows them all? Now the very absurdity of such a Tenent might make them suspect
the integrity of their comment on those words; and, that they only declaim
against their own Fancies. When as indeed; to render any Point, after defined,
necessary explicitly to be believed, not only, this one condition, of the
Churches having defined them, is required (for none is obliged necessarily to
believe explicitly, whatever the Church has defined) but a second also, of a
sufficient proposal, made to us, of the Churches having defined them. And then
indeed, so many Articles are necessary to be explicitly believed, as to the
doing of our duty in order to our salvation, but not all of them necessary to
be believed, as to acquiring some knowledge necessary to our salvation, without
which knowledge it could not be had, as that of some of the Articles of the
Creed is. See what has been already said of this whole matter much what to
this purpose, in Disc. 3.. 85. n. 4. etc.

Points, or Articles of Faith necessary to our Salvation to be believed; or,
extra quae credita nemo salvus, in a tripple sense. 1. Some necessary ratione
Medii: few of the many Articles of our Christian Faith. ratione praecepti:
which are necessary to be believed, only conditionally: And they are of two
sorts* 1. Either such, which I am not only obliged to believe, when known to me
to be Divine Truths, but the knowledge also of which, as Articles of high
concernment, I am bound, according to the different quality of my condition to
seek after, wherein my ignorance and neglect, when by using a due diligence I
might have known them, being thus in an high degree culpable, does, unrepented
of, destroy my salvation. Such are some other chief Principles of Religion and
Piety, the ten Commandments, and some Sacraments, etc. delivered in the common
Creeds, and Catechisms; such as are not absolutely necessary, ratione Medii.

such, as though I am not obliged to such, a diligent search of them, as of the
former, yet a belief of them I am to embrace so often, as these two things
precede* 1st. that they are defined by my spiritual Guides to be Divine
Revelation, etc, 2ly. that this Definition is sufficiently evidenced to me.
Where, though not my mere ignorance in such Points, yet my denial or dis-belief
of them thus proposed, is to be judged wilful, and obstinate; and this,
unrepented of, destroys my salvation.

most, or chiefest of the Protestant Controversies, defined, 8.
or made, de Fide, in the Council of Trent (to repeat here what has been said
formerly in the first Disc.. 50.) were made so by sormer Councils of equal
obligation: or also were contained in the public Liturgies of the Church
Catholic, -- As: The law, fullness of communion in one kind, declared in the
Council of Constance. Canon of Scripture; Purgatory; seven Sacraments, the
Popes Supremacy, in the Council of Florence. Auricular Confession;
Transubstantiation; in the Council Lateran, Veneration of Images, in second
Nicene Council. -- Adoration of Christ's Body and Blood as present in the
Eucharist, in the Council of Frankfort (if Capitulate Caroli may be taken to
deliver the sense of that Council. See Capitulare. l. 2. c. 5. -- c. 27.
) Veneration of the Cross, Ib. l. 4. c. 16.
and of Relics, Ib. l. 3. c. 24.
in the same Council [only this Council condemned the Adoration of Images in
such a sense, as they mistook the second Council of Nice to have allowed it See
Capitulare prefat. -- Dr. Hamn^ond o Idol, 57. -- Thornd. Epilog. l. 3. p. 363.
] Monnastick vows; Celibacy of Clergy, sufficiently authorized in the four
first General Councils. Invocation of Saints, Prayer for the Dead, Sacrifice of
the Mass; and many other, apparent in the public Liturgies of the Church,
preceding the Council of Trent, and unaltered for many ages (Protestants being
Judges.) Now the Church obliges her Subjects to believe all those things
lawful, which in her Liturgies, she obliges them to practice: And, why was
there made a departure from the Church for these points, before the Council of
Trent, if the Church before made them not, de Fide, or if the Council of Trent,
or Pius the 4th, were first faulty, herein? But if Councils, before Trent, have
defined such things, then by these first were all hopes of peace, except by
yielding to their Decrees, cut off, and not by Trent; because these Councils
are by the Roman Church accepted, and held obligatory, as well as that of
Trent. And here I may repeat those words of Bishop Bramhal (recited in Disc.
1.. 52.) in answer to the Bishop of Chalcedon, who urged the separation of
Protestants from the Church, long before the Grievances of Trent, or Pius. --
These very Points (says he p. 263.
) which Pius the Fourth comprehended in a new Symbol, or Creed, were obtruded
on us before by his Predecessors [ i. e. then, when Luther and his Followers
forsook the Church] as necessary Articles of the Roman Faith; and required, as
necessary Articles of their Communion: -- This is the only difference, that
Pius 4. dealt in gross, his Predecessors by retail. They fashioned the several
rods, and be bound them up into a bundle. They fashioned the rods, i. e. in the
Synods held in the Church, before Luthers appearance. For these Rods only
require submittance, as being necessary Articles of her Communion; and such are
only the Definitions of her Councils.

Consid. That the Protestants, who accuse, seem as guilty in making new
definitions in matters of faith, and enjoining them to be believed, or
assented, and subscribed to, 9.
by those of their Communion, as the Council of Trent, or Roman Church, that is
here taxed for it. For, as the one is said to make new affirmatives in
Religion, so the other, new Negatives; all, or most of which (as has been
showed in the 3d. Disc. c. 7.. 85 n. 2.
) are implicitly new affirmatives. Neither can the Church of Rome be more
justly questioned in her not leaving points in universals only, Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, Invocation, etc. than the Reformed, and particularly those
of the English Church for new-stating the contrary to these. 1. Who (as has
been showed, Disc. c. 7.. 85. n. 3.
) 1. do not suspend their judgment concerning those new points, which, they
say, the Roman Church presumes to determine, but do, in the main Articles
handled in the Council of Trent, as peremptorily state the one side, as the
Roman Church, the other: and, as to several points, the reformed also were the
first, I mean in comparison of the Council of Trent, in determining them; and
condemning the doctrines and practices of the other side. So (to say nothing
here of the Augustan Confession, composed many years before the sitting of this
Council, and condemning most of the points; which this justifies) the Sacrifice
of the Mass, Communion in one kind, Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images,
Purgatory, Indulgences, and some others were condemned and declared to be
against Gods Word by the Articles of the Church of England many years, before
the same were either imposed to be sworn to by Pius, or defended, and justified
by the Articles of Trent; the one done in 1549. liberty to their Subjects to
hold the Roman tenants, as the Roman Church does, to hold theirs. For as the
Roman Church does Anathematize those, who affirm the contrary to her Articles,
to be true, so does the Church of England, in the Synod held under King James,
1603. can. 5. excommunicate those, that affirm any of her Articles to be
erroneous: And for this Churches requiring also not only an external
non-contradiction, but internal assent, I desire you to weight the proofs
produced in the 3d. Disc. c. 7. wither, 83. n. 1.
to avoid Repetitions, I remit you.

And, if we look into the Protestant Churches abroad, we find the National
Synod of Dort, assembled, A. D. 1618. touching some differences among their
Divines in those high, and dark points of Divine Predestination; Cooperation
of Grace, and Freewill, etc. where were present also some Divines sent from all
the other Protestant-Churches following the Doctrine of Calvin (except the
French) We find it, I say, in those five Points, * to have passed, partly in
asserting Truths, partly in condemning errors, no less than 91. Articles, or
Canons. (What might their Canons have amounted to; had they discussed so many
Points of Controversy, as that of Trent did?) And then, * to enjoin all the
Pastors their Subjects the teaching to the people of these Truths [and
therefore the believing of them;] and * to excommunicate all those holding the
contrary, as corrupters of the Truth, till they shall give satisfaction to the
Church, in professing the true Doctrines. The words of the Synod, Sess. 138.
are these. -- Synodus haec Dordrechtana, pro authoritate, quam ex Dei verbo in
omnia Ecclesiarum suarum membra obtinet in Christi nomine injungit omnibus, and
singulis in Faederato Belgio Ecclesiarm Pastoribus, etc. ut banc sacram
veritatis salutaris doctrinam [ viz. that delivered in the 91. Articles
concerning the five Points in Controversie] sinceram and inviolatam,
conservent; illam populo and juventuti fideliter proponant, and explicent, etc.
[which public teaching of them, required, includes assent to them.] Then
against the Remonstrants pronounces thus -- Synodus, suae Authoritatis ex
verbo Dei probe conscia, omnium legitimarum tum veterum, tum recentiorum,
Synodorum vestigiis insistens, declarat, atque judicat, Pastores illos, etc.
[the Remonstrant Ministers] corruptae Religionis, and scissae Ecclesiae
unitatis reos teneri. Quas ob causas, Synodus praedictis, omni ecclesiastico
munere, interdicit, eisque ab officiis suis abdicat, donec per seriam
resipiscentiam, dictis, factis, studiis contrariis, comprobatam, ecclesiae
satisfaciant, atque ad ejus communionem recipiantur. Then orders, -- Vt Synodi
Provinciales neminem ad sacrum Ministerium admittant, qui doctrinae, hisce
Synodicis constitutionibus declaratae, subscribere, eamque docere, recuset.

difference there is between these two Churches: That the one requires assent
to her Articles, telling her Subjects, that in necessaries she cannot err: the
other requires assent, declaring to her followers that she may err, even in
points Necessary: The one requires assent in obedience to her Authority,
delegated to her by our Lord: the other seems to require assent only from the
Evidence (in Scripture, or otherwise) of the matter proposed, Therefore so many
of her Subjects, as see not such Evidence, in equity, me thinks, should be
freed from her exacting their assent. And then, such obligation to assent would
fail of its end, expressed before her Articles, viz. -- the hindering diversity
of Opinions, and the establishing of consent touching true Religion.

offense, either this strict Profession of Faith summed up by Pius, 10.
or Anathemas multiplied by the Council of Trent, may have given to the
Reformed; yet neither the one, nor the other, can justly be charged to have
given occasion to their discession, and rent from the former Catholic Church.
Which Division, and (as I have showed. 200.
) their Censure also of the Roman Doctrines, preceded both the times of Pius,
and the sitting of this Council: and, on the contrary, their Departure, and
such Censure, first occasioned the Churches standing upon her Defense, and the
setting up these new- fences and Bars, for preservation of her ancient Doctrine
invaded by them, and for hindering her sheep from straggling out of her fold,
and harkening after the voice of Strangers.

CHAP. XII.
V. Head. Of the Decrees of this Council concerning Reformation.
1. In matters, concerning the Pope and Court of Rome.. 207. 1. Appeals,. 212.
and Dispensations,. 215. 2. Collation of Benefices,. 218. 3. Pensions. 218
Commenda's,. 219. and uniting of Benefices, 220. 4. Exemptions,. 221. 5. Abuses
concerning Indulgences, and Charities given to Pious uses,. 223.

2. In matters concerning the Clergy.. 209. 1. Unfit persons many times
admitted into H. Orders, and Benefices,. 225. 2. Pluralities,. 232. 3. Non,
Residence,. 235. 4 Neglect of Preaching and Catechizing,. 236. And the Divine
Service not in the vulgar tongue,. 236. n. 2. 5. Their restraint from Marriage;
and Incontinency in Celibacy,. 238, 239. 6. Their withholding from the people
the Communion of the Cup,. 241. 7. Too frequent use of Excommunication,. 243.
n. 1. 8. The many disorders in Regulars and Monasticks,. 243. n. 2. 9. Several
defects in the Missals and Breviaries,. 243. n. 3.

multitude of the Canons, Definitions, and Anathemas, of this Council, in
points of Doctrine. The fifth succeeds; touching the Acts for Reformation of
several corruptions, and disorders in the Churches Government, and Discipline;
which was so much petitioned for by Christian Princes; and also, from its first
sitting, undertaken by this Council; But, with such a contrary, and unexpected
issue ( says Soave l. 1. p. 2.
) That this Council, being managed by Princes for Reformation of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, has caused the greatest Deformation, that ever was since
Christianity did begin; and, hoped for by the Bishops to regain the Episcopal
Authority, usurped for the most part by the Pope, has made them lose it
altogether, bringing them into greater servitude; on the contrary, feared and
avoided by the Sea of Rome, as a potent means to moderat the exorbitant power,
mounted from small beginnings, by diverse degrees, unto an unlimited excess, it
has so established, and confirmed the same over that part, which remains
subject unto it, that it was never so great, nor so soundly rooted. Thus he. To
which may be added the like passage in Mr. Stillingfleet, Rat. Account, p. 480.
I suppose, from this Historians Detractions too confidently followed, who
tells his Readers, -- That the Pope was still in a bodily Fear, till the
Council was ended to his mind; But then, what rejoicing, that they had cheated
the world so, that that which was intended to clip the wings of the Court of
Rome, had confirmed, and advanced the Interest of it!

Soave, in the latter end of his History, to make appear, how untruly these
things are said, in the beginning. For, after the Council now ended, and a
Confirmation desired from the Pope of these its acts, the authority of Bishops
was found to be so much enlarged by the Council; and the former exercise of the
Popes Authority (though all done with a Salva authoritate Apostolica sedis) so
much pared; the privileges of the Cardinals, and gains of the Court of Rome,
by the restraints of Appeals, of Dispensations, of Pluralities, of
Non-Residence, Exemptions; Pensions, Elections, etc. so much diminished, that
the Pope, (though of himself much inclined to a General Confirmation,) with his
Cardinals, and Court, is related by Soave, to have, long time, deliberated:
whether the Articles of Faith only should be accepted, and confirmed; and those
of Reformation rejected, or moderated.

To give you these things rather in his own words; which may serve as an
Antidote to the former. L. 8. p. 814. He says, -- That the Court,
understanding that the Pope was resolved for the Confirmation, changed their
joy into grief; and all the Officers complained of the loss they should receive
in their Offices, if that reformation were executed. -- That Supplications
also, and Memorials, were given to the Pope by those, who, having bought their
Offices, and foreseeing this loss, demanded Restitution. -- That the Pope,
having diligently considered hereof, deputed eight Cardinals to consult upon
the Confirmation; and to think upon some remedy for the complaints of the
Court. -- That these Cardinals were almost all of opinion, that it was fit they
should be moderated before the Confirmation. -- And that it was certain, that
they, who did procure the Council, had no aim but to pull down the Popes
authority; and, while the Council did last, every one did speak, as if It had
power to give laws unto him, [where you see what freedom the Council took] --
At last, that, satisfied with two speeches, the one of Cardinal Amulius, the
other of Hugo Buon Compagno, persuading him, and the Court; that, by dispensing
with its acts, or giving, what interpretations to them he pleased, he might
provide for his Ministers, and Servants, and accommodate things to that which
might be for the benefit of the Church, without violating the Decrees of the
Council, because in them the Apostolic authority is still reserved, the Pope
proceeded to confirm them entirely.

Soave concerning the relu^tance of the Popes Court (not without great cause,
if an eye may be had only to gain,) I may add, what Pallavicino, writing but
the other day, and well acquainted with the present state thereof, relates
concerning it -- That, as to Favors, and Dispensations, Introduct. c. 10.
formerly granted from the Apostolic See, this Council has so far moderated
the use of them, that, if the Pope will observe these laws, the fountain of his
beneficence is dried up, for one half: And, that, although he has still a
power to dispense with these laws, yet the Popes, for their Conscience, and
Honor sake, require for the most part such pressing Motives, and so rarely
happening, of doing this, that their Concessions in such matters, as are
prohibited by the Council, do not amount to the 20th part of those formerly
accustomed. And, that the same thing also happens, * in the Causes, primae
instantiae (as they phrase it) that are brought to the Court of Rome: And, * In
those privileges, or exemptions, by which many particular persons withdrew
themselves from the Jurisdiction of Bishops; which was no less, than rendering
many the immediate Subjects of the Tribunals of the Pope; and finally, * in all
those affairs, concerning which the Council grants power to the Bishops, that
they shall proceed in them, as Delegats of the Apostolic See; which, as to the
advancing of the Bishops power, amounts to the same, as if they dispatched them
[in their own right] without any such formality. Thus he. And again. l. 23. c.
12. n. 5. To Soave, objecting: That the leaving the cognition, l. 8. p. 792.
and termination of several causes to the Bishops Tribunals without any more
Appeals to Rome, ordered in the 20th Chapter of Reformation, Sess. 24. was
quite destroyed, by the exception there added. -- Ab his excipiantur causae --
quas ex urgenti ration abilique causa, judicaverit summus Romanus Pontifex; per
speciale Rescriptum Signaturae sanctitatis suae manu propria subscribendum,
committere, aut avocare: he answers thus, -- That, though the Pope may still
call to himself, what causes he thinks fit, so he passes this first, under his
own hand, and seal; yet, that the former faculty of his Officers to call such
causes to him, though in his name, yet without his knowledge, or subscription,
was now ceased by this new Order; -- And That, if it be numbered (as that is
easily counted which is seldom done) How many Commissions, of this kind, are
signed by the Pope in a year for the whole Circuit of Christianity, if these
rise to three or four yearly, it is acknowledged very much (...). Thus he, of
the former Income to the Court of Rome much diminished: and, of the Acts of
this Council, after the decurrence of an hundred years, as to this matter,
still retaining their primitive vigor; publishing these things in that place,
where, in matters so obvious, and evident, his credit must suffer very much by
any falsification. But, on the other side, the Episcopal authority, in this
Council, was so much increased by the Popes, and the Councils committing many
both persons, and affairs, before exempt, and reserved, to their inspection,
and Government, (as which Bishops, being at a nearer distance, could better
discern and attend them) that the King of Spain said of his -- That they went
to the Council as so many Parish Priests; but returned from it so many Popes.

Pius; and, amongst these, those chiefly of the 24th Session.) I say, the
Decrees themselves do show the great service, which this Council has done to
the Church, at that time much relaxed, and languishing in its Discipline,
partly by reason of its non-execution of former necessary Church-Canons, partly
by other abuses, not provided against by any former laws, and now growing
intolerable. In all which matters a much better face of Ecclesiastical affairs
appears at present, through the Influence, which this Council has had upon the
succeeding times. And much have those ungrateful Detractors to answer to God,
by whom the Good of this great Body of the most sacred of Magistrates has
been, not only so little acknowledged, but so evil spoken of.



The manners, and customs of the Church, that chiefly in those times were
imagined to give cause of just complaint, seem to be,

1st. Concerning the Pope, and Court of Rome. 1. a. The Avocation of so many
Causes, and admission of so many Appeals (without ascent, as formerly, through
inferior Courts; especially those of Diocesan, and Provincial, Synods). b. And
the reservation of so many Licenses, and Dispensations to the Apostolic See,
and Court of Rome; These not to be prosecuted, or procured, without great
charge; Nor the Judge, at so great a distance, capable of so true, and exact
informations, either touching the person, or cause. 2. g. The Popes Collation
of Bishoprics, and other spiritual Benefices in foreign States, where the
Merits of such persons, as are most fit, and capable of them, are little known
to him. 3. d. The imposing of Pensions on such spiritual Benefices. e. or
giving them in Commenda; z. Or uniting many of them into one without any
necessity; So to furnish Favorites with a superfluous wealth; and hidden
Pluralities. 4. e. The Exemptions of so many persons, and Societies, from
Episcopal Jurisdictions, which Bishops, by their vicinity of Residence, are the
fittest rectifiers of all disorders. 5. th Several abuses committed by the
Persons publishing Indulgences, and collecting the Charities of Christians for
pious uses.

Annats (in lieu of the Tenths of Tithes) or other constant supports received
from the inferior Clergy out of the several States of the Western Church,
because it neither seemed just to the Council to deprive him of them; nor, to
the Secular Princes, in their many Articles of Reformation proposed, to request
it. (See those of the Emperor, Soave, p. 513. of the King of France, p. 652.)
as they well seeing,, that it was necessary for this General Father of the
Church, both to have, wherewith to maintain so many Officers in his service
whether at home, or abroad, as the Church affairs, passing through his hands,
required; and, wherewith also to reward their pains. And if the ancient Bishops
of Rome managed these great affairs with a much smaller Revenue; yet it must be
granted; 1. Both that much less was then necessary, by reason as well of the
much narrower extent of Christendom; as also of the union of most of it, in
those times, under one Secular Power, the Emperor; whereas now the
preservation of the unity of Catholic Faith, and necessary correspondence
between the Members of this Church so much more diffused, and residing in so
many States of a contrary temper, gives much more trouble and charge to the
supreme Head thereof. And, 2ly, Must be granted also; That, by the want, then,
of the present subsistence, whilst the Pope was the Emperors temporal Subject,
both many inconveniences, and injuries were suffered, and many Benefactions
hindered.] This of the Complaints concerning the Pope and his Court.

2. Concerning the Clergy. 1. ^. unfit persons elected into Bishoprics, and
other Ecclesiastical Benefices, Pluralities of Benefices; where these, singly,
afford a maintenance sufficient, whilst other worthy persons are destitute; and
the misexpence of such ample Church-Revenue on their Secular Relations. 3. m.
Non-Residence, where having the care, or charge, of souls. 4. n In their
Residence, Neglect of frequent Preaching, and Catechizing. And, Their not
celebrating, at least, part of the Divine Service, nor teaching the ignorant
the Mysteries of Religion, in the vulgar tongue. 5. x. Their being restrained
from marriage; and, in Celibacy, their frequent incontinency, and violation of
Chastity. 6. p Their withholding the Communion of the Cup both from the Laity,
and themselves, when not officiating. 7. r. Their too common use of
Excommunication; applying many times the severest of the Churches Censures to
the smallest Delinquencies, 8. s. To which may be added, the many disorders,
then observed, in Regulars and Monasticks. 9. t. The correction necessary of
several things in the Missals, and Breviaries; and bringing them to a greater
uniformity.

Soave, p. 513, and 751, and by the French, before the 23. Session, in Soave,
632. These therefore the Council took into due consideration; and rectified
what they judged amiss, * so far, as that Iron-age would permit: (of which the
Council thus complains, Sess. 25. De Reform. Regul. c. 21. Adeo dura,
difficiluque est praesentium temporum conditio, ut nec statim omnibus, nec
commune, ubique quod optaret, remedium posset adhiberi:) and, * so far, as the
National parties in the Council, inured to several customs, and enjoying
different privileges, without the making of a schism, could agree upon:
rectified, I say, so far, as their Ordinations, strengthened with severe
penalties, could do it: But the constant execution of these depends on others,
whose diligence, or supineness herein must needs produce, in the Church,
contrary effects; and also the necessity of leaving their Canons, upon just
occasions, (all which no law can fit,) dispensable, must also leave open a
passage to such Governors, as are corrupt, or negligent, of doing this without
a reasonable cause.

Pope, and Court of Rome: See the many Decrees in this Council, wherein the
Bishops are substituted, as perpetual and standing Delegates of the Apostolic
See for the Execution of them and the former Reservations remitted; though this
to the great diminution of the Revenue of the Pope, and his Officers, as has
been said. Such Decrees are, Sess. 5. c. 1, 2. De Reform. -- Sess. 6. c. 4. --
Sess. 7. c. 6. -- Sess. 13. c. 5. -- Sess. 21. c. 5, 8. -- Sess. 22. c. 5.8. --
Sess. 24. c. 11. And very many others. In which matter, though the Bishops are
empowered, as Delegates of the Sea Apostolic, because the point, whether
Bishops hold their Jurisdictions, as to the exterior, and forensick, exercise
thereof, in, and over, such particular things, and persons, immediately from
Christ, or from the Pope, was indeed much agitated in the Council, but on no
side determined, Yet so it is, that a possession they have now of several
branches of such Jurisdiction, since this Council, which they had not before.
Nor varies it any thing in the good service actually done, thereby, to the
Church, by what way soever this power descends upon them.

Causes; and Appeals: To a.
See the restraint made therein, Sess. 13. c. 1. Sess. 22. c. 1. -- Nec
appellatio executionem hanc, quae ad morum correctionem pertinet, suspendat.
And, Sess. 24. c. 10. -- Nec in his, ubi de visitatione, aut morum correctione
agitur, exemptio, aut ulla inhibitio, appellatio, seu querela, etiam ad sedem
Apostolicam interposita, executionem eorum, quae ab his mandata, decreta, aut
judicata fuerint, quoque modo impediat, aut suspendat. Again, Sess. 21. c. 8 --
Sess. 25. c. 10. The Pope, and Council, delegate such persons, as shall be
chosen in the Provincial, or Diocesan, Synod, together with the Ordinary (to be
supplied, if any one of them dies before the next Synod, by the Bishop, and
Chapter) to decide these Appeals in the Province, or Diocese, where such
Controversies arise; unless they be such, as for the weight of them are thought
fit to be removed to Rome. Sess. 24.5. It is ordered, That the criminal causes
of Bishops, except those more heinous ones of Heresy, or the like, where their
ejectment is questioned, which are reserved to the Apostolic See, are to be
terminated either by a Provincial Council; or, in the interval, by its
Deputies. And, Ib. c. 20. Civil, Matrimonial, Criminal Causes are left to be
ended by inferior Tribunals (without the intermedling of the Popes legates, or
Nuncio's, herein): except those; Quas, ex urgenti, rationabilique causa,
judicaverit summus Romanus Pontifex, per speciale Rescriptum signaturae
sanctitatis suae, manu propria subscribendum, committere, aut avocare. Where,
ex urgenti, rationabilique causa, rescriptum signaturae sanctitatis sua manu
propria subscribendum, a Rescript, after the matter is particularly made known
to the Pope, and, upon this, his hand, and seal obtained, cannot be a thing so
ordinarily happening, as to overthrow the whole benefit of the Decree, as Soave
would persuade p. 792.


Provincial, and Diocesan Synods, which were to elect the persons for deciding
such Appeals [which Synods the Council judged very necessary, -- Moderandis
moribus, corrigendis excessibus, controversiis componendis, etc. and to which
it committed a chief superintendence over the actions of Bishops, as to their
due execution of its Decrees touching Reformation.] It is ordered, Sess. 24. c.
2. That the Provincial Synods be called by the Metropolitan; or, he justly
hindered, by the Senior Bishop of the Province, at least once every three
years, after the Octave of Easter, or other time, if more convenient; and a
Diocesan, once every year; In the calling of, and meeting in, which, if any
neglected their Duty, they incur the Ecclesiastical Censures, prescribed by
former Canons. And those Bishops, who are Subject to no Archbishop, are obliged
to choose some Province, of whose Synods they shall for the future be members,
and be subjected to its decrees. Ordered also, that in these Synods (not having
a constant being) certain Deputies be chosen, which may, in the Intervals,
determine such Causes, and execute such Orders, as this Council has committed
to them. But mean while, as for other causes, not thought meet to be entrusted
to Delegats, nor that conveniently can be so long suspended, as till another
Provincial Synod sits (which for the great trouble, and charge of their
meeting, later Councils, upon the experience of former Canons neglected,
appointed to be held seldomer, nor yet is this obeyed) it seemed necessary,
that without expecting these, such causes should, from the Pope, a higher
standing Judge, receive a present dispatch (of which see what is said before,.
16. n. 6. and n. 8.) And, -- The restoring of Synodal Judicatures [ i. e. as to
all causes] (says Soave p. 336.
) was rejected by almost all the Fathers of the Council; For which he gives a
reason, after his usual manner, the most uncharitable one, he could invent, --
That they did this, because such Synodal Judicatures did diminish the
Episcopal, and were too popular. The Episcopal he means taken singly in their
distinct Courts; else the Synodal is nothing else but a conjunct Judicature of
Bishops. But perhaps some of those reasons given by Castellus, for this ( apud
Soave, p. 335.) may seem more persuasive, viz. Beside their being no standing
Court, and rarely convened, the difficulty that was found, to inform so many;
and the impediments in the examination, where many are to do it; the infinite
length in the proceedings and dispatches; the parties and divisions therein,
that are usually made by the factious; for which Castellus imagines, that
Synods came to be, in later times, more intermitted; and other Courts, and
Officers brought in, to remedy such disorders.

n. 1. And, indeed, such a superlative power, as to causes of greater moment,
seems very necessary. For, 1st. This Prime Patriarch, and supreme Governor in
the Church, being constituted by a more choice Election, is presumed ordinarily
to be a more knowing person, and, according to the eminency of his place,
assisted both with a wiser Council, and a greater portion of God's Spirit. But,
2ly, though he were neither more prudent, nor better informed from others in
difficult matters, nor more assisted from heaven, yet must he needs, be a less
partial judge in such matters because not so interessed in the cause, or in the
persons, as the Metropolitan often must be, or also those other Bishops, who
live upon the place, and are subject to the Metropolitans power: Now, the more
remote from all private interest, and high in place, the Judge is, the more
even he is likely to hold the scales of Justice; and to administer it, less
sweyed with affection, or mastered by fear. 3ly. The chief Courts, to whom,
beside the Roman Bishop, the termination of Appeals of moment is recommended,
being Provincial, National, or General, Councils, were their Judgments never so
satisfactory to all parties (though Provincial, or National Synods have not
been always thought so, witness those Affrican ones in the cause of
Cecilianus) yet are these not always to be had: The Provincial Synods much
seldomer assembled; than the Canons appoint; Councils General yet more rare;
none of them, by reason of the trouble of convening, fit, upon every such
Appeal, to be called. 4ly. Many cases of Appeals are not matters of Fact,
where witnesses are necessary; but questions, de jare, where the fact is
confessed; and, in such, no more plea can be made to have them tried at home,
than the Mosaical Legalists of Antioch could justly have demanded, not to have
this matter decided at Jerusalem; or Arius of Alexandria, his, at Nice. As for
the convenience of hearing witnesses, where this necessary in such Appeals, it
was ordered indeed anciently; that, whenever it could safely be done, such
causes should be arbitrated in the same, or some adjoining, Provinces, by some
Judges, either sent thither, or, there, delegated by the Patriarch (of which
the Seventh Canon of Sardica seems to take special care;) or at least, that
Commissioners might be sent to examine witnesses at home; in the non observance
of which Canons perhaps some Roman Bishops may have been culpable, and caused
some affliction to the Churches Subjects: But yet other exigences may occur
(every cause not being sit to be decided by Delegates) that require the trial
to be before the Pope's own person, to which greater necessities the trouble
caused to witnesses must give place, which trials at Rome are also allowed by
the Council of Sardica, c. 4. And we have no reason to think, but that this
grave Assembly at Sardica weighed the troubles of such Appeals, as well as the
Affricans did afterward; or we now: but thought fit to admit smaller
inconveniences to avoid greater mischiefs, namely, in the Intervals of
Councils, Schisms, and Divisions between Provincial, and between National,
Churches, by the Church her having thus so many supremes terminating all
spiritual causes within themselves, as there were Provinces, or Countries;
Christian. 5ly. If this Avocation to the supreme be now done without the
Method, sometimes used, of ascending by degrees through many subordinat Courts,
this, when such Courts have not a cogent power for terminating the Cause, seems
only a shortning both of the trouble, and charge.

Dispensations. See, Sess. 25. c. 18. where, in General, Provision is made by
the Council, That, -- Si urgens justaque To b.
ratio, and major quandoque utilitas, postulaverint cum aliquibus dispensandum
esse; id, causa cognita, ac summa maturitate, atque gratis, a quibuscunque ad
quos dispensatio pertinebit, erit praestandum; aliterque facta dispensatio
surreptitia censeatur. This Dispensation, then, by whomsoever given, is to be
made gratis; otherwise, to be held surreptitious; and the cognition of this
surreption is referred to the Ordinary, Sess. 22. c. 5. Again ordered, Sess.
22. c. 5. That no Dispensations of Grace, obtained at Rome, shall take effect,
except first examined by the Bishop of the place, whether obtained justly, and
upon a right information. Again, Sess. 24. c. 6. Bishops are empowered to
dispense with their Subjects, in foro conscientiae, in all irregularities, and
suspensions, for secret offenses, except voluntary murder, etc. and to absolve
in all cases occult, that are reserved to the Sea Apostolic. Of which, and
other the like, relaxations in this Council, of their former restraints, what
the issue has been in the Court of Rome, see what is quoted before out of
Pallavic. Introduction. c. 10.

Sess. 25. c. 18. it seems necessary; 1 That laws be not so enacted, as to
leave in the hands of no person a power of Dispensations. 2 And again
necessary; That this power of Dispensing be not, as to matters more important,
left always in the hands of Inferior Magistrates; especially those living upon
the place; and therefore more liable to be sweyed by friendships; importunity;
fear, and over-awing; this last, requisite, that the obligation of laws, by the
facility of dispensing, be not quite dissolved; the first; that the law, too
rigidly exacted, may not sometimes oppress; And what Civil Government is there,
that by its retaining a Dispensative power, as to their temporal laws, in the
hand of the supreme Magistrate, does not amply justify the Ecclesiastic,
herein?

Dispensative power, therefore, from ancient times, has been thought fit to be
deposited in the chief Bishop of the Christian Universs, and from him such
Dispensations, and relaxations to be received, as necessity requires. Such was
that, conceded by S. Gregory, l. 12. Ep. 31. to the English, upon the hazard
of their deserting the new-founded Christianity, concerning Marriages, for a
time in some degrees prohibited by the Canons of the Church, and that, to the
Sicilian Bishops (who could not be brought to do more) concerning holding a
Provincial Council once a year, when the Canons required twice: Before him,
such that conceded by Gelasius, in Ep. to the Bishops in Italy (complaining to
him that many of their Churches, by the Gothic wars, were rendered destitute of
a Clergy) in which he relaxed several things required by the former Canons to
Ordinations, etc. after he had made this Presace, -- Necessaria rerum
dispensatione constringimur, sic Canonum paternorum decreta librare, and retro
Praesulum, decessorumque nostrorum praecepta metiri: ut quae praesentium
necessitas temporum, restaurandis Ecclesiis, relaxanda deposcit, quantum potest
fieri, temperemus, -- Igitur, tam instituendi quam promovendi clericalis
obsequii sic spatia dispensanda concedimus, etc. Before him, by Simplician,
Epistle 14. to the Emperor Zeno, in which he allowed the election of the Bishop
of Antioch made, for preventing a sedition, at Constantinople, contrary to the
Fourth Nicen Canon. And, before him, by Celestine, Socrat. Hist. l. 7. c. 39.40.
allowing, by his Letters sent to the Bishop, of Alexandria and Antioch, the
Election of Proclus, who was before the designed Bishop of Cyzicum, to be
Bishop of Constantinople, procured by the Emperor Theodosius for preventing
some Tumults; where the Pope either dispensed with, See Conc. Antioch, c. 2.
or more indulgently expounded, some former Church Canons that seemed, to have
prohibited all Translation of Bishops.

To g. See the answer to k.

Pensions, reserved by the Pope out of some richer Ecclesiastical Benefices, To
d.
as rewards of persons much meriting in the Churches service; It seemed hard,
To d.
suppose it could have been justly done, to deprive the Pope of them, whilst
Secular Princes would still retain them; and were much displeased, when, in the
Articles provided for Reformation of Princes, Mentioned in Soave, p. 769.
such things were demanded of themselves, as they would have redressed in
others; yet the Council thus far moderated this matter; That those Bishoprics,
or Benefices, of a smaller Revenue, not amounting to above such a certain sum
yearly, should not be, for the future, charged with any such Pensions, Sess.
24. c. 13. And for the rest, since all Pensions could not be voided, (which
perhaps had been best;) yet may it seem as equitable, That the Ecclesiastic
Governors do continue to make use of them for recompensing persons of
extraordinary merit in the Church, as Princes, those in the State; Especially
when the Council has provided; that they be taken from no Church, but where
such an overplus may be spared; and that Revenue only applied to maintain two,
which indeed is superfluous for one.

Monasteries; To e.
or other Ecclesiastical Benefices with, or without, cure, given in Commendam,
a superintendence over which the Council has committed for ever, either to the
Superiors of such Orders; or to the Bishops, as the Popes Delegates; to take
care, that in the one all religious observance be maintained, with all
necessaries supplied; and in the other, the care of souls faithfully
discharged, and the Vicar sufficiently provided for: See Sess. 21. c 8. -- And,
Sess. 25.20. Reform. Regul. And further, c. 21. That for Monasteries
Commendatary, they, for the future, shall be conferred only on Regulars. A
Constitution, which in France, where very many Monasteries are given by the
Prince in Commendams to great Personages, has been one of the chief obstacles
of that Princes refusing to accept this Council, as to its Acts of Reformation.

uniting of Ecclesiastical Benefices: As the Council does allow such an union
to be made by the Bishops, To z.
as Delegates of the Apostolic See, where one single is not a sufficient
maintenance of the Pastor, Sess. 21. c. 5. -- Sess. 24. c. 15. And allows the
same to be done in Bishoprics by the Pope, upon Testimonials received from a
Provincial Synod of such a necessity, Sess. 24.13. So, on the other side, Sess.
7. c. 6. It impowers Bishops for ever, as the Popes Delegates, to inquire into
all former unitings of Livings passed within forty years, and to void them,
Nisi eas ex legitimis, aut alias rationabilibus causis, coram loci Ordinario
vocatis, quorum interest, verificandis, factas fuisse constiterit. And, c. 5.
and 7. Constitutes the Bishops likewise visitors of all those having cure, that
are annexed to Chapters, or Monasteries, that the incumbent Vicars do their
duty, and be provided of a sufficient Revenue, all manner of privileges, or
exemptions, being repealed. See more below (l).

Exemptions. This Council has ordered. 1st. That all Churches whatever, To e.
though formerly exempted, those also that are annexed to Colleges, or
Monasteries, be subjected to the yearly visitation of the Ordinary, as Delegate
of the Sea Apostolic; to see to, that the Cura animarum be rightly discharged,
all things kept in a due repair, etc. Sess. 7, 8. 2ly. Sess. 22. c. 8. Bishops,
as Delegates of the Apostolic See, are made Executors of all pious Disposures,
as well Testamentary, as of the living; Hospitals also, and whatever Colleges,
Confraternities of Laics, Schools, the Alms of the Mounts of Piety, etc.
whatever Exemptions they might have had formerly, are subjected to their
visitation (where it is not otherwise ordered by the Founders,) to take
knowledge of, and see executed therein, whatever is instituted for God's
worship, salvation of souls, or sustentation of the poor, and the
Administrators thereof tied to give to them a yearly account ( c. 9.) 3. Again;
All Secular Clergy, that had formerly any exemption, and all Cathedral Chapters
(formerly exempted under the notion of Regulars, which many of them anciently
were) are likewise submitted, for the future, to the visitation, and correction
of the Bishop -- Sess. 6.4. -- Sess. 14. c. 4. -- Sess. 25.6. 4. As for
Regulars; All such, living out of their Monasteries, and other persons whatever
relating to them, or otherwise privileged, may be visited, corrected, punished
by the Bishop, as are others, Sess. 6.3. -- Sess. 29.11. Nor may any Regulars
preach in any Church, not belonging to their Order, without the Bishops license
first obtained; Nor in Churches of the Order, without first showing to the
Bishop a license from their Superiors, and receiving his Benediction. 5.
Lastly, for the Monasteries, and Religious Houses themselves exempted from the
Episcopal Visitation, it is ordered; that, if the Regular Superiors, to whom
this is committed, omit their duty, the Bishop, after a Paternal admonition,
and their six months further neglect, may proceed to visit, and reform them;
Notwithstanding whatever, Exemptions, or Conservators appointed of their
Privileges. Sess. 21.8.

Gregory's Epistles, not only conceded by himself, but mentioned to have been
so by his Predecessors. See, l. 7. Ep. 33. and Ep. 18. And see -- l. 11. Ep. 8.
such Privileges granted, at the request of the Queen of France. Yet still, as
was said but now, the Episcopal power is admitted by the Council of Trent in
these Houses also, upon any continued neglect of their other Superiors, when
first admonished hereof.

Abuses concerning Indulgences, and Collecting the Charities of Christians for
pious uses: It was ordered, Sess. To ^
21. c. 9. That the Office of the ordinary former publishers of such
Indulgences, and Spiritual Favors, and the Collectors of such Charities
(having given so much scandal, after the endeavor of three several precedent
Councils to reform them) and all their privileges, should be taken quite away;
and hence forward, that the Ordinary of the place, assisted with two of the
Chapter, should publish the one, and collect the other, Gratis.

Reservations, and Exemptions. So that Lainez the General of the Jesuits in
his speech before the 24. Session observes. -- That the hand of the Council had
fallen heavy upon others, without touching at all the Bishops; that there was
contained in those Articles of Reformation much against the Pope, against the
Cardinals, against Arch Deacons, against the Chapters, against Parish Priests,
against the Regulars; but against the Bishops nothing. And Soave See Palla. l.
23. c. 3. -- n. 30. p. 343 (...)
on Sess. 13. produces the Priests of Germany complaining of the Reformation;
and saying, -- That the Bishops authority was made too great, and the Clergy
brought into servitude. And p. 568.
on the 22th Session, says, -- That points of Reformation were proposed
favorable to the Authority of Bishops, that the Legates proceeding might not be
hindered by the opposition of any. From all which you may further gather, what
truth his words have, set in the entrance of his History: p. 2.
-- That the Bishops, hoping to regain the Episcopal Authority, usurped, for
the most part, by the Pope, now wholly lost it; and the Pope, fearing a
Moderation of his former exorbitant power, had it now, much more than ever,
established, and confirmed.

^. To ^
The Complaint concerning unfit, and unworthy persons elected both into
Bishopticks, and inferior Benefices of Cure.

1st. For the future Election of Bishops, this Council ordered, Sess. 24. c. 1.
That there should be drawn up by the Provincial Synods a certain Form, for
taking Informations, and examining the Persons nominated to such Ecclesiastical
Dignities, to be approved by the Pope; Then, concerning the particular Person
to be elected; an Instrument of the Examination, made according to the Form
prescribed, is to be sent to his Holiness: And this Instrument there first to
be perused by four Cardinals; who, if they also approve, are to subscribe, it
and to affirm -- Se certo (to give you the words of the Canon) existimare, sub
periculo mortis aeternae, idoneos esse, qui Ecclessis praeficiantur; the
relation also of these Cardinals is to be made in one Consistory; but the
deliberation deferred to another, that things may be more exactly weighed. The
person also to be chosen is particularly to have the Testimonial of his
Ordinary, or of the Pope's Nuncio, residing in such place, Sess. 22. c. 2. And
what course is observed in Bishops, the same ordered to be in the Election of
Cardinals, Sess. 24. c. 1. Lastly, the Council admonishes in General * all
those, who have the Right of any such Collation. -- Eos mortaliter peccare,
nisi eos praefici curaverint, quos [not dignos, but] digniores and Ecclesiis
magis utiles, ipsi judicaverint; And particularly, * the Pope, that, if he be
faulty herein, either as to the Promotion of Cardinals, or Bishops, unfit, --
Ovium Christi sanguinem, quae ex malo negligentium, and sui Officii immemorum
Pastorum regimine peribunt, Dominus Noster Jesus Christus de manibus ejus sit
requisiturus.

Church-Benefices with Cure. 1st. It is ordered, Sess. 24. c. 18. That, whoever
the Patron be, there be six Examiners nominated by the Diocesan Synod; all
which, or at least three of them, together with the Bishop are, at a time
prefix't, publicly to try the sufficiency of such as are presented; and only
such a person as is approved by them, or, if many be presented, who is thought
the more worthy, is to be admitted to such Benefice; without such Examination,
and approvement the Collation of such Benefice to be accounted Surreptitious;
and another Election to be made. The Bishop being permitted thus to choose the
Person, even where the Pope gives Institution. -- It a Sanctissimus voluit
(says the Congregation of Cardinals appointed for the Interpreters of the
Decrees of the Council, In 24. Sess. c. 18. fig. 33.
) quia Episcopus melius cognoscit personas. Pius the Fourth Pallavic. l. 22. c.
1. n. 18. quoting Card. Borrom. letter to the Legates.
having also, before this Session, concerning Benefices in his Disposal, made
this free offer to the Fathers of the Council, 1. Either, that henceforth all
Benefices having Curam Animarum, should be in their Gift, and the other without
Cure in his, Or, that henceforth he would bestow them on none, who shall not
also be, by the Ordinary approved worthy. 3. Or, that he would only make his
Election out of such Persons, worthy, and of the Diocese, of whom the Bishop
should send him a Roll: After which, the Council agreed upon the Constitution
forementioned: Which not escaping Soave's Censure, who says, -- That it was
framed with exquisite artifice, and with a fair show makes the Bishops Patrons
to give the Cure to whom they please, upon pretense of Examinations But yet
takes no profit from the Court of Rome: [The Institution still being reserved
to the Pope, and a Bull to be had from thence.] Pallavicino l. 23. c. 3.12.
returns this answer, -- That any reasonable man may well observe what a loss
here of his own benefit the Pope consented to, for the benefit of the Church,
when he was pleased to take from himself the bestowing according to his own
choice [by this being now left to the Bishop, and the Examiners] of so many
Benefices, as should happen to be vacant, for eight months in the year, in so
many Kingdoms of Christendom; and when he deprived his Court of that frequent
Concourse, formerly made to it, of so many foreign Ecclesiastics, who,
otherwise, must first have made themselves known there, for the obtaining these
Benefices at home.

gain, to introduce persons into the Clergy of less worth: It is ordered, Sess.
21. c. 1. that all things be passed Gratis; save that the underofficers, such
as have no set stipend, may receive some small fee, not to exceed the tenth
part of a Crown for their labors, provided the Collator share nothing in it.
-- Nihil (says the Council) pro collatione quorumcunque Ordinum, etiam
clericalis Tonsurae, necpro litteris dimissorus, aut testimonialibus, nec pro
sigillo, nec alia quacunque de causa, etiam sponte oblatum, Episcopi and alii
ordinum Collatores, aut eorum Ministri, quovis praetevtu, accipiant. Notarii
vero in iis tantum locis, in quibus non viget laudabilis consuetudo nihil
accipiendi, pro singulis liteais dimissortis, aut Testimonialibusque decima in
in tantum unius, aurei partem accipere possint; dummodo eis nullum Salarium sit
constitutum pro officio exercendo; nec Episcopo ex Notarii commodis aliquod
Emoluentum, ex eisdem, Ordinum Collationibus direct, vel indirecte, provenire
possit, tunc enim gratis operam suam eos praestare omnino teneri decernit: And
-- Qui secus fecerint, tam dantes quam accipientes, ultra divinam ultionem,
paenas a jure instictas ipso facto incurrant: which Decree is understood also
of the Collation of Benefices, and of Dispensations. See the Exposition of the
Congregation of Cardinals on this Decree,. Item Declarat.

Sess. 24.3. That the Bishop by himself, or his Vicar, visit yearly his
Diocese; or, if large, the greatter part of it; and the Remainder in the year
following; and that the Provincial Councils punish any Bishops neglects herein.

Sess. 29. c. 4. That the Bishop, as Apostolical Delegate, where the People of
a Parish are very numerous, may either erect a new, dividing the Profits; or
compel the Rector of such Parish, when not able alone to perform the Pastoral
Duty to so great a multitude, to admit, and maintain so many other Priests,
assistant, as may be sufficient; and also, where the Bishop finds an illiterate
Rector, who is otherwise of a good life, may add a Coadjutor, partaker of the
Profits. See Sess. 21. c. 6.



Ne Coelestis ille sacrorum librorum Thesaurus, quem spiritus sanctus summa
liberalitate hominibus tradidit, neglectus jaceat (says the Council) that
Divinity-Lectures, for the expounding of the Holy Scriptures, where these yet
wanting, should be set up in all Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches; in the
Convents of Regulars; and public Schools of learning; and, in poorer
Churches, at least a Schoolmaster founded, to teach Grammar: All such Lectures
to be approved by the Bishop: And for their Maintenance, the first vacant
Prebend, or a simple Benefice, or a Contribution from all the Benefices of such
City, or Diocese, to be applied to this use. All these Constitutions made for a
better Provision for the future, of a learned and virtuous Clergy.

7. Lastly; For introducing amongst this Clergy a greater strictness and
Holiness of Life: This Council revives and gives vigor to all the former rigid
ancient Canons; notwithstanding whatever present, contrary, customs, with the
same or greater penalties to be inflicted on offenders, at the arbitrament of
the Ordinary; and that, without admitting any appeals from his Censures. See
Sess. 22, c. 1. de Reform. -- Statuit S. Synodus, ut quae alias a summis
Pontificibus, and a sacris Conciliis de Clericorum vita, honestate, cultu,
doctrinaque retinenda, ac simul, de luxu, comessationibus, choreis, aleis,
lusibus, ac quibuscunque criminibus, nec non saecularibus negociis, sugiendis,
copiose ac salubriter sancita fuerunt, eadem in posterum, iisdem paenis, vel
majoribus, arbitrio Ordinarii imponendis, observentur: nec Appellatio
executionem hanc, quae ad morum correctionem pertinet, suspendat; Si qua vero
ex his [Sancitis] in desuetudinem abiisse compererint, [Ordinarii] ea
quamprimum in usum revocari, and ab omnibus accurate custodiri, studeant, non
obstantibus consuetudinibus quibus cunque ne subditorum neglectae emendationis
ipsi condignas, Deo vindice, paenas persolvant. This heavy charge have the
Bishops in this Council laid upon Bishops concerning reformation of the
inferior Clergy.

To l.
Pluralities, and possessing superfluous wealth: It is ordered, Sess. 24. c.
17. That no person for the future (Cardinals themselves not excepted) shall
hold two Bishoprics, or other Ecclesiastical Benefices, either simple, if one
of them sufficient to maintain him, or with Cure, and requiring residence, on
any terms whatever; and that all, having such Pluralities, shall, within six
months, quit one, all former Dispensations, or unions for life,
notwithstanding; and, if this not done within such time, they to lose both;
pronounced, then, to be vacant, and disposed of, otherwise: A rule, in
Benefices requiring Residence, still Religiously observed, says Pallavic. 23.
c. 11. n. 8.
(one who well knew the Popes Court) replying to Soave, p. 792.
who says, this Canon was too good to be kept, save in the poorer sort. And
for other simple Benefices without Cure, as it is granted, that many are still
possessed by one, and the same Person; so is this a thing permitted by this
Rule, where one such living is insufficient for his maintenance.

Conc. Car. 4. c 15. Can. Apostol, 39, 40.75. -- con. Antioch c. 21 -- Gratian
Cause. 12, 9.1, 2. De Rebus Ecclesus dispensandis.
none spend more of the Church-Revenue upon themselves, than their Condition
necessarily requires; nor bestow the remainder thereof on any of their Secular
Relations, further than the relieving them, when, and as, poor; but expend it
on those pious uses ( viz. for maintenance of Holy Persons, and things; and
the poor) to which it is dedicated. Its words there are, -- Sancta Synodus,
exemplo Patrum nostrorum in Concilio Carthaginensi, non solum jubet, ut
Episcopi modesta supellectile, and mensa, ac frugali victu, contenti sint;
verum etiam in reliquo vitae genere, ac tota ejus domo, caveant, ne quid
appareat, quod a sancto hoc Instituto sit alienum, quodque non simplicitatem,
Dei zelum, ac vanitatum contemptum, prae se ferat. Omnino vero eis interdicit,
ne ex reditibus Ecclesiae consanguineos, familiaresve suos, augere studeant;
cum and Apostolorum Canones prohibeant, ne res Ecclesiasticas, quae Dei sunt,
consanguineis donent; sed, si pauperes sint, iis, ut pauperibus, distribuant:
Eas autem non distrahant, nec dissipent, illorum causa: Imo, quam maxim
potest, eos sancta Synodus monet, ut om^^^^ humanum hunc erga fratres, nepotes,
propinquosque carnis affectum, unde multorum malorum in ecclesia seminarium
extitit, penitus deponant: -- Quae vero de Episcopis dicta sunt, eadem non
solum in quibuscunque Beneficia Ecclesiastica, tam saecularia, quam regularia
obtinentibus, pro gradus sui condition, observari, sed and ad sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Cardinales pertinere, de^cornit, etc. And see, Sess. 22. c. 11.
Therefore also it was anciently decreed: Canon. Apost. 40. -- Council Agatheni,
c. 48. and Gratian. cause. 12. q. 1.
That, a Clergiman having an Estate of his own, It, and the profits thereof,
should be kept distinct from their Church means; That, in leaving their own to
their Secular Heirs; the rest, whether Lands, Rents, Tithes, or Oblations,
should be preserved for the uses of the Church: Where (occasionally) may be
considered the great difficulty married Priests would undergo to be faithful in
such a trust; and, to spend no more of the Churches Revenue on so near
Relations, as Wife, and Children, than what may relieve their necessities in
such a manner, as he does those of the poor.

Laical Habit, -- Pedes in diversis ponentes, unum in divinis, alterum in
carnalibus; but a Clerical, suiting to their Order, upon pain of the
sequestring, and if they continue obstinate, Privation of their Benefices.
Again, Sess. 22. c. 1. Renews the observance of all those former Church-Canons.
-- Quae de luxu, commessationibus, coreis, aleis, lusibus, ac quibuscunque
criminibus, nec non saecul aribus negotiis, fugiendis, copiose, ac salubriter
sancita fuerunt, iisdem paenis, vel majoribus, arbitrio Ordinarii imponendis:
And, that no appeal should frustrate the execution of these laws, which belong
to the correction of manners.

To m.
Non-Residence. In Sess. 23. c. 1. -- And, -- Sess 6. c. 1, 2. 1st. It is
declared by the Council: That neither Bishops, nor inferior Clergy, enjoying
any Benefice with Cura animarum, may be absent from their charge at any time,
without a just cause; and, that, by their long, and causless absence, they
incur mortal sin. 2ly, As to Bishops; for the absence of two months, or at the
most, three in the year, the Council leaves the Examen of this just cause of
such absence to their conscience, Quam sperat, religiosam, and timoratam fore;
cum Deo corda pateant, cujus opus non fraudulenter agere, suo periculo tenetur;
yet admonishes them especially to forbear this absence, as to Advent, Lent,
the Feasts of the Nativity, and Resurrection, Pentecost, and Corpus Christi.
3ly But then, ordered; That none, whether Bishop, or also Cardinal, exceed such
time of two or three months in the year, except upon a cause allowed, under
their hand, by the Pope, or the Metropolitan; or, for the Metropolitans
absence, by the Senior Resident-Bishop of the Province; the Provincial Council
being empowered to see to, that there be no abuses committed in such licenses;
and that the due penalties be executed on the faulty. 4ly. As for Priests
having cure; the Bishop may prohibit their absence for any time, exceeding two
or three days, unless they have a license under his hand for it, upon some
cause approved: Nor yet is such license for just cause to be granted them, for
above two months, unless this be very pressing, -- Discedendi autem licentiam,
ultra bimestre tempus, nisi ex gravi causa, non obtineant. 5ly. Among just
Causes of absence, as the Congregation of Cardinals has interpreted the
Council, such as these are not allowed; * want of a House; * a Suit in Law
about the living; * a perpetual sickness; or if it not such, as that, for the
Cure thereof, either Medicines, or a Physician, is wanting in the place of
Residence; upon which, absence may be conceded for three or four months, if
necessiity require so much; * An unhealthful air of the place, to one bred
elsewhere; unless this air such only for some certain time; * absence desired
for study; for a sufficiency of learning is supposed to be found, by the
Examiners, in such persons, when elected: * Their being Officials of the Pope,
or employed in some service of the Bishop, or Cathedral Church; unless it be
their assistance of him in the Visitation; * The living at a distance three or
four miles off, and visiting his Church, every Lords day. These, I say, and
some others are held no just causes, for which Residence may be dispensed with.
6ly, Where such Residence is, for a time, justly dispensed with, the Bishop is
to take care, that, in such absence, an able Vicar be substituted with a
sufficient allowance out of the Profits, by the Bishops arbitration. 7ly, The
Penalty of absence, that is not thus allowed, is Sequestration of Profits for
time of absence: to be applied, by the Ecclesiastical Superior, to pious uses;
Or, in such absence continued above a year, and further contumacy showed, when
admonished thereof, ejectment out of such Bishopric, or Living; The former to
be done by the Pope, whom the Metropolitan, or Senior Bishop-Resident, is
obliged to inform thereof by Letter, or Messenger, within three months; the
latter, by the Ordinary. 8ly, All former Exemptions, or privileges, for
non-residence, abrogated. See also the like strictness concerning the Residence
of the Canons of Cathedral Churches, and Personal performance of their
Church-Offices, Sess. 24. c. 12.

To ^. To ^.
The want of frequent Preaching,. 236. n. 1.
and Catechizing: As the Council orders, Sess. 23. c. 14. That the Bishops take
care, that the Priests on every Sunday, and solemn Festival, celebrate Mass; so
concerning Preaching, Sess. 5. c. 2. and Sess. 24. c. 4. They do declare it to
be the chief office of a Bishop, and enjoin it to be performed by him in the
Cathedral, and by other inferior Clergy, having care of Souls, in their
Parishes, at least, on all Lords days, and solemn Festivals; Or, if the Bishop
be some way let, that he cannot do it himself; then, that he procure another
to do it, at his charge; as also, if the Rector of a Parish be hindered, or do
neglect such office, the Bishop is to substitute another to supply it,
appointing to him part of the Profits. In which Sermons, the Council injoyns;
-- Vt plebes sibi commissas, pro sua, and earum capacitate, pascant,
salutaribus verbis; docendo, quae scire omnibus necessarium est ad salutem;
annunciandoque eis, cum brevitate, and facilitate sermonis, vitia, quae eos
declinare, and virtutes, quas sectari oporteat, ut paenam aeternam evadere, and
calestem gloriam consequi, valiant. The Bishop also is to take care, that in
time of Advent, and Lent, in such places as he thinks it meet, Sermons be had
every day, or three times a week: and in these things the Bishop has power to
compel, if need be, with Ecclesiastical Censures.

The Bishop is to take care also; That,. 236. n. 2.
at least on every Lords day, and other Festivals, the Priest do catechize the
Children of his Parish, and teach them the Principles of their faith, and
obedience to God, and their Parents: Finally, Sess. 24. c. 7. -- and Sess. 22.
c. 8. to see to; That before the Sacraments be administered, the force, and use
of them be explained to the people in the vulgar tongue; and that the
Catechism, to be set forth by the Council, be also faithfully transtated into
the vulgar, and expounded to the people by their Pastors; and that also, in the
celebration of the Mass, and other Divine Service, -- Sacra eloquia, and
salutis monita eadem vernacula lingua, singulis diebus festis, vel solemnibus,
explanentur; That the Holy Scriptures, and instructions necessary for
Salvation, be explained to them on all Holydaies, and solemn Festivals, in the
vulgar tongue; without handling any unprofitable matter, or question.

Latin Church the same constancy, as is found in the Greek; and to continue the
Divine Service still in the same language, and words, without any alteration,
in which their Ancestors had delivered it to them, and in which it had
descended, to these, from all former ages (as for this Western Church) ever
since that, next to the Apostles times. Neither does this, or the following
Ages seem imprudently to have chosen, for this service, the most common
language, in the understanding whereof all these Nations are united, and
concur: So that, however any removed their Station, they might still find the
Divine Service both in matter, and words, the same; and any Priest, however he
changed his Residence, be able to serve the people in it.

To x
The Clergies being restrained from Marriage, and living continently. 1st. The
Council, retaining the ancient doctrine of the Church, so expounding the
Scriptures, Matt. 19.11. -- 1. Cor. 7.78. etc,
holds: That Continency is a Grace, or Gift, which, though not actually
possessed by all, yet is denied, by God, to none, who, with using due means,
and preparations thereto, seek it of him; the using of which means is a thing
in every ones power (in such ordinary sense, as other humane actions are said
to be) 2ly. That Continency being thus, by every one, either possessed, or
attainable, the vow of perpetual Celibacy is lawful; which is a thing seconded
by the universal practice of the Religious, or Monasticks, as well in the
Eastern, as Western, Church: all of them making such a vow. 3ly, Holds; That
such Celibacy, attainable, and observable by all, may be enjoined, and imposed,
by the Church, on some; viz. such, as shall desire to enter into the Priestly
Function, for many weighty reasons; and particularly, for those given by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.28, 32, 34 35, 38. -- Vt non habeant tribulationem carnis, --
ut sint sine [mundana] solicitudine -- ut sint sancti and corpore, and spiritu,
-- ut faciant, non been, sed melius: Whilst, mean while, none at all are
compelled absolutely either to become Priests; or, in order to it, to profess
Celibacy: (but only; that if they are desirous of the one, they must undergo
the burden of the other:) nor none instructed, that God's law, but only the
Churches Constitution, does require it of them. 4ly. The Council had also, in
this matter, the warrantable Precedent of former ages, both in the Occidental,
and Oriental, Churches, so far; as that none at all, entering into the holy
Order of Priesthood in either Church, has been hitherto permitted, after, to
marry. 5ly. The Council, injoyning this, does not deny this Celibacy of the
Clergy, (as being only Ecclesiastical Constitution) to be dispensable. And,
though the Council it self thought not fit to give such dispensation,
especially since those Princes, and their Prelates in the Council, whose
Kingdoms remained untainted with Protestanisme, opposed it (. See Soave p. 688,
and 690. Where he says, That the King of Spain, and his Prelates, had neither
Interest [i.e. out of any necessary compliance with Sects] nor affection, to
prosecute the three Instances of the marriage of Priests, communion of the Cup,
and use of the vulgar tongue): Yet neither does the Council prohibit any such
dispensation, if at any time, circumstances considered, it shall so seem good
to the Pope. And so he, after the Council ended, was, both by the Emperor, and
the Duke of Bavaria, much solicited for it, See Soave, p. 823, 824 Pallav. l
24. c. 12. n. 9.
I mean, for a toleration of it in their Dominions; being in hopes of
reclaiming thereby some of the Sectarists. But, both the Emperors death,
following shortly after, hindered the further prosecution of it; and the Pope
seemed very averse from gratifying any Prince with such an indulgment, of which
he knew not, where it would stop; nor how far it might draw on Petitions from
other places, in the same, or also in other, matters; and those, perhaps, of
much more prejudice to the Churches welfare. In which thing, Soave also p. 690.
is pleased to ^^commend the Popes prudence therein.

Nice, are to be reckoned all: Nisi Matter, aut Soror. aut Avia, aut Avita, vel
matertera, sit. In his namque solis personis, and harum similibus, omnis quae
ex mulieribus est suspitio, declinatur: which Canon the 3d. Carthag. Council
thus expounds, or inlargeth, -- Sorores and filiae fratrum, aut sororum, and
quaecunque ex familia, domestica necessitate, (...) antequam ordinatis
Parentibus, uxores acceperunt, aut servis, non habitantibus in domo, quas
ducant, aliunde ducere, necessitas fuit.

all; and further should be suspended from officiating; And, after disobeying a
third admonition, should be ejected out of their Living, and made incapable of
another. And the Bishop to proceed herein, without any formal Conviction in
Court, so the verity of the fact were sufficiently proved to him. Their
Concubines also, by the aid of the Secular Power, to be expelled the Town, or
the Diocese. [And Sess. 21. c. 6. the same power of Ejection of the Clergy,
when found incorrigible, the Bishops have, as to any other great and scandalous
faults, without the relief of any Exemptions or Appeals.] But if a Bishop were
so faulty; after an admonition, from the Provincial Synod, if no amendment, he
was to be suspended; and, still continuing so, the same Synod to inform the
Pope thereof; and he to proceed to the Deposition of him from his Bishopric:
the Council providing also, that this their Constitution should not hinder the
force and execution of any former Laws, or Canons, made for the correction of
such crime.

To p.
Withholding the Communion of the Cup. 1st. The Council, Sess. 21. c. 1.
following the custom, and judgment, of former Churches, declares: That there is
no divine Precept, that obliges all Communicants to receive in both kinds;
since the frequent practice of Antiquity, to some persons, in some places,
administered it only one kind, when yet there was a possibility (though not
convenience) of doing it in both: and esteemed this a sufficient, and lawful,
Communion, and no way offending against any command of our Lord, enjoying the
contrary. 2ly It is a thing not denied by Protestants, that Christ, now no more
divisible, is totally contained in, or exhibited by, every particle of either
Symbol. 3ly These things supposed; the Council maintains, Ib. c. 12. that the
Church did not change the former ordinary custom of receiving in both kinds,
without great, and just cause, moving her thereto. 4ly But yet the Council
grants also; That some just Motives there may be for restoring the use of the
Cup; especially as to some particular places, or persons; and, lastly,
refers the judgment of these, and Concession of it, to the Pope's prudence:
the impediment, that no such Dispensation was conceded by the Council it self
(upon so much importunity, used by several Princes, who having their States
much imbroiled with new Sects, hoped, by this way, to give them some
satisfaction) being this; That the Fathers in the Council did not unanimously
concur in the same judgment, but the Spanish Bishops, chiefly, made great
opposition to it: as they not having the same motives, which others for such an
alteration; and much fearing; least some Division might happen between National
Churches from the Communion celebrated, in a several manner. See Soave, p. 459,
Neither were the rest willing to pass such an act, with the displeasure of so
considerable a party. Though (if we may believe Soave) the Legates of the Pope,
then Pius Fourth, (who of himself also was well inclined to grant it See Soave,
p. 459.
) labored much for the Concession of it; Soave, p. 567.
Of which Concession these conditions also were proposed by some in the
Council, Soave, p. 525.
-- That the Cup should never be carried out of the Church: and that the bread
only should be sufficient for the sick; that it should not be kept, to take
away the danger of its sowring; that they should use little pipes to avoid
effusion, as was formerly done in the Roman Church. And when it could not be
passed in the Council, Pro, being strongly opposed (as was said) by the Spanish
Bishops, and others, where the Reformed Religion had taken no root, it was with
much diligence, by the same Legates, procured, that it should not be voted
contra; but referred to the Pope; and this reference also first was drawn up
with a clause, of the Councils approbation of the Concession thereof, if he so
pleased, in this manner, Apud Pallav. l. 18, c. 7. n. 13.
That, since the Council could not at present determine such affair, They
remitted it to the judgment of his Holiness: who, premising the diligences that
he thought fit, should either with the Conditions forementioned, or some other,
according to his prudence, allow the use thereof, if it should seem good to
him, with the vote and approbation of the Council. But neither would such
clause pass (See Soave, p. 569. But to the Pope, at last, it was referred,
unbyassed any way by the Council, to do that in it, -- Quod utile Reipublicae
Christianae, and salutare petentibus usum Calicis, fore judicaverit. Conc.
Trid. Sess. 22. fin.


Soave, p. 823.
granted the use of the Cup to some parts of Germany. Though this practice, not
having such effect as was hoped, for reducing Sectarists (as who differed from
Catholics in so many other points; for which, though they seem to have less
pretense, yet they did retain, in them, no less obstinacy) neither did it
continue long amongst the Catholics; who desired, in this matter, to conform
to the rest of the Church. The same practice was likewise indulged formerly by
the Popes to the Greeks in Polonia, to the Maronites, and others, reconciled to
the Church of Rome, that they should still receive the Sacrament in both kinds,
after their former manner; viz. the Body of our Lord intinct in the Blood, and
both delivered them out of the Chalice in a Spoon. Indulged also by Pope Paul
the Third, Soave, p. 293, and ^^4.
in the Cessation of the Council, to those in Germany, who should humbly demand
it, nor did condemn the Churches contrary practice; and, so that it were done,
neither in the same time, nor place, with that [Communion] which is given by
decree of the Church; this caution, I suppose, being inserted, to avoid the
offense, which others, communicating only in one kind, might take thereto.
Indulged also formerly to the Bohemians, and Moravians by the Council of Basil
(See Histor. Bohem. apud Aeneam Silvium, c. 52. -- His [Boemis, and Moravis]
qui consuevissent, sub bina specie, panis scilicet and vini, divinae
Eucharistiae communicare licebit. And, should any Pope or Council restore the
use of the Cup generally to the whole Church, yet can this no way infer any
variation of the Churches Faith, or Confession of her former Error. For in such
matters of practice, where no divine precept confineth us to any side, the
doing one thing is far from inferring a confession of the unlawfulness of
having done the contrary; unless the Pope, or Council, should restore the Cup
upon this reason, because our Lord has expressly commanded it. But then, as
this would show a fault, so it would no less condemn the practice of antiquity,
than the present.

. 243. n. 1.
To ^. To ^.
The too much frequency of Excommunication. See the Provision made by the
Council against it, Sess. 25. De Reform. Gener. c. 3. Excommunication to be
forborne, where any other punishment, effective, can be inflicted.

To s. To s.
Disorders of Monasticks. See the reformation of them delivered, Sess. 25. in
22. Chapters. Wherein, amongst other things, it is ordered: * That frequent
Visitations be made of such Houses for the strict ob^ervance of their Rule;
and, for this purpose, those Houses, formerly subjected immediately to the Pope,
are submitted to the Bishop, as his Delegat. * That none living in any such
Houses retain any Propriety: nor any superfluous expense be made therein, not
suiting to the vow of Poverty. * That Monasticks never depart from their
Convent, for the service of any place, or person, or any pretense of other
employment whatsoever, without a License obtained in writing from their
Superior; otherwise, to be punished by the Bishop, as Desertors of their
Profession.* That none shall have leave to wear their habit secretly. None be
permitted to depart, from an Order more str^ct, to one of more liberty. * That
the Bishop take care, That any offending scandalously out of his Convent
receive due punishment. * That all Superiors, and Officers be elected by
secret scrutiny. * That no Estate, or Goods of any Novice (save for his food
and apparel) be received by any Monastery before his Profession, that so, after
his Noviceship ended, he may retain a perfect freedom to depart, if so
inclined. For religious Houses of Women: * That none either receive the Habit,
or profess without first being examined by the Bishop, concerning her
will^ngness, and free inclination, thereto. * That in such Houses, most strict
clausure be observed. None to go forth on what occasion soever, without the
Bishop be first acquainted therewith, and license it: None, of what sex, or age
soever, to enter in, without the license of the Bishop, or Superioress: All
such Votaries enjoined to Confess, and Communicate, at least once a month, -- Vt
eo salutari praesidio se muniant (says the Council) De Reform Reg. c. 10.
ad omnes oppugnationes Daemonis fortiter superandas. These, and many other
like, Constitutions were passed by this Synod of Bishops, for the reforming of
Monasticks: the effect of which Decrees, since the time of this Council, has
been very great, both as to removing much former scandal, and restoring
Discipline relaxed. And perhaps if some Religious Houses, that now l^e in
ashes, had but stood, till these Decrees of Trent might have been applied to
their great distempers, these severe remedies might have healed those
Corruptions, for which, still more and more putrefying, and increasing, it is
to be feared, the hand of God's Justice cut them off.

To t. To t.
Correction of the Breviary and Missal, See,. 243. n. 3.
Sess. 25. Decret. de Brev. Where the Council, having committed this affair to
certain Selected Fathers, and being necessitated to conclude, before it was
finished, leave the care of it to the Pope; after which, the some Fathers, with
some others joined to them, still prosecuting it in Pius the Fourth's days,
Both the Missal, and Breviary thus corrected, and reduced to a greater
uniformity, were licenced and published by his Successor, Pius Fifth.

later, and Principal, actions thereof, with a Pope much inclined the same way,
and also much sweyed by his holy Nephew Carlo Borrome^) endeavored to repair
the defects observed, and scandals complained of, in the former Ecclesiastical
Government, and Discipline. By which it is clear, that many things are reduced
into a much better order since this Council, than they were in before; and the
opposition of many enemies searching into the faults of those times, (by the
Divine Providence bringing good out of evil) conduced much to the rectifying of
them; and the pretended Reformation from the Church produced a true one in it.
And if, after all this, some blemishes do still remain, 1st. It must be
considered; * That some things the Council could have wished amended, and
altered, which yet were too difficult to be brought about, without hazarding
schism amongst the National Churches, or Prelates, long inured to different
Customs: And, * That several things also had dependence on the Reformation of
the Secular Governors; which when the Council touched upon, though very
tenderly, and drew up some Articles concerning it, but such as were decreed
both by former Church-Canons, and the Imperial Laws See Soave, p. 769. Pallav.
l. 23. c. 4. n. 6.
presently the Princes grew displeased: and so, for fear of alienating their
minds, to whose favors, otherwise, the Church stands much obliged, and by
whose sword (under the Divine Providence) she is upheld, the Council was forced
to bear with their weakness, and desist from its purpose. Review the Councils
complaint set down before,. 210. -- Adeo dura, difficilisque est Praesentium
temporum conditio etc. 2ly Again; It may be considered; That several things,
that were well ordered by the Council yet are not so well executed: nor ought
the Council to be charged at all with this, but its Ministers; who as they
shall happen to be more, or less active, or piously disposed, so its
constitutions in all future ages will receive vigor, or languish; And, in this,
Its laws do only suffer the common Fate of all others, made heretofore either
in the Ecclesiastical, or Civil, States; No Court hitherto having been able to
devise a law, that could infallibly promote the execution of their Laws, or of
It self. 3ly. After this, to be considered yet much more; that, if every thing,
which private judgments (amongst which every one is to reckon his own) do think
fit to be corrected, was not thought so by the Council, they ought rather, with
an undisputing humility, to submit these to that of so Reverend an Assembly,
than to censure it, as not conformable to theirs, and that too, as to matters,
not received, or rejected by this Council, but after that all sides had been
much disputed, and weighed. Especially they ought to ponder well these two
things.

Council of Trent its differing in some practices from what was observed in the
ancient Church; That all the same Constitutions do not fit all times, where the
circumstances of things are much varied, the former manners much relaxed, the
Christian Profession much enlarged, the Civil Governments much altered, etc.
Nor is one age of the world (no more, than of a man) in every thing, to be
treated, as the precedent: Nor are the Distempers of Christianity in all times
so agreeable in their nature, as to be cured still with the same Medicines: And
several projects, that seem very beneficial in the Speculation, yet, in the
Experience, and Practice, by not finding such an indifferent matter to work
upon, as is supposed, would have a quite contrary effect; and, instead of
better order, bring in Confusion, in removing what good was before* and being
unable to establish any thing better; A thing often pressed in the Council, in
answer to those, who would have every thing restored according to the Model of
Antiquity.

2
The other, concerning that Supereminent-power in several particulars, which as
it was found, so was left still, by the Council, in the hands of the Bishop of
Rome; That, as by the Church-Canons anciently he has possessed it, so it
ought, if either, rather to be increased than any way diminished, in these
later times: when the Christian Churches now much more enlarged, and extended,
and separated, under so many several Secular Heads, and so both by their bulk,
and different temporal Interests, more subject to divide, and to fall a sunder,
one from another, therefore we have much more need of a firm union in one
Spiritual Head, and such Jurisdictions and Privileges to be enjoyed by him,
whereby He may have some influence upon the whole Body, and It, some necessary
recourse to, and dependence on, Him. As we see in Civil States, how strictly
upheld, and unviolably kept, are the Prerogatives, Legislative, Dispensative,
Donative, Power of Princes, to keep the whole Body* in a due dependence on a
Supreme; and to secure the public peace, and happiness, in the best of
Governments, a Monarchical Regency.

CHAP. XIII.
Solutions of the Protestant Objections.
Brief answers to the Protestant Objections made before,. 3. etc. --. 247. etc.
Where, Of the Councils joining Apostolical Tradition with the Holy Scriptures
as a Ground of Church Definitions,. 264.

etc.) against this Council; which, for the most part, I think, now will appear
to you to have their main force and sting already solved, and taken away.

To a. To a.
The words of Bellarmine, who is quoted here by the Archbishop, are not, Vt ex
omnibus Provinciis; or (which is more) from all particular Churches, which the
Archbishop says: But -- Vt saltem ex majori part Christianarum Provinciarum
aliqui conveniant. See touching this matter, what is said before,. 35. etc. --
65, 66, 67, 69. Whether a Council be General; or, in its obligation, equivalent
thereto, much matters not; that Council is equivalent to a General, whose
Decrees are accepted by the much major part, * of the Church-Catholick, or * of
all particular Churches in it. Now the Greek Churches do agree with the Council
of Trent, in the chief points determined therein, against the reformed. See 3.
Disc.. 158, etc.
-- Their Prelates also were invited in the General Summons; and the Council, or
those who called it, no causers of their absence, but their great distance;
their Present secular poverty, and oppression: The open wars then between the
Turk and Christendom. Lastly, the general accord and peace in their Churches,
as to the Trent Controversies.

b.
See before,. 70, 75, 77. The paucity of Prelates in some Sessions (occasioned
by the long duration of the Council; by the wars, and jealousies of Princes, by
the Bishops necessary defense of their several charges at home against the
reformed, in France, and Germany) was abundantly recompensed * by the
ratification of the Decrees of those Sessions by a very numerous, and unanimous
Body assembled in the later end of the Council, and * by the acceptance of the
absent Prelates, after the Council.

To g.
See what has been said,. 47. etc. 80, 81. It was called, as General Councils
ought, and use, to be: namely by the Prime Patriarch, and chief Ecclesiastical
Person of Christianity, presiding in such Councils (as other inferior Councils
are also usually assembled by the Ecclesiastical Prelates presiding therein;)
the Emperor, and much major part of Christian Princes consenting to it,
desiring it, and sending their Bishops, and Orators, to it.

To d.
This title [representing the Church Vniversal] (never used by any General
Council, save only by Constance, and Basil, who also decreed a General Council
its superiority to the Pope) was opposed by the Pope, or his Legates; not
because he held not this Council to be General, or Ecumenical; for the title
of it every where, with the Pope's approbation, runs, -- Haec sacrosancta
Oecumenica and Generalis Tridentina Synodus; but because he held, no General
Council whatever, neither that of Trent, nor that of Nice, to represent the
Universal Church, exclusively to him; i. e. so as to have authority to
conclude, and oblige the whole Church by its Acts, without these Acts first
receiving their confirmation from the Sea Apostolic. That this only was the
Controversy, see witnessed by Soave, p. 138. Now this: whether the Acts of a
General Council, unconfirmed by the Prime Patriarch of the Church, be valid?
the Dr. knows has always been a question among Roman Catholics, and so has
that Proposition in him ( Haeres. 11. s. 9. n. 10.) Whether the Universal
Church Representative understood so, as not including the Apostolic See, may
err? -- Or, Whether the testimony of an Ecumenical Council, understood
exclusively to the Apostolic See, be the testimony of the whole Church? Which
question as some of the French Church seem to affirm, so other Churches deny;
neither was it decided in the Council of Trent (of which see what is said
before,. 155.) but yet, de facto, the Pope's Confirmation was desired by this
Council (see the last Act, Sess. 25.) Neither does this thing concern the
Council of Trent more than any other General Council. Nor is the deciding of
this question material to the Protestants concerning any such Council, whose
Acts are confirmed by the Pope; in which the stating of this question surely is
needless; whether such acts are also of force without the Pope?

To e.
See what is said,. 67, 64. Neither does the absence of Protestant Clergy,
such as are not Bishops, disauthorize the Council; for such have no right to
sit, or vote in it: Nor the voluntary absence of Protestant Bishops, if
invited; if secured; as they were. n="" See. 68.82. etc. 92.
Nor, lastly, the exclusion, or non admittance of them; if guilty of Tenants
censured and condemned by former lawful Councils: as many of the former
Protestant Doctrines were: n="" See. 198.
The several causes, alleged by Protestants for absenting themselves, have
been showed in this discourse not sufficient, or satisfactory, from. 82. to
122. and from. 159. to. 172.

To z. To z.
review the answer to ^. See the reason of the absence of the French Bishops in
some Sessions, no way chargable on the Council, or on the non-freedom thereof,
before,. 70 etc.

To ^.
See what is said,. 167. where is showed; that the nearness, and non-impediment
of the Italian Bishops by reason of the freedom of that Country from
Lutheranisme, and not any particular interest of theirs, thwarting the
proceedings of the Council, was the true cause of their being so numerous. That
the absence of other Bishops was culpable, but no way, their presence: that the
much major part of them were Subjects to other Princes (the Emperor, King of
Spain; Duke of Florence; the State of Venice, etc.) not the Pope; and did
manifestly in the Council follow and adhere to their Interests, and
Instructions, in several matters. That, as to the Protestant Controversies, the
Pope had no need of their assistance against the rest, the whole Council in
these unanimously according: and that, as to the contests between the Episcopal
and Papal Rights, many of them sided against him; which is every where showed
also in Soave's History describing the great perplexities, and Artifices of the
Pope, and his Legates, in preserving his pretended privileges, and not that
they might be confirmed or asserted by the Council; but that, not diminished or
voted down by it. Lastly, that, however such a number of Italian Bishops might
hinder something, prejudicial to the Pope, from being voted in the Council; yet
were they insufficient alone to vote any thing, or to pass any Decree, at least
in matter of Doctrine, against the rest: because no such things were valid, a
considerable part dissenting; as the non-Italian, or also the Bishops of any
one greater Nation, were granted to be.

To th. To th.
See what is said,. 39. etc. 67. An universal Acceptance by all Churches of
the Acts of a Council, to render them obliging, is not necessary; for so none
would be valid, wherein the Doctrines of any Church are censured.

To ^.
See what is said,. 77. Both the Ecclesiastical, and Civil State of France
accepted the Trent Decrees as to matter of Doctrine; the things, wherein
Protestants chiefly oppose it. The Ecclesiastical State of France accepted, and
petitioned the King and Civil State to receive, this Council also in points of
Discipline. And if the Civil State received it not in every thing, I mean, so
far, as it meddled not with their temporal rights, I think, it appears, from the
former Justification of the Legality of this Council, that they cannot be freed
from fault: Neither, if that State refuse these Canons of Discipline, will it
just fie the Protestants for refusing the rest, of Doctrine: unless the French
plead the Council totally illegal, as they do not; neither will it justify the
Protestants, at least, in refusing these; if the French do, faultily, refuse
them.

To l. To l.
See what is said,. 254. n. 1.
from. 113. to. 127. where is showed. 1st As to the Bishops; That the same plea
has been usually made against former Councils by the Heretics, they
condemned. That the Christian world was divided into Arrians, and Anti-Arrians
before the Council of Nice, as it was into Catholics, and Protestants before
that of Trent; and the Arrians were many ways proceeded against, before the
assembling of that Council, by some of those Bishops; who yet afterward sat in
Council as their Judges; and the Anti-Arrian Bishops only, as the major number,
condemned the other. That the Church Governors, whatever their persuasions are
formerly known to be in the controversy proposed, cannot be removed from the
Tribunal, for the deciding purely ecclesiastical, and spiritual, matters; and
this is only necessary (not, to see, whether they side any way, or own a party;
but only) to see on which side is the major part: That in causes of Religion,
in which all men are concerned, and the Clergy especially stand obliged
earnestly to defend the truth, and oppose Novelties, and are culpable in
remaining neuters, and omitting this duty (to use Mr. Chilling-worths words) it
is in a manner impossible to be avoided, but that the Judge must be, some way
or other, a party; if he may be called a party, who has formerly declared
himself of such an opinion. But, if their being questioned of judging in their
own cause, relate not here to matters of opinion, but of honor, or profit;
then, for most matters defined in the Council of Trent, its judgment cannot be
declined on this later account, being given in matters, merely speculative, or
at least, far remote from such Secular concernments.

2ly As to the Pope: That the same things may be repeated for him, as for the
Bishops. That Popes have often presided by their Legates in former allowed
Councils, when they were accused, and excepted against, by those persons, for
the judging of whose cause the Council was convened: As Celestine, excepted
against by Nestorius, presided in the Third, and Leo, by Dioscorus, in the
Fourth, General Council. That it is thought most reasonable, that the supreme
Civil Judge, either by himself, or his Substitutes, be the Judge of all those
causes, which concern his own Rights, when there is a controversy in these
between him, and some of his Subjects. That, if the Pope, for defects in his
Office, or other personal faults, be Table to any other Judge, it must be to
the Council. Now by this Council he remains either cleared, or not condemned,
as to the Accusations of Protestants.

This having ever been the chief plea for those,. 254. n. 2.
who foresee, that they shall be over-numbred, and over-voted in a Council to
allege it to consist of a contrary Party; and so to decline its judgment (for,
usually, no Council happens to be called for suppressing any new Doctrine, till
a considerable opposition is first made by those Pastors of the Church against
such Doctrine, who also are the proper Judges of it) I think it not amiss, in
the last place, to give you the judgment of Protestants themselves touching the
insufficiency of such an excuse, when (by God's providence) it happened
afterward to be their own case, in, I think, the most noted, and general Synod,
that has been held amongst them since the Reformation; I mean, the Synod at
Dort, assembled, A. D. 1618. Wherein were present Delegates from the King of
England, Elector Palatine, Landgrave of Hess, the four Protestant-Cantons of
the Swisses, the Commonwealth of Geneva, etc. For some time, great Controversy
had been in the Low Countries concerning the high points of Predestination,
Grace, and Freewill; the Pastors there divided into Remonstrants, and
Contra-Remonstrants, the contest proceeding so far in several places, as to a
separation of Communion. Upon it this National Synod is called, and the
Remonstrants in this of Dort, foreseeing themselves in the same condition, as
the Protestants did in that of Trent, defenc^d themselves with the same Arts
and Excuses: See Acta Synod Dordrecht Sess. 25.
Alleged, that the Synod, excepting the Forrainers, did mostly consist (a
thing which could not be denied) of an already declared contrary Party, who, it
was unreasonable, that they should sit Judges in their own cause; a party too,
who had before also separated themselves from communicating with the
Remonstrants; and amongst other things, those Remonstrants did particularly
insist upon this very plea, we are now speaking to, of the Protestants against
the Council of Trent; which was held justly to exempt them from any obligation
to its Decrees. They required also a Synod, as the Protestants did in the time
of that of Trent, In which a set and equal number on either side might be
chosen to consider, how to accommodate, rather than decide, these
Controversies: After which, any Clergy dissenting, being only removed from
their places, might still enjoy the same liberty of conscience as others: For
that, since the Apostles, there was no such infallible Guidance of the Holy
Spirit, but that Modern Synods might err; as several Ancient had done. See
Synod Delf. Sess. 26.


In answer to this; the Synod defends it self (all the foreign assistants
thereof concurring in their judgment) with such replies as these,. 254. n. 3.
Than which, only changing the name, I cannot imagine a better justification of
the Council of Trent. 1st Concerning the members of the Synod, their being of a
contrary persuasion, and so a Party, and Judges; They say (see Acta Synod.
Dordr. Sess. 26. p. 84. Nunquam praxin hanc Ecclesiarum fuisse; ut, Pastores,
quoties exorientibus erroribus, ex officio. sese opponerent [as the Tridentine
Bishops, before that Council, did] propterea jure suffragiorum, aut de illis
ipsis erroribus judicandi potestate, exciderent. Ita enim omnem everti
judiciorum Ecclesiasticorum ordinem; efficique, ne Pastores officio suo
fideliter fungi queant. Again, p. 88. -- Eos, qui in doctrina aut moribus
scandalorum authors sunt, semper Censores suos, Consistoria, Classes, Synodos,
seu partem adversam, rejicere. -- Ad eum modum, Arrianis aliisque olim
haereticis, adversus Orthodoxos Pastores semper licuisset excipere. And, -- Quo
pacto (say they) iis Pastores se neutros, ut loquuntur, praebebunt (Quando
praesertim tam multi anni intercedunt, priusquam legitimum and publicum
Ecclesiae judicium obtineri potest) quum Deus illis praecipiat, ut serio
Doctrinae sinceritati attendant.

The English Divines there deliver their judgment also in the same case very
solidly. -- Non valet (say they) ad Synodi hujus, [but suppose they had said
Tridentinae] authoritatem enervandam, quod causentur Remonstrantes maximam
Synodi partem constare ex adversariis suis: Neque natural jus permittere, ut,
qui adversarius est, in causa sua judex sedeat. 1. Nam huic sententiae
refragatur primo perpetua praxis omnium Ecclesiarum. Nam in Synodis.
Oecumenicis, Nicaeno, etc. ii, qui antiquitus receptam doctrinam oppugnarunt,
ab illis, qui eandem sibi traditam admiserunt approbarunt, examinati judicati,
damnati, sunt. 2. Ipsius rei necessitas huc cogit. Theologi enim, in negocio
Religionis, neque esse solent tanquam abrasae tabulae, neque esse debent. Si
igitur soli neutrales possunt esse Judices, extra Ecclesiam, in qua lites
enataesunt, quaerendi essent. 3. Ipsa aequitas hocsuadere videtur. Nam quae
ratio reddi potest, ut suffragiorum jure priventur omnes illi Pastores, qui, ex
officio, receptam Ecclesiae doctrinam propugnantes, secus docentibus adversati
sunt. Si hoc obtinuerit, nova dogmata spargentibus nemo obsisleret, ne, ipso
facto, jus omne postmodum de illis controversiis judicandi amitteret. Enough of
this.

2. Again:. 254. n. 4
For the just and obliging authority of this Council, and the Credibility, at
least of its not erring, they urge. See Sess. 26. Syn. Delf.
-- Christum Dominum, qui Apostolis promisit spiritum veritatis, Ecclesiae
quoque suae pollicitum esse, se cum ea usque ad finem saeculi mansurum, Matt.
28.20. And, -- Vbi duo, aut tres in ipsius nomine congregati fuerint, se in
eorum medio futurum, Matt. 18.20. They urge the precept of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.29, 31. -- Vt judicetur de iis, quae Prophetae loquuntur: And, --
Prophetarum Spiritus prophetis subjecti sint. And the Geneva Divines, Sess. 29.
urge also, -- Dic Ecclesiae, -- and -- Si Ecclesiam non audiverit, etc.

3ly. In defense of the Protestants refusing submission to the Judgment of the
Council of Trent,. 254. n. 5.
because it was a party, without their allowing the same privilege to the
Remonstrants, for that of Dort, they answer, -- Sess. 25. p. 82.
Valde disparem esse hanc comparationem. Illos enim [the Remonstrants, and
Contra-Remonstrants] eidem subesse Magistratui. And, -- Remonstrantes membra
esse Ecclesiarum Belgicarum, and Reformatarum. See the same said again, Sess.
26. p. 85. But, according to this answer, the reason, why the Protestants
denied their submission to the Council of Trent must not be, because it
consisted of an adverse party, but because all its members were not Subjects of
the same Prince; a thing never alleged before. But here I ask, Is there then,
no preservation of the Churches unity by Synods, no subordination of Clergy, no
rule of one party, the Superior and Major, judging another, the Inferior and
Minor, any further, than only in such little parcels of the Church, as happen
to live under the same Secular Governors? Are our Lords Promises, and, Dic
Ecclesiae, all confined to these? What will become of the Authority of
Ecumenical and Patriarchal Councils? Why not in these also one Ecclesiastical
major Party judge another, as well as in that of Dort. Credo unam, Catholicam,
Ecclesiam: How this Church One, if united in no one common Government and
Subjection? But if it be: here also one party must judge another; and so the
Protestants alleging the Council of Trent an adverse Party, availes them
nothing, as to the annulling of its Judgment. But, as the Remonstrants, yet
further replied See Synod. Delf. Sess. 26
If, at least, of the Clergy living under the same Secular Government one
adverse Party may judge the other, then may a Synod of the Catholic Clergy in
France oblige the Protestant Clergy there to stand to their sentence: To this,
therefore, the Synod shapes another answer, as me seems no better, than the
former: That all Protestants are freed from being tried or judged by the Popish
party in Synods, Conc. Delf in Acta Dordrecht, Sess. 6.
For that -- Primi Ecclesiae Reformatores pro Doctoribus Ecclesiae Pontificiae
haberi noluerunt, sed contra ab iis secessionem fecerunt. Again, Ibid, -- Isti
nunquam Ecclesiae Pontificiae Doctores censeri voluerunt, sicuti Hi [ i. e. the
Remonstrants] pro Ecclesiae Reformatae Doctoribus habert cupiunt. So also the
Geneva Divines, Sess. 29. deliver their judgment, -- Licuit (say they) nostris
protestari adversus Concilium Constantiense, and Tridentinum: quia non
profitemur unionem cum illis: Imo ill am aspernamur, and aversamur. But, I say:
does our renouncing, and professing to have no communion with a lawful,
Superior Ecclesiastical Authority presently, in justice, free us from it? For
example, the Presbyter Arius his renouncing communion with the Bishop of
Alexandria? or the Presbyter Luther, with his Ecclesiastical Superiors in
Saxony? Is there not a due subordination both of persons and Synods, from the
lowest to the highest, as well in several, as in the same secular Governments,
to preserve the unity of the Church not only Belgic, or Brittannick, but
Catholic? Which gradual Authority all those are obliged to obey, and conform
to, and are liable to its censures; not who voluntarily profess obedience, but
who truly, according to the Churches Canons, do owe it; as the Protestants did
to that of Trent, and owe it not a whit the less for their declaring against
it: Else so many as will venture to be schismatics, and divide, will put
themselves out of the reach of the Churches Spiritual Courts; And, had the
Remonstrants, to their supposed innovation in doctrine, added a separation in
communion from the rest of the Belgic Clergy, the Contra-Remonstrants, they
had, by this second fault, freed themselves from having been either justly
tried or censured by the Synod: and their declaring once, -- Non profitemur
unionem cum vobis: immo illam aspernamur, and aversamur, would have voided all
the counter-actings of the Synod of Dort; as these Dort-Divines say, the
Reformed's like Protestation did, those of Trent.

Leo. the Tenth did no wrong in declaring the Protestant-tenents Heresies, To m.
if several of them were condemned by several allowed Councils, See. 198.
and consequently the maintainers of them, were Heretics: Yet is it usual for
Councils, and other Courts of Judicature, to reiterate their sentence so often,
as offenders reiterate the same faults, or revive the same errors: And
therefore was this done in Trent.

To n.
See. 83, 92. The place of the Council was chosen by the consent of most
Christian Princes: no place could be appointed of an equal convenience for all
Countries: the place was under the Emperors power, as himself often declared;
not accessible by the Popes forces; and secure enough to the main Body of
Protestants, those of Germany; from which place also their forces, when time
was, frighted the Council: Lastly, nearer to them than to the Catholics of
Spain, and France. A Saseconduct also the Protestants had, as large, as could
justly be desired; and the Exceptions they took against it, were unreasonable.
Of which see before,. 104. The Council of Constance is also much wronged, and
the proceedings thereof against Jo. Huss misrelated: Of which see before,. 101.
The Divines also that, upon the Safe Conduct, came to the Council of Trent,
were courteously treated, and dismissed; though the designs of those Princes,
that sent them thither, were treacherous, and bloody.. 68, 90.


To e.
The whole abode of the Protestant Divines of Trent, from their first coming to
their departure, was but in all about a Fortnights time; after which short time
the Protestant Princes, unexpectedly, appeared in Arms. Though it is true also,
that at their coming one of the Legates his accidentally falling sick of a
disease, of which he died within a few weeks, somewhat retarded the business of
treating with them; the manner of which treaty required much deliberation.
Lastly, by their printing the defense of their tenants the Fathers of the
Council heard sufficiently what they could say; yet were no way sweyed with
their Arguments,

To p.
See. 68. n. 2. and what is said before to l. To refer the judgment of
Spiritual matters to Lay-persons, as more indifferent; or to change the former
ordinary Ecclesiastical Judges of such Controversies, because these are
fore-known to be of a contrary opinion to those, who are to appear before their
Tribunal is showed before,. 254. to be a most unreasonable demand. Neither, if
such thing had been granted, could it have advantaged the Protestants: For,
whether their Judge had been the whole, and not only the Episcopal, Clergy, or
Secular Princes, or People; a major part of all these, they knew, to be
Catholic, and of a belief opposite to theirs. See before. 115. n. 2.. 118. etc.
And, whom their writings had hitherto not changed, or persuaded, why should
they think their discourse, or disputes would? Lastly; an equal number on both
sides, without any umpirage, appointed to be their Judges, is a Court, that,
where either party is resolute, can proceed to no sentence. They, who foresee a
major part of those, to whom our Lord has committed the Government, and
guidance of his Church, opposing their Doctrine, are already self-condemned, as
to Authority; and ought not to seek a new Judge, but reform their errors.

To.
See what is said,. 105. To show, that this Oath was not given in any prejudice
to the freedom of the Council, for 1st. It was only an oath used at
Ordinations, not new framed for, or imposed on, the Council at Trent. It, or
the like was anciently taken by the Bishops when ordained, without being
thought prejudicial to the liberty of former Councils. 2. Again an Oath it was
only obliging to a legal obedience due by the Divine, or Church-laws (an Oath
to this purpose being taken also by Protestant Bishops;) and so, strengthening
only that engagement of Bishops to the observance of these laws, which they had
before, when yet unsworn. So that, notwithstanding such Oath, they might
question any Papal pretended right, which they thought not Canonical: As also
it is clear they freely did, without any thought, or jealousy, of their
trespassing against this Oath, and without the Pope's Legates objecting it to
them. 3. Again; neither did such Oath, in such a sense, restrain them to
observance of the Canons; as that now, when in a conjunct Body, and the Sea
Apostolic concurring, they might not also abrogate, and change the same
Canons, as thought fit. 4 However; An Oath it was laying no restraint upon the
Counicls liberty, as to voting any way concerning most of the Protestant
Controversies: unless perhaps that of the Popes Supremacy. 5. Again, If this
Oath binding them to any thing thought unlawful, their learning well enough
knew, they were, without any Dispensation, obliged to break, not keep, it; and
that in an unlawful engagement, every one is free from it, as soon as he knows
it such, 6. Lastly, this Oath being taken generally by all, how come the
French; and Spanish Bishops to be said to have acted so diversely from the
Italian Bishops, if all were so straightly tied, by the same Oath, to the Popes
interest.

As for what is said, -- That none had suffrage in this Council, but such as
were professed enemies to all, that called for Reformation, or a free Council:
Here, since it cannot be denied; that all the Bishops, present in Trent, had
Suffrages, none excluded, it is by the Objectors confessed, that not only a
Major part, but the whole Council of Trent, was an enemy to the Reformation;
and the Pope, as to all those Points, that proceeded singly against them,
secure enough of a full vote, without the multiplying of Italian, or Titular,
or Pensionary, Bishops.

To s. 1
1 See. 160 The proposal of the Legates could alter nothing in the Councils
votes as to the things that were proposed; especially as to those Protestant
Controversies, wherein they unanimously agreed; but only could hinder some
things from being voted, because not proposed, But no Protestant Controversies
are found so omitted. Again, such Proposal seems very necessary for order sake;
nor was any way used by the Legates to abridge the desires of any considerable
part of the Council concerning any proponends, as is amply showed, See. 164.
160.

To. s. 2
2 Things were first consulted on, and voted in Trent, not at Rome; the Pope
usually advertised of their Consultations, after the judgment of the
Congregations already passed, returned Instructions to his Legates, before the
General Sessions, concerning his opinion of the matter in hand; and commendable
had it been, and advantageous to the Synod, could the Bishops, or Metropolitans
of each Province have done the like to their Representatives. Celestine, and
Leo declared their judgments to the third and fourth General Council, not to
give a law to them, but advice. If the Pope's Instructions to his Legates
concerning any Points to be handled in Council were lawful before the Council,
why not during it: Especially the matters being so various, as that the Legates
were not capable of such Instructions all at once; neither did this encroach on
the liberty of the Council: unless it can be showed, that the Council was
obliged to follow it; which, it is clear, they were not, because, de facto,
they many times opposed it. Neither was any thing in matter of Doctrine voted
in Council, whatever instructions came in the male from Rome, a considerable
part resisting.

To t.
See what is said,. 170, 171. The Popes Pensions given to some poorer Bishops,
during so long a Session of the Council, might be an effect of his charity, not
policy. However, it is clear, that their assistance to him was useless as to
Protestant Controversies; and stood him in little stead as to those Catholic
ones, wherein a considerable part of the Council opposed him; none of which
were passed for him; if any perhaps were hindered by his party from being passed
against him, this was the uttermost of any service, done by his Pensioners. As
for many Titular Bishops sent, and new Bishoprics erected, during the Council*
whilst those things are only in general said, and no particulars named, they
carry the suspicion of a groundless report.

To n.
The Councils determining things repugnant to Scripture. 1 That no injunction
repugnant to the Holy Scriptures is to be obeyed, is on all sides agreed on:
But, that some of the Councils decrees are contrary to the Scriptures, as it is
a thing affirmed by the Protestants, the lesser; so is it denied by the
Council, and its adherents, much the major, part of the Doctors and
Church Governors of the West. We are to seek then, which of them, our duty
does oblige us to obey, and follow.

Next, 2 As to the Councils determining things not warranted by Scripture, See
before,. 176. the two Propositions (both Divine Revelation) whereby the
Scriptures warrant the Church, in her defining, and requiring a belief of, such
things to be lawful, and in her injoyning such things to be practiced, as the
Holy Scriptures have not prohibited, or declared against. This warrant from the
Scriptures, for any of their Decrees, the Council wants not: and affirms no
further warrant from them, as to such Decrees, necessary.

To PH
I answer. 1st, That the Council of Trent allows no Tradition, extra
Scripturas, or unwritten there, to be sufficient ground of defining matter of
faith, unless it be Tradition Apostolical. -- Traditiones (says It) See Sess.
4. Decret. de Canon Scrip.
quae exipsius Christi ore ab Apostolis acceptae, aut ab ipsis Apostolis,
spiritu sancto dictante, quasi per manus traditae ad nos usque pervenerunt. --
And Salv. Conduct. Sess. 15.
-- Vult S. Synodus quod causae controversae secundum sacram Scripturam, and
Apostolorum Traditiones etc. in praedicto Concilio tractentur.

2ly That any Council should make the word of God delivered by the Apostles
either by Tradition written (the Holy Scriptures) or unwritten ( i. e. by
them,) equally a ground of Faith* where there is a certainty, equal, or
sufficient, of the one, as of the other, that it is Apostolical* I see not, how
it can be liable to any Censure. -- Of this thus Mr. Stillingfleet, p. 210.
-- Your next inquiry is to this sense: Whether Apostolical Tradition be not
then as credible, as the Scriptures? I answer freely: (supposing it equally
evident,) what was delivered by the Apostles to the Church by word, or writing,
has equal Credibility. [As for the necessity of standing Records, which he
there alleges, from the speedy decay of an Orall Tradition; this is
sufficiently remedied, if the Apostles Successors at least do commit to writing
things which were by them orally received]. And thus Mr. Chillingw. -- We
conceive no antipathy between God's Word written, and unwritten, but that both
might stand very well together, -- If God had pleased, he might so have
disposed it, that part might have been written, and part unwritten: but then he
would have taken order, to whom we should have had recourse for that part of
it, which was not written [So he has, sending us to our spiritual Guides, Heb.
13.7, 17. -- Ephesians. 4.11, 14.
who do, by Tradition of their Predecessors writings conve^^^^^^ to us that
right sense of Scriptures, which is dubious in the written letter of them.]
3ly. None can rationally deny, that the Traditive Doctrine of the Church-Guides
would have been a sufficient ground of our faith, had the Scriptures not been
written, because it was so, before they were written; and is so still to some,
who cannot read them written; or know, that others read them right. Of this
also thus Mr. Stillingf. p. 208.
-- It is evident from the nature of the thing, that the writing of a divine
Revelation is not necessary for the ground, and reason of faith, as to that
revelation: Because men may believe a Divine Revelation without it; as is not
only evident in the case of the Patriarchs, but of all those, who in the time
of Christ, and his Apostles, did believe the truth of the Doctrine of Christ,
before it was written, -- and this is still the case of all illiterate persons,
who cannot resolve their faith properly into the Scripture, but into the
Doctrine delivered them out of the Scripture. 4ly We find the first General
Councils, universally allowed, to have grounded their Decrees upon the Argument
of Tradition, and the Doctrine, or Interpretation, of Scriptures, descended to
them from former ages, as well as upon the Text of Scriptures; and by both
these, not one of them singly, to have defended their cause against Heretics.
Of which thus Athanasius. Synodi Nicen: decreta.
-- Ecce nos demonstramus istiusmodi sententiam a Patribus ad Patres, quasi per
manus, traditam esse, -- and, -- In eo Concilio illa sunt scripta, quae ab
initio ipsi, qui Testes oculati, and Ministri verbi fuere, tradiderunt. Fides
enim quae scriptis, decretisque Synodi sancita est, ea est totius Ecclesiae.
And, Epistol. ad Epictetum.
-- Ego arbitrabar omnium (quotquot unquam fuere) haereticorum inanem
garrulitatem, Nicaeno Concilio sedatam esse. Nam fides, quae inibi a Patribus,
secundum sacras Scripturas, tradita, and confessionibus confirmata est, satis
mihi idonea, essicaxque videbatur ad omnem impietatem evertendam, and pietatem
ejus, quae in Christo est, fidei constituendam. 5ly. Protestants, in some point
of faith, ground their belief only, or at least sufficiently, on Tradition
Stillingf. pt. 1 c. 7.
namely in this: That the Scriptures are God's Word; and consequently must
allow any other Tradition of equal evidence a sufficient ground of any other
Article of Faith; and so do, -- When you can produce (says Mr. Stillingf. p.
210.
) a^ certain evidence of any Apostolical Tradition distinct from Scripture, as
we can do, that the Books of Scripture were delivered by the Apostles to the
Church, you may then be hearkened to. And Mr. Chillingworth, p. 73.
-- Prove your whole Doctrine by such a Tradition [as that by which the
Scripture is proved to be God's Word] and we will yield to you in all things.
6ly Tradition, unwritten in Scripture, is either a delivery of something not
contained in Scripture, or the exposition, or delivery of the true sense of
what is contained there: The latter sort of which Traditions the Church much
more makes use of, and vindicates, than the former (see Disc. 2.. 40. n 2.)
Again, both these Traditions are either only orall, (in which is the less
certainty,) or also committed to writing by the Apostles Successors. Now an
unanimous Tradition of the sense of Scriptures found in the writings of the
Fathers, is also often pretended to be made use of by Protestants as the ground
of their faith, where the sense of Scripture is in dispute. For, if we ask
them, whether the letter of Scripture only, or the sense, is that which they
believe, and call Gods word, or divine Revelation; they answer, that they
believe the sense of it to be so: If asked again, in Scriptures of dubious
interpretation, why they believe this to be the sense, not another; they
answer, because this by primitive Tradition is delivered to be the sense of it;
which Tradition, so early, so universal, etc. they believe to have descended
from the Apostles. 7ly Concerning, what Traditions have the Evidence of
Apostolical (as Protestants grant some have) what not, I know no other
authorized, or also fitter, judge, than the Council; nor any other way, that
the Church can deliver her Judgment in them, than by her Councils. And, if
Councils are to Judge, what Traditions are such, the same Councils may proceed,
where they find these clear, to ground their decrees on them, as such. This is
said to show: that Traditions, if evidently Apostolical, are a sufficient
ground of faith; that some Traditions are granted to be evidently so; and, that
private Christians depend on the Churches Judgment, which are so; That ancient
allowed Councils have used the Argument of Tradition, as well as of Scripture,
to ^^prove the verity of their Definitions; and for these reasons, the Council
of Trent Sess. 4.
seems not culpable, if using the same as a ground for her defining
Controversies, de fide. 8. But, 8ly I know no definition of the Council of
Trent in any matter of faith, that is opposed by Protestants, which is not
pretended to be grounded on the Divine Scriptures* On these Scriptures, either,
if it be in speculative points of faith, revealing it; Or, if in matter of
practice, either commanding, or not prohibiting it: This latter being enough
for an obliging of that assent, or belief, which the Council requires, viz.
that the thing, not so prohibited, is lawful. 9. Lastly, where ever the
Protestants for the points in Controversy press the Council of Trents defining
them from pretended Tradition, not only extra, but, contra, Scripturam
[speaking of the true sense thereof] the Catholics freely join with them;
that, where any Tradition is not said, but proved contrary to Scripture ( i. e.
the pretended Apostolic unwritten Tradition contrary to the written) such
unwritten Tradition is to be rejected, the other followed.

To.
That nothing, as matter of faith, was defined by the Council of Trent, which
has not descended from, and is not warranted by, Apostolical Tradition, is as
constantly affirmed by Catholics, as denied by Protestants. That nothing is
maintained by the Council as Apostolical Tradition, that is repugnant to what
is unanimously delivered in the writings of the first 300 years is also
asserted by Catholics, as the contrary is pretended by Protestants. But that
nothing is, or may be pretended Apostolical Tradition, but what can be showed
unanimously delivered in the foresaid writings (as if all that descended to
posterity must needs be, in them, so few, so short, set down, and registered)
this as Protestants allege it a just, so Catholics hold it too short a,
measure, by which to examine Traditions Apostolical. This for matters of faith;
as for other things decreed, or enjoined by the Council to be practiced; and so
consequently, this to be believed of them, that the practice thereof is lawful;
it is not necessary, that such things be warranted by Apostolical Tradition,
but only, that they cannot be showed repugnant to it.

To ps.
See what has been said at large in satisfaction to this great complaint,
from. 173. to 203. Where is showed; that the Lutheran's many erroneous opinions
in matter of faith engaged the Council to so many contrary definitions; and
that it is no wonder, if the Decrees of this Council were a sum of former
Church Doctrine, and Tradition; as Lutheranisme was a complex of former errors
(probably, the last, and greatest attempt, that shall be made against the
Catholic Faith:) and that, for the Councils making so many Anathema's, it is
only their blame, who have broached, or revived so many dangerous Tenants. That
this Council has inserted no new Article into the former Creeds; though no
just cause can be alleged, why this Council (only, if supposed a General one)
might not have done so, had they thought fit, 1. no former Canon of any Council
(not that of Ephesus See. 77) having prohibited such a thing. 2 No former
Canon, that prohibits such a thing, being valid, or justly prescribing to a
succeeding Council of equal authority. That for its making new Definitions in
matters of Faith; and for its requiring assent to, or belief of, them under
Anathema, or Excommunication, it is, if a crime, a common one to it with all
other former allowed Councils, even the four first: and that the Protestants,
accusing this Council thereof, yet do the same thing in their own. That this
Co^ncil requires not, from all persons, an explicit knowledge and belief of, or
assent to, all these their Definitions under pain of losing Salvation; where an
ignorance of them is without contempt of the Churches Authority, and where the
persons, after knowing them, do not persist obstinatly ^o contradict, or refuse
to submit their judgment, and give credit to them, as the Decisions of a Judge,
authorized by our Lord to determine such Controversies, and ever preserved
infallible in all Necessaries. Lastly, That, in the beginning of the Council,
two ways being proposed, as Soave relates, the one, p. 192.
to condemn the Lutheran Heresy in general, and their Books; only singling out
some chief Article, thereof to be Anathematized; the other. -- To bring under
examination all the propositions of the Lutheran Doctrine capable of a bad
construction; and out of these to censure and condemn that, which, after mature
Deliberation, should seem necessary and convenient, with much reason the
Council seems to have taken the latter of these, though much more tedious and
painful, For the greater benefit both of those within, and those without, the
Churches Communion; that her children might more exactly know all those noxious
Tenants they were to avoid, and her adversaries those they were to reform. And
if, in taking this second way, the Council escaped not obloquy, yet much more
had they incurred it in taking the firsti; e. in condemning so many Persons and
their writings for many Corruptions of Catholic Truths, and then naming none,
or a few; and not using so much care in sifting the Novelties of Luther, who
drew such a train after him, as their Predecessors at Coustance did, in those
of Jo. Wicleff or Jo Huss.

Neither, in so particular a Discussion and Censure of the Lutheran Doctrines,
Example of many former Councils, very copious in their Anathemas against
Heresies of a much less latitude, and in some matters, as considered in
themselves, seeming of no great Malignity. For which; see no less than twelve
Anathemas of the third General Council passed against Nestorius, according to
the several Particulars, whereinto his Error had br^^ched it self, and colors,
he had laid upon it, though all pointing at one thing; two persons in our Lord
Christ (a thing Soave says, p. 192.
the Council of Trent took notice of, and set before them as a Pattern:) See
the 25 Anathemas of the Syrmian Council, all relating to several branches of
Photinianisme: The eight Anathematismes of the Milevitan Council pursuing all
the particular points of Pelagianisme. The eleven Anathemas of the second N^cen
Council, Act 7.
all about veneration of Images; The twenty Anathematismes of that ancient
Council at Gangra, A. D. 319. (wherein the famous Hosius was present)
pronounced against the Eustathians, letting nothing, how small soever it might
seem to be, in this their censure pass unbranded, wherein this Sect was found
to oppose the Churches common Doctrine, and Practice. Many of which Anathemas
of former Councils, if you please to compare with those of Trent, you shall
find several of them, as to the Gravity of the matter, much inferior: Lastly,
see the late Council at Constance condemning not only 45 propositions, of John
Wicliff recited there, Sess. 8.
but 260 more, besides; of the same temper: All which had been formerly with
much care, by the University of Oxford, gleaned out of his writings: they
bringing under their censure not only such Articles, as were Blasphemi,
Haeretici, or Sediosi, but also, as were temerarii, scandalosi, or piarum
aurium offensivi, and letting none escape them, that might do hurt. In the same
Council also afterward Sess. 15.
were no less than 30 propositions of John Huss condemned. Now, we may presume,
that Luther, and his Followers, to those who put their sickle into their books,
to bring to trial what seemed faults, could not but yield an harvest much more
fertile; Nor was the care here to be less, where the danger was much greater.
And, for this strict Inquisition, and search made by Councils, we owe great
thanks to the providence of God. For thus, whilst the wantonness and curiosity
of men's understanding, from the Faith delivered in General still descends to
things more particular; and so, raises new Disputes in the Church, and spreads
false opinions, the contrary Determinations of Councils (regulated by necessary
Consequences) render also the Christian Faith from time to time more
particular, and so, more exact, and less liable to the corrupted; when all that
(in question) comes to be stated, that is clearly evidenced, and the knowledge
thereof, any way useful. So, since the settling, by Council, of those
particular points contained in the Athanasian Creed, explicating that of the
Apostles much more short, and General, the Church, as to these points, has
enjoyed a great repose, and freedom from those disputes, with which some ages
of it before were miserably distracted. And, if the Decrees of the Council of
Trent have had the same effect (as Soave complains they have, in the beginning
of his History p. 1, 2.
) the Protestants may impute it to their precedent questioning of the Churches
Doctrine, and disturbance of her peace.

To o,
See what is said before,. 244. Been facere, male audire, is the common fortune
of Governors, and to the censorious and male contents the world is still out
of order (though God himself Governs it,) and the worst times are always the
present. Whether the Trent Decrees for Reformation, which were never so
numerous in any Council, and designed from the beginning of it to have an half
share, with points of Doctrine, in all their Consultations, and in the
composition of which so many several Parties, well seen at least in one
another Defects, concurred, were so contrived as to remove motes, and not
beams, to cure itches, not feavours, I must refer you to the re-consideration
of the particulars set down before, from,. 212. Neither may we think, that it
was the meddling with mo^es, that offended so much, either the Court of Rome,
or of France, as Soave tells us their reformation did. For any defects, still
seen in Church Government, Discipline, etc, (which always are, and will be,
many) it ought not to be charged on these laws, but the non execution of them;
which neglect also uses to be much more in those laws, that are more exact,
and perfect, and so more contrary to common practice. But, since the sitting of
this Council, there have not wanted those pious Bishops (as S. Carlo Borremeo,
and others) who molding their Reformations exactly according to these Decrees,
have manifested to the world the great perfection thereof.

To a a.
See what has been said in Defense of this Dispensative Power placed in the
supreme Ecclesiastical Governor, before,. 216. 1. The Council, weighing the
conveniences thereof with the inconveniences, yet declared, Sess. 25. De
Reform. Genesis c. 18.
-- Public expedit, legis vinculum quandoque relaxare, ut before,
evenientibus casibus, and necessitatibus, pro communi utilitate satissiat.
Else, the laws may sometimes hurt, where they should help. 2. Again, this
Dispensative Power, deposed in this Ecclesiastical Supreme, is no new
usurpation, but an ancient privilege enjoyed always by him; Of which see
before, 217. 3. Next: It had here some qualifications, and clogs laid upon it
by the Council: As; See before. 215.
that such Dispensation shall be accounted surreptitious and void, when not
given gratis, and causa prius cognita; the Ordinary being constituted the
Inspector and Examiner of this. Sess. 25. c. 18.
Now he must be very perversely wicked, who will issue forth such a
Dispensation, where he neither receives benefit by it, nor sees just cause for
it. 4. Lastly. The same Dispensative Power, as to the civil Laws, is reposed in
the Secular Supreme; neither is the vigor of such Laws esteemed to be
overthrown by it.

To b b. To b. b.
See before (. 204.) the contrary declared by Soave.

This briefly, here, to the Protestant Objections, the satisfaction of which
has been more largely prosecuted through the whole Body of the former
Discourse.

And thus, through many obstacles, I have at length finished my Design, the
Vindication of a Council, which, once admitted, has passed a peremptory
sentence against the new pretended Reformation, and determined all the chiefest
modern Controversies,

CHAP. XIII.
Of the pretense of following Conscience, against Church Authority.
Two Defenses against obeying, or yielding Assent to, Church Authority,. 271.

1. The Necessity of following our Conscience. 2. The Certainty of a Truth,
that is opposed by the Church.
Reply to the first,

That following our Conscience, when misinformed, excuses not from fault.. 272.

Three ways, whereby the Will usually corrupts the Judgment or Conscience, and
misleads it, as it pleases, in matters of Religion.

1. Diverting the intellect to other employments, and not permitting it at all
to study and examine, matters of Religion,. 274, 2. Permitting an inquiry or
search into matters of Religion: but this not impartial, and universal,. 275.
3. Admitting a free, and universal, search as to other points controverted in
Religion, but not as to Church Authority,. 277.
Where, That the Judgment may, and often does, oblige men to go against their
own Opinion, and seeming Reason,. 278.

Legal Authority of this Council, some perhaps will wish this labor had been
rather spent in a confirmation, by solid and evident arguments, of the Truth of
its particular Decrees: because, though we have our end, and though this
Council should be granted justly to claim all that obedience, which will be
confessed due to the most supreme Church Authority; Yet this most Supreme
Church Authority is denied by Protestants rightly to challenge obedience from
its Subjects, especially that of assent, in several cases: Whereof two are much
urged, and so seem necessary here to be a little more exactly considered,
before I dismiss the Reader, that the precedent Discourse may not be
frustrated, by such pretenses, of its desired effect.

Guard, That is used against obedience to such Authority, is this. That none
can be justly obliged to obey any humane Authority, so, as to go against his
conscience, or profess any thing truth, which he thinks error. For, though such
person err in thinking such thing an error, yet must such an erroneous
conscience, and not such Authority, in this case, be followed, and obeyed.

The second is: That, at least, none are obliged to obey the Definitions, or
Judgment, of a legal Church Authority, where such are, not only persuaded in
conscience, but demonstratively certain (as some affirm they are) of the
contrary to its Definition; and that, therein, it manifestly erreth.

doubt, and fear of the contrary, here the Will, or the Person, ought to
suspend action, and put the Judgment first on a further search. 2ly That, where
such sear is not, the Judgment (erring, or not erring) is indeed to be obeyed:
because the person always supposes this, not to err, but to propose what is
right, since he has no way to know when it erres, but by it self: And it also
can never err knowingly, or willingly. 3ly Yet: That in the action, wherein he
follows it when erring, he may much offend God; and this more or less,
according to the quality of the error, namely, where the Judgment, or
Conscience, does not invincibly, but culpably, err; and has means of being
better informed, and so of discovering its error. So the Jews, when killing our
Lord and his Apostles, most grievously offended God, in following an erroneous
Judgment, or Conscience dictating to them, that they did God good service
herein. And indeed it is a great art of the Devil, as much as he can, to put
out the eye of the Judgment, to make men act more resolutely, where Conscience
leads them on; he finding, that the zeal of ignorance does him far more
service, than a timorous hypocrisy, and dissembling against Conscience, could
ever do.

Will, that is entrusted; though the understanding does the work. For we must
know; that, though the Understanding, in its assents, or dissents, acts
necessarily; and cannot but know, and believe, what it knows, and believes: and
does generally in all its acts follow the evidence of its object (so far as it
appears,) not the command of the will: And, therefore, Secondly, as to those
Principles that are per se nota, and self-evident [as; That every whole is
bigger than a part: The same thing cannot be, and not be. Equals taken from
Equals, the remains will be equal: Good is to be followed, Evil avoided,] the
Judgment cannot suffer the least corruption, or alteration, from the Will:
Whence it is, that as to such Principles, all men, how differently soever
engaged in their affections, do fully consent, and agree. Yet, as for other
propositions, the truth of which is not discerned from any self-evidence, but
learned by proofs and arguments drawn from some other things better known, here
the truth of such proposition cannot be attained, but by the industry and
application of the intellect to the study, and discovery of such proofs; and
again, such application of the intellect to one thing, or another, for a
little, or a long time, depends wholly on the Will. And thus come our opinions
and tenants to be subjected to our Will, and she again is so, commonly, to our
secular interests. And she, thus, by applying the Intellect, or Judgment, to
what things, and how far, she thinks fit, makes in it what impressions she
pleases: And then, after all this, excuses her self; that she is led by it;
that it is appointed her Master, and Director; that it always necessarily
assents to what appears truth to it, and that she regularly practices, and
lives according to, its dictates. And she corrupts it, in those who deny
obedience, in spiritual matters, to that Ecclesiastical Authority to which it
is due, commonly by one of these three ways following. Which charity toward
those, who are frequently thus deceived, obliges me here first to set down
more particularly; and then, to consider some remedies thereof.

Will, then, is wont to abuse the Judgment, or Conscience. 1. Either first, by
keeping it in much ignorance, as to those things wherein more knowledge may
happen to be prejudicial to her, and check her contents; Applying it rather to
Secular Affairs, or Humane Literature, and cautiously waving the consideration
of matters of Religion, and keeping it a stranger from all such Debates; that
so, when it is summoned, by its local Superiors, to a profession thereof, it
may soon resolve it self out of that stock, which in our former Education it
has received from our Parents, or other Instructors: and may always, without
scruples, move with the common stream, where we live, and whereon depend our
fortunes: Or also, may readily become of any other persuasion, if a different
interest calls for it: whilst it is solidly founded in none, nor has any deep
counter-impression to any side; but keeps the judgment, as to these matters of
the greatest concernment, in an indifferent, tepid, lazy, lukewarm sloth, most
pernicious to so many, as are not, by God's merciful providence, ranged under
the Guidance of a just Church Authority. And, such persons, ordinarily, quiet
themselves with that persuasion of some of the Donatists mentioned by S.
Austin, Epist. 48.
-- Nihil interesse credentes, in qua part quis Christianus sit; and ideo
permanebunt in ea part, in qua nati sunt. Or else think, at least, by their
voluntary winking, that they shall be excused, if they after this, stumble, or
miss their way. -- Tria sunt (says this Father De utilitate Credendi, c. 11.
) hominum genera, profecto improbanda ac detestanda: Vnum eorum, qui neque se
scire existimant, nec quaerere volunt. Alte^um eorum. qui sentiunt quidem se
nescire, sed non ita quarunt, ut invenire possint. Tertium eorum, qui se
arbitrantur scire, quod nescinnt. These then seem to be of the first sort. Qui
neque se scire existimant, nec quaerere volunt. This is the first Deceit.

Will, (more piously inclined) thinks fit to apply it self to the considering
of matters of Religion (as which, surely, most concern all men, as to their
Salvation, and Eternity;) 2ly It has another way still of corrupting the
Judgment, * by permitting it only to be acquainted with such Authors, or
Directors, in these matters, as are of its party, and conspire with its
interests; and * by most carefully withholding it from such others, as write,
or teach contrary; unless it be only so much of them, as its own Authors take
in hand to confute. Which Authors, though they usually relate both sides of the
Controversy, and explain their adversaries Tenants, as well as their own, (and
so the Reader conceits himself impartial enough, in his receiving information
of both parties) yet seldom do they, I mean, those, who have not only an
Adversary, but the Truth, against them (for those Writers, who have truth on
their side, need no such arts) seldom, I say, do they do this entirely, or
advance and press their opponents reasons, or arguments any further, than they
think themselves able to resolve and dissipate them: Often do they misrelate,
often also misunderstand, them: Often is the Question, they not speaking to the
same thing, on both sides stated true: and the answer very good, because the
objection is proposed amiss, and a reply shaped, to their own, not their
Adversaries, Arguments: and thus the Judgment, confined by the Will to such a
partial information from persons, pleading both their Adversaries cause, and
their own, is, if not of an extraordinary apprehension, easily deluded; or if
such, much perplexed. The Fathers also, here not consulted by this judgment in
the^r own works, but only considered, as cited by these Authors in some short
Sentences disjoynted, and separated from the context (which, viewed in the
whole piece, perhaps would appear quite of another color) are made to speak
whatever the Controvertist pleases; and, in all matters disputed, are usually
brought in to bear witness on both sides. And by this device of conversing only
with one sort, or sect, of Authors, the Will renders the Judgment of what
opinion it pleases, by opening to the understanding in fair characters, and a
full prospect of them, all those arguments and reasons, that favor one side;
and removing quite out of sight, or much disfiguring, what is brought for the
contrary. Or at least, if, by many shifts, matters on both sides can but be
brought to an Aequilibrium; or, by much bandying to and fro, and multiplied
replies, be made appear somewhat intricat, and Quodlibetical, here also with
good reason, we think, we may take that scale, or side, which much complies
with our secular advantages. These persons seem to be of the second sort of S.
Austins improbandi (mentioned before) qui sentiunt quidem se nescire, sed non
ita quaerunt, ut invenire possint.

Will (either our own; or, if we in minority, theirs, who have the command and
government over us) in these matters of Science, it is, that, though the
persons be of very different intellects; and some, in all Places and Sects, of
excellent parts; yet almost all those of one Nation; or Society; or such, in
these, as are more bound together in one interest; from their having the same
education under Parents, or other Instructors, that are all of the same
persuasion; or, afterward, from their turning usually the same Books, are seen
to be of the same Opinions, and to continue the same Sect of Religion; and
those, contrarily instituted, and engaged, elsewhere, to be all of another;
though these two contrary opinions (whereof one many times is a truth, the
other an error) are never almost supported with equal reason: nor would these
opposite influences upon judgments equally piercing happen to be so universal,
but from these Arts used by a Will preingaged. Now, as this is to be esteemed
an happy captivity of the Judgment, and a very safe course for those, who are
bred: in the bosom of the Church-Catholick, and who are secure under an
Ecclesiastical Guide; So is it to be looked on as a great misery in those
Sects, divided from it. And it may be rationally presumed; that would private
interest, every where, permit a free search, Truth, in all places, (I mean,
such eminent truths, as the Catholic Church in her Councils has recommended
to the faith of Christians) would find more Disciples than Error; as having
much more reason, and evidence, on its side.

Judgment is When the Will, yet more heartily, allows and invites the
Understanding, * to make a free and impartial search into all sides, and into
whatever Authors, or other Teachers, seconding, or opposing, its present
persuasions; and * equally to admit all such arguments produced by these pro or
contra, drawn from Scripture, or from Reason, that intrinsecally relate to the
matter in Controversy: But yet (perhaps fearing, that, here, all stands not
right with him) allows it not to study first, and duly examine the main point
of Church Authority (which, if found so great, as it is pretended, would save
many other searches;) Of Church Authority I say: viz. what perpetual power our
departing Lord has left to the Governors thereof, and what assistance
promised them, for exposition of the sense of the Divine Scriptures, where this
disputed; and for deciding controversies in matters of faith: And what
obligation he has laid upon all the Churches Subjects to hearken to them, and
not to depart from their Directions, and Determinations, ne circumferantur omni
vento doctrinae in nequitia hominum (a yoke the pride of the will has no great
mind to,) Yet a search this to be undertaken much rather, than all the other;
Because, abstracting from this Guide, after never so impartial a view of other
intrinsecal arguments belonging to the subject debated, an ordinary
understanding in points so much ab^ve reason, may happily mistake the Truth; and
because matters of Faith and Religion, wherein the Intellect now negotiates,
depend chiefly on Church-Tradition, not rational-seeming proofs; And because a
Judgment, left to a free information of it self herein, must needs find many
persuasive arguments to entertain and prefer the Judgment of this Authority,
when it is on one side, though this naked, and seconded with no reasons at all
(that are known to such person) for its Proposals, before all those intrinsecal
reasons relating to the nature of the subject, that appear on the other. Such
persuasive Reasons, I mean, drawn from Authority, as these; That this
Authority, that delivers the contrary to what all my other arguments, or
reasons, recommend to me, is by our Lord instated in an Infallibility in all
necessaries: and that it, not I, also is to judge, what, or how much, is
necessary: Or however, that this Authority (fallible or infallible) is, by the
Divine Ordination, in such points of Faith, and Religion, appointed my guide;
and, in opposition of such Authorities happening, the Superior this Guide: (of
which things enough has been said in the former Discourses:) That, setting
aside these principal considerations, the persons constituting this Authority
are also of greater parts, get studies, and (I have reason to presume) more
dispassionate than my self; and more in number, than I, or those others of my
persuasion: that they have seen and considered all those reasons, that as yet
swey me, and have pronounced contrary: that they may have reasons for their
Decisions that I have not seen, nor they are obliged to show me, since my
judgment stands subjected to theirs on another account, than the evidence of
argument.

Authority, and Reason, my final Judgment is, that I ought to join and side
with the first, against the second; though these reasons be unsolv'd, or that
none better, or none at all, be presented to me, by the said Authority. And so,
now, to go against my Reason is to follow my Judgment, or Conscience; and on
the contrary; It is to go against my Judgment or Conscience, if I follow these
my reasons, or my private judgment as grounded on them.

Conscience releaseth them from Authority, have not well considered this; and
therefore give me leave to dilate a little more upon it. If we look then into
Secular Affairs, this matter seems decided in our ordinary practice. Do not we
commonly, upon receiving the advice of an experienced Friend, a learned
Physician, or Lawyer, concerning our Estate, or our Health, both believe his
Directions good: and, according to them, do, and also judge we ought to do,
many things contrary to our own private Judgments: i. e. contrary to those
reasons, which our selves have imagined, not to do so. Is not Abraham said to
believe a thing that seemed contrary to his own reason, Romans 4.17, 18? And so
the man in the Gospel, Mark 9.24.. What is the meaning of that saying,
ordinarily used also by Protestants, [These and these reasons I have for my
opinion, but I submit my judgment herein to the Church.] Is it (as Dr. Fern
comments on it Consid. touching Reformation. c. 1. n 16.
) only; I submit my judgment, as to the publishing of it? But this is only a
submission of silence, not of our judgment at all, to the Church; and is a
submission, which may well be performed in things. wherein our judgment is
utterly fixed and unalterable; namely, in things, whereof we are infallibly
certain. Again; What means that of Dr. Hammond ( Schism. 2. c.. 10, where he
says, -- A meek son of the Church of Christ, when the Fundamentals of Faith
are not concerned in the concessions, etc. will cheerfully express his
readiness to submit, or deposit, his own judgment in reverence, and deference,
to his Superiors; Submit and Deposit; means it not, to renounce, and desert it
in such matters; and to believe and hearken to the judgment of the Church,
rather than to it? Neither can that of the Apostle, Romans 14.23. Whatever is not
of faith is sin, be objected to any for so doing; Because, who thus deposits
his judgment, does it out of faith, namely, that the Churches Judgment is
wiser, safer, preferrable to, his own.



CHAP XV.
Remedies of the former Deceits of the Will.
Considerations, For remedying the first Deceit.. 281. Whether Salvation, etc.

Where. Whether Salvation may be had in any Christian Profession, retaining the
Fundamentals of Faith,. 282.

For remedying the second Deceit,. 289. Where; That persons, not wholly resigned
to Church Authority, ought to be very jealous of their present opinions: and
indifferent, as Reasons may move, to change their Religion, Ib.

For remedying the third,. 291.

Where, 1. That the Illiterat, or other persons unsatisfied, ought to submit
and adhere to present Church Authority,. 292. That learned Protestants have so
determined this Point,. 294.

That apparent mischiefs follow the Contrary,. 296.

2. That, in present Church Governors divided, and guiding a contrary way,
such persons ought to adhere to the Superiors; and those, who by their
Authority conclude the whole,. 298. 3. As for Church Authority past, such
persons to take the testimony, concerning it, of the Church Authority present,.
301. Yet, That it may be easily discerned by the Modern Writings, what present
Churches most dissent from the Primitive,: 302.

Where; of the aspersion of Antiquity with Antichristianisme,. 311.






1. In opposition to the first of them, mentioned before,. 274 [keeping the
judgment in ignorance as to Divine matters, and employing it wholly about other
studies] That, since a right persuasion in Religion is of so great consequence
to salvation, All those, who are not settled, in their Belief, upon the Basis
of Church Authority, and so, under it remain in a sufficient security of their
Faith, as to all those points, wherein the sense of the Holy Scriptures is
disputed, and controverted by several parties (as for example, in these:
Whether Justification is by Faith alone? Whether there be Evangelical Councils
as well as Precepts? Whether Christ our Lord be Co-Essential with God the
Father? Whether exhibiting his Corporal Presence in the Eucharist? Whether
there be a Purgatory after this life for some imperfect souls, though departing
in God's Grace? or the like;) All such, I say, since they have taken the
guidance of themselves, in Spirituals, into their own hands, have great reason
themselves to fall, most attentively, to the study thereof. For it were to
serve God too carelessly, and at hap -- hazard, to cast off Church Authority for
the Exposition and Sense of God's Word in these disputed, and difficult
matters, and not himself to use any other endeavor at all for the right
understanding of them: And in such endeavor he ought not only to take a
perfunctory view of some places, that may seem at the first sight to represent
to him what he would have, but to seek out all those Texts, that both sides
build upon; and then diligently to examine and compare them, For, though some
Texts may seem never so plain, as to the Literal, and Grammatical sense [as
what more clear, than, -- Accipite, comedite, Hoc est Corpusmeum; Matt 26.
] yet scarce is there any sentence, where the terms are not capable of several
acceptions, Figurative, and Non-literal; Or, if they be not, all sides must
necessarily agree in their sense, and so about such Texts be no dispute; And
again, there being a necessary consonancy, and agreement in every title of
Scripture, no place, how plain soever, for the expression, it seems to be, may
be so inter preted, as to contradict another, that seems as clearly to say the
contrary. He ought also to weigh not only the immediate sense of Scripture, but
the necessary consequences; and, since whatever things are not opposite to
Scripture, are truly lawful, and practicable, to discern the true, and not only
pretended, repugnances thereto; He ought also to examine Translations, peruse
the Comments, and Expositions of others, Modern, Ancient: For all these things
that Authority most exquisitly does, whose judgment and conduct he declines.
Lastly, he must be a Divine, who will not be guided by Divines; for of the true
way of Salvation none can securely be ignorant. And what Prelatical Protestant
allows this in an Independent, or Fanatic, when he will neither guide his
ignorance by following the learned, nor remove it by study?

1 Cor. 8.1^.
For these, I say, their case seems very dangerous, who happen to be in any
separated Society out of the external Catholic Communion: Since the One God
will be worshipped (as S. Austin Epist. 48.
answered those Latitudinarian Donatists) not only in verity, but unity; and,
again, has left marks and Testimonies sufficiently evident for the discerning
and distinguishing that Catholic Communion, wherein he will be worshipped,
from all other Heretical, or Schismatical, Societies. All those therefore, who
either, through their own fault, do not know this Communion, because they will
not search; or, knowing it, yet voluntarily still remain in any other divided
from it, must needs be in a very perilous Condition. The first, because their
ignorance, in a thing so manifest, and withal so important, must needs be very
gross, and unexcusable. The second, because any long stay in any such separated
Society, to one convinced, seems both by the Scriptures, and by the Church,
frequently prohibited; And, were it not so, at least brings so much detriment,
and damage to the spiritual Condition of such a person; as is no way to be
recompensed by any other fancied advantages enjoyed, therein. Which things it
will not be amiss to discourse a little more fully, if perhaps some Laodicean
complexion may receive some benefit thereby.

Ephesians. 5.7, 8. The children of light are to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, nor to be partakers with them, but to reprove
them, -- 2 Cor. 6.14. Light and darkness, Justice and iniquity, Believers and
Infid^ls, the Temples of God [which all good Christians are] and of Idols, are
to have no fellowship or communion, together: But, Come ye out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord. And, 1 Cor. 3.16. Si quis Templum Domini
violarerit disperdet illum Deus. Nor may such separation be understood from
Infidels, Heathens, or non-Christians only: For, 1 Cor. 5.9.11. If a Brother [
i. e. one that professes Christianity with us] be a Fornicator, an Adulterer,
an Idolater, a Drunkard, with such a one we are charged not to eat. [But, to
withdraw our ordinary converse from him: i. e. where no duty of charity,
either to our selves, or to them, or to some others, obliges us to the
contrary. And this, for many good ends; as to preserve our selves from, all
contagion, and infection, from their vices or partaking of their punishments,
or giving suspicion of our consentment with them in their errors; or scandal to
others, who, by our example, may use the same converse to their hurt: To
produce some shame and confusion, and so perhaps amendment, in them.] Upon this
we read St. Austins Holy Mother Monica forbear sitting at table, or eating with
her Son, when addicted to the Manichean Heresy. Austin. Confess. l. 3. c. 11.
Matt. 18.17. If any Brother [ i. e. in Christianity] refuse to hear the
Church, we to carry our selves to him as to an Heathen [who were Idolaters] or
a Publican, [with whom the religious Jews forbear to eat, or converse] -- Romans
16.17. [ Those [Christians] that cause divisions contrary to the Doctrine.
which we have received, to mark and avoid them. -- Titus 3.10. An Heretic,
after admonition, to be rejected, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. If any man obey not our word,
[be a Separatist from the Church, and her Doctrine] note that man, and have no
company with him. -- 2 John 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
Apostolical Doctrine, receive him not into your house; nor say (...) God save
you, to him: For he that says so to him communicates with his wickedness. And
it seems this Apostles practice was according to his rule: For Irenaeus l. 3.
c. 3.
says, S. Polycrap related of him; That going into a Bath to wash himself, he
presently leaped out of it, and departed, when he saw Corinthus there, who
denied our Lords Divinity.

Apocal. 2d and 3d. chapter) against those new Sects that endeavored to mingle
themselves with, and to seduce, the Catholics, by tempting them to compliance,
when in persecution; where he calls them, -- the Synagogue of Satan; Profunda
Satanae; Jesebels, followers of Balaam, etc. Praises the Churches of Ephesus,
and Philadelphia, -- for trying them, and not suffering them, and not
complying, and denying him, with them; but hating their deeds, as himself did,
See Apocalypse, 2.2, 6. -- 3.8.9.) and censureth others of the Churches for
doing the contrary ( Apoc. 2.14, 15, 16, 20.) and especially reprehendeth that
of Laodicea, -- for her lukewarmness, and neither being cold, nor hot; and then
urges her to be zealous, Apoc. 3.15, 16, 19. The same also seems to appear by
his severe censure (upon occasion of the Samaritan Woman's consulting him about
her Religion) of the Samaritan, Schismatical, worship (in a Temple built, in
opposition to that in Jerusalem, some 250. years before our Lords coming, in
Mount Garisim: Which one Manasses the High Priest, expelled from the function
of his Office in Jerusalem, procured to be erected, and afterward officiated
there) our Lord telling this woman, That the Samaritans knew not what they
worshipped; and that salvation was of the Jews. And before this, the same
appears * from Gods great displeasure against the Division made by Israel in
setting up the Calves, though it is probably imagined, worshipping still the
same God in the same Representation of Cherubims, only in another place. And
afterward, * from Elias his expostulation with the people, 3 King. 18.21. --
Vsque quo claudicatis in duas parts? which holds as well for separating Sects,
as false Religions: God having so established the Economy of his Church; as to
be worshipped therein in unity, as well as verity: Vnus Dominus [Caput] unum
Corpus, and una fides, Ephesians. 4.4.

From all these Texts prohibiting Communication, in our daily converse, with
particular persons so affected, I argue, how much more, we not to communicate,
1 with whole Congregations of them; and 2 with such Congregations separated
from the Church, and 3 this, in holy things; lastly, 4 so communicating with
them, in these, as to forbear the same Communion with the Church Catholic.

Cor. 10.20, 21. -- 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 13. -- 2 Cor. 6.14, 17) seem more chiefly to
prohibit Communion with such in the Sacraments (especially that of the Holy
Eucharist) and the public Divine Worship; and this, upon some other, yet
higher, reasons: Namely, the duty of the public owning and professing our
Religion, and the keeping it pure from, and unmixt with, any unbelieving,
Heretical, or Schismatical, Societies. For this Holy Sacrament of feeding at
the Lords Table, being instituted as for a sacred instrument of our Communion
with the Deity, so also for a public tessera, and mark, of a strict league,
and amity between all those, who together partake it, so that, (as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 10.17.) by being made partakers of that one bread and Body [of
our Lord] we though being many, become one bread, and one Body; and so, in this
Body members of one another; things, I say, standing thus in this Grand
Sacrament of Union, neither will the honor we owe to God the Father, who
dwells in us, and adopts us for his children (2 Cor. 6.16.18) Nor, to God the
Son, of whose Body we are members, (1 Cor. 6.15, 16.) Nor to the holy Spirit,
whose Temples we are, (1. Cor. 3.16, 17.) suffer us, by such a sacred, and
solemn tie to link and unite our selves to any Congregations, that are once
estranged from him, or disclaimed by him. This is mingling light with darkness:
2 Cor. 6.14.
joining the members of Christ to a Spiritual Harlot, by which they two become
one Body (1 Cor. 6.15, 16.) (For such a virtue has this Sacrament, as that
they become one Body amongst themselves, that partake it: 1. Cor. 10.16, 17.
) And, by touching the unclean, our selves also becoming unclean ( Lev. 5.2,
3.) For all those separations under the law of the corporally unclean from the
Congregation of the Lord, because they were to be a sanctified people unto the
Lord, and holy as he is holy (Lev. 11.43, 44.) were only types of the
separation, which ought to be, from such notorious sinners, and such false
worshippers of him, as we here speak of: To which the Apostle makes application
of them, 2 Cor. 6.17. -- Be ye separate; and touch not the unclean thing, says
the Lord: taken out of Esa. 52.11. And hence also takes he strict order for
the separation and ejection of such persons out of the Church (especially from
the communicating the Sacraments thereof) as of a piece of Leaven from a lump
unleavened, that our Christian Passover may not be celebrated with such a
meslange (See 1 Cor. 5.2, 5, 7, 13.) Ejection, I say, or casting them out,
where the Church has the power: Or, her going out from them, (2 Cor. 6.17.)
where they have the power; but still a separation there must be; else, in
consorting with them, we provoke our Lord to jealousy, (1 Cor. 10.22.) as if
we are not a true and loyal Spouse to Him, and entirely his.

To these may be added all those Texts requiring the glorifying of God in our
public worship of him in the Society of his true Church, and in the Confession
of Christ before men: Confession of him with the mouth, as well as believing on
him with the heart (Romans 10.9, 10.) of all persons with one mouth, as well as
with one mind (Romans 15.6.) Which Texts seem in a special manner to imply that
Confession, which is made in the public Assemblies of the Church: Which
Assemblies therefore were never intermitted in its greatest persecutions from
the Civil Magistrates.

To these again may be added those many precepts of Unity and Charity enjoined
amongst all the fellow members of Christ, (Ephesians. 4.3, 11, 12. -- 1 Cor. 10.16.
etc. -- Phil. 1.27, 28. -- Jo. 10.4, 5.) which Texts seem to extend and oblige
to all the external, as well as internal, acts thereof; especially, for what
concerns Gods public service and worship. And that Article of our Creed, that
we believe one Church Catholic and Apostolic, ie One external, visible
Communion upon earth, united in its members, that always is, and shall be
such, seems not sufficiently asserted, and professed by any, who forbears to
join himself openly unto it. Such a denial before men of the Body of Christ,
his Church, seems not to fall much short of the crime, of denying before men
the Head, Christ Himself. But chiefly there, where this Church, the Spouse of
Christ, happens to be under any disgrace, or Persecution, here our taking up
the Cross with her, and the Doxology of Confessing him, and her, seems yet more
zealously to be embraced; and no such opportunity of so highly promoting our
Eternal reward, upon any Secular inductive whatsoever, to be omitted: For which
consider, Heb. 10.25.

remaining in any such separated Congregation prohibited in Scriptures; and the
contrary also there required. Next, It is also both prohibited by the ancient
Canons of the Church; and disallowed by her practice.

For the Canons; see those early ones: Can. Apost. 11, 12, 13. -- 12. -- Si
quis cum damnato Clerico, veluti cum Clerico, simul oraverit, iste damnetur. --
11. Si Quis cum Excommunicato saltem in domo locutus fuerit, iste communione
privetur. Which Canon calls to mind again, 2 Jo. 10. And l. 6 c. 13.
Eusebius reports of Origin, when yet a youth; that necessitated, by reason of
poverty, to live in the same house with Paulus, one not Orthodox in the Faith,
yet he forbear to be present at Prayers with him: -- Quippe qui, ab ineunte
aetate, Ecclesiae Canonem obnixe observasset, probably those Apostolic ones,
before named. See Council. Laodicen: held by the Catholics in the time of the
reigning of Arrianisme before the Second General Council: Where, as it is
decreed. -- Non oportere cum Paganis festae celebrare, (c. 39.) And, --
Nonoportere a Judaeis azyma accipere ( c. 38.) So, -- Non oportere cum
Haereticis, vel Schismaticis, orare ( c. 33.) And non oportere Haereticorum
benedictiones accipere ( can: 32.) See Council. Carthag. 4. (held, A. D. 436. a
little after S. Austins death) can. 72. -- Cum Haereticis nec orandum, nec
psallendum: And, c. 73. Qui communicaverit, vel oraverit cum excommunicato,
sive Clericus sive Laicus excommunicetur. So it is then, that all Heretics and
Schismatics, such as make Congregations, and celebrate the public Divine
Worship, separate from the Church, stand Excommunicated and Anathematized, by
the supreme Church Authority in several Canons of Councils. And hence all those
stand so too, who communicate with them in such their service: For: This
freequenting, and joining with them in, their service, is an external
profession of such separation; which external Profession always it is, that
the Church, not knowing Hearts, proceeds against in her Censures. And the
Church, in her expelling such Congregations from being members any longer of
her Communion, may be imagined, much more, to prohibit any pretender to her
Communion from being, or appearing, a member of theirs. And, though the modern
Church laws, in several cases, may perhaps have remitted some of the ancient
rigor, that restrains our presence, with known, and declared, Heretics, in the
Catholic Divine Service, or Sacraments, and has admitted some limitations;
Yet the communicating with any of a separated external communion in their
Divine Service, or in such* Holy things, or Divine Worship, as are commonly
understood, and taken, for a distinctive note of such separation from that
Church, which is the Catholic, such a dissembling of ones Religion is at no
hand lawful: but is a denying, before men, of Christ's Church, and so of Christ;
since who thus denies conjunction with the Body, denies it with the Head also,
that is joined to this Body. Nor was there, in any times, the least
dissimulation in any thing required as an external Tessera, and Touchstone of
their Religion, I say not, a non-professing of our Religion, but a professing
against it, ever suffered, or excused, in the greatest Persecutions: Though
other usual ceremonies and practices of the Church, not distinguishing, so
essentially and properly, her Communion (nor this communion made a necessary
consequent of them) but instituted, and performed for other ends, may, amongst
Separatists, be dispensed with, and omitted; As fasting, or abstinence, on
days appointed for them: Provided, no great scandal happen thereby. But,
whatever compliances with Separatists for our Secular conveniences may be
lawful, yet, since all suffering for the Catholic Religion is a degree of
Martyrdom, it is much nobler, by keeping the strictest distance, to aspire to
what is most perfect, than, by seeking inlargements, to hazard the doing of
some thing unlawful.

Practice ( piz. the Catholics neither going to the Prayers, or Sacraments of
Sectarists; nor admitting these to their own) Their Letters Commendatory,
mentioned, C^n. Apost. 13. called Epistolae formatae, sufficiently show, how
cau^^ous and strict it was: Which Letters, from the Churches careful avoiding
all mixture with Sectaries, were procured, so often as any had occasion to
travel from one Church to another; Without which Testimony they could not be
admitted to their prayers, etc. The same also appears from the strict
separation of Catholics from the potent division of the Arrian Sect. Which
Arrians, though, in many of their Councils, they required subscription of no
positive Heresy, br^^only an omission, in their Creeds, of some Truth, the
word (...); yet were the Catholics, even when much persecuted by the Secular
Princes, and, by the banishment of their Pastors, in some places destitute of
the Sacraments, strictly prohibited to come at the Arrian Assemblies; though
these had the same Sacraments with them, and possession of the Cathedrals, and
other Churches: and chose rather, to relinquish their Temples, to pray at home*
to live without the Sacraments: nay, to be without these in their sickness, and
at their death, than to receive them from the Arrians. See for these things, S.
Athanas, Epist. Synodica ad Antiochenses, -- And Epist. ad ubiq, Orthodoxes --
S. Austin De vera Religione, c. 5. -- S. Hilary, lib. contra Arrian. S. Basil.
Epist. 293. to some Egyptian Bishops. And see, in Theodoret, Hist. l. 2. c. 17.
the jealous deportment of the Romans toward Felix: who substituted by the
Arrian Emperor in Liberius his place; sent into banishment, -- Tametsi (says
Theodoret) fidem in Concilio Nicaeno expositam ipse servavit integram, tamen,
quia cum illis, qui eandem labefactare studebant, libere communicarit, nemo ex
Romae habitatoribus in Ecclesiam, dum ille intus erat, ingredi voluit. And this
resolution, signified to Constantius, happily procured the return of Liberius.
This of the Declaration of the Church, against any such liberty of Christian
Communion, where soever our Secular interest, or Education, may be apt to fix
us.

3. But were there no such bars put in against it, by the Scriptures, or H.
Church; yet this were enough to dissuade it; votum, where is an actual defect,
of the participation of its Sacraments, that some may have; they seem no way to
such persons as those, who are not by force hindered of her Communion; but,
invited to it, do voluntarily deprive themselves: And, partaking the Sacraments
in voto signifies nothing to us, where, de facto, we may have them, and, de
facto, do refuse them. And, then, what other advantages can there be, that can
make us satisfaction for such a loss?

I will conclude this point, with the Declaration sent to the followers of the
Donatists (some of whom, for their stay in that Sect, urged this very excuse,
we are now speaking to, -- Nihil interesse, in qua part quis Christianus sit)
by S. Austin, and the rest of the Provincial Council at Cirta in Numidia,
presently after that famous Conference with them at Carthage, A. D. 411. S.
August. Epist. 152
-- Quisquis ab hac Catholica Ecclesia fuerit separatus [amongst whom they
reckoned the Sect of the Donatists] quantumlibet laudabiliter se vivere
existimet, hoc solo scelere, quod a Christi unitate dis^unctus est, non habebit
vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum. And, as for the Sacraments received in that
separation. -- Sacramenta Christi [say they, though celebrated in the same
manner with them, as in the Church] in sacrilegio schismatis ad judicium
habetis; quae utilia, and salutaria, vobis erunt, cum in Catholica pace
habueritis Caput, Christum, ubi charitas cooperit multitudinem peccatorum. Thus
much (I fear not needlessly) I have taken occasion (from 283.) to set down in
opposition to that irrational Fancy, Nihil interesse, in qua part quis
Christianus sit, not knowing, but that this Discourse may meet with some
Readers not much averse from such a persuasion. For, by the foresaid Arts of
the Will, men's Judgments are too apt to digest opinions very gross, where the
Secular advantages, by these, are very great.

2. Thus much considered by a Judgment, set at liberty, in order to the first
Art of the Will to deceive it, Viz. Its keeping the Judgment in much ignorance
as to the Divine matters, and to a cold indifferency as to parties; and
diverting it wholly to other matters. Next, as to the Second, mentioned before,
275. (namely; applying it indeed to the learning of these Truths; but this,
only from those Authors, and Instructors, that are of its own party) a
rectified Judgment will as freely conclude, and resolve; That all those, who
are not well settled upon this Basis of Church Authority; and so, by a resigned
obedience, have prevented all disputes, ought rather, in making such a quest
after Divine Truth, in so many Controversies agitated between parties, and in
choosing their Religion, to apply themselves, for learning it, to the reading of
those Books, and Authors, and discoursing with those persons, who oppose the
tenants, in which they have been educated; and to which all Secular, or carnal
advantages do incline them: that thus they may bring things to some equipoise;
and, having first heard the plea of both sides, be able to make a truer
Judgment. And if, in the issue, neither side do seem to preponderate, should
choose rather that, to which their interest seems more averse; for they may well
imagine, that men are ordinarily so far partial to their own sides that they
would not think both equal, unless that against (...) were over weight: and
that a crooked staff, to be made straight, must be bent the contrary way.

And, upon this, such Judgment, also will consider; That, since our first
persuasions, in Religion, and the particular sect thereof wherein we live, are
not taken up upon our own choice, but another; who, having some command over
us, anticipate our judgment, and educate us in what opinions they please; hence
it is, that our constancy and perseverance, even sometimes to the loss of
Estate, and Life, to whatever we thus casually first light on (called by the
name of Fidelity and love of Truth; and the contrary, perfidiousness, and
Apostasy) is indeed, before we have examined things better, only a rash, and
inconsiderat Obstinacy; and that on the contrary, in prudence, every one ought
to put himself in a great indifferency to change those first principles he is
thus seasoned and possessed with, as he shall, by new experience, find cause;
and to esteem that only Constancy in his Religion, i. e. in his true serving of
God, to alter every day, and that through a thousand Secular obstacles, to any
thing, wherein he conceives, he may serve him better. As in our manners, when
any way deficient, we do this, without reproach.

Yet further will consider, since (as has been showed) there is but one
Communion of all those various Sects, in which, promiscuously, the Education of
Christian Youth happens to be molded, namely that which adheres to the Supreme
Church Authority, that is Catholic, and truly disingaged of Schism; That all
those, who find themselves to live under such Superiors, as are broken off, and
stand divided, from their Superiors, and condemned by them, ought to entertain
a great jealousy of their present state, and not acquiesce in any such
Government, at adventure; but presently to reduce their subjection to that
Authority that is established by our Lord. Again, in the next place, that such
a one ought to improve, or to check, in himself, these suggestions of a change,
as the Religion he deliberates on, is more licentious, or more strict in
comparison of that, which for the present he professes. For strong
inclinations to change to a Religion that is more rigorous, and mortifying his
lusts, that requires much Obedience, Resignation, and Humility from him, that
captivates his understanding as well as curbs his appetites, things nature much
relucts against, we may presume to proceed from the Spirit of God: But, if to a
Religion, that promises him in many things more liberty; to proceed from his
lusts.

And, such a happy discovery being made by him, such a freed Judgment will
proceed to consider; That, if yet further, by reason of the persecution of such
a Religion, in the place where he lives, such a Convert has an occasion also
offered him of leaving Father, or Mother* Friends, or Fortunes, and, among the
rest, not the least, his Reputation, and good Name, in being esteemed a
Turncoat, an Apostate, a Seducer; to embrace, again, in the Religion he turns
to, nothing but Crosses, and Fastings, Confessions and Penances, Resignation of
Judgment, strict obedience to the Churches, as well as Gods, Laws, and many
more hardships, set before him, if he purposes to arrive at perfection; such a
true enlightened Judgment, I say, will here consider: that this is one of the
greatest Honors, that his Divine Majesty could do him upon earth; and a
happiness next to Martyrdom. Lastly, will consider, that the wisdom of God has
permitted so many Sects and Factions, divided from the true Church, and
propagating their Schisms to their children, to exercise the diligence of such,
as have the hap to be so mis-educated, to find out that holy Communion, of
which he has left sufficient testimony, and, after this, to practice their
Christian Courage and Resolution, to own and repair to it.

Austin in an instance of the Donatists (frighted with the Emperors severe
Edicts) which I think may be usefully here transcribed for a pattern to such
others, as are detained at present in the like chains, in any other divided
Sect. -- Quam multi (says he, speaking of the Donatists) quod certo scimus,
jam volebant esse Catholici, manifestissima veritate commoti; and, offensionem
suorum reverendo, quotidie differebant; Quam multos non verita^, sed obduratae
consuetudinis grave vinculum, colligab^t? -- Quam multi propterea putabant
veram Ecclesiam esse partem Donati, quia eos ad cognoscendam talem veritatem
securitas [or much more, res prosperae in the continuing in their present Sect]
torpidos, fastidiosos, pigrosque faciebat? Quam multis aditum intrand^
obserabant rumores maledicorum; qui nescio quid aliud nos in altari ponere
jactitebant [what maledicency does the Church still suffer touching what she
affirms to be on her Altars?] Quam multi nihil interesse credentes, in qua
part quis Christianus sit, ideo permanebant in part Donati, quia ibi nati
erant? His omnibus h^rum legum terror it a profuit; ut nunc alii dicant: Jam
hoc volebamus; sed Deo Gratias, qui nobis occasionem praebuit; faciendique jam,
and dilationum morulas amputavit. Alii dicant: Hoc esse verum, jam sciebamus;
sed nescio qua consuetudine tenebamur; Gratias Deo, qui vincula nostra dirupit,
and nos ad pacis vinculum transtulit. Alii dicant; Nesciebamus hic [ i. e. in
the Church] esse veritatem; nec eam discere volebamus: Gratias Deo, qui
negligentiam nostram stimulo terroris excussit, ut saltem soliciti quaereremus,
quod, securi, nunquam nosse curavimus, Alii dicant; nos falsis rumoribus
terrebamur intrare; quas falsas esse nesci remus, nisi intraremus; nec
intraremus, nisi cogeremur; Gratias Deo, qui expertos docuit, quam vana and
inania de Ecclesia sua mendax fama jactaverit. Alij dicant; putabamus quidem
nihil interesse, ubi fidem Christi teneremus; sed Gratias Deo, qui nos a
divisione collegit; and hoc uni Deo congruere ostendit, ut in unitate colatur.
Thus S. Austin. I need not comment upon it. A return into the Church, upon
whatever occasion, is welcome, and to be wished for: and happy they, who, to
preserve an estate here on earth, are reduced into the true way to gain a
better in heaven: or, to escape some punishment here, become freed also from
that hereafter: But yet, much more acceptable, and praiseworthy, is such a
Conversion, wherein fear and force have no hand; and where perhaps this their
securing their eternal state, and happy condition, must be built upon the ruin
of their temporal.

Deceit. For the third (delivered before,. 277.) Viz. The weighing indeed
universally, and impartially, all the intrinsecal reasons, and arguments, pro
and contra, that relate to the subject in hand; but not those extrinsecal ones
also, that confirm obedience, and submission of judgment, in all points
whatsoever, already determined, to Church Authority: Here also a judgment, set
at liberty, will consider: That, in points of Controversy, some of them
certainly of great consequence; where both the true sense of the Scriptures,
and of the ancient Church, is debated, with many adherents to either side; here
all those, who by reason of illiterat education, and mechanic employments, are
not able to compare, and weight Texts of Scripture, and search former
Church-Records; or also those, who, after such search (especially if being of
no extraordinary capacity) find on all fides things either, by subtle wits,
rendered so smooth and probable, or, by multiplied replies, so intricated and
involved, as they know not which to hold to; or also become still of his
opinion, whom they read last; That all these, I say, can take no other prudent
course (were it no duty enjoined) than to repair, and submit their judgment, to
Church Authority, i. e. to their spiritual Pastors, and Superiors, set over
them by our Lord, and stating these things.

more to persuade their adherence to it, as implying more obscurity and
difficulty in the thing defined. And much reason have they to presume, that
these their spiritual Governors, both by reason of their convening in a
greater body, and their consisting of more dignified persons (probably advanced
to such high places by their greater merits) and by their great learning, being
acquainted with, and weighing, all the same arguments that private men do, and
in charity we ought to think, they as dispassionat as our selves, and lastly,
by their ampler fortunes, less necessitated to serve private interests, are, by
all these, the less liable to error of the two: And that the confining of the
belief of such persons to the directions of supposed fallible Superiors is, of
the two evils, the much more tolerable, than the leaving them, in such high an
spiritual matters, to the roving of their own fancies: For thus, in stead of
some few errors of the Church, in matters obscure, will be multiplied
thousands, of such persons, in matters most evident and clear.

Austin speaks much on this subject in his Book de utilitate Credendi, of the
benefit of believing the Church, written to his friend Honoratus (led away by
many extravagant Manichean dotages) advising him submission of judgment to
Church Authority. -- Nihil est facilius (says he De utilitate Credendi c. 1.
) quam non solum so dicere, sed etiam opinari, verum invenisse, sed reipsa
difficillimum est. And c. 12.
-- Quis mediocriter intelligens non plane viderit stultis [under which name,
he says, he comprehends all, except those, quibus inest, quanta in esse homini
potest, ipsius hominis Deique firmissime percepta cognitio] utilius, atque
salubrius esse, praeceptis obemperare sapientum, quam suo judicio vitam degere?
-- Hoc si in rebus minoribus, ut in mercando vel colendo agro, etc. expedire
nemo ambigit, multo magis in religione. Nam and res humanae promptiores ad
dignoscendum sunt, quam divinae; and in quibusque praestantioribus and
sanctioribus, quo majus ets obsequium cultumque debemus, eo sceleratius,
periculosiusque peccatur. And c. 17. he argues. -- Si unaquae; disciplina,
quanquam vilis and facilis, ut percipi possit, Doctorem aut magistrum requirit*
quid temerariae superbiae before, quam divinorum sacramentorum libros ab
interpretibus suis nollecognoscere? And, c. 7. -- Nulla imbutus poetica
disciplina Terentionum Magistrum sine Magistro attingere non auderes, -- Tu in
eos libros, qui, quoquomodo se habeant, sanctitamen divinarumq, rerum pleni,
prope totius generis humani confessione, diffamantur, sine duce irruis, and de
his sine praeceptore audes far sententiam, etc. And, c. 16. -- Cum res tanta
sit, ut Deus tibiratione cognoscendus sit, omnes ne putas idoneos esse
percipiendis rationibus, quibus ad divinam intelligentiam men's ducitur humana?
Thus he, to induce Honoratus, in such divine matters, to yield the guidance of
himself to Church Authority. And then, the Church Authority he would have him
submit to, he describes thus, c. 17. -- Quae [Ecclesia] usque ad confessionem
generis humani, ab Apostolica sede per successiones Episcoporum, frustra
Haereticis circum latrantibus, and partim plebis ipsius judicio, partim
Conciliorum gravitate, partim etiam miraculorum Majestate damnatis, culmen
authoritatis obtinuit: Cui nolle primas dare, vel summae profecto impietatis
est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae. Nam si nulla certa ad sapientiam, salutemque
animis via est, nisi cum cos rationi praecolit [prepares them] fides, quid est
aliud ingratum esse opi, atque auxilio divino, quam tanto labor, praeditae [
praedictae rather] authoritati velle resistere? Again, c. 16. -- Quae
authoritas seposita ratione (quam sinceram intelligere, ut saepe diximus,
difficillimum stultis est, dupliciter nos movet, partim miraculis [very
frequent in his times. See De Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.] partim sequentium
multitudine. And c. 14. -- Quae celebritate, consensu, vetustate, roboratur.
And c. 11. -- Si jam satis tibi jactatus videris, finemque hujusmodi laboribus
vis imponere, sequere viam Catholicae disciplinae, quae ab ipso Christo per
Apostolos ad nos usque manavit, and abhinc ad posteros maenatura est. I have
given you St. Austins advice somewhat more largely, as hoping his words will
have more weight.

not able to examine Controversies, or the learned, after examination, in some
degree unsatisfied, be received for a truth, thus the greatest part of
Christians, are, hereby, for ever settled in their religion, and belief, as to
all points determined by the Church, I will here also set down, for the benefit
of such Readers, as most value their judgment, the testimony of several learned
Protestants in confirmation of it, several of which have been mentioned in the
former Discourses. The Reader, who thinks the allegation of witnesses needless
in a matter so evident, and would only know, when Ecclesiastical Authorities
divide and dissent, to which of them his submission is due, may omitting them,
pass on to,. 296.

In confirmation hereof, then, first consider that noted passage of Dr. Field
in the Preface of his Book,. 295. n. 1.
recommending to Christians chiefly the discovery of the True Church, and, when
this found, submission to it. -- Seeing (says he) the Controversies of
Religion in our times are grown in number so many, and in matter so intricate,
that few have time, and leisure, fewer strength of understanding to examine
them, what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out, which, amongst all the Societies of
the world, is that blessed company of Holy ones, that Household of Faith, that
Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the Pillar, and Ground
of Truth, that so he may embrace her Communion, follow her Directions, and rest
in her Judgment.

In the same manner Dr. Hammond writes, 295. n 2.
in his Answer to the Catholic Gentleman, chap. 2. p. 17. -- When the person
is not competent to search grounds [I add, or not so competent as those; to
whose definition he is required to submit] a bare yielding to the judgment of
Superiors, and a deeming it better to adhere to them than to attribute any
thing to his own judgment, a believing so far as not to disbelieve, may
rationally be yielded to a Church, or the Governors of it, without deeming
them inerrable. -- And in his Treatise of Heresy,. 13. n. 2, 3. he speaks thus
of the Christians security, from the Divine Providence, in his adherence in
matters of Faith to Church Authority. -- If we consider Gods great, and wise,
and constant Providence, and care over his Church, his desire that all men
should be saved, and in order to that end, come to the knowledge of all
necessary truth; his promise, that he will not suffer his faithful servants to
be tempted above what they are able; nor permit scandals, and false teachers to
prevail to the seducing of the very Elect, his most pious godly servants; If, I
say, we consider these, and some other such like general promises of Scripture,
wherein this Question [about the errability, of Councils] seems to be
concerned, we shall have reason to believe, that God will never suffer all
Christians to fall into such a temptation, as it must be, in case the whole
Representative, should err in matter of Faith [I add, to define, therein, any
thing contrary to the Apostles depositum, and which Christians may not safely
believe, or, without Idolatry, practice] and therein find approbation, and
reception amongst all those Bishops, and Doctors of the Church diffused, which
were out of the Council. And, though, in this case, the Church might remain a
Church (and so the destructive gates of hell not prevail against it) and still
retain all parts of the Apostles Depositum in the hearts of some faithful
Christians, which had no power in the Council to oppose the Decree, or, out of
it, to resist the general, approbation; yet still the testimony of such a
General Council, so received, and approved, would be a very strong argument,
and so a very dangerous temptation to every meek and pious Christian; and it is
piously to be believed* though not infallibly certain, -- That God will not
permit his servants to fall into that temptation. Thus he. [But, if here the
Doctor be asked, why, upon these considerations, he does not submit to all
those latter Councils held in the Church, that have delivered something
opposite to the Protestant Tenants: For example, all those Councils concerning
Transubstantiation, held before Luther, I suppose his answer is ready, because
these were not General, nor universally accepted; But, since these were the
most General, that the Churches Subjects have had in those times for their
direction; and had also the most universal acceptance, that those times could
afford, unless he would have also the Berengatians, the persons condemned in
them, to accept them (an acceptance most unreasonably demanded,) why do not
here also Gods Providence, and Promises, stand engaged in compassion to the
meek, and pious, Subjects of the Church, that these Councils err not, nor the
Christians of those times fall into such a temptation, as it must needs be, if
these, the greatest Representatives the Church had in those days, should
misinstruct them in a matter of so great consequence, as is the committing of
Idolatry ever since?]

See also his Comment on 1 Timothy 3.15. [The Church the Pillar and Ground of
Truth.] According to this it is (says he) that Christ is said, Ephesians. 4.12. to
have given not only Apostles, etc. but also Pastors and Teachers, i. e. the
Bishops in the Church, for the compacting the Saints into a Church; for the
building up of the body of Christ, confirming and continuing them in all truth,
that we should be no more like Children carried about with every wind of
doctrine. And so again, when Heresies came into the Church in the first ages,
it is every where apparent by Ignatius his Epistles, that the only way of
avoiding error and danger, was to adhere to the Bishop in communion and
doctrine; and whosoever departed from him, and that form of wholesome words kept
by him, was supposed to be corrupted, etc. And in his Treatise of Schism,
chap. 2.. 10. he speaks in this manner, -- A meek Son of the Church of Christ
will certainly be content to sacrifice a great deal for the making of this
purchase, i. e. of enjoying the Churches communion; and when the fundamentals
of the faith, and superstructures of Christian practice are not concerned in
the concessions, he will cheerfully express his readiness to submit, or
deposite his own judgment in reverence and deference to his Superiors in the
Church, where his lot is fallen. [Methinks he might better have said, where his
obedience is due: For, the Church, where his lot is fallen, may, by Heresy, or
Schism, stand divided from the Church-Catholick.] Here he allows depositing of
our judgment in deference to our Superiors, where the Fundamentals of Faith,
etc. are not concerned; But would not one think rather, that in these points
especially a person, to be safe, should adhere to the Churches judgment rather,
than his own? Suppose a Socinian in the Point of Consubstantiality.

Doctor Jackson on the Creed,. 295. n 3.
l. 2,. 1 c. 6. p. 175. in stating the Question. p. 170.
Whether the injunction of public Ecclesiastical Authority may oversway any
degree of our private persuasion concerning the unlawfulness of any opinion, or
action, goes on thus, -- Superiors (says he) are to be obeyed in such points
as their Inferiors are not at leisure to examine; or not of capacity to
discern; or not of power or place to determine, whether they be lawful or no.
Again, p. 170. In case of an Equilibrium in ones persuasion, he argues thus.
Wheresoever the persuasions or probabilities of the goodness of any action are
as great, as the persuasions and probabilities of the evil, that may ensue, --
a lawful Governors command must in this case rule all private choice, either
for doing, or omitting it. The case is all one as in things merely indifferent:
for here is an indifferency of persuasions. But suppose we have not such
indifferency, yet, p. 172 -- Whilst men of skill and judgment (says he)
appointed by God to advise in such matters, are otherwise persuaded than we in
private are, the rule of Christian modesty binds us to suspect our own
persuasion, and consequently to think there may be some good even in that
action, wherein heretofore we thought was not. -- And the performance of
obedience it self is a good, and acceptable action in the sight of God. [Now
what he says here concering the goodness of an action holds as well concerning
the truth of an opinion.] Again, Ibid p. 174. -- True spiritual obedience, were
it rightly planted in our hearts, would bind us rather to like well of the
things commanded for authorities sake, than to disobey authority for the
private dislike of them. Both our disobedience [ i. e. dissent, or
non-submission of judgment] to the one, and dislike of the other, are
unwarrantable, unless we can truly derive them from some formal contradiction
or opposition between the public or general injunction of Superiors, and
express law of the most High.

And. c. 4. p. 165. -- Sundry (says he) in profession Protestants, in
eagerness of opposition to the Papists, affirm; that the Church, or spiritual
Pastors must then only be believed, then only be obeyed, when they give
sentence according to the evident and express law of God made evidens to the
heart, and consciences of such, as must believe and obey them. And this, in one
word, is to take away all authority of spiritual Pastors; and to deprive them
of all obedience, unto whom doubtless God, by his word, has given some special
authority and right to exact some peculiar obedience of their Flock. Now if the
Pastor be then only to be obeyed, when he brings evident commission out of the
Scripture for those particulars, unto which he demands belief or obedience,
what obedience do men perform unto him more, than to any other man whatsoever?
For whosoever he be, that can show us the express undoubted command of God, it
must be obeyed of all, But whilst it is thus obeyed, it only; not he, that
shows it unto us, is obeyed. And if this were all the obedience, that I owe
unto others, I were no more bound to believe or obey any other man, than he is
bound to obey, or believe me: The Flock no more bound to obey the Pastors, than
the Pastors, them. Yet certainly God, who has set Kingdoms in order, is not
the Author of such confusion in the spiritual regiment of his Church. Thus
Doctor Jackson tying all to obedience or submission to the judgment of their
spiritual Guides, save only those who are certain of a formal contradiction
between God's Laws, and their Injunctions.

To this may be added that much noted place of Mr. Hooker in his Preface to
Ecclesiastical Policy,. 295. n. 4.
. 6. commenting there on Deuteron. 17.8. etc. where it is said, ver 11. --
According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee, and according
to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do; thou shall not
decline from the sentence which they shall show thee to the right hand, nor to
the left. -- God was not ignorant (says he) that the Priests and Judges, whose
sentence in matters of controversy, he ordained, should stand, both might, and
oftentimes would, be deceived in their judgment. However, better it was in the
eye of his understanding, that sometimes an erroneous sentence definitive
should prevail, till the same authority perceiving such oversight, might
afterward correct, or reverse it, than that strifes should have respit to
grow, and not come speedily to some end. And here he answers the objection;
that men must do nothing against conscience, saying, -- Neither wish we, that
men should do any thing which in their hearts they are persuaded they ought not
to do: But we say, this persuasion ought to be fully settled in their hearts,
that, in litigious and controverted causes of such quality, the will of God is,
to have them to do, whatsoever the sentence of judicial, and final decision
shall determine; yea, though it seem in their private opinion [ i. e. according
to their own reason and arguments drawn a part rei] to swerve utterly from
that which is right: as, no doubt, many times the sentence amongst the Jews
did, unto one, or other, part contending. And yet in this case, God did then
allow them to do that, which in their private judgment seemed' yea and perhaps
truly seemed, that the law did disallow. For, if God be not the Author of
confusion but of peace, etc, And again, -- Not, that I judge it a thing
allowable for men to observe these laws, which in their hearts they are
steadfastly persuaded to be against the law of God; But their persuasion in this
case [ i. e. where their Superiors have determined otherwise.] they are bound
for the time [ i. e. till the same Authority reverse it and release them] to
suspend, etc. -- unless they have an infallible Demonstration. Thus he. Where,
you see, he grounds their yielding to Authority, and changing their former
persuasion, upon an non-certainty of such persuasion. As for his limited
expression before, -- in litigious and controverted causes of such quality,
whatever he means thereby, the Commission and Injunction, Deuteronomy. 17. extends
to all litigious, and controverted causes whatsoever; As also it is more
clearly drawn, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 8, 10, 11. Where it runs, -- What cause soever
shall come to you of your brethren between blood and blood, between law and
commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall etc. And note also, that the
command, Deuteronomy 17.10. Thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform
thee, requires not only a passive (willingly paying mulcts or undergoing
punishments) but active, obedience: Again, an active obedience, not only in
doing something thought by me lawful, but to which I think I am not obliged;
but in doing also of something, where the lawfulness of it is questioned by me;
which thing also, here by the text, I am to do, if they command me. And
therefore after such Injunction I ought to alter my former persuasion
concerning it, and to believe, either that in general it is lawful to be done,
or at least lawful to be done by me, not certain of the contrary, rebus sic
stantibus, and such sentence past.

illiterat and ignorant, or also, though learned, after much examination,
doubting and unsatisfied, persons have to submit their judgment to
Church Authority, I may add the apparent mischiefs which follow the contrary,
observed amongst Protestants (neglecting this duty) from the beginning of the
Reformation, Luther himself much lamenting the divisions he saw among his
Disciples even in his own days, -- Ego (says he Prefat. comeut. in Galat.
) qui jam sum in ministerio Christi viginti annis, quanquam nihil sum, vere
possum testari, me plus quam viginti sectis esse petitum, etc. And, in Genesis c.
6. published not long before his death. Quantum sectarum excitavit Satan nobis
viventibus? Quid futurum est nobis mortuis? Profecto tota agmina
Sacramentariorum, Anabaptistarum, Antinomorum, Servetianorum, Campanistarum,
etc. And himself also is much noted for his varying from himself in his
opinions often changed. But still these divisions are more apparent in the
longer course of his Schism; which daily multiplies and brancheth its self
into more and more clefts and sects, and some of them most gross, and
ridiculous, and for which it is hard to find names; and which their forsaken
Leaders are much ashamed of, whilst the Plebeians will neither study truth
themselves, nor follow the learned; The mistakes of these persons in such high
and Divine matters, being greater, as their science less: and their opinions,
since weakly grounded floating and unconstant: and, from the usually prevailing
interests of the flesh, inclined to liberty and sensuality.

Divisions, Grotius, in several of his writings, sadly complains, as caused by
this, that they will pitch upon no Superior and common authority, by which they
will be content to be guided, and regulated in their Faith. -- Protestants
(says he in his last reply to Rivet Apolog. Discussio p. 255.
) nullo inter se communi ecclesiastico regimine sociantur: quae causae sunt,
Cur factae parts in unam Protestantium corpus colligi nequeant; immo and cur
Parts aliae atque aliae sint exurrecturae. And in the Preface to his Votum pro
Pace, speaking of their primitive Dissentments. -- Confessiones (says he)
factae sunt variis in locis variae, atque inter se pugnantes: and non modo quae
factae erant parts non potuere unquam inter se coalescere, sed and novae
quotidie exortae sunt particulae tot, ut nemo sit, qui earum inire possit
numerum: and ut faecunda est ista seges (unoquoque sibi licere credente, quod
alius ante usurpavit) credibile est, novas quotidie extituras. A presage at
this time too much verified in this our Nation. But Dudithius, the famous
Bishop of Quinquecclesiae in his disconsolate Letter to Beza, when Dudithius
now a Protestant, and married, and beginning to stagger in his new Religion,
that had dispensed with his Celibacy, much more deplores these their intestine
discords, and schisms in a scisme. There, Apud Becaw. Epist. 1.
-- Si quae aliquando (says he) inter eruditos, ex quodam disputationis quasi
calore, Controversiae extiterunt, illis statim Concilii, sive etiam Pontificis,
decreta finem imposuerunt. At nostri quales tandem sunt? palantes, omni
doctrinae vento agitati, and in altum sublati, modo ad hanc, modo ad illam,
partem differuntur. Horum quae sit hodie de Religione sententia, scire sortasse
possis; sed quae eras de eadem futura sit opinion, neque ille, neque tu certo
affirmare queas. Again, -- Ecclesiae ipsae pugnant inter se capitalibus odiis,
and horrendis quibusdam Anathematismis [perhaps looking at the Dissentions then
between the followers of Futher, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, etc. not yet
healed.] Ipsi, qui summum haberi volunt, Theologi, a seipsis indies dissident:
fidem cudunt, and a sua ipsius, quam paulo ante professi fuerant, and ab
aliorum omnium, fide abhorrentem; denique menstruam fidem habent [perhaps
looking at the often varyings of Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, and others, from
their own former opinions, and doctrine.] Thus Dudithius. For, though the
Churches make some particular standing Articles to bind together their own
Subjects, yet both the Articles of the several Churches do not accord one with
another, in some principal Points (as appears in the Lutheran, Calvinist,
Belgic, French, English, reformed Churches;) and the Subjects of each Church
do, upon the reforming Principles, without scruple, break these Bonds, upon any
new greater verisimilities, thinking their Christian liberty infringed by them.
And certainty, whatever deviation from Truth, and former Tradition, we may
suppose the first Reformers to have made, yet if they could have restrained the
people their Subjects from following their example, and from taking that
liberty of dissenting from them, which they, being also Subjects, took of
dissenting from their Superiors, both the whole Body of the Reformation would
have had much more unity and peace, and such persons much less error.

2
Advanced thus far (learned Protestants consenting) That all such persons, as
we here speak of, are to conform to, and to suffer themselves, in matters of
Religion, to be guided by Church Authority: Next, a Judgment freed from the
interests of the Will, may easily further add: That where these Ecclesiastical
Governors happen to differ amongst themselves, and guide a contrary way, here,
since these are placed, for avoiding schisms, in a due subordination, such
persons, in such case, owe their obedience to the Superiors of them: To which,
in all regular Governments, the inferior Magistrates, if they do not, ought to
give place. -- Si aliquid (says St. Austin De verbis Dom. Sermon. 6.
) Proconsul jubeat, and aliud jubeat Imperator, nunquid dubitatur, isto
contempto, illi esse serviendum? [ i. e. in things, which our Ecclesiastical
Guides do not instruct us to be contrary to the Divine Laws.] So, as to
spiritual matters, and the sense of Scripture, a Provincial, and a National,
Synod guiding such persons several ways, their obedience is due to the
National; again, a National, and a Patriarch Council of all the West, or a
General, determining matters in a diverse manner, the obedience of such persons
is due to the Patriarchal, or General, not the National, Council. And the same
it is, in any Patriarchy, or Province, in the intervals of Synods, as to the
subordinate Pastors and Prelates.

See the obedience required by the Church of England from all inferior Clergy,
or Synods, to a National Council, in the Canons made, 1603. Can. 139. and 140.
-- Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the sacred Synod of this Nation is
not the true Church of England by representation. -- Or, that no manner of
person either of the Clergy or Laity, not being themselves particularly
assembled in the said sacred Synod, are to be subject to the decrees thereof,
etc. let him be Excommunicated. And as of persons, so Churches. -- That Church
(says Bishop Bramhal Schism guared, p. 2
) which shall not outwardly aquiesce, after a legal determination [ i. e. of
its Superiors] and cease to disturb Christian unity, though her judgment may be
sound, her practice is schismatical. And elsewhere Vindic of Church Engl. p. 12.
-- If a Superior presume to determine contrary to the determination of the
Church [ i. e. of his Ecclesiastical Superiors] it is not rebellion but loyalty
to disobey him [and obey them.] And, -- I acknowledge (says Dr. Hammond Knew.
to Cath. Gentl. c. 8.. 1.
) as much as C. G. or any man, the Authority of a General Council against the
dissent of a Nation, much more of a particular Bishop. And, in his Book of
Schism, p. 54. and 66. He grants it Schism, for the Bishop to withdraw his
obedience from the higher power of the Metropolitan, or Primate, as well as for
Presbyters, from the Bishop. Now from these I collect, that if these inferior
Synods, or Clergy, are to yield such external obedience to their respective
Superiors; Then are the Subjects of these, when ever a lower Church Authority
clasheth with an higher (either in submission of their judgment, or of their
silence) to adhere to the higher; nor are the one freed from this duty, because
the other neglect it. So some National, and a Patriarchal Council dissenting,
or some Metropolitan, and his Patriarch; here the forenamed persons, being the
Subjects of both, owe their submission of judgment only to the higher
Church Authority of the two; which Authority if the forecited Protestants allow
the lower to dissent from, yet not to gainsay.

namely, where either the Assembly, or the approbation of it, must be
absolutely Universal; either as to the whole Body of Christian Bishops; or, at
least; as to some Bishops of every Province; an usual demand of the Reformed.
For such Provinces as are censured, or condemned by the Council (which thing
often happens) it cannot be presumed, that they will ever accept it: No more
than the Council of Trent supposed never so universal as to the rest of
Christianity, would have been accepted by the Protestant Bishops, who fell
under its censures.

Controversies, yet have light enough to discern this their Superior Guide: For
example: Whether a Patriarch, or a Primate be of an higher authority: Whether
an Occidental Council at Trent, under Pius: Or a National at London, under K,
James be the Superior and more comprehensive, and universal: For the
Subordinations of Clergy, and their Synods are well known: and, amongst Sects,
that are in corners, the Church-Catholick stands like a City set on a hill, and
a light on a Candlestick. -- Quae usque ad confefsionem generis humani, ab
Apostolica sede per successiones Episcoporum, frustra Haereticis
circumlatrantibus, etc. (as St. Austin before,. 293.) culmen authoritatis
obtinuit; and which its very Adversaries show (but as an intolerable ambition
in it) to be that body, which challenges, in our Lords name, obedience from
all the world Christian, and, hitherto, has out-numbred any other Christian
Society of one Communion. For all Sects, as they divide from it, so also most
certainly (from the same continued liberty against Authority) among themselves.
And therefore, though such others, as by their mean education, and low
employments, know no more of the Church, its Governors, or Doctrine, than what
their Parish Priest (perhaps factious) teaches them; and so, without ascending
higher, here terminate their obedience, may be excused by invincible ignorance
for a thing, that is their unhappiness indeed, but not their crime; yet those,
who by their more liberal Education, and ingenuous employments, cannot be
inculpably ignorant of such Authority, and whose example the ruder sort are
steered by, if they neglect to range themselves under it, shall bear their own
judgment, and also that of their followers. And, if any Authority, canonically
subject to another, shall rebel against it, and declare it self, as to some
part of the Church, supreme; and will govern that part independently, what less
can it expect from the Divine Justice, than that its Subjects, likewise
animated by its example, should revolt from it; and as it reforms for it self,
against others above it, so it should suffer more Reformations still, for
themselves, from others below it; and the measure meted by it to others be
meted again by others to it; till all divine matters, not on a sudden (which
is not the ordinary course of God's long-suffering) but in process of time, be
brought, in such part, to confusion and Anarchy.

present Church Authority; 2. And then, this divided, to the highest in actual
being; which without much search cannot but be known to the greatest part of
Christians.

3. Next, as to Church Authority past, with which many would evacuate the
present, here also such, as cannot search and examine; or, in examining, cannot
clear to themselves its certain Traditions, ought also, concerning it, to take
the judgment of the present Church; for, whose can they prudently prefer to it?
But yet, give me leave to add one thing more, that without looking into the
Ancients themselves, for which few have leisure, or Books, such persons may
easily discern by many other Symptoms, and evidences, and by their traveling
no further, than the modern writings, on what side Antiquity stands, as to
matters of religion in present debate, and which of the opposite parties it is,
that has deserted, and receded from it. Of whom you may see what has been
said already to this purpose, in 3 Disc.. 78.)

liberty of Opinion, of Judgment, of Conscience; and endeavoring to prove the
Fallibility of whatever Authority, whereas the other, generally, presses
obedience, and adherence to Authority; and defends the Infallibility also of
it, as to all necessaries. Which argues, that such Authority pincheth the one,
promotes the other.

past Councils were, nor future can be, capable of; I mean either, as to such
an universal Convention; or acceptance, as this Party demands, He will find
them * urging much the Non-necessity of Councils; the difficulty to know, the
right qualifications of the persons; the legality of their proceedings; the
sense of their Decrees: * Quarrelling about the calling of them; the presiding
in them; the paucity of their members; inequality of Nations: Pretending their
contradictions ( Councils against Councils, says Mr. Chillingw. p. 376.
) their being led by a faction; * carping at their Anathema's; even those of
the very first Councils. [ -- The Fathers of the Church (says Mr. Chillingw.
p. 200.
) in after times [ i.e. after the Apostles] might have just cause to declare
their judgments touching the sense of some general Articles of the Creed. But
to oblige others to receive their Declarations, under pain of damnation [ i. e.
of Anathema] what warrant they had, I know not. He that can show, either that
the Church of all ages was to have this Authority; or, that it continued in the
Church for some ages [ viz. for the four first General Councils] and then
expired, let him; for my part, I cannot. Thus he;] Questioning their making
more new Articles of Faith, after the declaration of the Third General Council
at Ephesus against it. All these, I say, are manifest Indications concerning
such Questioners, that the forepast Councils are no friends to their cause.

Fathers apart; he will find the same Party * frequent in alleging the
corruptions, and interpolations of those writings, which it confesses theirs;
* affirming several writings, which the rest of the world admits for genuine,
to be supposititious, and none of theirs, will find them * complaining
sometimes of their obscurity; sometimes of their Rhetoric, and Allegories
(which occasion often a mistake of their opinion;) and their using terms in a
much other sense, than the modern do: * Representing them, as to the many
matters now in Controversy, impertinent, or ambiguous, confused, not clear,
(by their own judgment then, the Fathers not clear on their side:) *
Discovering their nakedness as much as they can; and laying open their errors,
Repugnances and Contradictions: Contradictions of one to another; of the same
to himself; -- [ Some Fathers against others, the same Fathers against
themselves: A consent of Fathers of one age against a consent of Fathers of
another age; the Church of one age against the Church of another age; says Mr.
Chillingw, p. 376.
] * Allowing certain Tradition hardly of any thing, save of the H. Scriptures;
And, few, or no, Traditive interpretations thereof. I have the words from Mr.
Chillingw. [ No Tradition (says he p. 376.
) but only of Scripture can derive it self from the Fountain [our Lord and his
Apostles:] but may be plainly proved, either to have been brought in, in such
an age, after Christ; or, that in such an age it was not in. And, -- Traditive
Interpretations of Scripture are pretended; but there are few, or none to be
found. So he. * Alleging, that the Fathers tranferred several conceits and
customs, into the Church, from their new-deserted Paganism; Platonic
philosophy; And Divinity of the Sybils; or at least out of compliance with such
new Heathen Converts: And then, that the more prudent and sober Fathers,
through timorousness and despair of a reformation, have complied with the rest,
and been carried down with the stream. Thus Zuinglius De vera and falla
Religione. p. 214.
of S. Austin, touching Corporal Presence (in which point many Protestants
would have him their Patron) -- Facile adducimur (says he) Augustinum, prae
aliis acuto, perspicacique ingenio virum, sua tempestate non fuisse ausum
diserte veritatem proloqui, quae jam casum magnaa part dederat. Vidit omnino
pius Homo, quid hoc Sacramentum esset; and in quem usum esset institutum; verum
invaluerat opinio de Corporea carne. And thus Chemnitius Exam. Con. Trid. 3.
part. p. 197.
of the same Father, touching Invocation of Saints, -- Haec Augustinus, sine
Scriptura; temporibus and consuetudini cedens. And Bochart Origin. de l' Invoc.
p. 488. -- St. Austin ( who seems to have been of a disposition wonderfully
sweet and courteous) suffers himself often to comply with the common errors,
and superstitions, endeavoring rather to put a good sense upon them, than to
cross them, etc: And, -- Tantae vir authoritatis in negocio Dei libere loqui
non audebat. -- Cum praesumptionibus omnia impleri videret, schismatis metu,
aperte damnare non audebat, says Vossius These. de Invocat. S.
] Again, * saying, they held many things only as probabilities, which later
times have advanced into matters of faith, and that necessary. He finds them
also, in Appeal to this Antiquity, ascending rather to the 3 first ages
thereof; ages wherein the Church was persecuted; and few Records are left of
her general Doctrines, or Practices; and more willingly declining the later;
where the Records many; and the Church, in her flourishing condition, more
fully displaying to the world all her Government and Discipline; these men
confessing some appearances of several of the Tenants and Custom^, they oppose,
in the fourth age. Lastly he finds them, apt to change the phrase, and language
of the Ancients; and bogling at many of their terms [such as those of Merit,
Satisfaction, Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, etc.] which novelty of words often
argues a new conceit of things*

This the Protestants behavior to Antiquity (in relating which, those who are
versed in their books of Controversy, especially the writings of the French,
know, that I falsify nothing,) whereas on the other side, the opposite party
to this he finds usually defending those works of the Fathers, which the others
question; and not discarding Records certainly ancient, because perhaps some of
them mis-entitled as to the Author, or somewhat antidated as to the time: Again
stating their Theological questions, and extracting their Comments on Scripture
controverted, out of their writings: Covering their defects: and charitably
interpreting what, in them is any way capable thereof, and reconciling their
seeming Contradictions: Lastly Sainting the Fathers, and solemnly commemorating
them in their public service: Often urging, and laying much weight on ancient
Tradition, and so keeping stable, and firm from generation to generation, the
Doctrine and Faith of the Church, and, out of this Tradition, convincing
Heresies: Defending the legal authority of those Councils, which the other
oppose; and gathering their Canons into certain Heads for the standing Laws and
Rules of present-Church Government: Not looking back with such rigor and
jealousy upon their supreme Judges, and examining their numbers, their
Commissions, Elections (if these free from Simony) Ordinations, nay Baptism:
nor holding them of more virtue, authority, or illumination, as to the deciding
of Controversies, or enlarging Creeds, in one age, than another; but, in all
ages, alike necessary, alike assisted.

Trent, their plain refusing to be tried by the Councils, Fathers,
Church-Tradition, but as these are first proved to have founded their Doctrine
in the Scriptures.

See the two heads thereof, Luther and Calvin, their plain dealing in this
matter in the many Quotations cited out of them before, Disc. 3.. 78. n. 3.
etc. -- Quanti errores (says Luther) in omnium Patrum scriptis inventi sunt?
In asserti^^ne Articul.
Quoties sibi ipsis pugnant? Quis est, qui non saepius scripturas torserit?
etc. And, contra Regem Angliae -- Non ego quaero (says he) quid Ambrosius,
Augustinus Concilia, and usus saeculorum, dicunt, -- Miranda est stultitia
Satanae, quae iis impugnat, quae ego impugno. And, lib. de ministris Eccl.
i^stituend. -- Non habent Papistae quod his apponant [ i. e. to his private
sense, and exposition of Holy Scriptures] nisi, Patres, Concilia,
Consuetudinem. [Is not that enough?]

Calvin, De Ecclesiae reformandae ratione, c. 19. to the judgment of Antiquity
urged against him in the point, De sacrificio and Missa, returns such general
answers as these, not unfrequent with him also concerning many other points. --
Veterum sententias non moror, quas ad obruendam veritatem hic congerunt
Moderatores. Solemn est nebulonibus istis [you must pardon his heat, like that
of Luther] quicquid vitiosum in Patribus legitur, corradere. And below. --
Desinant boni Moderatores veterum sententiis pugnare, in mala causa. Again, --
Non est, quod vel Ambrosium, vel alium quemp iam ex tota veterum cohorte,
acutius vidisse putemus, quam ipsum Apostolum. Again, -- Vt millies clament
Papistae, oblatum olim fuisse panem; veteres ita solitos facere; non novam esse
censuetudinem; toties excipere nobis licebit: Christi mandatum inviolabilem
esse regulam, quae nulla hominum consuetudine, nulla praescriptione temporum,
convelli, aut refigi debeat. And, -- Quod ad veteres spectat; non est quod, in
eorum gratiam, ab aeterna, and inflexibili Dei veritate [ i.e. his own fancies
concerning God's Truth] recedamus. And, concerning the ignorance or negligence
of the Fathers in the main points of our salvation, Man's servitude under sin;
Reconciliation to God; Justification; the effects of Christ's Death, and
Intercessions, thus he, in his answer to Cassander's offic. pii viri Apud
Cassand. p. 802.
-- Si, quid in controversiam vocetur, quia flexibile est (...) instar nasi
ceres, si absque Traditionis [ i. e. Patrum] subsidio, quicquam definire fas
non sit, Quid jam fiet praecipuis fides nostrae capitibus? Tria solum exempli
causa, preferam, 1 Naturae nostrae corruption, and misera animae servitus sub
peccati tyrannide; 2 Gratuita Justificatio; and 3 Christi sacerdotium, apud
vetusissimos scriptores, it a obscure attingitur, ut nulla inde certitudo
possit elici. -- Satan callide spinosis quaestionibus pios Doctores intricabat,
ut negligentiores essent in hac part. Quomam vero errores, quibus profligandis
tunc circumagebantur, magna ex part sunt obsoleti, mediocrem duntaxat fructum
percipimus ex eorum libris. Interea, si ex eorum Traditione haurienda sit
cognitio salutis nostrae, jacebit omnis fiducia: quia ex illis nunquam
discemus, quomodo Deo reconciliemur; quomodo illuminemur a spiritu Sancto; and
formemur in obsequium Justitiae; quomodo gratis accepta nobis feratur Christi
obedientia; quid valeat sacrificium mortis ejus, and continuae pro nobis
intercessio, etc. The knowledge of such things (surely the chief principles of
our salvation) not to be learnt out of the Fathers. And, that you may not
think, that herein Calvin's censure stands single; before this man, Melancthon,
speaking of Luthers new discovery to the world of the Apostolical Doctrine in
the very same points, in his Preface to the second Tome of Luthers works, thus
pleases himself in the rare invention thereof. Eruditis (says he) gratum
erat, quasi ex tenebris ^duci Christum, Prophetas, Apostolos; conspici
discrimen Legis, and Evangelii, promissionum legis, and promissionis
Evangelicae: Quod certe non extabat in Thoma, Scoto, and similibus [This throws
off the Schoolmen, the Disciples of the Fathers:] But he stays not here; till
he has hunted up the same error, and mistake, in these matters, in the Fathers
too, as high as Origens time. -- Origenica aetas (says he) effudit hanc
persuasionem; mediocrem rationis disciplinam mereri remissionem peccatorum,
etc. And, -- Haec aetas paene amisit totum discrimen Legis and Evangelii; and
sermonem Apostolicum dedidicit [Now, who, here, could have the boldness to
embrace a way of Justification or Salvation, though pretended never so rational
or scriptural; yet which is, withal confessed (if not also boasted of) after so
many ages of the Church, that it is a new Discovery?]

Descend we to others of the same, more free and open, times. Peter Martyr, in
his common Places, writing De Patrum Authoritate Class. 4 c. 4.
alleges, -- Statim ab Apostolorum temporibus capisse errores. -- Quum ergo
volumus (says he) instaurare Ecclesiam, nihil consultibus est, quam omnia
revocare ad prima ecclesiae principia, and religionis primordia. Quamdiu enim
eonsistimus in Conciliis, and Patribus, versabimur semper in iisdem erroribus'
Again, -- Quid fecerunt Antiquissimi illi scriptores, cum nulli adhuc essent
Patres? Si tum ecclesia judicabat ex verbo, and spiritu, cur nunc quoque ita
non potest judicare? [which Question is soon answered: that the Fathers Fathers
were the Apostles; and that they judged ex verbo, and spiritu, and Traditione
Apostolorum, for the sense of the same Scriptures, where dubious.] Again, --
Provocare a Scripturis [he must mean, for what is the true sense of Scripture]
ad Patres, est provocare a certis ad incerta, a claris ad obscura, a firmis ad
infirma, -- Et aliud, quod dixi, potissimum spectandum est; Patres non semper
congruere inter se: and interdum, ne unum quidem ipsum convenire secum. [Would
any thus prejudice the witnesses he intends to bring into the Court for his own
cause?] Again, -- Objiciunt nobis Paulum, in Ep. ad Tim. appellare ecclesiam
Columnam veritatis. Fateor. Est quidem Columna veritatis. Sed non semper.
Verum, quando nititur verbo Dei. [But, thus is the most ignorant person that
can be named, Columna veritatis.] So Peter Martyr. Bishop Juel, our Countryman,
(as the English Divines, who have departed less from Antiquity than other
foreign Protestant Churches, seem also more desirous of being reputed to keep a
fair correspondence with it) in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days; in
his challenge at Paul's Cross, proposed no less than 27. Articles of Religion,
wherein he offered to be tried by the Fathers of the first six hundred years:
But then, it is very observable; that this learned man has chosen them so
warily, that of the twentyseven, twenty two are concerning the Eucharist; and
again, most of these, only about circumstantiels therein: and, in these
concerning the Eucharist, he omits, the Oblation of the Eucharist, as a
Sacrifice, to God the Father (only contends, Art. 17. no offering up, therein,
of Christ unto his Father:) omits also the reservation of the Euhcarist, after
Communion ended. Omits also the most, if not all, the other principal points
that are in Controversy: As Invocation of Saints. Purgatory, and Prayer for
the Dead. Veneration of sacred Relics. Evangelical Councils. Monastic Vows.
Celibacy of the Clergy. The Roman Doctrine concerning Justification, Freewill
and Merits, concerning Penances, and Satisfactions. Concerning Auricular
Confession. Distinction of venial and mortal sin, etc. His silence in which,
arguing the Fathers not for, but against, Him, seems to have done much more
prejudice to his cause, than his confident challenge for the other, has done
it credit. This thing Dr. Cole, then a Prisoner, observed; and in a Letter
expostulated with him: Quod minutiora attigerit, graviora praetermiserit, See
Dr. Humphrey vita Juelli, p. 132.
who returned this answer, -- Quaestiones se primum leviores movisse, ut post
ad alia dogmata veniretur: Alia [ i. e. the points he omitted] esse ejusmodi,
ad quae probanda Conciliorum and Patrum authoritates quaedam obtendi possint.
Haec, quae ab ipso sunt posita, -- nullum colorem probabilitatis habere, etc.
And Dr. Humphrey ( Vita Juelli, p. 212.) seems not very well pleased with this
challenge of Juels, where he says, -- Tamen utmiam largitus est, and vobis
plus aequo concessit, and sibi nimium fuit injurius, quod rejecto medio, [ i.
e. the Scriptures] quo causam suam facilius and firmius sustentare potuisset,
and seipsum, and ecclesiam quodammodo spoliavit. -- Satis enim erat Christrano,
sic dixisse: Sic dicit Dominus. Satis erat, opposuisse; Vestra dogmata
Scripturis edversantur. Siquidem Daemoniacorum quaestio est: Quid nobis, and
tibi, Jesu, fili David? At sanctorum interrogatio est: Quid rei nobis cum
Patribus, cum carne, aut sanguine? Aut quid ad nos attinet, quod Episcoporum
pseudo-Synodi constituunt? etc.

In those more confident times also, Centurists freely set down in the several
ages the errors of the Fathers, which, in the modern Controversies, misled the
latter Roman, and Greek Churches. Hospinian in the Preface to his Histor.
Sacrament. to Antiquity urged as opposing the new reformed opinions, and
practices, returns for answer, * the command in the Prophet, Jeremy. -- In
statutis Patrum vestrorum nolite ambulare: And * that saying of our Lord, --
Sine causa colunt me, mandata and doctrinas hominum docentes; and * that of St.
Cyprian, -- Consuetudo, sine veritate, vetustas erroris est; and of S. Austin,
-- Antiquitatem praejudicare veritati nec posse, nec debere. The forementioned
Dudithius in his discontented Epistle to Beza. See Beza Epist. 1.
-- Si veritas est, (says he) quam veteres Patres mutuo consensu sunt
professi, ea a Pontificiis tota stabit.

Rome, there are, who have been ingenuous in the same confession. Grotius in
the beginning of his Votum pro pace, giving an account of his reading of the
Fathers. -- Collegi (says he) quae essent illa, quae veterum testimonio; and
manentibus in hunc diem vestigiis, semper and ubique, and perseveranter, essent
tradita; videbam ea manner in illa ecclesia, quae Romanae connectitur. Is.
Causabon (cited by Arnauld, in his late answer to Claude an Hugenot Minister,
with many others, which you may view in his 1. Book 5. chap.) in his Epistle to
Witenbogard,. 207.
praestantium virorum Epistolae written, 1610 a little before his coming into
England, when he seems to have been in some greater dissettlement, speaks thus.
Deum toto affectu veneror, ut mala ecclesiae suae qui potest solus velit,
Sanare. Me, ne quid dissimulem, haec tanta diversitas (in Protestants) a fide
veteris ecclesiae non parum turbat. Ne de aliis dicam, in re sacramentorum a
majoribus discessit Lutherus, etc. Then speaking of Peter du Moulin his making
(as other Protestants usually do) those Tracts of the Fathers,. 297.
that are urged to confirm the Roman Doctrine, spurious and counterfeit, As. S.
Ambrose de sacramentis, -- Cyril Herosol. Cateches. Mystagog. -- Gregory
Nyssens Catechetical Oration, he thus goes on, -- Jam, quod idem Molinaeus
omnes veterum libros suae doctrinae contrarios respuit, ut (...) cui
mediocriter docto fidem faciet? Falsus illi Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, falsus
Gr. Nyssenus, falsus Ambrosius, falsi omnes: mihi liquet falli ipsum; and illa
scripta esse verissima, quae ipse pronunciat (...). Thus Causabon;

Socinus, Ep. ad Radecium. Legantur (says he) Pontificiorum scripta adversus
Lutheranos, and Calvinianos, and satis intelliget, si, praeter sacras literas,
illorum [ Patrum, produced by the Pontificii] authoritate sit standum, nobis
omnino causa cadendum esse. And indeed the followers of Socinus, despairing as
to their chief points concerning God's Attributes, and the Trinity, to produce
any just plea from ancient Church Authority, do also, more heartily, relinquish
this interest as to those other Controversies, which they, in common with other
reformed, maintain against Catholics. In defending which points, when the
Fathers are urged against them, their ordinary answer is: 1 That Error and
Antichrist came into the Church so soon as the Apostles by death went out of
it: And therefore they make even the Apostles themselves, not the Roman Empire,
(for that, they say, would keep out Antichrist too long) to be the (...) 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2 That the Fathers would have the Holy Scriptures to be believed,
rather than any thing they say. 3 That the Fathers are not to be believed in
any thing they say contrary to the Scriptures: and that, if Antiquity be to be
followed, the Prophets and Apostles are the most ancient; [these persons,
impudently, calling by the name of Prophets, Apostles, Scriptures, that private
sense they impose upon them] See for this Volkelius de vera Relig. l. 3. c. 40.
-- and l. 4. c. 22. and frequently elsewhere, and see Beza, in his first
Epistle, applying like plasters to the wound of Dudithius.

Chillingw. also, more heartily than many of his followers, in his new Socinian
way, that all necessaries, to all manner of persons using their industry, are
clear in the Holy Scriptures, seems very little solicitious in engaging the
Fathers, or other Antiquity, on his side, by reason of the evidence, in Holy
Scriptures, of all necessaries; and the needlesness of deciding any
non-necessaries. -- I for my part [saith he in the latter end of his work after
his declaring, not the Articles of the Church of England, not the harmony of
Protestant Confessions; but the Bible, the Bible, to be his Religion] after a
long, (and as I verily believe and hope) imimpartial search of the true way to
eternal happiness, do profess plainly, that I cannot find any rest for the
sole of my foot, but upon this Rock only [ i. e. of the Bible, not, of the
Church; for as for this latter he goes on.] -- I see plainly, and with my own
eyes; that there are Popes against Popes, Councils against Councils, some
Fathers against others, the same Fathers against themselves, a consent of
Fathers of one age against a consent of Fathers of another age, the Church of
one age against the Church of another age, Traditive Interpretations of
Scripture, few or none found, -- no sufficient certainty, but of Scripture
only, [not any it seems of Antiquity, or of the Primitive Church: yet, out of
which the Catholics always convinced Heresies] for any considering man to
build upon. Thus he, downright.

Motives of his turning Catholic See the conclusion of his Preface,. 41. etc.
(that you may see the Authority of Antiquity, and of Church-Tradition, had a
great hand in leading him to Popery, but none at all in reducing him to
Protestantisme) he is not sollicitous at all to deny, or disprove, the truth of
these motives; but, to traverse the consequence he formerly made from them, So,
to the first Motive to the Roman Catholic Religion: viz. -- That a perpetual
visible Profession is apparently wanting to Protestant Religion, so far as
concerns the points in contestation. He answers, not, by denying any such
visible profession to be wanting to Protestants; But, that any such visible
Profession, without any mixture of falsehood, is not necessary. Again, to the
Fourth: -- That many Points of Protestant Doctrine are the opinions of
Heretics, condemned by the Primitive Church He answers, not, by denying the
Protestant Doctrines to be condemned as Heretical, by the Primitive Church;
But, that those in the Primitive Church condemned many doctrines as such; that
were not so. To the Sixth, -- That the Doctaine of the Church of Rome is
conformable, and the doctrine of Protestants contrary, to the doctrine of the
Fathers, who lived in the first 600 years, even by the confession of
Protestants themselves. He Answers, not by denying this; but by retortion of
the like to the Roman Church: -- That the Doctrine of Papists is confessed by the
Papists, contrary to the Fathers, in many points. But here he tells not, in
what points. And had he, I suppose it would either have been in some points not
controverted with Protestants; As perhaps about the Millenium: communicating of
Infants, or the like; or else, in some circumstances, only of some point
controverted. To the Tenth, -- That Protestants, by denying all humane
Authority either of Pope or Councils, or Church, to determine controversies of
Faith, have abolished all possible means of suppressing Heresy, or restoring
unity to the Church: He answers, not, by denying Protestants to reject all
humane Authority, Pope, Councils, or Church: But by maintaining, that
Protestants, in having the Scriptures only, and endeavoring to believe them in
the true sense, have no need of any such authority for determining matters of
Faith; nor, can be Heretics; and do take the only way for restoring unity. In
all which, you see Church Authority and ancient Tradition led on the man to be
Catholic; and the rejecting this authority, and betaking himself to a private
interpretation and understanding of the Scriptures, and endeavoring to believe
them in their true sense, reduced him to Protestantism. He meanwhile not
considering, how any can be said to use a right endeavor to believe Scripture
in the true sense; or, to secure himself from Heresy; or to conserve unity, *
who refuses, herein, to obey the direction of those spiritual Superiors, past,
present, Fathers, Councils, Bishops, whom our Lord has appointed to guide and
instruct his Church in the true sense of Scriptures, as to matter of Faith, Vt
non, fluctuantes, circumferamur omni vento doctrinae, etc. Ephesians. 4.14. Again, *
who refuses to continue in the Confession of the Faith of these Guides, so to
escape Heresies; and, to continue in their Communion, so to enjoy the Catholic
unity. And what Heresy at all is it here that Mr. Chillingw. suppresseth?
which none can incur, that is verily persuaded, that sense, he takes Scripture
in, to be the right; and what Heretic is not so persuaded? For professing any
thing against ones Conscience, or Judgment, or against what he thinks is the
sense of Scripture, is not Heresy, bu Hypocrisy. And what new unity is this
that Mr. Chillingw. entertains? that none can want, who will but admit all to
his communion (whatever tenants they are of) that, to this Interrogatory,
whether they do endeavor to believe Scripture in a true sense? Will answer
affirmatively. See his Preface,. 43. parag. To the 10th.
But this is beside my present purpose; and his Principles have been already
discussed at large in Disc. 2.. 38. etc. So much of Mr. Chillingw.

By these Instances the disinteressed will easily discern, what way he is to
take, if he will commit his ignorance, or dissatisfaction in Controversies, to
the guidance of Antiquity, or Church Authority past, when he sees so many of
the Reformed in the beginning, but also several of late, deserting as it were
their Title to it (excepting the times Apostolical) as not defendable.

5. Lstly, In all this he will be the more confirmed, when he observes, that
these men, instead of embracing, and submitting to, the Doctrines and
Traditions of former Church-Doctrine, fly, in the last place, to that desperate
shift of the early appearance of Antichrist in the world; who also (as they
say) must needs be comprehended within the Body of the Church, and be a
professor of Christianity; nay, must be the very chief Guides, and Patriarchs
thereof; and these, as high as the Fourth, or Fifth age; nay much sooner, (say
some) even upon the Exit of the Apostles. A conceit, which, armed, with the
Texts, 1 Jo. 2.18. [little children, as ye have heard, that Antichrist shall
come, so are there even now many Antichrists] -- and c. 4. v. 3. -- [This is
the spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard, that it should come; and even
now already is it in the world,] armed, I say, with these Texts misapplied to
the persons, whom they think fit to discredit, at one blow cuts off the Head of
all Church Authority, Tradition, Fathers, Councils, how ancient soever: And the
main Artifice this was, whereby Luther made his new Doctrine to spread abroad
and take root; when he had, thus, first taken away all reverence to former
Church, and its constant Doctrines and Traditions, as this Church having been,
for so long a time, the very seat of Antichrist, Babylon, the great Whore, and
I know not what. And after this groundwork laid; now, so much in Antiquity as
any Protestant dislikes, presently appears to him under the shape of
Antichristian Apostasy: and in his resisting, and opposing the Church, he
quiets his conscience herewith; and seems to himself, not a Rebel against his
spiritual Governors, but a Champion against Antichrist. But on these terms, if
they would well consider it, our Lords promises to the Church, that it should
be so firmly built to the Rock, as that the Gates of Hell should never prevail
against it, and the Apostles Prediction, that it should always be a Pillar and
ground of Truth, are utterly defeated, and have miscarried, in its very
infancy. For how can these Gates of Hell more prevail, than, that the chief
Guides and Governors of this Church, signified by the false Prophet, Apoc.
13.11. etc. with great signs and miracles, shall set up Satan's Kingdom and
Standard in the midst of it, shall practice a manifold Idolatry within it; and
corrupt the Nations with their false Doctrines; and lastly, maintain this
kingdom of Satan (thus set up, I say, not without, or against, but within the
bowels of, the Church) now, by the ordinary computation of Protestants, for
above Twelve hundred years; whilst the Emperor, and other Roman Catholic
Princes are imagined during all this time to be the Beast, or Secular State,
that opens its mouth in Blasphemy against God; and makes war with the Saints?
Apoc. 13.6, 7.
To whose Religion this false Prophet gives life, Apoc. 13.11, 15. Both which,
this Beast and this False-Prophet, for their Idolatry and Oppression, at the
appointed time (before this expected; now, they say, not far off;) shall be
cast into the Lake or poole of Fire. For so their doom runs, Apoc. 19, 20. --
And the Beast was taken and the False Prophet, -- and both these were cast
alive into a lake of fire.

False Prophet Mahomet upon the stage: and since they might easily discern, and
the phenomena, or Characters of the Apocalyptical false Prophet, which are by
them, through insuperable difficulties, misapplied to the Pope, the Head of the
Church, to have been most visibly and eminently fulfilled in Him. * Who is the
head and Founder of that false Religion, which has so boldly invaded
Christianity, after so many hundred years growth; and supplanted it in the
greatest and most dignified part of the converted world. Whose signs and
wonders, how lying or ridiculous soever (for God forbid, any such should be
expected from this false Prophet, as our Lord, or his Apostles did) have had
the very same effect, as the two Apostles Apocal. 13.13, 14. -- 2 Thessalonians. 2.9,
10.
have foretold those of the false Prophet should have, viz. the seduction, and
delusion of the Nations; and if there be no wonder in the wonders, the greater
wonder there is in the seduction, that followed upon them. * Who has
introduced a new Gospel, and that pretended to have been written in heaven, he
assuming therein the person and voice of God; new Sacraments; new days, and
places, of solemn worship; who has molded a new, fine, easy religion, void
(as he says) of all Controversies and subtilties; and consisting only of one
Article of Faith [ One only God and Mahomet his Prophet.] Devised new pleasing
laws, which (that they might be point-blanck opposite to our Lords) are full of
lust and uncleanness on one fide, and of cruelty, rapin, tyranny, violence, the
sword, slavery, and the law martial, on another: and has invented new future
sensual -- Beatitudes suitable to the observance of his laws. * Who has
changed Dies Dominica, for solemn worship, into Dies Veneris; and the visiting
of our Lords Sepulcher and Temple at Jerusalem, to his at Mecha; Subjecting
Sarah to Hagar, and Isaac to Ismael. * Who has taken away the Christian
Altars, and the daily Evangelical Sacrifice, the Sacraments, the Priests, and
thrown out of the Churches of Bodies of the Saints, interred there, as
contaminating them.

Cerinthus, Carpocrates, and others in S. John's days, and the progress of
Arius, and his Disciples, in following ages (almost all the ancient Heretics
being treacherous to our Lords Divinity) has at last completed that which is
spoken of 1 John 4.2. * the Dissolution of Jesus [as the vulgar, and those
Greek Copies it follows, have it; (...), See Socrat. Hist. l. 7, c. 32. --
Irenaeus, l 3. c. 18.
] or * the denial of Jesus his coming in the flesh (as other Copies) i. e. his
descending from Heaven into the flesh; whilst he has robbed our Lord not only
of his Divinity, but also, by this, of the High Prerogatives of his Humanity
too; robbed him also of his Cross and Death (which he says he never suffered)
and so robbed Him and the world of his Satisfactions and Merits; and all the
virtue of the Sacraments relating thereto; and has challenged the Honor, of
being the last Prophet, sent from God, unto himself. * In whom the Dragon seems
to have showed his greatest, Apoc. 13.2.
and last, Art; (after the world was somewhat well acquainted with his former
snares.) For, whereas heretofore he thrust all the world into Idolatry, now,
out of the envy which Satan bears to the Honor given by the Church to the
glorified Saints, his Disciple and Champion, this false Prophet, becomes a
professed enemy to all former Idolatry; and much displeased he is with
Christianity upon this account. And again, out of the envy Satan bears to the
Divinity of our Lord, a great zealot this his false Prophet is for the worship
of one only God; that (says he) has neither wife, nor child. Yet who, in
opposing and denying the Divinity of our Lord Jesus, the Son, has lost, and
deprived himself of, God the Father too, in St. John's consequence; For, 1 Jo.
2.23. -- He who denies the Son [ i. e. that Jesus is the Son; or ( ver. 22.)
that Jesus is the Christ, or, 1 Jo. 4.3. -- that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh [ i. e. come from heaven, or from God, into the flesh, all which this
false Prophet expressly opposes;] He that, thus, denies the Son, the same
[also] has not the Father, says the Apostle. And so this man of sin retains
no title either to God the Son, or God the Father; either to the God of
Christians, or to the Heathen God's; whom also he has cast off.

Apoc. 12.6, 14.2 These 2.4. Apoc. 13.3.12, 13. Apoc. 13.3, 4.
amongst others, in God's Temple at Jerusalem; from the possession of which no
Christian Heroical attempts have been able hitherto, finally to expel him. *
Who, possessing all the middle of the earth, and having thrust up the Church as
it were into a corner, and the outerskirts, thereof, the Islands of the West,
has erected a new dreadful Empire; and revived the Image of the former Heathen
State, that persecuted the Church in the beginning, and which long since seemed
to have received its mortal wound; which he has wonderfully cured: And seated
this his Empire in the very same place, and turned the St. Sophia, heretofore
the glory of Christian Churches, into a Mosche.* Whose miraculous conquests
have made the world to wonder after him, and to Adore him, saying, who is like
to him? who, able to make war with him? Apoc. 13.3, 4. * With whose persecution
no former can be compared either for duration of time, or (by his facile, and
sensual, Religion) slaughter of souls. * Who also has afflicted Christianity
now for above a 1000 of the Protestants 12 hundred and sixty Days Apoc. 12,
6.14. -- 13.5. -- 11.3. Dan. 7.25. -- 12.7.
taken for years: and near upon the same time (that they may see the ^numbers
also fit Him) as, they say, the Pope has oppressed it. [Only, the Antiquity of
the Churches pretended Idolatry, said to be about, or before, A. D. 400. Mede
Apostasy of latter times, c. 14. -- Dr. More Synops Prophet, c. 7. n 7. --
Apoleg. p. 552.
forces them to begin their account of the Popes Apostasy, and oppression of
the Faith, so early, as, justly computed, it happens to be already expired. Yet
expired, without any alteration of affairs observed at this time, correspondent
to the Prophecy (for that change at the Reformation, (a great one indeed) on
the other side, comes too early) whereas the account applied to the Mohammedan
Apostasy, being of 200. years later date, suffers as yet no contradiction from
the event.]

Heathen Gods, but also of the Christians, and the true, God; and, instead
thereof, setting up his own, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. has opposed, and exalted himself
above, all that is called God; and showed himself, as though he were God: if we
may understand these expressions of the Apostle, coucerning this later enemy of
God, and his Church, as we do those of the Prophets (whence they were borrowed)
concerning those ancient ones: The King of Babylon, and the King of Tire, and
Antiochus Epiphanes, of whom like things are spoken there. Of the King of
Babylon thus the Prophet Esaias c. 14.13, 14.
-- Thou did say in thine heart: I will ascend into heaven; above the Stars
of God, will I exalt my throne: I will sit in the Mount of the Testament [the
Temple] I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and be like to the
Highest. Of the King of Tire thus the Prophet Ezech. c. 28.2.
-- Thou have said, I am God; and have sitten in the chair of God, etc. and,
ver. 6. -- Thy heart is elevated, as the heart of God. And of Antiochus thus
the Prophet Daniel. c. 11.36, 37.
-- That he should elevate and magnify himself against every God; and against
the God of Gods speak magnificent things, -- That the God of his Fathers he
should not account of, neither care for any of the Gods. Yet, in the fulfilling
of these Prophesies; their exaltations and blasphemies (who still had some
Deity whom they externally professed to adore,) their Empires, and Tyrannies
over the Saints, are no way comparable to those of the present Mohammedan
Empire; and this Son of Ismael's presuming to exalt himself above the Son of
God; Christ our Lord, who is over all things, God Blessed for ever. Lastly,
Romans 9.6,
* who has effected all his Projects with the greater success, and less
disturbance or jealoufie of Christians, because one part of them, out of a
particular interest, and intestine quarrels, misapply the Prophesies to another
Person; Another part, from the high expressions of them, (which are usually
very Hyperbolical) expect yet greater matters, than have been discovered in
him, or probably shall be, in any other.

However, I think, He, that soberly weighs the things said before, will see,
what little reason Protestants have had to arraigne, and condemn, the Bishop of
Rome; the chief Pastor of Christ's Flock, for this great false Prophet; and mean
while to absolve, and dismiss this Barrabas. To whom the New Testament
Prophesies seem to agree with much exactness, but no way to suit to the other.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the pretense of Certainty, against Church Authority.
Reply to the 2d Defense, The pretended certainty of a Truth, against
Church Authority,. 318. 1. That it is a very difficult thing to arrive to a
rational, and demonstrative certainty, in matters intellectual; more, in
matters Divine, and Spiritual; and especially, in such Divine matters, where
Church Authority delivers the contrary for a certain Truth, Ibid. Instances
made in four principal points of modern Controversy: For which
Church Authority is, by many Protestants, charged with Idolatry, and
Sacrilege,. 320. 1. The Corporal presence, and consequently Adoration, of
Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist,. 321. 2. Invocation of Saints, 322. 3.
Veneration of Images,. 323. 4. Communion in one kind,. 324.

2 That such certainty, if in a Truth of small importance, though it cannot
yield an obedience of Assent to Church Authority, yet stands obliged still to
an obedience of silence.. 330, Conceded by Protestants,. 331. 3. That such
Certainty of a Truth never so important, and necessary (where also one is to be
certain, that it is so) though it be supposed free from the obedience, of
Assent; and of silence; yet stands obliged to a third, a passive obedience, to
Church Authority, a peaceable undergoing the Churches Censures (though this be
the heaviest, Excommunication; and that unjust;) without erecting, or joining
to any other external Communion, divided from it. Which third obedience only
yielded, preserves the Church from schism.. 332, 333.


Council of Trent, or any other, though proved never so legal, or supreme; viz.
the obligation to follow their Conscience against any humane Authority, even
though this Conscience be erroneous. To which has been replied: That, such
obligation granted, yet there is no general security to any one in this
practice; because of another obligation precedent to this: namely, his duty,
first, rightly to inform his Conscience; so that, whenever the first is
neglected, the latter excuses not. And then: For the rectifying this
information of Conscience, which requires our greatest care, I have set down.
(. 274, 275, 277.) the three common deceits, the interested Will uses to
corrupt, or misguide the Conscience, or Judgment, as it pleases; namely, 1.
Either by hindering the Judgment from any search of such matters of Religion,
and wholly diverting it to other employments, whereby it may become more pliable
to any impression, in these spiritual matters, which secular interest
recommends: 2. Or, by indulging a search into such matters, but this
preingaged, and confined to a Party: 3. Or, by admitting an impartial search
into all sides: But this, only as to arguments drawn from seeming Reason; but
not, as to those other, drawn from the just weight of present, or past,
Church Authority. All which Arts and Deceits, of the Will, have been seriously
reflected on, and censured (the first in,. 281, etc. The second,. 289 etc. The
third,. 291, etc.) And so, a well-informed Conscience, reduced to obedience of
Church Authority, in all spiritual matters; at least, such, or so many, wherein
it acknowledges no absolute Certainty of its own opimions.

Guard, or Defense, (mentioned before,. 271.) against obedience to a legal
Church Authority; (used by those Protestants, who see the weak plea of a
misinformed conscience, which every gross error makes use of; and who seem more
respectful, and wary, to preserve their duty to their spiritual Superiors) viz.
Where persons have a certainty, that such Church Authority manifestly errs.
Which certainty they say, any one may presume of so often, as he can
demonstrate the contrary of what is maintained by this Authority. The trial of
which Demonstration also, whether it be a true one, they say, is thus certainly
discovered, if so many others, as hear it, and understand the terms, are also
satisfied and convinced by it (for such a fence against false Demonstrations
the more judicious Protestants have made against the Puritans, and those, who
have pretended manifest errors in, and so refused obedience to, their own
Provincial, or National Synods.)

not-certain are, by this plea, left to Church-Obedience, Secondly. These
things, concerning Certainty, shall freely be granted unto them: 1. That, who
is certain of any thing, neither ought, nor indeed possibly can, yield the
obedience of Assent to any Authority whatever proposing the contrary; nor may
profess to yield it; for this is lying, and acting against Conscience: 2. And
again; That to one liable to error in some things, yet some other things may
well be so plain, and manifest, that he may have abundant certainty thereof.
And: 3. That such a Demonstration of his Certainty, as, proposed to any that
understands the terms, satisfies and convinces him, is good. But, these
granted, yet a Judgment, well purged from Secular Interest, will here also
consider,

1. That it is no such easy matter, as it is thought, to arrive at certainty
in things intellectual, where our senses do not assist us; and especially
those, that are Divine, and Spiritual; * where, these things not being
collected by Reason, but originally delivered to us by Divine Revelation, both
the matters are, many times, very mysterious, treating of the perfections,
wisdom, and ways, of God: His Divine Laws, and Sacraments; things above our
natural reach; and the words also, signifying these to us, are many times not
free from several acceptions, literal, and figurative (else all persons would
agree in the same sense) so that apparent contradiction in the words, by
distinguishing of some term, is none in the sense, but both the verbal
Contradictories very true; * Where again, these Revelations being many, and all
most certainly true, none may be taken in such a sense, as to contradict any
other; And lastly, * where, the true essence of things, abstracted from all
their Accidents (which accidents again cannot be known to us to be so, but by
an actual separation) being not perfectly known to us, hence also though it be
most certain to us that two contradictories cannot be true, yet is it most
difficult to discern, what things truly contradict. For it is a Contradiction
only, when the same thing is denied of, or removed from, its felf. As this [a
man is not a man.] Or this [A man is white, and not white] where the formal
Contradiction, being resolved, is [whiteness is not whiteness: Manhood is not
Manhood.] And it is no contradiction, but truth, when ever a thing is denied of
any thing not it self. Therefore this, what is, or is not, the thing it self;
or, its essence; must exactly be known, before a true and real contradiction
be so. And this difficulty, which is indeed in all nature, must still be the
greater in these things spiritual, and more remote from sense; of which we are
speaking. -- Cum res tanta sit (says St. Austin See before,. 293.
) ut Deus tibi ratione cognoscendus sit, omnesne putas idoneos, etc. And, Tu in
eos libros, qui sancti, Divinarumque rerum pleni, etc, sine Duce irruis? And,
-- Nihil est facilius, quam, non solum se dicere, sed etiam opinari, verum
invenisse; sed hoc reipsa difficillimum est. And therefore, in that excellent
Treatise, De utilirate Credendi.
he advises them first, laying aside such fancies of certainty to believe the
Church. -- Quo illuminaturo praeparentur Deo.] And, indeed, who is there, if he
reflect upon the many seeming certainties, that he has had in some opinions,
afterward forsaken, that will not perceive, that this conceited certainty is an
ordinary fallacy, which those, who know least, and so have least reason to
think themselves certain are most subject to. -- Qui ad pauca respicit, facile
pronunciat.

themselves as well as for their Subjects; and set down their own, as well as
prescribe another, faith; this, I say, will make any such conceited certainty
on our side yet much more irrational: (See more said of this in the 4th. Disc..
11.) And lastly, besides all this, our pretended Demonstrations, being put to
the trial according to the former Protestant. Definition of a demonstration,
will prove constantly false, as from which so many rational and learned
persons, hearing or reading them, continue to dissent. Neither here will the
plea, of the perspicuity and clearness of the Scriptures in such point
(ordinarily the chief pretense we have for our certainty) any way relieve us,
or release our obedience to these Governors, but rather promote it. Because,
if these Scriptures to us clear, so will they be to them: Or, if these
Scriptures, like the Israelites Cloud, be light to one, and darkness to
another, our humility ought to believe, that the light side of it will be
rather toward the Church Governors, than toward us, when singular, and
differing from them; who also are appointed to enlighten us Mat. 5.14.


Rome with Idolatry and Sacrilege; (...), 1. The corporal presence of Christ's
Body and Blood in the Eucharist, and consequently Adoration of them, as
present. 2. Worship and Invocation of Saints. 3. Veneration of Images; 4.
Communion in one kind. As for a fifth, which might be added: The language, that
ought to be used, according to several Nations, in the Celebration of the
public Service of God, I here omit it: Supposing this might be easily so
accomodated, as solely, to be no hinderance of an union; where all the other
real Controversies are accorded between the two Churches.

For the First, then, of these four points, the corporal presence of our Lord
in the Eucharist, Adoration: Since, as has been showed in the first
Discourse,. 62, and more copiously in the Historical Disc. of the Eucharist,.
35. a possibility thereof is not opposed by many of the Reformed; and the true
sense of Hoc est Corpus meum, and of other Scriptures, whether de facto, these
do declare it so present, is that, by which this Question, between the two
Parties must be decided; I see not what Demonstrative certainty, any Protestant
can rationally pretend, of the sense he gives to these Scriptures, in
opposition to that other sense of them, which is maintained by
Church Authority; and has been, by so many Councils, expressly declared, (long
before Protestancy thought on; -- Of which Councils, see 1 Disc.. 57. etc) and
this, after so long, and subtle disputes for about three hundred years; viz.
from the 2d. Nicen Council to the days of Berengarius; and after so diligent
an Examination (on all sides) of Primitive Tradition, by Paschasius, Bertram,
and others, Eight hundred years ago; and, fince that, by Lanfrank, Guitmund,
etc. at the appearance of Berengarius. Which Primitive Tradition, and judgment
of Antiquity, that it was, (if this may not be taken on the credit of so many
Councils,) the same concerning these Scriptures, with that of the present
Church Authority, I think any one, that is well affected to the peace of the
Church, and not pre-ingaged in Disputes, will receive sufficient satisfaction,
herein, who will at his leisure spend a few hours in a public Library to read,
entire, and not by cited parcels, the short Discourses, on this subject, of *
St. Ambrose, De Myster, initiand. chap. 9. -- * The Author of the Books, De
Sacramentis [ascribed to the same Father] l. 4 the 4, and 5. Chapters. *
Cyrill. Hierosol. Catechis. Mystagog. 4. and 5. * Chrysostom, in Matt. Homil.
83. -- In. Act. Apost. Hom. 21. -- In, 1 Cor. Hom. 24. * Greg. Nyssen, Orat.
Catechet. c. 36, 37, * Eusebius. Emissen. or Caesarius Arelatens. De Paschate
Sermon. 5. * Hilarious Pictao. De Trinitate, the former part of the eighth book. *
Cyril. Alexand. In Evangel. Johan. l. 10. c. 13. Concerning the Authenticalness
of several of which pieces (for the last Protest^ant refuge is to pronounce
them spurious) you may remember the fore cited passage of Casaubon. 307.
speaking of such a subterfuge of Du Moulins, -- Falsus illi Cyrillus
Hierosolymitanus, falsus Gr. Nyssenus; falsus Ambrosius, falsi omnes; mihi
liquet, falli ipsum [Molinaeum.]

Not, that I affirm here, that every one, that reads these pieces, shall be so
persuaded, and convinced. For, as has been showed, the Interests of the Will
have a strange power of disguising, and miscolouring, things to the
understanding. As, when, perhaps, the pre-design of making a Reply to an
Adversary, is the reason of ones reading of such a piece of a Father; and when
one has, first, stated the Question to himself, ordered his Arguments, deduced
his Conclusions, solved Objections, etc. and then, upon such provocation of an
Antagonist, is brought to examine their writings; here we may presume, such a
one will be very loath now to pull down the whole Fabric he has built before,
and to lay down his Arms: and that it will go hard, if he cannot find something
in them seeming favorable to his cause. Either, 1. for the Terms used by the
Father; he will contend, that they are to be taken according to the mode of
those times, and not in a proper, or modern, sense: O^, That their Rhetoric,
and Eloquence, fitted, not to state the Question, or inform the Judgment, but
to move Affections, and gain the Will, does often make use of such expressions,
as, rigourously taken, transcend the Truth. Or, 2. For the sense given, when
apparently against him; he will propose some seeming-irrational consequences
and absurdities, that follow from it; or, some other Tenants of the Father,
that will not consist with it; and the Translation alsor, or the Copy, shall
many times be blamed. Or, 3. Touching the Discourse; 1 He will either pronounce
the whole illegitimate and spurious, as pretended to be found of a different
style from the Father's other works: or, some words used in it, some Rites, or
Customs mentioned, that are of a later date or age; or, such work not found in
such Editions; or, not mentioned by later writers: or, that it is in part
corrupted and interpolated; and, not all of a piece. 2 Or at least, He will
find some Clauses, in the same, or in some other, discourse of the Father,
whereby he may seem to confess in one place, what he denies in another: or,
which may serve at least to render him somewhat confused and obscure in the
Point, and so, serviceable to no Party. I name these defenses not so, but that
some times they may be true, but, that they are much oftener made use of, than
there is any just cause; and, are apt to blind the unwary, and preoccupated,
and such, as have the infelicity to be engaged against Truth, before they are
well read in Antiquity.

So the late Censurer of Dr. Arnaulds last Book concerning the Eucharist,. 321.
n. 2.
Vigier, after the two former Combatants, Arnauld, and Claude, one by taking
the Fathers in a plain, and literal, the other, in a Metaphorical sense, had
each of them challenged Antiquity, as clearly on his own side, seeks to
dispatch the Controversy, much what like the Woman in the Book of Kings 3 Reg.
3.27.
, whose the child was not. -- Nec mihi, nec Tibi sit. Saying Eng. Translat. p.
80.
-- That the true belief of the ancient Church, about this point of the
Eucharist, is very hard to be known; That there are innumerable perplexities in
it; and that, if the Fathers have believed the Reality, as he sees no reason
to doubt, but they did, they believed it in such a manner, which neither Roman
Catholics, nor Protestants, nor any other Christian Society, would approve of.
And so. p. 66, etc. That the former Greek Church may not be found
Transubstantialists, he is content, they should be Stercoranists; ( i. e.
holding I know not, what panified corruptible corporal presence of our Lord,
much more gross, and incredible, than that of Transubstantiation) For, whether
the Greeks fall short of, or ago beyond, the Latin Church herein, he thinks
all to his purpose, so they be not just the same. But then, overborn with Dr.
Arnaulds modern testimonies, manifesting the unanimous accord herein of the
present Oriental, with the Western, Churches, here he will have them, to have
taken up this their opinion of late from Travelers, but by no means to have
derived it from their Forefathers, -- There may have happened (says he p. 94.
) a change, since the establishing of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the
Latin Church, either by the mixture and commerce of the Latins and Greeks, or
by the Voyages of the Portugais, and other Nations, into the Oriental Churches;
-- mean while, the present Oriental Churches thus consenting with the Roman, it
may well be considered, what would become of the Protestant cause, if the
Controversy should now be referred to the Decision of a lawful General Council.

Much what the same course takes Monsieur Claude in his last Reply to Dr.
Arnauld. 321. n. 3.
For the showing of which a little more at large, because I am speaking here of
the Eucharist, and what I shall say, may serve for a pre-advertisement to some,
less experienced in this Controversy, that may light on his Book, and are in
danger of receiving some impressions from it, prejudicial to the Catholic
Faith; I beg leave of the Reader to make a step, though somewhat out of my way,
yet not much beside my purpose; Remitting those, who think this Foreign Author
less concerns them, to the prosecution of the former Discourse, resumed below.
321. n. 27.

1st. This Author busyes himself l. 2. c. 1.
to accumulate many Testimonies concerning the miserable ignorance, and decay
of Learning, in the modern Greek, and other Oriental, Churches, as also that of
the Moscovites l. 5. c. 1.
, even amongst their Monasticks, Priests, and Bishops; which industrious
disparaging of their Science shows, he has no mind to stand to their
Judgment. He relates their many Superstitious and ridiculous Rites, and
Ceremonies in Religion; their extreme Poverty; and so, how easily they are to
be gained to say, or do, any thing, with the Money, or, (to speak it in better
Language,) with the Charities, which the Latins frequently bestow on them.
Hence these Nations being so ignorant, their sentiments in Religion are less to
be valued.

2. He proceeds l. 2. c. 2. etc.
to tell us the many opportunities, 321. n. 4.
the Latins have had, of introducing Innovations, and propagating the Roman
Faith in those Countries; 1. By so many Western Armies that have passed
thither, for the Conquest of the Holy Land; and have settled there, to maintain
their Victories; and so kept the Orientals in Subjection for near 200 years; By
the inability of the later Grecian Emperors to defend their Dominions; and so,
their often endeavoring to accommodate Religion after the best way for their
Secular advantages; and that was, by a Conformity in it with the West; 3. By
the continual Missions of Priests, and Religious of all Orders, (each of them
striving to have some plantation in the East;) especially, the Missions of
Jesuits, thither; who by their manifold diligence, in instructing their
children, educating their youth, distributing many charities to the
necessitous, playing the Physicians, teaching the Mathematics, etc. insinuate
also into them their Religion, having corrupted also several of their Bishops.
Hence we may imagine, these Missions of the Latins having thus overspread the
whole face of the East, and practicing so many Acts to change its Faith, it
will seem a hard task to prove, concerning any particular Testimony procured
from thence, that the persons subscribing it are no way Latiniz'd, no way
tainted in their judgment; and, that they are not already circumvented, and
won over in some Points, though perhaps they may still stand out in some
others. [All this He does, to show the great industry of these Missions to
pervert the Truth there: But, indeed, manifests their indefatigable zeal and
courage, through infinite hazards, to advance it: negociating the Conversion of
Infidels, as well as the instruction of ignorant Christians: And Roman
Catholics are much indebted to M. Claude for his great pains, in giving so
exact an account of their Piety]

3. Having premised such a Narration as this, 321. n. 5.
to be made use of, as he sees fit, for invalidating the Testimonies of the
modern Greeks. 3ly. He declares, that he does not undertake at all to show,
that the Greeks concur with Protestants in their Opinion concerning our Lords
presence in the Eucharist; and much complains of his Adversary, for imposing
such an attempt upon him. L. 3. c. 1. -- It is not our business here (says he)
to show; whether the Greeks have the same Faith which we [Protestants] have, on
the subject of the Holy Sacraments: This is a perpetual Illusion that M.
Arnauld puts upon his Readers; but, whether the Greeks believe of the Sacrament
that, which the Church of Rome believes. And l. 3. c. 13. He says, -- He would
have none imagine, that he pretends no difference between the Opinion of the
Greeks, and Protestants: and he thinks that none of the Protestant Doctors have
pretended is. And Ibid. after his stating of the Greek Opinion, To the censure
that he makes it pe^^ raisonnable, he says p. 336.
That to this he has nothing to answer; save, that Protestants are not obliged
to defend the Sentiment of the Greeks: and, that his business is to enquire
what it is; not; how maintainable. And says elsewhere, That both the Greeks
and Latins are far departed from the Evangelical simplicity, p. 337.
and the main and natural explication, the Ancients have given to the Mystery
of the Eucharist.

Here then; 1st as to the later ages of the Church, Protestants stand by
themselves; and the Reformation was made, as Calvin confessed it, Epist. P.
Melancthoni.
a toto mundo. 2. After such a Confession, M. Claude seems not to deal
sincerely, in that with force enough, he draws so frequently in both his
Replies, the sayings of the Greek writers of later times, to the Protestant
sense; and puts his Adversary to the trouble of confuting him; And, from the
many absurdities, that he pretends would follow upon the Greek Opinion, taken
according to their plain expressions, says; these intend only, * a Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist, as to its Virtue and Efficacy, opposite to its
Reality and Substance; and * an Union of the Bread there to the Divinity only
so far, as the Divinity to bestow on it the Salvifical Virtue or Efficacy of
Christ's Body: and * a conjunction of the Bread, there, to Christ's natural Body,
born of the Blessed Virgin, but to it, as in Heaven; not here; to it, as a
Mystery may be said to be an Appendix, or Accessory, to the thing, of which it
is a Mystery. But all this is the Protestant Opinion 3. Again, seems not to
deal sincerely, in that, whilst he affirms the modern Greeks to retain the
former Doctrine of their Church as high as Damascen, and the 2. Council of Nice
l. 3. c. 13. p. 315.
and again, l. 3. c. 13 p. 326. -- and l. 4 c. 9. p. 488.
Damascen not to have been the first, that had such thoughts. ( viz. of an
Augmentation of Christ's Body in the Eucharist by the Sanctified Elements; as it
was augmented, when he here on earth, by his nourishment,) but to have borrowed
them from some Ancient Greek Fathers; naming Greg. Nyssen. Orat. Catechet. c.
37. (See this Fathers words below. 321. n. 14.) and Anastasius Sinait. who
explained their Doctrine by the same comparison, as Damascen. and the Greeks
following him, did; yet does not freely declare both these, the Ancient Greeks,
as well as the later, either to differ from, or to agree with, the Protestant
Opinion.

n. 6.
That, however the Greek Opinion varies from the Protestants, it concerns him
not: Next, he declares: That what ever the Greeks may be proved to have held,
concerning some transmutation of the Bread, and Wine into Christ's Body and
Blood; or, concerning a Real, or Corporal presence, and their understanding,
Hoc est corpus meum, in a literal sense, neither does this concern his cause:
who undertakes only to maintain, that these Churches assert not
Transubstantiation: at least, assert it not so, as to make it a positive
Articles of their Faith. His words (upon D. Arnaud's resenting it; That whereas
he contented himself only to show, that the Real presence was received by the
Oriental Schismatical Churches, M. Claude diverted the Controversy to
Transubstantiation, His words I say are these. l. 3. c. 1. p. 157.
In the Dispute concerning the Greeks, our business is only about
Transubstantiation; and not at all, about Real presence. For it was to this
only, and Adoration, that I formally limited my self in my last Answer. But
then; as if this might do him some prejudice, he, as it were cautiously,
adds: -- Yet I would have none draw a Consequence from hence, that I
acknowledge a Real presence established in the Greek Church, [But here to make
his words true, he adds again,] in that sense, as the Roman Church understands
it. And, what sense is that? surely, by the way of Transubstantiation. And so,
you see, he pares his words, till they say no more, than just what he said
before: That he acknowledges no Real presence, (viz.) by way of
Transubstantiation, established in the Greek Church. And, this is to say only;
that he acknowledges them not to hold Transubstantiation. 2. Next; concerning
the Greeks their receiving, or opposing Transubstantiation, he has one Hold
more, Ibid. -- It is not (says he) our business, to know; whether the Greeks
formally reject Transubstantiation; Or, whether they have made It an Article of
Controversy between them and the Latins; but only, whether they comprehend it
amongst their points of Faith, or no: Our Dispute is only concerning this
matter. One would think, that he had been chaced very much, and driven up to
the wall, that to preserve himself safe, he makes so many outworks; and
contracts the Subject of his Disputation within so narrow a Compass. But does
he not here, for the Greek Church also, thus decline, and tacitly as it were
yield up that to the Catholics, which they have always professed to be the
main Controversy with Protestants on this Subject; (viz.) The Real and
Corporal presence of our Lord; and the perpetuity of the Christian Faith, as
well East as West. in the constant Belief of this, for all the later times of
the Church Catholic; which consent found in the later times, is the truest
proof, from which we may collect also the true sense of the former? And, from
this Corporal presence once established, whether a Transubstantiation be, or be
not, necessarily follows also the lawfulness of a Sovereign Adoration: which
renders the Dispute concerning one of the two Points he contesteth needless;
and decideth it against him: since, an Adoration of the Mysteries practiced
among the Greeks he is content to allow, but not, Sovereign; Now Real presence
makes it out a Sovereign one.

5. His way thus far made;. 321. n. 7.
and his cause pretended not to be conterned, in that the Greeks have a
different Sentiment of the Eucharist from Protestants; Nor, that they take, Hoc
est corpus meum, as also the Latins, in a literal sense, and hold a Real
presence: Nor, that they do not reject the Roman Transubstantiation; Or make
any Controversy with the Latins about it: And, so all Authorities, save those
that press Transubstantiation, being removed from giving him any trouble: Next;
For the Greeks asserting a Transubstantiation, the alleging such Testimonies
as these which follow, and frequently occur in their Authors, will not be
admitted by him as good, or to the purpose. -- That, by the Consecration, the
Bread is changed, and converted into the very, the proper, the True, ( or in
veritate, in reipsa,) Body of Christ, which Body also is the same with that
born of the Blessed Virgin, and that suffered on the Cross. -- That the
Eucharist is not a Figure, or Image only, of this Body, but the very Body of
our Lord, united to his Divinity, as the Body born of the Blessed Virgin was;
Neither are these now two, but one. -- Unum corpus, and unus Sanguis cum eo,
quod sumpfit in utero Virginis; and quod dedit Apostolis. And -- Calix, quem
Sacerdo^ sacrificat, non est alius, nisi ipse, quem Dominus Apostolis tradidit.
-- That the Bread, that is offered in the Mysteries, is the very same Flesh of
Jesus Christ, that was Sacrificed at the time of his Passion, and buried in the
Sepulcher, and which St. Thomas handled, and which is at the Right Hand of the
Father. -- That, after the Consecration, Though it appears Bread, yet, in
verity, it is the Body of Christ. Or, -- Licet Panis nobis videatur, revera
Caro est. Or, -- Non manet Panis; sed pro Pane factum est Corpus Christi. I
say, such expressions as these (very usual in the Greeks,) are not current with
him for proving a Substantial change of the Bread; Or, That the Substance of
it, after Consecration, does not still remain so entire as before. For, as for
Ipsum, proprium, verum, etc. he can produce places in the Fathers, where they
are applied to a Metaphor; where the Poor, the Faithful, the Church, are said
to be Ipsum, or Verum, Corpus Christi* The Bread is changed into the Body of
Christ [ i. e. says he, not in Substance, but in Vertue] The Eucharist is not
a Figure, or Image of this Body [ i. e. without all Virtue or Efficacy,] but
the very Body it self: [ i. e. in being such an Image, or Figure, as retains
the supernatural Virtue of it.] But, still I say; This Supernatural Virtue is
not the Body. And, if the Greek's arguing from our Lords Dixit Hoc est Corpus
meum be good, viz. That whatever is not our Lords Body, the Eucharist is not;
It holds as well against Virtus, if taken exclusively to Substance, (for such
Substance is [Body] here, or else, why not Imago a Body?) as against Imago, or
Figura; as well against Imago cum Efficacia, as sine, etc. For -- Non dixit.
Hoc est Virtus, or continens virtutem Corporis mei, but Hoc est Corpus meum.
And, this being urged by his Adversary, the best answer that I see M. Claude
makes to it l. 4. c. 7.
is; That the Protestanes are no engagers for the verity of the Greek's
Opinions. i. e. He imposes such a sense on the Greeks, as makes a
Contradiction in their Opinion, or arguing; and then leaves them to make it
good. Again: Though it appears Bread, it is truly Flesh: [ i. e. says he; The
Greeks hold it indeed still Bread in Substance, and not Flesh at all: But they
mean here; that, though it appears or seems, yet it is not, [simple] Bread: but
it is truly Flesh [in as much as it now has the true Virtue of Christ's Flesh:]
making them say, It is, in truth, that, which yet they hold it is not; save
only in Virtue, or Efficacy: And again: that it only appears that, which yet
they hold, that in Substance, and, in truth, it is. And, to render this his
Exposition more current, in his 2. Answer, he says, -- We must not press too
much such manner of expressions as these, part. 3. c. 2.
licet appareat Panis, tamen in veritate Corpus Christi est, lest we make the
Fathers speak many absurdities; And so urges a place in S. Chrysostom, where
the Father says, -- That we ought not to think of our selves, that are upon
the Earth; because we see the Earth under our feet: for we are translated into
Heaven, and placed among the Angels. Where, says he, the Father denies not
absolutely, that we are upon Earth: and so, he thinks himself as safely guarded
here against the Panis apparet by this; as before, against the Eucharist being
pretended to be Ipsum Corpus Christi in a litteral or a proper sense, by his
showing, that the poor were said to be ipsum, or Verum, Corpus Christi too.

Such Evidences therefore rejected by M. Claude, he requires, for the verifying
of Transubstantiation, that we produce a Testimony, such as this. That the
Bread is Transubstantiated; or, the Substance of Bread is changed into the
Substance of Christ's Body. So that, according to him, The Bread, [but, not a
Substance,] is said by them to be changed into Christ's Body, [but, not in^o a
Substance.] And, by the same reason, we may say; That our Lords Nourishment,
when he lived here on Earth, being changed into our Lords Body, proves not,
that it was changed into the Substance of his Body, But suppose then the
Expression running, as he would have it. -- That the Bread is changed into the
Substance of Christ's Body; And, that though it seems the Substance of Bread;
Yet, in truth, it is the Subst^nce of Christ's Body, or Flesh, are we ever a
whit now the abler to silence him? Or, will not his answers still fit as well
as before, viz. That, though it seems, yet it is not the simple, or naked,
Substance of Bread. -- That it is, in truth, also the Substance of Christ's
Body: i. e. containing in it the whole Virtue (or, if I may so say* the
Substance) of this Substance. For so, it may be showed, sometimes, that
Substance is used for Virtue.

He Grants l. 3. c. 10. p. 263.
; the Greeks cannot think, Christ's Flesh, or Body, to be the Subject of those
accidents, which are perceived, by our Senses, to remain in the Eucharist; and
then, the Greeks also to say: Videtur Panis, and Vinum; in veritate Corpus
Christi and Sanguis est; and yet will not yield, that they hold the Existence
of these Appearances or Accidents in the Eucharist without a Subject. He grants
the Greeks to hold, our Lords Body, that is distributed in the Eucharist, to be
indivisible, impartible, impassible; and then affirms them (though it is not
so) to say; that no other Substance is this Body, than the Bread; and yet not
to hold, the accidents only of the Bread to be passible, partible, etc. The
Greeks say, that the Body of our Lord, which is consecrated and offered in many
places at once, and at many times successively, yet in all these, is but one,
and the same, Body: and, that, though it is in all these places broken,
divided, and eaten by many Communicants, yet is received by each of them, not
in a piece of it, but whole, and entire: and, after this, remains still,
perfect, unconsum'd, alive, immortal. And yet he says l. 3. c. 13.
, the Greeks do not hold or affirm; Idem Corpus in pluribus locis: do not
maintain a concomitancy of our Lords Flesh and Blood; not the existence of his
Body in the Eucharist, after a non-natural manner. And, that the same Greeks do
hold, the Substance of that which is offered and distributed in one place, as
to one person, to be really, and numerically diverse from that offered, or
distributed, in another: But, that their meaning only is; that the Virtue of
this Body is in all places one, and the same; and to all persons, whole and
entire; and must he not say also, that this Virtue is incorrupted and alive? 2
Resp. p. 514.
-- I yield [saith he, in answer to D. Arnaud's Objections touching Remigids]
that, if the Bread were made the Body of Christ in its Substance, it would
follow, that our Lord would have so many Bodies, as he is united, [i. e. in his
Divinity.] to different Breads [this he grants, notwithstanding Remigius his
arguing; all these Breads but one, and the same Body, from the same Divinity
replenishing them; of which more below:] But, the Bread not being made Christ's
Body save only in Virtue, and in efficacy, this consequence is null; because
this Virtue, through the whole world* is one and the same. -- For this Virtue
is indivisible, and is all of it entire, wherever it is. Thus he. And, that
such are his answers and explications, of these expressions of the Greeks, as I
have here represented, You may see in his 2d. Answer part. 3. c. 2. and 4. --
His last Answer. l. 3. c. 9 c. 10. -- l. 4. c. 7. -- l 5 c. 7. -- l. 6. c. 10.
and frequently elsewhere.

n. 8.
that, how punctual soever the Expressions of the Greeks are concerning the
pre^ence of Christ's very Body, yet he expounds them only of the Virtue,
exclusive to the Substance, of Christ's Body. And yet this person confesses
that the Greeks hold, l. 4. c 7.
-- That the Bread is made the proper Body of Christ [opposed to figure] by the
way of Augmentation of his Natural Body; so as our Nourishment is made our
Body. And yet elsewhere, l. 6. c. 10.
more fully -- That [upon the Consecration] they held and Union of the Bread
with the Divinity of our Lord; and, by the Divinity, [an Vnion] to his natural
Body; and that they understood, that by the means of this Union, or of this
Conjunction, the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and is made the same Body
with it. [I add, as our nourishment, by its union to the same Soul, is made the
same Body with our's.] Now then; when we say, that our nourishment, upon such
an operation passing upon it, is, or is changed into, or is made, our Body or
Flesh, did he heartily here interpret our meaning, who should say, that we
affirm only; that this nourishment is our Body, or Flesh, in Virtue, or changed
into the Virtue of it, exclusively to its being also made the Substance of it?
So; does this person deal heartily, for instance, when Euthymius a Greek
Author, that held this opinion, expresses himself thus Comment.
-- Quemadmodum Jesus Christus, supernaturaliter, assumptam carnem deificavit;
Matt. c. 64
Etiam Hac [the Bread and Wine] ineffabiliter transmutat [ i. e. by his united
Deity] in ipsum vivificum Corpus, and in ipsum pretiosum sanguinem suunt, and
in gratiam ipsorum. (which Grace he explains presently after by this Body
strengthening us, as Bread does; and this Blood exhilarating, and encouraging
us, as Wine See Psalm 103.15.
;) I say, does he deal ingenuously, to expound the [and] here by a [C' est a
dire,] or, [id est] -- Transmutat ineffabiliter in ipsum Corpus, and in ipsum
Sanguinem, id est, in gratiam ipsorum? Making the Body a Synonyman with its
virtue; Such a Synonyman says he, as that of S. Paul, in 1. Tim. 4.3. They who
believe and know the truth. or 1 Timothy 6.3. Wholesome words, and Doctrine of
Godliness. But might he not have said, more aptly, such a Synonyma^ as that in
Psalm. 32. -- Verbo Domini Caeli firmati sunt, and omnis virtus eorum; firmati
sunt Caeli, id est, virtus eorum. Or Psalm. 147. -- Magnus Dominus and magna
virtus ejus. Dominus, id est, virtus Domini. -- But, if the Greeks mean, as, he
says indeed they do, -- That the Bread, by Consecration, is made out Lords
proper Body, though not that Numerical one born of the Virgin, yet another,
added to it by way of Augmentation; and so, in some sense, made the same with
it, ( viz. so, as our nourishment is with ours) by the Union, and inhabitation
of our Lords Divinity to, and in, them both; and lastly, that, by its being
thus made our Lords Body, it has also the vivificating virtue of his natural
Body, inherent in it; then I say; in plain dealing, this Person, expounding the
Expressions of the Greeks, ought to have confessed their maintaining the
presence, in the Eucharist, of this Substance of Christ's Body, as well as of
its Virtue; this Substance I say, of which they affirm, that it is the same
with the other crucified so far as, to be united to the same Divinity, and in
the same person, of our Lord; and, from this, to receive the same vivisicating
Virtue; though indeed this new Substance from that crucified numerically
distinct. Nor, consequently, ought he to impose upon the Greeks, as every where
he does, their holding the Bread, after Consecration, to remain still so
entirely Bread, as it was before; but only, the matter of it so to remain, as
the matter of our Nourishment does, when yet that, which was Bread, is now
truly our Flesh, and no more Bread; our Flesh, not by I know not what Mystical
Relation to it, but by a most interior receptio, and incorporation into it, and
dispersion through that our Substance, or Flesh, which was existent before.
Nor, lastly, using the same integrity, ought he to have said, this new
Substance to have been held by the Greeks augmentative of Christ's Natural Body,
or also to be the same with it, (as the Greeks always say it is) by reason of
a supernatural virtue of Christ's Natural Body communicated to it, (as he
usually explains them;) for one thing may have the Virtue of another; without
being an aug mentative part of it, or contracting any Identity with it: But,
that this new Substance is held by the Greeks an accruit to our Lords natural
Body, and the same also with it, from its Union to the Divinity, and so its
change into Christ's Flesh; and so its partaking also the (...), Graces, or
Virtues of it; which the Greeks speak of, with much reason, as well as of the
substance, because in these we are most concerned.

Thus, perhaps with much less labor, might this ingenious Person have
comprehended in his Answers and Explications of the Greek's opinion more Truth,
and gained from his Readers more belief. And for this, I appeal to any sober
Person, when he shall have considered M Claudes concessions set down below, n.
11. and the necessary consequences of them n. 12. But this person well saw the
great prejudice he should do to his cause in explaining these Authors in such a
manner (which would have made a fair way at least toward a Total
Transubstantiation,) and therefore judged it safest to hold fast to a vertual
presence. Now, in this way he takes, many of these Expressions seem so clearly
to say the contrary to what he would have them, as a proof can hardly be
brought against such anf^wes, that will not have as little, or perhaps less,
evidence in it, that the thing that is proved. And, in such manifest wresting
of an Authors clear sense, it is Conscience only must confute such gainsayers,
not an Argument. And in such cases it concerns the Reader not easily to resign
his Reason to another engagement's; nor suffer his Judgment to be figured
with the impressions of every man's fancy, (especially when opposing Church
Authority) nor to apprehend difficulty in every thing so long, as he sees it to
be contested.] This of M. Claude's Art in evading of such, as seem very
evident, and indisputable Testimonies.

n 9.
6ly. Suppose such clear and express Testimonies produced, as that no such
answers can discountenance them; nor no Exceptions be made against them, then
especially out of the 1st. and 2d. Observations precedent; he has some at
least against the Person. Urge against him the Testimonies of the Modern Greek
Writers, such as will admit none of his Qualifications, He tells us, many of
them are Greeks Latiniz'd, and won over to Rome: Or, the writing quoted wants
another testimony, that it is not forged; such as lived in the same times,
having in their writings not mentioned such a Piece; thus he throws off
Samonas, and Agapius l 4 c. 3.
; Proceed, in adding to these the testimonies of several Dignifyed persons of
the present Greek Clergy; and that in several Countries, and Churches of the
East, distinct, and averse, from the Roman Communion. By a diligent Collection
of which, his prudent Adversary, has done the Church Catholic great service,
* in manifesting, that the doctrine, and practice of the Greeks, not only
touching Real presence and Transubstantiation; but most of the other
Controversies agitated in the West, consents and agrees with the Church of
Rome, and * in representing to the more ingenuous amongst Protestants, how
singular they stand, and divided, in their Faith, from the whole Christian
world. He tells us: They are the Declarations only of Greeks Latinized, and
corrupted by the Roman Missions: Though the same persons, still, maintain their
dissent from the Latins, as to those Points formerly in Controversy between
the two Churches: and though the Testimony, they give, is not so much
concerning their particular persuasion; as, what is the Common Tenent, and
Profession of the Greek, [ i. e. those no way reconciled to the Roman
Communion,] or other Oriental, Churches: A matter, wherein a false testimony,
as it would carry a greater guilt, so lies too open to discovery. Urge to him
the testimony of the Orientals, especially persons dignifyed in the Clergy,
that have travailed, about some negociations, into the West. He says, l. 5. c.
5 p 594. There is little credit to be given to this kind of People, who come
not usually into the West, but for their own Interest; and who fail not to
speak in such a manner, as one would have them. Urge to him the testimony of
those of the Greek Communion, inhabiting in the West, and here indulged their
own Service, and Rites, easily inquired into; as for example, the Greek Church
in Venice. See ( Respon. 2. part. 2 c. 8.) his answer to what was urged out of
Gabriel Archbishop of Philadelphia the Prelate there. -- That we are not to
think it strange, is one, who had lived some 40 years in that place, suffered
himself, [and so those under his charge,] to be wrought upon by the ordinary
commerce they had with the Latins. Urge the Oriental Liturgies, which, though
not denied to be different in several Regions, or perhaps several also used in
the same, (as both S. Basil's and S. Chrysostom's are by the Greeks,) yet have
a great congruity and harmony both amongst themselves, and with the Greek and
Roman, as to the Service, and Ceremonies, of the Eucharist. His answer is His
last Answer, l. 5. c. 5.606. and 608.
, -- That we have not any certainty, that these Pieces are sincere, or
faithfully translated; or, some of them not corrected by the Missions.

As for the Liturges, and other witnesses, produced for the Faith of the
Jacobites of Syria; the Armenians; Cophtites, or Egyptians: Ethiopians, or
Abyssines, agreeing in this Point with the Roman, he thinks them all
sufficiently confuted, from Eutychianism being held by these Eastern, and
Southern, Churches. For, says he, l. 5. c. 6. p. 604.
-- What can one find more directly opposite; than, to maintain on one side,
that Jesus Christ has no true Body; that there is nothing in him save only the
Divine Nature: that all that which has appeared, of his Conversation in the
World, of his Birth, Death, Resurrection, were nothing but simple appearances
without Reality: and, on the other side, to believe, that the substance of the
Bread is really changed into the proper substance of his Body, the same he took
of the Virgin. Thus He; for his advantage, applying the extremities of that
Heresy to all these Nations, contrary to the Evidence of their public
Liturgies. But Entychianism, taken in the lower sense, as Entyches (upon the
mistake of some expressions of former Fathers, Athanasius, and Cyrill,
Patriarchs of Alexandria, which perhaps also induced the engagement of
Dioscorus their Successor on his side) maintained, and the Ephesin Council, i.
e. above 90 Bishops, under Dioscorus, allowed; it affirms no more than -- that
the two Natures of our Lord, the one Divine, the other Humane, Consubstantial
with us, and received of the Bl. Virgin, after their conjunction, become one,
yet this without any confusion, or mixture, or conversion of the two Natures
into one another. Now, that these Nations adhere to Eutychianism only in this
latter sense, not well distinguishing between Nature, and Personality;) I refer
him that desires further satisfaction, to the Relations of Thomas a Jesu, l 7.
c. 13, 14, 17. -- and Brerewoods Enquiries. c. 21, 22, 23. -- and Dr. Field on
the Church. l. 3. c. 1. p. 64. etc. and of the several Authors cited by them:
and to the testimony of Tecla Mariae a Learned Abyssin Priest cited by M Claud.
l. 5. c. 6.
who says: They hold, after the Union, only Vnam Naturam; sine tamen mixtione,
and sine confusione. [ i.e. of those two Natures, of which the One, afterward,
is compounded.] Which Testimony may serve either to expound, or to confront,
one, or two, of the other he brings, that seem to say otherwise.

Urge to him the Confession of Protestants, Grotius, Bishop Forbes, and others,
(though themselves of a contrary persw^sion) that the Modern Greek Church
believes Transubstantiation: for which they cite their late Writers; the
Reading of whom convinced them in this, though it cannot M. Claude. Of these
two Grotius and Forbes, he replies, l. 4 c. 4.
-- That they are persons, who permitted themselves to be pre-possessed with
Chimerical fancies and designs, upon the matter of the Differences between the
two Communions, Catholic and Protestant; which they pretend to accommodate,
and reconcile. So he censures Casaubon out of Spondanus. -- Levitatem animi
Vacillantem eum perpetuo tenuisse; cum and his, and illis placere cuperet, and
nulli satisfecisset. Where indeed, whose judgment ought sooner to be credited,
than theirs, who appear more indifferent between the two contending parties?
So, To Archbishop Lanfrank's words to Berengarius. Interroga Greacos, Armenios,
seu ^ujus libet Nationis quoscunque homines uno ore hanc fidem, [i. e.
Transubstantiationis] se testabuntur habere, cited by Dr. Arnaud. He answers.
p. 361.
-- That Pre occupation renders his Testimony nothing worth.

Urge the Socinians, because the Fathers oppose so manifestly their o^wn
opinions, therefore more apt to speak the truth of them, in their opposing also
those of other Protestants, and part^cularly in their differing from them in
this point of the Eucharist; He tells us, they are not creditable in their
Testimony, because so much interested, to decry the Doctrine of the Fathers in
their own regard; and thus they imagine, Protestants will have less countenance
to press them with an Authority, that themselves cannot stand to. Urge the
Centurists, confessing Transubstantiation found in some of the Fathers; and in
magnifying their new-begun Reformation more free plainly to acknowledge those
they thought errors of former times. He l. 1. c. 5.
denies them fit witnesses in this Controversy, because, themselves holding a
Real Presence, they had rather admit a Transubstantiation in the Fathers, than
a presence only Mystical. And suppose such excuses should fail him; yet how
easy is it to find some other, whereby a person may be represented never to
stand in an exact indifferency, as to whatever Subject of his Dicourse?

With such personal exceptions M. Claude frequently seeks to relieve his Cause,
where nothing else will do it. Whereas indeed such a common Veracity is to be
supposed amongst men, especially as to these matters of Fact, that, where a
multitude, though of a party concerned, concur in their Testimony, they cannot
reasonably be rejected on such an account, either, that their being deceived,
or purpose to deceive, and to relate a lie, is possible; or, that, what they
say can be showed a thing well pleasing, and agreeable, to their own
inclinations. For as it is true, that ones own interest, if, as to his own
particular, very considerable, renders a Testimony lees credible; So, on the
other side, almost no Testimony would be valid, and current, if it is to be
decryed, where can be showed some favor, or engagement of affection, to the
thing, which the person witnesses: and so, for Example, in the Narration of
another Countries Religion, (often made by all Parties,) none here can be
believed, save in what he testifies of them, against his own. Such things
therefore are to be decided according to the multitude, and paucity, and the
Reputation, of the witnesses rather, than their (only some way general)
interest; and the Credibility of such things is to be left to the equal Readers
Judgment.

n. 10.
7ly. Should all that is said touching the later Greek's, from the 11th. or the
8th. to the present, age, their holding Transubstantiation be, undeniably, made
good; and, all the testimonies concerning it, exactly true: Yet he says l. 2.
c. 1.
-- It will not follow, that a change [of the Churches former Faith in this
Point] is impossible: or, has not actually happened: and consequently, that
all M. Arnaud 's long dispute, about it, is vain, and unprofitable. I add; and
then, so his Replies. But here, since the true sense, and meaning of Antiquity,
on what side This stands, is the thing chiefly questioned, and debated between
the Roman Church, and Protestants, (unless he will throw off this too, and
retreat, only to sense of Scripture,) I suppose to wise men it will seem little
less, than the loss of the Protestant cause, and too great a prejudice to it,
to be so slightly yielded up; if that, not the Roman only, but the whole
visible Catholic, Church (besides themselves,) from the 11th. to the present
age, does defend a Corporal presence, and a literal sense of Hoc est corpus
meum; or also Transubstantiation; and so, consequently, does concur, and Vote
against them, touching the sense of former Antiquity; for this, each side, in
their present Doctrine, and Practice, pretend to follow. And I can hardly think
M Claude, would spend so great a part of his Book to defend a Post, the loss of
which he thought no way harmed Him. Again; thus it is manifest, that in an
Ecumenical Council, if now assembled, the Protestants would remain the Party
Condemned.

8. After all these Defenses, wherewith he seems sufficiently guarded;. 321. n.
11.
He proceeds l. 3c. 13. thus to declare the true opinion of the Modern Greeks
on this Subject, which I will give you in his own words. p. 310. -- They
believe (says he;) That by the Sanctification [or Consecration] is made a
Composition of the Bread and the Wine, and of the Holy Ghost: That these
Symboles, keeping their own Nature, are joined to the Divinity, and, That by
the impression of the Holy Ghost, they are changed, for the Faithful alone,
[the Body of our Lord being supposed either to be not present at all, or to
cease to be so, in the particles of the Symbol received by the unworthy] into
the virtue of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: being, by this means, made
not a Figure, but the proper and true Body of Jesus Christ; and this by the way
of Augmentation of the same natural Body of Jesus Christ. To which they apply
the comparison of the nourishment, which is made our own Body by Assimilation,
and Augmentation Again, p. 237. more briefly -- The Doctrine of the Greek
Church is: That the substance of Bread, conserving its proper Being, is added
to the Natural Body of Jesus Christ; that it is rendered like unto it: That it
augments, and by this means becomes the same Body with, it. By this also (he
says, p. 334. and see the same in his 4 l. c. 7.) the Greeks would observe in
some sort the literal sense of the words, Hoc est Corpus meum, which (says He)
we do not; we understand them in this sense: This Bread is the sacred sign, or
Sacrament of my Body. Or, which comes to the same pass, The Bread signifies my
Body. They, on the contrary, taking the word [is,] in some sort according to
the letter, would have, that the same subject which is the Bread is also the
Body of Christ. From preserving this pretended literal sense it is also; That
they would have it; That the Bread is made one with the Body, by its Union to
the Divinity, by the Impression of the Holy Ghost, and by a change of virtue.
Or, as he has it in his 6. l. c. 10. -- That there is an Union of the Bread to
the Divinity of our Lord; and by the Divinity, to his natural Body: by means of
which Union, or Conjunction, the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and made the
same Body with it. [with his natural Body.] Again, for preserving this literal
sense, That they bring the comparison of Nourishment made One with our Body and
that they have invented this way of Augmentation of the natural Body [of
Christ] It seems also, That the Modern Greeks understand some real or Physical
impression of the Holy Ghost, and of the vivificating virtue of Jesus Christ,
upon the Bread, with some kind of inherence, [ i. e. of the vertue] Although I
will not (says he) ascertain positively, that this is the General Belief of
their Church, though the expressions seem to sway on this side. But however it
be, this is not our opinion. We believe, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost, and
virtue of Christ's Body, accompanies the lawful use of the Sacrament; and, that
we partake the Body of Jesus Christ by Faith, as much or more really, then of
we received it in the mouth of our Body. But we (...) understand this Real
impression, or inherence, [ i. e. of the Supernatural Virtue of the Body of
Christ, See p. 338.
l. 3. c. 13. p. 315.
viz. that born of the Virgin,] of the Greeks. Whence it is, that our
Expressions are not so high, as theirs. And this Opinion of theirs he makes to
be as ancient as Damascen -- This Opinion [of the Modern Greeks, faith he]
seems to be taken from Damascen: some of whose expressions I think fit to
produce. For it is certain, that, to make a good Judgment of the Opinion of
the modern Greeks, we must ascend as high as him. -- And M. Arnaud himself has
observed; That John Damascen is as it were the S. Thomas of the Greeks. Thus He.

But, 321. n. 12.
lest he should seem to fasten such a gross Opinion upon the Greek Church as
they will not own, nor others easily believe, they maintain; (for he
confesses, that it has something in it, that appears little reasonable; and
especially, as to the Augmentation of Christ's natural Body, to be assez
bizarre;) and lest he should make it liable to so many and odious absurdities,
as that a Transubstantiation, which he endeavors to avoid, may seem much the
more plausible, and eligible of the two; perhaps I say for these
considerations; he undertakes to qualify, and render a credible and likely
sense to, it on this manner: In saying, 1. That they hold indeed an Union of
the Divinity to the Bread, and that in an higher manner, than to any other
Sacred sign, or Ceremony; but yet not Hypostatical. 2. That they hold the Bread
changed into an augmentative part of Christ's natural Body; but, it remaining
still entire Bread as before, and altered only in a Supernatural virtue, added
to it. 3. Hold it to be joined to Christ's Body and augmenting it; but so, as to
be not individually the same, but unmerically distinct from it, as also those
new parts we receive by nourishment are distinct from all the former parts of
our Body.

To be joined to this natural Body of Christ, not locally, or to it as present
in the Eucharist; but, as in Heaven. How this? As, says he, a Mystery may be
said to be an Appendix, or Accessory, to the thing, of which it is a Mystery.
And, to these 4 Qualifications this Author semms necessitated; because,
otherwise, Adoration, and Transubstantiation, in some part, tho not a total;
Existence of the Accidents without a Subject; The same Body at once in many
places; and several other Consequents, thus appearing also in the Greek's
Opinion, would have given too much countenance to the Roman.

Where you may observe; 321. n. 13.
that there are three things wherein his explaining of this Opinion, he imputes
to the Greeks, to render it more remote from the Latins, falls short of that,
which, according to the Comparison, and the expressions, they use, he is justly
obliged to maintain. 1. The first, That the Union of the Divinity to the
Consecrated Bread, is Hypostatical or Personal. For such an Union had our Lords
Divinity to the Nourishment, (to which this is compared) received by him, See
M. Claud 2 Answ part. 2. c. 2 p. 249
and added to his natural Body, born of the Blessed Virgin: And no less Union
than this will serve to make the Eucharistical Bread one, and the same, with it
(a thing constantly affirmed by the Greeks,) at least as to the Suppositum; or
to make both these the Body of the same Person. The difference of the Union,
(says M. Claude l. 6. c. 10. p. 867.
) is discerned by the difference of the effect it produces in the things. Now
what thing more is requisite to style it an Union Hypostarical ( Hypostasis,
and Subsistentia, or Persona, with the Greeks, importing the same thing,) than
this effect, that it renders this Body, to which it unites it self, and that
Body born of the Blessed Virgin, the same Body of one Person: and this Union
gives to this new Body the self-same vivicating virtue, Physically inherent, as
it does to the other Natural? And then, such an Hypostatical Union, if granted,
will infer the same Dignity of this breaden body with the other: the same
Ceremonies of Honor and Adoration due: Things, which this Person is unwilling
to hear of; and that would ruin his Gause.

The 2d. That there is a Substantial change of the Bread;. 321. n. 14
i. e. of the substantial form of Bread at least; in that this Bread is truly
made the Flesh, and Blood, and animated with the humane Soul, of our Lord, as
well as, united to his Divinity: For so the Nourishment received by our Lord on
Earth, and added to his Body born of the Virgin, remained not, still, Bread;
but was truly changed into his Flesh; and so also is ours. And the Expressions
of the Greeks are suitable, and cannot, without an unjust force and straining,
be otherwise explicated.

To instance in one or two. Such is that of Theophilact, in Mats. 26, -- Non
enim dixit: Haec est figura; sed Hoc est Corpus meum. Ineffabili enim
operatione transformatur, etiamsi nohis videatur Panis, quoniam infirmi sum^^
and abhorrenius crudas ca^^es comedere, maxim hominis carnem: and ideo Panis
quidem. apparet sed revera Caro est. And in Mart. 14. -- Et quomodo, inquis
Caro non videtur? Sanguinem propositum, and carnem videntes, non ferremus sed
abhorremus. Idcirco misericors Deus, nostrae infirmitati condescendens, speciem
quidem Panis, and Vini servat; in virtutem autem carnis and sanguinis
transelementat. Where, if Theophylact had meant by [Caro vere est,] Caro tantum
in virtute est, he would never have given this reason, in his comment on Matt.
-- Panis apparet, quod vere est Caro, quoniam infirmi sumus, and abhorremus
crudas carnes: but rather would have removed all difficulty here, and
prevented such a Question; Cur Caro non videtur? by telling them: Vt apparet,
it a est, Panis: Caro audem est, non vere, aut in substantia, sed tantum in
Virtute. This had been plain dealing: but then he had overthrown his Text: Hoc
est Corpus meum, non figura Corporis mei; and made it only, (as M. Claude
does,) at the most, Hoc est Efficax figura Corporis mei, non ipsum Corpus. As
for the pains M. Claude has taken l. 4. c. 7. p. 448.
to qualify this Panis apparet, caro vere est, in mingling together
Theophylact's Comments on Matt. Mark, and John; and in taking Speciem Panis in
S. Mark, not for the show, or appearance; but Substance, of Bread (by which it
should run, not vere Caro, but vere Panis, in his Comment on S. Matt.) and in
understanding Virtus Carnis in S. Mark, with a tantum; (so as this excludes
vere Caro, in S. Matt.) I am confident, that the ingenious Reader will find
therein only great industry used to obsure a clear Truth.

[For Virtue may be used as well augmentatively, as diminutively, in respect of
Substance; as including Substance, and adding something to it, and as opposing
an outward show only without Reality, or a Substance without efficacy; as D*
Arnaud l. 2. c. 9. p. 186.
has judiciously observed; and for clearing it, instanced in that of St. Paul
2 Timothy 3.5. -- Habentes speciem quidem pietatis, virtutem ejus abnegantes: and
that of S. Greg. Nyssen. Orat. Catechet. c. 37. -- Igitur unde in illo corpore
[of our Lord, when here on Earth] transmutatus Panis transit in Divinam
virtutem; per idem [Verbum] nunc fit similiter; Nam and illic Gratia Verbi
Corpus, cui expane erat substantia and quodammodo ipsum erat Panis: sanctum
secit: and hic [in the Eucharist] similiter, Panis, sicut dicit Apostolus,
sanctificatur, per Verbum Dei, and orationem; non eo quidem, quod, per
comestionem and bibitionem, in Verbi Corpus evaedat; sed quod, starim, per
Verbum in Corpus transmutetur, sicut dictum est a Verbo: Hoc est Corpus meum*
And afterward he says, -- In illud [^orpus immorale Cur^sti, mentioned before
transelementata eorum quae apparent, Natura* Which place, because D. Arnaud
much pressed as thoroughly clearing that of Theophylact, our Lords Nourishment
being changed, as into the virtue, so doubtless also into the Substance of his
Body; and because it is that place, from which first Source M. Claude, l. 3.
c. 13.
derives the Modern Greek Opinion, I was curious to search what M. Claude would
say to it; but I found him, as to speak to that of S. Paul, and other passages,
so, prudently, to pass over this, the most insisted on by his Adversary, in
silence. But who pleases may see in another place 2 Resp. part. 2. c. 2.
(where it is urged against Protestants for Transubstantiation) how miserably
this plain passage of this Father suffers under his Exposition of it: Whilst
this Expression ( dure and irregulier, as he calls it) represents nothing else,
but Damascen's and the Modern Greek Opinion to any one, that has not shut his
eyes, and shows the modern and ancient Greek Church to be all of one Faith.
Here then you see, in Greg, Nyssen, Virtus includes Substance; Now see it in
that place of Euthymius cited before,. 321. n. 8.
added to Substance, as being indeed the main thing to be insisted on. -- Haec
inessabiliter (says he) transmutat in ipsum vivificum Corpus, and in ipsum
pretiosum sanguinem suum, and in Gratiam [or virtutem, or vim] eorum: which
Grace he explains presently after, by this Body strengthening us as Bread does;
and this Blood exhilarating us, as Wine See Psalm. 103.15.
. And see Theophylact's Comment on Joh. 6. the like addition. -- Panis, (says
he, speaking of our Lords nourishment,) in corpus ejus mutabatur [there is the
change of the Substance.] -- Et in augmentum and sustentamentum conferebat,
[there is the virtue.] Again, -- Ita and nunc Panis in Carnem Domini mutatur
[there is the Substance;] Nec nudi hominis Caro est, sed Dei, and quae
deificare valet [there is the Virtue.] Now, Virtus taken thus in Theophylact,
all things in him agree well together: Thus, it suits well with, vere Caro est:
-- with, Ineffabilis Operatio, Language not so usual for a change of virtue
only. -- With the Question, Cur non videtur Caro? simply asked, if Theophylact
spoke only of a change of virtue, and not Substance too; and if this then the
known common Doctrine. -- With his answer to the Question; which, as I have
showed, in case he held a presence of virtue only, ought to have been quite
another; and such as a Protestant now would give. Lastly, it suits well with
his former arguing. -- Non enim Dixit; Hoc est Figura Corporis, sed, Hoc est
Corpus, (which, if good, must hold as well of virtus, or of any thing else,
that is not ipsum Corpus) But Virtue taken so exclusively, overturns all; and
makes Theophylact contradict himself, that he may not, M. Claude. Thus much in
vindication of the true sense of Virtue, when used by the Greek Authors.]

A like passage to this in Theophylact, see in Remigius Antisicodor: in Expos.
Missae, a follower, a M. Claude grants l. 6 c. 10. p. 862.
of the Opinion of Damascen, and the Greeks. -- Cum Mysterium sit (says he)
quod alind significat, Si [Eucharistia] in veritate Corpus Christi est, quare
appellatur mysterium? Propterea utique; quia post Consecrationem aliud est,
aliud videtur. Videtur siquidem Panis and Vinum; sed in veritate Corpus Christi
est and sanguis. Consulens ergo omnipotens Deus infirmitati nostrae, qui usum
nou habemus comedere Carnem erudam and sanguinem bibere facit, ut in pristina
remaneant forma illa duo munera, etsi, in veritate, Corpus Christi and Sanguis,
sicut ipse dixit, etc. Where Pristina forma cannot be extended to the internal
substantial Form or Essence of Bread still remaining, as M. Claude p. 869.
would divert the sense; For this internal Form or Essence, either in the
Bread, or Flesh, since not seen, neither causes, nor removes Horror and the
maintaining of this Form, suits not with the, In veritate Christi Corpus est;
and vere Caro est, in these Authors; which expressions do imply, In veritate,
not Panis; but is to be understood only of the external form, and other
qualities thereof, occurring to sense, the sight, taste, etc. For, so that the
Eucharist has all these exterior qualities of Bread, where we do not see, or
taste, we dread not, crude Flesh; and the horror, we have, is from its
appearing, not from its being, Flesh. Now this, [Panis quidem apparet: Caro
vere est,] of the Greeks, what is it, but saying the same thing with that of
the Latins. -- Substantia panis mutatur in carnem, licet remaneant adhuc
accidentia Panis, quae sub sensum cadunt. And Hence, when, upon an unusual
expression happening in the Council at Constantinople under Constantius,
Copronymus, [ that the only Image adorable, was the (...), Corporis Christi in
the Holy Sacrament] the Real and corporal presence, from a jealousy, (though
causless as this Council explained it self) that this expression might vary, or
derogate something from it, began now to be more particularly insisted upon and
explicated, a curious Question arose among the Greeks, as well as Latins:
whether, upon the Bread being thus changed, and becoming our Lords Body, the
Body of our Lord were digestible, and corruptible? which caused to some,
affirming it, the imputation of Stercoranism. But such odious name, surely,
these could never have incurred, no more than now Protestants do, had they
held, (at least, as the opposite party understood them) only a vivisicating
virtue of our Lords body to reside in the Bread, and not the very Substance of
his Body to be present instead of it, according to the then common Opinion.

This of the 2d thing, wherein M. Claude's explication is deficient; the change
the Greeks held of the Bread, into the Substance of our Lords Body, at least so
far, as our Nourishment is, into the Substanct of ours, the principal reason of
their using this similitude; Yet, wherein M. Claude deserts it, though, in some
other things, more advantageous to him, (as in the matter of the nourishment
still remaining, and that numerically distinct from the Body nourished,) he
presses it too far. Now this 2d. thing, [the Bread in the Eucharist its
receiving such a change, as our Nourishment,] once granted, will be at least an
half-Transubstantiation of it; the Substantis Form of Bread being gone; the
former Qualities of Bread gone, viz. from their any longer inherence in the
Bread; So that the Substance, not of Bread, but of Flesh, is also under the
former Accidents of the Bread; The name also gone with the thing; it being in
truth now no more to be called Bread, but the Flesh of our Lord. And so, when
the Bread is said by S. Damascen. to be united to the Divinity, it must be
understood so, as that, in the Union, it becomes another thing; though still it
remains a diverse thing from the Divinity. Hence also the pretense of the Bread
its being made our Lords body only in Virtue, not in Substance, gone; and all
M. Claud's quest after this word Virtue in the Greek Authors useless, and his
Descants upon it unsound: of which enough has been said already,. 321. n. 8.

The 3d. (If we may prosecute their similitude of nourishment to its utmost
extent,. 321. n. 15.
) That there is a local Union of the Bread and the Body of our Lord; not, by
way of Accumulation, and Addition: or of Continuation only; as a Leg and an Arm
are joined in the same Body; but by way of an interior reception one into the
other, and the most intimate commixtion and con-fusion of them, as to the least
natural parts, that are divisible, and capable of a digestion, one within the
other: So as the least part of one cannot be severed from the other, or
communicated without the other; and, as to any actual separation of them, (a
thing not fecible,) they may be said to be numerically the same; which comes
also the nearest to a total tranfition, even of its matter also, into another
Substance; though, as to this total Conversion, we must permit the operation of
Gods Omnipotency (out of his infinite kindness to us) in the Holy Fucharist to
stand fingular, and unparalled by any work of Nature.

All these three therefore the Author, in dealing ingenuously with the Greek's
comparison, and their expressions, as it seems to me, ought to have allowed.
But this, probably, he much dreaded; as seeing he might as well, nay in some
respects better, have admitted a total Transubstantiation of matter as well as
Form; which would have avoided those many prejudices and indignities, which an
Impanation labors under. But yet thus the Sentiment of the Greeks, supposing
no total Conversion, is advanced far beyond not only M. Claud's, and The
Calvinists, vertual presence, but also the Lutherans Consubstantiation. For,
whereas these hold only Bread, and Christ's natural Body joined in the
Eucharist, so that the Body and the Bread are two several things still, this
Opinion holds the one changed into the other so, as that, as Jeremy the
Patriarch of Constant. replied upon the Lutherans in his 2d. Answ. c. 4.
(and as Damoscen also said long before. De Fid. Orthod. l. 4. c. 14
) -- Non duo jam sunt [ i. e. as the Lutherans said, Panis, and, Corpus
Christi, joined,] sed unum, and idem, [ i. e. Corpus Christi only.] The Bread
made his natural Flesh; animated with his Soul; Hypostatically united to his
Divinity: in fine, the same with his Body, as much at least as our Nourishment,
interiorly received, and digested, is with ours.

Thus far the Greeks usual simile carries us.. 321. n. 16.
But their common Doctrine farther, even to a Total Transubstantiation, as I
think will appear from what follows.

1. For, 1st. They hold; that the same Numerical Body of our Lord, that was
born of the Virgin, and Crucified, is exhibited to us in the Eucharist:
Present, not by its descending from Heaven; but, by the Conversion of the
Consecrated Elements into the self-same Body, and by the multiplication of its
local Existence in more places, than before.

1. Which appears; 1st. From this; That the Identity of the Body Consecrated,
and that Crucified, quod suppositum, or as both united to, and filled with, the
same Divinity, (which well consists with a, Real, Substantial, Numerical,
diversity between themselves*) is not sufficient, that the one of them,
therefore, may be denominated of the other; or this said to be th^^; nor yet
sufficient, that all the same things may be said of them both. Some general
things indeed may be predicated of them, wherein both agree; but their
Properries individual, as local presince, Motion, any particular Qualities or
applications them cannot: (Yet which Individual properties are usually applied
by the Greeks to the Body Crucified, and to that distributed in the Eucharist,
as one, and the same.) Any Individual Properties of the one or the other, I
grant, may always be truly demonstrated of our Lords Body in general, as we
will; But cannot be truly said of both, or either of these, the Consecrated,
and the Crucified, as we please, if these not numerically the same. So we
cannot say, That ones Soul is his Body; or a Leg, an Arm; or, the one in the
same place, or motion, or every way affected, as the other is, because that
both are parts of one and the same Person, or Body, and both animated with one
and the same Soul. And, for a Grecian Priest to tell his Communicants, that he
delivers them the same Body that was Crucified and offered for their Salvation,
and Redemption (when he gives them neither it, nor any part of it,) because he
gives them another Augmentative Breaden part, belonging to the same Person,
which Person indeed was Crucified for them, seems too bold an Equivocation to
be, by this Person, so confidently imposed on the Greek Church, and their
ordinary expressions. The Truth therefore of that, which the Greeks, or other
Latins, embracing their Opinion, do affirm; viz. that the Eucharists,
Consecrated in never so many places, are all the self-same Body, one with
another; and all with the Crucified; because replenished every where with the
same Divinity, must be understood to proceed, not from the mere Union, or
Conjunction, how intimate soever, of these two (as is showed but now:) but to
proceed from the effect (as M. Claude, pressed with his Adversaries Arguments,
confesses p. 867.
) from the effect, I say which this Divinity, first uniting, or conjoyning it
self to the Elements upon the words of Consecration, works in them, to make
them, by a total Transmutation of their Substance, (for nothing less can do it)
individually all one, and the same, with one another, and with that crucified;
after which follows another, an Hyppostatical Union of the same Divinity to
them, as made our Lords Body.

2. Again: Their holding a Numerical Identity every where of this Body of our
Lord appears from this; that they explain its being, in all places, but one;
and in every place, and in every Particle whole and entire, by the Divinity's
being so; and the Divinity is so, numerically. See that passage of Remigius,
and Alcuin. (cited by M. Claude l. 6. c. 10.) concerning the effect of this
repletion of the Consecrated Elements by the Divinity. -- Sicut Divininas Verbi
Dei una est, [una numero] quae totum implet mundam; Ita licet multis locis, and
innumerabilibus diebus, illud Corpus consecretur, non sunt tamen multa corpora
Christi, neque multi Calices; sed unum Corpus Christi, and unus Sanguis cum eo
quod sumpsit in utero Virginis and quod dedit Apostolis. Divinitas enim verbi
replet illud quod ubique est, [the Bread] and conjungit, ac facit [by a
transmutation of this; Bread by the Divinity joined to it] ut, sicut ipsa
[Divinitas, quae totum implet mundum, tamen] una est, ita [quod ubique est, or
Panis] conjungatur [ i. e. by such a transmutation of it] Corpori Christi, and
unum corpus ejus sit in veritate. [ i. e. one not only, as to the Person, but
one in Reality and Essence* as the Divinity is one; and otherwise, that, which
follows, and which he collects from this Unity, cannot be true.] Vnde
animadvertendum est, quod sive plus sive minus quis inde percipiat, omnes
equaliter Corpus Christi integerrime sumunt, and generaliter omnes, and
specialiter unusquisque. Certainly, where the whole is in every part, and every
part (if I may so say) contains in it the whole, here is supposed a numerical
Identity, and a sicut Divinitas una est. Nor has M. Claude, in his holding the
Substance of the Eucharist, in several places, really diverse, and so, to each
Communicant, any way to relieve himself in answer to such expressions,
necessarily inferring a total Transubstantiation, but by inducing vertual
presence only, which Virtue he says is every where numerically the same; and
whole, and entire, to every Receiver. This for Remigius.

And here also, if we may make use of a Negative Argument (which is sometimes
very weak, sometimes very strong, and convincing, according to the
circumstances, which must be left to the prudent to consider,) whereas the
Greek Doctors, had they, declared the Body of our Lord, that is distributed in
the Eucharist, to be really diverse from that on the Cross; and when
Consecrated in several places diverse one from another, (a necessary
consequent, as M. Claude says, of their Tenent,) might have rendered th^s
Mystery much more easy, and intelligible; Yet they have never mentioned any
such diversity; but still, as it were to prevent and strangle any such fancy,
cautiously added, that it is one and the same with that which was born, and
dyed for us; And, for this numerical Identity, urge our Lords own words Matt.
26.28 Luke 22.19
, -- Hoc est illud, quod tradetur, that Flesh of his, that was to be Crucified;
and so for his Blood, qui effundetur, that was to be shed on the Cross. As if
our Lord would make this for ever a firm Article of our Faith, and prevent all
such Equivocation, as eadem caro quoad suppositum, or personam. And, upon this
supposition of the same numerical Body here present, the Greeks (mistaking the
sense of it) censure the expression of the Latins in their Canon. -- Jube haec
perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in supercaeleste Altar tuum, etc. as
incongruous, if pronounced after the Consecration once ended. For so, says
Cabasilas, Quomodo fuerit, Liturg expos. c. 30.
, si nondum est, supercaeleste ipsum Corpus Christi, quod est supercaeleste?
Quomodo sursum ferretur in manu Angeli, quod supra omnem Principatum, etc.
[that is above already,] But this Quomodo might soon have been answered by
himself, if he held this Consecrated here a new body, really distinct from that
above. This, of the 1st. proof of a Total Transubstantiation, the Greek's
holding the Eucharist the same numerical body with that Crucified; which,
according to M. Claude, necessarily infers a total Transubstantiation of the
Bread, as well for its matter, as Form.

2ly. they hold the Body, that is thus present by Consecration, 321. n. 17.2.
to be incorruptible; and this Incorruption of it to depend on its
Resurrection, and so, to relate, only, to that numerical Body that was
Crucified, and Raised from Death. -- Quod nec laeditur, nec corrumpiour, nec in
secessum abit: Hoc avertat Deus, says Damascen: and therefore the Greeks, who
are said generally to follow his Opinion, must, in Justice, be freed from
Stercoranism. Now the Bread, remaining entire for its whole Substance, or for
its Matter and qualities at least, as before Consecration, cannot be held such
a Body of our Lord, as suffers no digestion, or corruption. For, something
there is in the Sacrament, that suffers this: And we cannot imagine, that the
Greeks, whilst holding the Substance of Bread to remain, will lay these changes
only upon the Species, or Accidents of it; and not the Substance at all; so
that, though they eat the Bread, they taste, and are fed only by the Accidents;
and so, without a Transubstantiation, will espouse the difficulties of it.
Their holding, then, the Body, that is present, and participated in the
Eucharist, to be incorruptible, excludes the Substance, or matter, of Bread
from this Body. And, -- Panis quidem videtur, or, apparet, sed revera Caro est:
as Theophylact. In Matt. 26
-- Corpus Christi non particulatim diducitur, etc. -- Partitio est
accidentium, sub sensum cadentium, as Samonas: Dialog. cum Saraceno.
-- Non Panis, sed Corpus Domini sacrificatur: -- and -- Si Panis manens,
sacrificatus fuisset, Panis esset Sacrificium, non Agni Dei: and Cabasilas:
Liturg. Expositio. c. 32.
must all be understood of an entire change of the Bread, as well its Matter as
Form.

3ly. They hold this Body, that is present, and distributed in the Eucharist,
to remain, -- quoties frangitur, totum, and integrum in unoquoque frusto: And,
-- Omnibus distributum, minime diminutum. -- Frangitur Agnus Dei, and non
comminuitur; semper comeditur, and non consumitur; says their Liturgy Missa
Chrysostom.
. Not a several piece, or part of (...) Lord's Body received in the several
Particles, but all: Nor, those receiving more of this Body, that receive more
of the Symbol: In infinite places offered only the same Sacrifice, viz. that
one which was offered on the Cross To several Communicants distributed the self
same Body; and: It to each entire; A Tenent flowing from the former, Its
incorruptibility (and by all the same persons maintained.) For, what is so, is
no more capable of being parted, or divided, etc. Now these things cannot suit
to our Lords Body, if the matter of Bread be said, still to remain, and to make
up an augmentative part of our Lords natural Body, but this numerically and
really distinct from it. For so, in several places will be offered Sacrifices,
but these really different from one another, as also from that of the Cross:
Nor will the Communicants receive our Lords Body entire, but each a part; and
this part numerically differing from that Corpus, quod traditum est (which
Communion of a parcel was a thing objected to the Stercoranists, and those, who
held our Lords Body corruptible.) See M. Claud's Concessions concerning this,
2d. Answ. part. 3. c. 2. and so his retreat to a Virtual presence, to verify
these expressions of the Greeks, of this Body every where the same, and
received by every one entire.

As for some speeches used by the Greeks, in making application of their
Similitudes, (none of which can exactly fit so high a Mystery,) that seem not
to accord so well with a Total Transubstantiation. -- The Bread said by them to
be assumed by, or united to, the Divinity of our Lord: -- The Bread, and his
Body, by the Divinity, to be made One: -- An Augmentation of Christ's Body to be
made by the Bread consecrated, as, here on Earth, by his Nourishment, etc. I
see no Reason, why this Person should not be contented with the former
Explications given of them; Such, as 1 both free these Authors from
contradicting themselves; and 2 do render the sense of the Fathers unanimous,
and the Christian Doctrine to run all in one common Stream; [viz. the Real
Presence, and Exhibition, in the Eucharist, of that numerical Body that
suffered for us on the Cross;] 3. and whereby also may be avoided those many
gross absurdities concerning new Contracts, and Unions, and new Bodies of our
Lord, which, being so unworthy these high Mysterious, and very injurious to our
Lords Incarnation, are all avoided by a total Transubstantiation. See, if you
please, these absurdities mentioned by Bellarmine De Euchar l. 3. c. 13. (...)
and by Suarez. De Sacrament. Disp. 49.. 3. The Divinity of our Lord, then, may
be said to assume, or unite it self unto the Bread; or, to make the Bread one
with his Body, not by a mere joining it to Himself, or to his Body, whilst it
remains still Bread; but, by his first converting and changing of it, by his
Divine Omnipotency, into his Body, and then, his uniting, Hypostatically, his
Divinity to it. And, his Body may be said in some sort to receive daily an
Augmentation from these iterated Consecrations of Bread to be made his Body, in
as much as there is a daily multiplication of his Body, as to its local
Existence in more places than before, according to the frequency of Communions;
whilst his Body, in Heaven, does not descend, but keeps its constant former
residence there.

Thus Greeks and Latins, ormer and latter times,. 321. n. 20.
will be at some accord. Whereas this Author, to maintain a variance between
the two Churches, seems necessitated to fasten on the Greeks an Opinion, which
being taken in its just extent, Tranubstantiation seems much the more eligible;
and which he is forced many times also to pare, and qualify so, that it may
have some Conformity to the Doctrine of Protestants, and keep a greater
distance from the Roman, as offers extreme violence to the natural sense of
their words. For Example. He allows, * an Union of the Divinity to our Lords
Body in the Eucharist, as the Greeks say; But no such Union Hypostatical. *
Christ;s body in the Eucharist the same with that born of the Blessed Virgin,
as they say; but in such a sense as meanwhile to remain really, essentially,
numerically, diverse from it. * The Bread, the same body with that born of the
Virgin; but, It not changed into Christ's Flesh, but remaining still Bread. *
Bread still, not only for the matter; as it was in our Lords, or is in our,
nourishment; but, for the same Substantial Form, and Qualities, still inhering
in it, as before. * The Bread made the very, and true, body, as they say; But
virtually only, in having infused into it, and inherent, in it, the
vivisicating virtue of Christ's natural body; (Where the Protestants leave the
Greeks to stand by themselves; allowing this Virtue communicated to the
Believeer only, not to the Symbols.) * The Eucharistical body conjoined (as our
nourishment is to ours,) to Christ's natural body, as they say, but the one only
in Heaven, the other on Earth. * Our Lords Body in the Eucharist, by the same
Divinity inhabiting in both, made one and the same with that born of the
Virgin, as they say; but Mystically and Sacramentally only. For the same
Divinity, replenishing both, does not, therefore, render them really the same
one with another. * The same Body this, with that; but no Sovereign Adoration
due, or by the Greeks given, to this, as to that. * This the same body with
that; and this also, as indivisible, received entire by every Communicant, as
the Greeks say; But this Body entire, in virtue only, not in Substance. * The
same Body of our Lord in all places, where this Sacrament is celebrated; But
only in the former sense; i. e. the virtue and the efficacy of it, the same.
If such be their sense, the Reader cannot but think the Greeks very unfortunate
in their Expressions; or, if not their sense, this person presuming, he should
meet with very credulous Readers. This (from n. 11.) of the 8th. Observation,
M. Claud's explication of the true Opinion of the Modern Greeks; and the
necessary consequents of it.

9ly. After this,. 321. n. 21
He confesses; That it does not appear, that the Greeks have made any
Opposition to the Roman Church about Transubstantiation. l. 4. c. 5. p. 390. --
In a word, says he, the Greeks neith^r Believe, nor impugn,
Transubstantiation. They believe it not; for it has no place in the Doctrine
of their Church. It is neither in the Confessions of their Faith; nor Decisions
of Councils, nor Liturgies; [ i. e. in such Language, as he exacts. Surely,
this main Point, the Manner of our Lords Pres^^ce, is not omitted in all these:
the Constantinopolitan, the second Nicene, Council, the Liturgies speak of it;
Nor is Transubstantiation impugned in them, according to Him: is clearly
maintained by them, according to Catholicks] They do not impugn it; For, as
far as appears, they have not argued with the Latins, nor formally debated it
with them in their former Disputes. Thus He. And, as he grants the Creeks not
to have quarrelled with the Latins, p. 375.
because they held Transubstantiation, So the Latins never to have accused the
Greeks, as if they held it not. There seems therefore no great need of
Missions, distributing charities, teaching Schools there, etc. to induce these
Orientals to approve a Tene^t, which they never formerly contested; and of an
error in which, though the main Point, these two Churches never accused one
another: Nay, the Greeks, in some of their Confessions, as in that of the
Venetian Greeks to the Cardinal of Guise, seem to have outdone the Latins;
and to go beyond Transubstantiation.

Meanwhile; the great quarrels the same Greeks make with the Latins about
smaller matters in this principal part of the Christian Service, and the chief
Substance of its Liturgies, the Eucharist, as about the manner of the
Consecration; and about Azymes; and, on the other side, the great Storms, that
have been raised between Catholics and Protestants, from the very beginning of
the Reformation, about this very Point of Transubstantiation, do show, that, if
the difference between the Greeks and Latins were considerable and real
herein, there could not have been, on both sides such a constant silence;
Though in some other matters, of little consequence, or, at least, of little
evidence, such as M. Claude instanceth in, there can be showed a silent
toleration of the different Judgments, as well of Churches, as of private
Persons.

10ly. Hitherto,. 321. n 22.
from. 321. n. 11. I have reflected on M. Claude's Explication of the Greeks
Opinion concerning Transubstantiation. Now to view the other Point, Adoration.
Here 1st. He denies not an inferior and Relative Adoration to be allowed to be
due, and paid by the Greeks, to the Holy Mysteries in the Eucharist; such as is
given to the Holy Gospel, and to other Sacred things. Of which we find in S.
Chrysostom's Mass, that, before his reading the Gospel, -- Diaconus respondet.
Amen. and reverentiam Sancto Evangelio exhibet. See M. Claud's last Answer, l.
3. c. 7. p. 219. where he grants; That the Greeks have much Devotion for
Pictures; for the Evangile, and for the pain benit, for the Bread of the
Eucharist, before the Consecration. 2ly. A Supreme Adoration he grants lawful,
and due to our Lords Humanity wherever present, and allows such an Adoration
actually given, even by Protestants, at the time of their receiving the
Eucharist, to our Lord Christ, and to his Sacred Humanity, as in Heaven. And,
to his Adversary urging some places of the Fathers for the practice of
Adoration in the Communion, he replies. -- 2 Resp part. 2. c. 8 p 416.
The Author deceives us, in proving what is not controverted. For the Question
is, not: whether in the Communion we ought to adore Jesus Christ our Redeemer,
and his Flesh personally united to the Word, represented by the Sacrament: We
practice it with an ardent, and humble Devotion, when we approach to the Holy
Table. And afterward, Who doubts; but that the Body of Jesus, Christ is
Soveraignly Adorable. 3ly. He cannot but know, or else has been very careless
to inform himself; that no Sovereign Adoration is pretended either by the
Roman, or Greek Church to be given to the external Species, or Symboles, of the
Eucharist, (which they hold Venerable only with an inferior cult, such as is
due to all other Holy things,) but only to the Body and Blood of Christ
contained under them; as the Council of Trent, allowing the Expression of
adoring the Sacrament cultu Latriae, yet explains it in their Canon thus. Sess.
13. c. 6.
-- Si quis dixerit in Sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum, unigenitum Dei
filium, non esse cultu Latriae etiam externo adorandum, Anathema sit: And, as
Bellarmin De Euchar. l. 4. c. 29.
also resolves the state of the Controversy. -- Quicquid sit de modo loquendi;
status questionis non est, nisi An Christus in Eucharistia sit adorandus cultu
Latriae. 4ly. In the 4th. Observation precedent, M. Claude says he will not
contest the Greek's holding a Real Presence of our Lord in the Eucharist,
Though, he contends, it is not by the Roman way of Transubstantiation. Now from
this Real Presence held by the Greeks even after that way he allows, at least,
if he will but grant the true consequences thereof, mentioned before,. 321. n.
13. Viz. An Hypostatical, or other, Union to this Body offered and distributed
in the Eucharist, such as converts it into the Flesh of our Lord, and renders
it the Body of the same Person, with that born of the Blessed Virgin; non aliud
ab eo, quod sumpsit in utero Virginis; (By which she People seem sufficiently
instructed not to distinguish, in their Mode of Adoration, between these two,
that they are taught to be personally the same.) I say from such a Real
Presence held by the Greeks a lawfulness of adoring Christ's Body, as there
present, must be held by them. And then; if it can be showed by M. Claude they
do not actually adore, it must be reckoned a matter of neglect; not, of
Conscience, or denying such thing due.

5ly. But, now, to consider their Practice. He denies not the Greeks to adore,
in their Mode of Adoration, (which is by inclining the Head and Body; seldom,
kneeling,) when they receive the Communion; their Liturgies have it, often
repeated; and, surely, he will allow them, herein, as much Devotion as he does
to the Protestants: and also them, to give at least an external Relative
Devotion to the Mysteries, for such they give to the Evangiles: and, methinks,
the witnesses he produces. p. 216. should not, in general, deny simply, any
Adoration of the Greeks at all. The Question, then, only is; granting already
an external Adoration given by the Greeks, when they approach to the Communion;
whether this, in their intention, be a sovereign Adoration exhibited to Christ's
Sacred Divinity and Humanity, as there present, Now; the Greek's holding this
Humanity there really present, conceded before, seems sufficient to determine
this, without more ado. And, for one to pretend, that this Adoration of the
Greeks is given only to God; or to Christ's Divinity as every where present; or,
to the Humanity united to it, but only this as in Heaven; and, not to it also
as present in the Eucharist, when the same Greeks confess it to be so; and,
when the Eucharistical presence is the occasion of such their Adoration; here I
say, not to allow the extent of their Adoration, so far as they believe the
presence of the Person adored; and their worship the same latitude, as their
Faith, would be an unjust and groundless abridgement of their Devotions: as
also this, to pretend an interior, or relative. Adoration given by them only to
the Mysteries, where the same Communicants hold a supreme due to the Person
Present with them.

To view a little the Form of their Liturgy. We read in S. Chrysostom's Mass:
That the Priest, after Consecration, and before he takes the Holy bread, to
communicate himself with it, adores: and says, -- Attend, Domine Jesu
Christ, de Sancto habitaculo tuo: veni ad sanctificandum nos qui in excelsis
cum Patre simul resides, and hic una nobiscum invisibiliter versaris; and
dignare potenti manu tua nobis impertiri immaculatum Corpus tuum, and pretiosum
sanguinem; and per nos, toti Populo. Corpus tuum. I add, never severed from thy
Divinity, and thy self. To whom also the Priest had faid before in the beginning
of the Service. -- Tu enim es, qui offers and offerris; assumis, and
distribueris, Christ Deus noster. Then the Priest adores again, and says
thrice to himself; -- Deus propitius esto mihi Peccatori; An Act of Humiliation
used here by him, before he takes the Sancta into his hands for the Communion,
as it was once before, at the beginning of the Oblation. And so, says the
Rubric, all the People adore with him. -- Populus similiter cunctus cum
devotione adorat. Then he takes the Holy Bread, and makes the Elevation of it,
yet whole, and entire; saying, Sancta Sanctis; And the Quire answers, with
relation to It yet one, and entire, -- Vnus Sanctus, Vnus Dominus, Jesus
Christus. Then the Priest, breaking it into 4. Pieces, says. -- Frangitur
Agnus Dei; qui frangitur, at non comminuitur; qui semper comeditur, and non
consumitur; [which shows, what Agnus Dei, whether this in Heaven, or present
here, is now spoken of, and thus adored.] Sed eos, qui sunt participes,
sanctificat. So taking a piece thereof in his hand, and preparing himself to
receive it, he says, -- Credo Domine and confiteor, Quod Tu es Christus, etc.
-- Dignare in praesepe animae meae (...), and in coinquinatum meum Corpus
ingredi -- and dignare me participem effici sanctissimi tui Corporis and
Sanguinis. [I add never severed from thy Divinity, and thy self.] Also, when he
calls the Deacon, to communicate him with the Holy Bread: it is said, --
Accedens Diaconus Reverentiam exhibet. And so also before receiving the Chalice
It is said again, -- Diaconus venit, and adorat semel, dicens: Ecce venio ad
immortalem Regem, etc. Where it must be remembered, that the Greeks also held,
the Body of our Lord that is received in the Eucharist, to be immortal, and
incorruptible. This we find in the Liturgy. And, suitable to this, we read, in
Cabasilas c. 39.
(expounding the Liturgy,) concerning the People before their communicating. --
Ipsi autein (says he) fidem attendentes, and aedorant, and benedicunt, and
Jesum, qui in eis [donis Sanctificatis] intelligitur, [oppos'd to videtur] ut
Deum, celebrant; Where M. Claud's note is l. 3. c. 7 p. 222.
that -- Non adorant dona, sed Jesum. But who says, that a Sovereign Adoration
is due, or given, to the Dona? Again 2 Jesum, (says he) qui intelligitur, i.
e. only, qui representatur in Donis. But all the former Expressions, implying
our Lords presence, show their belief to be contrary. Tues, (said the Priest
before) qui offers, and offerris: assumis and distribueris, Christ Deus
noster. And the People, after this adoring, in their receiving, say. --
Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini, of which, the same Cabasilas, --
Tanquam nunc ad eos venientem, and apparentem, Christum benedicunt Who also
before ( c. 24.) intimates the custom of the Greeks, in the Service adorare,
and alloqui corpus and sanguinem Domini. Now I say, All these Passages in the
Greek Liturgy well considered; Here for one to grant, the Real and corporal
Presence of our Lord in his whole Person in the Holy Mysteries to be believed
by this Priest, Deacon, and other Communicants, and yet to say, their
Adoration, and other Addresses and Allocutions are not given and made to him,
as there present; but to him, only as in Heaven; or only to his Divinity as
there, and every where present, abstracted from his Humanity, is such a Comment
upon this Liturgy, as nothing but a strong pre-ingagement can force upon any
ones judgment.

The Testimonies,. 321. n 23.
this Author brings, l. 3. c. 7. p. 216.
do accuse the Greeks of some neglect in this Duty, but do not show them to
justify it; and these very Persons, that censure such neglect toward the Holy
Mysteries after Consecrated, accuse them almost of committing Idolatry toward
them before, So that it seems rather some defect, of knowledge, in such,
concerning the Ceremonies of Consecration, than want of Devotion. Cabasilas c
24.
, long ago, observed the same in some ignorant People, and blamed it: but yet,
in the same place, allows the Adora^ion of, and Allocutions made to, the Body
and Blood of our Lord, when the Offerings are Sacrificed, and perfected. The
Consecration also of the Greeks being longer extended, and the Adoration not so
unitedly pe^formed presently upon the pronouncing of our Lords words of
Institution, as amongst the Latins; but, disjunctively, at their
communicating, might occasion some mistake in those Latins, who accused them
of a Non Adoration. So, the other irreverences and indecencies, objected, are
to be esteemed, only negligences in priv^te practice; not, consequences of the
public Doctrine; nor countenanced by their Liturgies. Which L^turgies use as
much Ceremony toward the Holy Mysteries, as the Roman does; Where also, first,
the Remains of the Holy Bread are carefully put into the Chalice, for the
People to be communicated threrewith; and then, for the Remains, after the
Communion consummated. -- Sacerdos (says the Rubric) quod residuum est
Communionis in Sancto Calice, cum attentione, and devotione consumit, and ter
S. Calicem abluit, and attendit, ne remaneat particula, Margarita vocata [not
the least crum of the intinct Host]

As for several Devotions and Honors performed to the Blessed Sacrament, here
in the West, (which this person d^ligently reckons up, much to its praise,) not
so in the East; (freq^ently urged by M. Claude, as good Arguments of the Greek
Church not believing Transubstantiation, or such a Real Presence, as the
Roman;) and, in latter times here more, than in the former. 1st. they are held
no such necessary circumstances, or consequences, without the which a Real
Presence may not be believed, and a due Adoration, (in some convenient manner
or other,) practiced 2ly. The occasion of them is well known to have been the
Berengarian, and many other, Errors concerning the Eucharist: which appeared
here in the West, but disturbed not the East. Which Errors, inferr^ng many
Indignities and affronts to this richest, and dearest Legacy of our departing
Lord, caused the Church to multiply also the external testifications of her
Devotion, Gratitude, and Reverence, to it; and Gods wisdom, as usually, out of
such vilifyings, and disrespects extracted a greater Honor, as to External
Ceremony, to these High Mysteries. So also the many subtle Questions, that have
been discussed and stated among the Latins, not so much thought on by the
Greeks, but all shut up in a Quo modo novit Deus, (another frequent Argument
with this Author, of the Greeks not believing Transubstantiation) acknowledge
the same Original, viz. the Provocations, Objections, contrary false
positions, of the Heterodox, Which forced the Church to descend to the same
particulars with them; Nor could she censure these as Errors, without
establishing their Contradictories, as Truth. This of Adoration.

To conclude. The many Concessions of M. Claude, 321 n. 24.
and the Consequences of them, forementioned, seem to me sufficient, 1st. to
dissuade any sober and modest person, who relies not on his own judgment for
the controverted sense of Holy Scriptures, but holds it a safer way to conform
to that of Church Authority, to dissuade him. I say, from any such Communion,
as he sees, by the former Account, opposed both by the Latins and the Greeks;
Greeks, present, or past, as high as Damascen, in the 8th. age; and may not I
say as high as Gregory Nyssen. See before
in the 4th. whilst both these Latins and Greeks hold a Real, or Corporal
presence of our Lord in the Eucharist,. 321. n. 14.
and agree in a literal sense of Hoc ost Corpus meum. Nor will M. Claude enter
with his Adversary into this Controversy. 2. Next; to persuade him, of the
two, rather to the Roman Communion: as whose Transubstantiation, besides that
it has been established by so many Councils See the guide in Controversy.
Disc. 1.. 57, 58.
, is of it self much more credible, and more accommodated to the
Scripture-expressions, then I know not what Augmentation of Christ's natural
Body, born of the Blessed Virgin, by a new Breaden one assumed in the
Eucharist, numerically distinct from the other; yet, by the like assumption,
and Union to our Lords Divinity, rendered personally one and the same Body with
it. But much more will be confirmed in the same Resolution, if, by what has
been said above,. 321. n. 16 etc.
he discerns M Claud's Relation of the Modern Greek opinion unsound; and that
the main Body of them (except perhaps some few Impanatists, that have been
there, as also in the Western Church,) in holding a total substantial change of
the Bread, have accorded with the Roman Church.

I hope the Reader will pardon this digression,. 321. n. 29
the rather, because, it serves much to illustrate that, whereof I was
discoursing, That, (notwithstanding whatever evidence of Truth,) Answers, and
Replies, from Persons ingenious, and pre-ingaged, find no end; and that, when
Controversies are, by one of the contending parties denied any Decisive Judge;
though error may easily be overcome, yet it can hardly be silenced. For as God,
for the greater trial of our obedience, has permitced in the world not only
Evil, but very many allurements also, and enticements, to it; so, not only
Errors, but many verisimilities, and appearances of Reason, ever ready to
support it, with those, that do not by Humility attain the illuminations of his
Grace. Evidence sufficient God has left always to clear, and manifest all
necessary Truth to those, who are of an obedient Spirit, and willing to learn
it: But not sufficient to force (like the Mathematics) the Understandings of
the self-confident, and interested to gainsay it; But that they may have some
fair color or other, to oppose to it, and catch the credulous.

All which still more infers the great necessity of Church Authority, and a
conformity to it, and the reasonableness of Monsieur Mainbourg's Method for
reducing Protestants to the true Faith,. 321. n. 10
viz. -- That matters, once decided by this Authority, should be no longer
disputed; A Rule, the Protestants, i. e. the more potent Party of them, for
preserving their own peace, would have to be observed in the Differences among
themselves, (showed in the proceedings of the Synod at Dort, of which see
before. 254. n. 2.) but not, in those between them and Roman Catholics,
because here they are the weaker. To whom M. Claud's answer in the Preface of
his last Reply to D. Arnaud, is this. -- It is unjust (says he,) that he will
have the Decisions of Councils to be Prescriptions against us [the
Protestants;] not remembering, that nothing can prescribe against Truth,
especially when it concerns our Salvation. And, the Determinations of Councils
not being with us of any Consideration but as they do conform to the Holy
Scriptures, and to the Principles of Christian Religion, we cannot have from
hence any reasonable or profitable way to end the particular differences that
divide us, but only this, to examine the matter to the bottom, to discern
whether such conformity [ i.e. of the Councils to the Scriptures,] which we
suppose necessary, is; or, is not.

To which he adds there, as also frequently elsewhere: That the shortest, and
surest, and only right, way for settling the Conscience in repose, (which must
rest its Faith immediately on Gods word and Divine Revelation, is, for both
Parties to proceed to the Trial of their cause, all other Authority and
Methods laid aside, by the Holy Scriptures. And, when he is pressed by his
Adversary; That, in these Controversies, at least all persons doubting, i e.
what is the true sense, of the Scriptures controverted, and of Antiquity
expounding them, and not certain of the contrary of what the Church teaches
concerning them, (as all unlearned Protestants must be,) ought, herein, to
conform, and adhere rather to the Church, than to Separatists, he seeks to
decline it thus: That the simplest person may receive sufficient certainty from
the clearness of Scripture, in all matters necessary; that, from these
Scriptures learning what he ought to believe, he may easily know also, whether
the society, he lives in, be a true Church, and such as will conduct him to
Salvation, that hence he needs not trouble himself with Controversy, touching
what the former Church has believed; Yet that, our Lord promising to be with
true Believers to the end of the word, so as they shall not fall into damnable
error, Chari^y obliges him, (without his reading them,) to believe, that the
Fathers are of this number; and so, believed, as they ought; and so, were of
his Faith. To give you his own words. l. 1. c. 4. -- The word of God, (says
he) contains purely, and clearly, all that, which is necessary (...) form our
Faith, to regulate our Worship, and Manners. And, God assisting us with his
Grace, it is easy for the most simple to judge, whether the Ministry, under
which we live, can conduct us to salvation: and consequently, whether our
society is a true Church. For, for this, he needs only examine It as to these
two Characters. One, if they teach all the things clearly contained in God's
word, and the other, if they teach nothing, besides, that is contrary to those
things, or does corrupt the efficacy, and force of them. And afterward. -- This
Examen, (says he,) is short, easy, and proportioned to the capacity of all the
world: and, it forms a judgment as certain, as if one had discussed all the
Controversies one after another. Again l. 1. c. 5. -- There are two Questions:
One, touching what we ought to believe on the matter of the Eucharist. The
other, touching what has been believed by the ancient Church, The first of
these cleared, we need not trouble our selves about the 2d. Now, as for those
of our Communion, the first Question is cleared by the word of God. And for the
2d. he resolves it thus, l. 1. c. 6: -- That the Promises of J. Christ assure
us, that he will be with true Believers to the end of the world. Whence he
concludes, -- that there has always been a number of true Believers, whose
Faith has never been corrupted by damnable Errors. Then, -- that charity
obliges us to believe, that the Fathers were of this number. And then lastly,
We knowing from Scripture what we ought to believe in this Point, we also are
confirmed, without studying them, that the Fathers believed the same.

Now to reflect briefly on what he has said in the order it lies here. A
Council (says he) cannot prescribe against Truth. True. But the Council is
brought in for a Judge, where a dispute and Question is: what, or, on what side,
is the Truth. The determinations of Councils are not with us of any
consideration, but as they do conform to the H Scroptures. Right. But the
Council is called in for a Judge, where a doubt and dispute is; what, or on what
side, is the true sense of such, and such, Scriptures. Where, if he means;
that they refuse to submit to a Council unless conforming to Scripture, as the
sense of Scripture is given by the Council, that is it we desire: for the
Council will still profess its following the sense of Script: if, as this sense
understood by the Protestants, what is this, but to say they will subm^t to the
Judgment, or Decision, of a Council, so often as it shall agree with their own?
The only reasonable and profitable way to end differences, is this, to examine
the matter to the bottom; i.e. whether the Decisions of the Council conform
with H. Scripture. But, when this is done, How will the Difference end? Will
not the Controversy, as the Replies multiply, swell rather still bigger; as
his, and D. Arnaud's does? Search to the bottom; Suppose a Socinian should say
this, against the former Church-decisions, concerning the Trinity, the supreme
Deity of the Son, and H. Ghost; Gods essential Omnipresence, his absolute
prescience of future Contingents, etc. will Protestants say, he makes a
rational motion? Then, how can any Protestant rest his Faith in these Points
upon the Authority of the Councils, and their Creeds? will you say, he does
not? but, on the Scriptures. Have they then searched all these Points to the
bottom there; compared the particular Scriptures urged by the Socinian, and
those urged against him; and weighed them in the Balance? If, yet, they have
not, ought they? If they ought; what a task here for young Protestant-students?
what an Eternal Distraction in this, [a search!] what heavenly peace, in the
other [obedience to the judgments of former Councils;] and Vacancy for better
employments! Again. If they ought: what, all Protestants? the most of them, as
of all Christians, are illiterate Men, not having either leisure, or ability,
to search, etc. Must these adhere, therefore, to former Councils, and their
Creeds, in these Points? Then in others; and in this of Real Presence, or
Transubstantiation; and so they remain no longer on M. Claud's party. Or will
he bind them to submit their judgment to some inferior Ecclesiastical
Authority, or Ministry, standing in opposition to a superior? But this is
Schism in them both: and justly is such person ruined in his credulity to one
authority usurped, for his denying it to another, to whom it is due; Nor would
M Claude be well pleased, if any one should follow some few reformed Ministers,
divided from the rest of their Consistory, Class, or Synod.

As for the Trial,. 321. n. 26.
he motions, to be made by H. Scriptures. This is a thing that has been by the
2. Parties already done, first; as it ought. And the issue of it was; That one
Party understood these Scriptures in one sense, the other in another; For
Example. The one understood, Hoc est Corpus meum, literally: the other in a
Metaphor, and so differently understood also all the other Texts of Scripture
produced in this Cause. Here, the true sense of Scripture, became the Question,
and their Controversy. For the Judge and Dec^der of this between them, when
time was, they took a Council: For, since Scripture they could no more take,
the sense of that being their Question, to whom should they repair, but the
Church? and of the Church a Council is the Representative. Councils, several,
to a great number, in several ages See Guide in Controver. Disc. 1.. 57 58.
, decided this matter, and declared the sense of the Scriptures; but so, as it
liked not one Party. These therefore thought fit to remove the Trial from
thence to the more Venerable Sentence of the Fathers, and Primitive Church;
i.e. of their writings Again, the sense of these writings as, before that of
Scriptures, is understood diversely by the Contesters; And now the true sense of
the writings of the Fathers is the Question, and Controversy. Nor, here will
Disputes end it; Witness so many Replies made on either side. Former Councils,
as they have given their Judgment of the Sense of the writings of H
Scriptures, so they have of those of the Fathers, but their Authority is
rejected, in both; And, a new Council, were it now convened, besides that M.
Claud's Party, being the fewer, and, so, easily over-voted, would never submit
to it, we may, from M. Claud's Confession l. 3. c. (...) p. 337.
-- That both Greeks and Latins are far departed from the Evangelical
simplicity, and the natural explication that the Ancients have given to the
Mystery of the Eucharist, rationally conjecture that Protestants, in such
Councils, would remain the party condemned. What, then, would this person have?
He would have the Controversy begin again, and return to the Scriptures. Which
is, in plain Language: That, the Question should decide the Controversy: and,
till this can do it, That, so long as the Protestants are the weaker Party, all
should have their Liberty. For, when they are the stronger, they do well
discern the necessity of Synods for ending such Differences; and, though not
professing themselves infallible, ye^, upon the Evangelical promise of our
Lords assistance to such Councils, think fit to require all the Clergy under
their jurisdiction, upon pain of Suspension from their Function, to receive and
Subscribe their Decrees for Gods Truth; and to teach them to the People, as
such; and think fit to Excommunicate those teaching the contrary, till they
shall recant their Error. Of which see before. 200. Witness such carriage of
the Synod of Dort toward the Remonstrants, who challenged the same exemption
from their Tribunal, as they had done from that of Trent; but could not be
beard.

As for that which follows, in Answer to D. Arnaud's most ratianal challenging
a Submission, and Conformity, of so many Protestants, as have no certainty of
their new Opinions, rather to the Church, than to Innovators, to me it sounds
thus. That every plain, and simple Protestant, 1st. thinks his Exposition or
sense of Scripture, in this Point of the Eucharist, and so in others, any way
necessary, to be clear, and without dispute, [and the more simple he is, the
sooner he may think so; because he is not able to compare all other Texes, nor
to examine the contrary senses given by others, or the reasonable grounds
thereof,] 2. Next, that every one, who thinks his Exposition, or Sense of
Scripture clear in such Point, is by this sufficiently assured, that he has a
right Faith; or, from this sense of his, knows what he ought to believe, and
forms a Judgment herein as certain, as if one had discussed all the
Controversies, one after another: [a strange proposition; but I see nothing
else, from which such person collects his faith to be right; if any does,
produceit] 3ly. That every such simple person now easily knows, whether the
Society, wherein he lives, be a true Church, or otherwise, viz. as they agree
with, or dissent from, that right Faith of his already supposed; or as he finds
them to teach the things clearly contained in God's word, i. e. in his clear
Sense thereof. 4ly. Knowing thus, from this his clear exposition, or sense of
Scripture, what he ought to believe, he needs not trouble himself, what the
Ancient Church has believed; [which is very true:] nay, he knows, without
reading them, or M. Arnaud's and Claud's discourses upon them, that the
Fathers, if of the number of the Faithful, were of his Opinion, by M. Claud's
arguing forementioned. I desire the Reader to review his words, or, the 5th and
6th Chapters of his 1st. Book, and see if he can make any better construction
of them. Now, if there be any Sense in this, he says; How can he hinder, but
that a simple Catholic way use the self-same Plea (Church Authority being laid
aside) for a certainty of his Faith upon the same pretensions, viz. his clear
sense of Scripture, quite contrary to the Protestants -- clear sense? And, in
any Controversy amongst Protestants: (Suppose that of the Remonstrants and
Anti-Remonstrants,) here both sides have the same Plea, one against another;
namely, the certainty of their Faith from their own Sense of the Scriptures
controverted between them. And, why does not this certainty void their Synods.
For M. Claude says, -- The word of God contains nettement and clairement, all
that which is necessary to form our Faith, and that the most simple are capable
to judge of it, etc. Unless the Protestant Controversies be never about any
thing necessary. This is the way M. Claude thought on to leave no Doubters,
though never so unlearned, among Protestants as to the Eucharist, or other
Points of their Faith. But mean while, if, after such Speculations of his, any
such Doubters there be, I do not find, but that he leaves so many wholly to D.
Arnaud's disposal, viz. that they return to, and remain in, the bosom of the
former Church so long, till they become certain of its errors; and not follow
strangers that have not entered by the door, into Christ's Fold; and, I hope,
they will consider it. As for the settling of our Conscience this person speaks
of, by resting our Faith immediately on Gods Word, I see not, where the sense
of the Scriptures is supposed the thing controverted, how any one rests his
Faith more immediately on God's word by following his own Exposition or Sense
thereof, or the Exposition of a Minister, etc. (for some person's exposition he
must follow,) than he, that follows that of the Church.

If we are, then, for a total application to the Scriptures, and for searching
things to the bottom; Let us search there first this main Point, (that decides
all other) concerning our Lord's establishing a just Church Authority for
ending contentions. Where we shall find also; that he is not a God of
dissension, or Confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33 Ephesians. 4.11, 14 1 Cor. 12.28.
in his House, the Church; but of Peace. And -- That he has given his Clergy
in a certain Subordination, that we should not be carried about with every wind
of Doctrine; as we must be, when ever these disagree in expounding Scripture to
us, if we have no Rule, which of them to follow. The truth of this once found
out by our search, will save many other searches; of which, without it, I see
no end. In vain do we endeavor, with whatever pains, so discern Gods Truth
without the illumination of his Holy Spirit and Grace; and since, revelat
parvalis, in vain expect this, without great Humility, and self-d^s-esteem, and
a reverent preference of, and pious Credulity toward our just, and lawful
Spiritual Superiors. -- Credendo, first, [i. e. Ecclesiae] says S. Austin in
his Tract De utilitate Credendi c. 1.
, praemunim^r, and illuminaturo praeparamur Deo.

To resume then here the matter we were speaking of before, 321. n 27.
. 321. n. 1. from which we have so long digressed. For such Persons, as are
self-confident, despisers of Superiors, much pre-engaged, whatever evident
Testimony Truth may have on its side, I can affirm nothing, For Pride, and
thinking they see utterly puts out their eyes. But I think, so many as are no
way thus entangled, and are humble, and well affected to Authority, will by
reading the pieces aforesaid, be reduced either to a full persuasion on the
Churches side in this great Point; or to a Dubitancy and uncertainty of that,
which is maintained against it. And then, this later only (as has been showed.
291. etc.
) is a sufficient Ground, and Inductive of their conformity to it, I mean, to
the authority of the present Church,

In this point, then, the main Trial seems to be 1. Whether Antiquity indeed so
understood, and Councils declared, the sense of these Scriptures, as is
pretended. Since, as Mr. Thorndike has it; in his Rule of Reformation, Forbea.
and Penalties, c. 8.
this is to be taken for granted, -- That nothing can be the true sense of
Scripture, which the consent of the whole Church contradicts. 2. If this
found so; whether this Authority ought not to prescribe to any particular
judgment; especially when he perceives, the new pretended Demonstrations to the
contrary no way to persuade this present Church Authority, as any true
Demonstration (in the Protestants Definition of it) necessarily must.

For the Second Point, Invocation of Saints.

1. It is granted by Protestants;. 322. n. 1.
that if the Saints deceased hear, or otherwise know, our requests made to
them, it is lawful to invocate them, or desire their prayers for us, as we do
those of Saints here; and the invocation of them in any other manner Catholics
disclaim.

2. It sufficiently appears, from the knowledge of things done, or said, 2
King. 6.8, 9, 12, 31.32.
in absence, that several Prophets, King. 5 25. -- Act. 5.3. -- Col. 2.5.
and other Saints of God, by Revelation, or Vision, have had here in this life,
that it is possible; that the Saints glorified, without imagining any their
omni-presence or omni-science, may know, by the like Revelation,
Representation, or Vision, or by some other way as God pleases, (for the
particular manner thereof is no way stated by the Church) may, thus, know, I
say, either all, or so many of those prayers, that are made to them (though at
the same time, by several persons, in the most distant places) as it may
concern their Petitioners, touching any benefit to be received by their
Intercessions, that they should know them. Lastly, possible, that the Saints
Glorified may know these, or some other instrument of God's mercy, viz. Angels,
know these for them, or in their stead (for this clause also is put in by St.
Austin, proceeding most cautiously in this matter.) These things, I say, are
possible: And if any of these be put, it is abundantly sufficient to render
Invocation of Saints glorified not vain. For, to frustrate the benefit here,
of, the Saints must neither know, nor others for them; who, only upon their
general Intercessions offered, may be, as God pleases, made his instruments in
relieving the necessities of such Supplicants. They must neither know all, nor
any of our affairs or prayers: For if they, or others for them, only know and
relieve some, it will be lawful, at any time, in any thing, to implore their
help, who, we know not, but in that time, and thing, they may assist us. Again,
suppose, neither the Saints, nor others for them, save God only, to know at all
our particular prayers, or wants; but the Saints, only in gross, to intercede
for all those, that implore their help; or, yet more generally, only for all
their fellow members here, that are in distress, whether imploring, or not
imploring, their help; yet, if God, at least, apply the benefit of any Saints
general Intercessions more particularly to those, who more particularly honor,
and, with their addresses, solicit such a Saint; Such Invocation, and Honor
still remains profitable, and advantageous to the Supplicant.

[Where note,. 322. n. 2.
that neither those, who make, nor yet God who reveals, their prayers to the
Saints, do it at all for this end, that so the Saints may make known such their
prayers to God (a thing in which Protestants please themselves to find
absurdities and contradiction;) but, that these nearer favorites of God, and
more powerful with him, may obtain from him (who knows all our prayers before
we think them) the grant of those requests, which great sinners many times
cannot. And out of great mercy to the Supplicants it is, that God manifests
such their prayers to the Saints: much what so, as he vouchsafed to direct Jobs
three Friends to make their addresses to his Servant Job, to pray to Him for
them, that so he might pardon them; because Him he would accept. Job 42.8.
Or, as he spoke to King Abimeleck, Genesis 20.7.
whom he had smitten, that he should procure his Servant Abraham's prayers, to
Him, that so he might heal him; for, how little will it differ from this, had
God revealtd to Abraham himself Abimilecks necessities, and willed him to pray
for him; that so, upon his intercessions, he might heal him? So God reveals
Readiness prayers to Ananias, Act. 9.11. And Cornelius his, to Peter, Act. 10.19.
both, in order to their assisting them. And why may not God manifest to his
Saints the necessities of others, that, by thus occasioning their
Intercessions, he may relieve them, as well, as manifest to his Saints the
impenitency of others, and so prohibit such their Intercessions, that he may
punish them (As we find God speaking to Moses, Exodus 32.9
-- Let me alone that mine anger may wax hot, etc. And to the Prophet Jeremy
Jer. 7.16.
-- Pray not thou for this people, neither make intercession to me, for I will
not hear thee. This to show, that there is no absurdity in the former
possibilities.]

Sufficient, I said,. 322. n. 3.
were any of the ways abovementioned (and all possible enough) to render the
supplicating of Saints deceased not vain, ^ And so also, in obtaining the
benefit, and effect of such supplications, it cannot be denied possible; that
the Saint, that obtains it, may be also the Instrument in conveighing it (and
what de facto is done, I meddle not;) but yet this thing is no way necessary;
no not, when the Supplicant, in any such supernatural effect, fees their
appearance, or hears the sound of their voice. For such Apparition was that of
Ananias, Act. 9.12, who appeared, and spoke to, and laid his hand on, S. Paul
in a vision, when himself knew nothing of it. And such that of S. Austin De
Diverse. Sermon. 31, 32. and De Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
to Paul the trembling youth, and his sister; and they hereby admonished, that
they should repair to Hippo, where S. Austin was Bishop, for their Cure; where
also both of them miraculously received it; and yet St. Austin says Ibid.
-- Apparui illis, nesciens. Illi enim me videbant, and ego nesciebam: and
admonebantur, ut ad istam civitatem venirent. And such also his appearance to
Curma (in that his strange ecstasy and peregrination out of his Body) seeming
to baptize him; when he far distant (as he says De Cura pro mort. c. 12.
) and busied in other affairs, And such that of S. Ambrose (at the discovery of
the Bodies of the Martyrs, Gervasius and Protasius) his torturing of the
Devils, who publicly confessed it, and begged his forbearance, -- Illo aliud
agente, atque hoc, cum ageretur, om nino nesciente, as S. Austin, then himself
at Millan, relates it. De Cura pro mort. c. 17.
Such presence, or instrumency of the Saint supplicated to is not necessary for
such effect; but it is sufficient, if this be done by the more ordinary,
ministry of Angels: (And these, perhaps, sometimes representing the likeness of
such Saints,) or yet some other way, (...) God pleases. And therefore may such
appearances of a Saint be made, at the same time, in many places, without
affirming the Saints presence in all, or any, of them. This therefore in the
second place, I presume to be put out of dispute, that all those things, that
are necessary any way to render the Invocation of Saints glorified beneficial
to their clients, are possible: Possible, that they, or some other Instrument
of the Divine Mercy for them, may hear, or otherwise know, our prayers; and may
effect, or procure, the relief of our wants.

3. So that Thirdly. The only Question here is:. 322. n. 4.
Whether they, or some for them, actually do so: Because so generel a practice
may seem too rashly grounded upon a bare possbility. Now this latter Catholics
affirm, from the much experience, that the Church in all ages has had of such
their prayers, being frequently answered with supernatural, and miraculous
effects. And it will be hard for any Protestant to deny this, who will take the
pains to look into the Ecclesiastical Histories, or only to read over the 8th
Chapter of S. Austin's 22 Book de Civitate Dei, and Sermon. De Diversis, 31, 32.

In this Point then, the main Trial seems to be, concerning the pretended
experience whether not falsified? Which Falsification, that Protestant would
seem to have an hard forehead that would undertake to demonstrate, * against
what occurs in all former Church History, Ancient, Modern (and these so
uniform, and like one another, both in the Devotions used, and favors
received; no stranger relations in the latter, than the former; and these in
both many times witnessed beyond all exception) Or even * against those
particular relations only, fore mentioned, in S. Austin.

For the Third Point:. 323. n. 1.
Veneration of Images. 1. The use of these Images Protestants allow: Nor, these
to be removed for every abuse of, or scandal taken at, them (which Puritans do
at theirs) 2. For the Veneration of them; The Churches Councils have stated,
That no Latria or Divine Worship may be given to any Images: but only such an
inferior honor, and respect (and that too merely for the Exemplars sake) as to
other sacred utensils, and also to the name of Jesus (at the last of which,
when read, or heard, Protestants also bow.) The Council of Trent (dispatching
this Article concerning Images, as also some others, in some have, so to
conclude the Council before the much feared death of the Pope then dangerously
sick) refers us to the more full Declaration of the Second Council of Nice,
where this matter had beed much examined. Now the Definition (...) that Council
runs thus, -- Definimus venerandas, and S. Imagines dedicandas, and in Templis
Sanctis Dei collocandas, habendasque: Quo scilicet, per hanc imaginum pictarum
inspectionem, omnes, qui contemplantur, ad Prototyporum memoriam, and
recordationem, and desiderium, veniant [this for the lawful use of them.]
Illisque salutationem, and honorariam adorationem, exhibeant: Non secundum
fidem nostram [or, sicut fides nostra est] veram latriam; quae solum Divinae
naturae competit; sed, quemadmodum typo venerandae, and vivificantis Crucis,
and sanctis Evangeliis, and reliquis sacris, oblationibus suffitorum, and
luminarium, reverenter accedimus. [Which last was then the general practice, as
well of the Iconoclasts, as the Catholics, nor any Controversy in those days
concerning it,] Thus the Seventh General Council, whose whole business was the
stating of this Question. And see the comparing of the Honor given to Images
with that, to the Name of Jesus, in a Synod held at Mentz. A. D. 1549. since
the Reformation, c. 41, in the larger Acts of it. Apud Vasquez in 3. Thom.
Disp. 108. c 14.
-- Codicem oculis perlustrans, cum ad venerabile and tremendum nomen Jesu
devenerit, caput aperit, and suspiciens in coelum, oculos attollit: and ob id,
omni reprehensione and Idololatria suspicione caret; siquidem non literas, etc.
sic honorat; sed, cogitatione and veneratione mentis suae, ad eum honorandum [
i. e. latria] rapitur, cujus memoriam hae literae ei suggerunt. Cur ergo
superstitionis, aut Idololatriae reus peragitur, qui ante Imaginem crucifixi
Domini caput aperit, aut procumbens adorat, etc. And see Vasquez, who cites
this Synod, thus entitling his, c. 11. Disp. 108. in. 3. S. Thom. -- Eodem modo
atque Imagines, nomen Jesu, and alias res sacras (naming, Crucem, vasa sacra,
lib. Evangeliorum) esse adorandas. And see Suarez: Disput. 54.. 6. -- Card.
Lugo de Incarnatione. Disp. 36.. 6. saying the same. I have the rather
mentioned here the reverence given at the name of Jesus, because, though that
to the sacred utensils, and Holy Gospels is grown into desuetude among
Protestants, yet this other is still retained.

When therefore we speak of that Superior Honor [ latria,. 323. n. 2.
or Dulia] that is given, or due, to the Exemplar, I mean either the internal
honor of the soul, or also external of the body, for the latria, Divine worship
consists of both, and herein the external act receives its specification from
the internal; and not one, but both these, we equally give to our Lord, then
also, when we pray to him, not-before, or without, an Image; or, if you will,
when, in the middle of our prayers, an Image is presented before us: I say,
when this Superior Worship is spoken of, though here we uncover our Heads, we
kneel (...) and ^^brace it; yet is the Image neither objectum, nor Ratio
Adorationis, but only Adjunctum (as the Cardinal has it) De Imag. l. 2. c. 23.
-- Ipsa Imago nec est suppositum, quod adoratur, nec ratio adorationis, sed
quiddam Adjunctum, a Circumstantial, an Inductive, a Motive, thereof. For the
mental intention here wholly directs (as it can at pleasure) to the Prototype
these outward notes of Honor, some of which, (as kissing, or embracing) are
accidentally, and concomitantly, applied to the Image. Neither is such external
latrical worship conveyed to the person represented, either by, or through
the Image, as a medium to it: any way so to facilitate, or promote the
acceptance thereof, or ingratiate it with the Prototype: But the Image is a
mere circumstance of such Adoration, as time, and place are, and any creature
of God may be. Yet a circumstance very beneficial for reminding us of such
duty, as also for rendering this service more fixed and steady; or intense, and
devout. This for worship due to the Ptototype.

Next, as for the inferior relative Veneration exhibited to their Images:
Catholics do not here pretend, or affirm, any peculiar presence of our Lord or
his Saints, or any virtue either natural, or accessory and derivative, in any
such Image, for which it should be worshipped, or honored; or our requests to
have any more access, or efficacy by, or through, any such Image, upon the
Exemplar, or person represented; Or, again, the Exemplar any greater influence
by, or through, it, upon those, who supplicate him before it (these are Heathen
fancies derided by Christians); lastly, pretend no advantage in the use of such
Images, either to render our prayers, or worship more acceptable to our Lord,
or his Saints, or more effectual to us, save only, as the retaining of such a
grateful memory of our Lord, and his Saints, is conceived a thing well-pleasing
to them: And, as the frequent beholding also such representations may excite,
and increase our Devotion, Affection, Imitation, etc. and these again,
performed, obtain a greater reward.

Things standing thus on the Catholic side,. 323. n. 3.
as most certainly they do, I ask, what certainty, or demonstration can a
Protestant here produce of any other error, or fault in the Church; unless he
will dispute here against, some subtle expressions of some Schoolmen; or some
practice of rude people: The first of which he is neither tied by the Church to
justify; nor the second, to follow. In this po^nt, if any trial necessary, it
seems to be: Whether the present Church continue to teach, what the former has
defined? (For which see the late Council of Trent referring to that ancient
(...) of (...); and sufficiently expressed in a very eminent stating of this
point) Whether the practice of some ignorant people in the Church be so faulty,
as some would make it? And, if it be; whether the Church, teaching otherwise,
be chargable with it; or obliged to take away Images, for it? Lastly, if here a
fault in the Church; Whether a Subject of hers, obliged to nothing in this
matter unlawful, may, for such her fault, quarrel with her, and desert her
Communion?

For the Fourth; Communion in one kind. Here, since it is granted by
Protestants, See Confess. Wirtenberg. -- Chamier l. 9. c. 8. -- Confess.
Protest. in the Diet at Ausburg.
as also taken for Principle by Catholics Conc. Trid. Sess. 21 cap. 3 and Can.
3.
That Christ is wholly and entirely contained, and exhibited in either species
taken singly, and in every least Particle of either species; Christ's Body,
Blood, Soul, Deity, suffering no more separation since his Resurrection; (so
that none need fear the being deprived of our Lords precious Blood by receiving
only the Symbol of his Body) Since this, I say, is agreed on, The Question
only is; Whether there be any absolute Precept in Scripture commanding,
always, to all persons, the communicating in both kinds. Now Catholics think
this matter, that there is no such precept, sufficiently cleared by the
practice of Antiquity, and the purest times: Which on several occasions, gave
it in one kind only; and this, when there was no case of absolute necessity to
give it in one kind (but, then, always indeed some inconvenience in giving it
in; both which is still pretended, when the Church administers it in one.) Now
such practice could be in no times lawful, if there were a Divine Precept
absolutely, to all persons, enjoining the contrary.

But if such universal precept there be, Drink ye all of this, Matt. 26, 27. --
Or, Do this in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. -- Or, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, Jo. 6.53. which is
equivalent to this: Let all those eat my flesh, and drink my blood, that will
have life.] It seems most reasonable. 1. That such Precept be extended to all
Communions whatever, as well those private, or domestic, as, the public
(since in both possible to be observed) For there occurs nothing in our Lords
words distinguishing these Communions, one from another: or ordering a receipt
of the Cup, in the one, which shall be left at liberty in the other: And so by
such sense of Scripture, as we have said, the practice of Antiquity is
condemned. 2. That it be extended, as to the receiving in both kinds, so to the
receiving them apart, and to the drinking of the one, as the eating of the
other: For the Scripture is no more express for the receiving of the blood,
than it is, for receiving it separated by it self, and for drinking of it: By
which the practice of the Eastern Churches is condemned, who receive the
Symbol of Christ's Body only intinct in the Blood. 3. Especially, from that
text in c. 6. John 53. That this precept be extended to all persons for whom we
expect eternal life: and so to Infants. Therefore the communicating of them
also in both kinds, or one at least, was a custom used in Antiquity. Yet such a
necessity, by virtue of any Scripture-precept, Protestants together with
Catholics deny; and both desist from such a practice.

Act. 15.29. for abstaining from Blood, and things strangled. Luke 6.30. -- Of
him, that takes away your Goods, ask them not again, -- and; Give to every one
that asks, Matt. 6, 17. -- When you fast, wash your face, and anoint your
head. c. 5.34. -- Swear not at all, Matt. 23 9. -- Call no man your Father on
the earth; neither be ye called Masters [The Quakers Precepts.] Salute one
another with a kiss of charity, or an holy kiss, frequent in the Apostle, Rom
16.16. 1 Cor. 16 20. -- 2 Cor. 13.12. -- 1 Thessalonians. 5.26. -- I have given you an
example, that ye should do, as I have done to you, Jo. 13.14, [for the Clergies
washing feet before the Communion] -- Do this, unlimited, in St. Luke 22.19.
for any Christian whatever his breaking bread, or, consecrating, and
distributing the communion. -- If any be sick among you, let him call for the
Elders of the Church: and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the
name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up [not, that every sick person, that the Apostles prayed over,
should be cured:] and, if he be in sins they shall be forgiven him, James,
5.14, 15. urged as enjoining extreme unction.

strict and universal Precepts, yet in the understanding and practicing of all
these, save the last, Protestants conform to the judgment of former, and
present, Church. And in the last, though Catholics think themselves obliged to
receive it, as a Precept; and, accordingly practice; yet Protestants deny the
one; and forbear the other.

Lastly, some Protectants there be, and those of note, that deny any peremptory
precept, or command in Scripture, as in these, so in those urged for Communion
sub utraque species. -- * Vbi jubentur in Scripturis (says Bishop Montague
Origin. Eccl. p. 396.
) Infantes baptizari? aut, Caenam Domini, sub utraque specie communicantes,
participare? Sexcenta sunt ejusmodi, etc. -- de quibus possumus profiteri: Nil
tale docet scriptura. * Bishop White on the Sabbath p. 97. -- Genuine
Traditions derived from the Apostolical times are received, and honored by us:
Now such are these which follow. The historical Tradition concerning the
numbers, and dignity of the Books of Canonical Scripture: The Catholic
exposition of many sentences of holy Scripture [Which indeed unless received,
there will be no conviction or cure of Heresies, and Schisms:] Baptism of
Infants, observation of the Lords day: The service of the Church in a known
tongue [the tongues used by the Apostolical times for God's public Service,
the Church still continues, unchanged:] The delivering of the Holy Communion to
the people in both kinds [ i. e. for public communions: For as for private,
ancient Tradition many times practiced otherwise:] * Spalatens. de Rep. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 6. Dico, non esse adeo sub praecepto, ut Eucharistia and in cibo and
in potu semper a fidelibus sumatur, quin ex gravi, seu privata privatorum causa
possit, cum fructu and licite, etiam sub solo pane sumi, etc. And, indeed, in
the omnes added to Bibite. Matt. 26. it seems clear, that our Lord had no
particular intention, thereby to prescribe, what every Christian was
necessarily to practice; because the Manducate, as necessary as the Bibite, is
pronounced without an omnes: But, only to show, what he would have to be done
at that time by all the other Apostles, as well as by him, whom he first
delivered the Cup to. For whereas several portions of the bread were severally
given to every one of them: Yet the Cup was delivered only to one, from whom it
was to be handed successively to all the rest, and divided amongst them all.
Therefore St. Luke instead of omnes, has, Take this, and divide it among your
selves.

Trial seems to be: Whether Antiquity did, indeed, use such a practice, as, on
several occasions where inconveniences happened of giving it in both, to
communicate persons in one kind only. Which if found true, it would be too
great a temerity and boldness in a Protestant to allege certainly, or pretend
Demonstration of the sense of any Text of Scripture contrary to that, wherein
both the present and ancient Church has understood, and interpreted it.
Especially (as I said) when these they style Demonstrations do not convince
others, or, if, notwithstanding this, they be good and sufficient
Demonstrations, then must they be so too for m^^y other Texts named before, as
well as for these touching communion, to impose the same sense, and universal
preceptive force, on them: Yet, against which sense, Protestants are
necessitated to concur, in their judgment, with Catholics; nay proceed further
to deny some to be Precepts, which Catholics accept for such.

Controversies of consequence, what small Foundation. Protestants have to
pretend Certainty and Demonstration, against the former Church's Doctrine. To
which, in the last place, I may add, that such pretense of Certainty against
Church Authority suffers a great prejudice from that, which S. Austin has
observed; that it is a plea used by all Heretics, -- Hoc facium (says he
Enarrat in Psalm. 8.
) Haeretici universi, -- vetant credere [Ecclesia proponente] incognita; and
certam scientiam pollicentur. And he says, De utilitate Cred. c. 1.
that he was enticed by the Sect of the Manichees on this account, because they
promised. -- Se, terribili authoritate separata, mera and simplici rations [or,
as afterward, magna quadam praesumptione, and pollicitatione, rationum] cos,
qui se audire vellent, introducturos ad Deum, and erroreomni liberaturos: And,
-- Se nullum premere ad fidem, nisi prius discussa and enodata veritate. And
again, -- Ibid c. 9.
Eos Catholicam Ecclesiam eo maxim criminari, quod illis, qui ad eam veniunt,
praecipitur, ut cred^nt; se autem, non jugum credendi imponere, sed docendi
fontem aperire, gloriari. And therefore he says in his Retract. l. 1. c. 14.
That upon this he writ, against this presumption of their's, his Book, De
utilitate Credendi: Or, Of the benefit of ones believing Church Authority. This
from (. 318.) of the weak Grounds Protestants have of pretending Certainty
against Church Authority.

Church Authority delivers as certain, yet if this certainty be only of such a
Truth, from the knowledge of which arises no great benefit to Christians, or
to the Church: or at least, not so much benefit, as, weighed in the balance,
will preponderat this other benefit of conserving the Churches peace. Here
again these Demonstrators, Protestants also being Judges, are to yield to
Church Authority the obedience of silence, and non-contradiction: and are to
keep such Truth to themselves; and not to disturb the public peace, after any
thing defined to the contrary, by divulging it to others.

such obedience, thus Dr. Potter, -- It is true, when the Church has declared
her self in any matter of opinions, or of rites, her Declaration obliges all
her children to peace, and external obedience; nor is it fit or lawful for any
private man to oppose his judgment to the public. Where he says also, --
That, by his factiously opposing this his own judgment to the public, he may
become an Heretic in some degree, and in foro exteriori, though his opinion
were true; and much more, if it be false. After him Bishop Brambal, thus,
Schism guarded, p. 2.
-- That Church [and much more that person] which shall. not outwardly
acquiesce, after a legal Determination, and cease to disturb Christian unity,
though her judgment may be sound, her practice is schismatical. And, Vindic. of
Church of England, p. 27. -- When inferior Questions, (says he) not
fundamental, are ^nce defined by a lawful General Council, all Christians,
though they cannot assent in their judgments, are obliged to passive obedience,
to possess their souls in patience; and they, who shall oppose the Authority,
and disturb the peace of the Church, deserve to be punished as Heretics.
Doctor Fern, Division of Churches, p. 81. requiring conformity of Sectaries to
the Church of England, argues thus, If Sectaries shall say to us: You allow us
to use our reason and judgment in what you teach us: True, say we; for your
own satisfaction: not to abuse it against the Church. But we do not abuse it,
say, they: but have consulted our Guides, and used all means we can for
satisfaction, We tell them; You must bring evident Scripture, and
Demonstration, against public Authority of the Church: and [next] having
modestly propounded it, attend the judgment thereof. [But what if, after all,
this go against them.] To which, if you cannot assent inwardly, yet yield an
external peaceable subjection, so far as the matter questioned is capable of
it.] Thus he states the point.

Now, such an external peaceable subjection, and obedience (as has been often
said) if it were well observed, stops all Reformations as to these points, that
are found of less consequence; the Demonstrators Truth must die with him. Nor,
thus, will any Disciples be drawn from the Church, or their Pastors, to follow
Strangers.

peace and external unity is to be broken, rather than such a Truth strangled,
or lost; what less thing also can secure them for this, that it is a Truth of
much importance, than that, which secures them of their certainty, that it is a
Truth, namely a Demonstration hereof. Now, the Evidences Protestants have
brought either of the one, or the other; either, that such Church-Doctrines are
errors; or, if so, errors of great consequence, have been heard and considered
by Church Authority: And these, by it, neither thought errors intolerable, nor
errors at all, But, if Church Authority may not interpose here, and every one
may rely on his own particular Judgment, when truths, or errors, are of moment,
when not; who is there, when his thoughts are wholly taken up with a thing, and
he totus in illo, and perhaps, besides, troubled with an itch, that that
knowledge of his, which he esteems extraordinary, should be communicated, and
that se scire hoc sciat alter, will not thus induce himself to think the
smallest matters great? Lastly, concerning truths of much importance, let this
also be considered: Whether that, which is so much pretended by the Reformed,
that the Holy Scriptures are clear in all Divine Truths necessary, does not
strongly argue against them, that none of those things, wherein they gainsay
the Church, are matters much important, or necessary: Because all these
Scriptures, clear in necessaries, will surely be so to the Church, as well as
to them: As they grant, these Scriptures to be generally, as to all persons,
perspicuous, in all those common points of faith, that are not at all
controverted.

important and necessary: and that neither the obedience of assent, nor yet of
silence, or non-contradiction, ought to be yielded to Church Authority therein,
yet all this granted will not justify or secure any in their not yielding a
third obedience, merely passive, viz. a quiet submission to the Churches
censures, however deemed in such a particular case unjust: Whereby, if this
censure happen to be Excommunication, he is patiently to remain so (as who, in
such case injoyes still the internal communion of the Church, though he want
the external) till God provide for the vindication of Truth, and his Innocence:
But, by no means, to proceed further to set up or join himself to, an external
communion apart and separated from that of his Superiors; and, such a communion
as either refuses any conjunction with them, or at least is prohibited, and
excluded, by them; which must always be schismatical; as being that of a Part
differing from the Whole; or, of Inferiors divided from their Canonical
Superiors, by which now that Party begins to lose that internal Communion of
the Church also, which, when unjustly excommunicated, and acquiescing therein,
he still enjoyed. Of which persons, thus S. Austin, De vera Relig. c. 6.
-- Saepe sinit divina Providentia expelli de congregatione Chrstiana etiam
bonos vir^s; quam contumeliam vel injuriam suam cum paticu^^ssime pro eccl^siae
pace, tulerint, neque ullas novitates, vel schismatis [ i. e. segregationis
conventiculorum, as he explains it afterward] vel haeresis, moliti fuerint,
docebunt homines, quam vero affectu, and quanta sinceritate charitatis. Deo
serviendum sit. -- Hos coronat in occulto Pater, in occulto videns. And, ( De
Baptism. l. 1. c. 17.) of such persons he says, -- Ibi magis probantur, quum
si intus permaneant [only with this exception] Cum adversus ecclesiam
nullatenus eriguntur, sed in solida unitatis petra, fortissimae charitatis
robore, radicantur. Thus he in the defense of such.

unjust Excommunication should further warrant any to erect Anti-communions;
and then, a private person may also pass sentence of such injastice, against
the Church, who sees not, that this pulls down the whole structure of
Church Government, and fills it full of schisms; and is the same in the Church,
as this would be in the Civil State, if a Subject unjustly condemned to some
mulct, or imprisonment, should presently raise, and head an Army against the
Prince, and with it detain from him some part of his Dominions. No man is
authorized, by suffering injustice, to do it.

Schism. 1 If we are of those, that do not profess certainty of the contrary to
that which the Church teaches (as the most of Christans are such) here
Protestants See. 295
agree, that we owe the obedience of assent, and submission of judgment to the
supremest known Church Authority, that presides over us. 2 But next, suppose we
pretend certainty of a Truth against this Authority; yet, in case this truth be
not of much concernment, Here Protestants See. 331.
consent, that we are to yield the obedience of silence, and noncontradiction
to it: 3 But, if the Truth be of moment; and so supposed, that neither silence
may be used herein; yet are we still tied at least to yield a third sort of
obedience, a passive one to the Churches censures, even to that of
Excommunication, though supposed unjust, without erecting, or resorting to, any
Anti-Communion to that of our Superiors, and of the whole; i. e. the Communion
Catholic: 4 And then, whatever degree of obedience a Person, well considering
these things, shall judge due to be yielded to Church Authority in General, I
hope the former Discourse, by clearing the Legality of it, has justly
vindicated to the Council of Trent. 5 And this Council, once submitted to,
infers, as to all the principal modern Controversies, an universal Settlement
and Peace. Now the great Pastor and Bishop of Souls, in an accptable time, ^
Pet. 2.25.
bring home all those Sheep that are yet going astray, and hearken to the voice
of Strangers, into the happy Communion of all his Saints; That there may be one
Fould, and one Shepherd, unus Dominus, una Fides, unum Corpus. Jo. 10.16. Ephesians.
4, ^.5.
To Him Allpowerful, and Good, and the constant lover of his Spouse, the
Church, be given all Glory, and Praise, in the same his Church, forever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 19 dele] 9. 2. read formed 16. marg. r, Milevit. 28.40. r,
Catholic 41. r. National 36 marg. r.. 34. etc. 37 marg. r.. 37. 38 marg. r..
38. 39 marg. r. 40. 47 marg. r. 667. 79 marg. r, n. 102. ^6.23. r. [Trent]
128.3. r. would 136.20.1. obstructions, 137.6. r. fifth. 149.29. r. Politician
153.25. r. Olaus. 26. r. Vpsal. 160.23. r. which was established 171.26. r.
Hebraei 198.5. r. testimonialibus, decimam tantum unius aures. Ib. 8. r.
Emolumentum ex eisdem ordinum 200. marg. r. Agathens 216.13. r, so both a
220.40. r. To a^ 1 see 221. 6. r. To ^. 2. 164. 239.9. r. Rusticks, those p.
240. 33. r. Ceriuthus. 241.22. r. Caput] unum 242.31. dele if we are 245.40. r.
it is 246.31. r. to divine 246.19. t, schismatis 249.34.34. r. 1st. That 251.4.
r. Terentianum Maurum 257. marg. r- Bezam. 258.1. r. summi 259. marg. r.
guarded, Ib. marg. r. Answ. to 264.29 r. in the 164.41. r. iis me 265.23. r.
(...), instar nasi cerei 265.26. r. proferam 266.21. r. consultius 268. marg.
dele. 207, and,. 297. Ib. 19. dele Praestantium virorum Epistolae. 273.32. r.
(...) 281.40 r. Censurer. 283. marg. Forbearance. 284.42. r. them? As 287.26.
r. or Divine. l. 32. r. we kneel before, and embrace, kiss. etc. 288.32. r.
and, there, the Churches doctrine.
The Reader is desired to correct with his pen the Errata page, 128-287, line
32-and,-288.


