THE ROMAN DOCTRINE OF REPENTANCE AND OF INDULGENCES: VINDICATED From Dr.
Stillingfleet's Misrepresentations.

Council. Trident. Sess: 6. c. 14. Docendum est, Christiani hominis Paenitentiam
post lapsum multo aliam esse a Baptismali; eaque contineri non modo Cessationem
a Peccatis, and eorum detestationem, aut Cor contritum and humiliatum; verum
etiam eorundem Sacramentalem Confessionem saltem in voto and suo tempore
faciendam; and Sacerdotalem Absolutionem; Itemque Satisfactionem per Jejunia,
eleemosynas, Orationes, etc.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXII.

The Roman Doctrine of Repentance Vindicated.
Roman Devotions. The other matter of great consequence, wherein that Church
has suffered much wrong from Doctor Stilling fleet (as also before him, from
Bishop Tailor in his Disswasive,) is the Roman Doctrine concerning Repentance,
and a good life in these. 5. Particulars following, wherein this Author informs
his Credulous Reader, (according to what the General current of his discourse
represents), 1st, That the Roman Church holds no necessity of Repentance, but
only once in ones life; i. e. in articulo mortis; Romans Idolat. c. 3. 1. p. 181.
Ibid. page 180.
(as he expresses it out of Dr. Tailors Disswasive, an Author of the same
fidelity). 2ly. That the Roman Repentance or Contrition does not include, or
oblige any to, forsaking of their sin, or Reformation of life. 3ly. That it
holds the Sacraments to confer Grace ex opere operato on whatever subject,
Ibid.. 6. p. 203.
or receiver of them, though never so indisposed, or unprepared. 4ly. Of the
easiness for any in the Church, by this feat of the Sacrament of Penance,
Ibid.. 2. p. 184.
remitting sin, and conferring Grace ex opere operato, to change the Eternal
punishment of sin, (which is certainly remitted always together with the sin it
self) into a Temporal one; or to change Hell Torments into those of Purgatory;
and then of the easiness of getting out of these with a little Money or
Friends. 5. Lastly of the Roman Doctrine of Indulgences charged by him G. 6..
4, 9, 10.
with many gross Absurdities, and as excusing Roman Catholics from doing the
best parts of their Religion.

Luthers time, when there was none, besides, any better than it, was called in
our Creed, the Holy Catholic Church, and which is so spread over the face of
the Earth, and the Nations flowing into it. And who would think, that a Church,
that taught such doctrines, as he here presents to his Protestant Reader,
should keep such a do about Abstinences, fasting, and Penance, and Personal
Satisfactions, and the Justification by, and Merit of, Good Works? about long
Offices and many Hours of Prayer; about Poverty, Celibacy, Solitude, Silence,
Hair-cloath, Disciplines? which, if he says, they are not really performed,
yet, he must confess in this Church, at least they are taught, and called for;
Or, if he says, they are only vaingloriously, and hypocritically performed,
so, to speak truth, he must know hearts. Who would think, I say, a Church
should make such a noise about these things, of many of which among Protestants
is deep silence, (unless to revile them) when as, after this Author has cast
up a true account of it, this Church holds, and teaches Repentance only
necessary to any person once in his life; and that, not extending to any
reformation of it, or forsaking of his sin; nothing less; but only to some
sorrow for his sin, and that but a little sorrow, at one time, and that at the
hour of his death, sufficient? that the Sacraments freely confer Grace, and put
every one in the state of Salvation, come and take them who will; prepared, or
unprepared? only if he, that goes to them, confesses such his sins; and does
not resolve against receiving any benefit by them, -- Only (says he) c. 3..
6. p. 2.6.
that there be no mortal sin unconfessed, that there be no actual opposition in
the Will to the Sacrament; as for instance, if a man that goes to be baptized,
resolves with himself not to be baptized; [i. e. not to have the benefit of
Baptisme], And that thus every one is rid of Sin, and its Eternal punishment.
And then, for the Temporal that remains, the charges come to a very small
matter, and this punishment is redeemed too; and so away, straight to Heaven.
So that he says of Catholics -- That it is the hardest thing that may be,
Ibid. p. 212.
for any one to want grace among them, if they do but suffer the use of
Sacraments upon them; and that they are the gentlest givers of it imaginable;
for all they desire of their Patients for Grace, is only for them to lie still;
but if they should chance to be unruly, and kick away the Priests, or their
rites, I know not then (says he) what may become of them. And page 181. he
says -- That it is impossible to imagine a doctrine that more effectually
over-throws the necessity of a good life, than theirs does: [It seems the
Protestants Justification by Faith alone is nothing to it]. In all which I
think, in common prudence he ought to have showed a little more moderation, if
he intended to have gained belief even with his own party.

Now, out of Charity to those who may be deceived by him, I shall, without much
engagement, in the particular controversies, briefly show to the pious Reader,
that this Author, in none of these points forementioned, has dealt
faithfully, or truly related the Doctrine of the Roman Church; and I desire the
Readers faith to my words no further than the following Testimonies make it
appear.

Non-necessity of Repentance save at the Hour of Death. For the contrary
hereof, 1. Of Repentance not to be deferred.
First, It is clear out of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; that no person
that has the use of Reason, can enter into the state of Grace, or
Justification; can be capable of the benefit of any Sacrament, even that of
Baptism, much less of the rest, the Sacrament of Penance, of the Eucharist,
etc. without an Actual Repentance preceding. [See Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 6.
Where speaking of the preparation for obtaining Justification, it requires in
such person -- sidem, spem, Dilectionem dei, and, adversus peccata odium, and
detestationem, hoc est eam paenitentiam, quam ante Baptismum agi oportet; and
propositum inchoandi novam vitam, and servandi mandata; quoting the Text, Act.
2.28. Paenitentiam agite, and baptizetur unusquisque restrum in nomine Jesu
Christi, and Mat. 24.19. -- Baptizantes eos in nomine Patris, etc. and docentes
eos servare quaecunque mandavi vobis. Again, for the Sacrament of Penance,
after a relapse, the Council declares it to require yet a greater preparation
by Repentance than Baptism does. -- Ad quam novitatem vitae (says it Sess. 14.
c. 2.
) and integritatem, per Sacramentum Paenitentiae sine magnis nostris fletibus
and laboribus, Divina id exigente Justitia, pervenire nequaquam possumus.
Again, for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, here the worthy Receiver ought to be
already in the state of Grace; and all, guilty of any Mortal Sin, are required
to prepare themselves not only with Repentance, but the Sacrament of Penance,
Sess. 13. c. 7. -- Ecclesiastica autem consuetudo declarat, eam probationem
necessariam esse, ut nullus, sibi conscius mortalis peccati, quantumvis sibi
contritus videatur, absque premissa Sacramentali Confessione, ad Sacram
Eucharistiam accedere debeat. For the time also, the same Church requires of
all her Children, at Least once a year, Repentance and Confession of their
sins, in order to the holy Communion; though it is the practice of many to
receive it every Festival, or once a week; or at Least once in a fortnight. So
that those, who hold no necessity of Repentance, save at the hour of Death,
must also hold no necessity of Justification, of the Sacraments, of Faith,
Hope, Charity, or the Love of God, of being a member of Christ, or of the
Church, but in articulo mortis.]

Roman Church, concerning Repentance, consider what just cause this Author had
in disparagement thereof to say p. 182.
-- We dare not flatter men so [in teaching that Repentance only in articulo
mortis serves the turn] into eternal misery; we cannot but declare to them the
necessity of a sincere repentance and holy life in order to Salvation [as if
the Church of Rome declared no such thing] And -- we cannot absolve those, whom
God has declared he will not absolve, [i. e. the impenitent; but does he not
number among these men not to be absolved, the old sinner repenting on his
deathbed, whom the Popish Priest with his two fingers and a thumb ventures to
absolve? whom, he says, God has declared he will not absolve, if his words
here have any application to his former. He goes on] Indeed for the
satisfaction of truly penitent Sinners our Church approves of applying the
promises of pardon in Scripture, to the particular case of those persons; which
is that we mean by Absolution. Here (if I rightly understand him) this Author
supposes Absolution only useful for the satisfaction of the truly penitent; not
also necessary for the effectual Remission of their sin, if Mortal. And again,
in his describing it only, an Application of the promises of pardon in
Scripture, he seems to make Sacerdotal Absolution nothing differing in its
virtue or efficacy from a Laick's; for, surely, these may also apply such
Scriptures, as they see need, to the Penitents comfort. How his Superiors may
like of this, I know not.

mortal sins, by, or before God; and that, when ever such Absolution can be
had, and they, not out of an invincible but faulty ignorance hereof, do
neglect, or contemn it, they can have no just hopes, the Ordinance of God
standing as it does, of the Remission of any such Mortal sin, committed after
Baptism, by God himself. And for this, I refer any, who think this matter
worthy their further inquiry, not to the Fathers or Roma Doctors, but even to
Bishop Andrews in his Court-Sermon, and Comment on Jo. 20.23. -- Quorum
remiseritis peccata, etc. where concerning Sacerdotal Absolution its having a
just share in Remission of sin -- We are not (says he), pa. 58.
the Ordinance of God thus standing, to rend off one part of the Sentence:
There are here expressed, three Persons: 1 The Person of the Sinner in quorum;
2 of God, in remittuntur; 3. Of the Priest remiseritis. Three are expressed,
and where three are expressed, three are required; and where three are
required, two are not enough. It is St. Augustine that thus speaks of this
Ecclesiastical Act in his time -- Nemo sibi dicat, occulte ago paenitentiam,
Hom. 29. de 50.
apud deum ago. Novit deus qui mihi ignoscit, quia in cord ago. Ergo sine
causa dictum est, quae solveritis in terra, soluta erunt in Caelo: Ergo sine
causa Claves datae sunt Ecclesiae Dei; Frustramus Evangelium Dei, frustramus
verba Christi. Thus He. where also he takes notice, that the Ordination of
Priests (even those of the Church of England) is only by these words, Quorum
remiseritis peccata, page 57.
etc. -- Neither are they says he, that are ordained, or instituted to that
calling, ordained or instituted by any other words or verse, than this. Yet not
so, that absolutely without them, God cannot bestow it. [A thing also said by
Catholics.] But speaking of that which is proper and ordinary, in the course
by him established, this is an Ecclesiastical Act, committed, as the residue of
the Ministry of reconsiliation, to Ecclesiastical Persons. [I add: and so
properly and ordinarily, we to obtain remission i. e. of such Mortal sins, by
their Absolution, if we expect it from God's]. And accordingly the words of the
Absolution of Penitents run thus in the English Liturgy -- I, by the Authority
of Jesus Christ committed to me [i. e. in these words here, Quorum remiseritis
peccata] absolve thee, etc. And -- God ordinarily proceeds (says the Bishop)
in remitting sin by the Churches Act. Page 53.
And hence they have their parts in this work, and cannot be excluded; no more
in this, than in other acts and parts of their function. And to exclude them,
is (after a sort) to wring the Keys out of their hands, to whom Christ has
given them; is to cancel, and make void this clause of Remiseritis, as if it
were no part of the Sentence; To account of all this solemn sending and
aspiring [or breathing on them. Jo. 20.22.] as if it were an idle and fruitless
ceremony. Be this Sacerdotal Act, then, only declarative; be it applying the
Evangelical Promises, or what you will else; yet it is a special Authority
given to Christ's Ministers, so that ordinarily for Mortal sins, which sins
only, after Baptism, put us out of the state of Grace, it seems, without the
remiseritis of the Priest, there is no remittuntur by God; if we take the
Judgment, not only of the Roman Doctors, but of Bishop Andrews. To whom give me
leave to add the words of Mr. Thorndike on the same subject, that it may make
the more impression on some considering Protestant, when he sees the evidence
of such a truth to force a confession from the pens of such Persons contrary to
secular interest. He, at his Majesty's happy return, in his Just Weights chapter
18. p. 122.
making many proposals of the Reformation of the Reformation, mentions this
among the rest, the restoring the Power of the Keys, as to imposing Penances on
such, whose sins have voided the grace, or, effect of their Baptism (called by
Catholics Mortal Sins) that so by the Churches Ministry they may obtain a true
and valid remission thereof, -- It will appear (says he) a lamentable case, to
consider, how simple innocent Christians are led on till death, in an opinion,
that they want nothing requisite for the obtaining and assuring of the pardon
of their sins; when it is as manifest that they want the Keys of the Church,
as it is manifest, that the Keys of the Church are not in use for that purpose.
S. James ordains, that the Presbyters of every Church pray for the sick, with
a promise of pardon for their sins. This [promise] supposes them qualified, by
submitting their sins to the Keys of the Church, which the Presbyters do
manage. The promise belongs not to the Office of Presbyters upon other terms
[but by their submitting their sins to the Keys]. And after -- In the mean time
(says he) the Forgiveness of Sin, according to S. James, comes by the Keys of
the Church; Recovery of Health, from the Prayers of it. Again, in his Epilogue,
l. 3. chapter 8. p. 94. -- If this be said [i. e. that when the Churches Ministry
cannot be had, a desire thereof serves the turn, for pardon of such sin]. I
will allow (says he) that he, who refuses the Ministry of the Church (rendering
him a reasonable presumption of attaining reconcilement with God, by the means
of it, according to the just laws of Christianity) can have no cause to promise
himself pardon without it. Thus He. Though it is true, that he maintains the
Church has no power to forgive sins immediately, but only by the medicine of
Penance; and, that he supposes also some such cases, wherein the pardon of
Mortal sin may be obtained without the Keys, as differ from the Doctrine of
Catholics. Pardon this Digression, because I hope it may be useful. Now to go
on in the present matter.

Though it is generally true of these Precepts, (and so of this) that non
obligant ad semper; for so one ought continually to do nothing else but
practice such a particular command; and as much all, as any one; and so a man
must be said to be bound necessarily in the next instant after his sinning, to
exercise immediately an act of Repentance, or else to stand Guilty of incurring
a second Mortal sin; and these Mortal sins too to multiply, as the instants do,
wherein the act is longer deferred;) yet 1st. After sinning, a present
Obligation is maintained by Catholic writers of no further perseverance in, or
bearing any affection to, such sin; For this were sinning a new; all sinning is
at all times prohibited -- Loquimur (says Lugo D. Paenitentia disp. 7.. 11.
) de mer a dilatione Penitentiae, cessante omni continuatione pec^cati
praeteriti and omni affectione erga illud. Which if any one thinks hardly
possible to be observed, viz. to lay aside affection to sin, without an actual
disaffection to, and displicency of it; not to hate God, and as yet not to Love
him; this still the more hastens an act of Repentance? 2ly. The Act of
penitency is made by Catholic writers as necessary after sin, as the Precept
of Loving God is; and, if we will follow the most common opinion of them,
though they say, it is hard to prescribe to sinners positively a set time,
after which any longer delay of Repentance would be another Mortal sin; yet
negatively it is not hard to name it; viz. That Repentance is not for any long
time to be deferred; and then for the positive time, they first tell us; the
sooner, the better; and the safer; [ Consultissimum est (says P. Layman Moral.
Theol. l. 5. tr. 6. c. 2.
) statim post commissum peccatum ad paenitentiam confugere. And the Roman
Catechism De SaSacrampaenitent
is yet more pre^^^, -- Neque enim (says it) ad ullum temporis punctum, cum in
memoriam praeterita peccata redeunt, vel jam aliquid offendimus, contritione
animus debet vacare] this being the Key by which, after Mortal Sin, we can only
re-enter into such a condition, wherein we can have any title to Christ, or
Heaven; and then they remit every one, for this seasonable time, to the
dictate, and remorse of his own Conscience; or the directions of those whom he
acquaints with it. Of which matter thus Suarez De Paenitent. Disp. 15.. 6. n.
20.
Hanc obligationem [paenitendi, i. e. sub mortali peccato] magis explicamus per
modum praecepti negativi, non differendi conversionem ad Deum usque ad mortem;
vel diuturno tempore -- Ex hac autem obligatione negativa necessario infertur
affirmativa, al'quando excreendi hanc contritionem ante mortem. Illud vero
tempus, si non sit positiva lege praescriptum, prudenti arbitrio ipsius
hominis, vel alterius qui (ejus conscientia cognita) possit auxilium praestare,
committendum est, ut pensatis circumstantiis omnibus judicet, an incipiat nimia
esse dilatio, neque aliquam regulam certiorem, aut magis particularem assignare
possum, tam in hoc precepto, quam in aliis affirmativis; praesertim circa
actus, qui ad Deum ordinantur, sola ac nuda ratione naturali perspectis.
[though in relation to other things mentioned before (our Justification,
participation of the Sacraments, etc.) it is necessary, when ever they are.]
And the very same he says elsewhere of the act of the precept of Charity, or
of Loving God. De Charitate Disp. 5. 5.
Articulus temporis non tam affirmative, quam negative assignari potest; sicut
in praecepto restitutionis, dicitur obligare ad non multum differendum
restitutionem, licet non possit assignari primum instans restitutionis. So
Card. Lugo de Paenitentia. Disp. 7.. 11. n. 248. comparing that of Repentance
with the obligation of the precept of Loving God. And see Paul Laymann Theol.
Moral. 5. tract. 6. c. 2. n. 6. quoting S. Thomas, Caietan, and others, to the
same purpose.

Repentance as may be Salrificall; and that, if deferred till death, yet this
may be valid, [may; but I do not say, always, or often, is; nor yet the Roman
Doctors; who warn all to take heed of such a procrastination, and in this
matter cite that of St. Austin-Paenitentia, quae, ab infirmo petitur [ petitur,
i. e. of the Priest, to prescribe him penance] infirma est; quae autem a
moriente petitur, timeo, ne and ipsa moriatur. And again, De Tempore Sermon. 57.
Agens Paenitentiam ad ultimum and reconciliatus, si securus hinc exit, ego non
sum securus. And -- Nunquid dico, damnabitur? non dico. Sed dico etiam
liberabitur? Non. Et quid dicis mihi? Nescio; non praesumo; non promitto]. And
so, if we put the case, that one lives a wicked life for threescore or
four-score years, yet I suppose, will a Protestant Minister on his death bed
exhort such a one to Repentance, nor pronounce it fruitless; therefore neither
may they expect the Catholic should do this, when such a person, dying in that
Church, adds to his Repentance the Sacraments; Confession of his sins to the
Priest, the receiving his Absolution, the Holy Communion, and Extrem unction.

Author or Bishop Tailor, can produce some Testimonies out of other Catholic
Writers to this purpose; that Repentance, considered merely as an affirmative
praecept, and abstracted from all those necessary ends mentioned before, (in
respect of all which God conditionally requires it), it not obligatory, as in
case of necessity, under Mortal sin if deferred any longer, save only in
articulo mortis; Yet this seems far from ingenuous dealing, either from such
Testimonies to deduce in general these Authors affirming that God has
commanded no man to repent sooner than the Article of his death See Romans
Idolat. c. 3. p. 181.
; or, if such things were rightly deduced from these Authors, therefore to
accuse the Church of such a Doctrine: Since, where the Doctors of the Roman
Church are divided in their opinion, and her Councils are not found to have
stated any thing therein, here either none of these opinions may be charged on
the Church; or else, in Charity, that rather ought to be so, which to us seems
the more reasonable and true. Most of the Doctors of the Church in any Age are
not Writers; nor, of these Writers, the major part Schoolmen, or Casuists, or
applying themselves to their Subtilties. And so long as the Church, I mean in
her Councils, cannot be charged with a doctrine that seems to us malignant and
corrupt, it seems vain to tell men, such a doctrine is taught by several in the
Church, when as its Subjects have many other Teachers in the same Church, that
(with its allowance and Countenance) instruct them otherwise, and better. (For
Example: What Catholics are there, that do not receive from their Teachers
frequent Exhortations to a speedy repentance for their sins, and Reformation of
their lives: the chiefest Commonplace in Divinity? and amongst whom they do
not first lay this Foundation of Repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1
as the Apostle calls it?) But here especially those, who defend their
separation from the Communion of a Church by reason of its erroneous or corrupt
Doctrines, are not excused at all in their showing such Doctrines taught (by
some) in it; but only, if they make appear that these are taught by It; and the
belief of them also exacted from its subjects. For, where the Church has
determined no such corrupt Doctrine, we may still abide in this Church, and
believe otherwise: or, if we be of its Clergy, teach what is better. Much less
then, may we complain for such gross and corrupt doctrine taught by some, when
a greater number of others give us that, which is more pure and refined. And
this here said, sometimes these men, when it is for their Advantage, seem to be
sensible of: as this Author, speaking of the manner of the Sacraments
conferring Grace, ex opere operato, Although (says he c. 3. p. 109.
) Cassander produce some particular Testimonies against it of persons in that
Church, yet we must appeal for the sense of their Church to the decrees of the
Council of Trent. But this he said, when he conceived the Council to maintain a
grosser sense of Opus Operatum, than several of their Writers.

And from these Considerations, I conceive may be returned a reasonable answer
to Bishop Tailors defense made in his disswasive chap. 2. Sect. 1.
for his charging (as he does very frequently) that, which he calls (though
indeed it is not, in that manner as he relates it, without their limitations) a
Common opinion of the Roman Doctors, or Casuists, upon the Roman Church. He
there says for his defense of charging the Opinions of the Schoolmen upon the
Church -- That, if by the Doctrine of the Roman Church we mean such things only
as are decreed in their Councils, it is to be considered, that but few things
are determined in their Councils: [Here for his purpose, he says few things,
but elsewhere the multitude of them is exclaimed against by himself, and
others]: But, if few; hence it follows; that few are required of him, for
enjoying the communion of that Church, to be asserted or believed: But not;
that therefore a Common opinion of Casuists is to be adopted, or pronounced by
him a Doctrine of the Church, lest her Doctrines should be few. Again he says
That, if they [the Roman Doctors] will not be reproved for any thing but what
we prove to be false in the Articles of their simple belief, they take a
Liberty to say, and to do what they list, and to corrupt all the world by their
Rules of Conscience. I Answer. That That so many of these Doctors, as he can
prove to err in any thing, he may also take as much liberty to reprove: but
not, reprove or defame the Roman Church, or dissuade her Communion for that
error, which she does not own. Lastly, He says, That their own men tell us, it
is the Doctrine of the Church, when they say Communis omnium. It is the
doctrine of all their men. I Answer. Communis omnium is only opinio or
sententia; and that in such things wherein he cannot deny the Church to have
left to all their Liberty to think so, or the contrary. But when these men
would say it is the Doctrine of the Church, he cannot but know their comcom
expression, not communis omnium, but that such point is De side, from which
none may dissent. Again, this their Opinio omnium must admit many limitations.
First, Of such Schoolmen, or Casuists as have writ of such a Question: and
this extended only to those of such time as the Author writ in, not the
present; (when perhaps such opinion, better considered, may be changed).
Secondly, Of so many of them as he has seen; and, as such person apprehends
their sense, in which perhaps too much addiction to his own opinion may cause a
mistake. And, in this particular point concerning Repentance, what ever
Reginaldus and Navarr say (though they say it only with limitations omitted by
Doctor Tailor,) yet that it is not Sententia Communis Omnium is clearly showed
before. I say therefore, this Injustice of some late Protestant Writers in
loading all the supposed Common Opinions of Schoolmen, or Casuists upon the
back of the Church, if well considered, might save them, for the future much
labor in raking into particular Authors, and picking out some odious
sentences, when their design is not the dissuading men from the reading or
crediting such Roman Authors in all that they say, for which such search were
pertinent; but, from the Communion of the Roman Church, as to which it
signifies nothing.

Roman Repentance or Contrition, that it does not include, 2. Of Reformation of
life necessary to Repentance.
or oblige any to, a forsaking of their sins, or a Reformation of life: The
contrary to this is evident and obvious in the Council of Trent, See Session.
4. c. 4. -- Declarat S. Synodus, Contritionem non solum cessationem a peccato,
and vitae novae propositum and inchoationem [i. e. from the beginning of the
Contrition], sed veteris etiam odium continere. And Sess. 6. c. 14. -- Docendum
est in Paenitentia contineri non modo cessationem a peccatis [or a new life; so
far it goes along with Protestants]; verum etiam Sacramentalem Confessionem,
saltem in voto, and suo tempore faciendam; and Sacerdotalem Absolutionem;
itemque Satisfactionem per Jejunia, etc. Thus much it goes beyond Protestants,
and requires more in a sincere Repentance, and a return into the grace and
favor of God, than they do. Again, Sess. 14. can. 13. -- Si quis dixerit
optimam paenitentiam esse tantum novam vitam [as some Protestants are there
supposed to say, and Catholics say so with them, excepting the tantum] Et pro
peccatis quoad paenam temporalem minime. Deo per Christi merita satisfieri
paenis ab eo inflictis, and patienter toleratis, vel a Sacerdote injunctis, vel
sponte susceptis; ut jejuniis, orationibus, etc. Anathema sit. Here also as it
says nova vita with the Protestants; so, in the rest, it presents to God
something beyond them. Again Sess. 14. c. 8. speaking of the Penitents
satisfaction -- Habeant autem (says it) Sacerdotes prae oculis, ut
satisfactio, quam imponunt, non sit tantum ad novae vitae custodiam [or as
before, ut vitiosi habitus male vivendo comparati contrariis virtutum
actionibus tollantur] sed etiam ad praeteritorum peccatorum vindictam and
castigationem. Here are satisfactions or Penances required by the Church, for
preserving of the Penitents nova vita; which perhaps Protestants will allow;
but exacted further ad praeteritorum peccatorum vindictam too; This Protestants
do not press. See Sess. 14. c. 4. in the Definition of Contrition one clause to
be Propositum non peccandi de caetero; in which also is included, and pressed
by Confessors a resolution to avoid and remove, for the future, the former
usual nearest occasions of sinning: Again see in the Description afterward Ibid.
of Attrition this to be one clause -- Voluntas non peccandi [a Velleitas being
not sufficient]. And see before. c. 2. Novitas vitae made the end of all the
Labors of Repentance. Ad quam tamen novitatem and integritatem per Sacramentus
Paenitentia, sine magnis nostris fletibus and laboribus, Divina id exigente
justitia, pervenire nequaquam possumus. So Sess. 6. c. 6. One of the
Dispositions for obtaining Justification is said to be Repentance, and in it
expressly -- propositum inchoandi novam vitam, and servandi mandata: And, when
Justification is so attained, -- Nemo, (says the Council) quantumvis
justificatus, liberum se esse ab observatione mandatorum putare debet. And
afterward Nemo sibi in sola fide, [you know against whom this was levelled]
blandiri debet, putans fide sola se haeredem esse constitutum: urging that of
St. Peter-Saetagite, ut per bona opera certam vestram vocationem and electionem
faciatis. bona opera here, it is strange to see, of what contrary errors and
seducements the Roman Church is impeached by her Adversaries. Heretofore her
Religion was decried, for that Catholics held Justification by, and trusted
for Salvation in, the merit of their good works: that they did them indeed,
this was not denied; but did them with a saulty intention, and for a wrong end.
And two of Bellarmin's five Books of Justification are written against
Protestants in defense of the necessity, and of the merit, of good Works; and
the Possibility of the observing Gods Commands, as to a cessation from all
Mortal sin: But now they are assaulted on the other side; and now Catholics
are discovered to hold no Necessity of Good Works, of a New life, or forsaking
of sin: Now, for Salvation with them it serves the turn, only to procure a Sigh
or two, a very little sorrow for our sin past, confess, be absolved, sin on,
and so to Heaven. Again, it was the accusation of Protestants heretofore, See
Calv. Institut. 3. l. 4. c.. 2. Chemnit. Exam. conc. Trident. De Paenitent. c.
4.
(in their magnifying of justifying Faith) that the rigidness of the Roman
Contrition drove men to despair, and left their Consciences very unsettled,
and tortured, in not knowing the just measure or quantity of it necessary for
the remission of their sin; And Bellarmin spends two Chapters ( De Paenitent,
l. 2. cap. 10, 11.) to free the Roman Church of this Charge; And now a
complaint is brought against the Littleness and easiness of the Roman
Contrition. How shall it please them?

Trent, in order to receiving the Sacrament of Penances -- Animi dolor and
detestatio propeccato commisso, cum proposito non peccandi de caetero; which
purpose is supposed also to include an actual cessation from Sin before
Absolution and the Sacrament, for that distance of time between our exercising
this Contrition, and our receiving of the Sacrament; ( Cessatio a peccato,
novae vitae propositum, and inchoatio, says the Council); what more would
these men have? The Continuation of an actual new life? This is that which is
to follow the effect of the Sacraments, the infusion of Sanctifying Grace, our
Justification, our new Birth, and Regeneration, by them. When Repentance is
required by Protestants to the Baptism of the Adulti, does it include an
actual good life to precede such Baptism? See Dr. Hammonds description of this
Repentance, in his Practical Catechism, c. 6.. 2. p. 311. -- The resolving to
forsake sin and live Godly, is supposed before Baptism, to make the person
capable of it. On the other side, the actual forsaking of sin, is the
consequent task of him that makes a right use of the Grace of Baptism for his
whole life after. Thus He. And p. 313. The forsaking of the heart [which he
calls a little before a general Cordial removing of sin] is here meant by
Repentance [i. e. before Baptism]; and the forsaking in the actions, is that to
which the strength is made over [to us] in Baptism. So he says 1. l. 3.. p.
56. -- That sorrow for displeasing of God, and a real sincere resolution to
amend and forsake sin, have the promise of Mercy belonging to them. And indeed,
if an actual good life be necessarily required before the Sacraments, before
remission of sin, or Justification, for what certain term is it so, before
these may be administered or obtained? and is not perseverance also in such a
good life necessary, (for, any relapse undoes all)? and then, none are to
receive the Sacrament, nor can obtain remission of sin, or Justification, but
upon perseverance first; i.e. but in the hour of their Death. But if this
Author speaks not of the Act of Repentance, requisite to the Sacraments, or
Justification; but of that which Dr. Hammond calls the State of Repentance, or
of Regeneration Ib. l. 1 l.. 3. p. 54
there is nothing more known than this Doctrine of the Roman Church; That there
must be not only a purpose, but actual cessation from all mortal sin so long,
as there is any continuance of the Person in such a state.

sorrow for, and detestation of sin, and the Living an actual New life, the
Doctrine of the two Churches; to see which carries more rigor and severity in
it. The Protestant Clergy exhort a Person, relapsed after Baptism into a
vicious life, for the regaining of Gods favor and pardon of his sin, and for
obtaining of Salvation, to a due sorrow for, and detestation of his sin, and a
strict reformation of his life for the time to come: (For, a Sacrament for any
fallen after Baptism, by which they may be restored to the state of Grace, they
acknowledge none). Next: If a Penitent happen, after such sorrow for his sin,
and a new life led for some time (or at least seriously purposed, or promised)
happen, I say, to return to his former, or perhaps a more, vicious course, they
forsake him not, here; but first they either tell him, that his former faith,
repentance, and good Life, obtained not at all for him any remission of his
sin, or Justification, for lack of Perseverance (wherein they must hold that
none fallen from Baptismal Grace have remission of sin, or Justification, till
the hour of their death); and so, that Person remains still accountable to God
for his former sins before his last relapse: Or they tell him; that such former
remission, and Justification, and Gods Mercy thus despised, do so much the more
aggravate this his second fall; and make his present condition worse than his
former was, before any Reconciliation. Next, they anew refer him to repentance,
and to an actual new life again, for his cure, and the making his peace;
because Gods mercies cannot be bounded by them: and this they still prescribe
to him in all his relapses, toties quoties: though aggravating much such his
falls to him, and forewarning him, that Repentance is not to be had, at any
time, without Gods Grace; and that, after so many affronts of Gods mercy, may
justly be feared his absolute denial thereof. And, when such a relapsing sinner
at last lies on his deathbed, they still exhort him to Repentance; which they
do not deny may be effectual upon a sincere purpose, though without an actual
performance, of a good life, where death prevents it. And, the the sick Man
professing such a repentance and sorrow for his sins past, as seems to them
true and sincere, and upon this, desiring Absolution of them, they give it him:
i. e. (as this Author will have it) Romans Idol. p. 183.
-- For his satisfaction they apply to his particular case the promises of
pardon in the Scripture. -- I said, seems to them true: for, as Doctor Hammond
Catech. p. 56. 1. l. 3..
-- Though sorrow for displeasing God, and from thence a real sincere
resolution to amend and forsake sin, have a promise of mercy belonging to them:
Yet no man can certainly judge [whether his repentance be such], neither
Confessor, nor Penitent himself, For 1. the man himself may through self-love
take that for Godly sorrow and resolution of amendment which is truly sorrow
for his own danger, etc. And 2. the sensitive expression being often as great
for the one sorrow, as the other, the Confessor may easily mistake likewise.
Thus Doctor Hammond. Yet such Patient, they say, the Confessor may absolve, in
hope of the truth of his repentance.

Protestant Clergy deal with Sinners. Consider we now the Roman Catholic way.
Here the Ecclesiastical Governors require of one fallen from his Baptismal
Grace by Mortal Sin in the first place Repentance; i. e. not only an hearty
sorrow for offending God; but also a firm resolution of a new life; but then,
exact also besides this, I say, for such Mortal sin, (which only, and not
Venial sins, as those called by Dr. Hammond Pract. Catech. l. 1.. 3. P. 60.
-- Sins of Infirmity, ignorance, or sudden surreption, acted in matters of
little moment, reconcilable with a regenerate estate, do exclude from Gods
Grace, and are the necessary matter requiring such a remedy) the repairing to
the Power of the Keys, left by our departed Lord to his Successors, which
relief God has provided in case of such relapses; (of which I suppose the
Reader has not forgot what was recited but now. 5.
out of St. Austin, and out of Bishop Andrews too, and Mr. Thorndike,) and to
the Sacrament of Penance or Repentance, Confession, Absolution, and
Satisfaction: In which it is sufficient, that the Confessor, upon probable
grounds of the true Repentance of his Penitent, pronounces Absolution,
because, (as Dr. Hammond conceded but now) neither he, nor his Penitent, can be
absolutely certain thereof.

so long as he is defective in a due Repentance. And, that of such a due
repentance (Contrition, or Attrition) none can be utterly certain: for so might
he be certain of his being in the state of Grace, since the efficacy of the
Sacrament non ponenti obicem is no way questionable: And as Bellarmin says De
Justis. l. 3. c. 2.
Nemo Catholicorum erit, qui non respondeat, posse hominem certo statuere sibi
remissa esse peccata, si constet eum seriam egisse, vel agere, paenitentiam.
[But says he Ib. c. 8.
-- Hanc propositionem [Mihi evidens est mea vera Conversio and Paenitentia]
dico non modo falsam esse, etc. -- And -- Neque potest quis certus esse
certitudine fidei se non ponere obicem; cum possit ex ignorantia gerere
affectum ad peccatum [and so have a defect in his Contrition or Attrition]
Quoting Ibid c. 7.
St. Austin Homil. 35.
Quamdiu vivimus hic, de nobis ipsis nos ipsi judicare non possumus, non dico
quid cras erimus, sed quid hodie simus. And Innocent. 3. -- Neminem scire
posse, an, ut oportet, egerit paenitentiam. And that is it, that keeps all more
prudent Catholics, formerly guilty of great and Mortal sin, in a perpetual
exercise of Mortification.]

Sin it self, and the Eternal punishment thereof (the pardon of both which go
still together, and necessarily depends on a right Contrition) is not remitted,
there neither can be any (nor to any purpose) cancelling of the Temporal. 1.
That therefore this is one end of Penances and Mortifications, whether
voluntary, or enjoined, and that in the first place, that, if our former sorrow
for sin were any way defective, and falling short of true or sufficient
Contrition or Attrition, these may conduce and help to the perfecting of it,
and rendering it such as is acceptable to the Divine Majesty: in which
Contrition, and so pardon of sin, and freedom from Hell, lies our chief
Concernment. To which end, also, such Penances were anciently given before
Absolution pronounced; but are to the same end still as effectual, when
performed after it, in case, I say, that such repentance be still deficient.

[Of these Penances, in order to advancing our sorrow for sin into a true and
acceptable Contrition, and so by it procuring remission of the guilt of sin,
and the eternal punishment, thus Bellarmin. De Panitent. l. 4. c. 12.
-- Opera laboriosa, quae cum Dei auxilio fiunt a paenitentibus sive ex
congruo, sive ut dispositiones, concurrere, and prodesse ad culpae remissionem,
and mortis aeternae liberationem, Scripturae and Patres perspicue docent:
Citing that passage of Tertullian De Panitentiae.
-- Si de cruciatu Exomologesis retractatis, Gehennae recordemini, quam vobis
Exomologesis extinguit. And thus he speaks De Indulg. l. 2. c. 18.
in his answer to Chemnitius, who with other Lutherans and Reformists contends,
that Penances were anciently imposed not for any satisfaction before God and
the redeeming and expiation of sins, but only for the preserving of
Ecclesiastical dicipline and scandal given to the Church. -- Cum ipse cum
Lutheranis caeteris contendat paenitentias veterum disciplinae causa, non autem
satisfactionis coram Deo, and redemptionis, and expiationis peccatorum
institutas, tamen fatetar se hoc etiam post remum apud Patres non raro legisse
[of which see much in Morinus de Paenitent l. 3. c. 11. and 12] After which he
adds -- sed profecto justius erat, novos Lutheranorum errores ex doctrina
veterum Patrum corrigere, quam ex novis illis erroribus de Patrum doctrina and
Sententiis judicare. So De Paenitent. l. 4. c. 12. -- Concurrunt and prosunt
(says he) nostra opera paenalia ad culpae remissionem and mortis aeternae
liberationem ut dispositiones, sicut actus sidei, etc. And see him elsewhere
De Indulgent. l. 1. c. 12.
recommending the practice of voluntary Penances for* perfecting of their
Repentance to those, who desire the benefit of an Indulgence, -- Fieri enim
potest (says he) ut aliquando Indulgentia non sortiatur effectum, ob defectum
ejus, qui illam suscipit, etc. [i. e. defect of Contrition, without which the
Indulgence, how large soever, nothing profits any.] And, for this reason, to
obtain the benefit of an Indulgence, are Penances also by the Confessor
imposed. And thus Estius 4 Sent. Did. 15.. 10.
-- Satisfactio Christi per se sufficientissima ad tollendam omnem paenam: sed
Divinitus sic ordinatum, ut illa nobis non applicetur ne quidem ad solutionem
paenae aeternae, nisi and ipsi per opera quaedam paenalia Christo compatianiur,
And -- Sunt (says he) Conditiones quaedam paenales ex part nostra requisitae
ad hoc, ut passio and mors Christi, tanquam plenissima satisfactio, nobis ad
tollendum reatum paenae aeternae appl'cetur. And of the Fathers he says Ib..
13.
the same as Bellarmin -- Probant manifestius ca loca, quibus satisfactiones
paenitentium iidem Patres extend^m, and valere dicunt, ad remissionem paenae
aeternae. [And indeed, till this secured by a sound Contrition, all
Satisfactions for the temporal nothing bestead us]. See also Ibid.. 14. where
he cites those words of the Apostle 2 Cor. 7.
-- Quae secundum Deum tristitia est paenitentiam in salutem stabilem operatur.
And the Council of Trent, in forbidding to the Priests the imposition of slight
Penances for greater crimes, lest so they be partakers of others sins, seems
also to intimate, that where only slight Penances are performed, there many
times happens to be a defective Contrition for the sins, and so they not
remitted, or at least an easy relapse into those sins that are remitted. See
more of this matter below. 58.]

They tell him therefore, that, when this seeming Contrition, if not so at
first, becomes afterward by the help of such mortifications true and sincere,
D. Tho. Supplem q. 9. Art. 1. Suarez De Panit. Disp. 20.. 5.
and such as God accepts, then only it is, and not before, that the Sacrament
of Penance confers its proper effect, remission of sin, reconciliation to God,
and infusion of Grace.

Per modum medicinae, and in novae vitae custodiam (as the Council of Trent)
for curing him of his former diseases and vicious habits, and preventing sin
for the future; for mortifying the Body, its Passions and Lusts, and weaning
him from such things, 1 Cor. 9.17.
the affection to which betrayed him formerly to sin. Which cure, and
prevention of mortal sin for the future, and so of our incurring anew the
Eternal punishment thereof (without which prevention all satisfaction for sin
past is but as it were a lost labor, and nothing worth to us, as to our
Salvation) is also a special end and design of Penances. For (as Suarez. De
Poenitent Disp. 38.. 4.
observes) -- In hoc Sacramento magis intenditur salus Paenitentis [i. e. from
Eternal punishment] and ejus emendatio, quam satisfactio pro paena [temporali]
Quocirca illud praecipue debet attendere Confessor ut satisfactionem imponat
accomodatam curationi and praeservationi a peccatis; in quo oportet ut
integritatem, and severitatem habeat: quod si in hac part sufficienter
peccatori provideat, quamvis in castigatione [i. e. in order to satisfaction
pro paena temporali] remissius agat, nunquam graviter errabit. Indeed according
to the present complexion of Christianity, when the whole world is crowded into
the Church, and great sins are grown more universal and common, and as they
become more common, so also appear (though they are not) much lesser; and a too
facile commutation also of Penance has much relaxed the Churches ancient
discipline; and Absolution likewise for great Crimes done most-what anciently,
only upon some considerable necessity, has been more usually joined with
Confession, the infirmity, shall I call it? or hardness of most penitents
relucts now to undergo so great and laborious Penances as may bear a just
proportion to their faults; (i e. as to removing the total punishment temporal
thereof, in this world or the next): and so, if they should think themselves
overcharged with too heavy Penances, perhaps they would do none at all, but
neglect and withdraw themselves rather from the Sacraments, and so lose the
benefit of Penances also, as they are prescribed them for the cure of sin; and
thus, whilst the Confessor endeavors, by the proportionable Penances he
prescribes, their release from all temporal pains, they, disgusted with it, and
so performing no penances at all, would continue in their former Vicious
habits, and so incur the Eternal; In this respect therefore, considering the
modern indisposition of many Penitents, some relaxation of such satisfactory
penances may be necessary, where Purgatory is the worst of it; and where, with,
or without, such penances, Salvation is secure; But for Penances in order to
preventing relapses into sin, and as they conduce to the effecting a true
Reformation of Life, here a convenient severity is always necessary, and is by
all discreet Confessors observed. The effect of which ( viz. a Sinners
amendment of life, and so leaving off sin, and exemption from eternal
sufferings) is incomparably of an higher consequence, than is the freedom, in
such state, from all temporal Purgations.

per modum satisfactionis; for Castigation and taking revenge on himself-for
former Sin; 2 Cor. 7 11 1 Cor. 11.31, 32
and, by this (I mean, from the application of Christ's all sufficient
satisfactions procured thereby) preventing Gods temporal Judgments, and
punishment thereof; such, as are removable; for, some punishments of sin (as
death) are not so: Of which see more below. 65.

And here also he is taught, that the more Penance, and the more devoutly
performed by him, takes off the more of such future temporal punishments; and
that, if the Priest imposes small punishment for great faults (when perhaps he
aims more at the cure of the Penitents sinning for the future, than the
expiation of the punishment of the past) that he is not therefore to think
himself quitted of all the debt he owes to God, at so easy a rate; and that no
whit lesser or smaller fruits worthy of Repentance are required by God in the
present, than in any past ages: (therefore also are the Clergy charged by the
Council of Trent Sess. 14. c. 8.
-- Convenientes satisfactiones injungere, and not levissima quaedam opera pro
gravissimis delictis) and that therefore such Penitent, when, perhaps out of
respect to his frailness and indisposition, small penances are imposed for
great saults, stands still engaged, if he would avoid the remainder of such
punishments, to a further performance of such penal works, as he knows bear
some nearer proportion to the weight of his former sins. And -- Quando
Confessor leviorem multo paenitentiam imponit propter fragilitatem paenitentis,
quam peccata ejus mereantur, debet illum admonere (says Suarez, Ibid.) illam
non esse sufficientem paenam; sed propter ejus indispositionem cum illo
benignius agi; ne forte ex levitate paenae occasionem sumat peccandi; and ut
fortasse moveatur ad alias voluntarias satisfactiones assumendas. And Bellarmin
De Indulg. l. 1. c. 8. -- Vt plurimum long plus est, quod explandum restat per
non injunctas paenitentias, quam quod expiatur per injuntas. And c. 7.. Ex his
-- Immo: Sacerdotes cum paenitentias imponunt, hortantur paenitentes, ut ipsi
etiam sponte assumant alias, cum credibile sit impositas non esse aequales
criminibus. So Estius 4. Sent. did. 15.. 41. -- Si Sacerdos officio suo
defuerit [injungendo opera leviae pro delictis gravibus] vel etiam just a
quadam ratione adductus minorem quam pro exigentia delicti satisfactionem
injunxerit, omnino videtur paenitens, qui eum defectum vel scit, vel scire
debet, teneri ad satisfactionem aliquam ultra assumendam; idque donec tota
satisfactio perveniat ad quandam aequalitaetem cum paena temporali pro peccatis
debita; cujus ratio est, quia quamdiu nondum fecit fructus dignos paenitentiae,
nondum satisfecit divino praecepto. Matt. 3.8. And then if another
Consideration be added to this, that a less penance enjoined by the Spiritual
Judge is (by virtue of the Keys) as much, or more effective, than a greater,
that is Spontaneous and arbitrary, which also wants the merit of our Obedience;
(all obedience being a kind of Mortification): I say, if this Consideration be
added, the imposing of light penances, where are great sins, though it may be
to many penitents very acceptable, yet is to them no small damage; and did
they well consider their own interest, they would seriously request greater.

Sacrament received, and the supposed effect of it, Justification, and
remission of his former sins; this Penitent is further instructed, that there
is necessary an actual good life, which was before purposed and resolved, and
an actual cessation from all Mortal sin: And that, upon relapse into such sin,
and his former wicked courses, this state of Grace is lost; and he reduced, not
into as bad, but much worse condion, than that before his Repentance, and
Absolution, by reason, of the Grace of God so affronted and despised, and as it
were by force ejected; of his great ingratitude to so great mercy; of his
sinning now, when by such grace received, he might much more easily have
avoided it; of the breaking his penitential resolutions; lastly, by reason of
the great difficulty, from God's Grace now justly more withdrawn, of renewing
again his Repentance. So that, though, toties quoties by the same means
repeated, he may possibly rise again from such a fall; (as also says the
Protestant too); Yet, since this rising cannot be without the help of Grace,
even for the first step of it, Repentance, it is justly to be feared, lest
this, before despised, be afterward denied.

and rendered more probable: Especially upon their discovery in any person such
ill symptoms as these; 1. That he has sinned as frequently after his former
Confession, as before it: 2. Has neglected to use the means for avoiding such
sin prescribed him in Confession: Has not removed or remedied the former
occasions, or temptations to sin, to which he has been advised, or also has
engaged himself: Or, 3. That the sin is of very general practice, from which
men are more difficultly weaned. The Sacrament, I say, on such a one not to be
hastily conferred, till some actual reformation for a certain time be
practiced, and some penances used in order to the begetting a sound Contrition,
and former bad habits appear some way corrected, and near occasions of sinning
removed. -- Vt possit de illius dispositione and proposito vitandi peccata
moraliter constare, says Suarez. Which cautions of not admitting habitual and
often relapsing sinners (i. e. as to Mortal sins) toties quoties to the
Sacraments occurr frequently in the Roman Casuists and Schoolmen. See Suarez De
Paenitent. Disp. 38.. 7. n. 7. Layman moral. Theol. l. 5. tract. 6. c 4. n. 10.
And see the many Authorities to this purpose diligently collected by Monsieur
Arnaud in his Book, De la frequente Communion, part. 2. c. 45. and
particularly, the instructions to Confessors of St. Carlo Borromeo, not long
after the Council of Trent, Ibid. c. 36. and 38. The Council of Trent also in
requiring Confessors not to impose slight Penances for great Crimes, ne
alienorum peccatorum participes efficiantur, Seems much more to enjoin the
non-admittance of a slight profession of Repentance, or amendment of life for
great and inveterate Sinners, in order to conferring on them the Sacraments; in
as much as a defect in their Repentance or Contrition is much more dangerous,
than a defect in their satisfaction; the non-remission of the sin it self, and
its eternal punishment, following the one; the non-remission of some temporal
suffering only, the other.

Repentance, and (where life continued) an actual Reformation; but the latter
exacting much more also, besides these, and laying many other yoaks upon
Sinners (as to the Sacrament of Penance) which Protestants are not willing to
bear; consider, what just cause this Author had, in disparagement of its Laws
and Discipline, to speak on this manner. p. 181.
-- To what end should a man [living in the Church of Rome] put himself to the
trouble of mortifying his passions, and forsaking his sins; if he commits them
again, he knows a present remedy, toties quoties; it is but confessing with
sorrow, and upon Absolution he is as whole as if he had not sinned. Again, p.
182.
-- We cannot but declare to Sinners the necessity of a sincere Repentance and
holy life, in order to Salvation. Again, p. 180.
-- We believe, that as no man can be saved without true Repentance, so that
true Repentance does not lie merely in Contrition [or sorrow only] for sins.
Repentance in Scripture implys a forsaking of sin, and without this we know not
what ground any man has to hope for the pardon of it* although he confess it,
and be absolved a thousand times over. Hence the doctrine imputed to the
Roman-Church, wherein his Protestant Reader must believe him, is; in the first,
that no man needs to put himself to the trouble of forsaking his sin: In the
second, that there is no necessity of a sincere Repentance, or holy life, in
order to Salvation: In the third, that true Repentance (where life continued)
implies not a forsaking of sin; and upon this he charge the Doctrine of the
Roman Church as prejudicial to piety. Thus men write ad Populum, and for those
that can know nothing, but as themselves inform them. Now, if these men in
these things do speak of some matters of Fact, or Practice only, not Doctrine;
or of some Doctrines found to be held or taught by some in that Church, but not
owned by It; let them then not censure the Churches Doctrine, but such
particular practices or doctrines. But indeed, should their style run so (as in
truth it ought) it could no way serve their design, viz. the Dissuading men
from such a Churches Communion; from which such partioular doctrines, or
practices, cannot justly deter them, because they are such things, as none by
embracing its communion, are obliged to; and any member of that Church may as
freely censure, as themselves do. But supposing the very worst, that such a
harmful Doctrine did find many Patrons, and some malignant Doctrine were very
commonly taught in this Church; yet does this afford to none a just pretense
for departing out of it, so long as this Church obliges none to the belief of
such Doctrine, or makes it part of their Faith; and surely these persons that
discover such a doctrine faulty, receive no harm by it; nor know they how soon
the Governors of this Church (the Divine Providence ever watching over it) may
take notice of, and rectify it.

Third, The Roman Doctrine (as he relates it) of the Sacraments their
conferring Grace ex opere operato on whatever subject or Receiver of them, 3.
Of a right disposition in the suscipient necessary to the Sacrament, its
conferring Grace.
though never so indisposed or unprepared; only if all Mortal sin be confessed
(he says not, repented of); and if there be no actual opposition in the will
to the Sacrament; as for instance; If a man when he is going to be baptized,
resolves with himself that he will not be baptized, or while he is baptizing,
that he will not believe in the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, Roman Idol. p.
206.
[i. e. that the party in receiving it, resolves in himself against receiving
the effect of it]. For the Contrary of this, First, see the express Declaration
of the Council of Trent Sess 14. c. 4.
concerning that Sacrament that most concerns Sinners after Baptism; the
Sacrament of Penance, -- Falso quidam calumniantur Catholicos Scriptores, quasi
tradiderint Sacramentum Paenitentiae, absque bono motu suscipientium, gratiam
confer: quod nunquam Ecclesia Dei docuit, nec sensit. To which this Author,
though pressed by his Adversary therewith, See p. 200. (...)
returns no Answer. So also, Sess. 7. can. 7. it says -- Dari gratiam per
Sacramenta semper and omnibus, quantum est ex part Dei; [but] si recte ea
suscipiant. And can. 6. Sacramenta Novae legis continere gratiam quam
significant and gratiam ipsam confer, [But] non ponentibus obicem. This in
General.

Come we to the particular Sacraments, and see what particular dispositions and
preparations are required for receiving any benefit by them, 1. For the two
Sacramenta Mortuoram (as they are called) the Sacrament of Baptism, and of
Penance, which confer justifying Grace; this Council. Sess. 6. can. 6. (urged
by Bellarmin long ago to this purpose), declares, that such Justification by
any Adult, or already having the use of Reason (for we speak not here of
Infants) cannot be had, whether with, or without the Sacrament, unless the
subject whatever be thus pre-disposed; that he have 1. Fidem (where we cannot
but remember the Fides sola justificat maintained by some Protestants, but the
Council is not content with this). 2. Spem, 3. Dilectionem Dei [such a one, qua
illum omnis justitia fontem diligere incipit], 4. Odium and detestationem
peccati (per eam paenitentiam, says the Council, quam ante Baptismum agi
oportet) and lastly 5. Propositum inchoandi novam vitam: The Council, I say,
declares no Justification (which Justification is the Opus operatum of these
two Sacraments of the Dead in sin) to be received by any Subject not thus
pre-disposed. And for the first of these Sacraments, see here in express terms
-- Paenitentiam ante Baptismum agi oportet: and in the form of Baptism, the
Adult Catechumen is first, to profess his Faith, and his renouncing Satan and
all his works. For the Second, the Sacrament of Penance; see the Council. Sess.
14. c. 4. declaring Contrition (as it is described in what is said on the last
point) perfect, or imperfect (called Attrition), to be a necessary disposition
to the Opus operatum of it.

Attrition, that it may attain the effect of this Sacrament, or Justification;
the Council declares also, that it must be (not any Attrition naturally flowing
from danger, and the fear of punishment; but) an Attrition Supernatural, not
having its original purely from our selves, but from the Holy Ghost; such as is
Donum Dei c 4.
and impulsus Spiritus Sancti; that it must also exclude voluntatem [or
affectum] peccandi; and contain also a spem veniae from God; which spes veniae
hopes of receiving a favor, and that done purely for ours and none of his own
interest, must necessarily include a love to the Benefactor; and though the
fear of God is as yet the most predominant in such Attrition, and the Council
has not mentioned a love of him here, yet it is sufficient, that the Council
has before, Sess. 6. c. 6. affirmed in General, that there is no
Justification, or remission of sin to be had by any Sacrament without a love of
God in some degree, and also hate of sin as offending him; though, this not
ascending to that degree of Love or Hate, as a perfect Contrition has, viz. to
a loving of God, and hating sin super omnia, amabilia, and detestabilia:
therefore Cajetan Opuse. Tom. 1. Tract. 4. Q 1.
on the Question, An Attritio potest fieri Contritio, calls Attrition --
Imperfect a displicentia peccati, imperfectum propositum non peccandi;
imperfectusque Dei Amor. And a little before -- Qua paenitentes, in confuso,
tam totum tempus futurum, quam comparationem peccati ad alia odibila, quam
etiam comparationem Dei ad alia amabilia, l. 1.. 3.
in voluntate sua, habent. And Dr. Hamond in his Catechism p. 56.
confesses, -- That, though a bare sorrow and compunction only respecting
present terrors, has no promise of mercy, yet if that which begins thus by
Gods Grace, using such terrors for softening the heart, improves farther into
sorrow for displeasing God, and from thence into a real sincere resolution to
amend and forsake sin, these superstructions have a promise of mercy belonging
to them, though the foundation had not: Now such is the Council's Attrition,
Donum Spiritus Sancti. Lastly, such an Attrition it is (which was said before
of Contrition. 15.
) as none, in his hating sin, and loving God, yet can be absolutely certain that
he has attained that Attrition which God requires and accepts of, for his
bestowing the Sacramental effect; (for otherwise, since this effect on Gods
part never fails to be given to the rightly disposed; thus one might be certain
of his Justification, and his being in the state of Grace, which the Council
says Sess. 6. c. 9.
none can be, save by Revelation). The surest sign and note of such a
sufficient Contrition, or Attrition is an actual change and Reformation of
life; which is the most certain fruit of a truly changed and converted heart.
This of the Pre-dispositions in the suscipient necessary to receiving the
effect of these two Sacraments, which indeed is no such easy preparation, if,
as to the repentance required in the latter of them, all that be considered,
which has been said in the last Point, and that, which the Council of Trent
says Sess. 14. c. 3. That -- Ad novitatem [vitae] and integritatem [remission
of sin, the effect, or opus operatum of this Sacrament of Penance] sine magnis
nostris fletibus and Laboribus, Divina id exigente Justitia, pervenire
nequaquam possumus: and that therefore the Fathers call it, Laboriosus quidam
Baptismus.

Sacramenta vivorum, Confirmation, Eucharist, and extreme Unction. For, all
these for working their due effect, require the Suscipient to be actually in
the state of Grace, at least for any thing he either actually knows, or (if
not culpably ignorant, either by neglecting to examine himself, or by mistaking
the true weight of Sin,) might know, of himself to the Contrary. Which when he
knows, before receiving these other, he is instructed to repair to the
Sacrament of Penance. Now such, as are here supposed to be in the state of
Grace, are also supposed to have not only the pre-dispositions for
Justification (mentioned before), but the infused habit of Faith, Hope, and
Charity.

Eucharist (to which, beyond any other Sacrament, is required the greatest
reverence) an actual and sensible Devotion is always necessary, so that,
without their discerning this in themselves, they are to desist from the other,
It is stated by many of the Roman Doctors (yet not by all) Negatively, viz.
That the want of this Devotion (or rather of their sense of it, which happens
sometimes to the greatest Saints), so they use their best endeavor to acquire
it, is not necessary to obtain the benefit of this Sacrament, and an
augmentation of Grace. Of which, thus Suarez De Sacramentis. Disp. 7.. 4.
against Cajetan -- Doctrina contraria nimis rigida est, ac praeter humanam
frugilitatem. Cum autem haec pendent ex Christi voluntate and institutione, pie
potius credendum est, sese in hoc humanae fragilitati accommodasse; praesertim
quia gratia habitualis in homine manens tantae est dignitatis apud Deum, ut
vincere possit and superare leves omnes defectus, ac negligentias: and ideo
ipsa sola est sufficiens dispositio ad hunc Sacramenti effectum. And Mounsieur
Arnaud De la frequent Communion, part 3. c. 1.
sufficiently rigid in this matter, yet accords -- That such persons [i. e.
deficient in a sensible Devotion], may approach to the Communion, and do
receive the benefit thereof, provided their heart be right toward God, which
may be known by their actions and works, which are the fruits of the heart,
although they suffer some tepidity from the Aridities and sterilities that
hinder them from having those sentiments of Devotion, they desire. If this
then, thus circumstantiated, be the want of Devotion, this Author so often
mentions as denied by the Roman Doctors to be any necessary obstruction of the
benefit of the Sacrament, it is confessed. But note, that such a want of actual
Devotion, that is, as is joined with a desire and endeavor to have it, and
consists, mean while, with an habitual possession of it (for who has the habit
of Charity, as all Regenerate have, cannot want that of Devotion); and is such,
as the Holiest Persons sometimes cannot remedy, and this he ought to have told
his Readers together with the other. This of Devotion, required particularly to
the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Extreme Unction (because, notwithstanding the Text of Saint James Jam. 5.14.
-- Is any man sick among you? let him call for the Priests of the Church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord; it
has not escaped this Authors derision) the Condition also, or disposition
required in such sick Persons, to receive the Spiritual benefit thereof, is,
that they be in the State of Grace (as was said before): and this Unction is
(si tempus and Infirmi condit o permittat) to follow the Sacrament of Penance,
and of the Eucharist administered before it. Which State of Grace, and
Contrition of such Person, since it cannot be by the Priest certainly known,
therefore upon the signs of such Contrition, and a desire of the Sacrament,
the Charity of the Church in such an extremity denies it to none; though
working, or not working its effect, according to such Persons due preparation,
known only to God. And again, Since the Priest is not always at hand to apply
such Holy Unction, when desired; therefore in case that such Person, after such
desire, lose his speech, or senses, the application thereof, which is only
external, is not thought fit, for this, to be withheld, because the benefit
thereof is conceived to depend on the Persons former pious and penitent
inclinations, when enjoying his Reason. This is the plain Song, on which this
our Author has made such a strange descant. p. 212. etc, if somewhat to the
commendation of his wit; yet little, of piety.

Dispositions requisite to the capability of the effect of the Sacraments. But
now, if in particular that of the Eucharist be re-considered, not as a
Sacrament, but Sacrifice, and the Representative Oblation to God of the
Passion, Merits, and satisfactions of our Lord: Here first; The Council of
Trent speaks not of it expressly thus, as conferring or procuring any effect ex
opere operato. 2dly. If the Schoolmen say this, they say it in no other sense
of this Sacrifice, than they do of the Sacraments; namely, to the rightly
disposed, or putting no obstacle to it, according as the Council, Sess. 22. c.
2.
explaining how it is Propitiatory, says -- Per ipsum fieri, ut, si cum vero
cord and recta fide, cum metu and reverentia contriti and paenitentes ad Deum
accedamus, misericordiam consequamur, etc. [i. e. Quo Sacrificio cruentum
illud, semel in Cruce peractum, repraesentatur, atque illius salutaris virtus
in rem^ssionem eorum, quae a nobis quotidie committuntur, peccatorum applicatur
*] And the Canon of the Mass says -- Memento Domine famulorum tuorum, Ib c. 1.
quorum tibi Fides cognita est, and nota Devotio, etc: In both which we see the
Persons, to be benefited, are supposed to be rightly disposed. But Thirdly, For
any, though never so indisposed, it is true and confessed that the Oblation of
the Eucharist, being the most prevalent, and acceptable intercession, and
address, mortals can make to his Divine Majesty, may benefit them by way of
Impetration, so as do also our Prayers; and so in all Ages it has been ever
solemnly offered unto him, as for all our necessities, and for all persons, so
for such impenitent and indisposed; that God would give them Repentance, and
other necessary dispositions for the receiving of his sanctifying Grace, and
remission of their sin; and many times such Oblation has its effect, (as also
have our Prayers) to the procuring such a mercy of Gods Grace for them [ Hujus
quippe oblatione (says the Council Ibid. c. 2.
) placatus Dominus gratiam and donum paenitentiae concedens, crimina, and
peccata etiam ingentia dimittit]; But this effect, as to particular persons,
not affirmed to be constant, or never failing. And this Bellarmin De effect
Sacram l. 2. c. 1.
answered long ago, in expounding the language of some Schoolmen concerning the
Mass profiting the indisposed -- Loquuntur (says he) de Sacrificio, non de
Sacramento, Porro Sacrificium prodest impaenitentibus per modum impetrationis;
quia impetrat illis conversionem, and paenitent am: quomodo etiam orationes
nostrae, licet non tam efficaciter id faciunt. And as this Author, p. 204 has
mentioned this Answer, so in reason he should have told us his Exceptions to it.

nor sensible of their loss); and return to the Sacrament. Of these it has
been showed, that all, for producing their effect, require a subject rightly
disposed: Next, These Sacraments are said to produce their effect, (though only
on persons rightly disposed) ex opere Operato. 1st. In opposition to any
necessary dignity, Sanctity, or Merit of the Minister thereof, expressed in the
12th. Canon of the Council of Trent De Sacrament is in genere, Sess. 7.
against that Proposition of Wicloff and his followers, and some other
Reformists mentioned by Soave, p. 233 -- That a bad Minister does not confer
the Sacrament -- Si quis dixerit, Ministrum in peccato mortali existentem, etc.
non conficere, aut confer Sacramentum, Anathema sit. 2ly. Ex opere operato,
In opposition to the dignity, or the merit of the Receiver of the Sacrament;
which Sacrament works its effect on a subject, though not indisposed, yet by
no such Disposition meriting it. So Gabriel Biel 4. Sent. did. 1. q. 3.
-- Praeter exhibit onem signi foris exhibiti non requiritur bonus motus in
suscipiente, quo de condigno, vel de congruo, gratiam [Sacramenti] mereatur:
Sed sufficit, quod suscipiens, non ponat obicem; [or, where an obex is, have
such boni motus, as may remove it. See him Ibid. Did. 14. q. 2.] 3ly. Ex opere
operato, In opposition not only to merit, but any disposition at all in the
receiver, i. e. so, that no disposition, though necessary as a causa sine qua
non to the effect, or as to removing some obstacles that may hinder it, yet is
the efficient, or instrument at all, actually conferring, or immediately
conveying the Sacramental Grace, but this is solely the opus operatum of the
Sacrament. [And of this speaks the Eighth Canon of the Council of Trent Sess 7.
(nor has Cassander applied any other sense to it, as this Author pretends he
has) p. 209.
. The words are -- Si quis dixerit per ipsa novae legis Sacramenta ex opere
operato non gratiam, sed solam fidem divinae promissionis ad gratiam
conscquendam sufficere, Anathema sit. against that proposition of the Reformers
mentioned by Soave, p. 264. -- That by the Sacraments Grace is not given in
virtue of the administration of them, called Opus Operatum, but that it
suffices [for obtaining such Grace] only to believe the promise [of it]: and
against those Reformed Propositions set down before by him, p. 233. -- That the
Sacraments are not necessary; but men may attain the effect of them by Faith
only. -- And -- That the Sacrament has never given Grace or remission of sins,
but only the faith of the Sacrament. In which Eighth Canon the Council affirms
-- Solam fidem non sufficere; not as if Faith were altogether needless to such
Sacramental effect; for therefore, it says, non solam; but not it alone
suffieicnt without the Sacrament; without it, i. e. as it solely ex opere
operato conferring the Grace, to which Faith also at the same time necessarily
pre-disposeth.] 4ly. Ex opere operato, in opposition to any dispositions as
necessary at all in the subject; but then, these Schoolmen do mean of Infants,
not of Adulti; because in all these last, there is an Obstacle of Mortal sin to
be removed; and this cannot possibly be so, without the dispositions of Faith
and Repentance. 5ly. Ex opere operato, In opposition to the Sacraments of the
Old Testament; in which, Grace is said to be received from the disposition of
the Suscipient called opus operantis, which was then signified also by these
Sacraments, but not conferred: The contrary whereof is verified in the
Sacraments of the New.

p. 202. this to be the Doctrine of the Roman Church -- That the efficacy of
Sacraments does not depend upon the preparation of the receiver, but the bare
administration, or the external work done. Again, p. 203. -- That the
Sacraments of the new Law do confer grace ex opere operato, i. e. by the thing
it self without any dependence therein upon the internal motion, or preparation
of mind in him that does partake of them. Again, how faithfully he deduceth,
from Bellarmine, saying, That the Catholics do not wholly exclude preparations
in the receiver, but only ab efficientia from the efficiency of the Sacramental
Grace, p. 204. That the Efficacy of the Sacraments [which as I understand him
is their actual producing such an effect] in conferring grace, does not at all
depend upon the qualification of the receiver. Again p. 206.
-- That the preparation of our minds for the use of the Sacraments is
unnecessary. For if grace (says he) be effectually conferred by the force of
the bare external action, which is acknowledged by them all, what need can
there be of a due preparation of mind by the exercise of Faith, Prayer,
Repentance, etc? From all which his conclusion is that the Roman Doctrine
obstructs the sincerity of Devotion. In all which expressions, if this Author
means, that according to the Roman Doctrine no qualification or disposition in
the Suscipient is the instrument that effects or confers the Sacramental Grace,
it is true, but nothing to his purpose, or to his conclusion drawn from it,
viz. That such Doctrine obstructs Devotion: But, if he means that such
disposition is not the efficient cause of such Grace, and therefore it is not
necessary at all to the effect, (as his words sound), it is indeed much to his
purpose, and infers his conclusion; but is most untrue. For many things are
necessary to an effect, besides the efficient cause thereof. To make use of an
instance, himself mentions: Fire is the only efficient of the burning of wood,
not the dryness of the matter, yet is dryness in the wood, as well as heat in
the fire necessary to the effect. And one may as truly argue in this, as he
does in the other; If the burning be effectually [ i.e. efficiently] wrought by
the fire, what need can there be of dryness in the matter: Or, the efficacy [
i. e. the efficiency] of the fire in its burning does not at all depend on the
qualification of the matter; or, such qualification concurrs not to the
efficiency, therefore such qualification is to such effect, no other way,
necessary.

That Catholics, when saying the internal disposition of mind is necessary to
reremove impediments, do not mean by this internal disposition the exercise of
Faith, Prayer, Repentance, etc. by no means says he [when as Bellarmin, in
that Chapter, this Author cites, and therefore read, says the expressly
contrary, and that six or seven times over to this purpose -- Opus operatum
excludere fidem and motum internum ab efficientia gratiae Sacramentalis, non
tamen excludere simpliciter fidem and motum internum [or in other places,
fidem, and paenitentiam], ita ut Sacramenta (ut ipsi calumniantur) conferant
gratiam accipientibus ea sine side, and sine interna conversione cordis]: But
(says he) they mean: That there be no mortal sin unconfessed; [Now, such
mortal sin may be confessed without Faith, or Repentance, or any other
disposition to remove the obstacle of such mortal sin: And next] That (says
he) there be no actual opposition in the will to the Sacrament [which he
explains thus]: As for instance, when he is going to be baptized, he resolves
with himself that he will not be baptized, or while he is baptizing, that he
will not believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Thus he. Now, if any
reflect on what we have proved before, is this ingenuous dealing? Is not this
writing Controversies for Ladies, for Women, for Laics, and such as cannot,
or, from a contrary interest, will not make a search into the truth of his
Relations?

See again, what fidelity he uses, p. 209. (after his rejecting the common
Doctrine of the Roman Authors, to search that of the Roman Church rather in the
Council of Trent) in his citing of the Eighth Canon of the Seventh Session
thereof to this purpose: That it affirms the Sacraments to confer Grace ex
opere operato so, as to render Faith, or other dispositions in the receiver
needless; and mean while concealing one half of the Canon, that plainly shows
the contrary. -- Si quis dixerit per ipsa novae Legis Sacramenta ex opere
operato non conferri gratiam, so far he repeats it; sed solam fidem divinae
promissionis ad gratiam consequendam sufficere; this he omits; and the Sola is
not at all considered by him. As if, from the Catholics saying, Sola fides non
justificat, he should prove that they hold Faith not necessary at all to
Justification: What this Canon opposetli, and how it is distinguished from the
Twelfth; I think I have given a satisfying account before -- 29.
: Yet, after this, see with what a strange confidence he concludes. p 211. -- I
dare now appeal (says he) to the most indifferent Judge, whether what I
objected to them concerning the efficacy of Sacraments, whether the minds of
the receivers of them be prepared, or no, were not so far from being a calumny,
that there is not so much as the least mistake in it: if the doctrine of the
Council of Trent be embraced by them. Thus he -- Tergens os suum dicit, non sum
operatus malum.

Bellarmin, and the Roman Writers affirm, that this truth, That the Sacraments
are the instrumental cause of conferring Grace, is Divine Revelation: and
Bellarmin spends two Chapters in producing the Scriptures that evidence it; and
so says, That the particular way or manner of their conferring Grace is a
thing not necessary to be determined, or understood, no more than that of the
Trinity is, or of several other Articles of Faith. Yet, Here see p. 204. how
solicitous this Author is to be informed of the manner, as if the whole issue
of the business depended on this; whether the Sacraments be physical or moral
causes; whether by a power inherent, or assistant; whether they produce Grace,
or only the union of it, etc. and, how heartily, he declaims against the
imposing such absurd, unreasonable, and unintelligible things to be believed;
and brings in the Alcoron, and his wit-conferring Cap to be admitted with the
like credulity: But takes no notice, that such effect is proved, (or pretended
by these Catholic Authors) to be Divine Revelation (which they will not allow
to the Alcoran, or to his Cap); nor shows he the falsity of such an assertion
in the disproving of their Texts urged for it.

habit of Charity, and consequently that also of Devotion, an actual or
sensible devotion, provided he use his best endeavor to be so devout, is not
necessarily required for receiving the benefit of the Sacrament; (and the
reason is given by them, because this indeed seems too rigorous, and would
cause too many scruples in men's minds concerning the preparation of a right
devotion.) See this matter thus stated by Arnauld's Adversary Arnauld de la
freq. Communion. part. 3. c. 1.
who is held to speak the most diminutively of a necessary preparation. -- This
is the Doctrine of the Saints (says he) that a man that has not the devotion,
and fervor of Charity he desires, but seems tepid to himself, is not obliged
therefore to abstain from the Communion; provided, he endeavor his best to
excite himself to devotion, and humbly presents himself in hope of benefit
thereby. And again, c. 9. One often thinks he has no Devotion, and yet cease
not to have it. True Devotion is not a certain facility to apply ones self to
it; and a contentment that one resents from it; but it is an effective will and
desire to please God. Now the Communicant here, being required by these Doctors
to be in the state of Grace, and to use his best endeavor to be also actually
and sensibly Devout; see how ingenuously this Author conceals these two
circumstances, and charge on them the admitting persons to the benefit of the
Sacraments that are impenitent, and void of any Devotion, p. 207. -- If want of
devotion (says he) does not hinder Grace being received, what arguments can
men use to persuade persons to it? who will undergo so strict an examination of
himself, and endeavor to raise his mind to a due preparation for the
participation of Sacraments, if he knows before hand that he shall certainly
receive Grace by the Sacraments without it? [i. e. without an endeavor to
raise his mind to a due Devotion. But what Roman Doctor reaches this?]. Again,
p. 211. -- Whether one have any Devotion or no, he is sure of Grace, if he does
but partake of their Sacraments; and need not trouble himself much about
Devotion, since his work may be done without it. Never any Doctrine was
certainly better contrived for the satisfaction of impenitent Sinners, than
theirs is, [representing the indevout and the impenitent, as the same; the
indevout, through infirmity, or through neglect, appearingly, or really, all
included.]

Extreme Unction, and its effect, p. 212. where he says -- Not so much as the
use of Reason is required for the effect of the blessed Sacrament of Extreme
Unction. And then descants p. 213.
-- A hard case for those who dye in mortal Sin! for if they could but express
any sign of contrition by the motion of an eye or a finger, all were well
enough, and they are sure to receive Grace. And p. 214. -- To make all sure at
last, the Exereme Unction very sweetly conveys grace into them, whether they be
sensible or not. Whereas in candid and serious dealing, instead of jesting, he
ought to have represented the Roman Doctrine thus: 1. That for the Application
of this Sacrament, the use of Reason in the Suscipient is not necessarily
required, if the person immediately before, when having the use of Reason,
appeared Contrite, and desired it. See before. 27
-- And 2. That all such persons only, as have that true and acceptable
contrition (known only to God) whereof they give external signs, do receive
Grace, or the effect of this Sacrament, but no other. Let this suffice for the
Third Point.

easiness in the Roman Church, 4. Of the Eternal Punishment of Sin, not easily
changed into a Temporal.
by this feat of the Sacraments ex opere operato remitting sin, and conferring
Grace, to change the Eternal punishment of sin, which is surely remitted with
the sin it self, into a temporal one; or to change Hell Torments into those of
Purgatory; and then the easiness of getting out of these too, with a little
money or friends. See Romans Idol. p. 185, 186. The contrary of this, viz. That
the procuring the pardon of Mortal Sin committed after Baptism, and
consequently of the eternal punishment thereof (these two being always
remitted together) is no such easy thing, has been amply showed in the
Vindication of the Second and Third Point. The Subjects of the Roman Catholic
Church then are in this matter thus instructed: 1. That the due effect of the
Sacrament of Penance (repaired unto by such delinquent) is necessary to the
Remission of such sin, and its Eternal Punishment. 2. That this effect is not
conferred on all that are Confessed (as this Author seems to take for granted
that it is See p. 206. 498.
) but only, among these, on the rightly pre-disposed by Faith, and a true and
acceptable Repentance. Which Repentance includes not only sorrow for sin, but
an actual amendment of life, and ceasing from sin (where life longer
continued): and for the sorrow, -- Sine magnis nostris fletibus, and laboribus,
divina id exigente justitia, ad hanc novitatem, and integritatem [viz.
remission of sin, and former state of regeneration] pervenire nequaquam
possumus, (says the Council of Trent Sess. 14. c. 2.
). 3. That when all is done, the person is not absolutely certain that he has
attained such a worthy and sincere Repentance, Contrition, or Attrition, as
infallibly receives the effect and benefit of the Sacrament. 4. That, if there
should happen any defect therein, the best way to complete such Contrition ( ad
praeteritorum peccatorum vindictam and castigationem, says the Council Sess.
14. c. 8.
) is the exercise of much Penance, and Mortification; and the surest sign of
such Contrition completed, is, a change of life, and perseverance therein; and
the surest means, again, for such perseverance ( ad novae vitae custodiam, and
infirmitatis medicamentum, says the Council Ibid.
) are Penances and Mortifications.

Penances their removing or taking away punishments, and so just Indulgences of
Penance doing the same, They are taught;

First, That no such Indulgence relates at all to quitting the punishment
Eternal.

Secondly, That no Penances or Indulgences are beneficial to the removing any
Temporal punishment, so long as the person, by his sin unrepented of, is still
liable to the Eternal: and, suppose they were, yet this infinitely greater debt
still uncancelled renders the discharge of the other not valuable.

Thirdly, That the remission of the Eternal depends chiefly on the sincerity of
their Repentance and Conversion to God, and change of life; as has been showed
before. And this thing ( viz. lest by any defect of these, there should be some
flaw in the pardon of the Eternal punishment), keeps all pious Sons of this
Church perpetually on their guard (notwithstanding whatever Indulgences are
passed concerning the Temporal) to make good on their part the conditions that
are required from them for the cancelling thereof. And if by the Money and
Friends this Author speaks of, as a means of evading these punishments, be
meant Alms-deeds, and other men's Prayers, it is granted; That, both for the
procuring Grace, and the Remission of Sin, and of these punishments attending
it, they help much. And in this respect granted again; that the Rich, both as
to giving Alms, and by them procuring the intercessions of such as are
relieved, have a great advantage. And very fit they should; having so many
disadvantages, and running so many hazards from their Wealth other ways. But
then the Poor are no way inferior to them; who, as they want the one, so are
freed from the other. And we are told by our Lord, that more Rich incur these
Eternal or Temporal punishments by the Temptations of their wealth, than escape
them by the Charitable distribution of it.

easy soever the releasment of such punishment is amongst Catholics, it is
made much more easy, or less difficult, among Protestants. For, 1st. For Sin,
and the Eternal punishment; if Protestants require repentance, sorrow for sin,
and an actual change, or reformation of life, Catholics (as has been showed.
10, etc.) require also these, and much more; namely, a necessary repair to the
Sacrament of Penance, Confession, Absolution; and for the greater securing of
their Contrition; or Repentance, of which none can be absolutely certain,
fletus, labores, penances, mortifications, and dignos fructus paenitentiae; and
these not only ad novae vitae custodiam, but ad praeteritorum peccatorum
vindictam. 2ly. 2 Cor. 7.11.
For the Temporal punishment, 1. Catholics hold after the Eternal remitted,
such a punishment to remain still uncancelled; Protestants deny it, and throw
all punishment whatever into the Pardon of the Sin; and as soon as the sentence
-- Dominus transtulit peccatum tuum is past, 2 Samuel 12.13.
clear all accounts. 2ly. Catholics hold many faithful Souls, such as have
been more imperfect in their repentance, and negligent in Christian-duties
here, (as it must be granted of those, who all find mercy, some are much more
than others,) to be detained after death for some time in a state of Purgation;
Protestants send all, (that go not to Hell, and the greatest misery) straight
to Heaven, and the most supreme happiness. 3ly. Catholics make diverse Penances
and Satisfactions, imposed, or also voluntarily assumed, necessary for the
discharge of such temporal punishment, that by judging of themselves they may
prevent that of God: 1 Cor. 11.31.
But Protestants, by denying such punishments, have also no need of such
Penances, and so release them to their Subjects.

4. And lastly: If, in some of her Indulgences, the Roman Church is said by
them to sell these Pardons of Temporal Punishments very cheap, the Protestants
give them to all for nothing. This of the 4th. Point.

Fifth: The Roman Doctrine concerning Indulgences; 5. Of Indulgences beneficial
only to those in the state of Grace.
charged by this Author p. 518.
with many gross Absurdities, and as excusing Roman Catholics from performing
the best parts of their Religion: i. e. (says he) enjoining Penances,
accounted among them fruits of true Repentance; severe mortification; Fasting,
frequent Prayers, and Alms p. 526.


To the Contrary of this, I shall show to his abused Reader, That neither the
Absurdities pretended by him, nor the omission of any necessary Duty follow
either from the Roman Doctrine of Indulgences, or the commonly allowed Practice.

And 1st. For the Doctrine of this Church; If this Author had done her justice
so far as to accuse or question no more than what he found to be her doctrine
in her Councils concerning this point; and, if he had said here for righting
the Church, what he has said elsewhere, p. 209.
when for his own advantage: That though some Testimonies of particular persons
may be produced [for several opinions] yet we must appeal for the sense of this
Church, to the Decrees of its Councils; how many leaves might he have spared
from his discourse on this subject as wholly impertinent? Indeed so compendious
and cautious have the Church's Decrees been in this matter, as that those
Protestants, who complain at other times of her oppressing their Faith with a
multitude of Credends, here accuse her silence and reservedness. So Doctor
Tailor observes in his Disswasive c. 1. 3. p. 39.
. That because the Doctrines were so dangerous, uncertain, invidious, by the
advice of the Bishop of Modena, the Council of Trent left all the Doctrines,
and all the Cases of Conscience quite alone, and slubbered [or, better, passed
over] the whole matter in this Question in general, and recommendatory, terms
-- That they established no Doctrine, neither curious nor incurious; nor durst
they [i. e. the Council, bold enough in other matters] decree the very
Foundation of this whole matter, the Churches Treasure. [And so all this our
Author's Questions about this Treasure, which amount to Ten of the Fifteen
Queries he proposes, p. 518, etc. and says -- That when be once sees those
Questions satisfactorily answered, he may then think better of our Doctrine,
are beside the purpose, and to be cancelled, if he intends only to encounter
the professed Doctrine of the Roman Church. But we on the other side say, That
these men deal not fairly, who, for defending their discession from the Church
of Rome, and from the Communion of their Forefathers urge such Doctrines, as
none, in staying in this Communion, are obliged to maintain; and that the less
this Church has determined or required our assent to in this point, the more
freely may any, holding what ever seems to him the most probable, submit to her
Decrees: and has the less cause to accuse, or reproach her.

See Con. Trid. Sess 25. Deer. de Indulg.
, (as Doctor Holden, F. Veron, and others have observed, who have endeavored
for the frustrating such Discourses as these, to sever points of Faith from
School-Opinions) -- Indulgentias conferendi potestatem ab ipsomet Christo
Ecclesiae concessam fuisse, at que hujusmodi potestate antiquissimis etiam
temporibus Ecclesiam usam fuisse: Hunc usum Christiano populo esse maxim
salutarem, and Sacrorum Conciliorum authoritate probatum and in Ecclesia
retinendum: Fosque Anathemate Synodum damnare, qui aut inutiles esse asserunt,
aut eas concedendi in Ecclesia potestatem esse negant. This is all the Council
has determined. And upon this, F. Veron in his Rule of Catholiek Faith c. 17.
justly contends -- That no more ought to be proposed to separatists to be
believed, than what the profession of the Catholic Faith, and the General
Councils engage them to. That it is sufficient to render one a true Child of
the Church, if he submit to these; and that other Questions, wherein the
Council is silent, are impertinencies and digressions.

Council in this her Decree, we see, defends her present Doctrine and Practice
by that of Ancient times, and by what is approved in former Councils, if we
look into Antiquity concerning this matter, we may there easily discover thus
much.

1. That severe and long Penances were then imposed on greater sinners some way
proportionable to their faults; and these not only for satisfaction of the
Church, and the Scandal many times given to it in public sins, but chiefly for
the Satisfaction of Gods Justice, and appeasing his wrath, for Reconciliation
unto Him, Remission of their sins and Eternal punishment due thereto, and for
begetting in them a true and solid Repentance, and Contrition for their Sin,
and so for saving their Souls. For which I refer the Reader to what has been
said before,. 16. and the many testimonies of the Fathers collected by Morinus
De Paenitent, l. 3. c. 11, and 12, -- and l. 10. c. 24. To which effects these
Penances were esteemed very advantageous; and though not, as to all of them,
any proper Satisfactions, yet a means very beneficial for perfecting the
Sinner's Repentance, and Sorrow for sin, and procuring the application to them
of the Merits and Satisfactions of Christ: Gods Mercy and Justice still
accompanying one another, as in respect of Christ's sufferings, and
satisfactions, paid for our sins by Him; so in respect of some temporal
sufferings of our own, either freely offered and tendered by our selves, or, if
not Prevented by these, inflicted on us by God to such a degree as seems meet
to his Divine Majesty.

Indulgences granted of such Penances, all, or part, to some Persons, thought
rightly qualified for them, upon certain just causes of a greater advancement
of piety, and Gods Glory and Service thereby; either in respect of such Persons
private, or some other public, and greater, good. Which cause was thought a
sufficient motive for such a relaxation and prevalent with God for ratifying
such indulgent act of the Church-Governors (to whom our Lord has committed in
his stead the power of binding and loosing Sinners); whereby the same
punishment of sin, due to the Divine Justice, is presumed to be remitted by God
to persons, if being, as they appear, sufficiently contrite, upon such
Indulgence granted, as would have been upon the Penances performed: for, else,
if such punishment in Gods Court (and not only that of the Church) had not been
taken away by them, the Indulgence, conceded as a favor, would have been
really much to the Penitents loss; whilst, after it, those heavier punishments
remain to be inflicted on, and undergone by, them, from which their much
easier Penances (if not indulged) would have discharged them: And so this power
of the Keys would have been rather to Destruction than Edification.

Paul's Indulgence, or Remission ( in the person of Christ as he says, 2 Cor.
2.10.
or by the Commission of Quorum remiseritis Jo. 20.23.
) of part of the Penance that was formerly imposed by him upon the incestuous
Corinthian, as for the scandal given to the Heathen, and the Church, so also
chiefly for the saving of his Soul, 1 Cor. 5.5. Yet such remission of them was
not without several just Motives, inciting the Apostle thereto, and which he
judged more acceptable to God; and so, more effectual for procuring the
application of Christ's Merits for this Sinners pardon, than the remainder of
his Penance, had it been fulfilled; Such as were the gratifying the
Intercessions for this person of the Saints in Corinth; and preventing their
apprehensions of the Apostles too great severity; the excessive sorrow and
confusion appearing already in the Penitent; and least perhaps through a
despondency of mind he should throw off the Christian Faith, and abandon
himself to vice; in all which the Apostle saw Satan's wiles, See 2 Cor. 2.6, 7,
11.

Indulgences used in the Primitive times upon several (judged by them) just
causes moving the Church-Governors thereto, either for the private good of the
Penitent, or public of Religion. 1st. Such anciently were, in respect of the
private good of the Penitent. 1. An extraordinary diligence and fervor in
their performing Penance, producing in them a great reformation, etc. and so
this seeming sufficient for quitting the remainder of their debt; in the
Indulgment of whom was also a public good intended, that so the negligent
might, hereby, be excited to like fervor, upon hopes of like favor. 2. The
pusillanimity, or weakness, or temptations of the Penitent, whereby it was
feared, that he might through despair sink under the burden laid upon him, or
throw it off his shoulders, revolt to Heresy, or Gentilisme. 3. In times of
great persecution, the better fitting and arming of the Penitent for
Martyrdom, by his receiving a reconcilement to God and the Church; and, after
it, the Holy Communion; and the same also was done in his being exposed to any
other eminent danger of death, by sickness or otherwise; in which necessity,
Absolution, and the Eucharist were administered, though the Penance unfinished:
(As still the inability of any further doing Penance, to such persons as are
supposed contrite, and otherwise well disposed at the hour of death, is thought
a sufficient ground of an Indulgence.) 4. Sometimes also some Heroical Act of
the Penitent was accepted instead of further Penance: As persons returned from
Heresy were usually received into the Church upon easy terms, and without
exacting from them the Penances due to so great a sin, both for other reasons
tending to advancement of true Religion, and for the great Confusion such
persons exposed themselves to in the public confessing and renouncing their
former Opinions; and professing of that Faith, they had before censured and
condemned; Errors that prejudice our understanding, being with much more
difficulty acknowledged by us, than those Sins that are only the exorbitancies
of our Passions. So sometimes the Lapsed, after their having denied Christ, in
their returning boldly to confess and suffer for him, were for this indulged
all the Penance imposed for their former lapse. See Morinus, l. 9 c. 14.


2. Again, Such Causes or Motives in respect of the public good, anciently was
the honoring of Martyrs (i. e. such who had already suffered loss of goods,
limbs, tortures, for the Christian profession, or were imprisoned and destined
to such tortures) in conceding Indulgencies of their Penance to such persons,
for whom these petitioned, or gave their commendatory Letters, or Tickets; and
for whom these Martyrs promised their Intercessions with God; and this done by
the Church, to show the power and value which she believed such sufferings and
intercessions to have with God; and hereby also to encourage many others to
Martyrdom. Such also was the preventing of the growth of Schisms, and the
enlarging of the Catholic Faith in the receiving of Heretics usually into the
Church with much indulgence, and not clogging them with such great Penances as
such a Crime deserved Ibid. l. 9. c. 8.
to encourage more to come in, and prevent their further infecting of others.

ancient customs have the latter times of the Church observed (in their
continuing of Indulgences) in these two principal points; 1. that such
Indulgence be to a person rightly disposed by Repentance, so far as the Church
can judge of it; otherwise without this, as no remission of Sin, so no reason to
expect such divine relaxation of punishment to a yet impenitent Sinner. And 2.
next, That there be a just and weighty Cause for granting it; else it would
quite ruin the Churches Discipline, and abuse the power she is entrusted with,
to remit the Penance, and expect that God should withdraw such punishments, and
change that ordinary course of his justice, by which he makes men sensible of
his hate to Sin, upon any light and frivolous Motives, which may daily occurr.
That there be a cause, I say not, exactly the same always with those ancient,
forementioned, (a thing not necessary; for the Ancient also, we see, were
various); but just still, and judged proportionable to the quality of the
Indulgence, as theirs was. In latter times then, (after a much remisser
imposing of Penances for great crimes, than was anciently, because of the
hardness of men's hearts; and a reluctance to receive, or bear them; When once
Commutations of Penances were become more in use, and Absolution frequently, in
great offenses also, was joined immediately with Confession, and the Penance
deferred till afterward,) In these latter times, I say, such Causes have been a
setting the Penitent, instead of such Penances declined by him, (which though
now not enjoined, yet now are as much, as anciently, due from him as to the
satisfying of the Divine justice), upon some other acts of piety or devotion,
more willingly performable by him; and these especially such, as, by their
tending to some public and eminent good, may be more acceptable to God, and
proportionable to the relaxation of such Penances. Such as are the enjoining of
Alms, Prayers, Fasts, etc. for averting some imminent Judgment, or danger from
the Church; for the conquering of Infidels, and the Churches Enemies (such was
the recovery of the Holy Land); for converting of Heretics, for relief of the
Poor, in some time of great distress; for the building of Churches, Hospitals,
or other pious Benefactions, where much necessity of them: And, among the rest,
this motive, not the least considerable, (mentioned also by Bellarmin De
Indulgent, l. 2. c. 18.) namely an excitement of the people to Contrition, and
Confession, to Prayers, and doing Penances now, (when they reject these any way
proportionable to their faults, and as satisfactions of the Divine Justice) at
least for the gaining of the Indulgences (which are by them supposed a much
easier relief): the procurement of which Indulgences has been much used by
many wise and Holy Prelates; as namely, by St. Carlo Borromeo, to this purpose;
and Ipso usu constat (says Suarez) gratiam and favorem Indulgentiarum multum
confer ad Spiritualem profectum fidelium, Disp. 49.. 1.
ut melius ac frequentius a peccatorum vinculis liberentur; That men, that are
not already in the state of Grace, may, by their preparation for the benefit of
the Indulgence, be brought thereto; and so, after a remission of the Eternal
punishment by their Contrition, and the power of the Keys, be also, by this
favor upon some pious work, discharged of the temporal, or at least of some
part thereof.

worthy person to be indulged 2 and a just cause of such indulgement, the
present use of Indulgences runs parallel with the ancient. And then the present
difference (which is confessed) between the latter and former times, 1. One,
that the former were Indulgences of Penances enjoined; the present of the
self-same Penances in the same measure due to Gods justice (and to be paid now,
as much as then, for obtaining from him a relaxation from such punishment;)
but, for the Penitents indisposition, after a long desuetude of such a
practice, not enjoined now, as formerly. 2. The other, that those were usually
granted to some particular persons, appearing penitent; these indefinitely to
all, but upon the same condition, that they be penitent (which also they must
testify, by their repairing to the Sacrament of Penance,) otherwise, they are
taught, that they receive no benefit thereby. Now a difference in these, I say,
seems to alter nothing in the substance of Indulgences; and, the one way to be
as necessary to the constitution of the present times, as the other was of the
ancient.

Absolution or Solution; whether with or without a Counter-satisfaction paid to
Gods Justice: and this when, or how, or by whom, paid, and the like, the
present Church is no more concerned to state them, than the ancient; and what
absurdities therein may be thought to press or prejudice the one, will as much
the other. In this Author's inquiring, then, from what Solutions, or
Satisfactions, or Church-treasures, these Indulgences become admitted and
ratified by the Divine Justice, much pains and his many Queries might have been
spared: the Church herein has determined nothing; and he, together with
Catholics, has the liberty to take that opinion that likes him best. Doctor
Holden in his Resolution of Faith l. 2. c. 6.
written for informing such Protestant Questioners has told him in this matter
-- Catera etiam dubia sunt, and a Theologis in utramque partem agitata,
Nimirum, An sit the saurus aliquis meritorum and satisfactionum in Ecclesia,
cujus dispensatores sint Romanus Pontifex, and reliqui Ecclesiae Pastores? And
paena, quae ex natura rei and coram Deo solvenda sit pro peccato, sive publico,
sive secreto, possit, ab-alio quocunque adimpleri per modum solutionis and
satisfactionis debitae, quam ab ipsomet peccatore? And F. Veron in his Rule of
Faith c. 17.
-- Since (says he) neither our profession of Faith, nor the Council of Trent
take any notice of this matter, why should we press such opinions, or propose
more to them [Separatists] than these engage it to? Here then, if this our
Adversary will grant, that there can be no remission of sin, or of any
punishment thereof, eternal or temporal, for satisfying in rigor the Divine
Justice, but by the application of the superabundant, and infinite merits and
satisfaction of our Lord Jesus Christ, (a thing which I suppose no Protestant
will deny) no more is desired of him, or any. For the other Treasure of the
satisfactions of the Saints; though it is certain, here. 1 That God may, if he
pleases, accept the satisfactions of one person for the debt of another (for
so he did in our Lord's); and 2 again, that, for what is imperfect in the
Saints satisfactions, he may complete it with his Sons; yet I know no Roman
Divines that do hold any such satisfactions of Saints in this matter absolutely
necessary, but that our Lords alone are all-sufficient; and, if the Saints
great sufferings for their Fellow Members (not to be denied) are also thrown
into this Treasure; this is more to honor them, than that it needs any recruit
by them. Thesaurus Ecclesiae (says Suarez De Indulg. disp. 51.. 3.
) non est simpliciter necessarius ut Indulgentiae concedantur, sumnque habeant
effectum. And, Sicut Christus est unicus Redemptor, ita etiam est per se
sufficiens sine adminiculo aliorum sanctorum. And -- Non est opus ut
adjungantur satisfactiones ex passionibus Sanctorum passionbus Christi, quasi
hae per se non sufficiant. Sed hoc tum gloriosum Christo, a quo est omne bonum
Sanctorum, tum ipsis etiam sanctis perhonorificum, says Bellarmin De Indulg.
l. 1. c. 4.
.

This said of the Doctrine, proceed we to consider the present practice of
Indulgences, and the great damage done to Piety and Devotion thereby, which
this Author so earnestly charge.

Eternal punishment thereof; or, to the making their peace with God, with which
these eternal pains are inconsistent; but only as to the temporal, that is
still retained by God after our reconciliation and peace made with him, for the
satisfaction of his Justice in some part, which thinks it not fit to let our
former wickedness pass altogether free from some temporal punishment, (which if
this Author please he may call Chastisement) to show his hatred of sin, even
when he has received into favor the Sinner. For, as the Council of Trent,
Sess. 14. c. 8.
-- Divinam clementiam decet, ne ita nobis absque ulla satisfactione peccata
dimittantur, ut occasion arrepta, peccata leviora putantes, velut injurij and
contumeliosi Spiritui Sancto in graviora labamur. [Of which ordinary course of
Gods Justice, even toward those already readmitted into grace and friendship,
he who doubts, may at his leisure consider well these passages of Scripture --
Numb. 20.12. -- 27.12, 13, 14. -- Numb. 14.34. -- 2 Samuel 12.10, 13, 14. -- 2 Samuel 24.10, 13. -- 2 King. 20.6, 18. compared with 2 Chronicles. 32.31. -- 2 Chronicles.
20.37. -- 35.22, 23. -- 1 King. 13.22. -- Exodus 32.34. (where the punishment,
threatened verse 10. being remitted, yet others less than that are reserved,
whenever their new sins should provoke the Lord also to remember the last.).
Josh. 22.17. -- Psalm. 89.31. etc. -- Prove. 11.31. -- 1 Pet. 4.18. -- Ecclus.
5.4. -- Psalm. 98.8. -- 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. -- 1 Cor. 3.15. (which text shows a
temporary suffering to remain also in the next world for faults not fully
expiated and accounted-for here by our judging our selves, that we may escape
the judgment of God. Of which faults, either in their nature, or by our
Repentance, and the Sacrament of Penance rendered, not mortal to us, thus
Caesarius Arelatensis Hom. 8.
-- Quicquid de istis peccatis redemptum non fuerit illo igne purgandam est, de
quo Apostolus, etc. Redemptum non fuerit, i.e. as he says before by our
Penances -- Continuis Orationibus and frequentibus jejuniis and largioribus
cleemosynis, etc. Nor is this postume punishment, since it is revealed and made
known to us here, purely vindicative for sin; but, as other Temporal
punishments here, designed to excite us to a cleansing and correcting betimes,
whatever is ill built by us for sear of it; and, by our lighter penances here,
to a preventing it; And if the preaching of Hell Torments to come may profit
us, so may those of Purgatory): Again, Mat. 12.32. De Civ. Dei. l. 21. c. 24.
From which Text St. Austin collected -- Sunt quibus, etsi non in isto, tamen
remittetur [i. e. not for the eternal, remitted always here or not at all, but
a temporal pain or punishment] in futuro. Examples also of such temporal
punishments, avertitible or removable by some penal works of our own; and our
greater suffering from God, changed into those lesser from our selves, See in
Jona 3.10. compared with 7, and 8. etc. -- 1 King. 21.29. -- 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7.
-- 33.12, 13. -- 2 King. 7.1. compared with 2 King. 6.30. -- 1 Cor. 11.31, 32.
I have quoted here the more Texts, to show that Gods Mercy ordinarily includes
also some personal satisfaction, in some part at least, to his Justice,
Justitia and pax osculatae sunt -- Miseri cordiam and judicium cantabo tibi
Domine: that he may be both loved and feared.]

They are taught therefore, that a true Contrition in the subject (the
requisites of which see before. 10. etc.) is still presupposed to the benefit
of any Indulgence; and that he who hopes any gain thereby, must also, if in
Mortal sin, by the Sacrament of Penance, render himself first in the state of
Grace: Contritis and Confessis being the Condition on the part of the indulged,
expressed, or employed in all Indulgences.

remission of their sins, the first of this Authors hard Questions, (who asks,
how it consists with this Doctrine of Indulgences their respecting not the
fault, but the temporal punishment thereof) it is answered long since by
Bellarmin De Indulg. l. 1. c. 7.
(and it were well, if this Author with his old objections would communicate to
his Protestant Readers the Catholics old Answers; and to the Catholic Readers
his own Reply to them) -- Id propterea dici, quod indulgentia conjungitur
ordinary cum confessione Sacramentali; and facit, ut qui per Sacramentum
Paenitentiae, [which is received as a preparation for the Indulgence] fuit
absolutus a culpa, per Indulgentiam absolvatur a paena and, that the
Indulgences speak of the remission of sins, quoad paenam: or as Suarez De
Indulg. Disp. 50.. 1.
-- Absolvit a culpa and paena non quia Indulgentiae utramque tollat: sed quia,
ut habeat effectum, debet supponere remissam culpam, and ipsa complet totius
paenae remissionem.

p. 525.
-- That after Indulgences were grown common, many men did abstain less from
evil actions. A second, That they were only profitable to the Idle and Wicked.
A third, That true Christian piety was destroyed by them, and that all manner
of wickedness did spring from thence; and that men were afraid of committing
no kind of sin, when at so cheap a rate they could purchase a remission of
them. A fourth, That let men do what wickedness they will, by them they shall
be free from punishment, etc. besides all his own invective stuff from page
415. to p. 499. or. 3. to. 8. (where he would persuade his Reader, that the
Roman Indulgences countenance the impenitent to a continuance in their sins, or
promise to them any the least relief as to their pardon), I say, what mean all
these impertinences? when as Indulgences belong to none but just persons; and
none, but the already penitent and reformed (as Catholics are generally
taught) are at all concerned in, or succored by, them. And it must be by a
most Gross and highly-Culpable ignorance, if any heretofore have so far
mistaken the Churches constant Doctrine of Indulgences, as to imagine the least
good from them, as to their Salvation, if they either still continued in any
Mortal sin, or afterward returned to it; and, if the pardon of such sin were
not first procured from God by a sincere repentance. There is (says this
Author, p. 497.
after his learned Collection of old Indulgences) one odd condition implied in
some of these Prayers (he ought to have said, in all) called being in the state
of Grace, the want of which may hinder the effect from them; but a due
Confession with Absolution will at any time put a man into it. But, by his
leave, there is another odd Condition besides, which Catholics call
Contrition, or Repentance; and what Catholics mean by it, may be seen before,.
10. and 23, which this Author (according to his wonted candor) has left out,
and without which his due Confession and Absolution signify nothing; and if
they have this indeed also to put them in the state of Grace, much good may
they have of their Indulgence; for also Protestants, and this Author hold this
Contrition or Repentance of such a strange virtue, that they admit all into the
state of Grace, though unabsolved, or unconfessed by it alone.

i. e. with alms, and other pious works,] on this account; and at last
deceiving the purchaser; whereas, suppose them all utterly to fail, and to be
mere frauds, they cannot be said to fail to any such unpenitent Sinners; they
fail only to those, that (however this bargain, as they call it, proves) are
already in Gods Grace and favor, and the state of Salvation, and to whom
perhaps the very granting such Indulgence (by reason of their diligent
preparation for it) was the occasion of bringing them into such a state; and
Indulgences fail to these for nothing more, but what the same Indulgences
pretend to give, viz. the remission of some temporal punishment, upon which
failing follow; some dilation, perhaps, of the possession of their future
bliss, whilst their Contrition, Confession, and the pious Work they do for such
an Indulgence, are forthcoming forth their reward. But Protestants, denying any
such temporal punishment to remain, after remission of the sin, consequently
must affirm, that Catholics gain much by what they do; and lose nothing at all
by what they are promised, though the Indulgence utterly fail them.

right disposition is necessary in the Penitent, so, that for the Indulgence,
is also necessary a just cause, or motive of granting it, and some way
proportionable to the quality of the penance that is relaxed by it; i. e. a
cause prudently estimated more acceptable to God, and sooner procuring the
application of our Lords satisfactions for the remitting of such punishment of
sin, than such penances would be. Nothing is more obvious than this in
Catholic Authors; and upon this ground, the saying of one Pater Noster, or
giving the Alms of a penny, or the like, is not thought by them a sufficient
cause (where is no other motive thereof) for the Church Governors thereupon to
concede a plenary Indulgence. Neither is it here pretended, that all past
Indulgences of Popes, or others, that may be produced, have always therefore
necessarily had, or included such a cause; neither are Popes maintained
infallible in their judgment herein -- Quia per indiscretas atque super fluas
[and, cur indisc^etae, and superstuae, (says Bellarmin De Indul. l 1. c. 12.
) nisi quia ot osae, manes and irritae sunt?] quas quidam Ecclaesiarum Praelati
facere non verentur, and claves Ecclesiae contemnuntur, and paenitentialis
satisfactio enervatur, decerninus, etc. Thus Innocentius 3. long ago in the
great Lateran Council Can. 62.
And Sixtus 4. having been somewhat Prodigal in this kind, recalled many
Indulgences formerly conceded by him. See Extravag. Commun. l. 5. tit. 9. c. 5.
And so Clement 8. effusas nimis Indulgentiarum concessiones restringere
aggressus est, says Baronius A D. 147.
. And of the possibility of the failing of the Pope himself sometimes in this
sufficiency of the cause, thus speaks a Jesuit Sua ez. De Indulg. Disp. 56.. 3.
-- Quamvis Pontifex express declararet se moveri propter talem causam, quam
reputat sufficientem ad tantam indulgentiam concedendam, non esset infallibile
vel causam esse talem, vel (quod consequens est) totam indulgentiam esse
validam. Quia talis declaratio Pontisicis non est de doctrina ad sidem
pertinente, sed de quodam facto particulari, quod ad prudentiam spectat; in quo
Pontisex non habet infallibilem assistentiam Spiritus Sancti, sed in his tantum
quae ad doctrinam sidei, and morum spectant. And again, Quamvis Pontifex
existimet aut declaret talem causam subesse, nihilominus decipi potest, quia
quoad hoc, prudentia, and existimatione humana gubernatur, possetque etiam
humano affectu moveri. Thus Suarez comparing the Popes dispensing in Penances
with that in vows. And thus Estius In. 4. Sent. Did. 20.. 9.
-- Si nulla rationabili causa movente, P^ntifex vel Episcopus Indulgentiam
concederet, existimandum non est, eam alicujus efficaciae, seu, valo^is fore.
What a many Jests and Sarcasmes now has this unserious Writer lost here in
playing upon the Pope's infallibility in this matter (the chief commonplace of
Protestants when seeking quarrels,) perhaps content to seem ignorant herein,
that he may show wit? Though mean while, the Christian Humility and Obedience
in the Subjects of this Church is far from distrusting the prudence, or
fidelity, especially of this their chief Pastor, assisted with so wise a
Council in his dispensing these favors; and far from weighing and discussing,
whether the cause of such promulgation be sufficient, or no; Which as it is a
thing of difficult resolution (where many circumstances are to be considered,
that are not so well known to Subjects, and such cause not expressed, or not
totally, in the Indulgence; for the pious work may be diverse from the cause,
or motive of the promulgation of such a pardon See Suarez De Indulg. Disp. 56..
3
) as, I say, it seems to be a matter of difficult resolution, so the assurance
thereof (as I shall show by and by) is of little consequence.

Valent quantum sonant, the sonant is to be understood not of that sense which
an illiterate person, not well instructed, may possibly take them in, but with
those commonly-known limitations, or suppositions belonging to them, and
particularly those now mentioned. Valent quantum sonaent. 1 To persons rightly
prepared; and, 2 if passed upon a just and sufficient cause, which are, or
ought, to be, common praecognita, to all that make use of them: Scarce any
promise passed amongst men, but includes some condition, which being well
known, is thought not necessary to be expressed. And when we find Remission in
the Scriptures promised, in several places, to Faith, to Alms, to the
Sacrament, to the love of God, to our For giving our Neighbors sins against
us, etc. I hope, we may rightly say, these Texts valent quantum sonant; and
that the Holy Ghost in them intends no fraud; and yet some other Conditions
must be understood, which are commonly known and learnt from other Scriptures,
without which none of these Texts rigidly and singly taken, are true, and
valid. If then some particular Indulgences, upon the defect of some condition
requisite to their validity, should fail at least in part of what they promise,
yet as rashly, and untruly, as uncivilly, does our Author therefore pronounce
the Promulgator a Cheat: Because one may possibly be mistaken without a design
to deceive; and this Author himself, when in a calmer temper, may discover a
Medium between speaking a truth, and cheating. Otherwise it will follow, that
himself also, in all he says, is either infallible, or a Cheat.

totally invalid; any pious cause whatever serving for a partial effect; and
so, that it would prove an oversight in any Christian to lose this benefit. And
if the releasment of some temporal punishment, by the omitting our penances,
and the Indulgences failing of its full effect, be not had; yet 1st. Some other
pious work, enjoined by the Indulgence, is performed, which has its reward:
2ly. Whilst some part of such temporal punishment, that remains so uncompounded
for, may retard for some time ones future bliss; yet his preparation to render
himself in the state of Grace, and so capable of the benefit of the Indulgence
(how dimuinitive soever this be) may be of much more consequence to him, than
is such punishment uncancelled; whilst it secures the main business, i. e. his
Salvation: and this way, he gains much more by the Indulgence, than he loses,
another. 3ly. It is also very considerable, that the Penances now adays
remitted by Indulgences are such, as are due indeed to Gods Justice, and these
as great as ever, yet most of them are not now imposed as formerly they have
been; and so we should have as much omitted such a quantity of these Penances
as is not enjoined (which is the most) without, as with, our receiving an
Indulgence for them. And so indeed it is but a small penance, that the most do
forbear by gaining an Indulgence; and as much temporal punishment we may think
would remain unsatisfied for, without such Indulgence granted to us, as now we
become answerable for, by any defect in it; and so, if we have no gain by it,
neither is there any great loss; I mean, from our neglects in doing penance
upon the security of the Indulgence. But 4ly. No loss there is but a sure gain
by it, if we take care both to perform all our penances enjoined, (in these
latter times, not so burdensome, nor bearing any porportion to those prescribed
by ancient Canons), and also to gain the Indulgence by doing the pious works it
enjoins, for that, wherein our penances performed may fall short of the
satisfaction due.

If any then shall urge here, that it is difficult to know the true validity of
an Indulgence, or the sufficiency of its cause, I answer; As it is difficult,
so (I have showed here) not much necessary.

validity, or fear a relaxation of necessary Christian Discipline by them, may
let them alone, do their Penance, and all is well. And those Protestants, who
so much dislike them, are welcome to stay in the Communion of the Church, and
have none of them. Neither had Luther any just cause to run out of the Church,
for fear Indulgences should have gotten some of his money.

obliged to the performance of any penances, either those enjoined them, or
others due for the satisfaction of any part of the Temporal punishment of their
sin: Yet 1st. As these penal deeds, such as Alms, Watching, Fasting, and
Prayers are numbered among other good works, that are always very acceptable to,
and highly rewardable with God, and may possess them of an higher Degree of
Glory, so all are advised to a frequentation of them still on this account;
which augmentation of glory, and our future reward by these penal, as they are
also good works, is much more to be esteemed (as Card. Lugo observes De Sac.
Paeuit. Disp. 27.. 2.
) than the Redemption of our Temporal pain by the benefit of Indulgences. 2.
And again, as they are any way profitable and requisite to those two ends of
Penances often forementioned See. 15 17.
as 1 the begetting of a true and solid Contrition for sins past, without which
had the very foundation of Indulgences fails; or 2 the cure of former vicious
habits, the moderating of our passions, and prevention of sin for the time to
come; a relapse into which in effect as to salvation ruins again what
Indulgences have formerly procured; and much better were it for the Penitent to
forgo the Indulgence; than such Penance, the omission whereof should betray
him to be re-enslaved to sin; Here also, I say, he is still advised, especially
as he has more reason to suspect his present estate, to a continuance of such
Penances, notwithstanding whatever favor done him by Indulgences [of which
matter thus P. Laeymann Lib. 5. tract. 7. c. 3.
out of Albertus Magnus -- Consultissimum esse, ut semper tota paenitentia
[namely, that is enjoined us] impleatur, quia plerumque minor, quam peccatis
debeatur, injuncta est per modum medicinae reservantis a recidiva; and saepe
incertum, an Indulgentiam lucrati simue [touched before]; vel saltem, an it a
plene, ut ab omni paena immunes existamus. And -- Paenitentiae, quoe pro peccat
is injungi solent, exignae sunt, and saepe tantum loco Medicina seu curationis
peccatorum imperatae, quas omnimodo implere expedit. Thus also Bellarmin De
Indulg l. 2. c. 13.
in answer to Chemnitius, urging -- Non bebere relaxari per Indulgentias
excrcitia virtutum, fructus paenitentiae, et novae vitae, and carnis
mortificationem, alioqui noxiae and perniciosae essent Indulgencae -- De paenis
sponte susceptis respondemus; non debere ^as relaxari, quatenus utiles sunt ad
novitatem vitae, and carnis mortificationem; sed posse relaxari quatenus sunt
panae debitae peccatis [i. e. post novitatem vitae ad adeptam.] And elsewhere
(says he) De Indulg. l. 1. c. 7.
-- Hoc tempore qui se parant ad Indulgentias consequendas confiteri solent
peccata Sacerdoti, and injunctam satisfactionem implere; non igitur
existimantes, sibi tantum injunctas paenitentias condonari, sed alias long
majores.

I said here, the Penitent, notwithstanding Indulgences, is advised to perform
his penances imposed; but some Roman Dctors say, obliged, if such Penances be
expressly imposed by his Confessor, not as satisfactory or vindicative for sin
past, but as judged by him morally necessary for preserving one from future,
[of which thus Suarez Cum in Paenitentia injuncta duplex ratio inveniri possit,
nimirum vindictae, and medicinae praeservantis, quamvis ex vi Indulgentiae
cesset satisfactio Sacramentalis sub priori rations, non tamen sub posteriori,
si sub illa posita sit. -- Quia Indulgentia tollit debitum; non tamen tollitur
materia sen necessitas medicina. Again De Paenit D. 50.. 2.
-- Intelligendum est per has Indulgentias remitti paenitentias impositas, ut
satisfactivae sunt, non ut medicinales; quia Indulgentia non datur in
destructionem, sed in aedificationem animarum. And -- His temporibus,
considerato modo quo paenitentiae imponi solent, raro vel nunquam omittere
licet paenitentias impositas propter Indulgentias: quia rever a imponuntur
levissimae paenitentiae, and quae vix sufficient per modum medicinae.] And that
passage of Card. Bellarmin, Indulg, l. 1. c. 7. seems much to confirm this --
Interdum etiam Pontifices (says he) in literis Indulgentiarum praescribunt, ut
Sacerdotes injungant paenitentias salutares iis, qui indulgentiam consequi
desiderant -- Relaxare autem non intendunt paenitentias illas salutares, quas
jubent imponi.] And those Doctors of a contrary opinion, yet grant an
obligation still of the penitents performing them, though not from the Priests
injunction, yet from the moral necessity of the thing as to avoiding sin, See
Card. Lugo, De Sacram. Paenitent. D. 27.. 2. who also concludes -- Consulendum
semper esse paenitenti ut opera imposita, quoad fieri possit, adimpleat; nec
debere panitentias omitti indulgentiarum occasion, quia illa opera imposita
etiam fuerunt a medico ex desiderio salutis, and quia prosunt ad meritum; quod
pluris faciendum est, quam redemptio panae temporalis.

Indulgences therefore are a great consolation to Christians in respect of the
Temporal Punishments, or Penances, for removing them, ( long majores, as
Bellarmin, than those enjoined), that they are liable to by their former sins;
so are they by prudent Christians made little or no use of for the omission of
any Penances, they can well perform, in their having a continual eye to the
other two ends now named, which must be made good for reaping any benefit by an
Indulgence; and to the third also, for the advancing of their future happiness.
And this, which is said here, may, I suppose, satisfy the Objection of our
Author p. 526.
-- that by Indulgences Catholics are excused from doing the best parts of
their Religion, viz. Severe Mortification, Fastings, Prayers, Alms, etc.
Which, 1st, If it have any strength in it, holds as much against ancient
Indulgences, as the modern; nor presses it the one more than the other, both
these remitting the like penal Satisfactions. 2ly. So far as such penal works
are necessary, as other good works, to the purchase or augmentation of eternal
happiness; or to repentance for sins past; or to leaving off sin for the
future, none are dissuaded from them by Indulgences; but on the contrary, for
the ampler partaking of the benefit of the Indulgence* are advised to, and also
enjoined them. Luther and Chemnitius long ago moved the same Objection, and
Bellarmin long ago gave such an Answer, De Indulg. l. 2. c 1. and l 2 c. 13.
which this Author (as his use is) instead of confuting, conceals.

Estius in 4. Sent. did. 20.. 10. and Layman Moral Theol. l. 5.7. tract. 5. c.
and the Authors referred-to by them), since a much greater penance by a plenary
Indulgence is remitted to one, than to another, as such is a greater sinner;
or, being an equal offender, has formerly done less penance for his sin; and
considering that the pious works, enjoined, are not varyed proportionably to
the different debts of those persons, who are by the Indulgence equally
released, reasonable I say, That there be supposed in the Suscipient (to obtain
the full effect of the Indulgence) a proportionable preparation, mortification,
and degree of Contrition to dispose him for it, according to his greater
offenses formerly, and smaller humiliation for them; [To this purpose
Bellarmin, Del Panit. l. 2. c. 14.
on St. Cyprians saying In Sermon. de Lapsis.
-- Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus, comments thus -- Non
significat dolorem absolute offensioni aequandum esse, quod fieri non potest;
Sed proportionem illam inter peccata and dolorem de peccatis esse debere, ut de
majore peccato magis, de minore minus doleamus. Ib. c. 11.
And * -- Periculum est, ne homo se ipse fallat, and dum in se acrem and
intensam contritionem excitare non satagit, revera ne appreciative quidem toto
cord crimina detestetur. And -- Non negamus (says Lugo De Paenit. Disp. 2.. 7.
in answer also to the Fathers) expedire, ut peccator conetur summa intensione
dolere, ut certior sit paenitentia, etc. In quo sensu debent accipi Patres, qui
Summum dolorem exigunt -- And Council. Trident. Sess. 14. c. 8.
-- Sane and Divinae Justitiae ratio exigere videtur, ut aliter a Domino in
Gratiam recipiantur qui ante Baptisnum per ignorantiam deliquerint; aliter
vero, qui semel a peccatis and Daemonis servitute liberati, and accepto
Spiritus Sancti dono, scientes templum Dei violare, and Spiritum Sanctum
contristare non formidaverint. Which reason seems to hold as much for sorrow
for sin, as for satisfaction, especially if we consider the like expression,
Ibid. c. 2. -- non sine magnis nostris fletibus and laboribus, etc.]

Reasonable also it seems, that where the pious work is indefinitely proposed,
as, for instance, the giving of Alms, without any certain quantity expressed,
this work should be performed to such a degree, as seems more to suite with the
greater favor any one receives; knowing this, that the dispensations of God's
Mercies by the Church Governors (who are entrusted in them, as Stewards, and
not as Lords) ought to be adjusted, as much as may be, to the receivers
different capacity thereof. And, if it be said here, that this leaves one
uncertain of a due preparation, and so, of the full effect of the Indulgence: I
answer, that every one is left uncertain in a greater matter, than this,
respecting Indulgences; namely, in his having a true Contrition, and being in
the state of Grace.

valere quantum sonant, as it is expounded before, and this Language is
ordinarily understood), for Bellarmins prudent man both to receive and make use
of all the Indulgences he can procure, nor lightly to distrust either the
judgment or fidelity of those to whom our Lord has committed the dispensing of
them; and that also, 1 for the noncertainty of his own due preparation, and 2
the danger of a relapse, and 3 the advancing his justification and future
reward, and also 4 as the Indulgence may possibly not be grounded on a cause
sufficient, as to the total effect thereof; that, I say, for some of these
reasons -- Simul [ i. e. together with his making use of the Indulgence] etiam
studeat dignos paenitentiae fructus far [which clause this Author omits] ac
pro suis peccatis Domino satisfacere. Of which the Cardinal gives these very
reasons in the same Paragraph, Ad tertium -- Quia (says he) potest fieri, ut
aliquando Indulgentia non sortiatur effectum, ob defectum ejus qui illam
suscipit; vel ob defectum authoritatis in eo, qui illam concedit; vel ob
defectum causae. Et Christianus populus non ignorant ad fidem pertinere, quod
sit in Ecclesia potestas indulgentias concedendi; non autem, quod in
particulari non possit fieri, ut indulgentia vel non sit rata, vel non prosit.
As he says elsewhere of receiving the Sacraments -- De Paenit. l. 2. c. 14^
Quia nemo certo scire potest se veram contritionem habuisse; itaque, ut quis
de adepta indulgentia securior sit, debet etiam omnia illa remedia adhibere,
quae Deus ad peccata purganda instituit. Which Reasons of the Cardinal our
Author, (making his prudent man, for several pages, the subject of his mirth)
instead of refuting (as his custom is) omits. For, indeed, they would quite
spoil his sport.

Abuses that have been, or are still, found in the use of Indulgences; As they
are by Protestants, and by this Author particularly, much exagitated, so they
are by Catholics confessed and deplored. Innocent the 3d. in the great Lateran
Council held A. D: 1215. Can. 62. complains of Indulgences undiscreet and
superfluous [i. e. inanes and irritae, says Bellarmin] quibus paenitentialis
satisfactio enervatur; and of the mis-behaviours of the Questors, or Collectors
in those days. Clement the 5th. in the Council of Vienna, held A. D. 1311.
censures the evil practices of those times much more. Constit Clemen. l. 5. tit
9. c. 2;
Part of which Constitution, I will here transcribe; to show the Reader, that
the blame, laid on the Pope and the Church, was the fault of the wicked
Ministers and Underofficers of the inferior Clergy, to whom the publishing of
Indulgences, and collection of the peoples Alms for some public pious uses,
was committed; and that Indulgences, as by these as well in their Sermons, as
collections, misrepresented to the people and perverted, are so much inveighed
against by several Roman Writers. -- Cum aliqui (says he there) ex hujusmodi
Quaestoribus [of whom he said a little before, -- Mos in suis predicationibus
simplices decipere, and aurum extorquere in animarum periculum, and plurimorum
scandalum] sicut ad nostram audientiam est perlatum, non sine multa temeritatis
audacia and deceptione multiplici animarum, indulgentias populo, motu suo
proprio, de facto concedant; super votis dispensent; a perjuriis, homicidiis,
and peccatis aliis sibi consitentes absolvant; male ablata incerta (data sibi
aliqua pecuniae quantitate) remittant; tertiam aut quartam partem de
paenitentiis injunctis relaxent; animas tres, vel plures parentum vel amicorum
illorum, qui elecmosynas eis conferunt, de purgatorio (ut asserunt mendaciter)
extrahant, and ad gaudia paradisi perducant; benefactoribus locorum, quorum
Quaestores existunt, remissionem plenariam peccatorum Indulgeant, and aliqui ex
ipsis eos a paena and a culpa (ut eorum verbis utamur) absolvant. Nos, abusus
hujusmodi, per quos censura vilescit Ecclesiastica, and cldvium Ecclesiae
authoritas ducitur in contemptum, omnimode aboleri volentes, inhibemus, etc.
Lastly, the Council of Trent, Sess 21. c. 9.
after the lost labor of several precedent Councils to reform these persons,
(who also gave so great scandal to Luther and his followers) quite abrogated
this Office and the privileges belonging thereto; and has committed the
publishing of such Indulgences, and collection of Charities to the Ord^nary of
the place, and two of the Chapter joined with him, to be done nulla prorsus
mercede accepta; i. e. when these Alms are directed to some certain public
work; and not left to the peoples own distribution of them, to what poor and
necessitous persons themselves think good, in such a quantity, as every ones
devotion shall move him to, as in many Indulgences they are; where we see, that
all the Sales, Harvests, Trading, Avarice, Cheating of the Pope and his
Hucksters, occurring almost in every page of our Authors discourse, comes only
to this; the relieving of some poor, and the occasioning of some deeds of
Charity to the rich, where themselves judge it best bestowed; And does this
Author think, in this liberty he takes to say what he pleases, that if words
spoken, words also printed, and those somewhat more than (...) shall not be
called to an account? Mat. 12.36.
But suppose it be a Collection of the peoples Charity for some public work,
as the building of a Church, or Hospital, the maintaining of a just War against
some Enemy and oppressor of Christianity, and this amounting to some vast sum
of money; may every one therefore take the liberty to charge the Pope, or the
Churches Prelates with fraud, covetousness, putting all, or a great part
thereof in their own Coffers, and pretending only not intending a public
benefit, at pleasure, and without proof? Or, this being a truth, may he
therefore deny the lawfulness of Indulgences, and defame the Church that allows
them, upon such a Personal fault?

frivolous causes, and some slight work? So do the Catholic Authors. And does
he not hold the Popes judgment to be infallible in these? Neither do they. Is
he for no Treasure of the Church? If the infinite and inexhaustible treasure of
the Merits and satisfactions of our Lord Jesus Christ be only allowed by him,
the Roman Divines hold no other Treasure necessary. Will he have Indulgences
only remit Canonical Penances? Those Authors, that hold so, are not censured by
the Roman Church. Does he think, that some of the Roman Doctors, in their
stating of Indulgences have swerved from the Doctrine of the ancient Church? he
may enjoy the Churches Communion, and hold with others of them those tenants
that please him better. I have here frequently quoted several of them, to show
that nothing here said by me is singular. Does such a frequency of Iudulgences
as ruins Church Discipline, and renders the Power of the Keys contemptible,
displease him? So does it the Council of Trent, Sess. 25. Decr. de Indulg.
(desiring a greater moderation therein, and a reduction to the pattern of
Antiquity): So has it likewise done several Popes, as is said before. Does he
detest the base Arts, and mis-informations of the people, for filthy lucres
sake, promising them much more than Indulgences extend to, or the Churches
Doctrine warrants? So have Councils, and Popes, as I have shown, censured and
endeavored to suppress them. Are such conplaints of the abuse of
Indulgengences made now? So were they in St. Cyprian's time. Of which he said
Serma de Lapsis.
-- Irrita pax: perniciosa dantibus, nihil profutura accipientibus. And --
Epist. 11. Ad Martyrs and Confessor.
Ea concedere quae in perniciem vertuntur, decipere est: nec erigitur sic
lapsus [from the Indulgence] sed per Dei offensam magis impellitur ad ruinam.
But not therefore, for such abuses, the use of Indulgences to be abrogated. To
conclude, the present allowed practice of Indulgences, by occasioning the
examination of men's Consciences, and a sense and sorrow for their sins, a
repairing to the Sacraments, and performing many penances, seems rather to
improve Christian Discipline (as the times are now degenerated from the
ancient) than to impair it; And ordinarily, by the Indulged his disposing of
his own Alms, this practice is sufficiently cleared from Covetousness,
Bargains, Sales, Cheating, this Authors main charge. Again, the Doctrine of the
Church concerning them is very compendious and general: Nor is there any part
of this Authors book, wherein so much may be granted him, without violating any
thing taught by It. And as no Point commonly is more baited by Protestants,
than this of Indulgences, so none seems to afford them less pretense of
discontent, or to give less cause of departing from the Churches Communion (yet
this is said to be the first, that occasioned that of Luther, and the
Reformation) since it is a Privilege, or Favor, that none are compelled to
make use of, and those who have any fears, or scruples concerning it, and
therefore would have no Indulgences, may let them alone, do their penances, and
all is well.

c. 6. 9. p. 5^8.
concludes his Discourse of Indulgences, and says, the Roman Doctrine of
Indulgences with a touch of these flies in p^eces like a Glass-drop, (though
this Doctrine has been touched by the chiefest of these Questions long ago,
asked by Luther, Calvin, Chemnitius, and others; and the Catholics Answers to
them, seem to have made them vanish away like so many water-bubbles: Neither
has this Author, for all his terrible and destructive touches, had the courage
to touch these Answers.) These, I say, I might pass by, having already spoken
to all that seems material, and pertinent therein, in the precedent Discourse.
Besides; He that maintains a thing as a point of his Faith, cannot therefore
reasonably be obliged to resolve all manner of Questions, that may be put
concerning it; It is sufficient, that he has a good evidence of so much, as he
does, or is obliged to maintain; or, as the Church has determined. Many
questions may be asked, wherein there appears not light enough for giving a
certain resolution; and this answer only needs be returned to them, that, to
maintain all that the Church, or our Faith requires, it is not necessary to
answer them. Many Questions there are concerning Indulgences stated Pro. and
Con. by learned Catholics, whilst all of them agree in the lawfulness and
benefit of them; and, Who doubts of the Holy Trinity, because he cannot clear
all difficulties about it? Bishop Andrews thought it a good Answer to Bellarmin
concerning the Real Presence -- Praesentiam credimus non minus quam vos veram.
De modo praesentiae nil temere definimus: And especially this liberty may be
claimed, when this Author is in such an unserious and drolling humor, with
which, in such sacred matters, his Adversary has no inclination to a
correspondence, asking such Questions as these: What satisfaction Gods Justice
receives for remitting a temporal punishment upon an Indulgence granted, where,
when, how, by whom, it is paid? Q 14.
in what way the payment is made? whether so much ready cash of the Churches
Treasure [i. e. of our Lords sufferings for us] is paid down upon the nail,
according to the proportion of every ones sins, [or temporal punishment]; or
God is told where such a treasure lies, and bid go and satisfy himself for so
much as is to be discharged of the Debt? But indeed such extravagant
Interrogatories made in these Spiritual matters, as if the Churches treasure
were kept under lock and key, and counted like money out of a bag, are rather
to be contemned, than replied to. Yet, that this Author may not please himself
too much therein, or his Protestant Reader overvalue them, I shall return to
them briefly that which I conceive sufficient to undeceive him, (giving here
only the sum of them, and leaving the Reader to view them more at large in the
Book).

Why in a plenary Indulgence the expression runs, Qu. 1.
Remission and Pardon of all their sins, when the Indulgence relates only to
the Temporal Punishment thereof? The Answer is set down before. 49. Remission
of sin is mentioned in the Indulgence, because an Indulgence always supposes
remission of the sin ( quoad culpam or offensam), and of its eternal punishment
by the use of the Sacrament of Penance, that is joined with the Indulgence; and
then It compleats all quoad paenam too, in remission also of the temporal
punishment.

How any punishment of the fault can be still due, Qu. 2.
when the fault is already pardoned? R. One would think our Author had never
heard of Reatus culpae, and paenae; or rather, he knew, the Lady had not. By
Remission of the Sin, Catholics mean, of the Enmity it puts between God and
the Sinner, whereby he is again received into his favor, with which is also
always necessarily joined the remission of the Eternal Punishment; the
retention of which cannot consist with our restitution into his friendship, as
the retention of some temporal punishment may. The sin then, as to this enmity,
wholly pardoned, yet, as to its punishment, is remitted only in part; and in
part still un-remitted, and to be answered-for. As a Parent, straight, upon a
Child's confession of a fault, moving him to pity, re-admits him into his lost
savor (which we call forgiving his fault; and do learn this Language from what
Nathan said from God to David; confessing -- Dominus transtulit peccatum tuum)
but nevertheless after this, 2 Samuel 12.13.
for many good ends, corrects him for it, as God did David, ver. 14. -- Propter
hoc, filius qui natus est tibi, etc. And so says the Psalmist of the Children
of Israel in the Desert Ps. 98.8.
-- Domine Deus noster, tu propitius fuisti eis [there is pardoning the sin,
and yet], and ulciscens in omnes adinventiones eorum; [i. e. the temporal
punishment of their pardoned sins he there inflicted on them, not entering into
the Land of promise, etc.] Perhaps this Questioner may better comprehend this,
if I set it him down in the Explication of a Protestant, Chemnitius Exam. Conc.
Trid. part. 2. De Satisfact.
-- Fide propter Christum, accipimus simul remissionem culpae and paenae
aeternae. Sed, quod ad paenas temporales in hac vita attinet, post acceptam
remissionem peccatorum subjiciuntur [justificati] in hac vita vel communibus
calamitatibus, vel peculiaribus paenis propter certa seu privata quaedam
peccata. Vt Adam, David, Populus Israel, Miriam. Testantur idem calamitates
Baptizatorum post Baptismum. Ostendunt etiam Scripturae exempla, Deum aliquando
and post reconciliationem, seu remissionem quibusdam singulares paenas ob
peccata in hac vita imponere, quanquam hoc non sit universale. -- Scriptura
etiam dicit, de reconciliatis; orpus mortuum est propter peccatum, Romans 8. And
2. Reg. 12, Quia fecisti hoc, etc. -- Non quasi Deus illis nondum satis sit
reconciliatus, seu aliquid offensae retinuerit, etiam post datam remissionem
peccatorum; Sed illis imponuntur ad castigationem sui, and ad exemplum aliorum:
Ne, accepta reconciliatione, obliviscantur, quanta sit abominatio peccati, and
quae magnitudo irae Dei adversus peccatum. Thus He

What temporal punishment reremains to be satisfied for by us, Qu. 3.
from which we may be freed by Indulgences? R. We can be freed only from those
temporal punishments by Indulgences, from which we may by our Penances. If
asked, from what temporal punishments our penances may relieve us? I answer;
from such, as God purposes to inflict on any here, or hereafter, in this
world, or the next (if he spare us here) in relation to our particular personal
and actual sins, unless our own penances and humiliations do prevent them. But
then, speaking of this present life, where many sufferings and afflictions
happen to Christians upon many other accounts, than the punishing and
chastising them for some former sins; and where some of those also, that are
inflicted for former sins, may be not upon any humiliation or penances
avertible; which, or of what kind those be, that are avertible; or whether of
any kind some, but not others; God only knows, not we. As for Death taken in
general, it is a punishment of Original sin, not removable by Penances; but,
for any thing we know, a premature, or some other kind of death, to some
particular persons, may. Mean while, that Penances, Humiliations, Fastings
Watchings, Prayers, Alms, etc. (such as the Ninevites used) may rescue us from
some temporal punishments for our sins, that God would otherwise inflict,
surely this Author will not deny; For the Protestants to such an end appoint
certain days of Humiliation. I now then demand of him, whether such our
humiliations free us from all temporal punishments, or only some one kind?
Whether diseases, pains and death, be not part of the temporal punishment of
sin; and whether men may be freed from these by such humiliations? Whether from
the effects of the Justice of God in extraordinary Judgments? if not, how can a
man by such humiliations be said to be freed from the temporal punishment of
sin, that is as liable to it as any one else? The answer here, sitted to our
humiliations and penances, will serve as well for Indulgences from such
penances. And so I leave his own Answer to satisfy his own Objection.

If freed from only one sort of the temporal punishment of sin, what sort that
is; Qu. 4.
that the Indulged may know, what punishment he is freed from? R. The Answer to
the former Question satisfies also this. I say then again: The freedom is from
such temporal punishment of sin, as the Divine Justice purposed to inflict,
unless prevented herein by our penances. I add here, which punishments, what,
or how many, they shall be, as none can tell the Indulged, so neither is he
concerned to know; he certainly gaining by the Indulgence, so long as the pious
work performed by him is of a less value than the punishment remitted to him.
However the Roman Authors be divided in opinion, all maintain to the truly
penitent a certain benefit by a lawful Indulgence.

If it be from Canonical Penance that one is freed, Qu. 5.
whether he be wholly freed from the obligation of that, or no? and if he be,
what power the Priest has to enjoin Penance after it? [i. e. as I understand
him, after a person is admitted to the benefit of the Indulgence.] I Anser:
After the gaining of the Indulgence, the Priest has no power to enjoin any
more penance for sins committed before it, i. e. in order to the satisfaction
of any temporal punishment due thereto.

Why the satisfaction of Christ might not as well remit the temporal punishment
at that time, Qu. 6.
when the fault is remitted upon the account of this satisfaction, as afterward
by Indulgences? R. It might, had God so pleased to remit to sinners, offending
him more highly by a relapse from their baptismal Grace, those their sins, and
all the punishments by his Justice belonging to them, at once. But that the
Divine Wisdom, for many good ends, de facto does not remit all the punishment
together with the sin, appears from the Texts alleged before. 48.

This to his six first Questions, wherein he seems a little more serious. that
remain, are all spent about the Churches Treasure, as it relates to the
satisfying the Divine Justice for the Indulgences conceded by the Church; To
all which it were sufficient to return him that little short answer of Doctor
Holden mentioned before. 47. De resol. fidei l. 2. c. 6.
-- Caetera omnia dubia sunt, etc. -- Nimirum an sit thesaurus aliquis
meritorum and satisfactionum in Ecclesia; cujus dispensatores sint Romanus
Pontifex, and reliqui Ecclesiae Pastores. The Council of Trent (as Doctor
Tailor observes) has said nothing of such a Treasure; neither is it more
necessary to be disputed now, as to the benefit of Indulgences, than in Saint
Cyprians time. There was no remission, then, or now, from any pain or penance
of sin, but through the merits and satisfactions of our Lord; and either their
Indulgences are liable to the same Questions, or, ours exempt. And thus I might
dismiss all the following. But, because they may not seem to some of greater
concernment, or gravity, than indeed they are, I shall also consider them. And,
this Treasure being said to consist partly of the satisfactions of our Lord,
partly of his Saints, I shall apply my self first to those things that are
questioned by him concerning our Lords satisfactions, in his 7, 8, 9, 14th.
questions; and then to those concerning the Saints in Qu. 10, 11, 12, 13.

satisfactions. This is certain, that the great, rich, and inexhaustible
Treasure of Christians, and of the Church (I call it the Churches Treasure,
because our Lord dispenses it by the Churches Ministry) by which our
Redemption from Sin, and all its punishments, is purchased, are the Merits and
Satisfactions of Christ. And this Treasure is not disbursed and laid out
promiscuously for all sinners whatever, but those only, on whom, rightly
prepared and disposed, the Successors of our Lord by his appointment, do confer
the Sacraments, instituted by him for remission of sin. Here, therefore, we
will suppose this Sacrament to be Baptism. Upon the administration whereof, to
the baptized, by the Ministry of the Clergy, are applied the Merits and
Satisfactions of Christ tendered to, and accepted by, Gods Justice for the
remission of their Sins, and all punishment thereof, Eternal, or Temporal. No
Protestant, I suppose, gainsaying this, Now I beg leave to return, to this
Author, his own Questions, the better to make appear the great levity and
vanity of them; only changing the subject, and asking them not concerning
Indulgences but Baptism; wherein this Author must grant this Treasure of our
Lords satisfactions, to the rightly prepared, to be applied for remission of
sin, and its punishment; so that they may every whit as well be asked of the
one, as of the other. And then, what Answers he thinks fit to give concerning
the one, he and his party may take the same also for the other. And, if he will
warrant them for satisfactory, I hope he will think better of the Roman
Doctrine concerning the Churches Treasure, according to his promise p 524.
.

Qu. 7.
then, with the Seventh question. Here, presupposing that our Lords
satisfactions are infinite, and not so exhausted by the discharging to Gods
Justice the debt of the sins and punishments of all those baptized hitherto,
but that there remains great plenty of them that may still be applied in the
baptism of others, and still be redundant; this, I say, being true, and clear,
I desire this Author would tell me, (repeating here the 7th. question) How,
here, the parts of Christ's satisfaction come to be divided into that which was
necessary, for those already baptized, and that which is redundant still for
others; and part of these be necessary to satisfy for the fault, another part
redundant, or remaining, to satisfy for the temporal or eternal punishment
thereof? Whether in general Christ in his Passion and Sufferings did any more
than God required? Whether any thing of that, all which God required, can be
said to be redundant? If the^e be, how some part comes to be applied already,
and the other to remain still for others in the Churches Treasure? What parts
can be made of an infinite and entire satisfaction? [where note, that speaking
of the application of our Lords satisfactions, part, or the whole, no other
Language is, or needs to be used in Indulgences, than in Baptism. Let the
entire satisfaction of our Lord be applied to one Sinner in baptism, so as it
remains entire also still, for another; and be applied entire for remission of
sin in baptism, so as it remains entire also for remission of the punishments
belonging to sin, temporal, or eternal; and after all, that ever hereafter
shall receive baptism, that it remains entire still, (because infinite), for
infinite more persons, if they were in being; and that it be so bestowed entire
already, that still it remains entire to be bestowed; and as is well. For as
Suarez De Paenit. Disp. 51.. 1.
answers to the silly question, In what place this Treasure is kept? -- Res
spiritualis est and moralis, non in materiali loco, sed in divina acceptatione
and presentia existens: so may I concerning its parts; Res spiritualis est, non
habens parts, etc. And it is this Author here, in making such questions,
troubles us with these Notions; How it is divided? where kept? when, and how
much, paid? etc. To proceed now in his questions] And if so little be necessary
for all already baptized, what needs so much redundant for remitting any sin or
punishment of others that shall be baptized hereafter?

Whether all the satisfaction of Christ taken together was not great enough to
remit the eternal punishment of the whole world, Qu. 8.
as well as of these that are, or that ever shall be, baptized? If it were,
whether all the redundant parts of that, which would have redeemed the rest,
since not all, but a very small part of the world is, or shall be redeemed, or
baptized, be cast into the Churches treasure too? and who has the keeping of
this treasure, and what use is made of so much treasure beyond what all that
ever were, or shall be baptized do stand in need of; and which, as remitting
the eternal punishment, is much more useful, than that which serves only to
remit the temporal in Indulgences? And what account can the Church Governors
give, if suffering so vast a part of the Churches treasure to lie idle, and
make no use of it for the benefit of those that need it; namely, of all that
part of the world to whom it is not already applied? [Mean while this Author
may know, that the Church. Governors do take their best care, that none do want
this application, who need it, and are rightly disposed for it; and where God
has made any promise to ratify their act].

Qu. 9.
in their administration of the Sacraments, why may they not, if they think of
it, procure another mighty treasure of the absolute power of God, which is
never used, as for making new worlds, etc? And may they not by the help of this
Treasure of Gods power deliver Souls out of Hell, as well as by the other from
it? And if this be so much the greater kindness, they ought to think of it, and
employ this treasure for these purposes. And why may they not think of another
treasure of the light of the Sun that is more than enough for the use of the
world, and to lay it up in store for the benefit of purblind and aged? [Doth
not this better become a Socinian, or an Atheist, than a grave Divine? and
might he not have done well to have chosen another subject, for such unseemly
levity, than the infinite Merits and Satisfactions of our Lord?]

Qu. 14.
of which by and by. Review we next then the Fourteenth. Where, if
satisfaction, by the sufferings of our Lord, be tendered to Gods Justice for
what ever punishment of penitent Sinners that are baptized, we desire to know,
when, and by whom the payment of these sufferings or satisfactions of our Lord,
is made to God? If it was made by Christ (the Person whose satisfactions make
the Churches Treasure) for that end, what have his Ministers to do to dispense
that, now in their conferring the Sacraments, which God has accepted long ago
from our Lord when he died, for payment? But if the payment be made now by the
Ministers, in what way do they make it? do they take out so much ready cash of
the Churches treasure, and pay it down upon the nail according to the
proportion of every ones sin that is baptized? Or do they only tell God where
such a treasure lies, and bid him go and satisfy himself for so much as they
then discharge of the baptized persons debt for his sins? [Disce sapere ad
sobrietatem].

Satisfactions of the Saints; those of one being accepted for averting some
temporal punishment from another; Q. 10.
On which subject are this Authors questions, from the 9th. to the 14th. Here
suppose (which not seldom happens) an Holy Man, upon some great offending of
God by some of near relation to himself, Prays, Fasts, wears Sackcloath, and
uses other Penances, and Mortifications merely on the others behalf for
preventing some temporal judgment that he fears hangs over his head: And God,
accepting such humiliation of his, for a person so disposed as to be capable of
it, averts this judgment, which, otherwise, he would have inflicted upon the
others Crimes; (a thing also, I suppose, this Author will grant not unoften
done, or at least possible to be so. And now let us return to his 10th.
Question, and demand of him: If the satisfaction of Christ be so redundant, as
it is made, how comes it not to be sufficient for so poor an end, as this
temporal punishment of this sinner is; but that the humiliations and penances
of this holy man must make up a share in this infinite treasure of our Lords
sufferings? [But note here, upon this word Must; that none say, there is any
necessity of the satisfactions of Saints to be added to our Lords; or says,
that our Lords are not sufficient, as our Author invidiously here proposes the
case.] Is not this worse, than to light a Candle to help the Sun, to suppose
Christ's satisfaction so infinite, as to be sufficient to redeem more worlds,
and yet not enough to deliver from a temporal punishment without the
humiliation of this holy man? [ Not enough, none says so. All-sufficient
Christ's satisfactions are; but yet God to honor his Saints, and for other ends
of his Wisdom, is pleased to do favors to others upon the penal works and
humiliations, or also prayers, of his Saints in their behalf; but all these
still accepted by God through his Sons Satisfactions.]

Qu. 11.
Here we repeat the same again. How comes this Holy Man to do such large
Penances with regard to Gods Justice and Wrath, if the sanctification of Christ
were of so infinite a nature? And if he practice mortifications and penances,
is he not sufficiently rewarded for them? If he be, how come these to help the
other, his Friend, which he is abundantly recompensed for himself. [Here I ask
also; How come our prayers to procure from God some benefit to others, when for
the Charity of them, we our selves likewise are rewarded by him; a thing not
doubted of? The same pious work or suffering may obtain a manifold recompense,
and that as to several persons, by way of Impetration from Gods bounty and
mercy which enlarges its self without bounds, See Bellarm. De Indulg. l. 1. c.
2.. 2. Propositio.
how far it pleases. But it is granted, that when we speak of a strick
compensation or satisfaction made to Gods Justice, thus no work or suffering of
ours, that is equivalently satisfactory only for another debt (suppose, of
temporal punishments), can be also of our own: for none can so pay to Gods
Justice two debts with that sum, which is due for one of them only.]

If the satisfaction of Christ does only obtain Grace for this Holy man to do
penance himself, Q. 12.
for averting the temporal punishment of his own sin, [But, who says thus?]
how can the application, or acception of this Holy Man's penances free another
from the temporal punishment of his sin, without his doing any penance? Or have
his penances being joined with Christ's satisfactions greater power with God for
this other person, than the satisfactions of Christ have for himself? [Whatever
the Authors meaning is in this Question, which perhaps I do not rightly
comprehend, Christ's satisfactions alone are affirmed, both for Common Penitents
and Saints, all sufficient, and not only do obtain grace for Saints, to
satisfy themselves, for a temporal punishment; but also, when applied by an
Indulgence, do procure a remission of such temporal punishment to them, without
their own Penances or Satisfactions.]

Qu. 13.
Why the satisfaction of Christ may not serve [But, who are they, that say, it
may not? See before. 47.] without this Holy Man's penances to remit only the
other persons temporal punishment for his sin, when the satisfaction of Christ
was sufficient alone to remit both eternal and temporal to that person in the
Sacrament of Baptism? Or was the force of it spent then, that it needs a fresh
supply afterward from this Holy Man's penances? But if then it could be applied
to a higher end, without any other help, why not where it is to have far less
efficacy?

We have now passed through all his Questions concerning the Churches Treasure;
many of them, as they seem to me, very irreverent and impertinent; of which (as
I said) he may accept of that Answer in his application of them to Indulgences
which he gives us in ours to the Sacrament. The last Question yet remains.

How came this treasure of the Church, i. e. the superfluities, Qu. 15.
as he calls them, of Christ's satisfactions for the temporal punishment of sin
which are applied in Indulgences, into the Popes keeping; and who gave him the
Keys of them? when every Priest is trusted in the Sacrament of Penance, with
the treasure of Christ's necessary satisfaction for the remitting of the eternal
punishment? R. After I have first told him (for the language is used by him
here) that I know no Roman Divine that styles Christ's satisfactions for the
remitting of Sin, and the eternal punishment, necessary, and of the temporal,
superfluous: I Answer; That in the doubt, what persons have the lawful power of
conced^ng Indulgences, it is sufficient that Protestants then be satisfied,
when they are first agreed to admit them. Mean while what needs our Author
trouble himself, or us, with such a question? The Pope, surely, has as much
power of, and right to keep, the Keys, as any. Of those Indulgences, then,
which he concedes, none needs dispute the validity: But not to leave this
unspoken to. I say 1st. That, as not the Concession of Indulgences, so neither
the Exercise of the power of Absolution (this also being an Act of Jurisdiction
and Judicature) i.e. neither the application of Christ's Merits and
Satisfactions, for the eternal, nor for the temporal punishment of Sin, does
belong to the Inferior Clergy, but dependently from the Bishops and Governors
of the Church; which Commission they receive also with a reservation of several
Cases, wherein they may not absolve. Next; for Church Governors: Not only the
Pope, but other Bishops de facto have conceded Indulgences in ancient times,
and do still. But whether the conceding of them does belong to all Bishops Jure
Divino, or only to the suprem Governor the Pope, is disputed among the
Schoolmen. The Council of Trent, (though there they were much disputed) has
determined nothing about the Limits of such Episcopal Jurisdictions; but left
them to the former current Ecclesiastical Customs and Practices; Several
limitations and restraints of them have been made by the supreme Bishop of the
Church the Successor of St. Peter (to whom in the first place our Lord
committed the Keys [Tibi dabo Claves] not only with a Precedence to, but Power
and Authority over, the rest): and have been made to very good ends, that
things might be done with better order and discussion, and with less confusion,
and relaxation of Discipline, as it is also particularly in this granting of
Indulgences; And so long as the Bishops acquiesce therein, such questions, as
this, seem rather moved to the disturbance of the Churches peace, than any
edification in the Christian Faith. And so I leave it. The Roman
School-Divines, to this and several other of his questions, have not been
silent; nor wanted his Predecessors the wit to ask them before him. If he looks
so much into their Books, as he pretends, why takes he no notice of their
Answers? Is it not because he finds so much Reason in them, as he is loath to
divulge to his party, unless he could do it with greater satisfaction?

Invectives against the Roman Indulgengences, i. e. against the remitting of
some Penances, and this not gratis; but, for some other Pious Works done in
live thereof [perhaps so many times Visiting a Church, and therein for some
time offering up his Devotions, Fasting on certain days, giving so much Alms,
and the like]; and for a Cause, that, in advancing some public, or private
good, bears some proportion to that which is remitted, or also far exceeds it;
as warring against Infidels oppressing the Church, Conversion of Heretics,
building of Churches, Hospitals, etc. And, again, For the remission of which
Penances the Person is required first to examine the quality of his sins, and
to excite a Contrition suitable thereto, to repair to the Sacrament of Penance,
Confession, and Absolution, and also to perform such penances as may be thought
salutary and medicinal to the conquering his lusts, and preventing the like
miscarriages for the time to come, and all this to be done by him to render
himself capable of the benefit of an Indulgence: I say, after all this
inveighing against such a practice of the Roman Church, wherein (as usually in
all other Points contested, she only stands upon her guard and defense of
Customs descending to her from Ancient Times; and the Accusers, and Invaders,
are the other Party); with what greater severity do the Protestant Ministers
treat a Person, that, after the losing his Baptismal Grace, labors under
mortal sin? What Penances, what better thing, than those Roman pious Works,
which they deride, do they impose? They indeed, as Catholics also, exhort such
a person to repentance of his sin, and amendment of his life; and tell him, as
Catholics also do, that these are necessary; but then the surest way to
acquiring a true repentance, and the chiefest means of working in him a
reformation of life, i. e. solitude, penance, mortifications, abstinences, etc.
they press not to him; and of the necessity also of the Churches Keys for
remission of such Mortal sin committed after Baptism they do not inform him.

They tell him, that he needs fear no further reckonings for his sin, as to any
punishment or sufferings for it, if once repented of; that sin, and all its
punishments are wiped off at once [for, says our Author, p. 519. Quest 2.
how can that fault be said to be remitted, which is yet punished?] and
therefore that our doing any penance, for avoiding such punishment, is
needless. The Indulgences in the Catholic Church, only sometimes used for
remitting such penances, (yet this not without commutation) are cried out of
Romans Idol. p. 526.
as excusing them from doing the best parts of their Religion; Yet, among
Protestants, such penances are remitted always, in their being never at all
imposed; and yet their piety and Religion thrives well enough without them; and
they are neither required as the best, nor any part of it. They cry out of the
lightening sometimes of men's burdens in the Church of Rome by Indulgences; but
themselves will not touch those lighter burdens (mentioned before), that are
laid on them for gaining these Indulgences, with one of their fingers. Nothing
is done right in the Church of Rome; whilst among them nothing is done at all;
and therefore, in the other is nothing done right.

Negative Way of Religion, as to so great a part of the Churches Practicals:
Which thus endeavors to pull down all that stands before it, but it self
builds nothing; and, under pretense of reforming Religion, and Devotions, only
defaceth them; and so leaves the ruins thereof to be trampled upon by
Atheists. Here are (speaking of the most part, and those that stand at a
farther distance from the Roman Church) no Mental prayer; no Purgation or
Mortification in order thereto; no Abstraction of life; no Contemplation, no
state of perfection, no Aspirations, no Active or Passive Unions, talked of. No
Evangelical Councils; but those so called, help precepts to some particular
persons, of which none finds himself to be one; no recommending of solitude; of
single life; of quitting the possession and cares of Riches, -- Vt soliciti
sint quae sunt Domini, quo modo placeant Deo 1 Cor. 7.32. -- and ut facultatem
praebeat sine impedimento Dominum obsecrandi; No Sacerdotal Confession; and so
no Casuists to satisfy scruples; and so no liability of such to be
misconstrued in stating such points; as the Roman Casuists are most shamefully
by Protestants citing their words, and defalking Circumstances, which
continually alter the state of the Question; No Penances, or Satisfactions to
appease Gods wrath for their sins, those of Christ being sufficient; and so, no
need of Indulgences; No Sacrifice of the Altar: No Corporal presence of our
Lords Body there; and so no solemn Ceremonies attending it; No Adoration there,
and so no questioning of them for Idolatry: No Sacrament of Penance for
deliverance from Mortal sin, and so no Grace expected from the Opus operatum of
it; When people are sick, no care of confessing them; or of not letting them
depart hence without their Viaticum; Jam. 5.15.
and without Extreme Unction in the name of the Lord. No recommending
themselves to the Prayers of Saints to help them with their Intercessions to
God: No Purgatory or present Middle State of any faithful Souls, however
departed hence with imperfect reformation of life; but all Christians sent
immediately to Hell, that do not go immediately to Heaven, and to the Beatifical
Vision of God; and so no Prayers, no Oblations, no All-Souls-days, no
Anniversaries, for benefiting of such Souls, No saving so as by fire; No
sufferings to be endured hereafter, if the most extreme be once escaped; and
what ever soul departing hence is not worthy of the lowest Misery, 1 Cor. 3.15.
instantly ascends into the highest Bliss: And there too, no Degrees of Glory;
but in Christ all equal. But then if it be considered, how few of those, who
seem to dye penitent, are well prepared (by reason of their repentance and
imperfect reformation of manners) to enter immediately to the fruition of Gods
presence, and possession of eternal joys, and how much many Protestants
disparage a deathbed Repentance, whilst thus they send no Souls to Purgatory,
they send the more to Hell: In extremes they are the one way, or the other;
whilst the Church, guided by Scripture, expounded by Tradition, goes in a
middle way, rather inclined to mercy, than rigor. Again, No Vows; no
macerations of the Body; no Vigils; no Observing Fasts; hardly any Festivals,
much less their Octaves. But every one left to pray, to repent, after his own
way; fast, when he pleases; do good works out of gratitude to him, who has
done and suffered for him all that God requires; to believe firmly and without
wavering the remission of all his sins, how heinous soever, and so to magnify
the more Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits, to read the Scriptures without asking
the Eunuck's Question Quomodo possum intelligere, nisi quis ostenderit mihi,
etc. and not to doubt but that God will illuminate him in the understanding of
them as much as is necessary, when as he stops his ears to the instructions of
those Missioners sent by our Lord to teach him in them; No such numerous
Catalogue of the Articles of their Faith, or Determinations of former obliging
Councils, nor yoke of Assent or Belief imposed; but boasting of their indulging
to all men liberty of opinon in those things, where the former Church they say
has used Tyranny. No sure Tradition, save only that of the Scriptures, (for
this alone serves their turn); no Church-Infallibility; and I had almost said,
no Church Authority. A fine contrived way of Religion for invading others, and
no need of defending it self: For on Affirms lies the Proof.

All these Church-Practices before Luthers appearance, are thrown off by many,
(for I cannot say it of all; Those among them, I hope will consider, whom these
things concern;) Nor have they any reverence to their gray hairs, or their
great antiquity: But, for their defense against this (not to be denied), they
bring in Antichrist to farther them; bring him not into the world only, in such
early days, but into the Church; and in the Church, place him also in the
chiefest Chair thereof, in the latter end of the Fourth Age, or beginning of the
Fifth: (for many of these Customs, rejected by them, are then found in the
Church); and there he has sat ever since, and given laws to Christianity (if
we will believe them) for a thousand years, till the Reformation appeared,
notwithstanding our Lords Promise to the Church of Portae inferi non
pravalebunt. And, since this his coming, all these things are found
Superstition, Will Worship, Mandata Hominum, with these Reformers: and, upon the
same account, many other Sects, Sub-reformers of the Reformed, are hard at work
to pull down the remainder of Church- Government, Ceremonies, Discipline, which
these first Demolishers have yet left standing. And having thus dismissed and
rid their hands of all these former Church-Customs they have now the leisure to
make sport with them too, and call them to an account. And for fitting the
Churches Tenants and Practices the better for their drollery, they mis-relate,
and mis-represent them so far, as that they can manifest them unreasonable and
ridiculous; and the extravagancy of any Casuist or Schoolman is applied, and
imputed, to the Church; whilst the Protestant Reader, though otherwise never so
prudent and knowing, yet unstudied and unexperienced in these things, believes
their relation as a truth; and the Learned, amongst Catholics, are astonished
to see the Churches Doctrine so disguised and falsified. Tuautem exaltare,
Domine, in virtute tua; and, as there want not many to invade thy Truth, so
raise up always those that may defend it with the strength, not which they
have of themselves (that is none), but which they receive from Thee; who usest
to confound the Wise of this world with things weak, and despised, that no
flesh may glory in thy sight. And, as for the Enemies of thy Church and Truth,
whoever they be, Imple facies eorum ignominia Domine, ut quaerant nomen tuum.


