THE Bow-mans Glory; OR, ARCHERY REVIVED.

GIVING An Account of the many signal Favors vouchsafed to Archers and Archery
by those Renowned Monarchs,

KING HENRY VIII. KING JAMES, And KING CHARLES I.
As by their several gracious Commissions here recited may appear.

With a brief Relation of the Manner of the Archers marching on several days of
Solemnity.

Published by WILLIAM WOOD, Marshal to the Regiment of Archers.

London, Printed by S. R. and are to be Sold by Edward Gough at Cow-Cross. 1682.

To the most POTENT MONARCH CHARLES II. KING OF England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc.
May it please your Majesty,
THE Credit and Esteem that ARCHE has always had amongst your Royal Ancestors,
makes me presume to Dedicate to your Majesty this little Treatise, which was
almost lost in the Ruins of Time, as well as the Subject Matter of it. I must
confess indeed, that this Art or Exercise holds not the same Rank and Place in
Military Discipline, that it did before the Invention of Guns; but yet to
assign it none at all, were (...) reflect upon the Prudence and Consideration
of those Laws that have since that Time been made for its Encouragement.

And methinks that the many Victories which our Kingdom (famous for their Bows)
owes to that sort of Arms, may at least recommend the Exercise to us, though it
be but in Sport and Triumph. Besides, we are sure the Labor will not be wholly
lost (if there were no Pleasure in it) it being (it may be) one of the most
wholesome and manly Recreations used in this Nation, and Conduces as much, or
more than other, both to the Preservation of Health, and the Improvement of
Strength. But I fear I am unmannerly, your Majesty knows better than any body
else, both the Usefulness and Pleasure of the Bow; and we were unjust to
distrust your Countenancing it. Long may we live under the Government of so
good a Prince, and may this, and all other worthy Exercises, fit and qualify
your Majesty's Subjects to Defend your Crown and Dignity. This is the Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Humble and Dutiful Subject and Servant, William Wood.

To the Honorable, Sir John Ernley Knight, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, and one of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's
Treasury, Sir Edward Hungerford, Knight of the Bath, Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight,
and Sir Joseph Williamson Knight.
FOR me that am so Unlearned and Ignorant, to speak of the Antiquity and Worth
of Archery, were a great weakness; for I find it to be almost as old as Adam:
For in Holy Writ, Genesis 21. 20. it is said, That God was with Ishmael, and he
became an Archer. And for the fierceness of the Bow and Arrow, Gods Vengeance
is sometime in Scripture compared to it. But to come nearer home, and to speak
of one or two of those great Victories that have been obtained against the
Enemies of England by Archers. As for Instance; first, the Battle of Cressy in
France, in the Reign of Edward the Third, where he himself in Person, with the
Black Prince his Son, with an Army of Ten thousand Archers, overthrew and
vanquished his Enemy, Philip King of France, and his Army, consisting of near
One hundred thousand Men; in which Battle were Thirty thousand slain: See the
Story more at large in Baker's Chronicle, page 124, and 125. But this is not
all the harm that Archery has done to our Enemies, nor honor it has won to
our selves; for in the Year 1415. in the Reign of Henry the Fifth, there was at
Agincourt, in the Territories of France, such a Victory obtained, over the
French, by the help of the Archers, that can scarce, if ever, be paralleled in
any History; where a considerable Number of Archers, under the Command of Sir
William Orpington, who with an Ambush of no more than Two hundred Archers, gave
the first Onset, (which take in Sir Rich. Baker's own words,) Causing the
Bow-men to let fly their Arrows, which so gawled the French Horse, that either
they cast their Riders, or through their unruliness so opened their Ranks, that
the right Wing of the English Horse had way to come in upon the French Foot.
The English Army being in Number not above Nine thousand, and the French six
times, nay, some say ten times as many in Number. The Number of the French
slain was above Ten thousand, whereof One hundred twenty six were of the
Nobility bearing Banners; of Knights and Gentlemen Seven thousand eight hundred
seventy four; and of Common Soldiers about One thousand six hundred, with a
very small damage to the English; as may be seen at large, page 175. in Sir
Richard Baker.

It were endless to recount what great Battles have been obtained by the help
of the Archers, and what high Esteem the Turks have of it to this day, I Will
refer you to Travelers and Historians; more particularly to that Ingenious
Book of Sir Paul Rycaut, in his History of the Turks: and it is much to be
lamented, that those Weapons by which our Ancestors gained so much Renown,
should now be almost totally laid aside, save only by your Honors, and those
Gentlemen that use it for their Health and Recreation. But we hope this drawing
forth may be a means to increase and add to the Number of those that love
Archery; which is the hearty Desire, and Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your most humble and obedient Servant, William Wood.

In Praise of Archery.
BRave Archery, what Rapture shall I raise
In giving thee thy merit, and due praise?
Divine thou art, as from the Gods begot:
Apollo with an Arrow Python Shot,
And Cupid, the fair Venus son, we know,
Is always figured with his Shafts and Bow.
The chaste Diana with her Nymphs in chase,
Will with no other Arms their shoulders grace.
A mighty Bow the great Alcides drew,
When he (to save his Bride) the Centaur slew.
It is the powerful Hand of Heaven that bends
The all-colour'd Rainbow that so far extends:
Before the Tormentary art was found,
The jarring string, did make the dreadfull'st sound.
And that invulner'd Greek unscar'd, by steel
Was shot, and slain by Paris in the heel.
The naked Indian does no Armor lack,
His Bow being bent, and Quiver at his back.
And the wild Tartar does no danger fear,
His Arrow nocht, and String drawn to his Ear.
The Parthian in this practice has such skill,
That when he flies, he can Shoot back and kill.
For us; what foreign Chronicles, but sing
Our Honors purchased by the Gray-goose wing?
Brave Cordelion with feathered Band
Beat the proud Sultan from the Holy Land.
And what an Honor did the Black Prince gain
When He with English Archers conquered Spain!
So Ancient, so Divine, so Nobly famed
(Yet for the Body's health there is nothing named)
It is an Exercise (by proof) we see
Whose practice does with nature best agree.
Obstructions of the Liver it prevents,
Stretching the Nerves and Arteries, gives extents
To the Spleens oppilations, clears the Breast
And spungy Lungs: It is a Foe professed
To all Consumptions: More what need I name?
The State approves it for a Lawful game.
What won our Honor, is now made our Sport,
Witness Poicteirs, Cressy, and Agincourt.
THE PATENT OF King HENRY VIII. Concerning ARCHERIE.
HENRY the Eight by the Grace of God King of England and of France, Defendour
of the Faith, Lord of Irelond, and in Earth Supreme Head of the Church of
England,
To all Judges, Justyces, Mayres, Sheryffys, Baylyffys, Counstables, and other
our Officers, Mynysters, and Subgyettys, as well wythyn the Lybertyes as without
thyes our Letters herying or seeing, Gretyng,
We let you wit, That of our Grace especyall, certain science, and mere
mocyon, We have granted and licencyd, and by thyes Presentys do grant and
license for us and our Heirs, asmoche as in us is, unto our trusty and
well-beloved Servauntys and Subgyettys Sir Crystofer Morres Knight, Master of
our Ordenauncys, Anthony Knevett and Peter Mewtes Gentlemen of our prevy
Chamber, Overseers of the Fraternytye or Guylde of Saint George; And that they,
and every of them, shall be Overseers of the Science of Artyllary, that is, to
wit, for Long-bowes, Cros-bowes and Hand-gonnes, etc. which Sir Crystofer
Morres, Cornelys Johnson, Anthony Antony, and Henry Johnson, that they and
every of them shall be Masters and Rulers of the saved Science of Artyllary, as
before is rehercyd, for Long-bowes, Cros-bowes, and Hand-gonnes, which Sir
Crystofer Cornelys, Anthony and Henry, we by thyes Presentys do ordeign, make,
and conferme four Masters and Rulers of the said Fellyshyp of Artyllery for
ever, ^uryng their lyves: And that the said Masters and Rulers, and their
Successors, Masters and Rulers, always ^eyng four of our Servants,
Englys^hemen or Denysens, may begin, found, edefye, make, ordeygn, gadre,
k^ytte and establysshe a certain perpetual Fraternytye of Saint George, and
that they may have full power and auctorytye to chose accept, take, and
admytte unto their said Fraternytye or Guylde Al^aner, honest parsonnes
whatsoever they be, as well being our Servaintys and Sub^iettys as Straungyers,
Denysens or not Denysens, at their lybertyes. And that the said Masters and
Rulers, and such Brethern as they shall elect, admytte, take and accept to
them, shall in thing and name be oon body and Commynaltye Corporate, havyng
succession perpetually by the name of Masters and Rulers and Commynaltye of
the Fraternitye or Guylde of Artyllary of Long-bowes, Cros-bowes, and
Hand-gonnes: And the same four Masters, Rulers and Brethern, and their
Successors, we yncorporate and make oon Body by theys Presentys; And that the
said Masters and Rulers and Commynaltye, and their Successors, shall ymplede
and be ympleded by the name of Masters and Rulers of the said Bretherhed or
Guyide; And also shall have power and auctorytye to chose and elect among
themselfys, with their assystence, four under Masters and Rulers of the same
Fraternytye or Guylde, to ouersee and govern the same Fraternytye from time to
time, and to have the governaunce and custodye of such? Lands, Tenementys,
Reutys, Possessions, Goodys and Catallys, as hereafter shall happen to be
purchased, betwethed, gyven, granted or assygned by any manner parson or
parsons to said Fraternytye or Guylde: And they every year as yt shall best
pleas them, shall mow, ordeygne, and chose successyvely four undre Masters
and Rulers, Englysshmen, Straungyers, Denysens or not Denysens, of good name
and fame; And they, or any of them, if need require, to amove, put out, and
discharge, and an other in his or their nam^ and place, as often as shall pleas
them to name, put y^, elect and auctoryse by the counsayll of the four
Masters and Rulers, and their said Assystence. And furthermore, That the same
Masters and Rulers may have and use a Common ^eale for all things and
necessaryes ^elongyng to the said Fraternytye or Guylde. And that they may be
of babylitye or capacitye y^ the Law, to ymplede or be ympleded, a^^swer and be
answered before any Judge or Justice, spyrytuall or temporal, whatsoever they
be, y^ any Court or Courts of this our Realm; And in all and syngular Accyons,
Demaundes, Duarre^^ys, ^l^^s, Suits real or personal, like as all other our
Lygemen have habylytye and capacytye. And furthermore, the said Masters and
Rulers and Commynaltye of the said Fraternytye or Guylde, amongy^ themselfys,
shall or may have full auctorytye and power to make, ordeygne and estably^she
Laws, Ordynauncys and Statutys for the good state, rule and governaunce of the
said Fraternytye or Guylde, for thencrease and good contynuance of the same,
and such Laws, Statutys and Ordenaunces so made from time to time, as often as
by them shall be thought necessary and convenient, to chance, and to transpose,
or keap at their pleasure; And to put in use and execution without hurt,
challenge, greve or perturbaunce of us, our Heirs or Successors, Officers,
Mynisters or Subgiettys, or their Heirs or Successors, whatsoever they he.
And furthermore, That the said Master and Rulers and their Successors for
the time being, have full power and auctorytye to purchase Landys and
Tenementys, and other Hereditaments whatsoever they be, which be not holdyn of
us in Capite, To have and to hold to the said Masters, Rulers, and
Commynaltye, and their Successors (the Statute of Mortmayn, or other Statute
or Statutys, or any other thing passed to the contrary notwithstanding). And
furthermore of our habundaunce Grace, we have granted, given and lycencyd,
and by these Presentys do gyve, grant, and license unto our foresayed
well-beloved Servauntys, and to every of them, and to all and every their
Successors, Masters, Rulers, Commynaltye and Brethern of the said
Fraternytye or Guylde that for the time shall be, as well being our Servauntys
and Subgyettys, as also Straungyers, being Denysens or not Denysens, being of
and in the said Fraternytye or Guylde, for the better yncrease of the defense
of this our Realm, and mayntenaunce of the Dcyence or Feate of Shotyng in
Long-bowes, Cros-bowes and Hand-gonnes, that they, and every of their
Successors, honest parsonnes of the said Fraternytye or Guylde, for their
dysporte and pastyme from time to time for ever hereafter and perpepetually,
may use and exercise the shotyng in their Long-bowes, Cros-bowes and
Hand-gonnes, at Almaner, Markys and Buttys, and at the Game of the Popyniaye,
and other Game or Games, as at Foul and Fowls, as well in our City of
London, the Suburbs of the same, as in all other places wheresoever yt be
wythyn this our Realm of England, Ireland, Calyce, and our Marches of Wayles,
and ellyswhere wythyn any of our Domynyons (our Forestys, Chacys and Parks,
without our special Warrant, and the Game of the Heyron and Feysaunt withyn
two miles of any of our Manners, Castellys, or other placys where we shall
fortune to be or lie for the time only excepted and reservyd) And also that
the said Masters, and Rulers, and Brethern, and their Successors, and every
particular parsonne of them may reteigne and keap their said Long-bowes,
Cros-bowes and Hand-gonnes in their Houses, Chambres, and other places, and
their Servauntys to here the same Cros-bowes and Hand-gonnes, when and as often
as yt shall like them, at their lybertye for ever, without any damage,
daungyer, penaltye, loss or forfaicture to ensue unto them, or any of them,
for the same. But neuerthelels the said Servauntes that so shall carry their
Masters Cros-bowes or Hand-gonnes, shall not by virtue of this our License,
shote in the said Cros-bowes and Hand-gonnes at no manner of Foul: And y^
case be that any such Servaunt be takyn shotyng at any Foul with any
Cros-bowe or Hand-gonne, the said Offender so takyn to forfacte the penalty
according to the Act (this Fraternitye or Lycense notwithstanding:) And also
that none other then the Fraternytye or Guylde aforesayed, shall wythyn any
part of this our Realm or Domynyon, keap any other Bretherhed or Guylde,
oneles it be by license of the foresayed Masters and Rulers of the said
Fraternytye or Guylde. And furthermore of our more ample Grace by theys
Presentys we do license the foresayed Masters and Rulers, and Commynaltye of
the said Fraternytye or Guilde, or any pertyculer parsonne or parsonnes, and
every of them, to use and wear any manner ynbrowdery, or any cognysaunce of
silver at his or their lybertye, in their Gowns, Jack ttys, Cootys, and
Dubl^^tys, and any manner of Silkys, as Ueluet, Satin, and Damask, (the
Colors of Purple and Scarlet oonly excepted) in their Gowns and Jackettys,
and all and synguler Furs in their Gowns or elsewhere, not above Fu^res of
Martirnes without renuying unto any manner daungyer, forfeyture, loss or
penaltye; Any Act of Apparel, or any other Act, Proclamacyon, thing or
matyer in any wise had, made, or gyven, or to be had, made, or gyven to the
contrary notwithstondyng. And furthermore of our further Grace especyall, we
have lycencyd, and by theys Presentys do license the foresayed Masters and
Rulers, and their said Successors, for the time being, that they, nor any of
them, shall from hensforth be enpanelled, or compelled to be upon any manner of
Queste or Jurye, upon what matyer soever yt be withyn our City of London, or
other place withyn this our Realm. And ouerthis, we wott and grant for us,
our Heirs and Successors, to the said Masters and Rulers and Commynaltye
by thyes Presentys, that when and as often as the said Masters and Rulers and
Commynaltye, and their Successors, or any of them, shall use, pronounce, and
openly speak this usual word commonly used to be spoken before he or they
shote, that is, to say this word Fast. And after this word spoken, if yt
shall happyn any parson or parsons, by the oversight of any parson or parsons,
ronnyng, passing or ^oyng between any such shoter, and the mark or place
whereto any such Masters and Rulers and Comynaltye, or any of them shall
h^reafter shoot, to be killed or otherwise hurt, so the same be a usual and a
known mark set in an open place, accustomed to be shote at, that then any
such Master, Ruler, and Brother whatso^ver, shall happyn not by that occasion
be attached, arrested, ymprysoned, sued, vexed, troubled, or otherwise
ynonpetted, nor shall not be ympeche^ nor otherwise molessed or troubled for
the same, nor shall not suffer death, nor lose any membre, or forfeicte any
manner, good, landys, tenementys or herediramentys, or any goodys, catellys, or
other proffyttys for the same; Any Act, Statute, Proclamacyon, Prouysyon, or
any other matyer or thing in any wise had, made, given, proclaimed or provided,
or hereafter to be had, given, made, proclaimed or provided at any time to the
contrary notwithstanding. And furthermore, we wott and grant that thyes our
Letters Patentys shall pass under our Great Seal without Fine or Fee, great
or small, in our Chauncery, to our use, or to thuse of our Heirs, or y^ the
hanaper of our said Chauncerye to be contented or paid for the same. That
express mencyon of the true yearly value, or of any other value or certentye
of the Premysses, or of any of them, or of any other Guiftes or Grauntes by us,
or by any of our Progenitors or Predecessors to the aforesayed Crystofer,
Antony, and Peter, or any of them before thyes times made in thyes Presents is
not made, Or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Prouysyon or Restraynt thereof to
the contrary before thyes times made, ordained, or provided, or any other
thing, cause, or matter whatsoever in any wise notwythstanding. In wytnes
whereof we have caused thyes our Letters to be made Patentys, Wytnes our self
at Westminster the xxv day of August, the xxix year of our Reign.

THE PATENT OF King JAMES Concerning ARCHERIE.
JAMES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc.
To our trusty and well-beloved the Lord Mayor of our City of London for the
time being, and to our right trusty and right welbeloved Councellor Thomas
Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England, and to our right trusty and
right welbeloved Cosens and Counselors Thomas Earl of Dorset, ou^ high
Treasorer of England, Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Chamberlain of our Houshoulde,
Charles Earl of Devo^^sheir, Master of our Ordinance, Robert Earse of
Salisburie, our principal Secretary; And to our trusty and welbeloved
Councellor Sir John Popham Knight, Cheef Justice of the Pleas before us to be
holden assigned; And also to our trusty and welbeloved Sir Julius Ceasar, Sir
Roger Wilbraham Knight, Masters of our Court of Requests, Sir Edward Coke
Knight our Attorney General, Sir Thomas Challenor Knight, Sir John Egerton the
younger, Knight, Sir Thomas Vavasor Knight, Martial of our Household, Sir
William Waade Knight, Lieftenaunt of our Tower of London, Sir Thomas Knyvett,
Sir Stephen Soame, Sir Walter Cope, Sir Edmond Bowier, Sir Thomas Fowler, Sir
Thomas Lake, Sir Henry Mountegue, Recorder of London, Sir George Coppin Clerk
of our Crown, Sir Thomas Windebanke, Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir Thomas Benne^^,
Sir Thomas Low, Sir Thomas Grymes, Knights, Nicholas Fuller, Nicholas Collyn,
Toby Wood, Edward Vaughan, Hughe B(...), Esquiers, Thomas Thorney, Hughe
Middleton, John Brown, Rowland Smarte, William Uxley, William Duncombe,
Nicholas Askew, Edward Mellowes, Edward Harvest, Hughe Goddard, Michael Crown,
George Walter, James Trafforde, Francis Moseley, Francis Medlicote, Henry
Addys, Nicholas Parks, John Redman, John Giles, Richard Falsham, Thomas Wood,
Michael Sussen, Christopher Potkin, Richard Huff, Roberte Harland, Nicholas
Gonge, Paull Smithe, Robert Carr, Danyell Godfrey, John Skeyff, Thomas
Gardener, William Robinson, Thomas Hughes, Randolph Fenton, Edward Roberts,
John Baker, John Chambers, John Vauasor, James Hodgeson, Valentine Long, John
Bendbowe, Christopher Thacker, Nicholas Plunkett, William Hodges, John
Reignolds, William Brownlowe, Jerrard Pettam, Mark White, William Smithe, John
Tutt, George Hastings, Christopher Allington, William Biggs, Henry Ratcliff,
Roger Aldredg, John Granett, George Budd, James Kenden, Christopher Allisone,
Adam Islipp, and John Halloway, Gentlemen, Greeting;
Albeit sundry very good and laudable Statutes, Ordi^^nces, Provisions and
Proclamations (...)ofore have been had and made, as well by us, as by our most
noble Progenitors and Predecessors, for the mayntenaunce of Archery and
Artillery within this our Realm of England, whereby the same being put in due
execution in times past, has not only bredd and increased a great force and
strength toward the mayntenaunce, defense, and safety of this our said Realm
against Foreign Powers, but also a fear and terror to all other Realms and
Foreign Enemies in times of War and Hostility: Yet the same good Statutes,
Ordynances, and Proclamations made by us and our said noble Progenitors, cannot
now so well take place as they ought, and have done in times past, and
specially about our City of London, by reason that diverse and sundry persons,
having about our said City of London diverse Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and saeking to enclose the same, otherwise then has bine
accustomed, to the advancement of their own singular benefitts and gain,
without respect of others Commodity, have plucked away, and yet still do mind
to pluck away from our lovinge Subjects, the necessary and proffitable
Exercise of shooting in such Feilds and ^loses, as time out of mind, have bine
allowed to be shot in, as well by making of such Banks and Hedges, as also by
plucking up of the oulde Marks of ancyent time standing in the said Closes;
Insomuch that our. said Subjects being in the common Feilds, and for
diversities and change of Marks, seeking to find a Mark in the said Closes
and several Grounds, cannot by reason for the most part, the Banckes and
Hedges being made of such a height, sae the Grounds of the said Closes or
Feilds within the said Banckes; As also by reason that where the Bancke or
Hedge being but of indifferent height, the Ditches be made so broad and deep,
and wanting Bridges and other convenient Places to pass through and over the
same, that our said Subjects, the Archers, using their Trade and Pastime, be
very much hind^e^, let, and discoraged therein, and often times in great
peril and danger for la^ke of convenient rooms and places to ^hoote in: And
as we are ^redibly informed, by reason of the aforesaid Ditching, He^ging, and
Enclosures, it is very like there will grow a very great straight and want
of room about our said City of London, as well for such as do presently use
the said game of shooting, as also for those that shall hereafter exercise,
use, or occupy the said Game and Pastime, to the great hi^drance and decay,
as well of the said use and exercise of shooting, as also of the said Statutes,
Ordynances, Provisions and Proclamations, and contrary to the ancyent Customs
heretofore used about our said City of London, whereby might ensue to sundry
of our said Subjects occasion to haunt and frequent some other kind of
unlawful Games (whereunto there are to many inclined) which our meaning is,
shall be in no wise suffered. For avoydinge whereof, and for reformation of the
foresaid inormityes, and of all such other as might hereafter grow, by reason
of taking away of the liberty and scope of ancyent time, accustomed to be had
about our said City of London for Archers; And trusting to your approved
Wisdoms, Fidelityes, and good Discrecions, We have assigned and appointed you
to be our Commissioners, and by these Presents do give unto you, and every of
you, and to the number of any six of you, full power and authority, not only
to survey all such Grounds next adjoining to out said City of London, and the
Suburbs of the same; and within twoe miles compass on any part of our said
City and Subu^bes, as before have bine accustomed, and used to have had Marks
in them for Archers to shoot at, or which any of our lovinge S(...) iects, or
of our Ancestors, have exercised themselves in shooting, and the same to
reduce, or cause to be reduced to such order and estate for Archers, as they
were in the beginning of the Reign of the late King of famous memory, King
Henry the Eight; but also calling, before you, or any six of you, as well the
Owner and Owners. Fermor and Fermors, and Occupiers of such Grounds about our
City of London, In which, since the first year of the Reign of the said
King Henry the Eight, have bine made any broad deep Ditches, hight Banckes,
and Quicksets or Hedges thereupon, being thought by you, or any six of you,
to be overthrown and made plain; or otherwise to be reformed; And also such and
as many honest and lawful men of our said City of London, or County of
Middlesex, or either of them; whose disposition, knowledge, and experience in
the Premises, or any part thereof, you shall think good to understand and
know, And you, and every of you, to examine, as well upon their Oaths as
otherwise, touching the Premises, as to the Wisdoms of you, or any six of
you, shall be thought most convenient; And upon the knowledge of the defalts
and annoyances in the Premises, or any part thereof, Our pleasure is, and We
give unto you, or any six of you, full power and aucthority by these Presents,
to cause the same to be, by the said Owner and Owners, Fermor and Fermors, or
any Occupiers, at their own proper Cos^es and Charges, to be amended, reformed,
altered and exchanged in such manner and form, and within such time, as to the
Wisdoms and Discretions of you, or any six of you, shall be thought meet
and convenyend, whom our pleasure and commandment is, that whatsoever shall be
in and about the Premises d^^n and executed by you, or any six of you, by
virtue and aucthority of this our Commission, you cause the same firmly to be
observed: Aucthorising you, or any six of you, further by these Presents, That
all such person or persons, being Owner or Owners, Fermor or Fermors, Occupier
or Occupiers of the said Grounds, or any of them, as you, or any six of you,
shall find negligent, gay^saying, rebelling, resisting, or any mean or way in
any wise notwithstanding against you, or any six of you, in the due execution
thereof, or not oueying your Orders or Decrees in the Premises, to be had or
made by virtue of these Presents, That you, or any six of you, cause him or
them offending, to be punished or ^ayned by Imprisonment, or otherwise by Fine
and Amercement to our use, as by your said Wisdoms shall be thought requi^te,
until he or they shall conform him or themselves to your Order in the
Premises. And for the better execution of this ou^ said Commission and
Aucthority to you given, We charge and command all Ma^ors, Sh^riffs, Justices
of P^a^^, Bailiffs, stables, and all other our Officers, Ministers and
Subjects, to be ay^ing, helping and assisting you, and everi^ of you, in the
due execution thereof, as they will answer to the contrary. In witness
whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents, Witness our self at
Westminster the first Day of February, in the third year of our ^aigne of
England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the nine and thirtieth.

THE PATENT OF King CHARLES I. Concerning ARCHERIE.
CHARLES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mayor of the City of London for the time
being, and to our trusty and right welbeloved Counselor Thomas Lord Coventry,
Lord Keeper of our Great Seal of England, Richard Lord Weston, Lord high
Treasurer of England, and to our right trusty and welbeloved Cosen and
Counselor, Philip Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery, Lord Chamberlain of our
Household, and to our right trusty and welbeloved Cousin, Edward Earl of Norwich,
and to our trusty and welbeloved, Henry Lord Levington, George Lord Goring, and
to our right trusty and welbeloved, Sir Thomas Richardson Chief Justice of the
Peace, and to our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Coke Knight, one of our
principal Secretaries of State, before us to be holden and assigned, Sir Robert
Carr Knight, Gentleman of our Bedchamber, Sir Henry Myldmay Knight, Master of
our Jewels, Sir Thomas Alsbury Knight, one of our Masters of our, Court of
Request, Sir Robert Rich Knight, one of our Masters ^f our Court of Chancery,
Sir William B^^ford Knight, Li^utenant of our Tower of London, Sir John Heydon
Knight, Li^utenant General of our Ordnance, Edward Littleton Esquire, Recorder
of our City of London, Sir Kenellyne Oysby, Sir Thomas Foweler, Sir Henry
Spiller, Sir Percivall Har^, Sir Henry Heart, Sir Leonard Harvy, Sir Edward
Cane, Sir John ^shatt, Sir Thomas Jarrat, Sir Hugh Ha^^^ sley Knights, Sir
Robert Ducy Knight and Baronet, Thomas Moulsow and Samuel Cran^er, Aldermen of
London, Thomas Carry, Endymeon Porter, William Carr, George Long, Richard
Louder, Richard Gibbs, John Green, William Williams, William Johnson, Abraham
Davies, John Jacobbs, George Fowler, John Harrison, Nathaniel Bacon, Bulstrod
Whitlocke, Andrew Brown, Edward Hubbard, John Hartwell, John Plumber, William
Wheeler, Ralph Wilbraham, James Glygorne, Thomas Gilborne, Samuel Armytage,
Robert Robinson Esquires, Humfrey Edwards, John Wheeler, Nicholas Askwett,
Will. Hodges, Rowland Wilson, George Walker, Adam Islip, Tho. Naylor, John
Tailor, Roger Hassal, Edw. Wormall, William Bartlet, Jos. Bradshaw, John
Elston, William Kathrens, Anthony Blades, Nicholas Butler, William Parker, Hugh
Edmonds, Jephry Smallman, Robert Budd, Thomas Bowyn, Francis King, William
Addams, Francis Neve, John Hallywell, Robert Ashwell, John Ellds, Richard
Caucett, Tobyas Richardson, Kelleway Gooydott, Richard Draper, John Hodges,
William Lamb, Richard Butler, Thomas Hughs, Thomas Redding, John Powell, Peter
Wright, Thomas Chapman, Thomas Chane, Thomas Ferris, George Low, William
Williams, Alexander Tracye, Martyn Grymston, John Baker, Henry Lee, Thomas
Backston, Edward Tailor, Nicholas Tench, George Hull, John Staney, Samuel
Baker, William Needs, John Powell, John Jefferson, Thomas Cook, Robert
West-Brooke, James Mason, Francis Gray, Anthony Lee, John Gover, Richard Yeame,
Henry Shelsbery, Lanclet Hobson, Steaven Estweek, Cornelius Cook, William
Crofte, John Newgate and Andrew Holdsworth, Gentlemen, Greeting:
Albeit sundry good and laudable Statutes, Ordinances, Provisions, and
Proclamations heretofore have bin had and made, as well by Us as by our most
Noble Progenitors and Predecessors, for the maintenance of Archerie and
Artillery within this our Realm of England, whereby the same being put in due
Execution in times past, has not only bred and increased a great Force and
Strength toward the maintenance, defense, and safety of this our said Realm
against Foreign Enemies in time of War and Hostility; Yet the same good
Statutes, Ordinances, and Proclamations made by us, and our Noble Progenitors,
cannot now so well be executed as they ought and have done in times past,
espetially about our City of London, by reason that diverse and sundry persons
having about our City of London aforesaid, diverse Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and seeking to enclose the same, otherwise then has bin
accustomed to the advancement of their own singular profit and gain, without
respect of others Commodity, have plucked away, and yet still do mind to
pluck away from our loving Subjects the necessary and profitable Exercise of
shooting in such Fields and Closes, as time out of mind have bin allowed to be
shot in; as well by making of such Banks and Hedges, as also by plucking up
of old Marks of ancient times standing in the same Closes: Insomuch that our
said Subjects being in the common Fields, and for diversities and change of
Marks, seeking to find a Mark in the said Closes, and several Grounds, cannot
see the ground of the said Closes or Fields within the Banks and Hedges,
because they be made of so great height; and where the Banks and Hedges he but
of an indifferent height, the Ditches be made so broad and deep, and wanting
of Bridges and other convenient places to pass through and over the same, that
our said Subjects, the Archers, using the commendable Exercise and Pastime, be
very much hindered, let and discouraged therein, and often times in great
danger and peril for lack of convenient rooms and places to shoot in. And as
we be credi^ly informed, by reason of the aforesaid Ditchings, Hedgings and
Enclosures, it is very like there will grow a great straight and want of room
about our City of London, as well for such as do presently use the said
Exercise of shooting, as also for those that shall be hereafter exercised in
the said Game and Pastime, to the great hindrance and decay of the said Use and
Exercise of Shooting, contrary to the purpose and true meaning of the Statutes,
Ordinances, Provisions and Proclamations, and contrary to the ancient Customs
heretofore used about the said City of London, whereby might ensue to sundry
of our said Subjects, occation to haunte and frequent some other kind of
unlawful Games, whereunto they be too much inclined, which our meaning is
shall be in no wise suffered: For the avoiding whereof, and for reformation of
the foresaid Inormityes, and of all such as might hereafter grow, by reason of
taking away the liberty and stop of ancient time accustomed to be had about
our said City of London for Archers, and trusting to your approved Wisdoms,
Fidelities and good Discretions, We have assigned and appointed you to be our
Commissioners, and by these Presents do give unto you, and to every or any
six or more of you, full power and authority, not only to survey all such
Grounds next adjoining to our said City of London, and the Suburbs of the
same, as before have bin accustomed and used to have bin Marks in them for
Archers to shoot at; or in the which any of our loving Subjects, or the
Subjects of any of our Ancestors have exercized themselves in shooting, and
the same to reduce, or cause to be reduced, to such order and state for
Archers, as they were in the beginning of the Reign of our late King James,
our Father of blessed memory, but also calling before you, or any six or more
of you, as well the Owner and Owners, Farmer and Farmers, Occupier and
Occupiers of such Grounds about our said City of London, in the which since
the first year of the Reign of the late King James have bin made broa^ deep
Ditches, high Banks, and Quicksets or Hedges thereupon, being thought by you,
or any six or more of you, to be overthrown and made plain, or otherwise to
be reformed: And also such, and as many lawful and honest men of our said
City of London, and County of Middlesex, or either of them, whose
dispositions, knowledge and experience in the Premises, or any part thereof,
you shall think good to understand and know, and them, and every of them to
examine, as well upon their Oaths as otherwise, touching the Premises, as to
the Wisdoms of you, or (...) every or any six or more of you, shall be
thought more convenient: And upon the knowledge of the Defaults and Annayances
in the Premises, or a^ie part thereof, Our pleasure is, and we do give unto
you, or any six or more of you, full power and authority by these Presents,
to cause the same by the said Owner, Farmer or Farmers, or any Occupiers, at
their own proper Costs and Charges to be amended, reformed, altered and
changed, in such manner and form, and within such time as to the wisdoms and
discretions of you, or any six or more of you, shall be thought meet and
convenient, Whom our Pleasure and Commandment is, that whatsoever shall be in
and about the Premises done and executed by you, or any six or more of you, by
virtue and authority of this our Commission, you cause firmly to be observed;
Authorizing you, or any six or more of you, further by these Presents, that all
such persons, being Owner or Owners, Farmer or Farmers, Occupier or Occupiers
of the said Grounds, or any of them, as you or any six or more of you, shall
find negligent, gainsaying, rebelling, resisting, or any mean or any way
withstanding against you, or any six or more of you, in the due execution
thereof, or not obeying your Orders or Decrees in the Premises, to be had or
made by virtue of these Prsents, that you, or any six or more of you, cause
him or them offending to be punished as by your said Wisdoms shall be thought
requisite, until he or they shall conform themselves to your order in the
Premises. And for the better execution of this our Commission and Authority
by you given. We charge and command all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other our Officers, Ministers and Subjects
to be aiding, helping and assisting to you, and every one of you, in the due
execution thereof, as they will answer the contrary. In witness whereof we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents, Witness our self at
Westminster the 20th day of December, in the Eighth year of our Reign.

A REMEMBRANCE Of the worthy SHOW and SHOOTING BY THE DUKE of SHOREDITCH, AND
HIS ASSOCIATES THE Worshipful Citizens of London, UPON Tuesday the 17th of
September, 1583.

Set forth according to the Truth thereof, to the everlasting Honor of the
Game of Shooting in the Long Bow.

By W. M.

London, Printed in the Year 1682.

To the Worthy SHOREDITCH DUKE, And his Two NEPHEWS, Sons to the EARL of
PANCRIDGE, AND To all the Worshipful Citizens and Chief Archers of the City of
London:
W. H. wishes continuance of Health, with Increase of Honor.
BOldly have I presumed (Right Worshipful Members of this Ho nourable City) to
publish unto the Eyes of the World, your late laudable Work, which not only
beautified this City, but the whole Realm of England. Rare was the Sight, great
was the Cost, yet greater your good Wills; the Report whereof will be in memory
while London lasts. Now seeing no man takes in hand to describe the same as
it deserved, and pitying greatly it should lie hidden, I considered that blind
Bayard often times seems boldest, and thereupon my self (though least able of
all other) have presumed, under your Correction, to publish the Truth of what I
noted in the Train: Therein purposing, that though to your own Ears it brings
no matter of Delight, yet the Truth of this seemly Show (which Fame has far
spread abroad) may through this Realm be expressed; as also left in Remembrance
unto your Childrens Children, and their Posterity after them: Beseeching
therefore that your Wisdoms would accept my good Will, for which I remain
thankful during my Life.

Your Worships In all Humility, W. M.

A REMEMBRANCE Of the Worthy SHOW and SHOOTING BY THE DUKE of SHOREDITCH, AND
HIS ASSOCIATES, THE Worshipful Citizens of London.
THE Learned in time past have greatly commended the penning of Histories,
because that by them their Posterity is certifyed, what has been done in the
days of their Ancestors; the benefit whereof is greatly considered in the
wisest of this Age, and I would it were unknown to none. Our Elders heretofore
that have registered the great Battles and Skirmishes in times past, mention
that the Long-Bow has done great acts, and been the overthrow of mighty
Armies: Wherefore considering what profit and honor our Commonwealth of
England has gained by the Long-Bow, I have thought convenient to set down in
Memory that most honorable Show of Archers, which was at London on the
Seventeenth of September, 1583. chiefly for two Causes: First, To exhort our
Country men to continue at home this laudable Exercise, the better to
discourage our Enemies when they happily hear thereof, that by so notable a thing
showed but in a Merriment, may the better conjecture what English men could do,
if necessity compelled them to the same. Secondly, To follow the Custom of our
Ancestors, which is, to leave Enrolled such Matter as is worthy Memory, that so
good a Work might seem new in such our Successors, and procure them to the
furtherance of the like Causes in themselves.

The Prince of famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, having red in the
Chronicles of England, and seen in his own time how armies mixed with good
Archers, have evermore so galled the Enemy, that it has been great cause of
the Victory, he being one day at Mile-end when Prince Arthur and his Knights
were there shooting, did greatly commend the Game, and allowed thereof, lauding
them to their Encouragement.

This noble King at another time keeping a Princely Court at Windsor, caused
sundry Matches to be made concerning shooting in the Long-Bow: and to which
came many principal Archers, who being in Game and the upshoot given, as all
men thought, there was one Barlo yet remaining to shoot, being one of the King^
Guard; to whom the King very graciously said, Win them all and thou shall be
Duke over all Archers. This Barlo drew his Bow, and shooting won the best.
Whereat the King greatly rejoiced, commending him for his good Archery; and for
that this Barlo did dwell in Shoreditch, the King named him Duke of Shoreditch.
(A sign of a Princly mind to the encouragement of his poor subject.) The memory
of all which, both by Prince Arthur and the Duke of Shoreditch, has been
greatly revived, and within these five years set forward at the great Cost and
Charges of sundry chief Citizens, whose Names I omit. And now this present year
1583. much more beautified than ever it was, as hereafter is expressed. The
worthy Shoreditch Duke, as Successor to the former Dukes his Predecessors, gave
warning to all his Marquesses, Earls and Barons, with all their Train of
Archers whatsoever, in and about the City of London, to be in a readiness to
accompany him into the Field, every one with a Long-Bowe and four Shafts, upon
the Seventeenth of September, and to meet him in Smithfield, which they did for
the most part.

On which Day in the Morning, the Duke being at Marchant-Taylors Hall, there
repaired unto him all those that were appointed for the Conducting of his
Person to the place of Meeting, as Barons, and a Multitude of good Archers
under his own Ensign; who, with sound of Trumpets, Drums, and other necessary
Instruments for the beautifying of the same, passed along Broadstreet, where
the Duke dwells, marching through Moorgate to Finsbury-Fields, and from
thence into Smithfield, where a great many attended for him: then the black
Train, and the Goldsmiths went forward into Holborn, the Duke and his Company
following in a seemly order; where coming against Hatton-House, the Goldsmiths
staid, and cast themselves into Ranks, that the Duke might have fair passage
between them: So that the Train being now marching along, and the Duke passing
by the Marquess Barlo, alias Covell, he presented to his Nobleness a Wedge of
Gold, in sign of good will, which the Duke very thankfully accepted; then came
the black Train, offering by a Page a Speech to this effect, That he was ready
to aid him with all his Power, for his safety, into the Field: Whereat the
Page, out of a Box, flung abroad, glistering like Gold, certain Spangles, in
sign of Liberality.

Then came the Marquess of Clarkenwell with Hunters, who having been abroad
with their Hounds, did wind their Horns, so that the noise of them, together
with the yelling and yelping of the Hounds, and the whooping and ^ollowing of
their Pages which followed, there was such a delight taken by the hearers
thereof, as is worth Memory; which Marquess coming with his Forester, proffered
his Service to the Duke, which he thankfully accepted; which Hunters were under
the Earl of Pancridge, whose two Sons being Nephews to the Duke, came with
their power of Knights, Barons and Squires, accompanied with many good and
excellent Archers, taking place, to the honor of the Duke, into the Field.
Then the Goldsmiths took their place behind the Duke, whose Gunners, when the
Duke was even past, gave a worthy Volley of Shot, which rung in the Air like a
Thunder Clap; and so took place in the hindward. Then went all the Train
through Chancerylane, and turned toward London down Owen (...)ton her (...)
(...)utenant (...)e Tow(...) Lon(...), Sir (...)land (...)ard, (...) diverse
(...)ermen London
Fleetstreet, until they came to Ludgate, where stood ready to receive them
into the the City, certain Knights of great worship, with many other of the
Aldermen of the City, and sundry principal Commoners in the same, who being men
of years, and had born great good will to the laudable Game of Shooting, entered
with fair large Arrows in their Hands, in black Gowns, Citizen-like, and took
their place behind the Duke; and as they yet passed through Paul's Churchyard
Paul's (...)olcame (...) them Mar(...)t-Tay(...)in their (...)s, (...) one
ha(...) a ^air (...)d Ar(...) in (...) hands
on the South Side, there came sundry Citizens forth unto them, all in their
Gowns, and took place, every one having an Arrow, as before, to the better
beautifying and setting forth of the same. Thus passed they through into
Cheapside, who by that time they were come thither, all their Train was in
place, and marched as follows.

First came two Ensigns before the Marshal of the Field, the Marshal being clad
in green Velvet and Satin, with a Trunchion in his hand: Then followed him
forty Foresters, apparelled all in Green, every one bearing a Bow and four
Shafts by their side, with horns at their backs, which they winded as they went
along.

And between every one of them Pages Mr Bea(...) in Pat(...) noster-Row, (...)
Mr. S(...) in Paul's Church(...) chiefest.
in white Frocks girt unto them, upon which was sowed green Oaken Leaves, with
Caps made in the same manner, every One bearing a Tiller Bow or Cross-Bow, and
broad Arrows in their hands, to the number of Forty, all whooping and hallowing
when These (...) men w(...) prepared Mr. W(...) who b(...) contin(...) Rangers
did both expriss name, (...) beautify the Sho^ His B(...) also bar^ fair (...)
upon wh(...) stood th(...) Sentenc^ Morew(...) than or to the Wood.
the Hunters did wind their Horns. Then came six Trumpets sounding, with Drums
and Fifes, guarded with H^lberds; then came the Marquess of Islington with 12
Knights, and those several had six Gentlemen attendant on them, and Pages in
white Fustian with black Stripes, and Caps agreeable, bearing Shields, with a
seemly show of Archers, wearing about their Necks and Bodies green Ribbons, and
large green Scarfs. Next followed a fair, large, red Streamer, with the red
Lion, with Halberds, Drums, and proper Pages in green, with Taffety Nightcaps,
bearing Shields and Shafts in their hands. Next five Swattrutters strangely
apparalled with great Hose down to the small of their Legs, with strange Caps
agreeable, bearing on their Necks long Swords, which Mar(...)s of (...)hns
(...)d (...)ght the (...)d men.
seemed very stearn in Countenance: Then followed five green men clad in Ivy,
with Clubs on their Necks, which were young Trees, and the Roots upward; with a
worthy Show of Bowmen, who for the most part wore Ribbons of colored Orange
Tawny, and Oringes hanging at them.

Then came the residue of the Earl of Pancridge's Train in the Forefront
thereof; the two sons to the Earl of Pancridge (himself not present, but his
cost and Charges in sign of a willing mind did largely appear,) with a worthy
Company of excellent good Archers acompanied with Trumpets, Halberds Drums,
Ensigns, and all other things necessary to the beautifying of the ^ame to their
great praise, for their large Liberalities, besides the great bountifulness of
the Earl their Father.

Next following the Fellowship and near Neighbors of Ludgate parts; who at the
Furtherance of this Show, had been at great cost in provision of Trumpets,
Drums, Ensigns, Fifes, and other Furniture, (...)ecially (...) Blamor (...)of
of (...)m.
the most part were Haberdashers of London; who very orderly marched through
the City of London, being sumptuously apparelled in Velvet Jerkins, and Hats
agreeable, with Chains of Gold about their Bodies, and Pages bearing their
Shields of fine workmanship, and a worthy Train of good Archers wearing green
Scarses and Ribbons of the same color. The show of Feryers proceeded, which
was One hundred handsome Fellows with Calivers on their Necks, all trimly
decked with white Feathers in their Hats; so had all their Company of Archers
throughout: Then their En sign and two Cardinals, wearing broad Hats of Tawny
color, with two silk strings buttoned under their Chins; the ends hanging down
to their feet, a pparelled in red Velvet and Satin; next followed two Friars
clothed in black Robes, with bald Crowns and Beads in their hands, seeming to
pray very devoutly, and blessing them that passed by, causing great laughing
and sport.

Then came the whole Inhabitants following, beautifying the Show, very costly
aparelled, with a Child in the midst of them, mounted on a great Horse richly
trapped, sounding a Trumpet, to the great wonder of many the beholders.

Then followed the Citizens and Inhabitants of Fleetbridge, Fleetstreet, and
Templebar, with a Show worth the beholding, of seemly Archers, all bravely
apparelled in Silks and Chains, with their Ensigns, Drums, Trumpets, and such
other Furniture. Then the odd Devise of Saint Clements Parish, which but ten
days before had made the same Show in their own Parish, in setting up the
Queens Majesty's Stake in Holborn fields, which Stakemaster Knevit, one of the
Gentlemen of her Majesty's Chamber, gave unto them at his cost and Charges. And
a Gunn worth three pound, made of Gold, to be given unto him that best deserved
it by shooting in a Piece at the Mark which was set up on purpose at Saint
Iame's Wall; whereby was to be seen the (...) L. of (...)icester (...)ue them 2
(...)ks, and (...)s. in (...). (...) E. of (...)ndel (...) lend (...)m his
(...)se ^o (...)t in, be(...)s a hogs(...)d of (...), and (...)ison, (...)ich
be (...)e them.
great good will of so bou^tiful and worshipful a Gentleman; who has promised
yearly, during his life, to give five shillings more to the same; the gift was
given for a year to the Winner, and to the Parish for ever: The liberality of
the right honorable Lords of the Nobility, their Bountifulness toward the
feasting of the whole Parish also, is worthy remembrance. The manner of the Show
was, first, Saint Clement wearing a Rochet and a Miter, having a long gray
beard, rid upon a Horse, with his man before him, between two hampers full of
small white loves, giving of Bread unto the poor, or any that would have the
same: having also twelve men following on foot in white Canvas Caps, and Canvas
Frocks girt to them, with Baskets on their shoulders, waiting upon him, having
a blew Anchor painted on their breasts and backs, finding it so registered of
him in their Legendary, That S. Clement was first a Baker, who for his good wit
and honest life, was made a Bishop, and after a Saint. After this Show came all
the young men of S. Clements Parish, very well apparelled with Chains and some
Scarfs; every one having his Page attending upon him in black Frocks, decked
with Silver, with Caps agreeable with Edgings of white Furrs, very seemly,
bearing Shields and Shafts, which before did carry the Guns of the Batchelors,
when they went to set up the Stake, and to shoot for the gilded Gun. Next
followed the ancient Householders of the same Parish, with their Pages, having
an Ensign, with Drums, and such other Furniture, with a worthy Show of Archers
following.

Then came the Marquess of H^gsden with a stately Ensign of red Crimson Damask,
in the midst of the which Ensign there was a Phoenix in silver carried by two
men on two Staves, with sound of Trumpets and Drums; the Show beautified with
Pages as before, Handswords to make room, and Halberds to guide and keep them
in order.

After them came the Marquess of Shackelwell, chief Treasurer to the Duke, with
his Men, every one with white and green Ribbons, and Badges in their Hats,
before whom was carried a mo^^ fair and long Ensign of red Damask, in the which
was the Golden Lion: After the Ensign followed two with Hand-swords, to make
room, and then after them two Pages all in white Jackets, upon the which was
painted with poudred Armor, and the one Page bare a Shield, on the which was
painted a Well, on one side of the Well there was a a Leg, and on the other an
Arm, both Arm and Leg shackled to the Well, and branches of Box springing out
of the same; the other Page a broad Arrow in his hand.

Next after this Company came the Master Comptroller of the Duke's House with
his Men, every man having a Bow and four Arrows as the rest, and green Ribbons
about their Necks.

Then came a large Table, wherein was written a Description of the benefit of
the Shooting in the Long-Bow, and how shooting has been decayed, and by whom
restored; advertising men from all unlawful Games, as Dieing Carding, Tippling
in Alehouses, and such like, wishing to have the Exercise of Shooting to be had
in use both by Masters and Servants to the strength and commodity of this
Realm, as also to the terror of all Foreign Enemies, besides two Tables drawn
with I^sc^iptions of honest Exercise: Then came two fair Ensigns, white and
black, with Wh^fflers in Chains of Gold, with white Staves, and Henchmen
following them bearing Shields, every Shield painted with a several Devise;
then came the Duke himself, going betw^en two fine Pages bearing S^a^ts, the
Duke bearing a Standard Arrow in his hand, and being apparalled in a long Gown,
Citizen-like, with a Hat on his Head, agreeable to the order of the chief
Commoners of the City; then after him followed Sir Owen Hopton Knight,
Lieutenant of her Majesty's Tower of London, Sir Ro^land Hayward, with other
the Aldermen and Citizens of London, bearing Standard Arrows in their hands,
(...) a seemly Company of Archers: Then came the Earl of Buckley close with
Master Day at Aldersgate, with a Show of Marquesses and Barons, accompanied
with many Knights of Archery, beautified with Trumpets, Drums, Ensigns, and
Halberds, all the Archers wearing green Scar^s; the black Prince having twelve
Knights, and a Troop of Barons following him in Chains of Gold very orderly,
and between them Pages in green Jackets and green Taffety Night-caps, all
dropped with Gold and Conceits of rare Device on their Shields.

Then last of his Train came the Baron Stirrup, whose costly Stake will be in
memory after he is dead, now standing at Mileend. This Baron brought a seemly
Show of good Archers, all with green Ribbons about their Neck, and Escocheons
in their Caps with the gilded Stirrup, expressing the truth of his Name: Who,
besides his great Cost and Charges in Feasting of his Archers, did choose many
good Ringers of his Neighbors, who in the Morning early did Ring at the
chiefest Churches about London, for the honor of the Duke and his Company,
feasting them in most commendable manner for their pains, who in the going out
of the Duke through the City, did also Ring the Bells in many chief Churches
all the way he went, and likewise at his coming home, to their great pains and
labor.

Last of all came the Goldsmiths, accompanied with some other Inhabitants in
Cheapside and elsewhere, that joined with them in Company. The Invention of the
Show was worthy noting: First came Trumpets and Drums, with two Handswords
playing, making room, with a fair beautified Ensign: Then the ancientest sort
first in Gowns and Hats, with every one a fair large Arrow in his hand,
expressing Marque(...) Barlo, as Co(...) was th(...) chief in (...)
Forefro(...) of the S(...)ters.
the good will to the Long-Bow, and now being aged, do give over that laudable
Game to their Sons and Servants, yet still wellwillers to the Action; and every
one of them had his Page seemly clothed in red Mandilians, striped with
silver, like broad Laces, and Caps of red Taffety, edged with white Furr; these
carried their Shield^ of sundry Devises, in the one of their hands, and an
Arrow in the other hand: Then came a Ship ready rigged, carried Pagentwise, and
cunningly made to toss and lean sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on the
other, with a Seafish ready to overthrow the same, thrusting forth her Head,
and plucking it in again, in the midst of the Waves, and two Indians or
Blackmores ^o go near unto it: On the one end of the Ship stood the Unicorne,
on the other end the Maremaid. The Ship seemed as though it had newly come from
India, and by great travel and danger had brought home her burden, laden with
Gold and Silver: Then followed the younger Men of their Train, and for the most
part apparalled in Satin Dublets, silk Hats, Chains of Gold about their
Bodies, and silk Hose, with a Bow and four Shafts, and every one had his Page
going before him in red Mandilians, as before mentioned, and Caps accordingly
suitable, some bearing Pickers, some Spades, and some Hammers, signifying as
though they came from the Indies, and had thence, by great labor, brought home
that Treasure which the Ship carried: And others carried Wedges of Gold, and
some of them Silver, which by Workmanship is made out of the same Earth that
the Ship brings; and every one of these Pages had upon their Mandilions these
Sentences written both before and behind; Honest labor procures health,
By honest labor men come to wealth.


Thus every one had his Page bearing these Tools, like Workmen by whose Labor
many things are made out of Gold and Silver to the use of all men, and to the
avoiding of Idleness. Then upon a Staff was borne in the midst of the same
Show, a Coronet, whereat hung three Arrows of Silver, very workmanly made; then
followed a Consort of broken Music, playing all the way, to the great delight
of all the Beholders and Hearers of the same: And last of all an hundred Shot,
being very ready and nimble to discharge, and these were well appointed with
Powder. Thus went they along through Cheapside up Coruhill, and turned by
Leaden Hall to Bishopsgate, where at the end of Houndsditch the Street was
chained in, and there placed the Image of a monstrons Giant, which in times
past dwelt in that place, being stoutly defended with long Morrice-Pikes,
Halberds, and Wheel Guns of great shot ready charged against the Duke's Gunners
and Archers, who valiantly shot many Arrows into the Giant, and discharged
their Calivers, which the Giants men would not put up, but shook their Spears,
shot off their Pieces in show to defend the Place, which since that Giant lived
belonged to Prince Arthur: Thus for sport on both sides, the Trumpets sounded,
the Drums, struk up, the Ensigns were tossed in seemly sort, and the Fencers
with Tanswords made room, beginning a Battle in seemly show, the Shot of the
Goldsmiths discharged their shot so fast, and in good order, to the shaking of
the Giants Fort, that hardly the People near hand, might know one another. Thus
the Train passed to Shoreditch Church, and then turned down into
Hogsdon-fields, into a fair large green Pasture Ground of goodly Compass, where
a T^nt was set up for the Duke and the chief Citizens, where, when they were
come, they might sit to see the Shooters appointed to shoot at the Butt new set
up for the same, being Sevenscore and eight yards from the other end of the
Tent. The true number of Archers that shot, was Thirty hundred: The number that
accompanied him into the Field, of Archers, Citizens, Whiffiers, and those
which guarded them with Bills, was Forty and one hundred and odd Persons,
besides Pages and Henchmen, which was in number Three hundred and odd. The
Attire worn by all this Company (for the most part) was very gorgeous; some in
black Velvet Jerkins, Dublets of Satin, with Hats of Velvet; the most part in
Satin and Taffety, and Hats of Taffety, a great many wearing Chains of Gold.
The true number of Chains of Gold worn among the Company, that I saw, was Nine
hundred forty two; the rest of the Company did all wear green large Skarfs,
some white Scarfs, othersome green Ribbons, Oringe tawny Ribbons, some black
and white, green and white, but the most part was green.

Before they came to the Tent, the Train marched about the Field in Warlike
manner, and forthwith cast themselves about and broke their Ray, every one
hasting to the Tent where the Duke purposed to begin shooting. Then every
Ensign brought in his Archers, and there with sound of Trumpet proclaimed by
the Herald, That every man should avoid Forty foot from each side of the Butt;
otherwise to stand to their own perils. Thus went they to shooting, where by
then three Ensigns had shot, which was about three of the Clock; word was
brought to the Duke, That certain of Prince Arthur's Knights was coming into
the Field, desirous to speak with his Nobleness; having answer that they should
be entertained courteously. Forthwith the Goldsmiths made forth to meet them,
staying at their own Stake against their coming, who anon came, and then the
Goldsmiths Ensign, and some of their Pages very orderly, with some of the
Archers in Chains of Gold, went and met these courteous Knights, mounted upon
stately Palsreys, with ten Pages also on Horsback, and Irish Lackies with Darts
running by their Horses on foot, besides a Trumpeter, a Herald, and a
Messenger, upon good Geldings: The Knights were apparelled in Cloth of Tissue,
or Crimson Silk and Gold; their Pages in green Silk; having likewise a seemly
Company of Archers very richly apparelled in Satin Dublets and Chains of Gold,
to the number of Two hundred, attending on Foot, half going before, the residue
coming behind. (A worthy Show beseeming so noble a Game). Thus with great
reverence they came near to the Tent, the Messenger clad in a Jacket of black
Velvet, with a black Velvet Cap, and green Satin Dublet; pronounced an Oration
to the Duke, the Copy thereof follows.

Most noble Duke, first to your good self and next unto all your worthy Society
and Company in general; I in the behalf of the most noble and renowned Prince
Arthur, and all his noble Knights, gratify you (and yours) with the choice of
a thousand commendations: Fame blowing abroad, and in the Court of the Noble
Prince Arthur that this day (in this place) should be practiced the most
excellent quality of shooting in the Long-Bow. Which news were no sooner blazed
in that most Royal Court, but by the consent of their renowned Prince, these
noble Knights mounted themselves on Horseback, (calling to mind) the great
courtesy they received of your Nobleness, at the late Royal Show of their
famous Prince. For requital of which your great Friendship, this Troop of noble
Knights (for the honor they owe to the Long-Bow) are repaired hither to present
unto your Nobleness a friendly Gift; which is, five Bows of Gold, and five
Silver Arrows; requiring your Nobleness to bestow them on five of the most
valiant, most active, and most expert of all your Train, in shooting in the
Long-Bow, requesting (friendly) we may presently see the delivery of them to
those persons most worthy: hoping you will accept these their friendly Gifts,
springing from well willing minds, loath to hinder your worthy exercise, we omit
for expense of time, that which else more largely should have been discoursed.
These actions being finished (we presume of your courtesy) we shall depar^
friendly, always wish^^g the prosperous success of your worthy Exercise.

The Duke with hearty thanks accepted these their presents, promising with
great protestation to match the Prince every way in good will and courtesy,
wishing that this their amity might long continue.

Then the Knights departed with great grief to the Duke, because he had
provided a Bankquet for them, which could not be served in by reason of the
unruliness and throng of the People.

The Marquess Barlo chief of the Goldsmiths, to gratify them with some Show of
courtesy, bestowed on them to Jugots or Wedges, one of Gold the other of
Silver, and after did conduct them into their own liberties with a Volley of
shot, which they very thankfully accepted.

And this one thing is worthy of memory, that upon the day of Prince Arthur's
shooting, which was five weeks before this Show, The Duke willing to beautify
the same in some seemly sort, sent a Buck of that season by the Marquess Barlo,
accompanied with many Goldsmiths; who coming in Satin Dublets and Chains of
Gold about their Bodies, with Horns at their backs, did all the way wind their
Horns, and presented the same to Prince Arthur, who was at his Tent, which was
at Mile-endgreen; he not only accepted the same, but also promised to have the
Dukes courtesy in mind if God lent him life.

Having now digressed in brief, I will return to the Duke, who seeing the night
draw on, broke up the shooting until the next day, which was Wednesday, where
they all met again to try who could depart Victors of those Games then to be
won. Which were in value as follows; The first Fifty three shillings four
pence, the second five nobles, the third four nobles, the fourth Twenty
shillings, and the fifth ten shillings. Thus every one having one shot at the
But, the best five were young men; four of the best Games did the Earl of
Pankridge's men win; the fifth one of the Dukes men did get. The best and the
second were won by two of S. Dunstans in the East; the best was a Skinners man,
the second a Brewers man, and he that won the first did dwell in S. Brides
Parish, being a Sadlers Son, all which three were brought home in this manner.
First, for that it was dark, they were brought out of the Field with Torch
lights to the number of two hundred, and the Winners mounted upon great
Geldings, sent to them from out of those parts where they dwelled, very
sumptuously trapped with cloth of Silk, and Silver, and another of Gold, with
eight Trumpets Drums and Ensigns, with shot which came from Fleetstreet to
fetch them home: and others with Halbards safely to conduct them, they all
three were clad in green; the first in green Taffety, with a white Scarf about
his Body, and a great Chain of Gold about his neck, with a Cap of Velvet, and a
golden Band about the same, bearing an Arrow in his hand, and a green Ribbon
hanging thereat; And so had they all: To their great laud and honor were they
conducted first into Grubstreet, then entered the City at Cripplegate, down
Woodstreet, and so into Cheapside, continual shot was bestowed to bring them
home, to the great delight of the beholders: Thus marching through Paul's
Churchyard, they went to Ludgate, and so home, where their Trains was very
thankfully received: Against they came home there was prepared great Banquets
by their Masters and Parents, to the great delight of that Parish where they
dwelled, who would not for money have lost the honor of the same.

Then did the Marquess Barlo with all the Goldsmiths and his convoy of men at
Arms safe conduct the Duke home to his Norrich Savage both n(...) table (...)
shot in (...) Train.
house, appointing one Jeffery Gates an ancient Servitor to them, to be the
Leader, who marched in the forward until they came to the Duke's house, where
the Duke was no sooner entered his house, and the Marquess together, with the
chief of the Train, but the Harquebussers, at the appointment of Gates, charged
their pieces, and forthwith did bestow such a Volley of shot, as caused the
Glass to shake forth of the Glass windows; to the honor of the Duke, and the
good liking of them all.

Then every Baron and the whole Company of Governors were brought home to their
joy and comfort, making good cheer, shooting off their Pieces, sounding of
Trumpets, and striking up of their Drums to delight and comfort.

Thus have I (as perfectly as I may) described the manner of the same,
reporting the truth of what I saw. Then on the Monday following, the Duke had
provided a sumptuous Feast, to which all the Archers came, being kept at the
Bishop of Londons Palace, who for the good will he bore to shooting, lent them
his house freely, wishing that it might be as commodious to them, as the Show
and Sight, for provision of so many Citizens in his house was comfortable to
him. And for fear of disorder, there was unto every Archer given a token
stamped with a Broad Arrow, who at the gate of the Bishops Palace, delivered
them to those they were appointed to receive them.

Which done, every man (for the most part having Ribbons about their necks)
went to those Tables, which by good foresight were provided for them, every man
taking his place until the Service was brought in, the Tables furnished before
with Table-clothes, Salt Bread, and trenchers: The great Hall of the Palace
was filled, and over the heads of the People hung the most sumptuous E^signs,
under which they were before conducted to the field. There might a man behold
the great provision of meat, the Cooks in such good order dressing the same in
quiet sort as was worthy noting. And when the service of meat was brought in,
the Trumpets sounded, the Drums struck up, and every man in very good order
placed to their contentment, so that the great Hall, the largest Parlor, the
Galleries, and other Rooms in the House were filled with People, who with great
rejoicing gave thanks to God for his providence and blessings, many ways
bestowed on them. Then was there served into one large Table, which was the
highest Table in the great Hall, boiled Capon, roasted Beef, Venison Pasties,
Custard, Tart, roasted Capon and Rabbets, with other Dishes necessary for the
time, with Wine, Beer, and Ale, and ever was replenished with sufficient
thereof to their contentation.

The rest of the Tables had this service to every' Mess. First boiled Mutton,
roasted Beef, a Pasty of Venison, and a roasted, Capon, and some had Rabbets,
besides Beer and Ale which was sufficient, every Mess had a Bottle of Wine
served in a Bottel unto the same: There were three hundred Messes of Meat
served in, to the great joy and comfort of those that were there, being served
in such good order as is laudable. When the Meat was served in, every man
familiarly drunk one to another, and then the Duke very reverently drank to
them all, whereat the Trumpets founded, the People hollowed, the Drums struck
up, and such a noise was made that it was heard far off. Then the Duke with
some of his Knights and Gentlemen, went about the whole House and visited every
Table, with Drum and ^ife, to the well liking of them all, so that with much
melody they came in again into the great Hall, giving thanks to the whole
Company. Then sundry times the Trumpets sounded, the Drums struck up, and the
Company drank to the Duke, passing away the time until Dinner was ended. Then
another Company did wind their Horns, which in good order of measures they did.
The People by this time beginning to depart, the Duke caused the Herald to
stand up and make a proclamation, that the people might be silent; which done,
he pronounced in short sentence, a thanksgiving to God for our gracious Queen,
desiring God to send her long Life and Victory over all her enemies; whereat
the People cried Amen; lifting up their Caps, heaving up the Tables over their
Heads, in sign of joy of her Majesty, whereat the Trumpets sounded, the Company
hollowed and showted. Last of all they praised God and so departed; giving the
remnant of the broken Meat to the poor and needy, of which company a number
gave diligent attendance for the same at the great Gate. (A charitable deed in
the knitting up of so honorable a matter.) Thus they declared their courtesies
one to another, to the maintenance of Christian unity, which I pray God long
continue, that this her Majesty's Realm of England may be kept still in Peace
and Tranquillity, to the maintenance of Gods Glory, the Fame and perpetual
renown of of her Majesty; whose life, the God and giver of all life, prolong,
that our lives which depend upon Hers, may the better be preserved and
continued.

Amen.
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE SHOW MADE AT S. Martins in the Fields, In setting
up Her MAJESTY'S STAKE.
ON Wednesday, being the Second day of October last past, standing at a Stall
in the Old Baily, I heard the sound of Drums and Guns, and draw(...)g near to
see it, there came Whifflers with Staves, red and white, with a lusty Company
of good Archers, very well and seemly apparelled, bearing Bows and Shafts;
every Archer his Page, clothed in red Mandillian, striped with silver, and Caps
agreeable to the same. There came in number Two hundred Bowmen, mixed with Two
hundred Calivers, besides Holbards, to beautify the Show, mixed throughout.
The Gunners were expert fellows, discharging their shot in very good order: All
this Train going under sundry fair Ensigns. Forthwith the Trumpets founded, and
a very fair Show followed. First men very strangely apparelled in long hairy
Garments, made of Skins like unto Martens, hopping and skipping along as they
went: Then came ^wo Horsemen harnished, their Horses all over trapped in white
silk: Then came a very sump^uous Stake, being the Queens Majesty's, which they
went to set up in S. James Field; upon this Stake stood a golden Lion holding a
Shield with her Majesty's Arms, the supporters whereof were Fortitude, Justice,
Temp^rance, and Prudence, the Lion havin^ (...) whol^ Crown on his head* Then
came(...) seemly Pagent, very cunningly made ^^d with great cost, wherein sat
the Gods; first ^an, with Fame and Honor, attending on Virtue; then Saint
Martin, and Eliza, as superior, accompanied with the sour Virtues, the Muses
attending very seemly with Music playing before the Pagent. Thus they passed
very orderly through Holborn to Chancery Lane, and so to S. James's in the
Fields: In the Train was carried three silver Games, as reward for the Winners
of shooting in the Long-Bow, and a gilded Gun, as a reward unto the best that
could handle their Piece. (Both Exercises of great strength unto this Realm.)
They used many speeches in their Train as they went. And at night were brought
home very worthily with Fireworks, which greatly beautified the same. To
conclude, never saw I a fairer sight, upon such a sudden, which being worthy
of commendation, I thought good to note the principal things therein, that it
might remain in memory to their continual praise.

A BRIEF RELATION Of the several APPEARANCES OF ARCHERS Since His Majesty's
Restoration.
ON March the a^st. Anno Domini 1661. Four hundred Archers, with their Bows and
Arrows, made a splendid and glorious Show in Hide-Park, with flying Colors,
and Cross-bows to guard them. Sir Gilbert Talbot Baronet, was their Colonel,
Sir Edward Hungerford, Knight of the Bath, their Lieu^enant Colonel, Mr. Done
was their Major. Great was the appearance both of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonalty: Several of the Archers Shot near Twenty score yards within the
compass of a Hat with their Cross-bows; and many of them, to the amazement of
the Spectators, hit the Mark; There were likewise three Showers of Whistling
Arrows. So great was the delight, and so pleasing the Exercise, that three
Regiments of Foot laid down their Arms to come to see it.

Yet as delightful as if then was, this Exercise was intermitted by some
unlucky neglective Fate, from the Year 16^1. (...)ll 1675. and then indeed
they began to Str^ng their Bows and handle their Arrows for a handsome
appearance to complement Sir Robert V^^er, then Lord Mayor: Their Randezvouz
was in the upper Moo^-fields: There, about Three hundred and fifty most richly
habited, were drawn up in a Body; From thence they marched through Moorgate,
through Cripleg^te, and through Woodstreet into Cheap^ide; then they past by
the north side of Saint Paul's, and marched round it into Cheapside again, and
so to Guild Hall, where they waited to receive the King's most Excellent
Majesty, and the then Lord Mayor. When the King had past by (who seemed highly
pleased with the sight of so many Archers) then they marched to Christ-Church,
where a very noble Dinner was prepared for them at the expense of the Lord
Mayor: Sir Rober^ Payton Knight, was their Leader, and Mr. Michael Arnold was
there bringer up, they marched under one Color, Six men with Cross-bows being
appointed to guard it: All the Officers had green Scarfs, and Every Bow-man
wore a green Ribbon. There was not any thing more material to be mentioned in
that days march.

Upon the 26th of May following, the Archers marched to Tuttle-feilds to Shoot
their Whistling-Arrowes. They Randezvouz'd in the Military-Ground near
Bloomsbury, and marched from thence through part of Holbourn, through Chancery.
La^e, through Temple-barr, and so through the Strand to Whitehall. There were
Six abreast; yet when the Van reached Whitehall, the Rear had not past through
Temple-barr, so numerous were the Archers then; from Whitehall directly to
Tuttlefeilds aforesaid. When they were drawn up in a Line, then came the King
with his Guard and Coaches of State, together with His Royal Highness, the Duke
of York, the Duke of Monmouth, and most of the Nobility attending him; to see
them Shoot His Majesty marched twice or thrice from one end of the body to the
other to view them. The Archers were in number near a Thousand; the Spectators
near Twenty thousand It was a great encouragement, and a mighty joy and
satisfaction to the Archers to see the King behold them with such a Serene,
Benign, Cheerful, Princely and Favorable Countenance: His Majesty was pleased
to stay an hour or two to look on, whilst they shot several Showers of
Whistling-Arrowes to entertain him, with which his Majesty, and the Nobility,
seemed very much satisfied: Then the King was pleased to return to Whitehall:
And then Sir Gilbert Talbot sent in several Barrels of Beer, and other
Provision for the Archers; so did Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Robert Peyton, and
the rest of the Captains; After they had refreshed themselves, then they
marched home with Drums beating, and Colors flying. Sir Gilbert Talbot being
the Colonel, Sir Robert Peyton Lieutenant Colonel, and Michael Arnold Major.

In the Year 1676. on St. Simon and Jude's day, Sir Joseph Sheldon being
Elected Lord Mayor, about 350 Archers marched under the Command of Sir Robert
Peyton Knight; they Randezvouzd in the upper Moor-feilds, and marched as before
mentioned in the time of Sir Robert Vyner's Maioralty, and were in the self
same manner placed to receive the King and Queen, the Nobility and Gentry, who
came to Honor the Lord Mayor with their presence at Dinner at the Guild Hall:
When his Majesty was past by, then they marched to Christ-Church to Dinner.
Amongst the variety of Sights, none seemed to give his Majesty more content and
delight, more pleasure and satisfaction, than to see the Bows and Arrows, these
Ancient Habiliments of war revived.

On the 14th day of July, 1681. the Archers marched from London to
Hampton Court, under the Command of Mr. Edwards and Mr. Henry Warren: That was
a Day appointed to Shoot for Several Pieces of Plate, worth Thirty pounds, at
Eightscore yards distance. After a little time was spent, the King was pleased
to honor them with his Presence, and Stayed near Two hours to behold their
Pastime, to the great joy, satisfaction, and honor of the Archers: And as
though this had not been honor enough, so full of Goodness and Clemency was
his Majesty, that he permitted as many of them as pleased to kiss his Hand, in
token of his being well satisfied with that Heroic Exercise; The Prizes were
two Silver Cups, and three dozen of Silver Spoons. The said Target was placed
upon a Butt, erected on the Green, before the Kings Palace there; but it rained
so fast that the King was forced to ^etire before all the Prizes were won,
which were Thirty in number; He stayed till six were won, and expressed his
satisfaction very much; and without all question the Archers may reasonably
hope for what favor they can humbly beg for the encouragement of Archery from
this King, and it will be granted with as much readiness as by any of his
Royal Ancestors in the like case whatsoever heretofore; for no King, unless
his glorious Father, could ever match his goodness.

Postscript.
ON Friday the 21st. of April, 1682. the Archers met in the Artillery-Ground,
marching through Cornhill, Fleetstreet, and the Strand to Tuttlefields. The
chief Officers were Sir Edward Hungerford Knight of the Bath, Colonel, Mr.
Michael Arnold Lieutenant Colonel, Mr. John Mould Major, Mr. Henry Warren
Captain Lieutenant, Mr. Edward Done, Mr. George Walker, Mr. James Manley,
Captains. The King's most Excellent Majesty, his Royal Highness, and most of
the Nobility, were so favorable as to Honor them with their Presence; as
likewise the Ambassador of the Emperor of the Kingdom of Morocco and Fez: There
were at least a Thousand Archers in the Field; for now Gentlemen begin to be
affected with the Divertisement, and pleased with this Manly Recreation: There
were Three Showers of Whistling Arrows: such a Sight, such a Noise, and such an
Appearance, it is presumed was never seen in England on the like Occasion; yet
we hope that every year will beget new Lovers of this profitable and harmless
Exercise, for they are now resolved, at least once or twice a year to make such
a Public Appearance, if His Majesty will be pleased to permit them.

FINIS.

