JUVENALIS Redivivus.

OR The First Satyr of JVVENAL taught to speak plain English.

A POEM.

-- Dent ocius Omnes
Quas meruere pati (sic stat sententia) poenas.
Printed in the Year 1683, and are to be sold by most Booksellers.

The Preface to the Reader.
THere is scarce any one in this our Age, tho a small Author, but that thinks
it convenient, and necessary to trouble his Reader with an Apology. Our very
Sermons will not walk abroad without a Prologue in prose upon their backs,
thinking themselves not secure, unless people are first persuaded into good
nature: Every one puts on as many clothes as he can get, and every one expects
a storm. Indeed we are fallen into times of strange malice, and ignorance:
Every illiterate spelling Coxcomb will be ready to give his verdict; yet who
perhaps by repeating a Poem, will render it more ridiculous than it is in it
self. Ariosto heretofore broke a Potter's vessels for singing a Song of his
composing out of tune, telling him, that all the ware in his Shop could not
suffice for the injury he had put upon him. And indeed, if such a Malefactor
was to be tried by an unbiased, understanding Jury; Scandalum Magnatum it self
ought not in reason to hope for greater Damages, than a poor, and thus abused
Author. But alas, there is no such remedy; we must like offending Soldiers run
the Gauntlet, and give every snearing Powder-monkey leave to claim the
privilege of a Lick. Sure this sort of people were not so common when Juvenal
first lived; If they were, I dare be confident some Scriblers had not found
such an easy and merry Passage to Posterity as they have done; and that
Persius himself (who lies sculking under the Patronage of our Author) had been
soundly Jirked, and abominably laughed at. One fault or slip of a Pen now a
days, is sufficient reason why the whole book should be condemned: Neither is
this all, but you shall be sure to have continually some good natured friend or
other at your elbow, who will ever now and then flap you on the mouth with it.
The severe Critic Longinus, and after him our admirable Laureat, take notice,
that a man of a sublime Genius, a man of large possessions has not leisure
enough to consider of every slight expense, will not debase himself to the
management of every Trifle; whereas your mean fortunes, your midling Wills,
manage their store with extreme frugality, are very nice in Grammar, but who
with fear of running into Profuseness, never arrive to the Magnificence of a
Living. I had rather see (both in men and women) wholesome, civil, careless
behavior, than the compleatness and exact motions of neat, finical, wire-drawn
Babies. I admire the one, and am apt to grin at the other. It Is indeed
ridiculous, that any one should take a great deal of pains, and be but ordinary
at last. I would willingly say all I could to excuse my own failings and
mistakes; but however it is, I can by no means admit every one to be a
competent Judge: I am sorry I am forced to be so ungentile as to deny it even
to the Ladies. If there is any Genius in the Poem, it appears as being somewhat
like a parallel to the Latin, and built upon old Juvenal's foundation; which I
must crave leave, to suppose them to be wholly ignorant of. It Is true, they
desire acknowledgments from men, that they are perfect beauties, tho at the
same time they show themselves naked no farther than their breasts. But I
willingly receive a Judicious Reader, One that will examine and handle all
parts, and that will not give his Judgment at first sight. The more he
understands the Latin, the farther he searches, I am sure it will be so much
the more to my advantage. He will find by an impartial scrutiny, that I have
aimed at that Naturalness, which Juvenal (in the judgment of Rapin) has seemed
wholly to have forgot; that I have purposely sometimes abstained from his
scolding and ill language; being certainly assured, that a sporting and
merriment of Wit does render Vice more ridiculous, than the strongest reasons,
or most sententious discourse. Indeed, he has seemed all along to write in
choler and passion, fancying himself to be really in the company of those
persons, that he describes with so much uneasiness and malice. 'Twas here only
that I found my self more than ordinarily obliged, and against my Conscience,
to keep somewhat close to him, to be downright and serious, lest in my too much
caution I should not write a Parallel to which I pretend, and lest I should
wholly loose the name of an Imitator. I have had, like him, no respect of
Persons or Parties, but like a truly Loyal Satyrist have run full tilt at vice
ana folly, where ever I found it, with a resolution not to give any quarter;
tho I must confess, I have discovered a greater abundance in the Faction, than
amongst those that are Loyal. It Is fit the world should know that there be some
men in it, that scout both Whigg and Torie, that hate the destroyers of
Society; That scorn to be concerned in noise and tumult, till there is a real
occasion. My design at first was to have lead on this way of writing in many of
the succeeding Satyrs, but I am unwilling to prevent a worthy and more
experienced Pen. Think if you please, that my Time lies upon my hands, and that
I delight to be scribbling, or that I was resolved to be Busy about Nothing,
rather than be Idle; I am however upon all occasions

Reader, Thy true Friend, and very humble Servant.

To the Excellent and unknown Author of the ensuing Poem.
SIR, I by chance the ensuing Satyr saw,
And found that I my self did suffer too:
But blessed the teeth that did so kindly bite,
That forced even duller Me at length to write;
Stripes in old Letchers often does raise an Appetite.
From Anger free I only wished that here
I could like thee give each a Character.
I Would tell the world that once Achitophel
Did please, but now the Ghost of Juvenal.
But by my Whiggery all Wits discry'd,
My Senses with the City-Charter died.
Could I recall my Youth, and brisker blood,
Sir I Would stretch high, -- ay marry that I would.
Noble, and gay, obliging whilst severe,
Thy Judgment deep, thy Fancy neat and clear.
Write on: Thou never sure can do amiss,
I vow thou 'rt born to scourge an Age like this.
June 19. 1683.
To his Friend the Author of JUVENALIS REDIVIVUS.
Blessed Poet! Thou alone writst unconfined,
And in a Style as free as is thy Mind.
Thy even Satyr no wrong Byas knows,
But equally on all its rage bestows.
Though (thou my Friend) have been provoked to write,
There Is not oneline that savours ought of spite.
But with impartial Pen Vice is drawn here,
And does in all its nakedness appear:
Where most men may perhaps with wondering look
See themselves ugly, and condemn thy Book;
Like some brown Dame, who, when she views her face,
Is angry at the sight, and breaks the Glass.
But still go on (brave Friend) and make us know,
What Rome to Juvenal, That to Thee we owe.
For in the Latin thou'st but changed each name,
The Matter, Manners, Men were all the same.
Nor do in this the Age alone refine,
But Juvenal himself in every line.
This gentle Satyr, if well understood,
May kindly awe, and force us unto good.
Yet I fear too, ill in the effect twill be,
All will turn wicked to be scourged by Thee.
June 23. 1683.
JUVENALIS Redivivus. OR The first Satyr of JVVENAL made to speak plain English.
BUT must I always suffer this? Can I
So tamely still an ears good nature try,
Exalted Nonsense being placed for Pillory?
Must I in complaisance conceal my pain?
No, I Will turn Fool, and write, and vex again.
Dear Doeg, long have I with patience heard
Cambyses roar, and mighty thundrings feared.
The Comic Mamamouch' has teiz'd me too,
And Sappho with her wondrous Empty show,
A Torie faith, yet shall not unpunished go.
The City Wits have often scared my Eyes
With lamentable, mournful Elegies,
But of all plagues Mack Fleckno is the worst,
With Guts and Poverty severely cursed:
Large is his Corpse, his mighty works do swell,
Both carefully filled up, and stuffed from Hell:
Eternal Sot, all over a public Ass,
Is cypher'd in the margin of his Face.
No tawdry Jilt does Playhouse better know,
Than I St. Jameses Park, or who kissed who:
I know Morefields, where cunning Bawds do live;
The Exchange, where none but Knaves and Cuckolds thrive.
I see it plain why grinning Whigs do sneer,
Or scold, and sweat to day at Westminster;
That Sr. George and I, shall have a Summons,
As Traitors, to the Royal [1] House of Commons.
That thin starved Squires will steal a Golden Wench,
That Wapping Buffe'ne longs to kick the French:
The laboring Press does daily this repeat,
And frighted Nokes on loaded Stage does sweat.
[2] These subjects do the best and worst wits choose,
But none will e're a tedious Dullness loose.
Then why should I, who long have left the Schools,
And all pedantick, boyish, Grammar rules;
I, who to Patience once did give advice
To quit Fur-gown, and public Offices;
Shall I minced Pies defraud, or paper spare,
Since in Taverns, Streets, troth and every where,
Jack-pudding Poetasters do appear?
Since piss-burn'd Wigg, torn clothes, and much of spite,
Or saucy Fool's sufficient plea to write.
But why the Ground must raging Fancy choose,
Which sharp and noble Dryden often does use,
'Lashing full stretch his fiery foaming Muse?
Strong Truths and Reasons shall declare the Cause,
And which forgiving Zeal will never oppose.
When Fumbling Sergeants wanton Girls do wed,
(Sad Tools alas to warm a Marriage Bed)
When shameless Women on the Stage are brought,
And puny Lords with naked Breasts are caught;
When Ishban swears he is richer than my King,
And Scriveners against Courts their Actions bring;
When leathern Clown, that came from [3] Islington,
To factious Common Councils strait does run;
And then with Pride on stately Stone-horse set,
Curses the Golden Chain that makes him sweat:
God's Death, from loud laughter I can never refrain,
I stop at grinns, and hide my teeth in vain;
My boiling Gall does such confinement scorn,
And strong desires of Pen and Ink return.
Here in his Coach the full-blown Jonas swells,
And Popish Rats the sharp-nos'd Arod smells;
The squeaking Jack-call Doctor starts the Game,
And each his share in Blood and Money claim.
Through strange beliefs he bribed sense decoys,
And swears that Devils never could utter lies,
Yet dreads that TO will once against the witness rise.
With such success Sham-plots a Midwife tried,
(As some affirm) by Tower'd Lords employed.
Here Covent Garden stabs an Heir Remove,
Stallions eat Gold, are blessed in Hellish Love;
They cheat fond, irksome, and deceiving Life,
In The Sweets of a Rich Merchant's ugly wife.
The Long-tayl'd Balaam from a [4] Table strikes
His twelfve Half-Crowns, nor fame nor pay dislikes.
Hard Brawny Strong does much and more inherit,
He drinks and roars on's stock of belly-merit.
But sure this hot-spur will the Profit reap,
When Is thin pale Soul through shriveled veins does creep;
When like declaiming Tyburn-Rogue he will Cry,
Good Countrymen take warning all by Me:
When in Pox, Gout, and stink Amyntas lies,
That was so brisk, so gay, so witty, and so wise.
Soft Pity, and fierce Angers tear my Soul,
When Knaves a Noble Essex Youth control:
Undone by Fraud he discontented walks,
And to his shabby threadbare Garment talks.
[5] He Sharks, and Cheats, he Pimps, and feign would Game,
To raise the Grandeur of his Birth and Name.
But those the Rogues in the Crowd of Footmen placed
The Boars that do our Fields and Countries wast.
They Eat whole Families, drink Orphans Tears,
And none the threats of walking Conscience fears,
(As God would have it too,) they are Usurers.
See Curse ye Meroz with mock sentence blessed,
(For what is disgrace, when Coin at home does rest)
Banished Mankind on Herbs himself he feasts,
And stares, and struts in the midst of's Brother Beasts.
With Haste and Zeal he loves his Angry Fate,
And Joys that God so mean a Wretch will Hate.
[6] oh Doctors, Doctors Commons, tho prevailing
Yet thou findst for thy wrongs no Help but wailing.
Where Is Auldram Rochester, and Wicherley,
You mighty Souls, that in this Cause dare dye?
Let Us draw our Pens, and quit [7] Tarsander's Praise,
Fair Phillis lovely Bum, the charming ways
Of Country Wife, renowned for mizmaze tricks,
Or where their Darts our Courtlike Cupids fix.
The Worlds on Fire, it does in madness reign,
Quench it with Ink, with Satyr breath a Vein:
Peevish, perverse, and base, it hates a Cure,
And scarce will out true honest minds endure;
It must, it must the kind Plain-dealers feel,
That will its sores, and foul diseases heal.
Then Smooth I wont forget that Handsome Lord,
Seditious Sot, unfaithful in his word:
With strange good Nature he his Horns receives,
And a whole Wife for Julio's Friendship gives.
When e're strong Drink or Sleep does seize his head,
Be sure that minute there is a Cuckold made.
His Conscience Pimps, his Brains the Friend does buy,
And all things yield to his No-Loyalty.
Fetch pious Swearmuch from New Market Race,
Religion jades him, and she tires apace:
He on good Horseflesh lives, but will not own,
That Fortune e're can cast her Rider down.
His noble Ancestors he scarce does know,
But with unsullied honor sneaks below
And says, it is well observed by the Wise,
That from starved Jockeys valiant Soldiers rise;
And underhand for a Commission tries.
A beggared [8] Duke thus once was set astride,
And did himself to a poor Devil ride.
Why should I not the Streets, and Churches fill
With sharp Lampeons, spew venom through my quill?
When bald-fac'd Split-cause in Sedan must roll,
The unfeather'd, glaring, rich, Majestic Owl;
Dowries he has from sweet oppression,
But Wax and Parchment was his Portion.
Worse than a Plague he dreads the Wind and Air,
It spoils his Curls, and does disturb his Hair.
To please the Earth let kind Heaven rain or shine,
The Day is damned that crosses his Design.
In ease and softness he melts down his hours,
And the spruce Earl above his God adores.
Clarinda here her mortgaged corpse would buy,
Itches once more for Maiden Liberty.
Wisely did Reverend Time her Mother see,
That Dog and Bitch, when coupled, never agree.
In vain are Myrtles raised, and Roses spread,
She loathes the joys of an unwholsom Bed;
Curses the false fires of her Ferret Eyes,
And charming, ill contrived deformities.
In short, to brave stout Ruffian Saints she prayed,
It lightened, thundered, and the Husband's dead.
Her desperate Gods with noise our City shook,
"And roared their vengeance out in fire and smoke.
Had she some secret, modish poisons sought,
[9] Madamoseile her knowledge would have taught;
She Would work above, the Frenchman down below,
[10] The Devil's in the Dice if 'twould not do.
Go on brave Souls, slight still all heavenly power,
Dare something worthy Newgate and the Tower.
Fame loves to talk of Rogues, their Ghosts does dread,
When I their Trials and their Memoirs read.
A pox of Honesty and Conscience,
Despised by all the men of wit and sense.
Learning and Piety ne'ere made man great,
Dull Knaves, and cringing fools preferment get.
See here this large Estate to Hell I owe,
And this from profitable sins does grow;
Base niggard Heaven on Earth must credit loose,
The liberal Devil for our God we choose.
O Hideous thought --
-- I Rave, I cannot Rest,
When sweet fair Lucia, like a VVanton dressed,
Sighs, smiles, looks, kisses in incestuous arms,
And frighted senses to strange feasts alarms;
Pity vile, beastly Lust had such amazing Charms.
Eunuchs and Monkeys Cloris still requires,
Creatures unfit for Loves soft Amorous fires;
Their Duty a good Christian often desires.
The young St John rots long before his time,
And of Guiacum stinks, and Turpentine.
Hence, hence, my own Poetic rage I slight,
The madness of the world shall make me write.
Let sinking Nature noble Scorn supply,
It may compose at least such lines as I,
Or the Dull, honest Barten [11] Holiday.
E're since the Royal Charles from England went,
And Floods of Tears bewailed his Banishment:
Since mad Religious Rebels did Command,
And joy'd to see a sad and naked Land;
Each Face for Satyr will afford a Theme,
And even silent Thoughts procure Esteem.
Bullies, Cheats, Pimps, and Whores, ay all mankind,
May here their ugly, well drawn Pictures find.
Vice (Heaven be praised) a tall fair Crop does yield,
A Harvest always, and from soil untilled.
Shop-keeping Gripes in large long Rows appear,
The Times are hard, they cry, on Rep they swear,
For King and Church they cannot afford a Prayer.
Sr. Fopling must to day at Lockets dine,
Where Cards and Dice commend the Nasty wine;
Grannums old Gold from Satin Purse is brought,
And Lordships are by Jilting Fortune caught.
Undone he stakes his Soul, tempts on his Fate,
While's Lowsy Footmen for their wages wait.
At length the Gentile Cully leaves our Isle,
Whilst Noise and Bully Thunder share the Spoil.
To please the Crowd our Fathers never meant,
Nor seven long years in mighty Nothings spent;
Never built a Costly useless MONVMENT.
Till selfish Shimei none e're dined alone,
Glutton and Swine himself he starves the Town;
Good Herbs and Air God made for our relief,
Fishes, Birds, Beasts for him, and's Woodstreet wife.
Our Noah's Ark the aged world now fears,
And down his Throat all Creatures go by Pairs.
Ravens and Carrion-bitts he gives the Rout,
But savoury Pigeons seldom do come out.
Grace said, he smiles, and standing up --
[12] Drive off the Torie Rogues, he loudly cries,
Take heed of Spanish Pilgrims in disguise,
The Brethren you may easily know from these,
True Protestants have lost their Consciences.
Let cashiered angry Courtiers still come on,
Sure trusty Trojans in Rebellion.
For each of these on factious treats depend,
Huge Ale and Beef did always find a friend.
Should I make public feasts, (which heaven prevent)
(Damnation gad's a milder punishment,)
The Zealous Zimri there should first be placed;
Then scribbling Arthur is a Hopeful Guest.
But here is an Alderman a seat must have,
A sober, sly, discreet, substantial Knave;
Spawned on the banks of Trent, a Todpole bred.
Now Toad all over, with a large Trimmers head.
Goodkind Addresses by his face are meant,
But's breech is all a Scottish Covenant.
Large mines of Gold do in his Cellar sleep,
'Twill all your Windsor [13] Kinghts in credit keep.
Well-born L'Estrange must not compare with us,
He Is wise, and poor, and therefore scandalous.
The roaring Lords admire our richer mould,
Each bows and crings to us Calves of Gold.
Money, dear money Titles will afford.
For silver Judas does betray his Lord.
Stand off then Peers, let a brave Citt come by,
Adore a Rag of lousy Majesty.
Under his branches beasts do take their rest,
There, there a bird of prey does make his nest:
With vast respect him let our children name,
Who sacred honors thus alone does claim,
Who to the Town a notch't, sunburned, itchy Prentice came.
Saint Paul shall now his stately Temple quit,
Goddess Pecunia must inhabit it.
Henceforth no Tipstaffs shall our Meeting search,
Meek kind Dissenters then will come to Church.
Then noisie [14] Jack-daw Jen -- s preach thy worth,
And Kaw, and Kaw thy goodly Doctrines forth.
Speak then, you that our Glories often have seen,
Great is Diana amongst our Englishmen.
He said, and long revolving in his thought,
What Coin his Dear Disloyalty had brought,
For Lies'gainst Court (says I) you this Receive,
For downright Treason this, and this as -- Shrieve.
But why should rich men thus engross a Trade?
The Rabble live by it, it is their daily Bread.
Through Grace a zealous Lobbish Traitor cries,
Help on O Heaven our weak Infirmities.
Three Tabernacles Lard do thou prepare,
For Ferg -- N, Tom H -- nt, and Harry C -- re.
Make this a Bishop, Tom a Judge shall be,
And the Gracious Lad chief Secretary;
Rewards sufficient for iniquity.
It Is true, a Jllr the Cause they lead about
With Midwife hands, and helped a Monster out.
In zeal and Conscience they this Babe did wrap,
And almost kis't and lick't it into shape.
But the good Devil owed his Friends a spite,
The Bastard -- plot half Grown is ruined quite.
A Fool; it neither Brains nor Breeding had,
A Driveling, Blundring, Milk-sop Oaf made.
Who'd think that such a Reformation
Was got by the wise part o'th Nation?
They Lie: their wisdom and their Purse is poor,
London The-wou'd-be Sheriffs.
Churchwardens do keep both child and whore.
Their Boasted number to a Nothing's fell,
Your Men in Moons good Sirs can never prevail.
Come show your Heads, young Julio wants a Vote,
He begs the assistance of a Carman's throat.
But see, the Godlike Caesar mounts the Throne,
And a vain empty Idol's melted down.
But tho God scattered thus this Jewish race,
Again with Nauseous spit they dawb his Face,
Huzzaing, we [15] Barabbas still Release.
No Hour can skip here unregarded by,
Their busy Souls each minute do employ.
Libels and Coffee first the Morning stay,
Then Wine and Whores lead on the Joyful Day.
The Prisons now for swearing Knights they take,
And fettered Rogues substantial Juries make.
The Refuse and odd scraps of time are
To write the Life of some Heroic Saint.
Tony in Print an Hair-brained Author puts,
Before the book a well-drawn Picture strutts,
So rotten Whetstone Jades wear Silken Petticoats.
Bumfodder sure before was not so scarce,
With Lives and Deaths I now must wipe mine A --.
Indeed a whole Day once they did
[16] To Pray and Praise in Butchers meat and wine.
But the good Tribe for Naught did Guinnies pay.
At Door they just peeped in, and sneaked away.
A Non-Con Abr'am would not trust his Eyes,
But looked behind for Rams to sacrifice.
Some Tradesmen too (who by my soul at least
Can forty Days upon occasion Fast,)
At length with tedious expectations Tire,
And do resolve henceforth they will never Aspire,
Beyond a Toast, a Nutmeg, and a Sea -- coal Fire.
Their Grandees baulk't like Owls do hate the light,
At home turn Fools and Gluttons out of spite.
Their whole Estates they swallow down, for fear
Their Treason known should give the K. a share.
Flattery they love, but 'tmust not come within,
It Is a good natured and expensive Sin,
So many Beasts to Adam never came,
Each now dish'd up from them expects a name.
The wide -- throat hungry Lawyers better sped,
They nobly on our stinking Charter fed.
But Vice brings still with it a Punishment,
A huge fat Carcass to the Bath is sent.
Though these Augaean Stables scorn a flood;
Epsom and Tunbridge waters do no good.
Strange Swellings rise from undigested meat,
Their names are known at the next Torie treat,
Who scout these Tympanies of Church and State.
Perfect and full-grown Ill can mount no more,
The Age to come its Glories must adore;
Know how from nothing our Creation grew,
And wondering stand a world of mischiefs view.
Poor in themselves with thanks they shall receive,
What we their Gods above will downwards give.
Yet spread my Sails, and launch into the Deep,
Over Death and Dangers shall my Satyr leap.
This Gyant-work I boldly do disown;
Pelion and Ossa now shall tumble down.
Help then, O Heaven, with a Destroying hand,
Scatter the Lice and Locusts of our Land.
With Famine, Plagues, and Inquisition kill,
But O remove, remove, a Greater ill.
I know They all defiance do profess,
Stubborn and disobedient to my Lash;
But time there was when they observed my Nod,
And gratefully would love and kiss the Rod.
For Johnson his't at length a Poet was,
But the HONORABLE ESQUIRE's still an Ass
If Whatdeecallum with Advice you hurt,
Lord, you must ask his Pardon in open Court.
But let each Tigelline in Coaches strut,
Look down on wiser men that walk a foot:
When Titles come we will sneer, and turn about,
Least Scandalum Magnatum's thundered out.
[17] Let Puny wits some Hero's fate rehearse,
And murder him again in Hobling verse:
My soul this Cowardice does wisely Dread,
It Is Cruelty to cut and slash the Dead.
See our Famed Laureats frown does fright the Crowd,
All fly the vengeance of an angry God.
Their Guilt and Shame an Horror does express,
Devoutly to Him they their sins confess.
Perhaps at last, if Wine their Courage move,
With base Rose Alley Drubs they him reprove,
And stand like Capaneus defying Jove.
All this I Will bear, this I can easily pass,
And boldly match the Muses [18] Hudibrass.
Be still then Westminster, thy Tombs shall rest,
Sleep on ye Reverend Shades in silence Dressed.
LONDON, thou sink of Vice, my Stripes expect,
The world shall know, that I the Living dare CORRECT.
Semper Ego Auditor tantum? nunquamne reponam,
Vexatus toties Rauci Theseide Codri?
Impune ergo mihi recitaverit ille Togatas?
Hic Elegos? impune diem consumpserit ingens
Telephus? aut summi plena jam margin Libri
Scriptus, and in tergo, nec dum finitus Orestes!
Nota magis nulli Domus est sua, quam mihi lucus
Martis, and Aeoliis vicinum rupibus antrum
Vulcani; quid agant venti, quas torqueat Umbras
Aeacus; unde alius furtivae devehat aurum
Pelliculae, quantas jaculetur Monychus Ornos,
Frontonis Platani, convulsaque marmora clamant,
Semper and assiduo ruptae Lectore Columnae.
Expectes eadem a summo minimoque Poeta
Et nos ergo manum ferulae subduximus, and nos
Consilium dedimus Syllae, privatus ut altum
Dormiret. Stulta est Clementia, cumtot ubique
Vatibus occurras, periturae parcere chartae.
Cur tamen hoc libeat potius decurrere campo,
Per quam magnus equos Auruncae flexit alumnus,
Si vacat, and placidi rationem admittitis, edam.
Cum tener uxorem ducat Spado, Mavia Tuscum
Figat aprum, and nuda teneat venabula mamma;
Patricios omnes opibus cum provocet unus,
Quo tondente gravis juvenis mihi barba sonabat;
Cum pars Niliacae plebis, cum verna Canopi
Crispinus, Tyrias humero revocante lacernas,
Ventilet aestivum digitis sudantibus Aurum,
Nec sufferre queat majoris pondera Gemmae:
Difficile est Satyram non scribere: nam quis iniquae
Tam patiens urbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se?
Causidici nova cum veniat Lectica Mathonis
Plena ipso, and post hunc magni delator amici
Et cito rapturus de Nobilitate Comesa
Quod superest,
quem massa timet, quem munere palpat
Carus, and a trepido Thymele summissa Latino.
Cum te summoveant, qui Testamenta merentur
Noctibus, in Coelum quos evehit optima summi
Nunc via processus, vetulae Vesica Beatae,
Unciolam Proculeius habet,
-- sed Gillo Decuncem,
Parteis quisque suas ad mensuram inguinis haeres.
Accipiat sane mercedem sanguinis, and sic
Palleat, ut nudis pressit qui Calcibus Anguem,
Aut Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad Aram.
Quid referam quanta siccum Jecur ardeat ira,
Cum populum gregibus Comitum hic spoliator
Pupilli prostantis?
At hic Damnatus inani
Judicio, (quid enim salvis infamia Nummis?)
Exul ab octavo Marius bibit, and fruitur Diis
Iratis: at tu victrix Provincia ploras
Haec ego non credam Verusina digna Lucerna?
Haec ego non Agitem? Sed quid magis Heracleas,
Aut Diomedeas, aut mugitum Labyrinthi,
Aut mare percussum puero Fabrumque volantem?
Cum Leno accipiat Moechi bona, si capiendi
Jus nullum uxori, doctus spectare Lacunar,
Doctus and ad calicem viglianti stertere naso,
Cum fas esse putat curam sperare cohortis,
Qui bona donavit praesepibus, and caret omni
Majorum censu dum pervolat axe citato
Flaminiam: puer Automedon sic lora tenebat,
Ipse lacernatae cum se jactaret amicae.
Nonne libet medio ceras implere capaces
Quadrivio; cum jam sexta cervice feratur,
Hinc atque inde patens, ac nuda pene cathedra,
Et multum referens de Maecenate supino
Signator, falso qui se lautum atque beatum
Exiguis Tabulis, and gemma fecerat uda.
Occurrit Matrona potens, quae molle Calenum
Porrectura viro miscet sitiente Rubetam,
Instituitque rudes melior Locusta propinquas,
Per famam and populum nigros efferre maritos.
Aude aliquid brevibus gyaris, and carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquid. Probitas laudatur, and alget:
Criminibus debent Hortos, Praetoria, Mensas,
Argentum vetus, and stantem extra pocula Caprum
Quem patitur dormire Nurus corruptor avarae,
Quem Sponsae Turpes, and praetextatus adulter:
Si Natura negat, facit Indignatio versum,
Qualemcunque potest, quales ego, vel Cluvienus.
Ex quo Deucalion Nimbis tollentibus Aequor
Navigio montem ascendit, sortesque poposcit,
Paulatimque anima caluerunt mollia saxa,
Et maribus nudas ostendit Pyrrha puellas:
Quicquid agunt homines, votum, timor, ira, voluptas,
Gaudia, discursus, nostri est farrago libelli.
Et quando uberior vitiorum copia? quando
Major Avaritiae patuit sinus? Alea quando
Hos Animos? Neque enim loculis comitantibus itur
Ad casum Tabulae, posita sed luditur Arca.
Praelia quanta illic dispensatore videbis
Armigero? simplex ne furor sestertia centum
Perdere, and horrenti tunicam non reddere servo?
Quis totidem erexit Villas? Quis fercula septem
Secreto coenavit avus? Nunc sportula primo
Limine parva sedet turbae rapienda togatae.
Ille tamen faciem prius inspicit, and trepidat, ne
Suppositus venias, ac falso nomine poscas.
Agnitus accipies: jubet a Praecone vocari
Ipsos Trojugenas, nam vexant limen and ipsi
Nobiscum: da Praetori, da deinde Tribuno.
Sed libertinus prior est, prior inquit ego adsum:
Cur timeam, dubitemve locum defendere? quamvis
Natus ad Euphratem, molles quod in aure fenestrae
Arguerint, licet ipse negem, sed quinque tabernae
Quadringinta parant. Quid confert purpura majus
Optandum? Si Laurenti custodit in agro
Conductas Corvinus opes? ego possideo plus
Pallante and Licinis.
Expectent ergo Tribuni,
Vincant divitiae: sacro nec cedat honori,
Nuper in hanc urbem pedibus qui venerat albis.
Quandoquidem inter nos sanctissma Divitiarum
Majestas, etsi funesta Pecunia templo
Nondum habitas, nullas nummorum ereximus aras,
Ut colitur Pax, atque Fides, Victoria, Virtus,
Quaeque salutato crepitat concordia Nido.
Sed cum summus honor finito computet Anno,
Sportula quid referat, quantum Rationibus addat:
Quid facient comites, quibus hinc toga, calceus hinc est
Et panis fumusque Domi? densissima centum
Quadrantes Lectica petit, sequiturque Maritum
Languida, vel Praegnans, and circumducitur Uxor.
Hic petit absenti nota jam callidus Art,
Ostendens vacuam and clausam pro conjuge sellam,
Galla mea est, inquit, citius dimitte, moraris?
Profer Galla caput: Noli vexare, quiescit.
Ipse Dies pulchro distinguitur ordine rerum;
Sportula, deinde, forum,
Jurisque peritus Apollo.
Atque Triumphales, inter quas Ausus habere,
Nescio quis titulos Aegyptius, atque Arabarches:
Gujus ad effigiem non tantum mejere Fas est.
Vestibulis abeunt veteres, lassique Clientes.
Votaque deponunt, quamvis longissima Coenae
Spes homini: Caules miseris, atque ignis emendus.
Optima Sylvarum interea Pelagique vorabit,
Nam de tot pulchris and latis orbibus, and tam
Antiquis, una comedunt patrimonia mensa.
Nullus jam Parasitus erit; sed quis feret istas
Luxuriae sordes! quanta est gula, quae sibi totos
Ponit Apros, animal propter convivia natum?
Poena tamen praesens cum tu deponis amictus
Turgidus, and crudum pavonem in Balnea portas.
Hinc sibitae mortes, atque intestrata senectus:
It nova, nec tristis per cunctas fabula coenas,
Ducitur iratis plaudendum funus amicis.
Nil erit ulterius quod nostris moribus addat
Posteritas, eadem cupient, facientque minores.
Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit, utere velis,
Totos pande sinus. Dicas hic forsitan, unde
Ingenium par materiae? unde illa priorum
Scribendi quodcnnque animo flagrante liberet
Simplicitas, cujus non audeo dicere Nomen.
Quid refert, Dictis ignoscat Mutius, an non?
Pone Tigellinum toeda lucebis in illa
Qua stantes ardent and fixo Gutture fumant,
Et latum media sulcum deducit arena.
Qui dedit ergo tribus patruis aconita, vehatur
Pensilibus Plumis, atque illinc despiciat Nos?
Cum veniet contra digito compesee Libellum,
Accusator erit, qui verbum dixerit, hic est.
Securus licet Aeneam, Rutilumque ferocem
Committas: Nulli gravis est percussus Achilles,
Aut multum Quaesitus Hylas urnamque secutus.
Ense velut stricto, quoties Lucilius Ardens
Infremuit, rubet auditor cui frigida men's est
Criminibus, tacita sudant Praecordia Culpa.
Inde Irae and Lacrymae: tecum prius ergo voluta
Haec Animo, ante tubas: Galeatum sero Duelli
Poenitet; experiar, quid concedatur in illos,
Quorum Flaminia tegitur cinis atque Latina.
NOTES.
1. THis I suppose may look somewhat like a Parallel to Quas torqueat umbras
Aeacus. For by Torqueat is meant nothing else than to be put upon a Trial; and
how often good honest Loyal men have been summoned before the Devil of an House
of Commons, I leave to those that have read the Actions of the RUMP Parliament,
and are acquainted with the Proceedings of FORTY ONE.

2. There are various Conjectures delivered upon this Verse, viz. Expectes
eadem etc. but this seems to me to be most consonant to the nature of the Place.

3. Canopus was a place in Egypt, twelve Miles distant from Alexandria,
reported to be a mere Sodom and Gomorrha; and that I have raised up Islington
as somewhat of kin to it, the Inhabitants sure cannot think twill bear an
Action of Scandal.

4. A Trick too well known among the brethren of Belly.

5. This whole description is contained in the word, Prostantis, the sense of
the Author being this, viz. That oftentimes upon the account of Knavish and
extorting Usurers, a poor, distressed, over-reachen Heir is forced to use the
most sordid ways of employment, to get a Livelihood.

6. This Humor of exposing a bad Poet is very consonant to the Genius of
Juvenal. Cicero himself is scouted by him for his O Fortunatam Natam etc. and
upon the consideration that I pretend to bring my Author to life again, it
would be a mere soloecism, if I should not take notice of those verses, which a
very wicked Poet and Translator would force upon him, and make the world
believe were his own.

7. Those that have read the E. of R. Poems, know very well what I mean by
Tariander, but (because I pretend somewhat to Modesty) I shall not explain it
at present.

8. Automedon was Achilles his Master of the Horse (if I may so call it) but
however his Inclinations that way, was the cause of the destruction of his
Estate and Family.

9. Locusta, a Notorious wretch (a French Lady) of this Name there was in the
time of Nero, whom she helped by her execrable experience in Poisons to
dispatch Britannicus etc.

10. There is nothing that commends this verse but the Naturalness of it. And
those that understand the true meaning and intent of Rarus enim ferme sensus
communis in illis, cannot but acknowledge, that I have personated my Author.

11. This Gentleman translated Juvenal, but after that uncooth, heavy, and
clumsey way, that I may with a safe conscience shake him and Cluvienus in a
Bagg. He was certainly a very Learned man, and a good Commentator, but it is no
less true, that he was a miserable and lamentable Poet.

12. Here I make an honest Countryman of mine stand up and make a kind of a
speech, according to the method and laudable custom of our more modern Poems;
and which surely Juvenal himself, if he were really alive, would allow of.

13. Quadringinta, to which this relates, was four hundred Sesterces, 3125l
sterling, which was the value of a Roman Knights yearly Revenue. He is called
Windsor Knight out of Contempt.

14. There is a great dispute concerning this Place. I think the Design of the
Poet is to intimate, that Storks built their Nests, and made a Noise nigh the
Temple of Concord: And why I may not call them Jack-Daws, and bring them in as
Preachers, let any one show me a Reason to the contrary.

15. Now Barabbas was a Robber (of the King's Prerogative,) who for raising a
certain tumult and sedition in the City, was committed etc.

16. The WHIGGS FEAST.

17. Juvenal here has thought good to cantradict what he said when he was first
alive, and Resolves now to prosecute the Living, as heretofore he did the Dead.
It Is an easy thing, and very natural to take an hint from a Place, and raise up
its Contrary; the definition of Imitation does allow of it.

18. Cowley says,

-- I Will cut through all,
And march the Muses Hannibal,
He was all for Action, and making the way clear, where he could not find it
already done to his hands. But I, like a good Tory Christian, being strangely
taken with the example of Hudibrass, do declare wholly for the valor that is
Passive.

FINIS.

