A WONDERFUL DISCOVERY OF A TERRIBLE PLOT AGAINST HUTL: By the Designs of
the Lord DIGBY, many Papists, and others, of the malignant Party.

Declaring the manner how the two Ships laden with great store of Ammunition
of Arms, came under a pretended color of Merchants Ships from the Indies, and
how they would have executed their PLOT that Night against HULL.

Also how by the providence of God, they were Discovered and Apprehended.

Lastly, the true Relation, how five Men in disguise would have entered into
Hull as being a Committee appointed by the Parliament to sit at YORK.

Having 100 Horse, and 500 Foot lying in Ambush, to have seized upon the Town
as soon as the Gates had been Opened.

With Irish Depositions by His Majesty's Commission And an Extract of a Letter
sent from Isidores Coll. in Rome, 4. January 1641.

London, Printed for Thomas Powell, 1642.

THE Discovery of a Terrible PLOT Against HULL, BY The Assigns of the Lord
DIGBY, many Papists, and others of the malignant Party.
EVer since Sir John Hotham, excluded the King from His Majesty's intended
entrance into Hull, there has been an intestine grudge against the said Act:
the King affirming it to be no less then Treason against His Royal Person, to
repel Him from His own possessions, and an high and unheard of affront to His
Majesty. But the Parliament unanimously voted to the contrary, and confirmed
that Act, but as a faithful service performed by the commands of Both Houses
of Parliament; and it would perspicuously appear in the face of the World, so
far distant from the suppository Impeachment of Treason, that it would rather
be commonly asserted an Act of Loyalty to His Majesty, and accommodation to the
whole Kingdom. These words it seems could not be digested by the swelling and
angry Stomachs of the Papists and others of the malignanr party. And the Lord
Digby understanding the truth hereof was much incensed, and being with a
seeming indignity exasperated, confirmed his resolution to vindicate the same
(if by any politic stratagem it could be circumvented:) The Plot was as
nefarious, as prodigious, as dangerous, as suspicious, that they had
clancularly intended against Hull; Two Ships laden with strong provision of
Arms, and other Ammunition, came by the Sea, under a pretended color of
Merchants Ships from the Indies, and the like: and they had also Spices and
other things in the Ship, that their Plot might be concealed, and detected the
better and with more oppertunity: and being searched, they had not suspected
any thing, but that by great chance they perceived a Barrel or two of Powder,
and making farther search in the said Ships, they found great store of
Ammunition of Arms, which they intended to have had executed at Night against
Hull, if they had not been prevented: but they were apprehended immediately,
and carried before the Mayor of Hull, who committed them to safe custody. Then
besides, these 5 Papists went under a disguised color of a Co^mittee at York,
appointed by the Parliament to sit there, and under pretense also, that being
threatened Imprisonment by his Majesty, they were constrained to fly thither for
security, and therefore desired them to open the Gates for them. But a
Parliament man that was in Hull, viewing them, denied them to be Parliament
men; whereupon they fled immediately, otherwise they had been apprehended.
There was 100 Horfe, and 300 Foot lying in Ambush thereabouts: and if the Gates
had been but once opened, they would immediately have assaulted the Town. But
God of his infinite mercy be praised and glorified, who has discovered all the
Plots of those that intend evil, and my prayers shall for ever continue, that
he may always discover the same.

FINIS
An Abstract of the Depositions by Virtue o^ His Majesty's Commission, taken
upon Oath, (...) the Traitorous intention o^ the Re^els.
TIrlagh O Gown a Papist Priest refuses the (...)meant of the English. Brian O
Co(...) ^aith T^^^ he will never submit to any English Man. Co(...) M(...) Mac
Mahowne, and other Rebels sai^ That they wou^d (...) be subject to any
Parliaments in England. Peter (...) (...) That they looked to have the King put
out the words Defender of the Faith, whereof the Pope was supreme. L(...) Birne
said, Their Religion should flourish no thanks to the King. John Good and
Dermot Mac Ph^lmi said That they hoped to have all Protestants hanged within
one fortnight. Rory Magwire, Richard Nug^nt, Donogh Magwire said That they had
a King of their own in Ireland, and regarded not King Charles, etc. And that
Phellemy Roe of Neale should be their King: Others, That the Earl of Tyrone,
and some, that the Lord Magwire should be King of Ireland.

Roger Puttocke, John Stern, John Watson Will. Aldrich, Henry Brereton, Will.
Hitchcock, Randall Adams.

An Extract of a Letter written 4. January 1641. From Isidores College in
Rome, by Bonaventure O Connye, to Feylmi Roe O Neill in Ireland.
THe Holy Fathers Cardinal Anthony Barbarinus and Cardinal Francis
Barbarinus, the Po^es Agents in Ireland, are glad of the War which you make for
your Religion and Liberty, and if they knew your designs, by D^clar^ion of
your grievances, you should want no help for your better proceedings. Make some
chief Head among you, but reserve the Crown for Con his side the Neills. Get
the upper hand, else much destruction will follow. Write Diurnals of your
passages, and overthrowes which your ^nemies recei^e. Spoi^e not ^he Country
for fear of Famine. We will send you a Bull after the form of the Bull, which
Hugh Mac-Baron got, If the Church do well, they will turn over the Election of
Prelates there to the Nobility, and will give them Authority in that point.

FINIS.

