PULPIT-CONCEPTIONS, POPULAR-DECEPTIONS: OR, The Grand Debate resumed, In the
point of PRAYER Wherein it appears That those Free Prayers so earnestly
contended for have no advantage above the Prescribed Liturgy in public
Administrations. Being an Answer to the Presbyterian Papers presented to the
most Reverend the Ls. Bishops at the SAVOY upon that Subject.

1 Samuel 15. 22. Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice.

Phil. 2. 17. (...).

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. 1662.

The PREFACE.
IT was well said of Mr. Case, in his Sermon before Page 38.
the Peers, March 25. 1646. That [if either Saints may make Opinions, or
Opinions may make Saints, we shall quickly have more Opinions then Saints in
the Land.] Indeed this Land is overgrown with wild Opinions, and those Opinions
have been planted in it by pretended Saints.

The design therefore of these Papers is, to blast some of those Opinions, and
to undeceive some of those persons, who are otherwise too forward to lose as
well their Souls as their Charity in their Opining. For they rest not in the
Speculation, their Opinions have an influence into their Practice, and from
Opining they proceed to Judgment, and pass their Sentence, as much to their own
peril and the injury of the Church, as to the Scandal of their Seduced
Confidents. For (amongst other things which fall under their Censure) while
they vilify the Liturgy, they reproach the Church, which performs her Solemn
Service by it; and while they admire their own Conceptions, as the certain
Effects of Grace and Vehicles of Comfort, they deceive themselves; and while
they insinuate their seize of Art and Industry to be immediate
Inspirations and the special Gift of God, they delude the people.

And yet, whether All the Devotions of the Church in Public Assemblies should
be restrained to Prescribed Forms, is a question wherein persons of great
Learning and Integrity seem to be divided; and the Presbyterian-Divines more
especially seem to lay the main stress of their Grand Debate upon this Article.
For they tell us, The Grand Debate, p. 48.
This Proposition in question, [That it is needful to the Peace of the Church
that all the Churches under one Prince should use one Form of Liturgie]
contains the rest; And they say further, [It is a matter of far greater
trouble to us, Page 70.
that you (the Commissioners they mean) would deny us and all Ministers the
Liberty of using any other Prayers besides the Liturgy, then that you impose
these; And again they add, [That if once Page 90.
it be known that you (the said Commissioners) have a design to work out all
Prayers (even those of the Pulpit) except such as you prescribe, it will make
many thousand people, fearing God, to be averse to that which else they would
have submitted to.]

By which expressions we may perceive they have a great fondness for their own
Conceptions: and for my part, I profess ingenuously, I was so far from
attempting to encounter them out of design or choice, that I had some kind of
prejudice to the practice I was to plead for, having never accustomed my self
to it. But being drawn into this engagement by such an invitation as I could
not handsomely decline, I was concerned to weigh the point in order to my own
satisfaction, that so I might be the better able to give an account thereof to
others.

But my purpose is not to run over the whole Volume of their Exceptions against
the Liturgy; (such a presumption would be inexcusable, an intrusion into that
Office which is incumbent upon others by a more especial obligation:) but to
gratify a particular Expectation, and by thus Skirmishing the Party, to
discover that they have more Colors on their side then sound Weapons; and
though they can make a shift to make a Show, and by false Musters to seem
numerous, yet that their Forces are not impregnable.

But I desire not to be mistaken; for I do not go about to disparage so
excellent and divine a duty as Prayer is, or discourage from the frequent
practice of it. I am satisfied that occasional Ejaculations and Prayers of a
private Conception are not unlawful; and the experience of devout and holy
Souls assures me, that (as they may be used, especially in private) they are of
great efficacy and very beneficial. But when they are set up in competition
with a well-digested Liturgy, prescribed and established by Authority for
public use, I am at a stand, and cannot find reason enough to be their
Advocate, or give them my suffrage upon that account.

For I observe, that the most Seraphic Souls, whose Conversation is in Heaven,
and their Lives unreprovable in all things, They are much addicted to the
Public Form, and Holy Martyrs have made use of it as their best Cordial, and
died with it in their bosoms. And truly the reverence which I do most
deservedly bear to the example and Authority of so venerable a Sanctity, does
heighten my esteem of it, and will not allow me to quit my interest in the
Liturgy.

I observe on the other side, that men of loose Principles (as to the duty of
Subjection and Obedience especially) do very much dote upon their Extemporary
Conceptions; and Malefactors (not of the least magnitude) without any
signification of Repentance for their Crimes, applaud themselves in this
Exercise, and are transported with the sense of such their occasional
enlargements. And for this reason I cannot persuade my self to think this
Pretended Gift such a sovereign Amulet, as is able to secure All persons which
carry it in their head, or wear it at their tongues end.

But it may be returned upon us, That such as have a good opinion of the
Liturgy, and offer up their Devotions in it, are not very strict in measuring
their lives and actions by the Rules of it. I wish there were less of truth in
this Objection: But let us consider the nature of the thing it self. For God's
part, being the Ancient of days, and knowing our thoughts long before, He can
no more be taken with the Novelty then with the Elegancy of our Expressions.
And for man, That Variety of Conceptions, (so earnestly contended for) has
more of temptation and peril, but not more of real advantage, then a Prescribed
Liturgy.

This indeed is no fuel to feed our wanton Curiosity: but for a solid Virtue
and Devotion. In submission to the use whereof, we exercise our Humility and
Obedience, our Self-denial, and the resignation of our own Judgment; all which
are duties of high account in the holy Gospel. Whereas those other are more apt
to be perverted, to be made an entertainment for Fancy, and to poison the heart
with affectation and vainglory. If they have any Prerogative above the common
Form, I am confident, we shall find the influence of it no where but upon the
sensitive nature, or lower Region of the Soul. If the Will and the
Understanding be more united unto God, and better fixed upon him, by this
means, sure they are able to make proof of it; and if they can do this, they
may gain a Proselyte to their Party. But till I find better Arguments then any
they have yet produced, I see no usurpation nor absurdity nor inconvenience in
it, if it be needful to have a more particular address in the Pulpit, for a
special blessing upon that Dispensation, That it be prescribed to us by our
Superiors. And to Their Authority and Prudence I humbly submit my self, with
the whole Discourse that follows upon this Argument.

Books sold by R. Royston.
1. The Calvinist's Cabinet unlocked, or Tilenus his Apology against Mr.
Baxter, set forth in the Preface to his Grotian Religion.

2. Memoranda touching the Oath ex Officio, together with an abstract of the
Apology written by Dr. Cosens; as also a Manuscript of Dr. Davenant's late
Bishop of Salisbury; by Sir Edward Lake Baronet, Chancellor of Lincoln. new. 4o.

3. The Merit of the Old English Clergy asserted; and the Demerit of the New
discovered. new. 8o.

4. A brief Survey of Antiquity for the trial of the Romish Doctrines asserted
in a book entitled Scripture mistaken, by H. Fern late Lord Bishop of
Chester. new. 12o.

PULPIT-CONCEPTIONS, POPULAR DECEPTIONS: OR, The Grand Debate resumed, In the
point of PRAYER.
THAT the jealous or unwary Reader may find no temptation to mistake our
meaning, we must premise, That the private Devotions of single persons are not
the Subject of this Debate; and consequently, Whether the use of a Set Form, or
his own occasional free Conceptions be most beneficial, is left to every man's
own experience to determine, being professedly no part of our Inquiry. What is
fittest for the Celebration of Divine Service in Public Assemblies, What most
advantageous to God's Glory and the peoples Edification; This is it which falls
under our present Examination.

That the Liberty which some men plead for, in this particular, has been a
Liberty to vent their Passions, to insinuate their Jealousies, to disseminate
their pernicious Principles, to foment a Faction, is so evident, that he must
have been somewhat more then asleep in the time of our late Storm, who has not
observed it. The door was no sooner opened for the enlargement of (that which
They call) the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, but we found presently that
the Spirit of Contradiction and Disobedience was let loose upon us. Whether
that Spirit of Moderation so much pretended to, be a sufficient Curb to
restrain the like Enormities at present, they are best able to judge, who have
most opportunity to frequent those Public Exercises wherein such a Liberty is
still used.

That the indiscretion or intemperance of some men should occasion a Law that
binds up the Liberty of all the rest, may seem severe, yet is not, for thus it
must be in the Government of Societies, not only for Uniformity, (which makes
them solid and beautiful) but to prevent sundry mischiefs which otherwise would
certainly ensue. A discrimination in this Case would prove a matter of envy to
some, of discouragement to others, an entertaiment to the itching ear, the
curiosity and vanity in most; and he had need be mortified into a profound
humility, that does not abuse his License, and make it an opportunity to
exercise his Pride and Ostentation, in stead of his pretended Gifts.

To prevent which Irregularities, it well becomes the Care and Prudence of our
Governors, to tie us up strictly to the use of Prescribed Forms in our Public
Worship: provided those imposed be not unlawful or inexpedient; which is the
main Matter of this Debate.

That in St Paul's days, not only Prayers, but Psalms also, were made by some
persons upon the Sudden and immediate Suggestion of the Spirit, is the
intimation of that Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 14, 26. Lest men through their ignorance
Vide Chrysostom. and Theophylact. ad locum.
should petition for things impertinent and unprofitable, that (...), that Gift
of Prayer, was conferred upon some one that then lived amongst them, and what
conduced to the common welfare of all, that he begged on their behalf, and
taught others also to petition for it. Thus Ad Romans 8. homil. 14.
St Chrysostom and Ad Romans 8. 26.
Theophylact.

But This with other Miraculous Gifts (which were needful at the Founding of
the Christian Church, as Scaffolds are for the Erecting of a Building) when the
Church was well established, were taken away, and the Fabric left to stand
upon the strength of those Pillars and Principles which were designed to
support it. And forasmuch as the necessity of Prayer was to continue, the use
of it likewise was to be perpetuated to the worlds end; and to this purpose the
absence of that Gift was supplied by the Ministry of a Liturgy, which is the
importance of those words which follow there in St Chrysostom, Ad Romans homil.
14.
(...), Of which [extraordinary dispensation] the Deacon is now the Symbol and
representative, in his offering up of prayers for the People; which certainly
the Deacon in S^ Chrysostom's time performed by an established Liturgy. In 1
ad Tim.
Whereupon the Father says, (...). The 2. Homil. 6.
Faithful knew very well what they were to Pray for, all Prayer being Common
(and so, well known) amongst them. And Ignatius, Contemporary with the
Apostles, and a Disciple to one of them, and therefore well acquainted with
their mind, does vehemently exhort the Magnesians to the use of one Common
prayer, as we shall have occasion to show more fully anon. And that the Apostle
himself was no enemy to this kind of Uniformity, may be reasonably evinced from
his woing the several Churches in a Dialect that can hardly be forced to a
Contrary interpretation; [Now I beseech you brethren, (says he, to 1 Cor. 1.
10.
the Corinthians,) by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the
same thing, and that there be no Divisions or Schisms amongst you: but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.]
Therefore, says Deodati, He requires a Consent in words, ad locum.
thoughts, affection, and will; to the end that all may be entire. To this
purpose also that great Apostle prays unto God, on behalf of the Church
planted among the Romans, in these words, [Now the God of patience grant you
Romans 15. 5.
to be like-minded one toward another, after the example of Jesus Christ.] But
would the Apostle have a consent of mind only, and no consent in their
expressions of it? an Unity in Doctrine, and no Uniformity in the holy Offices
of Religion? No surely, He would have them accord in mind, that they might the
better communicate in the practice of external Forms of Worship; for what else
can be employed by his following words, [That ye may with one Verse 6.
mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ?]
From which Scriptures it is obvious to collect, that a harmony of Devotions (as
to the external mode and vocal expression) as well as of Judgment, is very
acceptable to God, and very commendable in God's Worship and service. To deny
this is to impeach the wisdom of the great Apostle, which was assisted by
Divine inspiration.

Our proof then for the Lawfulness of a Prescribed Liturgy is managed thus:

That Service of God which is Consonant to Holy Scripture is Lawful. [This
Proposition cannot be denied unless something Consonant to Scripture be
unlawful.] This therefore being granted, I assume,

The Service of God performed by a Prescribed Liturgy is Consonant to Holy
Scripture. Ergo.

This Proposition is proved after this manner; That Service of God whereby we
declare that we are perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment, whereby we do all speak the same thing, and with one mind and one
mouth glorify God, That service is consonant to Holy Scripture; (for they are
the very words of it?)

By the Service of God performed by a Prescribed Liturgy we declare, that we
are perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment, we
do all speak the same thing, and with one mind and one mouth glorify God. Ergo.

It is therefore no ways contrary to Scripture what we find declared Cap. 27.
in Synodo Epaunensi, That Ad celebrandum divina officia, ordinem, quem
Metropolitani tenent, Provinciales observare debebunt. In the celebration of
the Divine Offices that Order which was observed in the Metropolitical Church
was to be the standard and pattern to which the whole Province was to conform.
And so it was determined De Consecr. d. 2. C. Institutio.
in Concilio Gerundensi, to this purpose, Institutio Missarum, sicut in
Metropolitanae Ecclesia agitur, ita in Dei nomine, in omnibus provinciis tam
ipsius Missae ordo, quam Psallendi vel Ministrandi consuetudo servetur. And
there is an excellent reason alleged for it in the Cap. 2.
4. Council of Toledo, Post rectae Fidei confessionem, quae in Sancta Dei
Ecclesia praedicatur, placuit ut omnes Sacerdotes, qui Catholicae fidei unitate
complectimur, nihil ultra diversum, aut dissonum in Ecclesiasticis Sacramentis
agamus; ne quaelibet nostra diversitas apud ignotos; seu Carnales, Schismatis
errorem videatur ostendere; and multis extet in Scandalum varietas Ecclesiarum.
Unus ergo ordo Orandi atque Psallendi a nobis per omnem Hispaniam atque
Galliciam conservetur; unus modus in Missarum solennitatibus; unus in
vespertinis officiis; nec diversa sit ultra a nobis Ecclesiastica consuetudo;
quia una fide continemur and regno. Hoc enim and Antiqui Canones decreverunt,
ut unaquaeque provincia and Psallendi and Ministrandi parem consuetudinem
teneat. After the confession of the true Faith, which is preached in the holy
Church of God, they would have all the Catholic Priests, which were
comprehended in the unity of the Catholic Faith, to do nothing different or
disagreeing in the celebration of Divine Service; lest amongst strangers, or
Carnal men, their diversity should be taken for an evidence of Schism, and
their variety become a matter of Scandal. They would have one order of Prayer
and Singing observed throughout Spain, etc. one mode in the Solemnities of the
Sacrement, one in the Offices for the Evening: Neither would they admit of any
diversity of usages in the Church; because they were of one Faith and one
Kingdom. And this they declare to be according to the Decrees of the (then)
Ancient Canons.

But perhaps though a prescribed Form of Prayer be very lawful, it may be
wonderfully inexpedient, and under that notion it may be fit to explode and
turn it out of the Church. What the Presbyterian Divines have delivered to this
purpose, we are now strictly to examine, by taking a punctual survey of that
harangue which they delivered at the Savoy upon that Argument.

By what means this came to be ushered in, we shall inform you, by giving you
notice that the said Divines did propose, [That all the Prayers and other
Materials of the The Grand Debate, page 2.
Liturgy may consist of nothing doubtful or questioned amongst pious, learned,
and orthodox persons.] And they add further, that [To Load our Public Forms
with the Private Fancies upon which we differ, is the most Sovereign way to
perpetuate Schism to the worlds end.] Here the Episcopal Divines join issue
with them, and return this Answer, [We heartily desire that, according to this
proposal, great care may be taken to suppress those private conceptions Id. p.
57.
of Prayer before and after Sermon, lest private Opinions be made the matter of
Prayer in public, as has, and will be, if private persons take Liberty to
make public Prayers.] This is that which raises the great cry, that has
awakened my attention, and engaged my pen to weigh the several periods and
accents of it.

For those Episcopal Divines having declared their defire (which seems very
reasonable) that the hastly Conceptions of private persons might strike sail to
the prescribed Forms of solemn Service in the Church; The Presbyterians, as if
they had been touched in the apple of their eye, let loose their passions, and
reply to them in these words, [The desire of your hearts is the grief of ours:]
ibid.
and to break the force of their reason as well as they can, they tell them
further, That [The conceptions of Prayer by a public person, according to a
public Rule, for a public use, are not to be rejected as private
Conceptions.] But how far the person they plead for is a Public person, and
how wide the Rule is which they choose to measure their Conceptions by, we shall
have occasion to examine hereafter. In the mean while, if their Conceptions be
really for a Public use, that is, for the common benefit of the Church, it is
very fit they should be allowed for such by public Authority; and till that
be first obtained, we cannot think fit to let them pass for current, though
they grow somewhat invective, and tell us [We had hoped you had designed no
such Innovation as this in the Church.] But what Complexion is that forehead of
that cannot blush at so shameless an Imputation! For this Matter has been
thoroughly examined, and, upon trial, the Innovation is found to ly at their
door who raise the Clamor; as Dr Heylin has evinced, in A Brief Discourse
touching this particular, to which we do refer them for their better
information.

And they have need enough of it; for this is so strange a thing to them, that
they profess, in the next words, [When we have heard any say that it would
come to this, and that you designed the suppression of the free Prayers of
Ministers in the Pulpit, suited to the variety of Subjects and Occasions, we
have rebuked them as uncharitable, in passing so heavy a Censure on you: And
what would have been said of us a year ago, if we should have said that this
was in your hearts?

It had been well for the Church, if the Pulpit had never been so much advanced
above the Deske in the opinion of the people. But that it was never designed
for a place of Prayer, but of Exhortation only, is well observed by Dr Heylin;
though it has been the practice of the Seditious A Brief Discourse, 20.
and Malcontents in this later Age, to take Sanctuary there, as a place of
freedom to vent themselves, and to say and pray what they list. Otherwise they
might have found variety enough, both for Subjects and Occasions, in the
several Services of the Church, to have entertained their Devotions. For herein
we are taught to ask those things which are requisite and necessary as well for
the Body as the Soul, as well for this life as for that which is to come; for
the whole estate of Christ's Church Militant here on Earth; for Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and Heretics: The very Litany alone is so Comprehensive in this
kind, that the attentive and devout Reader will stand in doubt which he should
most admire, whether the fullness of that excellent Form, or the injustice of
your Complaint for want of such a provision. And if in any particulars our
Forms appear to be defective, the Care and Prudence of our vigilant Superiors
is able to supply them; and no doubt they will perform it, upon a due and
modest application to that purpose: and then there will be no great need of
your Free Prayers in the Pulpit.

We cannot but thank you for your Charity and candor, in rebuking those as
uncharitable, in passing so heavy a Censure on us: but we should be more
engaged to you, if we might find those good Qualities in you when we do really
stand in need of them. However, we learn thus much by your own Confession, that
you are as liberal in giving your Rebukes as others are in passing heavy
Censures, upon light occasions. And yet I see not how you can properly call it
a Censure, which presupposes at least some pretended Misdemeanour; for this
was but a suspicion or surmise what we would endeavor to do for the future.
And if you had said a year ago, that this was in our hearts; I know not what
could have been said to it, but this, that you did us the honor to imply, that
the Good old Laws, (whereof this is one,) to which we have constantly adhered,
were written there also.

This being well considered, we cannot easily give credit to your next
Conjecture, That [nothing will more alienate the hearts of many holy, prudent
persons from the Common Prayer, then to perceive that it is framed and used as
an instrument to shut out all other prayers, as the Ministers private
Conceptions.] And yet we must tell you, the Common Prayer was neither framed
nor used to that end; but being it is a Form so well weighed, so well known, so
comprehensive, and one that has the stamp of Royal Authority to make it
Current, it is fit it should be restored to that due respect and veneration
which our First Reformers and holy Martyrs have paid to it: and if all private
Conceptions (for whose introduction this Common Prayer has been so long
sequestered and laid aside,) be now turned out of the Public Service of the
Church, that it may recover its Original right and entire possession therein,
this is but a just retaliation; and the hearts of persons truly holy and
prudent will not be the more alienated, but rather the more wedded to it upon
this occasion.

But you go on, and tell us [Such an end and design will make it under the
notion of a Means, another thing then else it would be, and afford men such an
Argument against it as we desire them not to have.] What your Notion of a Means
(as it is here inserted) signifies, and whither it would, I confess my self
unable to divine: but if it will afford any man a good Argument against the
Liturgy, I have good reason to persuade my self you are desirous enough of
that advantage. Had your kindness to it prompted you to cut off occasion from
them that seek occasion to quarrel at it, you would neither have strained your
Conscience nor your Wit to furnish them with such Weapons as you produce to
Combat it. And yet the best Artillery you arm them with are but those old
rusty Cavils, which have had their Edges turned and their Points broken off
long ago in the like encounter. You insinuate indeed, that the Argument which
we our selves afford is more dangerous then any of your framing; but let them
or you manage it as your skill shall serve you, we are not frighted with such
Mormoe's. And your expressions are nothing else to our apprehension; for had
you had any Confidence to prevail over us by this means, you would not have
added your next Exception, [But we hope you speak not the Public sense.]

What the Public sense is, you may learn from the Canons of Ancient Councils,
with the Custom of the Universal Church, and the practice of our most Reverend
and Learned Clergy since the Reformation; and to them we shall refer you.

But for your selves, you plead thus in the next place, [As the Apostle desired
that all would speak the same things, without giving them (that ever was
proved) a form of words to speak them in; so might we propose to you, That
uncertain Opinions be made no part of our Liturgy, without putting all their
Words into their Mouths, in which their desires must be uttered.] You say well,
so you might; but did the Apostle conjure all to speak the same thing? and did
he not give them a form of words to speak them in? What think you of his (...),
Romans 6. 17. his (...), Romans 12. 6? What think you of his (...), Phil. 3. 16.
his Rule of the New Creature, Gal. 6. 16. and his first principles, Hebr. 5.
12? Does he enjoin Titus to hold fast the faithful Word? Tit. 1. 9. and
Timothy, to keep the Depositum? 1 Timothy 6. 20. and to hold fast the Form of
sound words which he had been taught? 2 Timothy 1. 13. and yet desire a thing so
unreasonable, so impossible, that all should speak the same thing, and give
them no form of words (that ever was proved) to speak them in? Was not this
Form of words put into the mouths of all the Catechumeni? and were they not all
baptized upon the profession hereof? Can there be any thing more clear then
this out of the Writings of the Ancients? And what if a Form of Prayer be put
into our mouths too? Did not John the Baptist put such a one into the Mouths of
Luke 11. 1. etc.
his, and our Savior another into the Mouths of his Disciples? Why then, of
all the men in the world, must you be left at Liberty, to vent your own
Conceptions, as your Phantasy shall serve to vary them, upon all Subjects and
Occasions? Is the Church better edified, or Almighty God better pleased with
your devotions, when they are presented in such a new dress, then when they are
offered up in the solemn Form of an old Liturgy? I am sure (to say nothing of
Disobedience) Pride and Vainglory, Hypocrisy and Carnal craft may and do more
easily take sanctuary there then here. But if these cannot be proved to be the
Shrines, by the making whereof you get your wealth; we know you will have
Artifice enough to proclaim them to be that Palladium which fell down from
Jupiter; and if Act. 19. 25, 35.
this be once taken from you, you must presently give all for lost. This you
make the (...) of Election, and to deny you this is to eclipse, if not
extinguish, the light of your Comfort. The Reprobates many times have the same
spiritual irradiations, the same gusts and sentiments with the Elect, insomuch
that they cannot find matter enough in themselves for their own judgment to
make the discrimination. How then shall the Faithful be able to make a true
estimate of their own Adoption? Mr. Calvin Instit. lib. 3. cap. 2.. 11. mihi p.
338.
has resolved the doubt, Quamvis magna sit similitudo and affinitas inter Dei
Electos and qui fide caduca ad tempus donantur, vigere tamen in solis Electis
fiduciam illam, quam celebrat Paulus, ut pleno ore clament, Abba, Pater.
Although there be a great resemblance and affinity between the Elect of God and
temporary believers, yet there remains in the Elect only that affiance and
trust, (which St Paul celebrates,) whereby they are able with much freedom to
cry, Abba, Father. The Gift of Prayer (which is become appropriate amongst you
to these Extemporary effusions) puts his Adoption sure, beyond the hesitation
or Modesty of all peradventure. But the plain truth is, as the matter is
carried amongst you, this Gift of Prayer (as you phrase it) is made a
temptation and a snare, an instrument of much more danger then security to men's
Souls. For having first wrought this conceit into the minds of men, that to be
able to open his Bosom, or rather his Mouth, freely, in Confession,
Deprecation and Petition, is a certain sign of Grace; and persuading them, in
the second place, that that Grace is irresistible and inamissible; the man that
gets a volubility of tongue, a readiness of expression, with a competent
measure of boldness and hastiness to utter any thing before the Lord We might
instance in Harrison, Cook, Vane, Hugh Peter's, etc.
, is induced presently, or rather seduced, to flatter himself into an opinion
(whatever his other practices and course of life be) that his state is very
good and irreversible.

But to awaken men out of this golden Dream, that they sleep not the sleep of
death, let us remember them of that which is recorded by In Annal. Eccles.
Abraham Scultetus of a notorious Arch-Heretick in Germany, whose name was
Swenckfield. (He says) He was wont, Ardentes ad Deum Preces creberrime
fundere, to power forth frequently most ardent Prayers to Almighty God. And of
blasphemous Hacket, who was executed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, it is
observed See the Life and death of this Hacket, in Cambden's History of Q.
Elizabeth Ad annum 1591.
by many, that he was so ardent in his Devotions, that he would ravish all that
heard him: and some were infected with the venom of his Opinion, being drawn
into that contagion by no other engine but that very charm of his ardent
Praying. Fertur hic Hacketus, (says Hadrianus Saravia of him) in concipiendis
extempore precibus adeo excelluisse, ut Dei Spiritu eum totum ardere, and ab eo
ipsius regi linguam, isti duo crederent, etc. That is, This Hacket is reported
to have excelled so much in praying extempore, that those two (his Disciples)
did verily believe him altogether to have been inflamed by the Spirit of God,
and that his tongue was governed by Him: and such admirers were they of him,
that as they believed there was nothing but he might obtain by his prayers from
God; so consequently, nothing that he desired, but he might effect. Add
hereunto what is recorded of John Basilides Duke of Moscovia, that his carriage
at his solemn Devotions, how he prayed, how he fasted, how severe he was
toward others, as well of his Camp as of his Court, that did not at those
times conform themselves to his example, is wonderful to be related: and yet
the man was an horrid Hell-Hound, an incarnate Devil, to whom Nero, Caligula,
and the fiercest Tyrants of Ancient times compared may be thought Saints, or
Merciful men. He that desires further satisfaction in this particular, may
consult Dr. Meric Casaubon his Treatise of Enthusiasm, cap. 6. But we need not
travail Mihi p. 274, etc. edit. 2.
out of the confines of our own Island for Examples to verify this sad
Observation: for who pretended more to this Gift of Extempore-prayer then our
late As eminent as Hacket, as well for their Treasons, as for their pretended
Gift of Prayer.
Regicides? and yet I am persuaded, at least of some of them, that they had
never engaged so deep in those horrid Crimes for which they do most justly
suffer, had not the Devil taken his advantage to transport them by the help of
this execrable Delusion. Is it not then a signal piece of Charity, as well as
Prudence, to withdraw that slippery plank that has deceived so many men's
confidence, and betrayed them unto shipwreck, that others may be led by a pious
necessity to betake themselves to that The Liturgic of the Church.
bottom, which is more safe, because more steady, and less apt to run upon the
Rocks, or spring a leak, or founder under us, because it is built and preserved
and managed by the steerage of Authority?

But this will usher in another Objection, which falls upon us in this
language, [Your hearty desire and the reason of it makes not only against
Extemporary Prayers, but all prepared, or written Forms or Liturgies, that were
indicted only by one man, and have not the consent antecedently of others.] Be
they of whose inditing you please, if they have not passed the Test and
received the Stamp of public Authority, we do not think it fit they should be
adopted into the Public Service of the Church: for why should any man be
obliged (as he is in the use of the common Liturgy) to say Amen unto, or to
join in offering up, those Prayers, of whose incorruption and wholesomeness he
is not assured aforehand?

But you demand of us in these (your next) words, [Do you think this was the
course of the Primitive times? Basil used his private conceptions at Caesarea,
and Gregory Thaumaturgus before him at Neocaesarea, and all Pastors in Justin
Martyr 's and Tertullian 's days.] What all Pastors, that is, all Bishops, did
in those days, we have no leisure, neither are we much concerned, now to
examine. Indeed Nicephorus tells us, Non omnes, quamvis ejusdem Eccles. Histor.
lib. 12. cap. 34.
opinionis essent, easdem traditiones in Ecclesiis servarunt, etc. All that
were of the same opinion did not hold the same Traditions. And they which
maintained the same Faith, did not observe the same Customs. And he gives a
reason, why the first Ministers of the Word left such observances free to every
ones choice, Ut quisque non metu ibid.
aut necessitate quapiam adductus, quod bonum est deligere and sequi posset,
That every one might follow what is good out of choice, and not be led to it
out of fear and necessity. But to fetch the ground of this diversity from the
very first Original, we may consider, that where the Apostles planted the
Christian Faith, they likewise established such an Order, such Rites and Forms,
as they thought most apt to promote the Worship of God and the Edification of
his Church. But because they did not consult aforehand about the institution of
these Rites, etc. as they had done about the Faith, (which they were more
chiefly concerned to plant and propagate) Evenit ut statos ritus ab aliis
diversos suae quisque provinciae servandos tradiderit, hence it came to pass
that every one of them delivered to his own Province such Rites to be observed
as were different from the rest. Which Rites, so diversely established by them,
were out of a reverence to their Authority and Memory still retained by their
Successors: for so Nicephorus concludes, Dissensiones tales in Ecclesiis
invaluisse opinor, reverentia ibid.
eorum qui eis ab initio praefuerunt, and qui illis deinde successerunt. Nam ii
tanquam leges quasdam ab illis acceptas per manus posteris tradidere: non satis
pium, neque ferendum esse arbitrati, si traditiones, in quibus educati essent,
non honorifice colerent, sed contemptim rejicerent. The like has Hist. Eccles.
lib. 7. cap. 19.
Sozomen before him. But there is besides, another reason for the continuance
of this diversity of Rites and Usages in the Churches of several Nations;
because the rage of Tyrants would not suffer the Governors of the Church to
meet together to consult, and by their common Suffrages to establish one Form
and Order for the Universal Church.

And yet what was done by Basil, and other Bishops in their several Dioceses,
does not at all favor the Pretensions of these Dissenters; for whatever the
Bishops were allowed to do, yet the single Presbyters were always obliged to
use such forms as were duly examined and prescribed for them: witness that
ancient Canon, (which we find, though with some small variety, in three or four
Justell. Codex Can. Eccl. Afric. Can. 103. Conc. Carthag. 3 Can. 23. and Conc.
Milevit. Can. 12.
several places) in these words, Placuit ut Preces vel Orationes, seu Missae,
quae probatae fuerint in Concilio, sive Praefationes, sive Commendationes, seu
Manus impositiones, ab omnibus celebrentur: Nec aliae omnino dicantur in
Ecclesia, nisi quae a Prudentioribus tractatae, vel comprobatae in Synodo
fuerint; ne forte aliquid contra Fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus
studium, sit compositum. They would allow no Prayers to be used in the Church,
but such as were compiled by the most Prudent, or approved of in a Synod; lest,
through Ignorance or Carelessness, any thing should be delivered contrary to the
Faith. And we find that such as were entrusted with Cure of Souls, were obliged
to give account at certain times to the Bishop, whether the rites and
ceremonies of that Church to which they were subject were observed. The words
of the Franc. Synod. Capitul. li. 5. cap. 2.
Synod are these; Presbyter in parochia habitans in Quadragesima rationem and
ordinem Ministerii sui, sive de Baptismo, sive de Fide Catholica, sive de
Precibus and ordine Missarum, Episcopo reddat and ostendat. And this was a
thing judged most reasonable by in Epist. ad Magnes. (...), etc.
Ignatius, a Contemporary with the Apostles; Let there be nothing amongst you
that may divide you, (says he) but be united to your Bishop, by him be subject
to God in Christ. As therefore the Lord does nothing without the Father (for I
can do nothing Joh. 5. 35.
of my self, says He) so also let it be amongst you, whether Priest or Deacon
or Lay-person, let him do nothing without the Bishop. Let nothing seem
reasonable to you without his judgment; for that thing (whatsoever it be) is
irregular and offensive to God. Come unanimously together to your devotions.
(...), etc. Let there be one Common Prayer, one mind, one hope, etc. From all
which evidences it appears that the Liberty which we find used among the
Ancients, of varying in the public Forms or Rites of the Church, did not
belong to single Presbyters, but was the peculiar privilege of the Bishops in
their several Dioceses; and through the good Providence and Grace of God, that
liberty was at last restrained, and an Uniformity brought into the Church: For
so ubi supra, lib. 12. c. 34. in pr.
Nicephorus acknowledges; Mores, says he, qui antea quidem sic vary
obtinuerunt, nunc autem per Gratiam Dei cum tempore mutati, ad consentientem
concordiam apud omnes pervenerunt. And besides the good Providence of God
concurring to this effect, it is very well observed by a very worthy person, Mr.
Thorndike, The Service of God at Religious Assemblies, page 398.
that The reason why a Set Order in the Parts of Public Service is now
preferred before the disposition of the Guides of the Church from time to time,
is the same for which men choose to live by positive Law rather then by the Will
of their Rulers. And a little after, he says, Besides, in Ecclesiastical
matters, by a set Order we attain Uniformity with other Churches, to help
toward the unity of the whole; we avoid disputes about what is most fitting,
which in matters of this probable nature must needs be endless; we avoid
jealousies and umbrages upon that which is not customable.

But now it is high time for some dutiful Sons to step in and plead the Cause of
the Fathers of the Church; and are not these Dissenters very like to prove good
Advocates for them? Hear them argue: [And how injurious is it to the Public
Offficers of Christ, the Bishops and Pastors of the Churches, to be called
private men?] But you know, if you be not too hasty to consider it, Volenti non
fit injuria, there is no harm done, if they be contented with that
denomination. But it is demanded, [Who are Public persons in the Church, if
they be not? Every single person is not a private person: else Kings and Judges
would be so.] To which we answer, that Public persons are such only in those
offices wherein they are entrusted. If Uzziah 2 Chronicles. 26. 18.
comes to offer incense, though a King otherwise, yet in this action he is but
as a private person. Nadab and Abihu must not be allowed to offer strange fire
upon the account of their being invested with a public office. A Judge is but
a private person in respect of that Case which is not within his Commission to
determine. And if the King, and such as be put in Authority under him for the
Government of Church and State, tie themselves to the use of the Common
established Form, as if they were private Persons, others have the less reason
to complain for want of that Liberty, which for Order and Uniformity sake their
Superiors are pleased to deny themselves.

But you go on with your demands, and ask us, [Have you not better means to
shut out private Opinions, then the forbidding Ministers praying in the Pulpit
according to the variety of Subjects and Occasions?] Why? what though we have
other and better means? if that be lawful, as we affirm it is, why may we not
use that too? We see many times all the means we can use is little enough to
that effect. And therefore, though we have the examination of persons to be
ordained, and do see that they be able to speak sense, and fit to manage their
proper works with judgment and discretion, before we ordain them; yet finding
by woeful experience, that men make advantage of this their abused Liberty, to
insinuate their most detestable and pernicious Principles and Practices, to the
contempt of public Forms and Order, we cannot be so far wanting to our own, or
the peace and safety of the Kingdom, as to neglect to stop this vent, that we
may obstruct and keep off such mischiefs as have formerly made their passage by
it.

But you say, [Some Confidence may be put in a man in his proper Calling and
work, to which he is admitted with so great care, as we hope (or desire) you
will admit them.] But still you run upon mistakes, in supposing no sacrifice
will be so acceptable as the Calves of your breed; when we are persuaded, that
the Lambs which are designed for you from a Common fold will make a better
Oblation. But if you think so much Confidence is to be reposed in men, for that
which is their proper work and calling, why do you not allow it in your
Superiors, (whose proper office it is to * See Hebr. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
govern you) and acquiesce in their determinations?

But let us look upon your advice in your next words; [If you are necessitated
to admit some few that are injudicious or unmeet, we beseech you (not only to
restore the many hundred men laid by to a capacity, but) that you will not so
dishonor the whole Church, as to suppose all such, and to use all as such, but
restrain those that deserve restraint, and not all others for their sakes.] To
which we answer, That we have no reason to gratify those men with a change of
the Law, who have so long made it their design, (and if their demands were
granted would make that an introduction) to change the Priesthood also. And we
must ingenuously profess, we can have no such high opinion of those men's
worth, who have made use of such Engines as they have done to help forward
their intrusion into other men's possessions: and we know of no other that the
Law has laid aside: and if they never were in a Capacity, or if they were, if
they have put themselves out of it, we are sorry for it, but we cannot help it,
unless they will Conform themselves to the wholesome Laws and Canons of the
Church, by which we hold our selves bound to be Governed no less then they.
And there is a Canon, Ut Laici Contemptores Ex Cod. 16. lib. 15. cap. 4. apud
Coriol. Long. ad finem Conc. Carth. 3.
Canonum excommunicentur, Clerici honor priventur; That Contemners of the
Canons of the Church, if they be Laymen, they shall be excommunicated, if
Clergymen, (then) be deprived of that honor. And governing our selves by
these Rules, we shall admit none to Sacred Orders (as far as it lies in our
power to discern them) but such as are so well instructed to be resigned,
humble and obedient, that out of a Conscience of their Duty to those whom God
has set over them, they will pay a due and cheerful observance to all public
Orders and Constitutions: and such as these, we are sure, will be no dishonor
to the Church, but will adorn their Sacred Office and profession.

But you tell us further (for you leave no stone unturned or untried that you
can possibly lay for the pinning up of this your wall of Separation) You have a
public Rule (the Holy Scripture) for these men to pray by: And if any of them
be intolerably guilty of weakness or rashness or other miscarriages, the words
being spoken in Public, you have witness enough; and sure there is power
enough in Magistrates and Bishops to punish them, and, if they prove
incorrigible, to cast them out.] For the Rule you speak of, we confess it is
infallible where it is rightly used and well applied; but in stead of squaring
their practices by it, we find many men do make it a Lesbian Rule, and bow it
to an accommodation of their own vile pretensions. Why? Swenckfield, and
Hacket, and our late Regicides, and all Schismatics lay claim to this Rule,
and all their designs and actions will be just and right as long as their own
hands are allowed to measure them. But let the hand of Authority apply the Rule
(as it ought to do) and then we discover their unjustice and perversity. Is
not this a part of your Rule, [Obedite praepositis, Obey them that are your
Heb. 13. 17.
Guides, and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give an account; And, We command 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
you, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from
every brother that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he
received of us?] Do you walk according to this Rule? it is evident you do not.
Whereas you allege, that if this indulgence should be abused, the miscarriage
would be notorious, and then upon Complaint and Conviction there wants not
power to punish the Offender; This, we say, were something, if the Liberty you
plead for were a thing that would bring more benefit then disadvantage to the
Church of God: but the reason and experience of all Ages assures us it will
not. And therefore it is greater Prudence and Charity in Governors to take a
course to prevent the sin, then to give way to it, because they are able to
exert their power to punish it.

But you allege further, [In all other Professions these means are thought
sufficient to regulate the Professors. His Majesty thinks it enough to regulate
His Judges, that He may choose able men and fit to be trusted in their proper
work, and that they are responsible for all their Male-administrations, without
prescribing them forms beyond which they may not speak any thing in their
charge. Physicians being first tried, and responsible for their doings, are
constantly trusted with the Lives of high and low, without tying them to give
no Counsel or Medicine but by the Prescript of a Book, or determination of a
College.] If those men had duly considered how much the Eternal interest of
immortal Souls does outweigh the temporal concerns whether of Estate or Life,
perhaps their Modesty would have prompted them to have omitted these
impertinent comparisons. If the Judge commits a slip in his Charge, or the
Physician be guilty of a mistake in his Prescriptions, here is no irreverence
(in these Cases) offered or committed against the Divine Majesty. And yet we
see Physicians have their Dispensatory, and it is questionable in some Cases to
neglect it; and Judges have their Forms, and the Process that is not
according to them is pronounced void and of none effect.

But you go on, and tell us [Your Reason makes more against Preaching, and for
only reading Homilies; and it is so undeniable, as that we must like it the
worse, if not fear what will become of Preaching also. For first, It is known
that in Preaching a man has far greater opportunity and liberty to vent a
false or private opinion then in Prayer. Secondly, It is known de eventu, that
it is much more ordinary. And if you say that [He speaks not the words of the
Church, but his own, nor unto God, but man, and therefore it is less matter]
we answer, It is as considerable, if not much more, from whom he speaks, then
to whom. He speaks as the Minister of Christ, and in his stead and name, 2 Cor.
5. 19, 20. And it is as a higher, so a more reverend, thing to speak in God's
name to the people, then in the peoples name to God; and to speak that which we
call God's Word or Truth or Message, then that which we call but our own
desire. We make God a liar, or corrupt his word, if we speak a falsehood in his
name: We make but our selves liars, if we speak a falsehood to him in our own
names. The former therefore is the more heinous and dreadful abuse, and more
to be avoided: Or, if but equally, it shows the tendency of your Reason (for
we will not say of your design, as hoping you intend not to make us If you had
that gratitude which becomes you, you would acknowledge, Deus notus in Anglia,
in Britannia magnum nomen ejus. Non taliter fecit, etc.
Russians.) We do therefore, for the sake of the poor threatened Church, beseech
you, that you will be pleased to Repent of these desires, and not to prosecute
them, considering, etc.] Could you so lately have your hands employed in
tearing the Church of God in pieces? could you pave and paint her anew with the
bodies and blood of your fellow subjects? and are you now become Petitioners
for the poor threatened Church, as you odiously, but wilfully, mistake it; if
the Church be threatened by us now, whose Prayers and Tears and constant
Profession of her Faith and Practice (even with the peril and loss of estate
and life) was it that, under God, upheld her in the time of your Apostasy? A
cast of that Charity and Candor (which you pretended to show where there was
no occasion for it) would have become you here, much better then the repetition
of that perverse insinuation, that we have a design to dethrone or suppress
Preaching. And yet we must tell you, by the way, that Reading the Scriptures,
and Homilies too upon occasion, (for you your selves read such as are of your
own making, and your Sermons are nothing else) is a Substantial part of the
Public Service of the Church.

As for your first Reason, it might have some weight in it, if the Common
Prayer were designed for no other end then to keep out private and false
Opinions. But we consider withal, that it is better weighed and more
Authentical, better known and more Solemn, and consequently better accommodated
to set forth God's Glory, and to administer the peoples duty in the several
parts of God's Worship; and being of a competent length for the exercise of our
public Devotions, we would not have it suffer any defalcation or disparagement
by the intercourse of any private conceptions of whatever temper or complexion.
And this is a Supersedeas as to your second Reason.

But because we observe something of mistake in it, we must reflect upon it, to
undeceive you or your Reader. We confess it is a foul shame, and a foul fault
too, and therefore a foul shame, to mis-demean ones self, whether in Preaching
or in Prayer. But sure to miscarry in the last is the more heinous, because
therein the Glory of God is more immediately concerned; and therefore, He
styles his House, not the House of Preaching, but of Prayer. And as His
Majesty, whom we adore in Prayer, is greater then any Majesty we can be
imagined to address our selves unto in Preaching; so the irreverence or
profaneness is much greater in offering unto him a corrupt oblation, God
himself has thus resolved it, Mal. 1. 8. If ye offer the blind for sacrifice,
is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now
unto thy Governor: will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? says
the Lord of hosts. If such Oblations be a dishonor to a Governor, to God they
are a greater. Of all the duties of Religion Prayer certainly is the highest in
point of access to God; and therefore to account it (as you do) a more heinous
and dreadful sin to misbehave your selves in your discourses unto men then in
your prayers to Almighty God, is to prefer your Congregation before the God
that presides over it, and to worship the Creature more then the Creator, who
is blessed for ever. And you must not think to shift off the Blasphemy (for
materially so it is) by saying the Preacher speaks as Christ's Minister: for
Christ is a Priest as well as a Prophet; and we are in Christ's stead (here on
earth) in the capacity of our Priesthood as well as in the capacity of our
Prophetic (as that signifies the Preachers) Office; and we do no more minister
to the peoples needs in Christ's name in this capacity, then we minister for
their interest and advantage by his Authority in that other. For the Priest, as
the common father of the world, stands at the altar, taking care of all, after
the manner of God himself to whom he is dedicated, as Chrysostom and
Theophylact In 1 ad Tim. 2. ad haec verba, Obsecro primum omnium fieri
obsecrationes, etc. (...), etc.
have it.

I shall take notice but of one mistake more, and that is of making God a Liar.
If we contradict what God has said, St John tells us, we make God a liar, 1 John 1. 10. but we do not so, when we impose upon him what he said not, though
this likewise be a very high indignity, and abominable. The Preacher shall shut
up this part of our discourse, and he will determine the point for us, Eccles.
5. 1, 2. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God. Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: and be
more ready to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not
that they do evil, nor the distance betwixt themselves and his Majesty, whom
they do adore; for he is in heaven and they on earth.

And now, we hope, it does appear that, as yet, we have no reason to repent us
of these desires. Indeed, if you can make it good, (as you pretend, in your
next words,) that to avoid a lesser evil, we bring a far greater upon the
Churches, we shall have cause enough to repent of our desires. But what is that
greater evil? Why? even [such as is like to strip these Nations of the glory in
which they have excelled the rest of the world, even a Learned, able, holy
Ministry, and a people sincere, and serious, and understanding in the matters
of their Salvation.] But stay, do all these glorious things flow immediately
from your Liberty of venting your Conceptions of Prayer in the Pulpit, suitable
to the variety of Subjects and Occasions? and are there none Learned, able and
holy amongst the Clergy, none sincere, serious, and understanding amongst the
Laity, but such as are addicted to the Liberty you plead for? You must needs,
if you have any modesty in you, blush at such an assertion. But because you
boast so much of your Gifts, and attribute that Glory, wherein you presume your
own Party does excel the rest of the world, to nothing else but your
Inspirations or abilities for occasional prayers, I shall introduce an
adversary as well to us as you, to vie with you in this kind; and having
committed you together, shall leave it to the judgment of the Reader, to
pronounce sentence and award the prize. First then, that Person, acknowledging
both that there are Inspirations, Sancta Sophia in the Preface,. 31.
and that we are obliged to correspond unto them; and reckoning you and your
Confederates among the frantic Spirits of this Age, which made pretended
Inspirations (or we may call them by your own name, (Extemporary) Conceptions
of prayers suitable to the variety of subjects and occasions) the cause and
ground of all our late Miseries; He sets down what course is to be taken to
prevent such mischiefs, in these words: We should, says he, inform those
unhappy souls how to dispose themselves so as to be out of danger of Diabolical
illusions, and to be in a capacity of receiving Inspirations truly Divine: As
likewise with what Caution and Prudence, but withal what Fidelity, they ought
to comply with them. But especially we ought to demonstrate, and inculcate this
fundamental verity, That the general and most certain Precepts of Humility,
Obedience, Unity and Peace, must never receive any prejudice by any pretended
Inspirations or Illuminations; since those which are truly from God do
establish and increase all these virtues: yea that the External Order,
Authority, and Subordination established by God in his Church (by which alone
it becomes one Body, and not a monstrous heap of unlike, unproportionable
members, fighting and devouring one another) must be the Rule by which to
examine and judge, to pronounce sentence for or against all manner of
Inspirations. Having laid down this his fundamental Rule, he proceeds a little
after to compare their Inspirations with yours, in several. 33, etc.
particulars. And in the first place, says he, here the only proper
Disposition toward the receiving of supernatural Irradiations from God's holy
Spirit is an abstraction of life, a sequestration from all businesses that
concern others, and an attendance to God alone in the depth of the Spirit:
Whereas their Lights come never more frequently then when either being alone
they yield to discontented unquiet passions and murmurings aabout the behavior
and actions of others; or when in close Meetings and Conspiracies they vent
such passions by Invectives against the Governors of the Church or State.
Secondly, The Lights here desired and prayed for are such as do expel all
images of Creatures, and do calm all manner of Passions, to the end that the
Soul being in a vacuity, may be more capable of receiving and entertaining God
in the pure fund of the Spirit: Whereas their Lights fill them with all
tumults, disquieting Images and Phantasms concerning the supposed miscarriages
of all others but themselves; and not only heighten their Passions, but urge
them to most terrible desolating effects. Thirdly, The Prayer here acknowledged
to be the most effectual Instrument to procure Divine Light, is a pure,
recollected, intime Prayer of the Spirit: Whereas the Prayer that they glory in
is only an acquired ability and slight to talk earnestly to God before
others, and often thereby to communicate their passions and discontents to their
Brethren. Fourthly, Here are no new Speculative Verities or Revelations of
Mysteries pretended; no private new-found-out interpretations of Scriptures
bragged of: Whereas among them every day produces a new Fancy, which must
gather new Company. Fifthly, Here the established Order of God's Church, and
the Unity essential thereto is not prejudiced; yea the Inspirations expected
and obtained by pure internal Prayer do more firmly and unalterably fix souls
under this Obedience, and to this Order and Unity; insomuch as whatsoever
pretended Lights do endanger the dissolving of Unity, or do cross Lawful
Authority, or shall be rejected by it, they are presently suspected and
extinguished: Whereas those men's Lights teach them nothing so much as to
contemn and oppose all external Authority, and to dissipate Unity, dispersing
the Body of Christianity into innumerable Sects and Conventicles. Sixthly, Our
Lights teach us to attend only to God and our own Souls, and never to interess
our selves in any care or employment about others, till evidently God's
Inspirations force us, and external Authority obliges us thereto: Whereas
their Lights render them incapable of Solitude, and thrust them abroad to be
Reformers of others, being themselves impatient of all Reformation and
Contradiction. Seventhly, Our Lights make us to fear and avoid all
Supereminence and Judicature, all sensual pleasures, defires of wealth, Honor,
etc. Whereas their Lights engage them violently and deeply in all these carnal
and secular ways, and (for the attaining of these) in Tumults, Sedition,
Bloodshed and War; in a word, in all manner of actions and designs most
contrary to the Spirit of Christianity. Eighthly, and lastly, Our Lights, if
they should chance sometimes to be mistaken by us, no harm at all would accrue
to others, and not any considerable prejudice to our selves; because, as has
been said, the matters in which they direct us are in their Nature Indifferent,
and are ordered only toward a more perfect loving of God, and withdrawing us
from Creatures: Whereas all the Miseries and almost all the disorders and
enormous Vices of the Nation (he means England) are the effects of their
misleading Lights.

Thus (says he) stands the case betwixt Catholic Inspirations and the
pretended Inspirations of Sectaries. Such is that Spirit of Charity and Peace,
and so divine are the effects of it, directing the minds of good, humble,
obedient and devout Catholics: And such is the Spirit of Disorder, Revenge,
Wrath, Rebellion, etc. and so dismal are the effects of that Spirit wherewith
selfopinionated, presumptuous, frantic Sectaries are agitated. What
resemblance, what agreement can there be between these two? This evil Spirit,
though it Sacrilegiously usurps the name, yet it does not so much as
counterfeit the operations of the good one: Or if with the name it does
sometimes seem to counterfeit some outward resemblance, and to some persons
show demure looks, etc. yet the Aequivocation and Hypocrisy is so gross and
palpable, that they must put out their eyes that perceive it not.

Thus having given you an account, in his own very words, what opinion that man
has of you, I shall leave you to reflect upon them, and as you find your
selves able to impugn them, to challenge him still to the combat for that
Glory wherein you are so confident you excel all the world besides. In the
mean while, we shall force our selves into so much patience as to read over
your Arguments, (without Reason) why the denying you the free Liberty of
venting your Conceived prayers in the Pulpit, suitable to the variety of
Subjects and Occasions, should strip these Nations of an able, holy Ministry,
as you affirm.

For First, (you say) [It is well known that an Ignorant man may read a Prayer
and Homily, as distinctly and laudably as a learned Divine; and so may do the
work of a Minister, if this be it.] But we say this is not it, though an
appendant to it or an Ingredient of it; and so that Argument comes to nothing.
And the next will amount to no more, when you add, that [it is so well known
that man's nature is so addicted to ease and sensual diversions, as that
multitudes will make no better preparations, when they find that no more is
necessary. When they are as capable of their places and maintenance if they can
but read, and are forced upon no exercise of their Parts, which may detect and
shame their ignorance, but the same words are to be read by the ablest and the
ignorantest man, it is certain, that this will make multitudes idle in their
Academical Studies, and multitudes to spend their time idly all the year in the
course of their Ministry: and when they have no necessity, that they are
sensible of, of diligent studies, it will let loose their fleshly voluptuous
inclinations; and they will spend their time in sports and drinking and prating
and idleness, and this will be a seminary of lust: or they will follow the
world, and drown themselves in Covetousness and Ambition. And their hearts will
be like their studies. As it is the way to have a holy, able Ministry, to
engage them to holy studies, to meditate on God's Law day and night; so it is
the way to have an ignorant, profane and scandalous Ministry (and consequently
enemies to serious Godliness in others) to impose upon them but such a work as
in ignorance and idleness they may perform as well as the judicious and the
diligent.] Thus you are pleased to declaim (for want of Reason:) but how little
this signifies to the Cause you have in hand, the Reader will be able to judge
by our Reply, which is, in short, as follows. First, That such as are
Expectants, must submit themselves to an Examination of their Abilities, before
they can be admitted unto holy Orders; and if they have neglected their
Academical studies, this alone will detect and shame their Ignorance: and if we
find they have been so bad proficients, (though they should pass in a crowd
for their Degrees, which yet we heartily wish may be prevented, by the care of
those who from time to time shall have the Government of the Universities) that
they are able to do nothing but to read, we shall reject them as unfit for the
Priestly office. For, (secondly) we know that Reading is not all our work;
Sermons are to be preached, Where does Learning and Devotion abound more then
in such Churches and among such Societies as are strictly tied to the use of
Public Forms?
and therein the Scriptures to be expounded, emergent Controversies to be
decided, Cases of Conscience to be resolved, the weak to be supported, the
doubtful strengthened, the disconsolate and languishing comforted, and such
doctrines administered as may tend to the edification of all the people: and the
neglect of this their necessary duty, or their failing in it, will sufficiently
detect and shame men's ignorance; and the very fear of this will engage them to
be sedulous and diligent in their studies. Thirdly, As for your extemporary
Conceptions of Prayer suitable to the variety of Subjects and Occasions, they
cost you no time of premeditation in your Studies: And therefore (fourthly) We
have observed that many of your Gifted-men have been as much immersed and
drowned in Lust and Idleness, in Covetousness and Ambition, as any other; and
if it would bring any advantage to the Christian Profession, we could give you
some Centuries of such persons; but, in charity, we shall spare you. Fifthly,
We have a Conscience of our duty to God and man, (we need not disparage our
selves in saying as well as you) and an eye to that great recompense of reward,
designed to spur us up unto it; and how many of our persuasion, even upon this
single account, [do study to show themselves approved 2 Timothy 2. 15.
unto God, workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of
truth] we leave it to God and the world to judge. Sixthly, and lastly, If there
be any so forgetful of their duty, as to let loose their fleshly voluptuous
inclinations, and to spend their time in Sports, and Drinking, Prating and
Idleness; a thousand to one, some eye of inspection will take notice of their
miscarriages, (unless they be all committed in a very dark corner) and sure (as
you say) there is power enough in Magistrates and Bishops to punish them, and
if they prove incorrigible, to cast them out.

It is a shameless Calumny to affirm, (for you do more then insinuate) that
there is no other work imposed upon Ministers but what they may perform in
ignorance and idleness, as well as the judicious and the diligent. Let any man
but consider what a charge is laid upon Priests at their Ordination, and he
must needs be convinced, that the Work then and there assigned them is enough
to exercise all their ablest Parts as well in the Pulpit as out of it: and
therefore you might have consulted your own credit better, had you forborne that
following exprobration, That, [in Catechizing, in private Baptism, and
Communion, and in the Visitation of the Sick, their work is also such as a
Schoolboy may do as well as they.] To which impudent Slander we shall
confront the Charge aforesaid, and that will be sufficient to confute it. Thus
then the Holy Church conjures all that enter into those Sacred Orders: [We
exhort you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to have After the Oath of
Supremacy is administered, this Charge is given to the Priests to be Ordained.
in remembrance into how high a dignity, and to how chargeable an Office, ye be
called; that is to say, the Messengers, the Watchmen, the Pastors and the
Stewards of the Lord; to teach, to premonish, to feed and provide for the Lords
Family, to seek for Christ's sheep that be dispersed abroad, and for his
Children which be in the midst of this naughty world, to be saved through
Christ for ever. Have always therefore printed in your remembrance how great a
treasure is committed to your charge: for they be the Sheep of Christ, which he
bought with his death, and for whom he shed his blood. The Church and
Congregation, whom ye must serve, is his Spouse and his Body.

And if it shall chance the same Church, or any Member thereof, to take any
hurt or hinderance by reason of your negligence, ye know the greatness of the
fault, and also of the horrible punishment which will ensue. Wherefore consider
with your selves the end of your Ministry, toward the children of God,
toward the Spouse and Body of Christ, and see that you never cease your
labor, your care and diligence, until you have done all that lies in you,
according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are or shall be committed
to your Charge, unto that agreement in Faith and Knowledge of God, and to that
ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among
you either of Error in Religion, or for Viciousness in Life.

Then, forasmuch as your office is both of so great excellency and of so great
difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to apply your selves,
as well that you may show your selves kind to that Lord who has placed you in
so high a dignity, as also to beware that neither you your selves offend,
neither be occasion that others offend. Howbeit, ye cannot have a mind and a
will thereto of your selves, for that power and ability is given of God alone.
Therefore ye see how ye ought and have need earnestly to pray for his holy
Spirit. And seeing that you cannot by any other means compass the doing of so
weighty a work pertaining to the salvation of man, but with doctrine and
exhortation taken out of the holy Scriptures, and with a life agreeable unto
the same; ye perceive how studious ye ought to be in reading and learning the
Scriptures, and in framing the manners both of your selves and of them that
specially pertain unto you, according to the Rule of the same Scriptures. And
for this self-same cause, ye see how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as much
as you may) all worldly cares and studies.

Now we appeal to your own Consciences, whether the Church imposes upon
Priests (when she ordains them to the Ministry) no other work then what a
Schoolboy may do as well as they; or but such a work as in ignorance and
idleness they may perform as well as the judicious and the diligent.

If you will be so just as to repair the Honor of the Church (as you are
obliged,) for thus aspersing and reproaching her, we will grant your following
assertions with some additional amendments, That [the Priests Ministerial work
is, to show men their sins, and to preach the wonderful Mysteries of the
Gospel, to help men to search and understand the Scriptures, and to search and
know their hearts, and to know God in Christ, [and to be subject to
principalities It seems, Obedience to Governors makes not one of the links in
your chain of Virtues, that leads men to Salvation.
and powers, to obey Magistrates, the King as Supreme, and them that are
commissioned under him, as his Ministers; to render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's; to pay all due reverence
and submission to all Governors, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, that we may
lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty; and upon this
account] to hope for the glory that is to be revealed, and fervently to pray
for the success of his endeavors, and the blessing of the Gospel on the
people, and cheerfully to praise God for his various benefits: And we confess
this cannot be well done without abilities.] Though it becomes not a good
Christian to make ostentation of his good works, yet we acknowledge it is his
duty so to make his light shine before men, that they may see it, and be
edified by it, to the advancement of God's Glory. And our own judgment and
experience tells us as well as you, [that God ordinarily proportioneth the
success and blessing to the skill, diligence and holiness of the Instruments;
and blesses not the labors of ignorant, ungodly droans, as he does the
labors of faithful able Ministers. And also that the readiest way to bring the
Gospel into contempt in the world, and cause all Religion to dwindle away into
Formality first, and then to Barbarism and Brutishness, is to let in an
ignorant, idle, vicious Ministry, that will become the peoples scorn: yea, that
this is the way to extirpate And will not Sedition and Rebellion provoke all
Princes and Civil Magistrates to root out that Religion that does teach and
patronize such practices?
Christianity out of any Country in the World; and it is a sign it is decaying
apace, when men grow ignorant of the nature and reasons of it, and
unexperienced in its power and delightful fruits, and when the Teachers
themselves grow unable to defend it.]

We say therefore with Gelasius, (in Epist. ad Episcopos Lucaniae, cap. 18.)
Literis carens, Sacris non potest aptus esse Mysteriis, He that wants Learning
is unfit to dispense the Sacred Mysteries: and as it is in Concilio Toletano 4.
cap. 24. Ignorantia, matter cunctorum Errorum, maxim in Sacerdotibus vitanda
est, qui docendi officium Populi susceperunt, Ignorance, the Mother of all
Errors, is especially to be avoided in the Priests, whose Office it is to
instruct others. Hereupon we do very readily subscribe to that which we find in
Concilio Romano sub Eugenio 2. cap. 4. Presbyteri sint literati, aliter enim
quomodo erunt Magistri, qui non fuerunt Discipuli, etc. Isti sunt canes muti
non valentes latrare, Let the Priests be Learned; otherwise how shall they be
Teachers, who were never Disciples, etc. Those are dumb dogs which cannot
bark. We shall therefore bespeak all our Brethren of the Priesthood in the
words of St Ambrose, Digne cognoscamus quid sumus; In lib. de dignit. Sacerdot.
cap. 3.
and quod sumus professione, action potius quam nomine demonstremus; nomen
congruat actioni, actio respondeat nomini: ne sit nomen inane, and crimen
immane; ne sit honor sublimis, and vita deformis; ne sit deifica professio, and
illicita actio; ne sit gradus excelsus, and deformis excessus; ne habeatur in
Ecclesia Cathedra sublimior, and conscientia Sacerdotis reperiatur humilior; ne
locutionem simulemus columbinam, and mentem habeamus caninam; ne professionem
monstremus ovinam, and ferocitatem habeamus lupinam: ne digne nobis per
Prophetam respondeatur a Domino, Populus hic labiis me honorat, cor autem long
est a me. Let us know our selves; and let our Practice be suitable to our
profession: that the dignity of our Office may not be blemished by the iniquity
of our conversation. Let us not be Wolves, nor Dogs, nor Swine in Sheeps
clothing; lest that exprobration deservedly fall upon us, [This people honor
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.]

But for the honor of the Reverend Bishops and Conformable Clergy, we must
take the confidence to tell the world, that they have been the Chariots of this
our Israel and the horsemen thereof; Their Arms have been the Defense of our
Religion, their Learning and Piety its Vindication from time to time. And for
proof of this we need refer you to no other evidence then the Observation and
acknowledgement of that Learned Deodati.
Minister of Geneva, in his Letter to the late Assembly. And if through the
iniquity of these later days a multitude of their former Adherents have been
tempted to withdraw themselves from their Communion and Ministry, it is no
great wonder; for the Holy Ghost has told us of false Prophets and 1 Cor. 11.
19.
seducing Spirits, and why God is pleased to permit them; and of an ungrateful
giddy people, that would easily suffer themselves to be seduced, and become
guilty of Apostasy. For the time will come, when they will not 1 Timothy 4. 1.
endure sound doctrine, but will depart from the Faith, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
and give heed to seducing Spirits, and after their own lusts will heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching ears. And they will turn away their ears
from the truth, and be turned unto Fables. And men shall be lovers of their own
2 Timothy 3. 2, etc.
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; Having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof. And through Covetousness 2 Pet. 2. 3.
shall they, with feigned words, make merchandise of you: and shall creep into
houses, and lead captive silly women 2 Timothy 3. 6.
laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts. And of the very Clergy shall
men arise, speaking perverse things, to Act. 20. 30.
draw Disciples after them. And many shall follow their pernicious 2 Pet. 2. 2.
ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. Our Savior
Christ himself, a person beyond all exception, both for Parts, Holiness, and
Diligence, finds occasion to complain that his Ministry was deserted by such as
were inclinable to flock after some new-comer, though he had no other warrant
for his undertaking but what was drawn up by his own presumption.

But (to follow your steps) you add [That whatsoever can be expected duly to
affect the heart, must keep the intellect and all the faculties awake in
diligent attention and exercise.] It is very true, A manifold attention is
requisite to make our sacred office of Prayer devout and acceptable: An
attention, 1. ad verba, ut recte proferantur; 2. ad verborum sensum, ut mente
and cord percipiatur; 3. ad Deum, quem ut praesentem recitans (officium)
intuetur, ad cumque petitiones suas dirigit, and circa quem occupatur,
veritates aut mysteria fidei considerando, ut sic se ad ejus amorem excitet.
But you say [in the use of a form, which we have frequently heard and read, the
faculties are not so necessitated and urged to attention and serious exercise,
as they be when from our own understanding we are set about the natural work of
representing to others what we discern and feel.] Then belike John Baptist and
our Blessed Savior did their Disciples a disadvantage; they should not have
prescribed forms to them, but have dissuaded them from the use of all such in
the Exercise of their Devotion: which whether it be modest or impious to
affirm, is left to the judgment of the Reader. But you say further, [Mans mind
is naturally sloathful, and will take its ease, and remit its seriousness
longer then it is urged by necessity, or drawn out by delight.] Why? is there
not a necessity laid upon us? Is there not a Woe belongs to us, if we pray not,
if we obey not the commands of the Holy Church prescribing a Form of Prayer to
us? If we be obliged to obey this her command, we are obliged to be serious in
that obedience. Though she cannot judge of Internal Acts, she may command them;
and she is supposed to do so, seeing External Acts, under her command, are not
Acts of Virtue without those Internal ones: Otherwise it were possible to
satisfy the Precepts of the Church by a mere Simulation and Hypocrisy, which
is absurd. A necessity therefore is laid upon us, to urge us to be serious in
the use of this Form of Prayer. And if we set so high an estimate upon God's
honor and our own salvation as they deserve, I see no reason why this
seriousness should not be drawn out of us likewise (as it has been out of the
hearts of God's people before us) by a delight in this service.

But you say, [When we know beforehand, that we have no more to do but read a
Prayer or Homily, we shall ordinarily be in danger of letting our minds go
another way, and think of other matters, and be senseless of the work in hand.]
Indeed I have read of an Trithem. ad regul. c. 4. instruct. 57.
Abbot who was somewhat of your opinion, saying, Orationes conscriptas in
chartis, mentibus infirmis utile est ut legant: fortioribus autem and
perfectioribus non convenit, nisi interdum pro ariditate cordis irriganda; quia
illa oration maxim efficaciam habet, non quam Calamus sculpsit, sed quam Men's
ipsa formavit. But he speaks of private Prayer; and even of that too, there are
great Masters of Devotion, (as they call them,) who observe, that it is neither
the written Form, nor the present Fancy, that makes the difference, but the
Affection. Oration ab alio composita, quod ad se attinet, ornatior and subtilior
Jacob. Alvarez de Paz, de Inquis. pacis, l. 1. par. 2. cap. 17. mihi page 168.
esse consuevit, tanquam a viris sanctis and spiritualibus edita. Quae si pari
adfectu fundatur ac illa quam homo ex devotionis fervore enunciat, erit aeque
perfecta: si minus adfectus and devotionis habeat, imperfectior: si vero majori
devotione proferatur, perfectior invenietur. Nam orationis vocalis sublimitas
ex part Orantis, non ex sublimitate aut apta compositione verborum, vel
subtilitate, sed humilitate and devotionis adfectu ejus qui orat, pensanda est.
And that men ordinarily have no better attention to these Forms, of what kind
soever, it is their own fault, in undervaluing them, as well to God's dishonor
as their own prejudice. Alii (quod mirum est) suavitate Orationis ibid. Par. 2.
in introduct. p. 83, 84.
Mentalis illecti, Vocalem orationem tanquam minus utilem cursim and
festinanter proferunt, ut plus temporis considerationi rerum coelestium
impendant. Qui profecto minus recte considerant, cum consideratione sua,
oratione vocali irreverenter and oscitanter fusa, se Deo displicere, and ad
Orationem mentalem ineptos fieri minime animadvertant. But have we no more to
do but read a Prayer? (for if you please, you may forbear your Homily,) Are we
not therewithal concerned and tied to exercise our faith and affiance, our
fear and reverence, our love, joy, and longing desire of what we pray for? He
that minds his duty, and puts these Ingredients into the Prayer he reads, will
find no leisure to think of other matters, nor can he be senseless of the work
in hand.

You proceed, [Though he is but an Hypocrite that is carried on by no greater a
motive then man's observation and approbation; yet is it a help not to be
despised, when even a necessity of avoiding just shame with men shall
necessarily awake our invention, and all our faculties to their work, and be a
concurrent help with Spiritual Motives.] We see you are content to plow with an
Ox and an Ass, rather then the ground you have laid down should be untilled;
and to cloth the Controversy you have espoused with Linsey-woolsey, rather
then it should appear naked of truth and Reason. But take heed you make it not
your great Motive to your Extemporary Conceptions (according to the variety of
Subjects and Occasions) to be observed and admired of men: If you do, our
Savior tells you, you have your reward; and I must tell you, you had better be
without it, though, by this means, you can (as one of your Brethren boasted
that he did) break the Good wives hearts, and carry the pieces in your Pockets.
But will shame with men necessarily awaken a man's invention? It Is more then
shame with God and Hell torments can do to many thousands. But what if this
concurrent help does awaken your invention? will you offer that for a sacrifice
in stead of Prayer? I have read of a people reproved for going a whoring after
their own Inventions: but never of a people commended for praying after their
own inventions. Why? Prayer is a pouring out of the heart, not the brain, an
employment of the Affections rather then the Fantasy, of the Will rather then
the Understanding. Cognitio Dei Scholastica ad intellectum praecipue pertinet;
Cognitio Dei mystica (and it is that is useful in our prayers) non tam
cognoscere quam amare quaerit, and ad astringendum Deum amoris affectibus se
extendit, says de Mystica Theolog.
Gerson. True, the understanding has its part in prayer; but yet Meditation
and Prayer are two things. So those that are accounted the great Masters of
Devotion tell us; Whatsoever employment the mind or understanding exercises in
Prayer, by discoursing, inventing motives, etc. these are only Preparations to
prayer, and not Prayer it self, which is only and immediately exercised by the
will or affections adhering to God, as In Sanctae Soph. Treat. 3.. 1. c. 1.
page 6. nu. 8.
Augustine Baker has it. Meditatio docet quid de sit; oration quid de sit
obtinet: illa viam ostendit, ista deducit. Meditatione denique agnoscimus
imminentia nobis pericula, oratione evadimus, says S. Sermon. 1. in die S.
Andreae.
Bernard. And to the same purpose De vit. Spirit. lib. 2. part. 4. cap. 31.
(mihi) page 332. D.
Jacobus Alvar. de Paz. defining Prayer according to Damascen, [Petitio
decentium a Deo] he adds; Et quidem haec, ut fervens sit, communiter ex
Meditatione progreditur. Nam postquam Meditatione didicimus quae nobis fugienda
sint vel amanda, videntes non posse nos sine Dei favore aut malum fugere aut
bonum praestare, ad Orationem pro auxilii impetratione festinamus. So that your
wants may be summed up into a certain Form beforehand; and then, if your
Invention becomes silent, your Will and Affections will play their part with
the more exactness and fervency, when (there being nothing to distract the
other Faculties) they have it pricked down in a Book before them.

But you urge, that [Common experience tells us, that the best are apt to lose
a great deal of their Affection, by the constant use of the same words or
Forms.] Which if understood of the very best, is a very great falsehood; For our
Blessed Savior never prayed more earnestly, then when he said the same words,
and repeated the same form of Luke 22. 44. with Mat. 26. 44. Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
Prayer. And the Royal Prophet cries out, As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God? Cupio and sitio
cultum Dei mei viventis, as Theodoret does expound it. And yet that was a set
course of worship. And again, How amiable Psalm. 84. 1, 2, 4.
are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even faints for
the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God.
Blessed be they that dwell in thy house, they will be still praising thee: and
yet, in those days, their Solemn Service was not made up of Extemporary
conceptions, but of set Forms of Praise and Prayer, etc. to express and
entertain their affections. Christ himself sung that Hymn at his Passover
which was customarily sung amongst the Jews at their Paschal devotions, as Beza
does acknowledge. And Revel. 15. 3. They sing the old Song of Moses; and I hope
without any allay to their affection.

But from affirmations you come to instance thus; [Let the same Sermon be
preached an hundred times over, and try whether an hundred for one will not be
much less moved by it then they were at first.]

I confess it may be so: but here we have non causam pro causa, you put a
fallacy upon your selves as well as upon your Reader: For this happens not
through the Identity of the discourse, but through the defeat of the Hearer.
Man's phantasy desires novelty, and in a Sermon he looks to be entertained with
some variety; but finding his expectation deceived, he becomes unsatisfied, if
not moved (otherwise then at the first hearing of the same discourse) with
indignation: but let a man out of choice read the same Sermon never so often
over, for the settling of his Judgment and direction of his Duty, and he will
find that his satisfaction will be improved. Otherwise it would be advisable to
dissuade men from a frequency of reading the same Scripture, and receiving the
same Sacrament, for fear the frequentation should make them nauseous. But of
this Spiritual refection that of Syracides is verified to all truly devout
Souls, Qui edunt me, adhuc esurient; and qui bibunt me, adhuc sitient, They
that eat hereof Ecclus. 24. 21./29.
do yet hunger; and they that drink thereof are yet thirsty. And he that finds
it otherwise in himself, had need look to it; He has something in him that
must be mortified.

And our Dissenters confess as much in their next words; for they tell us, [It
is not only the common corruption of our nature, but somewhat of innocent
infirmity, that is the cause of this; and man must cease to be man, or to be
mortal, before it will be otherwise.] So far as our Corruption is in fault, we
must take care (as I was saying) to have it mortified; and for our common
incident Infirmities, they may be helped by wholesome methods and prescriptions.
Cassianus 2 De instit. cap. 20.
tells us, that in his time there was wont to be so strict a silence and
attention at the Celebration of the Public Synaxes, that you would have
thought there had been never a man present but he that did officiate. And even
while their City was besieged, the Jews were so intent Joseph. de Bello
Judaico lib. 2. cap. 5.
upon their Sacred Service, that Plurimi sacerdotum, quanquam hosts strictis
gladiis irruentes videbant, intrepidi tamen in peragendis rebus divinis
perseverabant; and in ipso libandi templumque adolendi ministerio mactabantur,
saluti quoque praeferentes Religionis obsequium. When the enemies rushed in
upon them with their naked swords, the Priests went on in their holy Office;
and preferring the duties of their Religion before their Lives, they were slain
in the very exercise of their Ministry. When the Priest summons the attention
of the people by that Preface, Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts, if they
answer his invitation in sincerity, Habemus ad Dominum, We lift them up unto
the Lord, their attention is unblamable. And that we may be the better disposed
to carry such an attention to the sacred office, we should reflect upon our
selves to get a sense of our own indignity and baseness; and look up to God,
to gain a lively apprehension of his glorious Majesty: and while we duly
ponder our distance from him and our guiltiness before him, this Consideration
will beget Reverence, that Reverence will beget Attention, and that Attention
will not fail to produce Devotion in us.

For such incident Evagations and distractions of mind as are involuntary and
inevitable, they will never be imputed (for sin) to us, if we may believe 2 a.
2ae. q. 83. a. 13. ad 3 m.
Aquinas, or Basil in him: Si debilitatus a peccato fix nequis orare,
quantumcunque potes teipsum cohibeas, and Deus ignoscet: eo quod non ex
negligentia, sed ex fragilitate, non potes, ut oportet, assistere coram Deo, If
thou want that fixation of Spirit which thou desire in thy prayers, God
will pardon it; because it proceeds not out of negligence, but of frailty. We
had better give such innocent infirmities a toleration, then seek to remove
them by a Sin and Scandal; and such will be our Disobedience.

There are some other infirmities that would be thought of too, though in
themselves very innocent. Whereas the Soul has Cum omnes potentiae anima in
una essentia animae radicentur; necesse est quod quando una potentia intenditur
in suo actu, altera in suo actu remittatur, vel etiam totaliter in suo actu
impediatur: tum quia omnis virtus ad plura dispersa fit minor, unde e contrario
quando intenditur circa unum, minus potest ad alia dispergi; ^um quia in
operationibus animae requiritur quaedam intentio, quae dum vehementer
applicatur ad unum, non potest alteri vehementer attendere. Tho. 1. 2. q. 77.
ar. 1. in corp.
sundry Faculties and Operations; we find by common Experience, that we are not
able intensively to actuate them all at once. When the Intellect does most
earnestly pore upon an Object, to make a Speculation of its truth, the Will is
taken off, or infeebled in her office, and grows remiss to love and embrace the
goodness of it. And man must cease to be man, or to be mortal, before it will
be otherwise. Now forasmuch as the Will and Affections are the most immediate
active instruments of Devotion (from which it has as well its worth as its
being) and forasmuch as these can act more earnestly and fix more steadfastly
upon holy Objects, the less the Soul is drawn off by the invention and the
discoursings of the Understanding; hence it follows that Common Forms (in which
the subject matter of the Prayer with suitable Motives and Arguments are so
digested, that the Phantasy and Understanding have nothing to do, but to
reflect upon them, and quietly to propound them to the Will) are of huge
advantage to Devotion.

By this means therefore we see Devotion has been kept up, and kept alive in
the Church in most, if not in all, Ages. And the benefit hereof, because more
discernible toward them, is generally acknowledged in reference to the
Orationes conscriptas in chartis, mentibus infirmis utile est ut legant.
Trithem. ut supra^.
Weakest (which makes up the far greatest number) of Christians. And therefore,
whereas you conclude, [that the nature of the thing and the common experience
of your own dispositions, and of the effect upon others, assures you, that
understanding serious Godliness is like to be extinguished, if only Forms be
allowed in the Church, on pretense of extinguishing Errors and Divisions;] we
must take the liberty to tell you, that as well the experience of our own
dispositions, as the constant Practice of the Church in all Ages, assures us
the contrary. Hereupon we are astonished no less at the untruth and
perversity, then at the arrogance of your following expressions, in these vain
words, [And though we have concurred to offer you our more Corrected
Nepenthe's, yet must we, before God and men, protest against the dose of Opium
which you here prescribe or wish for, as that which plainly tends to cure the
Disease by the extinguishing of Life, and to unite us all in a dead Religion.]
You need not force your modesty to tell us, (we know your opinion well enough)
that your own Geese are all Swans: but we like none of the breed, for their
black feet sake, which trample down all Order and Authority. But your
Nepenthe's happily are not so proper for your Constitutions: Things that do
exhilarate and raise the Spirits, and awaken Fancy, are dangerous to be
administered to the Frantic. And it is an ill Apud medicos (...) dicitur
affectus praeter naturam, qui morbum, velut umbra corpus, sequitur. Galen. ^:
Symptom, that you proclaim your medicine to be your poison: but, if (finding
you in some Lucid interval) we can persuade you to take it, that dose of Opium
will be more sovereign to cool your brain, and bring you to rest, and settle
your distempers.

For you talk idly still, in your next words, [And when our Prayers that avail
must be effectual and fervent, Jam. 5. 6. and God will be worshipped in Spirit
and truth, and more regards the frame of the Heart then the Comeliness of
Expression; we have no reason to be taken with any thing that pretends to help
the Tongue, while we are sure it ordinarily hurts the Heart.] So you say: but
are you sure on it? Will you not eat your words presently, and tell us, that
Forms have their laudable use? We shall observe it as we go along with you. In
the interim we do acknowledge, that it is not the style and ornament, but the
humility and the fervor, that gives the perfection unto Prayer: And Prayer is
then humble and fervent, not when it is designed and made to move affection (as
your extemporary ones for the most part are) but when it proceeds from it, as
the offspring of a heart that abounds with humility, fervor and compunction.
Hence Grad. 21.
Climacus advises, Noli verbis excultioribus in oratione tua uti. Saepe enim
Infantium simplicia, and pura, and balbutientia verba Patrem suum qui in coelis
est placaverunt. But he speaks of the Prayer, not of a Public, but a Private
person, offered up in his own name, and not in the name of the Church. For
should the Priest offer up those simplicia and balbutientia verba, those
Childish uncouth expressions there, he would certainly incur a just shame
with men, and so lose that concurrent help which you formerly commended to us.
But what? cannot a Form of Prayer be God forbid that I should ever think that
there are not righteous men among the Prelatical, or fervent effectual prayers
that are Liturgical; says your Advocate, in his Peaceable Enquiry about
Reordination, p. 125.
effectual and fervent, as St James requires? cannot God be worshipped in
Spirit and in truth in it? If you affirm, then you produce these Scriptures to
no purpose: but if you deny, then it will follow that no forms are laudable;
and then you contradict your selves, and condemn as well God himself as his
Servants for prescribing them.

But for all you have involved your selves in these palpable Absurdities, you
are resolved to hold the Conclusion still; for you say further, [It is not the
affirmations of any men in the world, persuading us of the harmelesness of such
a course, that can so far unman us, as to make us disbelieve both our own
Experience, and common Observation of the effect on others.] We know, Humanum
est errare, and if you will not be unmanned in that sense, who can help it? It Is
certain, men may be deceived in their own What think you of Corah, Dathan and
Abiram? Numb. 16. 3. All the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the
Lord is among them: Wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the
congregation of the Lord?
Experience and in those effects which they observe in others. There is a
sensible Devotion that begins in sensitive nature, and makes a conspicuous
alteration in it. It produces great tendernesses, fervor and melting
affections; it will draw sighs from the bosom, and tears from the eyes, and
spring many motions of delectation and sweetness in the heart. And men may have
so great a complacency in these inundations of sweetness and pleasing
impetuosities (imagining them to be gracious effects and actuations of the Holy
Ghost) as to be transported with them. And yet this sensible Devotion may
rather endanger to depresse the operations of the Spirit, then advance them;
and many times does nourish Pride, self-love, and a contempt of others, rather
then contribute to the augmentation of Divine Love, or a proficiency in
Obedience. To abate therefore the too high esteem that unwary souls may have of
this sensible fervor and devotion, we are informed by very Jacob. Alvarez. de
Paz, de Inquis. Pacis lib. 2. par. 3. cap. 3. per totum. Sancta Sophia Treat.
3.. 1. c. 5. per totum. Dr. Meric Casaubon of Enthusiasm, c. 6. per totum.
creditable observation, that it is not always a sign of a good disposition or
holiness in the Soul. Very impious persons may, and have enjoyed it. When it is
derived to us as the gift of God, he intends it for our encouragement in his
pure love; and therefore it is not to be neglected. Hae consolationes
sensibiles Sensible devotions are called also sensible consolations, by the
Writers of Mystical Theology.
verae, quamvis despiciendae non sint, non sunt tamen supra modum astimandae.
Quia nec sunt verae virtutes, nec necessarii solidarum virtutum effectus, nec
necessaria profectus instrumenta, sine quibus plurimi ad magnam virtutem ac
mentis puritatem ascendunt J^c. Alvar. ibid.
. When they are truly sent us from God, they are subject to great perversities;
if they be not used with discretion, they may prove pernicious, and plunge the
Soul August. Baker. in Sanct. Soph. ubi supra.
more deeply in self-love and corrupt nature, (in which they are much
immersed.) But this sensible Devotion, fervor and sweetness, may flow also
from the mere natural temper of the body, or from the vehement intention of the
mind, or from a tone and cadence of words, or power of language, or from the
subtle insinuation and illusion of the Devil; as the Masters of Devotions do
generally observe.

This is a Truth acknowledged in the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, (p. 515.)
where it is resolved, That we may easily be deceived by our Enlargements,
because there are many winds and gales blowing from several quarters, which may
set the Soul in active going and doing; as Popular applause, high opinions of
the Preacher, taking-Expressions in Prayer, flourishing Novelties and notions
in a Sermon, Satanical infusions, common and ordinary Inspirations of the Holy
Ghost, vouchsafed to Reprobates, Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. All which, or any of which,
may so draw and delight the heart, that (as Orpheus 's Pipe) they may make the
heart dance in a duty; and yet for all this, it may be possible, yea probable,
the heart may dance after the Devil's pipe.

And you must give other men leave to have their own experience and observation
as well as you. And when we see in you more Humility, Self-denial, Resignation
of will and self-conceit, and more obedience to Superiors, (which are under a
divine command, and of indispensable necessity to Salvation) we shall be the
more inclinable to believe your pretensions, that some proficiency in the way
of solid Virtue and Devotion is to be made by the course you plead for. But it
is not the affirmations of all the men in the world, speaking in their own
behalf and in favor of their own conceits, that can so far unman us, as to
make us interpret those practices to be the effects of the Holy Spirit which
contradict the Principles of Christianity, extinguishing both Charity and
Obedience.

But admit the effects you boast of were really the gifts of God, and truly
tended to the advancement of his pure Love in you: would this warrant you to
contemn or omit the established Liturgy of the Church? All the Masters of
Devotion, that I have met withal, do resolve otherwise. To this purpose
consider what Augustine Baker Sanct. Soph. ubi supra, cap. 2.
says in his Treatise of Vocal Prayer. As for that Vocal Prayer, (says he,)
either in Public or Private, which is by the laws of the Church of
obligation, no manner of pretenses of finding more profit by internal exercises
ought to be esteemed a sufficient ground for any to neglect or disparage it.
For though some Souls of the best disposition might perhaps more advance
themselves toward perfection by internal exercises alone: yet since generally,
even in Religion, Souls are so tepid and negligent, that if they were left to
their own voluntary devotions, they would scarce ever exercise either Vocal or
Mental Prayer; therefore inasmuch as a manifest distinction cannot be made
between the Particular dispositions of Persons, it was requisite and necessary,
that all should be obliged to a Public external performance of divine Service,
praising God with the tongues also (which were for that end given us;) that so
an Order and decorum might be observed in God's Church, to the end it might
imitate the employment of Angels and glorified Saints, in a solemn united
joining of hearts and tongues to glorify God. This was necessary also for the
edification and invitation of those who are not obliged to the Office, who
perhaps would never think of God, were they not encouraged thereto by seeing
good Souls spend the greatest part of their time in such solemn and almost
hourly praying to, and praising God. Thus he.

And this, perhaps, you may be induced to subscribe to, if we can get you in a
good mood, as you now seem to be; for you tell us, in your next words, that
[some Forms have their laudable use, to cure the error and vice that lies on
the other extreme.] It seems then there is a Mediocrity, and now you are
resolved to hit it. In good time; for hitherto you have done more then
insinuate, That Forms are not a worship of God in Spirit and truth, not
effectual and fervent: but a dead Religion; that ordinarily they hurt the
heart; that they are a dose of Opium, that does extinguish
understanding-serious-godliness, and the life of Religion. What could you have
said more to load them with contempt? yet now you confess, some Forms are not
only lawful, but laudable. This looks like Bellarmine's [Tutissimum,] that gave
a defeat to his whole design. He writes five Books against Justification by
Faith, and then concludes the Controversy with a Confutation of all that he
had written of it [Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum
inanis gloriae, Tutissimum est, fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere.] So our Deformalists, after a miserable stuctuation, are
glad to come to an Anchor, to their Tutissimum, and to take fanctuary from an
impendent storm, by confessing that some Forms are Lawful. Lawful; but for
what? for nothing but to make a medicine to kill the itch, that of pride,
curiosity, and novelty, [the error and vice that lies on the other extreme.]
It Is well Forms are good for something in your opinion. But let a wise and an
humble man use them, and they will serve very well to entertain and exercise a
sound Faith, and a sincere Love, and a substantial Devotion.

But by this we see these men can speak truth, if they list, especially when
their reputation and interest is concerned in it; witness that Position of Mr
Baxter's, In his Unsavory Volume against Mr. Crandon, or his Nosegay presented
to Mr. Joseph Caryll, (page 83.) ante finem.
which, if his Party had the conscience to practice it, would put an end to our
Divisions, and settle us in a happy state of Uniformitie: for thus he says,
[Let me be bold to tell my opinion to my Brethren of the Ministry, that though
I deny them to have either credit or Authority against the known Word of God,
yet so great is their credit and Authority, even as Teachers and Guides of the
Church, in Causes agreeable to the Word, And in Causes to the people doubtful
and unknown, and in Causes left by the Word to their determination, (the Word
determining them but generally) that I think the ignorance of this truth has
been the main cause of our sad Confusions and Schisms in England, and that the
Ministers have been guilty of it, partly by an over-modest concealing An
important truth falls from the pen of Mr. Baxter, if he could say and hold.
their Authority, and partly by an indiscreet opposition to the Papists error
of the Authority of the Church: and I think that till we have better taught,
even our Godly people, what credit and obedience is due to their Teachers and
Spiritual Guides, the Churches of England shall never have peace, or any good
or established Order. I say again, we are broken for want of the knowledge of
this truth, and till this be known, we shall never be well bound up and
healed.] This is Mr Baxter's sober Concession; and he thought it so signal a
verity, when he wrote it, that he set a hand in the margent to remark it, and
point it out to every Reader, as most worthy his observation. Let him preach
the same Doctrine still, and act accordingly, and I doubt not, the Liturgy of
the Church will become a Laudable Form of Divine Service, and more frequented.

But is it any uncharitable or rash Censure to say, that He has just cause to
cry out against himself, (Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor,) when we
see him so refractory to his Spiritual Guides, so cross to his own Principles,
setting himself in the breach industriously to prevent the closing of it? To
this end he has a new devise, in the next passage, which is recommended to us
in these words, [And might we but sometimes have the liberty to interpose such
words as are needful to call home and quicken attention and affection, we
should think that a convenient conjunction of both, might be a well-tempered
means to the Constitutions of most.] It seems your Wit goes a Wool-gathering at
the time of your devotion. But admit it does; is not the voice of a Public
Solemn Office loud enough to call it home, or can you not find a Rod to fetch
it? Get a lively sense and conscience of your duty, with an apprehension of
that dreadful Majesty, which is always present, to behold with how serious an
affection and reverence you perform your homage to him; Try what effects that
will work upon your Phantasy. However we commend your modesty, that you desire
but sometimes to have the liberty to interpose such words as are needful to
call home and quicken attention and affection. But what? will a dead affection
and a roving phantasy serve God's turn or yours otherwhiles? Besides, do you
take notice that your affection is dull, and your Phantasy a wandering, or do
you not? If you do not, you have no occasion of such interjections; if you do,
then now you are awakened, and you have nothing more to do, but to be careful
to go forward. He that apprehends that (out of his own oscitancy and
heedlesness) he has stepped aside, and loytered in his journey, and yet
descries his right way before him, does but trifle and wander more, in running
to the next house to parley about his deviation. And what are those needful
words which you desire the liberty to interpose, in the use of the Common
Public Form? Are they nonsense, or significant? If Nonsense, then it will be
ridiculous to interpose them; If Significant, then either they signify the same
thing with the Form wherein you would insert them, or something else. If the
same thing with the Form, why should the Form be interrupted? why cannot you
pray for the same thing in the same words, as did our Savior? If they signify
something else, (that is not in the Form, and yet you will interrupt the Form
to interpose them,) in stead of quickening attention, you will raise a wonder,
and give a scandal, and put the people into confusion. And therefore it is your
wisest way to keep those needful awakening words, as a Reserve, to assist you
in your private Closet; for the conjunction of such crude interpositions with
the Public solemn Liturgy would be disconvenient, they will never cotton well,
nor does God allow that his field should be ploughed with an Ox and an Ass
yoked together.

[But still we see, (as you proceed in your Complaint) the world will run into
extremes, whatever be said or done to hinder it.] And they that can run faster
this way then your selves, for me, let them win the goal and wear the garland.
But you seek to justify your selves, (if you could) in your next lines, where
you say [It is but lately that we were put to it, against one extreme, to
defend the lawfulness of a Form of Liturgy.] I perceive you would feign be
reputed Medium Harmonicum; but the world knows, you have for a long while
marred the Music of this Church by your jarring disproportions. For who
untaught even your Godly people, what credit and obedience is due to their
Spiritual Guides, but you? Who pulled down and disgraced the Solemn Liturgy of
the Church but you? That you were put to it, to defend the lawfulness of
Liturgy, was a necessity of your own creating, and you did but fight with your
own shadow in that combat; for that extreme was your own production, and we
observe you cannot forbear to express a very fond affection toward it upon
all occasions in your discourse. No, no, We cannot be deluded by such
aquivocation; you never cordially espoused the quarrel of a Liturgy: we
perceive well enough where the shoe wrings you, (in your next words) when you
tell us [Now on the other extreme, it troubles us that we are forced against
you, even such as you, to defend the use of such prayers of the Pastors of the
Churches as are necessarily varied according to Subjects and Occasions; while
you would have no prayers at all in the Church but such Prescribed Forms.]
Whether that reduplication of [you, even such as you,] be an Emphasis of
respect or indignation, we shall not consult Mr Baxter's Grotian Religion to
interpret it. But if to have no Prayers in the Public Solemn Service of the
Church but Prescribed Forms be one of your Extremes, we hope it is so only in
that sense in which the Pythagoreans called Virtue (...), an extremity, for
its supereminency and perfection; for we are sure it is opposite to no moral
Virtue. And yet if the Pastors of the Churches (by them understanding the
Bishops, as the Ancients usually do) shall in their Prudence think fit to vary
the Forms upon occasion, we are always content to submit to the variation: But
that single Presbyters ever had that Liberty of varying according to their own
Fantasies, we steadfastly deny. And we add yet further, that the Subjects and
Occasions may be such as in discretion are not fit to be inserted into the
Solemn Service of the Church. St Paul's thorn in the flesh might have wounded
the heart of an unwary weak Disciple, if it had been inserted into the Public
Liturgy. We could tell you of Tickets put up to Ministers to beg their
Pulpitprayers, which have been not only very strange, but very scandalous; and
he is a stranger to this City that has not observed it.
It is more safe and prudent to recommend some things to Almighty God in
general expressions, then to insist too particularly and positively upon them.
Christ knew very well the chief and particular wants of his Disciples, when
they begged that form of Prayer of him; yet he descends not to any enumeration
of those particulars, but delivers the Form in General terms, because it was
for a Public use and benefit. In petendis a Deo beneficiis saepe erramus,
Rosignolius de Disciplina Christianae Perfectionis, lib. 3. c. 19.
nec in hisce rebus Deo quasi precum vis est adferenda, sed liberum illi
permittendum, ut nos quo libuerit maxim impellat. Fieri enim saepe solet, ut
Deus iis qui hac animi dispositione carent quod petunt impertiatur, quod tamen
ipsis ruinae postea sit occasio. Quare Diaboli videtur esse ad certaru^
ejusmodi rerum intempestivas efflagitationes incitare. To this we may add that
of De la Cerda. Petere pro seipso temporalia, quamvis unicuique eatenus liceat
quatenus per talem petitionem fatemur Deum omnium authorem and prospectorem,
eique nos submittimus, ea efflagitantes quae nobis adminiculo esse possunt ad
virtutem and ad suum ipsius cultum: tutius tamen est, nihil in particulari
postulare, nisi ea quibus nullo modo possumus male uti, ut cor contritum and
humiliatum, deduci in viam veritatis, and in semitam mandatorum Dei, and
fimilia. Caetera vero, quorum bonus potest esse and malus usus, sub generali
nomine petenda sunt, ut docebat Socrates, dicens, Bona a Deo petamus, hoc est,
sub hoc generali nomine, Da quae nobis bona sunt. Quantumvis enim condition
moderetur petitio nostra, dicentes, si fuerit voluntas tua; semper tamen latet
anguis in herba, hoc est, voluntas nostra in illa condition, aviditasque
impetrandi, quod nostra est voluptas. De la Cerda in Epist. ad Rome c. 8.. 74.
ad haec verba [Nam quid oremus sicut oportet, nescimus.]

But you demand, [Why may we not add, that whosoever makes the forms imposed
on us, if he use them, is guilty as well as we, of praying according to his
private conceptions?] For your satisfaction herein you might have remembered the
old Rule, [Cum duo faciunt idem, non est idem:] What is composed as well by the
direction as allowance of Authority, and is enjoined by it to be used, has
that sacred stamp upon it, that does sufficiently distinguish it from all
private Conceptions.

You add in the last place, [We never saw it proved from Scripture, that
Christ appointed any to such an office, as to make Prayers for other Pastors
and Churches to offer up to God: and that this being none of the works of the
Apostolic or common Ministerial office in the Primitive Church, is no work of
any office of Divine Institution.] That God made Forms of Prayer and Blessing
for the use of the Church and Priesthood is evident, Numb. 6. 23, See Ecclus.
50. 20.
etc. Luke 11. 2. That David and other Holy Prophets were inspired of God for
that work, cannot be denied; or if it should, we may prove it by these
instances. 1. Officers are designed, 1 Chronicles. 15. 16, 17. And 2. their office
(to celebrate the Solemn Service of God morning and evening) is appointed, 1 Chronicles. 23. 30. And 3. this office did not consist of extemporary Conceptions,
but of set and prescribed Forms, penned by such persons as were endowed with
Gifts and invested with Authority to do it: as may easily be evinced from the
very Titles of these Psalms; Psalm. 4. [To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A
Psalm of David] That is, says Deodati, Published by David, for the use of the
Church, though it was penned before upon some particular occasion. Psalm. 50.
the Title is [A Psalm of Asaph] a famous Musician in David's days, 1 Chronicles.
25. 2. who was also a Prophet and Composer of Psalms, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
Whereupon (says Deodati) it is not certain whether the Psalms which are
entitled by his name were composed by him, or whether they were only directed
to him and his successors, to be played and sung in their turns by the holy
Music. Psalm. 102. the Title is [A Prayer of the afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and powers out his complaint before the Lord.] It is apparent,
says Deodati, that this Psalm was penned toward the end of the Babylonian
Captivity, to be a Form of Prayer for the restoration of God's people,
according to his promise. Psalm. 92. the Title is [A Psalm or Song for the
Sabbath day] that is, says Deodati, to be solemnly sung in the holy Assemblyes
upon the Sabbath day. From Psalm. 120. to Psalm. 134. (inclusive) there are 15.
Psalms which are entitled [Psalms of Degrees.] Which Title, says Deodati, is
of very obscure and doubtful signification; yet the likelyest opinion is, that
these Psalms were either newly penned, or chosen out from amongst the old ones,
to be sung by the people in their return from Babylon, in their several days
journeys or stages as they traveled, either one or more, or all at every
removing. Others say they were so styled, because they were wont to be sung
upon those fifteen steps which were between the men's Court and that of the
Priests. However we are sure they are Forms of Worship, of Praise, or Prayer,
and Thanksgiving: and then, if you will allow the Composers of them to be of
God's appointment, we have even in Scripture found some appointed by Christ to
such an office as to make Prayers for other Pastors and Churches to offer up
to God. And may we not find the like in the New Testament? Erant nonnulli apud
priscos illos Christianae Theophylact. in 1 ad Corinth. cap. 14.
fidei sectatores qui supplicandi gratiam lingua exciperent, etc. Quinetiam
Psalmos ex priscis illis nonnulli per spiritalem gratiam componebant. Cum
pleraque eorum quae nobis Idem ad Romans 8. 26.
prosint ignorantes inutilia peteremus, accedebat orationis charisma uni cuidam
eorum qui tum vixerunt, and quod communiter omnibus conferebat, ipse stans
precabatur, aliosque id petere docebat. And that these Psalms and Prayers were
intended for the use and benefit of God's Church we may conclude from the whole
discourse of the Apostle. And when that Apostle gives so strict a charge, [Let
all things be done decently and in order; let all things be done to the glory
of God; let all things be done to edification;] Is not the duty of ordering all
things according to this Rule especially incumbent upon the Governors of the
Church? Does he not say personally to Titus, [For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting?] Tit. 1.
5. And does he not write to Timothy, [that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men?] Is not Timothy the 1 Timothy 2. 1. See Mr Thorndike of the Service of God in Publ. Ass.
Bishop incharged with this Office? and is not this a special Order given to
him, touching the Substance of Public Prayer to be settled in all the
Assemblies of his Jurisdiction? This therefore is a work of the Apostolic or
common Ministerial office, and consequently the work of an office of Divine
Institution.

But admit we had no such warrant, either of express Precept or clear Example,
in Holy Scripture for this Practice: yet the lawfulness thereof may be evinced
upon these undeniable Principles,

1. The Apostles intended Unity, and to that end recommended Order and
Uniformity to the Churches. That they intended Unity is evident, Ephesians. 4. 1,
2, 3, etc. I therefore, the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called; with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love: endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit See 1 Cor. 1. 10. and Romans 15. verse. 5. 6. ut
supra.
in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called
in one hope of your calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. And Romans 16.
17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

That they recommended Uniformity and Order, to preserve that Unity, is no less
evident; and upon this account, their Order was a Prospect of so much pleasure
to the Great Apostle in the Church of the Colossians (Col. 2. 5.) For though I
be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding
your Order, and the Stedfastness of your Faith in Christ Vide R. P. E. S. Jo.
Davenant. in Locum.
. When men begin to break Order, they grow loose in their Faith both to God and
man. This is the First Principle.

2. The Apostles, at their first preaching of the Gospel, did not establish
that Order which the State of the Church did afterward require. This is
evident, from those Decrees made in the first Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.
and from that of the Apostle, [The rest will I set in order when I come.] The
Second Principle.

3. They exspected such a settlement to be made by those to whom they did
entrust the Government of the Church. This is evident from St Paul's Epistle to
Titus, (Chap. 1. 5.) where he tells him, [For this cause left I thee in Crete,
that thou should set in order the things that are left undone, (according to
the Original.)] From which words these two things do naturally follow: 1. That,
at his first preaching of the Gospel St Paul had left some things undone,
which, even in his own judgment, were, afterward, fit to be done, (which shows
the vanity and falsehood of that pretension, That because the Apostles did not
establish such and such things, therefore (forsooth) they did not think them
convenient to be established at all.) 2. (From hence it follows) That he
exspected the accomplishment hereof from the care of Titus. The Third Principle.

4. They gave certain Canons or general Rules to direct the Governors of the
Church in making such Establishments. Such are those mentioned in St Paul's
Epistles, Let all things be done to the glory of God; Let all things be done to
edification; Let all things be done decently, and in order. Hereupon Institut.
lib. 3. cap. 19.. 15.
Calvin, writing of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, does acknowledge some of them
to be lawful, ut Dei verbo consentaneae, as being consonant to the Word of God.
And In confess. Fidei, cap. 5.. 17.
Beza says, Necesse est ut in domo Dei omnia ordine fiant; cujus Ordinis una
quidem est universalis ratio ex verbo Dei petenda, sed non una and eadem forma
quibusvis circumstantiis conveniens: That is, It is necessary that in the house
of God all things be done in Order; of which Order the one Universal Rule or
Reason is to be taken out of the Word of God, though there be not one and the
same form agreeing in all circumstances. And again, Ejusmodi. 16.
constitutiones, (says he) quod attinet ad finem and fundamentum, nempe
generale illud decorum quod nobis observandum praecipitur, divinae sunt and
coelestes: That is, Such Constitutions, as to the end and foundation of them,
to wit, that General Decorum which we are commanded to observe, are divine and
celestial. The Fourth Principle.

5. They left it to the Judgment of the Governors of the Church to determine
of the Particulars to be established according to These Rules. That the Church
has power to institute External Rites, and prescribe Forms, and to make Canons
and Constitutions, to assist her Children and regulate their Practice in the
Public Worship and Service of God, is the Confession of All Churches. And this
is consonant to the Word of God too. For that Word, or God by it (which is all
one) gives a charge to the Church (as has been said) to do all things to
Edification, and the Glory of God; and to this end, it injoyns her to perform
all her Holy Offices decently and in order, and to worship God in the beauty of
Holiness. This the Word of God commands, but does not determine the Particulars
wherein that Order, beauty and decency do consist. It follows therefore that
This Word of God supposes a Power in the Church to institute Rites, and
prescribe Forms, and make Canons to this purpose. And where shall we find this
power lodged by the Apostle, (at that time when there were no Kings that were
nursing Fathers to the Church?) For this cause I left thee, (Titus, a single
Person, and at least a Bishop,) in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, (Tit. 1. 5.) The Power and Authority is lodged in the
Governors, that is, the Bishops of the Church. The Fifth Principle. Remember
Mr Baxter's Doctrine before mentioned, of the Authority of the Governors of
the Church.


6. That all Subjects and Members of the Church are obliged in Conscience to
submit to and obey such Determinations. For it is most certain, where some are
empowered to command, others are enjoined to obey; else the Power given to
Superiors would be to no effect. Hereupon Beza acknowledges, That although
these Ecclesiastical Constitutions be Humane and mutable, and do not proprie
per se, properly by themselves bind the Conscience; yet, si quidem probae and
justae sunt, if they be just and honest, we are so far forth obliged to observe
them as they conduce to the Ut Ecclesiae aedificationi cedant, and offendiculum
vitemus. Beza ubi supra.
edification of the Church, and that we may avoid Scandal. Thus Beza. And the
Presbyterian Divines do acknowledge as much in their Grand Debate, (page 92.)
[The Subjects (say they) are bound to obey a Was O. Cromwell's a true
Authority? you thought your selves bound to obey that, true or false.
true Authority in such impositions (as they are there speaking of,) where the
matter belongs to the Cognizance and Office of the Ruler.] But suppose I should
scruple my Obedience, thinking my Superiour's impositions to be against the
commands of God. Why, even in this case I am obliged to lay aside my own
scruples, and to bring such thoughts into captivity to the obedience of Christ,
who has commanded me to obey those Hebr. 13. 17.
that have the Rule over me. My doubting whether the Command be Lawful, or
whether it exceeds the Power of my Superior to command it, will not excuse my
Disobedience. For in doubtful matters, Melior est conditio Possidentis, He
that is in possession has the better interest: And that the Superior is
possessed of his Right of commanding is unquestionable; and therefore I am bound
in Conscience to stand for his command, till it be evinced that his command is
of a thing unlawful, or above the sphere of his Authority. It Is true, A
superior cannot command a thing unlawful: but seeing he does judge, upon mature
deliberation, that his command is lawful, though thou doubtest of the Honesty
or Lawfulness thereof, it is much more equal, in this case, to subscribe to his
Judgment, then to give way to thy Scruple or dubitation. Otherwise it will
unavoidably follow, that all Law and Order is gone, when upon the account or
pretense of such thinking, doubting or scrupling, the most stubborn and
pertinacious may take liberty to oppose all Laws and Orders, there being no way
left to bring them to acknowledge any, as subservient to the Laws of God, or
consistent with them, but such as Themselves shall dictate or find suitable to
their own Humor.

I have now finished my design, and run over so much of The Grand Debate as I
undertook to Answer; (The Rest, I hope, will be managed by a better pen and
judgment.) And if they have alleged any thing else in favor of their
Pulpit-Conceptions, to the neglect or disparagement of the Public Form, (in
some other Paragraphs of their Debate, which I have not yet had the leisure to
examine) I am apt to persuade my self, it is obviated in some part of this
discourse.

But we need no more to justify the Governors of the Church in their
imposition of Set Forms, then what the evidence and force of truth has drawn
out of the very bowels of Smectymnuus to this purpose.

Primo (says Mr Tim. Young in his Dies Dominica, lib. 2. cap. 10. page 112.
T. Y.) preces secundum temporis qualitatem erant adhibitae, hominum mentibus
ad precandum devote a Sp. Sancto dispositis. Postea vero (quando astutia
Diaboli varii in religione obrepserant errores) protractu temporis evenit, ut
preces contra fidem ab aliquibus inveherentur. Prospiciente Ecclesia huic
Errori, triplex adhibitum erat remedium. Primo, cautum fuit, ut nulli pro
arbitrio precum formulas contexere, quas in publicis conventibus recitaret,
liceret, sed I. e. Such as had been used in the Church diuturna consuetudine,
as Zonaras interprets it. Whence we infer, that such Forms had then been
customarily used for a long time in the Church.
eaedem retinerentur in quocunque conventu. Ita Conc. Laod. Can. 18.

Deinde statutum erat, ut de precibus, quibus in congressibus uterentur, cum
instructioribus fratribus conferrent. Ita Conc. 3. Carthag. Can. 23. erat
cautum.

Tandem definitum erat, ut nullae aliae preces vel orationes dicerentur in
Ecclesia, nisi quae a Synodo erant approbatae; (Council. Milevit. 2. Can. 12.)
ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium, sit
compositum. Utriusque remedii, secundi scilicet and tertii, occurrit mentio in
Council. Afric. can. 70. T. 1. Thus he.

And, not to reflect upon the Artifice which is there used to make these
Authorities, if it were possible, to comply with the Smectymnuan design and
interest, we may aver with Confidence, that never had any Church more reason
to determine the several parts of the Ministerial office, then the Church of
England has at this day.

The End.

