THE Protestants Plea FOR A SOCINIAN: Justifying His Doctrine from being
opposite to SCRIPTURE OR CHURCH AUTHORITY; And Him from being Guilty of
HERESY, or SCHISM. In Five Conferences.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE First Conference.
The Socinian's Protestant-Plea for his not holding any thing contrary to the
Holy Scriptures.
1. THat he believes all contained in the Scriptures to be God's Word; and
therefore implicitly believes those truths, against which he errs.. 2.

2. That also he uses his best endeavor to find the true sense of Scriptures:
and, that more is not required of him from God for his Faith or Salvation, than
doing his best endeavor for attaining it.. 3.

3. That, as for an explicit Faith required of some points necessary, he is
sufficiently assured, that this point concerning the Son's Consubstantiality
with the Father, as to the affirmative, is not so from the Protestant's
affirming all necessaries to be clear in Scripture, even to the unlearned;
which this, in the affirmative, is not to him.. 4.

4. That several express, and plain Scriptures do persuade him, that the
negative (if either) is necessary to be believed; and that from the clearness
of Scriptures, he has as much certainty in this point, as Protestants can have
from them in some other, held against the common expressions of the former
times of the Church.. 6, 8.

5. That, for the right understanding of Scriptures, either he may be certain
of a just industry used; or else, that Protestants, in asserting that the
Scriptures are plain only to the industrious; and then, that none are certain,
when they have used a just industry, thus must still remain also uncertain in
their Faith; as not knowing, whether some defect in this their industry causes
them not to mistake the Scriptures.

6. Lastly; That none have used more diligence in the search of Scripture, than
the Socinians, as appears by their Writings, addicting themselves wholly to
this Word of God, and not suffering themselves to be any way biased by any
other humane, either modern, or ancient Authority.. 9.

Digress. Where, The Protestant's, and Socinian's pretended Certainty of the
sense of Scripture apprehended by them, and made the ground of their Faith
against the sense of the same Scripture declared by the major part of the
Church is examined.. 9.

Socinian (who though denying the Trinity, and our Saviors Deity, yet, most
zealously urges Scripture, and its plainness in all necessaries, as if it
justified his own Errors; or that he Erred only in matters not necessary) upon
the Protestant Principles may return for himself to a Protestant endeavoring
to reduce him to the true Faith and the Nicene Creed; and using any of these
five Motives thereto, viz. The Testimony of 1. Scripture. 2.
Catholic-Church-Authority. 3. Councils, with the Danger and Guilt of 4.
Heresy, and 5. Schism. Not intending hereby to equal all Protestant Opinions
with the Socinian; but inferring that these Pleas as relating to these Motives
will as rationally justify the Socinian as the Protestant.

For, suppose a Protestant, first, concerning the Scriptures, question a
Socinian in this manner.

Prot. Why do you, to the great danger of your soul, and salvation, not
believe, God the Son to be of one, and the same essence, and substance with God
the Father, it being so principal an Article of the Christian Faith, delivered
in the Holy Scriptures?


Soc. To give you a satisfactory account of this matter. I do believe, with
other Christians, that the Scriptures are the Word of God; and, with other
Protestants, that they are a perfect Rule of my faith.


Prot. But, this secures you not, unless you believe according to this Rule;


Soc. However I believe in this point; truly, or falsely; I am secure that my
Faith is entire, as to all necessary points of Faith.


Prot. How so?


Soc. Because, as M. Chillingworth says p. 23, 159, 367.
-- He that believes all that is in the Bible, all that is in the Scriptures
(as I do) believes all that is necessary there.


Prot. This must needs be true: but mean while, if there be either some part of
Scripture not known at all by you; or the true sense of some part of that you
know (for, the Scripture, as that Author notes Chill. p. 87.
, is not so much the words, as the sense) be mistaken by you, how can you say,
you believe all the Scriptures? For, when you say, you believe all the
Scripture, you mean only this: that you believe, that, whatsoever is the true
sense thereof, that is God's Word; and most certainly true: which belief of
yours does very well consist with your not believing, or also your believing
the contrary to the true sense thereof: and then you, not believing the true
sense of some part of it at least, may also not believe the true sense of
something necessary there; which is quite contrary to your conclusion here.


Soc. Chill. p. 18.
-- I believe, that that sense of them which God intends whatsoever it is, is
certainly true; And thus I believe implicitly even those very truths, against
which I err. Next: Chill. Ib.
-- I do my best endeavor to believe Scripture in the true sense thereof. [By
my best endeavor I mean Chill. p. 19.
, such a measure of industry, as humane prudence, and ordinary discretion (my
abilities, and opportunities, my distractions, and hindrances, and all other
things considered) shall advise me unto in a matter of such consequence. Of
using which endeavor also, I conceive, I may be sufficiently certain: [for
otherwise, I can have no certainty of any thing I believe from this complete
Rule of Scriptures; this due endeavor being the condition, which Protestants
require; that I shall not be, as to all necessaries, deceived in the sense of
Scripture.] Now, being conscious to my self of such a right endeavor used:
Chillingw. p. 102.
-- For me, to believe, further, this or that to be the true sense of some
Scriptures; or to believe the true sense of them, and to avoid the false, is
not necessary, either to my faith or salvation. For, if God would have had his
meaning in these places certainly known, how could it stand with his wisdom, to
be so wanting to his own will and end, as to speak obscurely? Or how can it
consist with his justice to require of men to know certainly the meaning of
those words which he himself has not revealed? Chill. p. 18, 92.
-- For my error or ignorance in what is not plainly contained in Scripture,
after my best endeavor used; to say that God will damn me for such errors, who
am a lover of him, and lover of truth, is to rob man of his comfort, and God of
his goodness; is to make man desperate, and God a Tyrant.


Prot. express and explicit Faith.


Soc. Of what points?


Prot. Of all those that are fundamental and necessary.


Soc. Then if this point of Consubstantiality of the Son with God the Father be
none of the Fundamentals, and necessaries, wherein I am to have a right and an
explicit Faith, the account I have given you already, I hope, is satisfactory.

Chill. p. 92.
-- The Scripture is a Rule, as sufficiently perfect, so sufficiently
intelligible in things necessary, to all that have understanding; whether
learned, or unlearned. Neither is any thing necessary to be believed, but what
is plainly revealed: for to say, that when a place of Scripture by reason of
ambiguous terms lies indifferent between diverse senses, whereof one is true,
and the other false, that God obliges men under pain of damnation not to
mistake through error, and humane frailty, is to make God a Tyrant, and to say
that he requires of us certainty to attain that end, for the attaining whereof
we have no certain means. In fine, Chill. p. 59
where Scriptures are plain, as they are in necessaries, they need no
infallible Interpreter, no further explanation [to me]; and where they are not
plain, there if I, using diligence to find the truth, do yet miss of it, and
fall into Error, there is no danger in it.


Prot. True. Such necessary points are clear to the unlearned, using a due
Industry, void of a contrary interest, etc.


Soc. And in such industry I may be assured, I have not been deficient, having
bestowed much study on this matter, read the Controversy on both sides;
compared Texts, etc. (as also appears in the diligent writings of others of my
persuasion); and after all this, the sense of Scripture also, which I embrace,
(a sense, you know, decried and persecuted by most Christians) is very contrary
to all my secular relations, interest, and profit.

Now, after all this search I have used, I am so far satisfied, evident in
Scripture (and therefore no Fundamental) that I can produce most clear and
evident places out of the Scriptures (if a man can be certain of any thing from
the perspicuity of its Expressions) that the contrary of it is so.

[See Crellius in the Preface to his Book De uno Deo Patre, -- Haec de uno Deo
Patre sententia plurimis, ac clarissimis sacrarum-literarum testimoniis nititur
-- Evidens sententiae veritas, and rationum firmissimarum e sacris literis
sponte subnascentium multitudo, ingenii nostri tenuitatem sublevat, etc. --
Argumenta, quae ex sacris literis deprompsimus, per se plana sunt, ac facilio
adeo quidem, ut eorum vim deolinare alia ratione non possint adversarii, quam
ut a verborum simplicitate tum ipsi deflectant, tum nos abducere conentur. And
see the particular places of Scripture which they urge (where, as to the
expression, and other Texts being laid aside, that seems to be said, as it were
totidem verbis, which the Socimans maintain). Job. 14.28.17.3. Ep. 1 Cor. 8.6.
-- Col. 1.15. and Rev. 3.14. I set not down this to countenance their Cause,
but to show their Confidence.]


Prot.


Soc. It Is true, that I may mistake in the sense of some Scripture; but it
follows not from hence, that I can be certain of the sense of no Scriptures. To
answer you in the words of Mr. Chillingworth Chillingw. p. 111.
-- Though I pretend not to certain means in interpreting all Scripture,
particularly such places as are obscure and ambiguous; yet this methinks should
be no impediment, but that we may have certain means of not erring in, and
about the sense of those places which are so plain and clear, that they need no
Interpreters; and in such this my Faith is contained. If you ask me, how I can
be sure, that I know the true meaning of these places? I ask you again; Can you
be sure you understand what I, or any man else says; They that heard our
Savior and the Apostles Preach, can they have sufficient assurance that they
understood at any time what they would have them do? If not, to what end did
they hear them? If they could, why may not I be as well assured, that I
understand sufficiently, what I conceive plain in their Writings? Again; I pray
tell me, whether do you certainly know the sense of these Scriptures, for the
evidence of which you separated from the Church that was before Luther,
requiring conformity to the contrary Doctrines, as a condition of her
Communion? If you do, then give us leave to have the same means, and the same
abilities to know other plain places, which you have to know these. For if all
the Scripture be obscure, how can you know the sense of these places? If some
places of it be plain, why should I stay here? -- Ib. p. 112.
If you ask, seeing I may possibly err, how can I be assured I do not? I ask
you again, seeing your eyesight may deceive you, how can you be sure you see
the Sun, when you do see it? Ib. p. 117.
A Judge may possibly err in Judgment, can he therefore never have assurance
that he has judged rightly? a Traveller may possibly mistake his way; must I
therefore be doubtful whether I am in the right way from my Hall to my Chamber?
Or can our London Carrier have no certainty in the middle of the day, when he
is sober, and in his wits, that he is in his way to London? Ib. p. 112.
-- This I am certain of, that God will not require of me a certainly unerring
belief, unless he had given me a certain means to avoid error, and if I use
those which I have, will never require of me, that I use that which I have not
See also Chill. p. 140, 366, 367. Sect. 8.
. -- This is Mr. Chillingworth's solid Plea against the Papist's grand
Objection, for the proving an uncertainty in the Protestant's Faith upon any
their pretense of evident Scripture.


Prot. But the Scriptures, which you urge against the Son's being the same one
only God with God the Father, carry not the same evidence and clearness, as
those Scriptures do, whereon Protestants build the certainty of their Faith
against the Papists, or against the common Church-Doctrines that were before
Luther.


Soc. That say the Papists of your plain Scriptures, which you of mine: I pray,
what can be said more plain, or in what point, in your Opinion, more
fundamental (wherein we contend Scripture is most clear, even to the
unlearned), than this, in Joh. 17.3. -- Ut cognoscant te [Pater] solum verum
Deum; and, quem misisti, Jesum Christum -- And, 1 Cor. 8.6. Unus Deus, Pater;
and unus Dominus, Jesus. And, Ephesians. 4. ver. 5. Unus est Dominus, [i. e. Jesus;]
and then, ver. 6. Unus est Deus, and Pater omnium -- And, Joh. 14.1. Creditis
in Deum, and in me credit -- And v. 28. Pater meus major me est. I say, what
more clear for proving the Father his being the true, most high God, and
excluding the other Persons [the Son, or the Holy Ghost] from being the very
same God?


Prot. And 1. what more clear, on the other side, than these Texts, Romans 9.5.
Of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever -- And, Tit. 2.3. The glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. And 1 John 5.20.
-- we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true
God and eternal life, spoken by St. John, the great vindicator, against Ebion,
Cerinthus, Carpocrates and other, in his time, opposers of our Lord's Divinity
S. Hieron. de viris illust.
-- And Apoc. 1.8. compared with 1.17. -- I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the ending, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty? I
say, what more clear than these Texts, for showing the true Deity of Christ? 2.
And then, how many other clear Texts are there, asserting the Eternity of our
Lord; that he is nothing made or created, but pre-existent before the
constitution of the World; equal with God; and that Heaven, and Earth, and all
things were made by him, that were made; and that he descended from Heaven from
his Father, when he took our nature upon him? See Joh. 1.1. etc. -- 3.13. Heb
1.2, 3, 10 etc. -- Joh. 17.5, 24. -- Phil. 2.6. -- Joh. 6.38. -- 16.28. -- 1.
Tim. 3.16. -- Heb. 2.14. And 3. then, his Deity and Eternity thus cleared, his
Deity can be no other, than, in the total essence thereof, numerically the same
with that of God the Father. For, those of your own Sect, together with the
whole Christian world, do acknowledge, 1. That there is but one numerical most
high God, an inseparable attribute of whom is his Creating of the world, and
preexistence before it. And again; 2. That the substance or essence of this
most high God, is not any way divisible, partible or multipliable; so that, Si
Christus ex Dei substantia generatus fuit, tota ei Patris substantia, eadem
numero, communicata fuit. See Volkel. de vera Rel. l. 5. c. 12. upon which
consequence well discerned, your predecessors were constrained to desert
Arianism, or semi-Arianism, and to take in other respects a more desperate way,
of denying any pre-existence of our Lord before his Incarnation: To return then
to our business. All Scripture being equally true; you know, no Text thereof
can be pronounced clear in such a sense, which others, as clear contradict. The
non-consideration of which by the passionate or unlearned, is the mother of all
errors. The Texts therefore that you produce here so manifest on your side,
that they may not contradict many more others as clear against you, are to be
understood to speak of our Lord only according to his Incarnation, Messiah and
Mediatorship, in which he has an inferiority to the Father and is our Lord, by
a special Redemption with his blood, in another manner, than He together with
his Father, in the same essence, is the one true God.


Soc. All the Texts you have mentioned have been diligently considered, and
answered by our party.


Prot. And your Answers are new, forced, absurd, as may clearly appear to any
rational and indifferent person perusing Volkelius l. 5. from the 10. to the
14. Chapter. But to omit this dispute, as now beside my purpose. If your sense
of the Scriptures, you have urged, be so manifest and clear, as you pretend;
how comes so great a part of the Christian world (doubtless rational men), in
the sense of these very Scriptures so much to differ from you? Therefore here I
cannot but still suppose in you the defect of a due industry, well comparing
these Scriptures, and void of pride, passion, and other interest.


Soc. And I return the like question to you. If, on the clearness of the
express sense of these Scriptures, I cannot infallibly ground my faith, against
many other rational men contradicting; on what plainness of the sense of any
other Scripture is it, that Protestants can ground theirs against a contrary
sense given by the learned; by several Councils; by the whole Church of some
ages, as they do; not promising to the Councils, even to the four first, an
absolute, but conditional assent, viz. only so far, as their Degrees agree with
these clear Scriptures? If neither the plain words of Scripture can afford a
sufficient certainty to me in this matter, which Scriptures, you say, in
fundamentals are to all perspicuous (and such do many deem this point); nor I
can have a sufficient assurance of using an unbiast industry in the
understanding of these Scriptures, and also in the comparing them with others,
in which I am conscious to my self of no neglect, I see no sufficient ground of
my presuming to understand any other part of Scripture; and then, wherein can
lie the assurance of a Protestant's Faith, for his not erring in Fundamentals
at least? Bishop Lany tells me, Sermon. at Whitehall, March 12. 1664. p. 17.
That when we have certain knowledge of a thing, we may safely learn from the
Schools, viz. Ubi non est formido contrarii; that after diligent search and
inquiry when there remains no scruple, doubt, and fear of the contrary, when
the understanding is fixed, we are said to be certain -- And that they who will
say it, and do think so too, may safely be absolved from the guilt of
disobedience.


Prot. Dr. Fern Division of Churches, p. 46.61. Chillinw. p. 57.
You have a judgment of discretion I grant, and may Interpret Scripture for
your self: without the use of which Judgment you cannot serve God with a
reasonable service, who are also to give account of your self, and are to be
saved by your own Faith, and do perish upon your own score. -- Stillingfl. p.
1, 3.
None may usurp that royal prerogative of Heaven in prescribing infallibly in
matters questioned, but leave all to judge according to the Pandects of the
Divine Laws, because each Member of this Society is bound to take care of his
Soul, and of all things that tend thereto -- Chillinw. p. 59, 100.
In matters of Religion, when the question is, whether any man be a fit judge,
and chooser for himself, we suppose men honest, and such as understand the
difference between a moment and eternity. And then I suppose that all the
necessary points in Religion are plain and easy, and consequently every man in
this case to be a complete Judge for himself, because it concerns himself to
Judge aright, as much as eternal happiness is worth: and if through his own
default he Judge amiss, he alone shall suffer for it. To God's righteous
Judgment therefore I must finally remit you. At your own peril be it. This, of
the Socinian's Plea concerning the Scripture on his side.



And here first, from this way, lately taken by many Protestants, there seems
to be something necessarily consequent, viz. That instead of the Roman Church
her setting up some men, (the Church Governors,) as infallible in necessaries,
here is set up by them every Christian, if he will, both infallible in all
necessaries; and certain that he is so. For the Scripture they affirm most
clear in all necessaries to all using a due industry, and of this due industry
they also affirm, men may be certain, that they have used it; being not all,
possible, endeavor, but such a measure thereof as ordinary discretion, etc.
advises to. (See Mr. Chillingworth, p. 19.) And next, from this affirmed, that
every one may be so certain in all Fundamentals, it must be maintained also,
that their spiritual Guides, in a conjunction of them, nay more, every single
Prelate, or Presbyter, if they are not, yet may be, an infallible Guide to the
people in all Points necessary. And therefore M. Chillingworth freely speaks to
this purpose p. 140.
-- That these also may be both in Fundamentals, and also in some points
unfundamental, both certain of the infallibility of their Rule, and that they
do manifestly proceed according to it: and then, in what they are certain that
they cannot be mistaken, they may ((says he p. 118.140. and 166.
lawfully decide the controversies about them, and without rashness propose
their decrees, as certain, divine Revelations: and excommunicate or
anathematize any man persisting in the contrary error. And there seems reason
in such Anathema; because all others either do or may know the truth of the
same decrees by the same certain means, as these Governors do. Now then; what
certainty the Guides of a particular Church may have, I hope may also those of
the Church Catholic: and then, obedience being yielded to these by all their
inferiors, this will restore all things to their right course. All this follows
upon certainty, 1. That Scriptures are plain in Fundamentals; And 2. That due
industry is used to understand them. But, if you should deny that men can have
a certainty of their industry rightly used; then again, is all the fair
security these men promise their followers of their not erring in necessaries
quite vanished.

But now, to pass from this consequence, (to which I know not what can be
said), and to enquire a little after the true grounds of our certainty in any
thing, which is here so much pretended.

1. It cannot be denied, that he that does err in one thing, may be certain,
that he does not err in some other; because he may have sufficient ground and
means for his not erring in one thing, which he has not in another. Nor again
denied, that he, who possibly may err, yet in the same thing may be certain,
that he does not err, if not neglecting some means, which he knows will
certainly keep him from error.

Sense or Reason, in whatever Art or Science) one can never rightly assure
himself concerning his own knowledge, that he is certain of any thing for a
truth, which all, or most others of the same or better abilities for their
cognoscitive faculties, in all the same external means, or grounds of the
knowledge thereof, do pronounce an error. Not, as if truth were not so, though
all the World oppose it; nor had certain grounds to be proved so, though all
the World should deny them; but because the true knowledge of it, and them,
cannot possibly appear to one man's intellect, and, omnibus paribus, not to
others. Now for any disparity, as to defect, whether in the instrument, or in
the means of knowledge, there, where all or most differ from me, it seems a
strange pride not to imagine this defect in my self, rather than them;
especially, * whenas, all the grounds of my Science are communicated to them;
and * whenas, for my own mistakes, I cannot know exactly the extent of
supernatural delusions. I say, be this in what knowledge we please; in that of
sense, seeing, hearing, numbering, or in any of Mr. Chillingworth's former
instances mentioned, 7. So, I can never rationally assure my self of what I
see, when men, as well or better sighted, and all external circumstances for
any thing I know being the same, see no such matter. And this is the Rule also
proposed by learned Protestants to keep every Fanatic from pleading certainty
in his own conceit. See Archbishop Laud (. 33. Confid. 5. n. 1.) -- and Hooker
(Preface. 6.) their designing of a clear evidence, or demonstrative argument,
viz. Such as proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but
inwardly assent to it; and therefore, surely, proposed to many men, the mind of
the most cannot dissent from it.

Consequently, in the Scripture; abstracting from the inward operations of
God's Holy Spirit, two men delivering a contrary sense thereof:) I see not from
whence any certainty can arise to particular persons, for so many Texts or
places thereof, concerning the sense of which, the most, or the most learned,
or their Superiors, to whom also all their motives or arguments are
represented, do differ from them. From the plainness of the expression or
Grammatical construction of the words, such certainty cannot arise; unless no
term thereof can possibly be distinguished, or taken in a diverse or unliteral
sense; but, if it cannot be so taken, then all Expositors must needs agree in
one and the same sense. For Example, For the Literal and Grammatical sense,
what Text Plainer than [Hoc est corpus meum]? and yet Protestants understand it
otherwise. Very deficient therefore seems that answer of Mr. Chillingworth's
to F. Knot Chillingw. p. 307.
, urging, That the first Reformers ought to have doubted, whether their
opinions were certain, -- Which is to say (answers he), that they ought to have
doubted of the certainty of Scripture; which in formal and express terms,
contains many of their opinions [whenas the greater world of Catholics sees no
such matter.] Besides, as there is no term almost in any sentence, but is
capable of several acceptions; so, since no falsehood, no discord is in the
Scriptures, there is no sentence in it, however sounding for the expression,
but must be reconciled in its sense to all the rest; and for this a diligent
comparing of Texts is necessary, to attain the true meaning of many places,
that seem at the first sight most clear in what they say, but that there are
also other places as clear that seem to say the contrary: And some such places
they were, (and that in very necessary points too) of which St. Peter says;
That some wrested them to their own damnation 2 Pet. 3.16.
wrested them, because they wanted (not industry, but) learning; which the
unlearned (says he) wrest -- And indeed commonly the most ignorant have the
strongliest-conceited certainty for what they apprehend or believe, because
they know fewest reasons against it; whilst, by much study and comparing
several Revelations one with another, those come at last to doubt, or deny that
sense of some of them, which at the first they took for most certainly and
evidently true. Pardon this long Parenthesis.


CONFERENCE II. The Socinians Protestant-Plea, For his not holding any thing
contrary to the unanimous sense of the Catholic Church, so far as this can
justly oblige.
1st. THat an unanimous Consent of the whole Catholic Church in all ages, such
as the Protestants require for the proving of a point of faith to be necessary,
can never be showed, concerning this point of Consubstantiality.. 14.

And that the consent, to such a doctrine of the major part is no argument
sufficient, since the Protestants deny the like consent valid for several other
points 14.

2. That supposing an unanimous consent of the Church Catholic of all ages in
this point, yet from hence a Christian has no security of the truth thereof
according to Protestant Principles, if this point, (whether way soever held) be
a non-necessary; for that in such, it is said the whole Church may err.. 15.

3. That this Article's being in the affirmative, put in the Creed proves it
not (as to the affirmative) a Necessary.. 16.

1st. Because not originally in the Creed, but added by a Council; to which
Creed if one Council may add, so may another of equal authority in any age,
whatever restraint be made by a former Council.

2. Because several Articles of the latter Creeds are affirmed by Protestants
not necessary to be believed, but upon a previous conviction, that they are
divine revelation.. 16.

4. Lastly. That though the whole Church delivers for truth in any point, the
contrary to that he holds, he is not obliged to resign his judgment to here is,
except conditionally, and with this reservation, unless on the other side,
there appear evidence to him in God's Word. Now, of the evidence of Scripture
in this point on his side, that he has no doubt.. 17.

Conference. The Protestant, better thinking on it, will not leave the Socinian
thus at rest in this plerophory of his own sense of Scripture, but thus
proceeds.

Prot. Scriptures indeed are not so clear and perspicuous to every one
Stillingfl. p. 58, 59.
as that Art and subtilty may not be used to pervert the Catholic doctrine,
and to wrest the plain places of Scripture which deliver it, so far from their
proper meaning, that very few ordinary capacities may be able to clear
themselves of such mists as are cast before their eyes, even in the great
Articles of the Christian Faith. Therefore why do not you submit your judgment,
and assent to the sense of Scripture, in this point unanimously delivered by
the consent of the Catholic Church; which also is believed always unerrable in
any necessary point of faith, as this is?


Soc. First, If you can show me an unanimous consent of the Church Catholic of
all ages in this point, and that as held necessary, I will willingly submit to
it. But this you can never do according to such a proof thereof, as is
required, viz. Stillingfl. p. 72.
That all Catholic Writers agree in the belief of it; and none of them oppose
it: and agree also in the belief of the necessity of it to all Christians. *
That no later Writers and Fathers, in opposition of Heretics, or heats of
contention, judged then the Article so opposed to be more necessary than it was
judged before the contention. * That all Writers, that give an account of the
Faith of Christians, deliver it; And deliver it not as necessary to be believed
by such as might be convinced that it is of divine Revelation, but with a
necessity of its being explicitly believed by all See before Dis. 3.. 52.
. Now, no such unanimous consent can be pretended for the forementioned
Consubstantiality. For, (not to speak of the times next following the Council
of Nice, nor yet of several expressions in the Ancients, Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, that seem to favor our
opinion See Petavius in Epipha. Haer. 69.
: Nor, of those Eastern Bishops, which Arrius, in his Letter to Eusebius
Nicomed. Apud Epipha. Haer. 69 -- Theodor. l. 1 c. 5.
(numbers on his side,) Hilarious De Synod.
relates no less than Eighty Bishops before that Council, to have disallowed
the reception of the word (...); and in the Council also Seventeen, (some of
note) at first to have dissented from the rest.


Prot. small a party may by no means be adhered to by you, it being
inconsiderable in respect of the whole Body of the Catholic Church declaring
against you.


Soc. If the consent of the much major part is to be taken for the whole, then
the Reformed cannot maintain their dissent from the much more numerous body of
Christianity, that opposed their opinions, and sense of Scriptures at the
beginning of the Reformation, and do still oppose them. But not to stand upon
this, I would willingly conform to the unanimous, or most general judgment of
the Church Catholic; if I were secure that she could not be mistaken in it.
But Still. p. 59.
The sense of the Church Catholic is no infallible rule of interpreting
Scripture in all things which concern the Rule of Faith -- Stillingfl. p. 133.
Nor may she usurp that royal Prerogative of Heaven, in prescribing infallibly
in matters questioned.


Prot. You may be secure, that she never erreth in any point necessary.


Soc. But you tell me, that though she never err in necessaries, yet it follows
not, that she is an unerring Guide or Witness therein Stilling. p. 154, 152. --
Chillingw. p. 150. -- Dr. Hammond Defense of the Lord Falkl. p. 23.
or, that she must unerringly declare what points are necessary and what not;
and I must first learn, whether this point of Consubstantiality is to be
numbered among necessaries, before I can be assured, that the sense of the
Church Catholic errs not therein.


Prot. Stillingfl. p. 59.
It is a sufficient prescription against any thing which can be alleged out of
Scripture, that it ought not to be looked on as the true meaning of Scripture,
if it appear contrary to the sense of the Church Catholic from the beginning;
and therefore such doctrines may well be judged destructive to the rule of
Faith, which have been so unanimously condemned by the Church Catholic.


Soc. Why so?


Prot. Stilling. ib.
Because nothing contrary to the necessary Articles of Faith can be held by the
Catholic Church; for its very Being depends on its belief of necessaries to
salvation.


Soc. This last is most true; but then, if you mean to make your discourse
cohere, you must say, it is a sufficient prescription, etc. if it appear
contrary to the sense of the Catholic Church, viz. in a point necessary: for,
the reason you give carries, and secures you no further; and then that which
you say is no great matter: For, here we are still to seek, whether the point
we discourse of is in the affirmative such a necessary.


Prot.


Soc. From the beginning this Article was not in the Creed; and though it
should be granted that all points necessary are contained in the Creeds, yet
all in the Creeds are not thought points necessary: Stillingfl. p. 70, 71.
Necessary so, as to be believed by any before a clear conviction of the divine
Revelation thereof: which conviction I yet want.


Prot. non-necessaries; And 2ly. in what points are necessary, what not, her
judgment be not infallible, yet you have still great reason to submit your
judgment to hers; because, if it happen to be a point necessary, she is from
the divine Promise infallible and unerring in it; not so, you. 2. If not
necessary, and so both she and you therein liable to error, yet you much the
more; and she also in these things is appointed by God for your Teacher and
Guide.


Soc. Therefore I use the help and direction of my spiritual Guides; consider
their reasons; do not rashly depart from their judgment; but yet Dr. Fern
Considerations, p. 10.
The due submission of my assent, and belief to them is only to be conditional,
with reservation of evidence in God's Word. For in matter of Faith (as Dr.
Fern says) I cannot submit to any company of men by resignation of my
judgment and belief to receive for faith all that they shall define, for such
resignation stands excluded by the condition of the authority which is not
infallible; and by the condition of the matter, faith, of high concernment to
our own souls, and to be accounted for by our selves: who therefore stand bound
to make present, and diligent search for that evidence and demonstration from
God's Word, upon which we may finally and securely stay our bebelief -- And The
Case between the Churches, p. 40.
The Church determining matter of faith (says he) ought to manifest it out of
God's Word: and we may expect such proof, before we yield absolute assent of
belief. And so Dr. Stillingfleet says p. 133.
-- All men ought to be left to judge according to the Pandects of the divine
Laws, because each member of this Society is bound to take care of his Soul,
and of all things that tend thereto. Now I for my part see no solid ground out
of the Scripture for Consubstantiality, but rather for the contrary; which
several of our Writers have made appear to the world. And therefore unless the
Church were either infallible in all she determined, or at least in
distinguishing those necessaries wherein she cannot err from the rest, it seems
no way justifiable, that she puts this her definition into the Creed; she, as I
conceive, thus requiring from all an absolute consent thereto; and not only (as
some Still. p. 70.
would persuade me) a conditional for some of them, viz. whenever I shall be
clearly convinced, that such point is of divine Revelation.


CONFERENCE III. His Plea, for his not holding any thing contrary to the
Definitions of lawful General Councils, the just conditions thereof observed.
THat he conceives he ows no obedience to the Council of Nice.

1. Because this cannot be proved to have been a lawful General Council with so
much certainty, as is necessary for the ground of his Faith, as appears by
those many questions mentioned by Mr. Chillingworth, Stillingfleet, and other
Protestants, wherein he must first be satisfied, concerning it.

2. Because, though it were a General Council, yet it might err even in
necessaries, if it were not universally accepted; as he can show it was not.

3. That, though yielded to be generally accepted, it might err still in
non-necessaries; and that Protestants cannot prove this point to be otherwise.

4. That the Leaders of this Council were plainly a party contesting this, for
many years before, with the other side condemned by them; and were Judges in
their own cause.

5. All these exceptions cancelled, and Obedience granted due to this Council;
yet, that so, there is due to it not that of assent, but only of silence.. 19.

6. But yet not that of silence neither from him; considering his present
persuasion, that indeed the affirmative in this point is an error manifest and
intolerable: concerning which matter his party having long complained to their
Superiors, and produced sufficient evidence; yet these have proceeded to no
redress of it.. 20.

7. But yet that he will submit to the Judgment of a future Council, if it,
rightly considering the reasons of his tenent, decree that which is according
to God's Word, and he be convinced thereof,. 22.

3. PRot. But do you not consider by what persons this Article was long ago
inserted into the Creed: first General, and the most venerable Assembly of the
Fathers of the Church that has been convened since the Apostles times;
celebrated under the first Christian Emperor by a perfect Representative of the
Catholic Church; and by such persons, as came very much purified out of the
newly-quenched fire of the greatest persecution that the Church has suffered,
that under Dioclesian; will not you then at least submit your judgment to the
Decree of this great and holy Council; one and the first of those four which
St. Gregory said he received with the same reverence, as the four Gospels?

Soc. No, And for this I shall give you in brief many reasons, as I conceive
satisfactory. For 1. Had I an obligation of submission of judgment to lawful
General Councils, you cannot prove this such a one, and those the decrees
thereof which are now extant, with such a certainty as is necessary to build
thereon an Article of my Faith. For to prove this, you must satisfy me in all
those things questioned concerning General Councils * by M. Chillingworth, p.
94. * By Dr. Pierce in his answer to Mr. Cressy, p. 18. etc. * By Mr. Whitby
from p. 428. to p. 433. [where he concludes: 1. That we never had a General
Council. 2. That a General Council is a thing impossible] * By Mr.
Stillingfleet p. 508. etc. -- 495. 119. 123. etc. Who also, against the being
of such a General Council as is the Representative of the whole Church
Catholic, thus disputes p. 515, 516
-- The representation of a Church (says he) by a General Council, is a thing
not so evident, from whence it should come: for if such representative of the
whole Church there be, it must either be so by some formal act of the Church,
or by a tacit consent. It could not be by any formal act of the Church; for
then there must be some such act of the universal Church preceding the being of
any General Council, by which they receive their Commission to appear in behalf
of the universal Church. Now that the universal Church did ever agree in any
such act is utterly impossible to be demonstrated, either that it could be, or
that it was. But if it be said, that such a formal act is not necessary, but
the tacit consent of the whole Church is sufficient for it; then such a
consent of the Church must be made evident, by which they did devolve over the
power of the whole Church to such a Representative. And all these must consent
in that act whose power the Council pretends to have; of which no footsteps
appear -- The utmost then (says he) that can be supposed in this case, is,
that the parts of the Church may voluntarily consent to accept of the decrees
of such a Council; and by that voluntary act, or by the supreme authority
enjoining it, such decrees may become obligatory. Thus he. But I suppose its
Decrees obligatory then only to those parts of the Church that voluntarily
consent to accept of them, as the Arians did not to receive the Decrees of
Nice. Lastly, by * Bishop Tailor in the 2d. Part of his Disswasive, l. 1.. 1.
p. 29. etc. to the end of the Section. Where p. 31. he says concerning this of
Nice, that makes for you, compared with that of Ariminum, which makes for us --
That if a Catholic producing the Nicene Council be rencountred by an Arian
producing the Council of Ariminum which was far more numerous, here are aquilis
aquilae and pila minantia pilis: but who shall prevail? If a General Council be
the rule and guide, they will both prevail, that is, neither. And it ought not
to be said by the Catholic; Yea, but our Council determined for the truth; but
yours for error: For, the Arian will say so too. But, whether they do or no,
yet it is plain that they may both say so: and if they do, then we do not find
the truth out by the conduct and decision of a General Council; but we approve
this General, because upon other accounts we believe that what is there defined
is true. And therefore S. Austin's way here is best, Neque ego Nicaenum
Concilium, neque tu Ariminense:, etc. both sides pretend to General Councils:
that which both equally pretend to, will help neither; therefore let us go to
Scripture. And p. 32. -- What is the reason (says he of Councils in General)
that some Councils are partly condemned: the Council of Sardis, that in Trullo,
those of Frankford, Constance, and Basil? but that every man and every Church
accepts the Councils as far as they please, and no further? The Greeks receive
but seven General Councils, the Lutherans six, the Eutychians three, Nestorians
two, etc. -- Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata. It is as every one likes. I
spare to tell you what he says, p. 26. -- That in the first General Council of
Jerusalem, which was the first precedent, and ought to be the true measure of
the rest, the Apostles were the Presidents, and the Presbyters Assistants, but
the Church [viz. the converted brethren and the Laity, see p. 36.] was the Body
of the Council, and were Parties in the Decree, quoting Acts 15.22, 23. and
that we can have no other warrant of an authentic Council than this. 2. Though
it be showed a lawful General Council, representing the whole Church (as it
ought, if such) yet what obligation can there lie upon me of consenting to it?
since it may err even in Fundamentals, if it be not universally accepted, as
indeed this Council was not, for several Bishops there were, that were
dissenters in the Council, and many more afterward. See before,. 13.
3. Were it universally accepted; yet unless you can show me by some means,
that this point wherein I differ from its judgment, is a fundamental or
necessary point to salvation, both it, and the Catholic Church also that
accepts it may err therein. 4. The judgment of this Council seems justly
declinable also on this account. That whereas the Guides of the Church, many
years before this Council were divided in their opinion, Alexander Patriarch of
Alexandria, and Hosius a Favorite of the Emperor's heading one party; and Arius
and the Bishops adhering to him, whom I mentioned formerly. 13.
, heading another, and whereas afterward, in the prosecution of this
difference, both the foresaid Alexander in one Provincial Council held in
Egypt, and Hosius sent thither by the Emperor in another, had there condemned
Arius, and his Confederates; yet so it was ordered, that in this General
Council assembled for an equal hearing and decision of this Controversy of
these two professed Enemies to the other party, the one (Hosius) was appointed
to sit as President of this Council; and the other (Alexander) held in it the
next place to him; and poor Arius excluded; and the Bishops who favored him in
the Council, though at first freely declaring their dissent, yet at last
overawed to a subscription; as also was Arius himself chiefly by the Emperor
Constantine's overhearing authority; who, before somewhat indifferent in the
contest, yet upon Arius his undutiful and too peremptory Letters, had some
years before taken great offense at him; and also (as he was very eloquent)
publicly written against him See Baronius. A. D. 318, 319.
. Which overawing hence appears, in that the same Bishops that were adherents
to Arius, when, this Emperor being deceased, Constantius his Son countenanced
their Cause, returned, I say not to their former Opinion only, but to their
public profession of it. By which we may guess, that if the Controversy had
at that time been committed to equal and disengaged Judges, and such as had not
formerly showed themselves a Party; or, if the Oriental Bishops, without any
fear of the Prince upon them, might have given free Votes; and the Arian Cause
had then had a Constantius instead of a Constantine, (things wherein
Protestants well understand me, because on the same Grounds they have rejected
the Council of Trent) we may presume then the issue would have been under
Constantine the same that it was under his Successor, I say before Judges equal
and indifferent, and not such as were before a Party, though this Party should
be compounded of the chief Superior Prelates of the Church, For, as Dr.
Stillingfleet urges,. 478.
-- We must either absolutely, and roundly assert, that it is impossible that
the Superiors in the Church may be guilty of any error or corruption; or, that
if they be, they must never be called to an account for it; or else, that it
may be just, in some Cases, to except against them as Parties: And if in some
Cases, then the Question comes to this, Whether the present [he speaks of
Idolatry, I of Consubstantiality] be some of these Cases or no? And here if we
make those Superiors Judges again, what we granted before comes to nothing.

Prot. No Person that is appointed by our Lord to be a Judge in any
Controversy (as those Bishops you have mentioned were in the Cause of Arius)
can rightly or properly be said to be, on that Side for which he gives
Sentence, a Party. Nor does their giving Sentence once against any Side,
prejudice them (as supposed Enemies, or Opposites, or Interessed) from sitting
on the Bench, as often as need requires, to pass it again, alone, or with others.
But, if every one may be afterward called an Anti-party, who once declares
himself of a contrary Judgment, I perceive Mr. Chillingworth's Observation is
right, p. 60.
That, in Controversies in Religion, it is in a manner impossible to be
avoided, but the Judge must be a Party. I add also, That in Matters of
Religion, where every Man is concerned, and in great Controversies, especially
where is any division of Communion, all, both Laity and Clergy, speedily own,
and range themselves on one side or other; Clergy interessing themselves for
the necessary direction of their Subjects; Laity, in obedience to their
Superiors; neither can such a Judge be nominated, that is not to one side
suspected. So that, in Controversies of Religion, we must deny any Judge (as he
did Ib.. 10.
); or this Plea, That the ordinary Judge, that is assigned us, is a Party, must
not be easily hearkened to. As for that you urge out of Bishop Tailor,
concerning the Laity in the first Council at Jerusalem (the Pattern to all
following) being Parties in the Decree, I suppose it is meant no further, than
that also these may assist in the Council, and give there a consentient, or
attesting, but not a decisive Vote: which neither did the Emperors claim, when
they presided therein. See Dr. Field of the Church, p. 646.

Soc. But I have not yet said all. For Fifthly, Were there none of the
forenamed defects in it, Whitby, p. 15. Stillingfleet, p. 506, 537.
No Authority on Earth can oblige to internal assent in matters of Faith, or to
any farther Obedience than that of Silence.

Prot. Yes, you stand obliged to yield a conditional assent, at least to the
Definitions of these highest Courts, i. e. unless you can bring evident
Scripture, or Demonstration against them.

Soc. I do not think Protestant Divines agree in this. I find indeed the
Archbishop. 32. n. 5. and 33. consid. 5. n. 1.
requiring Evidence and Demonstration, for Inferiors contradicting, or
publishing their dissent from the Councils Decrees, but not requiring thus much
for their denial of assent. And I am told, Dr. Fern Case between the Churches,
p. 48, 49. and Division of Churches, p. 45.
-- That in matters proposed by my Superiors, as God's Word, and of Faith, I am
not tied to believe it such, till they manifest it to me to be so; and not that
I am to believe it such, unless I can manifest it to be contrary, because my
Faith can rest on no Humane Authority, but only on God's Word, and Divine
Revelation. And Dr. Field says, -- p. 666.
It is not necessary expressly to believe whatsoever the Council has concluded,
though it be true, unless by some other means it appear unto us to be true, and
we be convinced of it in some other sort than by the bare Determination of the
Council. Till I am convinced then of my Error, the Obedience of Silence is the
most that can be required of me.

manifestly erred; and that, in an error of such high consequence (concerning
the unity of the most high God) as is no way to be tolerated; and I want not
evident Scriptures, and many other unanswerable Demonstrations, to show it did
so; and therefore being admitted into the honorable Function of the Ministry,
I conceive I have a lawful Commission from an higher Authority, to publish this
great Truth of God, and to contradict the Councils Decree.

Prot. But you may easily mistake that for evident Scripture, and those for
Demonstrations, that are not. Concerning which you know what the Archbishop and
Mr. Hooker say A.B. Laud 245.
-- That they are such, as proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot
choose but inwardly assent to them Id. p. 227.
. You ought therefore first to propose these to your Superiors, or to the
Church, desiring a redress of such Error by her calling another Council. And,
if these Superiors, acquainted therewith, dislike your Demonstrations, which
the Definition says, if they be right ones, they must be by all, and therefore
by them, assented to, methinks, (though this is not said by the Archbishop) in
humility you ought also to suspect these Demonstrations, and remain in silence
at least, and no further trouble the Church.

Soc. May therefore no particular Person, or Church, proceed to a Reformation
of a former Doctrine, if these Superiors, first complained to, declare the
Grounds of such Persons or Churches for it, not sufficient?

Prot. I must not say so. But if they neglect (as they may) to consider their
just Reasons so diligently as they ought, and to call a Council for the
Correcting of such Error according to the weight of these Reasons, then here is
place for Inferiors to proceed to a reformation of such Error without them.

Soc. And who then shall judge, whether the Reasons pretended are defective, or
rather the present Church negligent in considering them?

Prot. Here, I confess, to make the Superiors Judges of this, is to cast the
Plaintiff before that any Council shall hear his Grievance, these Superiors,
whose Faith appears to adhere to the former Council, being only Judges in their
own Cause; and so the liberty of complaining will come to nothing Stillingfl.
p. 479, 292.
.

Soc. The Inferiors then, that complain, I suppose are to judge of this. To
proceed then. To these Superiors, in many diligent Writings, we have proposed,
as we think, many unanswerable Scriptures, and Reasons much advanced beyond
those represented by our Party to the former Nicene Council (and therefore from
which Evidences of ours we have just cause to hope from a future Council a
contrary Sentence); and finding no redress by their calling another Council for
a reviewing this Point, we cannot but conceive it as lawful for a Socinian
Church, Pastor, or Bishop, to reform for themselves, and the Souls committed to
them, in an Error appearing to them manifest and intolerable, as for the
Protestants, or for Dr. Luther, to have done the same for Transubstantiation,
Sacrifice of the Mass, and other Points that have been concluded, against the
Truth, by several former Councils.

Prot. But such were not lawful General Councils, as that of Nice was.

Soc. Whatever these Councils were, this much matters not, as to a reformation
from them: for, had they been lawfully General, yet Protestants hold See
before, Disc. 3.
, these not universally accepted may err even in Fundamentals; or, when so
accepted, yet may err in Non-fundamentals; Errors manifest, and intolerable,
34, etc.
and so may be appealed from to future; and those not called, their Error
presently rectified by such Parts of Christianity as discern it; and also S.
Austin De Baptismo, l. 2. c. 3.
is frequently quoted by them, saying -- That past General Councils erring, may
be corrected by other Councils following.

Prot. But I pray you consider, if that famous Council of Nice has so erred,
another Council called, may it also not err, notwithstanding your Evidences
proposed to it? For, though perhaps some new demonstrative Proofs you may
pretend from several Texts more accurately compared and explained; yet you will
not deny this sufficient Evidence to have been extant for that most Learned
Council to have seen the Truth, having then the same entire Rule of Faith as
you now, the Scriptures, (in which, you say, your clearest Evidences lie) for
their direction. When a future Council (then) is assembled, and has heard your
Plea, will you assent to it, and acquiesce in the Judgment thereof?

Soc. Yes, interposing the Protestant-Conditions of Assent, If its Decree be
according to God's Word, and we convinced thereof.

Prot. Why, such a submission of Judgment and Assent I suppose you will
presently yield to me in any thing, whereof you are convinced by me; may this
future Council then challenge no further Duty from you? why then should the
Church be troubled to call it?

Soc. Stillingfl. p. 542.
Though this future Council also should err, yet it may afford Remedy against
Inconveniences; and one great Inconvenience being, Breaking the Church's Peace;
this is remedied by its Authority, if I only yield the Obedience of Silence
thereto.

Prot. But if your Obedience oblige not to silence concerning Councils past,
because of your new Evidences, neither will it to a future, if you think it
also does err; and either these Evidences remain still unsatisfied, or these
satisfied, yet some other new ones appear to call for a new Consideration.

Soc. Stillingfl. ibid.
Because it may also err, it follows not it must err; and it is probable that
it shall not err, when the former Error is thus discovered, and if the Council
proceed lawfully, be not overawed, etc. Id. p. 526.
But however, if I ought upon this review to be restrained to silence, yet, I
not convinced of the truth of its Decree, this Silence is the uttermost that
any future Council, after its rejecting my Reasons, can justly exact of me; and
not belief, or assent, at all: It may not oblige me, that I should relinquish
that you call Socinianism at all, but that, not divulge it; whereas now by the
Acts of former Councils (I would gladly know upon what rational ground) an
Anathema is pronounced against me, if I do not believe the contrary, and I am
declared to stand guilty of Heresy merely for retaining this Opinion; which
retaining it is called obstinacy and contumacy in me, after the Councils
contrary Definition.

CONFERENCE IV. His Plea, for his not being guilty of Heresy.
THat he cannot rightly according to Protestant Principles, be accused as
guilty of Heresy, for several reasons.

1. Because Protestants holding Heresy to be an obstinate defense of some
error against a fundamental, he thinks from hence his tenent freed from being
an Heresy, as long as in silence he retains it, unless he engage further, to a
public pertinacious maintaining thereof.. 23.

2. Fundamentals varying according to particular persons, and sufficient
proposal; none can conclude this point in the affirmative, to be, as to him, a
fundamental, or, of the truth of which he has had a sufficient proposal.

3. That a lawful General Council's declaring some point Heresy, does not
necessarily argue that it is so; because they may err in Fundamentals; or at
least in distinguishing them from other points.. 26.

4. That he can have no autocatacrisie or obstinacy in a dissenting from their
Definitions, till he is either actually convinced, or at least has had a
sufficient proposal either of the truth of such point defined: that such
Councils have authority to require submission, of judgment, and assent to their
Definitions: of which conviction or sufficient proposal (that varies much,
according to the differing conditions of several persons) as to himself, none
can judge save himself; and, consequently, neither can they judge of his guilt
of Heresy. Ib.

PRot. You know that all Heretics are most justly anathematized, and cut off
from being any longer Members of the Catholic Church, and so do remain
excluded also from Salvation. Now this Tenent of yours has always been
esteemed by the Church of God a most pernicious Heresy.

Soc. I confess Heresy a most grievous Crime, dread and abhor it, and trust I
am most free from such a guilt; and from this I have many ways of clearing my
self. For Heresy (as Mr. Chillingworth defines it) p. 271.
being not an erring, but an obstinate defense of an Error; not of any Error,
but of one against a necessary or fundamental Article of the Christian Faith.
First, Though this which I hold should be an error, and that against a
Fundamental, yet my silence practiced therein, can never be called an obstinate
defense thereof, and therefore not my tenent an Heresy. 2. Since Fundamentals
vary according to particular persons, and (as Mr. Chillingworth says p. 134.
) -- N Catalogue thereof, that can be given, can universally serve for all men;
God requiring more of them, to whom he gives more, and less of them, to whom he
gives less; -- And that may be sufficiently declared to one (all things
considered) which (all things considered) is not to another sufficiently
declared: and variety of circumstances makes it as impossible to set down an
exact Catalogue of Fundamentals, as to make a Coat to fit the Moon in all her
changes: And (as Mr. Stillingfleet follows him p. 98.99.
) since the measure of Fundamentals depends on the sufficiency of the
proposition; and none can assign what number of things are sufficiently
propounded to the belief of all persons, or set down the exact bounds, as to
all individuals, when their ignorance is inexcusable, and when not; or tell
what is the measure of their capacity; what allowance God makes for the
prejudice of Education, etc. Hence I conceive my self free from Heresy, in
this my opinion, on this score also; because though the contrary be to some
others a Fundamental truth, and to be explicitly believed by them; yet to me,
as not having any sufficient proposal, or conviction thereof, but rather of the
contrary, it is no Fundamental, and consequently, my tenent opposing it, if an
error, yet no Heresy.

Prot. Do not deceive your self; for though according to different revelations,
to those that were without Law,. 24.
or those under the Law, or those under the Gospel; Fundamentals generally
spoken of, might be more to some than others; yet to all those who know and
embrace the Gospel, we say Chillingw. p. 92.
; all Fundamentals are therein clearly proposed to all reasonable men, even the
unlearned; and therefore the erring therein, to all such, cannot but be
obstinate and Heretical.

Soc. Unless you mean only this, That all Fundamentals, ( i.e. so many as are
required of any one) are clear to him in Scripture; but not all the same
Fundamentals, there clear to every one; but to some more of them, to some
fewer; I see not how this last said, accords with that said before by the same
person. But if you mean thus, then Consubstantiality, (the point we talk of)
may be a Fundamental to you, and clear in Scripture, but also not clear to me
in Scripture, and so no Fundamental, and hence I think my self safe. For, --
Chillingw. p. 367.
I believing all that is clear to me in Scripture, must needs believe all
Fundamentals; and so I cannot incurr Heresy, which is opposite to some
fundamental -- Ib. 101.
The Scripture sufficiently informing me what is the Faith, must of necessity
also teach me what is Heresy: That which is straight will plainly teach us
what is crooked; and one contrary cannot but manifest the other.

Prot. I pray you consider a little better what you said last; for since
Heresy as you grant it, is an obstinate defense of error only against some
necessary point of Faith; and all truth delivered in Scripture is not such;
unless you can also distinguish, in Scripture, these points of necessary Faith
from others, you can have no certain knowledge of Heresy; and the believing
all that is delivered in Scripture, though it may preserve you from incurring
Heresy, yet cannot direct you at all for knowing or discerning Heresy, or an
error against a fundamental or a necessary point of Faith, from other simple
and less dangerous errors, that are not so: nor, by this can you ever know what
errors are Heresies, what not; and so after all your confidence, if by your
neglect you happen not to believe some Scriptures in their true sense, you can
have no security in your Fundamental, or necessary Faith; or of your not
incurring Heresy. Neither, Secondly, according to your discourse, has the
Church any means to know any one to be an Heretic; because she can never know
the just latitude of his fundamentals. And so Heresy will be a grievous sin
indeed; but walking under such a vizard of non-sufficient proposal, as the
Ecclesiastical Superiors cannot discover or punish it. Therefore to avoid such
confusion in the Christian Faith, there has been always acknowledged in the
Church some authority for declaring Heresy; and it may seem conviction enough
to you, that her most General Councils have defined the contrary position to
what you maintain; and received it for a fundamental. Of which Ecclesiastical
Authority for declaring Heresy, thus Dr. Potter, p. 97.
-- The Catholic Church is careful to ground all her declarations in matters
of Faith, upon the divine authority of Gods written word. And therefore
whosoever wilfully opposes a judgment so well grounded, is justly esteemed an
Heretic; not properly because he disobeys the Church; but because he yields
not to Scripture suffientntly propounded, or cleared unto him [i. e. by the
Church.] Where the Doctor seems to grant these two things: That all that the
Catholic Church declares against Heresy is grounded upon the Scripture; and
that all such as oppose her judgment are Heretics: but only he adds, that they
are not Heretics properly, or formally for this opposing the Church, but for
opposing the Scriptures. Whilst therefore the formalis ratio of Heresy is
disputed, that all such are Heretics seems granted. And the same Dr. elsewhere
concludes thus, p. 132.
-- The mistaker will never prove, that we oppose any Declaration of the
Catholic Church, [he means such a Church as makes Declarations, and that must
be in her Councils] -- And therefore he does unjustly charge us with Heresy.
And again, he says, p. 103.
-- Whatsoever opinion these ancient writers [S. Austin, Epiphanius and others]
conceived to be contrary to the common or approved opinion of Christians, that
they called an Heresy, because it differed from the received opinion; not
because it opposed any formal Definition of the Church: where, in saying, not
because it opposed any Definition, he means, not only because. For, whilst
that, which differed from the received opinion of the Church, was accounted an
Heresy by them, that, which differed from a formal definition of the Church,
was so much more. Something I find also for your better information, in the
Learned Dr. Hammond, Titus 3.11.
commenting on that notable Text in Titus -- A man that is an Heretic after
the first and second admonition, reject, [a Text implying contrary to your
discourse, Heresy discoverable, and censurable by the Church,] where he
explains (...) self-condemned; not to signify a man's public accusing or
condemning his own doctrines or practices; for that condemnation would rather
be a motive to free one from the Church's Censures. Nor 2ly to denote one that
offends against Conscience, and though he knows he be in the wrong, yet holds
out in opposition to the Church; for so, none but Hypocrites would be
Heretics; and he that stood against the Doctrine of Christ and his Church in
the purest times [you may guess whom he means] should not be an Heretic: and
so no Heretic could possibly be admonished or censured by the Church, for no
man would acknowledge of himself, that what he did was by him done against his
own Conscience, [the plea which you also make here for your self.] But to be an
expression of his separation from, and disobedience to the Church; and so an
evidence of the (...) his being perverted, and sinning wilfully, and without
excuse. [See more Protestants cited to this purpose, Disc. 3.. 19. What say you
to this?

Soc. Protestant Principles, [ See D. Potter, p. 165, 167. -- D. Hammond of
Heresy,. 7. n. --. 9. n. 8. Def. of L. Falkl. c. 1. p. 23.] and to their own
positions elsewhere; neither, surely, will Protestants tie themselves to this
measure and trial of autocatacrisie. For, since they say; That lawful General
Councils may err in Fundamentals; these Councils may also define, or declare
something Heresy that is not against a Fundamental; and if so, I, though in
this selfconvinced, that such is their Definition, yet am most free from
Heresy in my not assenting to it, or (if they err intollerably) in opposing
it. Again, since Protestants say, Councils may err in distinguishing
Fundamentals, these Councils may err also in discerning Heresy, which is an
error against a Fundamental, from other errors that are against
non-Fundamentals. Again: Whilst I cannot distinguish Fundamentals in their
Definitions, thus no Definition of a General Council may be receded from by me,
for fear of my incurring Heresy; a consequence which Protestants allow not.
Again: Since Protestants affirm all Fundamentals plain in Scripture, why should
they place autocatacrisie, or self-conviction, in respect of the Declaration of
the Church rather than of the Scripture? But, to requite your former
quotations, I will show in plainer Language the stating of Protestant Divines
concerning Autocatacrisie as to the Definitions of the Church, under which my
opinion also finds sufficient shelter; We have no assurance at all (says
Bishop Bramhall Reply to Chalced. p. 105.
that all General Councils were, and always shall be so prudently managed, and
their proceedings always so orderly and upright, that we dare make all their
sentences a sufficient conviction of all Christians, which they are bound to
believe under pain of damnation. [I add, or under pain of Heresie] -- And Ib.
p. 102. -- I acknowledge (says he) that a General Council, may make that
revealed truth necessary to be believed by a Christian as a point of Faith,
which formerly was not necessary to be believed; that is, whenever the
reasons and grounds of truth produced by the Council, or the authority of the
Council (which is, and always ought to be very great with all sober discreet
Christians) do convince a man in his Conscience of the truth of the Councils
Definitions: [which truth I am as yet not convinced of, neither from the
reasons nor authority of the Council of Nice. Or, if you had rather have it out
of Dr. Potter -- It is not resisting (says he p. 128.
) the voice definitive sentence, which makes an Heretic; but an obstinate
standing out against evident Scripture sufficiently cleared unto him. And the
Scripture may then be said to be sufficiently cleared when it is so opened,
that a good and teachable mind (loving and seeking truth) [my Conscience
convinces me not, but that such I am] cannot gainsay it. -- Again p. 129.
-- It is possible (says he) that the sentence of a Council or Church may be
erroneous, either because the opinion condemned is no Heresy or error against
the Faith, in it self considered; or because the party so condemned is not
sufficiently convinced in his understanding (not clouded with prejudice,
ambition, vainglory, or the like passion) that it is an error [one of these I
account my self.] Or out of Dr. Hammond, Heresy, p. 114.
-- It must be lawful for the Church of God, [any Church, or any Christian,
upon the Doctors reason,] as well as for the Bishop of Rome, to enquire whether
the Decrees of an Universal Council have been agreeable to Apostolical
Tradition or no; and if they be found otherwise, to eject them out, or not to
receive them into their belief. And then still it is the matter of the Decrees,
and the Apostolicalness of them, and the force of the testification, whereby
they are approved and acknowledged to be such, which gives the authority to the
Council; and nothing else is sufficient, where that is not to be found. And
elsewhere he both denies in General an Infallibility of Councils, and grounds
the Reverence due to the Four first Councils on their setting down and
convincing the truth of their Doctrine out of the Scripture words understood
with piety, -- and the fetching their Definitions regularly from the sense
thereof, which the General Churches had received down from the Apostles. Of
Heresy p. 96.
[Upon which follows, that, in such case, where a Lawful General Council does
not so, (as possibly it may, and Inferiors are to consider for themselves,
whether it does not) there may be no Heretical Autocatacrisie in a dissent from
it, nor this dissent an evidence of the (...) and (...) his being perverted and
sinning wilfully, and without excuse.] -- Lastly, thus Doctor Stillingfleet
concerning Heresy Rat. Account. p. 73.
-- The formal reason of Heresy is denying something supposed to be of divine
Revelation; and therefore, 2ly. None can reasonably be accused of Heresy, but
such as have sufficient reason to believe, that that which they deny is
revealed by God. And therefore, 3ly. None can be guilty of Heresy for denying
any thing declared by the Church; unless they have sufficient reason to
believe, that whatever is declared by the Church is revealed by God; and
therefore the Church's Definition cannot make any Heretics, but such as have
reason to believe, that she cannot err in her Definitions. From hence also he
gathers, That Protestants are in less danger of Heresy than Papists, till
these give them more sufficient reasons to prove, that whatever the Church
declares, is certainly revealed by God. Thus he. Now such sufficient proving
reasons as Protestants plead, that Papists have not yet given them concerning
this matter of Church Authority, I allege, that neither have they nor others
given me. To be self-condemned, therefore, in my dissent from the definition of
the Council of Nice, I must first have sufficient reason proposed to me to
believe, (and so remain self-condemned and Heretical in disbelieving it) this
point; viz. That the Church, or her Council, has power to define matters of
Faith in such manner, as to require my assent thereto. Which so long as I find
no sufficient reason to believe, I suppose I am freed (without obstinacy or
Heresy, or being therein self-condemned,) from yielding assent to any
particular matter of Faith, which the Church defines. And, had I sufficient
reason proposed to me for believing this point, yet so long as I am not
actually convinced thereof, I become only guilty of a fault of ignorance, not
obstinacy, or autocatacrisie, or Heresy; for, if I am self-condemned, or
guilty of obstinacy in disbelieving the foresaid points, Stillingfl. p. 99.
Then I become so, either by the Church's definition of this point, or without
it. By reason of the Church's definition of this it cannot be; for this very
power of defining is the thing in question, and therefore cannot be cleared to
me by the Church's defining it Stillingfl. p. 74.
: and thus, That thing is proposed to me in the definition to be believed,
which must be supposed to be believed by me already, before such proposal or
definition, or else the definition is not necessary to be believed. Ib. p. 99.
Nor without, or before such definition, can I have an autocatacrisie; because
this autocatacrisie, you say with Dr. Hammond, arises from my disobedience to
the Church.

Prot. Methinks, you make the same plea for your self in this matter, as if
one, that is questioned for not obeying the divine precepts, or not believing
the divine Revelations delivered in Scripture, should think to excuse himself
by this answer; that indeed he does not believe the Scripture to be God's Word;
and therefore he conceives, that he cannot reasonably be required to believe
that which is contained therein. And, as such a person has as much reason
(though this, not from the Scripture, yet from Apostolical Tradition) to
believe that Scripture is Gods Word, as to believe what is written in it; so
have you, though not from the Nicene Council defining it, yet from Scripture
and Tradition manifesting it, as much reason to believe its authority of
defining, as what is defined. It Is true indeed; that had you not sufficient
proposal, or sufficient reason to know this your duty of Assent to this
definition of the Council of Nice, you were faultless in it; but herein lies
your danger, that from finding a non actual conviction of the truth, within,
(hindered there by I know not what supine negligence, or strong self-conceit,
etc.) you gather a non-sufficient proposal, without.

Soc. It remains then to enquire, who shall judge concerning this sufficient
proposal, or sufficient reason, which I am said to have, to believe what the
Nicene Council, or the Church has declared in this point. Stillingfl. p. 73.
Whether the Church's judgment is to be taken by me in this, or my own made use
of; If her judgment, the ground of my belief and of Heresy lies still in the
Church's definition; and thus it will be all one in effect, whether I believe
what she declares, without sufficient reason; or learn this of her, when there
is sufficient reason to believe so. It must be then, my own judgment, I am to
be directed by in this matter See Still. p. 479.
: and if so, then it is to be presumed, that God does both afford me some means
not to be mistaken therein; and also some certain knowledge when I do use this
means aright: (for, without these two I can have no security in my own judgment
in a matter of so high concernment, as Heresy and fundamental Faith is.) Now
this means, in this matter, I presume I have daily used, in that I find my
Conscience, after much examination, therein to acquit me, unless you can
prescribe me some other surer evidence, without sending me back again to the
authority of the Church.

Prot. 1. Whilst your discovery of your tenent to be an Heresy depends on your
having sufficient reason to believe it is so. And 2. The judgment of your
having, or not having sufficient reason to believe this, is left to your self,
the Church has no means to know you or any other to be an Heretic, till they
declare themselves to be so. And thus, in striving to free your self from
Heresy, you have freed all mankind from it, (as to any external discovery and
convincement thereof) and cancelled such a sin; unless we can find one, that
will confess himself to maintain a thing against his own Conscience.

Soc. If I, so do the Protestants; for, they also hold none guilty of Heresy,
for denying any thing declared by the Church, unless they have reason to
believe, that whatever is declared by the Church is revealed by God; and of
this sufficient reason they make not the Church or Superiors, but themselves,
the Judge.

CONFERENCE V. His Plea, for his not being guilty of Schism.
1. THat the Socinian Churches have not forsaken the whole Church Catholic, or
the external Communion of it: but only left one part of it that was corrupted;
and reformed another part, (i.e.) themselves. Or, that he, and the Socinian
Churches, being a part of the Catholic, they have not separated from the
whole, because not from themselves.. 28.

2. That their separation being for an error unjustly imposed upon them as a
condition of Communion, the Schism is not theirs, who made the separation; but
theirs who caused it.. 29.

Besides that, whatever the truth of things be; yet so long as they are
required by any Church to profess they believe, what they do not, their
separation cannot be said causless, and so Schism.. 32.

3. That though he and his party had forsaken the external Communion of all
other Churches, yet not the internal; in which they remain still united to
them: both in that internal Communion of Charity, in not condemning all other
Churches as non-Catholick; and in that of Faith, in all Essentials and
Fundamentals, and in all such points, wherein the Unity of the Church Catholic
consists.. 30.

4. That the doctrine of Consubstantiality for which they departed, is denied by
them to be any Fundamental; nor can the Churches, from which they depart for
it, be a competent Judge against them, that it is so.. 34.

5. That, though they are separaters from the Roman, yet not from the Reformed
Churches, which Churches leave men to the liberty of their own judgment; nor
require any internal assent to their doctrins (in which thing these blame the
tyranny of the Roman Church) save only conditional, if any be convinced of the
truth thereof; or, not convinced of the contrary.. 35.

6. In fine, that for enjoying and continuing in the Protestant Communion he
makes as full a profession of conformity to her Doctrins as Mr. Chillingworth
has done in several places of his book, which yet was accepted as sufficient..
41.

5. PRot. I have yet one thing more, about which to question you. Heresy in
opposing the public judgment, and definition of the Catholic Church in that
most reverend Council of Nice, upon pretense that you have not had a convincing
Proposal, that this Definition was therein made according to God's Word, or the
Scriptures; yet, how will you clear your self, or your Socinian Congregations
of Schism? avoidable upon no plea of adherence to Scripture, if it shall
appear, that you have for this opinion deserted the Communion of the Catholic
Church; out of which Church is no Salvation.

Soc. Dr. Potter p. 75.
I grant there neither is, nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church
of Christ; no more than from Christ himself: therefore I utterly deny, that our
Churches have made any separation from the Church Catholic at all: and this
for many reasons. For 1st. Chillingw. p. 274.
-- We have not forsaken the whole Church, or the external Communion of it: but
only that part of it which is corrupted, and still will be so; and have not
forsaken, but only reformed another part of it, which part we our selves are:
and I suppose you will not go about to persuade us, that we have forsaken our
selves, or our own Communion. And if you urge, that we joined our selves to no
other part, therefore we separated from the whole: I say, it follows not,
inasmuch as our selves were a part of it, and still continued so, and therefore
can no more separate from the whole, than from our selves.

Prot. So then, it seems we need fear no Schism, from the Church Catholic till
a part can divide from it self, which can never be.

Soc. Next, As for our separating from all other particular Churches, the
ground of our Separation being an error, which has crept into the Communion of
these Churches, and which is unjustly imposed upon us in order to this
Communion, we conceive, in this case, if any, They, not We, are the
Schismatics: for as the Archbishop Lawd. p. 142.
. -- The Schism is theirs, whose the Cause of it is; and be makes the
separation, who gives the first just cause of it, not he that makes actual
separation, upon a just cause preceding.

Again, Though we have made an actual Separation from them, As to Charity; we
do still retain with the same Churches our former Communion. -- Not dividing
from them through the breach of Charity; Or condemning all other Churches, as
no parts of the Catholic Church, and drawing the Communion wholly to our
selves, as did those famous Schismatics, the Donatists. [See Doctor Fern
Division of Churches, p. 105. and 31, 32.]

as to matter of Faith: We hold that all separation from all particular
Churches in such a thing, wherein the unity of the Catholic Church does not
consist, is no separation from the whole Church, nor is any thing more, than
our suspension from the Communion of particular Churches, till such their error
is reformed. For, as Doctor Stillingfleet p. 331.
-- There can be no separation from the whole Church but in such things,
wherein the unity of the whole Church lies: -- Whosoever therefore separates from
any particular Church as to things not concerning their being, is only
separated from the Communion of that Church, and not the Catholic. Now, that
for which we have separated from other Churches, we conceive not such, as is
essential, or concerns the being of a Church so, that without it we or they
cannot still retain the essence thereof; we declare also our readiness to join
with them again, if this error be corrected, or at least not imposed: And
Stilling. ib.
(as Dr. Stillingfleet says) -- Where there is this readiness of Communion,
there is no absolute separation from the Church as such, but only suspending
Communion, till such abuses be reformed, [or not pressed upon us]. And as
Bishop Bramhall Vindic. of the Church of Eng. p 9.
-- When one part of the universal Church separateth it self from another part,
not absolutely or in essentials, but respectively in abuses, and innovations,
not as it is a part of the universal Church, but only so far as it is corrupted
and degenerated [whether in doctrine or manners] it does still retain a
Communion not only with the Catholic Church, and with all the Orthodox members
of the Catholic Church, but even with that corrupted Church, from which it is
separated, except only in such Corruptions.

Prot. Saving better Judgments, methinks a separation (if causeless) from the
Communion of all other Churches, or from those who are our Superiors, in a
lesser matter than such a Fundamental or essential point of Christianity as
destroys the being of a Church, should be Schism; and the smaller the point for
which we separate, the greater the guilt of our separation. Were not the
Donatists Schismatics in rejecting the Catholic Communion, requiring their
conformity in such a point, in which St. Cyprian's error before the Church's
defining thereof was very excusable; and the African Congregations in his time
not un-churched thereby?

Soc. D. Potter p. 76.
-- But the Donatists did cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of
Salvation, the Church from which they separated, which is the property of
Schismatics. -- And Stillingfl. p. 359.
-- They were justly charged with Schism, because they confined the Catholic
Church within their own bounds. But as Dr. Fern says Division of Churches. p.
106.
-- Had the Donatists only used their liberty and judgment in that practice of
re-baptizing Heretics, leaving other Churches to their liberty; and (though
thinking them in an error for admitting Heretics, without baptizing them, yet)
willing to have Communion with them, as parts of the Catholic Church (saving
the practices wherein they differed), then had they not been guilty of Schism.
In that which I hold I only follow my Conscience, condemn not the Churches
holding otherwise: On the other side Chillingw. p. 278.
Christ has forbid me under pain of damnation to profess what I believe not
[be it small or great] and consequently under the same penalty has obliged me
to leave the Communion, in which I cannot remain without the Hypocritical
Profession of such a thing, which I am convinced to be erroneous. Ib. 279.
At least this I know, that the Doctrine which I have chosen, to me seems true,
and the contrary, which I have forsaken, seems false: and therefore, without
remorse of Conscience, I may profess that, but this I cannot: and a separation,
for preserving my Conscience, I hope will never be judged causeless.

Prot. At this rate none will be a Schismatic, but he who knows he erreth ( i.
e. not who holds, Truth, and the contrary, which he maintains, an error. But
Doctor Hammond Of Schism p. 23, 24, 25.
tells you. That he that does not communicate with those [I suppose he means
Superiors] the condition of whose Communion contains nothing really erroneous
or sinful, though the doctrine so proposed as the condition of their Communion,
be apprehended by him, to whom it is thus proposed, to be false, remains in
Schism.

Soc. And at this rate, all those, who separate from the Church, requiring
their assent to what is indeed a truth, will be Schismatics, (and that,
whether in a point Fundamental, or not Fundamental,) though they have used all
the industry, all the means they can (except this, the relying on their
Superiors judgment) not to err; unless you will say, that all truths, even not
Fundamental, are in Scripture so clear, that none using a right industry, can
(neither) err in them; which no Chillingworth has maintained hitherto.

Prot. But we may let this pass; for, your separation was in a point
perspicuous enough in Scripture (and so you void of such excuse): was in a
point Essential and Fundamental, and in which a wrong belief destroys any
longer Communion of a particular Person or Church, with the Catholic.

Soc. This I utterly deny; nor see I by what way this can ever be proved
against me, for you can assign no Ecclesiastical Judge that can distinguish
Fundamentals, Necessaries, or Essentials, from those points that are not so, as
has been showed already. And as Dr. Stillingfleet p. 73.
urges concerning Heresy, so may I concerning Schism: -- What are the
measures whereby we ought to judge, what things are Essential to the being of
Christianity, or of the Church? Whether must the Church's judgment be taken, or
every man's own judgment? if the former, the Ground of Schism lies still in the
Church's definitions, contrary to what Protestants affirm: if the latter; then
no one can be a Schismatic, but he, that opposes that of which he is, or may
be convinced, that it is a Fundamental, or essential matter of Faith. If he be
only a Schismatic, that opposes that, of which he is convinced; then no man
is a Schismatic, but he that goes against his present Judgment; and so there
will be few Schismatics in the world; If he, that opposes that, which he may
be convinced of; then again, it is that which he may be convinced of, either in
the Church's judgment or in his own: If in the Church's, it comes to the same
issue, as in the former: If in his own; how I pray, shall I know, that I may be
convinced of what, using a due endeavor, I am not convinced already? or, how
shall I know, when a due industry is used? and if I cannot know this, how
should I ever settle my self unless it be upon Authority, which you allow not.
Again, I am taught, that any particular, whether Person or Church, may judge
for themselves with the Judgment of Discretion: And in the matter of Christian
Communion, -- Stillingfl. p. 292.
That nothing can be more unreasonable, than that the Society [suppose it be a
Council] imposing conditions of its Communion [suppose the Council of Nice
imposing Consubstantiality so] should be Judge, whether those conditions be
just and equitable or no: And especially in this case, where a considerable
Body of Christians judge such things required to be unlawful conditions of
Communion, what justice or reason is there, that the party accused should sit
judge in his own cause?

Prot. By this way no Separatist can ever be a Schismatic, if he is
constituted the judge, whether the reason of his separation is just.

Soc. And in the other way, there can never be any just cause of separation at
all, if the Church-Governors, from whom I separate, are to judge, whether that
be an error, for which I separate.

Prot. It seems something that you say: But yet, though upon such
consideration, a free use of your own judgment, as to providing for your own
Salvation is granted you; yet, methinks in this matter you have some greater
cause to suspect it, since several Churches, having of late taken liberty to
examine by Gods Word more strictly the corrupt doctrins of former ages, yet
these reformed, as well as the other unreformed, stand opposite to you; and
neither those professing to follow the Scriptures, nor those professing to
follow Tradition, and Church Authority; neither those requiring strict
obedience and submission of judgment, nor those indulging Christian liberty,
countenance your doctrine. But you stand also Reformers of the Reformation, and
separated from all.

Soc. Soft a little. Though I stand separated indeed from the present
unreformed Churches; or also (if you will) from the whole Church that was
before Luther; yet I both enjoy the external Communion, and think I have reason
to account my self a true member of the Churches Reformed; and, as I never
condemned them, or thought Salvation not attainable in them; so neither am I
(that I know of) excluded by, or from them; so long as I retain my opinion in
silence, and do not disturb their peace; and I take my self also on these terms
to be a member, in particular, of the Church of England, wherein I have been
educated. For, all these Churches (as confessing themselves fallible in their
decree) do not require of their Subjects to yield any internal assent to their
Doctrins; or to profess any thing against their Conscience, and in Hypocrisy;
and do forbear to use that Tyranny upon any for enjoying their Communion, which
they so much condemn in that Church, from which, for this very thing, they were
forced to part Communion, and to reform. Of this matter, thus, Mr. Whitby p.
102.
-- Whom did our Convocation ever damn for not internally receiving their
decrees? Do they not leave every man to the liberty of his judgment? -- They do
not require, that we should in all things believe, as they believe; but that we
should submit to their determination, and not contradict them; their decisions
are not obtruded as infallible Oracles, but only submitted to in order to peace
and unity -- So that their work is rather to silence, than to determine
disputes, etc. -- and p. 438. We grant a necessity, or at least a convenience
of a Tribunal to decide controversies, but how? Not by causing any person to
believe what he did not antecedently to these decrees, upon the sole authority
of the Council; but by silencing our disputes, and making us acquiesce in what
is propounded without any public opposition to it, keeping our opinions to our
selves -- A liberty of using private discretion in approving or rejecting any
thing as delivered, or not, in Scripture, we think ought to be allowed; for
faith cannot be compelled; and by taking away this liberty from men, we should
force them to become Hypocrites, and so profess outwardly what inwardly they
disbelieve. -- And see Dr. Stillingfleets Rational Account, p. 104. where,
speaking of the obligation to the 39. Articles, he says, -- That the Church of
England, excommunicates such as openly oppose her doctrine, supposing her
fallible; the Roman Church excommunicates all, who will not believe whatever
she defines to be infallibly true. -- That the Church of England binds men to
peace to her determinations, reserving to men the liberty of their judgments,
on pain of excommunication if they violate that peace. For it is plain on the
one side, where a Church pretends infallibility, the excommunication is
directed against the persons for refusing to give internal assent to what she
defines: But where a Church does not pretend to that, the excommunication
respects wholly that overt Act, whereby the Church's peace is broken. And if a
Church be bound to look to her own peace, no doubt she has power to
excommunicate such as openly violate the bonds of it; which is only an act of
caution in a Church to preserve her self in unity; but where it is given out,
that the Church is infallible, the excommunication must be so much the more
unreasonable, because it is against those internal acts of the mind, over which
the Church as such has no direct power. -- And p. 55. he quotes these words
out of Bishop Bramhall Schism guarded, p. 192.
to the same sense, -- We do not suffer any man to reject the 39 Articles of
the Church of England at his pleasure; yet neither do we look upon them as
essentials of saving faith, or legacies of Christ, and his Apostles; but, in a
mean, as pious opinions fitted for the preservation of unity; neither do we
oblige any man to believe them, but only not to contradict them. By which we
see what vast difference there is, between those things which are required by
the Church of England in order to peace, and those which are imposed by the
Church of Rome, etc. Lastly, thus Mr. Chillingworth p. 200.
of the just authority of Councils and Synods (beyond which the Protestant
Synods, or Convocations pretend not.) -- The Fathers of the Church (says he)
in after times [ i. e. after the Apostles] might have just cause to declare
their judgment, touching the sense of some general Articles of the Creed: but
to oblige others to receive their declarations under pain of damnation, what
warrant they had, I know not: He, that can show, either that the Church of all
ages was to have this Authority; or, that it continued in the Church for some
ages, and then expired: He, that can show either of these things let him; for
my part I cannot. Yet I willingly confess the judgment of a Council, though not
infallible, is yet so far directive, and obliging, that (without apparent
reason to the contrary) it may be sin to reject it, at least not to afford it
an outward submission for public peace sake. [Thus much, as the Protestant
Synods seem contented with, so I allow] -- Again p. 375. He says -- Any thing
besides Scripture, and the plain, irrefragable, indubitable consequences of it,
Well may Protestants hold it as matter of opinion; but as matter of faith and
religion, neither can they with coherence to their own grounds believe it
themselves, nor require the belief of it of others, without most high and most
schismatical presumption. Thus he: now I suppose that either no Protestant
Church or Synod will style the Son's coequal Godhead with the Father a plain
irrefragable, indubitable Scripture, or consequence thereof, about which is,
and has been so much contest; or with as much reason, they may call whatever
points they please such, however controverted, and then, what is said here
signifies nothing.

Prot. Be not mistaken, I pray: especially concerning the Church of England.
For though she, for several Points, imposed formerly by the Tyranny of the
Roman Church, has granted liberty of Opinion, or at least freed her Subjects
from obligation to believe so in them, as the Church formerly required; yet as
to exclusion of your Doctrine, she professes firmly to believe the three
Creeds; and concerning the Additions made in the two latter Creeds to the
first, Dr. Hammond Of Fundamentals. p. 90:
acknowledges, -- That they being thus settled by the Universal Church, were,
and still are in all reason, without disputing, to be received and embraced by
the Protestant Church, and every meek Member thereof, with that reverence that
is due to Apostolic Truths; with that thankfulness which is our meet tribute
to those sacred Champions, for their seasonable, and provident propugning our
faith, with such timely and necessary application to practice, that the Holy
Ghost, speaking to us now, under the times of the New Testament by the
Governors of the Christian Churches, (Christ's mediate successors in the
Prophetic, Pastoral, Episcopal Office) as he had formerly spoken by the
Prophets of the Old Testament, sent immediately by him, may find a cheerful
audience, and receive all uniform submission from us. Thus, Dr. Hammond of the
Church of England's assent to the three Creeds. She assenteth also to the
definitions of the four first General Councils: And the Act 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
declares Heresy that, which has been adjudged so by them; now in the
definitions of these 4 first General Councils your enent has received a mortal
wound. But lastly, the 4th Canon in the English Synod held 1640. Can. 4.
particularly styles Socinianism a most damnable and cursed Heresy, and
contrary to the Articles of Religion established in the Church of England: and
orders that any, convicted of it, be excommunicated and not absolved, but upon
his repentance and abjuration. Now further than this [namely, excommunication
upon conviction.] No other Church I suppose has, or can proceed against your
Heresy; It being received as a common Axiom in the Canon Law; that Ecclesia
non judicat de occultis, -- And -- Cogitationis poenam nemo patitur. -- And --
Ob peccatum mere internum Ecclesiastica censura ferri non potest. And in all
Churches every one, of what internal persuasion soever, continues externally at
least a member thereof, till the Church's censures do exclude him.

Soc. The Church of England allows, assenteth to, and teaches, what she
judges evident in the Scripture; for so she ought; what she believes, or
assenteth to, I look not after, but what she enjoins. Now I yield all that
obedience in this point, that she requires from me; and so I presume she will
acknowledge me a dutiful Son.

Prot. What obedience when as you deny one of her chiefest, and most
fundamental doctrins?

Soc. If I mistake not her principles, she requires of me no internal belief or
assent to any of her doctrins, but only, 1st. Silence, or non-contradiction or
2ly, a conditional belief, i. e. whenever I shall be convinced of the truth
thereof. Now in both these I most readily obey her. For the 1st, I have
strictly observed it, kept my opinion to my self; unless this my discourse with
you has been a breach of it; but then I was at least a dutiful subject of this
Church at the beginning of our discourse; and for the 2d, whether actual
conviction, or sufficient proposal, be made the condition of my assent, or
submission of judgment, I am conscious to my self of no disobedience, as to
either of these; for an actual conviction I am sure I have not: and, supposing,
that I have had a sufficient proposal, and do not know it, my obedience, upon
the Protestant principles, can possibly advance no further, than it now does.
The Apostles Creed I totally embrace, and would have it the standing bound of a
Christian Faith. For other Creeds: I suppose, no more belief is necessary to
the Articles of the Nicene Creed, than is required to those of the Athanasian.
And, of what kind the necessity is of believing those, Dr. Stillingfleet states
on this manner p. 70, 71.
-- That the belief of a thing may be supposed necessary, either as to the
matter, because the matter is to be believed in it self necessary; or because
of the clear conviction of men's understandings; that, though the matters be not
in themselves necessary, yet being revealed by God, they must be explicitly
believed: but then, the necessity of this belief does extend no further, than
the clearness of the conviction does. Again, that the necessity of believing
any thing arising from the Church's definition [upon which motive you seem to
press the belief of the Article of Consubstantiality] does depend upon the
Conviction, that whatever the Church defines is necessary to be believed. And,
where that is not received as an antecedent principle, the other cannot be
supposed. [Now this principle neither I, nor yet Protestants, accept]. Then he
concludes -- That as to the Athenasian Creed [and the same it is for the
Nicene.] It is unreasonable to imagine, that the Church of England does own
this necessity, purely on the account of the Church's d^finition of those
things which are not fundamental, it being directly contrary to her sense in
her 19th and 20th Articles. [Now, which Articles of this Creed are not
Fundamental, she defines nothing; nor do the 19, 20, or 21. Articles own a
necessity of believing the Church's Definitions, even as to Fundamentals.] And
hence, that the supposed necessity of the belief of the Articles of the
Athanasian Creed must, according to the sense of the Church of England, be
resolved, either into the necessity of the matters, or into that necessity,
which supposes clear conviction, that the things therein contained are of
divine Revelation. Thus he. Now, for so many Articles as I am either convinced
of the matter to be believed, that it is in it self necessary; or, that they
are divine Revelations, I do most readily yield my Faith, and assent thereto.
Now, to make some Reply to the other things you have objected.

Eliz. allows no Definitions of the First General Councils in declaring
Heresy, but with this limitation, that, in such Councils, such thing be
declared Heresy by the express and plain words of the Canonical Scripture. On
which terms I also accept them.

Hammond's affirming, That all additions settled by the Universal Church [he
means General Councils] are in all reason, without disputing, to be received as
Apostolical Truths, that the Holy Ghost speaking to us by the Governors of the
Christian Churches, Christ's Successors, may receive all uniform submission
from us, suits not with the Protestant Principles often formerly mentioned. for
thus (if I rightly understand him) all the definitions of General Councils, See
before. 26.
and of the Christian Governors in all ages, as these being still Christ's
Successors, are to be without disputing, embraced as truths Apostolical.

Canon of the English Synod 1640. signify any more, than this; That any person
convicted of Socinianism ( i. e. by publishing his opinion) shall, upon such
conviction, be excommunicated; and if it be understood adequate to this, Qui
non crediderit filium esse (...) Deo Patri, Anathema sit, and, that the Church
of England, for allowing her Communion, is not content with silence in respect
of Socinianism, but obliges men also to assent to the contrary; then, I see
not upon what good grounds such exclamation is made against the like Anathema's
or exactions of assent required by that of Trent, or other late Councils, or by
Pius his Bull. If it be said here, the reason of such faulting them is, because
these require assent, not being lawful General Councils, such reason will not
pass; 1st. Because, neither the English Synod, exacting assent in this point,
is a General Council. 2ly. Because, it is the Protestant tenent, that neither
may lawful General Councils require assent to all their Definitions. Or, if it
be affirmed (either of General or Provincial Councils) that they may require
assent under Anathema to some of their decrees; viz. Those evidently true, and
divine Revelations; such as Consubstantiality is; but may not to others; viz.
Those not manifested by them to be such; then, before we can censure any
Council for its Anathema's, or its requiring of assent, we must know, whether
the point, to which assent is required, is, or is not, evident divine
Revelation. And then, by whom, or how, shall this thing touching the evidence
of the Divine Revelation be judged or decided? for those that judge this,
whoever they be, do sit now upon the trial of the rightness, or mistake of the
judgment of a General Council: Or when, think we, will those who judge this (
i. e. every person for himself) agree in their sentence? Again, If on the other
side, the former Church in her language, Si quis non crediderit, etc. Anathema
sit, be affirmed (to which purpose the forementioned Axioms are urged by you)
to mean nothing more, than, Si quis Haeresin suam palam profiteatur, and hujus
professionis convictus fuerit, Anathema sit, Thus the Protestants former
quarrel with her passing such Anathema's will be concluded causeless and
unjust. But indeed, though, (according to the former sentences,) her Anathema
is not extended to the internal act of holding such an opinion, if wholly
concealed, so far as to render such person for it to stand excommunicated, and
lie actually under this censure of the Church, because hitherto no contempt of
her authority appears, nor is any damage inferred to any other member of her
Society thereby? Yet her Anathema also extends, even to the internal act, or
tenet, after the Church's contrary definition known (which tenet also then is
not held without a disobedience, and contempt of her authority) so far, as to
render the delinquent therein guilty of a very great mortal sin; and so at the
same time internally cut off from being a true member of Christ's Body; though
externally he is not as yet so cut off. And the Casuists further state him ipso
facto to be excommunicated, before, and without conviction, if externally he
does, or speaks any thing, whereby he is convincible; and not if there be any
thing proved against him, but if any thing at least provable; and such a one,
upon this, to be obliged in Conscience, not only to confess his heretical
opinion, for his being absolved from mortal sin; but also to seek a release
from excommunication incurred, for his re-enjoying the Church's Communion. Thus
you see a rigor in this Church toward what it once accounted Heresy much
different from the more mild Spirit, and moderate temper of the Reformed.

Protestant Communion, I conceive that, as to any necessary approbation of her
Doctrins, it is sufficient for me to hold with Mr. Chillingworth (as I do
Chillingw. Pref.. 39.
) -- That the Doctrine of Protestants, though not that, of all of them,
absolutely true, yet it is free from all impiety, and from all Error
destructive to Salvation, or in it self damnable. And Ib.. 28.
-- whatsoever has been held necessary Salvation by the consent of
Protestants, or even of the Church of England, [which indeed has given no
certain Catalogue at all of such necessaries], that, against the Socinians, and
all others whatsoever, I do verily believe, and embrace -- And (which is still
the same) Ib.. 29.
-- I am persuaded, that the constant doctrine of the Church of England, is so
pure and Orthodox, that whosoever believes it, and lives according to it,
undoubtedly he shall be saved. [For if all truths necessary to Salvation be
held in it, then, so, is no error, opposite or destructive to Salvation, held
by it; and so, living according to the truths it holds, I may be saved.] Again
Ibid.
-- I believe that there is no error in it, which may necessitate, or warrant
any man to disturb the peace, or renounce the Communion of it, [For, though I
believe Antisocinianism, an error; Yet if I hold it not such, as that for it
any man may disturb the peace, or ought to renounce the Communion of the
Church, I may profess all this, and yet hold Socinianism.] Lastly as he,
Chillingw. p. 376.
so I; -- Propose me any thing out of the Bible, seem it never so
incomprehensible, I will subscribe it with hand and heart. In other things
[that I think not contained in this Book] I will take no man's liberty of
judgment from him, neither shall any man take mine from me; for I am fully
assured, that God does not, and therefore that men ought not to require any
more of any man than this; To believe the Scripture to be Gods Word, to
endeavor to find the true sense of it; and to live according to it. Without
pertinacy I can be no Heretic; And Ib.. 57.
, endeavoring to find the true sense of Scripture, I cannot but hold my error
without pertinacy, and be ready to forsake it, when a more true, and a more
probable sense shall appear unto me. -- And then, all necessary truth being
plainly set down in Scripture, I am certain by believing Scripture to believe
all necessary truth; and in doing so, my life being answerable to my Faith, how
is it possible I should fail of Salvation? Thus Mr. Chillingworth speaks
perfectly my sense.

Prot. I see no other cure for you; but that you learn humility and
mortification of your Understanding (in which lies the most subtle and perilous
of all Prides): And, It will reduce you to Obedience: and this to Truth. Tha^,
with all the Church of God, you may give glory to God the only begotten Son,
and the Holy Ghost, coessential with God the Father. To which Trinity in Unity,
as it has been from the beginning, and is now, so shall all Honor and Glory
be given throughout all future ages. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 19. lin. 18. read Emperor. p. 28. l. 1. dele [ See more Protestants cited
to this purpose, Disc. 3.. 19.] page 31. l. 7. r. there by.


