MONARCHY'S Unconquerable Champion.

BEING, Undeniable, Strong, and Powerful Collections, gathered out of the
Sacred Word of God, intended for the Convincing of those Sinful Wretches,
(hated by God himself, and all good men) who dares deny their Duty and
Allegiance to their Gracious SOVEREIGN; seeing we be all so expressly commanded
and taught by the Holy-Prophets and Apostles, that Excellent Principle of
Loyalty and true Obedience, (as also by Our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST
himself,) who not only commands us to give CAESAR his Due, but leaves us his
Blessed Example, (least we should offend) to obey His VICEGERENT, but Our
DREAD SOVEREIGN.

Diligently Collected and written by One or His Majesty's Loyal, Dutiful, most
humble, and Obedient Subjects, GEO. WOOD, Gent.

I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commardement, and that in regard of the Oath
of God, Eccl. 8. v. 2. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the
Law of the KING, let Judgment be Executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
Death, or to B^^^^^ment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to impriso^^^t. Ezra,
7 chap. v. 26. Printed by H. Brugis, for the Author. ^^^5.

TO THE SERENE, HIGH, and MIGHTY MONARCH, JAMES II. OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE,
and IRELAND, KING, Defender of the Faith. etc.
Royal Sir,
YOur MAJESTY'S most Humble and faithful Loyal Subject, though one of the
meanest and weakest of Your MAJESTY'S Servants, do in all Humility, make bold
to lay down at your Royal Feet these my Weak Labors, Humbly beseeching your
Sacred MAJESTY to be Graciously pleased, of your accustomed Goodness, to take
the same into your Protection; it being so Sacred a Subject, that properly the
Dedication thereof belongs to no other, than to your Royal Self. And although
by the Author it is done in Weakness, yet the Matter is so powerful, strong,
and convincing, (being the express Words of the Prophets, and Apostles, Christ
himself being the Chief Cornerstone;) that, by your Majesty's Gracious
Acceptance, I shall not only be fortified against all, that either Malice or
Envy can object against me, but likewise be Encouraged cheerfully to Publish
the same, for the good and satisfaction of your Majesty's Loyal and Loving
Subjects, and (I hope) for the converting of those, who dares deny their
Allegiance to so Gracious a King, and so pure a Government; I being confident,
that after the perusal of this Book, there is no person that owns himself a
Christian, although formerly never so much misled, (without GOD has left him
absolutely to a Reprobate sense, altogether for Damnation) that will not own
his error, and be heartily sorry, that ever he was of a rebellious principle,
and earnestly beg GOD's and your Majesty's pardon. So humbly begging your
Majesty's Gracious Pardon for this my presumption, I make bold to conclude with
the sayings of the Servants of King David, to their Lord the King, at the
Anointing of their Lord King Solomon, (only altering the names) As the Lord
has been with My Lord KING CHARLES II. even so be He with His Royal Majesty
KING JAMES II. and make your Throne greater than the Throne of My Lord KING
CHARLES. And let all your Majesty's Loyal and Loving Subjects say Amen, Amen,
which is, and ever shall be the hearty Prayer of,

DREAD SOVEREIGN, Your Sacred Majesty's most Humble, Dutiful, Devouted and
Faithful servant, Geo. Wood.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHen first I designed the publishing of this Book, I intended only to make a
Loyal Copy-Book with this Sacred Subject, the which I shall (God willing) with
all convenient speed so effectually perform, (setting aside the subject matter
therein contained) nothing inferior without vanity to the best that have been
made heretofore for the Education of Youth; The which Book has met with a kind
acceptance from all (that as yet have seen it;) but now for making of my work
perfect, and for the public good, I have ventured to go one step further,
which is, to publish this Book likewise in Print, having left out in my Loyal
Coppy-Book so many powerful; convincing Collections of Scripture, which
conveniently the Book could not contain.

The great and only Reason, why I take upon me, to Print, and publish this
Book, is [I being certain that there was never such an one presented to
public view before;] nor, (the more to be lamented a more needful time for so
doing) to convince those wicked Traitorous Rebels, (now too plentiful in his
Majesty's Dominions) that has the impudence to call themselves Christians, and
yet at the same time wilfully denies their Duty and Allegiance to their lawful
Sovereign; in denying of which, they most sinfully deny the sacred Scriptures,
and thereby certainly brings upon themselves (without true Repentance)
everlasting damnation, seeing that Monarchy is so absolutely grounded on God's
holy word, as this Loyal Book evidently makes appear.

Its likewise in my humble judgment, a very necessary Book to be made use of,
by his Majesty's Loyal and Loving Subjects, they being thereby presently
furnished with powerful Arguments out of the holy Scriptures, for convincing of
several persons, who in charity I am bound to believe, are really seduced by
their sinful Teachers, they knowing no better, than to believe their
Rebellious, Deceitful, Lying, Canting stories, (murder and ruin, being their
true design, when seriously considered) for the Apostle Paul says, All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of GOD, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. 2 Timothy Chap. 3. Ver.
16.

And as for those Traitors and Rebels, that so wilfully sins against Knowledge,
(by all unlawful means their false hearts can devise) endeavoring still to
seduce His Majesty's Subjects from their Allegience; My Advice to them is,
seriously to peruse this Book: For the Prophet Samuel tells them, (1 Samuel 15.
Chap. Ver. 22. 23.) that To obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken, than
the fat of Rams; for Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is
as Iniquity and Idolatry. And the Apostle Paul tells them, (Heb. 10. Chap. Ver.
26.) If we Sin wilfully, after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful looking-for
of Judgment, which shall devour the Adversaries. It is my hearty Prayer, that
these powerful Scripture-Proofs (with many more contained in this Sacred Book)
may so convince them of their errors, that thereby (from henceforth) we may
lead a peaceable and quiet Life, in all godliness and honesty; 1 Timothy 2 Chap.
Ver. 2. the which we shall never be able effectually to obtain, till we have
all learned that excellent Precept, given us likewise by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.
Chap. Ver. 17. To FEAR GOD, and HONOR THE KING.

Now to conclude this my Advice, (both to Seducers of His Majesty's Subjects,
as also to those that is blindly lead by them) it is my Request to them,
seriously to consider these two following passages of Scripture: Deuteronomy. Chap.
32. Ver. 46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the Words which I testify among you
this day, which you shall Command your Children to observe to do, all the Words
of this Law: For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your Life, and
through this thing you shall prolong your days in the Land. And the other is,
Ezra, Chap. 7. ver. 26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy GOD, and the
Law of the KING, let Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of Goods, or to imprisonment.

I pray God, that this my labors may effectually work upon the hearts of all
those, who heretofore have either wilfully or ignorantly been Guilty of that
grievous crying sin of Rebellion, that hereafter they may become true
penitents, and earnestly beg Gods, and His Majesty's Pardon, before it be too
late for some of them so to do. And so I shall conclude, with the Apostle Paul,
2 Timothy 2 chap. ver. 7. Consider what I say, and the LORD give thee
understanding in all things. Which is the earnest and hearty Prayer of

G. W.

Postscript.
THE Author having from his Youth, the Honor to be brought up in Millitary
Employments, and not brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel, thought it very
necessary to acknowledge the same; Hoping that by his too true acknowledgment of
his Weakness, for this Sacred Work, he may thereby meet with a favorable
Construction (of his Good meaning) from the Courteous, Loyal Readers, (not
valuing the Censure of the Factious) seeing his true intent in this Work, is
only his Duty to GOD and the KING; and humbly supposes (when wariously
considered) that it is as much (with the Pen) as can be well expected from a
Soldier of his Education.

SACRED, POWERFUL, and CONVINCING SCRIPTURE PROOFS for MONARCHY. Gathered out
of the Holy Bible. Containing the Old Testament and the New, Beginning in Order
With the Old TESTAMENT, etc.
EXODUS.
CHAP. 22.
Ver. 28. THou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people.

DEUTERONOMY.
CHAP. 17.
V. 14. When thou art come into the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee,
and shall possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall say, I will set a King
over me, like as all the Nations that are about me.

V. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God
shall choose, One from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee: thou
may not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy Brother.

JUDGES.
CHAP. 17.
Ver. 6. IN those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.

I. SAMUEL.
CHAP. 10.
V. 1. THen Samuel took a Vial of Oil and poured it upon his Head, and kissed
him and said, Is it not because the Lord has Anointed thee to be Captain over
his Inheritance.

24. And Samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the Lord has chosen,
that there is none like him among all the people; and all the people shouted,
and said, GOD SAVE THE KING.

CHAP. 11.
V. 12. ANd the people said unto Samuel, who is he that said, shall Saul Reign
over us? bring the men, that they may be put to death.

14. Then said Samuel to the people, Come and let us go to Gilgal, and renew
the Kingdom there.

15. And all the people went to Gilgal, and there they made Saul King, before
the Lord in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings
before the Lord; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

CHAP. 12.
V. 13. NOw therefore, behold, the King whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have
desired: and behold the Lord has set a King over you.

14. If you will fear the Lord and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel
against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye, and also the King
that Reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God.

CHAP. 15.
V. 1. SAmuel also said unto Saul, the Lord sent me to Anoint thee to be King
over his people, over Israel, now therefore hearken unto the voice of the words
of the Lord.

CHAP. 24.
V. 6. ANd he said unto his men, The Lord forbid, that I should do this thing
unto my Master, the Lord's Anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him,
seeing He is the Anointed of the Lord.

20. And now behold, I know well that thou shall surely be KING, and that the
Kingdom of Israel shall be Established in thine hand.

CHAP. 26.
V. 9. ANd David said to Abishai, destroy him not, for who can stretch forth
his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless.

11. The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand, against the Lord's
Anointed, but I pray thee take now the spear that is at his bolster, and the
cruse of water, and let us go.

14. And David cried unto the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying,
answerest thou not, Abner? then Abner answered and said, who art thou that
criest to the King?

15. And David said to Abner, art not thou a valiant man, and who is like to
thee in Israel? wherefore then have thou not kept thy Lord the King? for there
came one of the people to destroy the King thy Lord.

16. This thing is not good that thou have done, as the Lord lives, ye are
worthy to dye, because ye have not kept your Master the Lords Anointed: and now
see where the Kings spear is, and the Cruse of water that was at his bolster.

17. And Saul knew David's voice, and said, is this thy voice my son David, and
David said, it is my voice, my Lord, O King.

II. SAMUEL.
CHAP. 1.
V. 14. ANd David said unto him, how, wast thou not afraid to stretch forth
thine hand, to destroy the Lords Anointed?

15. And David called one of the young men, and said, go near, and fall upon
him, and he smote him that he died.

16 And David said unto him, thy blood be upon thy head: for thy mouth has
testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords Anointed.

CHAP. 2.
V. 4. ANd the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David King, over the
house of Judah.

11. And the time that David was King in Hebron over the house of Judah, was
seven years and six months.

CHAP. 3.
V. 17. ANd Abner had communication with the Elders of Israel, saying, ye
sought for David in times past, to be King over you.

18. Now then do it, for the Lord has spoken of David, saying, by the hand of
my servant David, I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the
Philistines, and out of the hand of all their Enemies.

21. And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel
unto my Lord the King, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou
may reign over all that thine heart desires, and David sent Abner away, and
he went in peace.

36. And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them, as whatsoever
the King did, pleased all the people.

37. For all the people, and all Israel understood that day, that it was not of
the King to slay Abner, the son of Ner.

38. And the King said unto his servants, know ye not that there is a Prince,
and a great man fallen this day in Israel.

39. And I am this day weak, though Anointed King, and these men the sons of
Zeruiah be too hard for me, the Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to
his wickedness.

CHAP. 4.
V. 8. ANd they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and said
to the King, behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which
sought thy life, and the Lord has avenged my Lord the King this day of Saul
and of his seed.

9. And David answered Rechab, and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon, the
Beerothite, and said unto them, as the Lord lives who has redeemed my soul
out of all adversity.

10. When one told me, saying, behold, Saul is dead, (thinking to have brought
good tidings) I took hold of him and slew him in Ziklag, who thought I would
have given him a reward for his tidings.

11. How much more when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own
house, upon his bed, shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand,
and take you away from the Earth.

12. And David commanded his youngmen, and they slew them, and cut off their
hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the Pooll in Hebron: but they
took the head of Ishbosheth and buried it in the Sepulcher of Abner in Hebron.

CHAP. 5.
V. 1. THen came all the Tribes of Israel to David to Hebron, and spoke,
saying, behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

2. Also in time past when Saul was King over us, thou wast he that leddest
out, and broughtest in Israel; and the Lord said to thee, thou shall feed my
people Israel, and thou shall be Captain over Israel.

V. 3. So all the Elders of Israel came to the King in Hebron, and King David
made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they anointed David King
over Israel.

CHAP. 7.
V. 1. AND it came to pass when the King sat in his house, and the Lord had
given him rest round about from all his Enemies,

2. That the King said unto Nathan the Prophet, see now, I dwell in an house of
Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within curtains,

3. And Nathan said to the King, go, do all that is in thy heart, for the Lord
is with thee.

12. And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I
will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy Bowels, and I
will establish his Kingdom.

13. He shall build an House for my Name, and I will establish the Throne of
his Kingdom for ever.

14. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son; if he commit iniquity, I
will chasten him with the Rod of men, and with the Stripes of the Children of
men.

15. But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom
I put away before thee.

16. And thine House, and thy Kingdom, shall be established for ever, before
thee, thy Throne shall be established for ever.

CHAP. 9.
V. 11. THen said Ziba unto the King, According to all that My Lord the KING,
has Commanded his servant, So shall thy servant do: As for Mephibosheth, said
the King, he shall eat at my Table, as one of the Kings Sons.

CHAP. 14.
V. 17. THen thine Handmaid said, The word of My Lord the KING shall now be
comfortable; for as an Angel of God, so is My Lord the KING, to discern good,
and bad: therefore the Lord thy God be with thee.

20. To fetch about this form of speech, has thy servant Joab done this thing,
and my Lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all
things that are in the Earth.

22. And Joab fell to the Ground on his Face, and bowed himself, and thanked
the King; And Joab said, To day thy servant knows, that I have found grace in
thy sight, my Lord, O King, in that the King has fulfilled the request of his
servant.

CHAP. 15.
V. 15. ANd the Kings servants said unto the King, Behold, thy servants are
ready to do whatsoever My Lord the KING shall appoint.

CHAP. 18.
V. 3. ANd the King said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you my
self also; But the people answered, Thou shall not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us dye, will they care for
us, but now thou art worth Ten Thousand of us; Therefore now it is better that
thou succor us out of the City.

28. And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the King, All is well; and he fell down
to the (...) upon his face, before the King, and said, Blessed be the Lord thy
God, which has delivered up the men that lift up their hand against My Lord
the KING.

31. And behold, Cushi came, and Cushi said, Tidings, my Lord the King: for the
Lord has avenged thee this day of all them that arose up against thee.

32. And the King said unto Cushi, Is the Young man Absalom safe? And Cushi
answered and said, The Enemies of My Lord the KING, and all that rise against
thee, to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

CHAP. 19.
V. 24. ANd Mephibosheth the Son of Saul, came down to meet the King, and had
neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his Clothes, from
the day the King departed, until the day he came again in peace.

25. And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem, to meet the King, that
the King said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me Mephibosheth?

26. And he answered, My Lord, O King, my servant deceived me, for thy servant
said, I will go sadle me an Ass, that I may ride thereon, and go to the King,
because thy servant is lame.

27. And he has slandered thy servant unto My Lord the KING, but My Lord the
KING is as an Angel of God: do therefore what is good in thine Eyes.

CHAP. 20.
V. 20. ANd Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me that I should
swallow up, or destroy.

21. The Matter is not so; But a man of Mount Ephraim (Sheba, the Son of
Bichri, by name) has lift up his hand against the King, even against David:
deliver him only, and I will depart from the City. And the woman said unto
Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the Wall.

CHAP. 21.
V. 16. ANd Ishbi-benob, which was of the Sons of the Giant, (the weight of
whose Spear, weighed three hundred shekels of Brass in weight) he being
girded, with a new Sword thought to have slain David.

17. But Abishai, the Son of Zeruiah, succored him, and smote the Philistine,
and killed him; Then the men of David swear unto him, saying, Thou shall go no
more out with us to Battle, that thou quench not the Light of Israel.

CHAP. 22.
V. 44. THou also have delivered me from the strivings of my people; thou have
kept me to be Head of the Heathen; A people which I knew not, shall serve me.

48. It is GOD that avengeth me, and that brings down the people under me.

51. He is the Tower of Salvation for his King; and shows mercy to his
Anointed, unto David, and to his Seed for evermore.

CHAP. 23.
Ver. 1. NOw these be the last words of David, David the Son of Jesse said, and
the man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of the GOD of Jacob, and the
sweet Psalmist of Israel, said:

2. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in my Tongue.

3. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that rules over
men, must be just, ruleing in the fear of GOD.

4. And he shall be as the Light of the Morning, when the Sun rises, even a
morning without Clouds; as the tender Grass, springing out of the Earth, by
clear shining after Rain.

CHAP. 24.
Ver. 20. ANd Araunah looked, and saw the King and his servants coming on
toward him, and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the King on his
face, upon the ground.

21. And Araunah said, Wherefore is my Lord the King come to his servant? and
David said, To buy the Threshing-floor of thee, to build an Altar unto the
LORD, that the Plague may be stayed from the people.

22. And Araunah said unto David, Let my Lord the King take, and offer up what
seems good unto him; behold, here be Oxen for burnt-sacrifice, and threshing
Instruments, and other Instruments of the Oxen for Wood.

23. All these things did Araunah (as a King) give unto the King: And Araunah
said unto the King, The Lord thy God accept thee.

I. KINGS.
CHAP. 1.
V. 28. THen King David answered, and said, Call me Bath-sheba: and she came
into the Kings presence, and stood before the King.

29. And the King swear, and said, As the LORD lives, that has redeemed my
Soul out of all distress,

30. Even as I swear unto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying, Assuredly
Solomon thy Son shall Reign after me, and he shall sit upon my Throne in my
stead; even so will I certainly do this day.

31. Then Bath-sheba bowed with her face to the Earth, and did Reverence to the
King, and said, Let my Lord, King David, live for ever.

32. And King David said, Call me Zadok the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, and
Benaiah the Son of Jehojada, and they came before the King.

33. The King also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your Lord, and
cause Solomon my Son, to ride upon mine own Mule, and bring him down to Gihon:

34. And let Zadok the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, Anoint him there King
over Israel: And blow ye with the Trumpet, and say, GOD SAVE KING SOLOMON.

35. Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my Throne,
for he shall be King in my stead: And I have Appointed him to be Ruler over
Israel, and over Judah.

36. And Benaiah the Son of Jehojada, answered, and said unto the King, AMEN;
the LORD GOD of my Lord the King say so too.

37. As the LORD has been with my Lord the King, even so be he with Solomon,
and make his Throne greater than the Throne of my Lord King David.

38. So Zadok the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, and Benaiah the Son of
Jehojada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and caused
Solomon to ride upon King David's Mule, and brought him to Gihon.

39. And Zadok the Priest took an Horn of Oil, out of the Tabernacle, and
Anointed Solomon; And they blew the Trumpet, and all the people said, GOD SAVE
KING SOLOMON.

40. And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with Pipes, and
rejoiced with great Joy, so that the Earth rent with the sound of them.

47. And moreover, the Kings servants came to bless our Lord King David,
saying, GOD make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his Throne
greater than thy Throne; And the King bowed himself upon the Bed.

48. And also thus said the King, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which have
given one to sit on my Throne this day, mine eyes even seeing it.

51. And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah fears King Solomon;
for, lo, he has caught hold on the Horns of the Altar, saying, Let King
Solomon swear unto me to day, that he will not slay his servant with the Sword.

52. And Solomon said, If he will show himself a worthy man, there shall not an
Hair of him fall to the ground: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he
shall dye.

53. So King Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the Altar, and he
came, and bowed himself to King Solomon, and Solomon said unto him, Go to thine
House.

CHAP. 2.
Ver. 24. THen King Solomon swear LORD, saying, GOD do so to me, and more also,
if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own Life.

24. Now therefore, as the LORD lives, which has Established me, and set me
on the Throne of David my Father, and has made me an house, as he promised,
Adonijah shall be put to death this day.

44. The King said moreover to Shimei, Thou know all the wickedness which
thine heart is privy to, that thou did to David my Father; therefore the
LORD shall return thy wickedness upon thine own Head.

45. And King Solomon shall be Blessed, and the Throne of David shall be
Established before the LORD for ever.

CHAP. 3.
Ver. 5. IN Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night; And GOD
said, Ask what I shall give thee.

6. And Solomon said, Thou have showed unto thy servant David my Father, great
mercy, according as he walked before thee in Truth, and in Righteousness, and
in uprightness of Heart with thee; and thou have kept for him this great
kindness, that thou have given him a Son to sit on his Throne, as it is this
day.

7. And now, O LORD, my GOD, thou have made thy servant King, in stead of David
my Father; and I am but a little Child, I know not how to go out or come in.

8. And thy servant is in the midst of thy people, which thou have Chosen, a
great people that cannot be numbered, nor counted, for multitude.

9. Give therefore unto thy servant an understanding heart, to Judge thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad; for who is able to Judge this
thy people, that is so great.

10. And the speech pleased the LORD, that Solomon had asked this thing.

11. And GOD said unto him, Because thou have asked this thing, and have not
asked for thy self long life: neither have asked Riches for thy self, nor have
asked the life of thine Enemies, but have asked for thy self Understanding to
discern Judgment;

12. Behold, I have done according to thy Word; Lo, I have given thee a Wise
and an Understanding Heart, so that there was none like thee, before thee;
neither after thee shall arise any like unto thee.

13. And I have also given thee that which thou have not asked; Both Riches,
and Honor; So that there shall not be any among the Kings, like unto thee.

14. And if thou wilk walk in my ways, to keep my Statutes, and my
Commandments, as thy Father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy Days.

28. And all Israel heard of the Judgment, which the King had Judged, and they
feared the King: for they saw that the Wisdom of GOD was in him, to do Judgment.

CHAP. 5.
V. 7. ANd it came to pass when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he
rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the LORD this day, which has given unto
David, a Wise Son, over this great People.

CHAP. 8.
V. 66. ON the Eighth day, he sent the people away: and they Blessed the King,
and went unto their Tents Joyful and glad of heart, for all the goodness that
the LORD had done for David his servant, and for Israel his People.

CHAP. 9.
V. 1. ANd it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the Building of the House
of the LORD, and the King's House, and all Solomon's desire, which he was
pleased to do;

2. That the LORD appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared unto
him at Gibeon.

3. And the LORD said unto him, I have heard thy Prayer, and thy Supplication,
that thou have made before me; I have hallowed this House which thou have
built, to put my Name there for ever, and mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be
there perpetually.

4. And if thou will Walk before me, as David thy Father Walked, in integrity
of heart, and in uprightness, to do all that I have Commanded thee, and will
keep my Statutes, and my Judgments;

5. Then I will establish the Throne of thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I
promised to David thy Father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the
Throne of Israel.

CHAP. 10.
V. 6. ANd she said to the King, It was a true report that I heard in mine own
Land, of thy Acts, and of thy Wisdom.

7. Howbeit, I believed not the words, until I came, and mine Eyes had seen
it: and behold, the half was not told me: thy Wisdom and Prosperity exceeds
the fame which I heard.

8. Happy are thy Men, happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy Wisdom.

9. Blessed be the LORD thy GOD, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the
Throne of Israel, because the LORD loved Israel, for ever: therefore made he
thee KING, to do Judgment and Justice.

CHAP. 11.
V. 37. ANd I will take thee, and thou shall Reign according to all that thy
Soul desires, and shall be KING over Israel.

38. And it shall be, if thou will hearken unto all that I Command thee, and
wilt Walk in my ways, and do that which is Right in my sight, to keep my
Statutes, and my Commandments, as David my Servant did, that I will be with
thee, and build thee a sure House, as I built for David, and will give Israel
unto thee.

II. KINGS.
CHAP. 6.
V. 9 ANd the man of GOD sent unto the King of Israel, saying, Beware that thou
pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come down.

10. And the King of Israel sent to the place, which the man of GOD told him,
and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor twice.

11. Therefore the heart of the King of Syria was sore troubled for this thing,
and he called his Servants, and said unto them, Will ye not show me which of us
is for the King of Israel?

12. And one of his Servants said, None, my Lord, O King; But Elisha the
Prophet, that is in Israel, tells the King of Israel the Words that thou
speak in thy Bedchamber.

CHAP. 8.
Ver. 6. ANd when the King asked the woman, she told him; So the King appointed
unto her a certain Officer, saying, Restore all that was hers, and all the
fruits of the Field, since the day that she left the Land, even until now.

CHAP. 10.
V. 30. ANd the LORD said unto Jehu, Because thou have done well in Executing
that which was right in mine Eyes, and have done unto the house of Ahab,
according to all that was in mine heart, thy Children of the fourth Generation
shall sit on the Throne of Israel.

CHAP. 11.
V. 12. ANd he brought forth the Kings Son, and put the Crown upon him, and
gave him the Testimony, and they made him King, and Anointed him, and they
clapped their hands, and said,

GOD SAVE THE KING.

17. And Jehojada made a Covenant between the LORD, and the King, and the
People, that they should be the Lords people, between the King also, and the
People.

19. And he took the Rulers over hundreds, and the Captains, and the Guard, and
all the people of the Land, and they brought down the King from the house of
the Lord, and came by the way of the Gate of the Guard, to the Kings House, and
he sat on the Throne of the Kings.

CHAP. 18.
Ver. 1. NOw it came to pass, in the third year of Hoshea, Son of Elah King of
Israel, that Hezekiah, the Son of Ahaz King of Judah, began to Reign.

3. And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all
that David his Father did.

5. He trusted in the LORD GOD of Israel; so that after him, was none like him
among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.

6. For he cleaved to the Lord, and departed not from following him, but kept
his Commandments, which the Lord Commanded Moses.

CHAP. 22.
Ver. 18. BUt to the King of Judah, which sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus
shall ye say to him: Thus says the Lord God of Israel, as touching the Words
which thou have heard.

19. Because thine heart was tender, and thou have humbled thy self before the
Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and against the
Inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation, and a Curse, and
have rent thy Clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, says the
Lord.

20. Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be
gathered into thy Grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the evil
which I will bring upon this place: And they brought the King Word again.

CHAP. 23.
V. 1. ANd the King sent, and gathered unto him all the Elders of Judah, and of
Jerusalem.

2. And the King went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah,
and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the Priests, and the
Prophets, and all the People, both small and great, and he read in their ears,
all the Words of the Book of the Covenant, which was found in the House of the
Lord.

3. And the King stood by a Pillar, and made a Covenant before the Lord to Walk
after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his
Statutes, with all their heart, and all their soul, to perform the Words of
this Covenant, that were Written in this Book: And all the People stood to the
Covenant.

I. CHRONICLES.
CHAP. 11.
V. 1. THen all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying,
Behold, we are thy Bone and thy Flesh.

2. And moreover, in times past, even when Saul was King, thou wast he that
leadest out, and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord thy God said unto thee,
Thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be Ruler over my people Israel.

3. Therefore came all the Elders of Israel to the King to Hebron, and David
made a Covenant with them in Hebron, before the Lord: and they Anointed David
King over Israel: according to the Word of the Lord, by Samuel.

CHAP. 14.
V. 2. ANd David perceived that the Lord had confirmed him King over Israel,
for his Kingdom was lift up on high, because of his people Israel.

8. And when the Philistines heard that David was Anointed King over all
Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David, and David heard of it, and
went out against them.

17. And the Fame of David went out into all Lands, and the Lord brought the
fear of him upon all Nations.

CHAP. 16.
V. 22. TOuch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

CHAP. 17.
V. 1. ANd it came to pass, as David sat in his House, that David said to
Nathan the Prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of Cedar, but the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord remains under Curtains.

2. Then Nathan said unto David, do all that is in thine heart, for God is with
thee.

11. And it shall come to pass, when thy days be expired, that thou must go to
be with thy Fathers, that I will raise up thy Seed after thee, which shall be
of thy Sons, and I will establish his Kingdom.

12. He shall build me an House, and I will Establish his Throne for ever.

13. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son, and I will not take away my
Mercy from him, as I took it from him that was before him.

14. But I will settle him in mine house, and in my Kingdom for ever; and his
Throne shall be Established for evermore.

CHAP. 21.
V. 2. ANd David said to Joab, and to the Rulers of the people, Go number
Israel from Beer-sheba, even to Dan, and bring the number of them to me, that I
may know it.

3. And Joab answered, The Lord make his people an hundred times so many more as
they be; But, my Lord the King, Are they not all my Lords Servants? Why then
does my Lord require this thing?

4. Nevertheless, the Kings Word prevailed against Joab.

CHAP. 28.
V. 4. HOw beit, the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my
Father, to be King over Israel, for ever: for he has Chosen Judah to be Ruler,
and of the house of Judah, the house of my Father, and among the Sons of my
Father, he liked me, to make me King over all Israel.

5. And of all my Sons (for the Lord has given me many Sons) he has chosen
Solomon my Son, to sit upon the Throne of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel.

6. And he said unto me, Solomon thy Son, he shall build my house, and my
Courts, for I have Chosen him to be my Son, and and I will be his Father.

7. Moreover, I will Establish his Kingdom for ever, if he be Constant to do my
Commandments, and my Judgments, as at this day.

9. And thou, Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek
him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off
for ever.

CHAP. 29.
V. 23. THen Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord, as King instead of David
his Father, and prospered, and all Israel obeyed him.

24. And all the Princes, and the Mighty Men, and all the Sons likewise of King
David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the King.

25. And the LORD Magnified Solomon exceedingly, in the sight of all Israel,
and bestowed upon him such Royal Majesty, as had not been on any King before
him in Israel.

II. CHRONICLES.
CHAP. 1.
V. 1. ANd Solomon, the Son of David, was strengthened in his Kingdom, and the
LORD his GOD was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

8. And Solomon said unto GOD, Thou have showed great Mercy unto David my
Father, and have made me to Reign in his stead.

9. Now, O LORD GOD, let thy Promise unto David my Father be established: for
thou have made me KING over a People, like the Dust of the Earth in Multitude.

10. Give me now Wisdom and Knowledge, that I may go out, and come in before
this People; For who can Judge this thy People, that is so great?

11. And GOD said to Solomon, Because this was in thine Heart, and thou have
not asked Riches, Wealth, or Honor, nor the life of thine Enemies, neither yet
have asked long Life; but have asked Wisdom and Knowledge, for thy self, that
thou may Judge my people, over whom I have made thee KING;

12. Wisdom and Knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee Riches and
Wealth, and Honor, such as none of the Kings have had, that have been before
thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like.

CHAP. 7.
V. 17. ANd as for thee, if thou will Walk before me, as David thy Father
Walked, and do according to all that I have Commanded thee, and shall observe
my Statutes and my Judgments;

18. Then will I establish the Throne of thy Kingdom, according as I have
Covenanted with David thy Father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man, to
be Ruler in Israel.

CHAP. 9.
Ver. 3. ANd when the Queen of Sheba had seen the Wisdom of Solomon, and the
House that he had built,

5. She said to the King, It was a true Report, which I heard in mine own Land,
of thine Acts, and of thy Wisdom.

7. Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

8. Blessed be the LORD thy GOD, which delighted in thee, to set thee on his
Throne, to be KING for the LORD thy GOD: Because thy GOD loved Israel, to
establish them for ever, therefore made he thee KING over them, to do Judgment
and Justice.

CHAP. 23.
Ver. 11. THen they brought out the King's Son, and put upon him the Crown, and
gave him the Testimony, and made him KING, and Jehojada and his Sons Anointed
him, and said, GOD SAVE THE KING.

20. And he took the Captains of hundreds, and the Nobles, and the Governors
of the People, and all the People of the Land, and brought down the King from
the House of the LORD, and they came thorough the high Gate, into the King's
House, and set the King upon the Throne of the Kingdom.

CHAP. 34.
V. 26. ANd as for the King of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the LORD, so
shall you say unto him, Thus says the LORD God of Israel, concerning the Words
which thou have heard.

27. Because thine heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before GOD,
when thou heardest his Words, against this place, and against the Inhabitants
thereof, and humbledst thy self before me, and did rend thy Clothes, and weep
before me, I have even heard thee also says the LORD;

28. Behold, I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered to
thy Grave in Peace, neither shall thine Eyes see all the evil that I will bring
upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants of the same. So they brought the King
Word again:

EZRA.
CHAP. 4.
V. 13. BE it known now unto the King, that if this City be builded, and the
Walls set up again, then will they not pay Toll, Tribute, and Custom, and so
thou shall endammage the Revenue of the King.

14. Now, because we have maintenance from the King's Palace, and it is not
meet for us to see the Kings dishonor, therefore have we sent and certified
the King.

CHAP. 6.
V. 8. MOreover, I make a decree, what ye shall do to the Elders of these
Jews, for the building of this house of GOD: That of the Kings Goods, even of
the Tribute beyond the River, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that
they be not hindered.

10. That they may offer Sacrifices of sweet savours unto the GOD of Heaven,
and pray for the Life of the KING, and of his Sons.

11. Also I have made a decree, That whosoever shall alter this Word, let
Timber be pulled down from his House, and being set up, let him be hanged
thereon, and let his House be made a Dunghill for this.

CHAP. 7.
V. 26. AND whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the KING,
let Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to
Banishment, or to Confiscation of goods, or to Imprisonment.

CHAP. 8.
V. 36. ANd they delivered the King's Commissions unto the King's Lieutenants,
and to the Governors on this side the River, and they furthered the People,
and the House of GOD.

NEHEMIAH.
CHAP. 2.
Ver. 2. WHerefore the King said unto me, Why is thy Countenance sad, seeing
thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of Heart. Then I was very
sore afraid,

3. And said unto the King, Let the KING Live for ever: Why should not my
Countenance be sad, when the City (the place of my Fathers Sepulchers) lies
waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed with Fire?

4. Then the King said unto me, For what do thou make thy request? So I
prayed to the GOD of Heaven.

5. And I said unto the King, if it please the King, and if thy Servant have
found favor in thy sight, that thou would send me unto Judah, (unto the City
of my Fathers Sepulchers) that I may build it.

6. And the King said unto me, (the Queen also sitting by) For how long shall
thy Journey be? And when will thou return? So it pleased the King to send me,
and I set him a time.

ESTHER.
CHAP. 5.
Ver. 1. NOw it came to pass, on the third day, that Esther put on her Royal
Apparel, and stood in the inner Court of the Kings House, over against the
Kings House; and the King sat upon his Royal Throne, in the Royal House, over
against the Gate of the House.

2. And it was so, when the King saw Esther the Queen standing in the Court,
that she obtained favor in his sight; and the King held out to Esther the
Golden Scepter, that was in his Hand; So Esther drew near and touched the top
of the Scepter.

3. Then said the King unto her, What will thou Queen Esther? and what is thy
request? It shall be even given thee to the half of the Kingdom.

CHAP. 6.
V. 7. ANd Haman answered the King, for the man whom the King delights to
honor,

8. Let the Royal Apparel be brought, which the King uses to wear, and the
Horse that the King rides upon, and the Crown Royal, which is set upon his
Head.

9. And let this Apparel and Horse be delivered to the hand of one of the Kings
most Noble Princes, that they may array the man withal, whom the King
delights to honor, and bring him on Horseback, through the Street of the
City, and proclaim before him. Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King
delights to honor.

CHAP. 7.
Ver. 2. ANd the King said again to Esther, on the second day, at the Banquet
of Wine, What is thy Petition, Queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee: and
What is thy request? and it shall be performed, even to the half of the Kingdom.

3. Then Esther the Queen answered, and said, If I have found favor in thy
sight, O King, and if it please the King, let my life be given me, at my
Petition, and my people at my request.

4. For we are sold, I, and my people to be destroyed, to be slain, and to
perish; But if we had been sold for bondmen, and bond-women, I had held my
Tongue, although the Enemy could not countervail the Kings damage.

5. There the King [Ahasuerus] answered, and said unto Esther the Queen, Who is
he, and where is he that durst presume in his heart to do so?

6. And Esther said, The Adversary and Enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman
was afraid before the King and the Queen.

9. And Harbonah, one of the Chamberlains, said before the King, Behold also
the Gallows, fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who had
spoken good for the King, stands in the House of Haman: Then the King said,
Hang him thereon.

10. So they hanged Haman, on the Gallows that he had made for Mordecai: Then
was the Kings Wrath pacified.

JOB.
CHAP. 29.
Ver. 25. I Chose out their way, and sat Chief, and dwelt as a King, in the
Army, as one that comfort the Mourners.

CHAP. 34.
V. 18. IS it fit to say to a King, Thou art Wicked; and to Princes, ye are
Ungodly?

CHAP. 36.
V. 7. HE withdraws not his Eyes from the Righteous: But with Kings are they
on the Throne; yea, he does Establish them for ever, and they are Exalted.

PSALMS.
PSALM. 21.
Ver. 1. THE KING shall joy in thy Strength, O LORD, and in Salvation, how
greatly shall he rejoice.

2. Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not withheld the Request
of his Lips, Selah.

3. For thou preventest him with the Blessings of goodness, thou set a
Crown of pure Gold on his Head.

4. He asked Life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever
and ever.

5. His Glory is great in thy Salvation, Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon
him.

6. For thou have made him most blessed for ever; thou have made him exceeding
glad with thy Countenance.

7. For the KING trusts in the LORD, and through the Mercy of the most High,
shall not be moved.

PSALM. 18.
Ver. 47. IT is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the People under me.

PSALM. 105.
Ver. 15. SAying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

50. Great Deliverance gives he to his KING, and shows Mercy to his
Anointed, to David, and to his Seed for evermore.

PSALM. 45.
V. 1. MY heart is inditeing a good Matter; I speak of the things which I have
made concerning the KING; My Tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer.

5. Thine Arrows are sharp in the heart of the KING's Enemies: whereby the
People fall under thee.

9. Kings Daughters were among thine Honorable Women; Upon thy Right Hand did
stand the QUEEN in Gold of Ophir.

10. Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear: Forget also
thine own people, and thy Fathers house.

11. So shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty; for he is thy Lord, and
Worship thou him.

13. The KING's Daughter is all Glorious within; her Clothing is of wrought
Gold.

14. She shall be brought unto the KING in Raiment of Needle Work: The Virgins
her Companions, that follow her, shall be brought unto thee.

15. With Gladness, and Rejoicing, shall they be brought; they shall enter into
the KING's Palace.

PSALM. 61.
V. 6. Thou will prolong the KING's Life, and his Years as many Generations.

7. He shall abide before GOD for ever; O prepare Mercy and Truth, which may
preserve him.

PSALM. 63.
V. 11. BUt the KING shall rejoice in GOD, every one that Swears by him,
shall glory; But the Mouth of them that speak Lies shall be stopped.

PSALM. 72.
Ver. 1. GIve the KING thy Judgments, O GOD, and thy Righteousness unto the
Kings Son.

2. He shall Judge the People with Righteousness, and thy Poor with Judgment.

PSALM. 89.
V. 3. I Have made a Covenant with my Chosen, I have sworn unto David my
Servant.

4. Thy Seed will I Establish for ever, and Build up thy Throne unto all
Generations.

20. I have found David my Servant, with my Holy Oil have I Anointed him.

21. With whom my hand shall be Established: mine Arm also shall strengthen him.

22. The Enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the Son of Wickedness afflict him.

23. And I will beat down his Foes before his face, and plague them that hate
him.

24. But my faithfulness, and my mercy shall be with him; and in my Name shall
his Horn be exalted.

25. I will set his Hand also in the Sea, and his Right Hand in the Rivers.

26. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my
Salvation.

28. My Mercy will I keep for him for evermore; and my Covenant shall stand
fast with him.

29. His Seed also will I make to endure for ever; and his Throne as the days
of Heaven.

34 My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
Lips.

35. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David.

36. His Seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me.

37. It shall be Established for ever, as the Moon, and as a faithful Witness
in Heaven.

PSALM. 132.
V. 17. THere will I make the Horn of David to bud; I have ordained a Lamp for
mine Anointed.

18. His Enemies will I Clothe with shame; But upon himself shall his Crown
flourish.

PSALM. 144.
V. 10. IT is he that gives Salvation unto KINGS; who delivers David his
Servant from the hurtful Sword.

PSALM. 148.
V. 11. KINGS of the Earth, and all people; Princes, and all the Judges of the
Earth.

12. Both young Men, and Maidens, old Men, and Children.

13. Let them praise the Name of the LORD, for his Name alone is Excellent, his
Glory is above the Earth, and Heaven.

PSALM. 20.
The Church Blesses the KING in his Exploits, etc.

Ver. 1. THe LORD hear thee in the day of trouble; the Name of the GOD of Jacob
defend thee.

2. Send thee help from the Sanctuary; and strengthen thee out of Sion.

3. Remember all thy Offerings; and accept thy burnt Sacrifice, Selah.

4. Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy Council.

5. We will rejoice in thy Salvation, and in the Name of our GOD we will set up
our Banners; the LORD fulfill all thy Petitions.

6. Now know I, that the LORD saves his Anointed; He will hear him from his
Holy Heaven, with the saving strength of his Right Hand.

9. Save LORD, let the KING hear us when we call.

PROVERBS.
CHAP. 8.
V. 14. Council is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am Understanding; I have Strength.

15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice.

16. By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.

CHAP. 14.
V. 28. IN the multitude of People is the KING's Honor; But in the want of
people, is the destruction of the Prince.

35, The KING's Favor is toward a Wise servant, but his Wrath is against him
that causes shame.

CHAP. 16.
Ver. 10. A Divine Sentence is in the Lips of the KING; His mouth transgresses
not in Judgment.

12. It is an Abomination to Kings, to Commit Wickedness; for the Throne is
Established by Righteousness.

13. Righteous Lips are the Delight of Kings, and they love him that speaks
right.

14. The Wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death, but a wise man will pacify
it.

15. In the Light of the Kings Countenance is Life, and his Favor is as a
Cloud of later Rain.

CHAP. 19.
V. 12. THe Kings Wrath is as the roaring of a Lion; But his Favor is as Dew
upon the Grass.

CHAP. 20.
V. 2. THe fear of a King, is as the roaring of a Lion; Whosoever provokes him to
anger, sins against his own Soul.

8. A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil
with his Eyes.

26. A Wise King scatters the Wicked, and brings the Wheel over them.

28. Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy.

CHAP. 21.
Ver. 1. THe Kings heart is in the hand of the LORD; as the Rivers of Water, he
turns it whithersoever he will.

CHAP. 22.
Ver. 11. HE that loves pureness of Heart, for the grace of his Lips, the King
shall be his friend.

29. See thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before Kings, he
shall not stand before mean men.

CHAP. 24.
Ver. 21. MY Son, fear thou the LORD, and the KING, and meddle not with them
that are given to change.

CHAP. 25.
V. 2. IT is the Glory of God, to conceal a thing; But the Honor of Kings is,
to search out a matter.

3. The for Heaven height, and the Earth for depth, and the heart of Kings is
unsearchable.

5. Take away the Wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be
Established in Righteousness.

6. Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King: and stand not in the
Place of great men.

7. For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither? than that thou
should be put lower in the presence of the Prince, whom thine eyes have seen.

CHAP. 28.
Ver. 2 FOr the Transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof; but by a
man of Understanding and Knowledge, the state thereof shall be prolonged.

CHAP. 29.
V. 4. THe KING by Judgment establishes the Land; But he that receives Gifts,
overthrows it.

14. The KING that faithfully Judges the Poor, his Throne shall be Established
for ever.

ECCLESIASTES.
CHAP 2.
Ver. 8. I Gathered me also Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Treasure of
Kings, and of the Provinces: I gat me Men-singers, and Womensingers, and the
Delights of the Sons of Men, as Musical Instruments, and that of all sorts.

CHAP. 5.
V. 9. MOreover the profit of the Earth is for all; The King himself is served
by the Field.

CHAP. 8.
V. 2. I Counsel thee to keep the KING's Commandment, and that in regard of
the Oath of GOD.

3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: Stand not in an evil thing, for he
does whatsoever pleases him.

4. Where the word of a King is, there is Power, and who may say unto him, What
do thou?

CHAP. 10.
Ver. 16. VVo to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in
the morning.

17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy
Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for Drunkenness.

20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy Thought: and curse not the Rich in thy
Bedchamber: For a Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice, and that which has
Wings, shall tell the Matter.

SONG of SOLOMON.
CHAP. 3.
Ver. 9. KING Solomon made himself a Chariot of the Wood of Lebanon.

10. He made the Pillars thereof of Silver, the Bottom thereof of Gold, the
Covering of it of Purple, the midst thereof being Paved with love, for the
Daughters of Jerusalem.

11. Go forth O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown,
wherewith his Mother Crowned him in the day of his Espousals, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.

JEREMIAH.
CHAP. 17.
24. ANd it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me, says the
LORD, to bring in no burden through the Gates of this City, on the
Sabbarn-day, but hallow the Sabbath Day, to do no Work therein.

25. Then shall there enter into the Gates of this City, Kings, and Princes,
sitting upon the Throne of David, riding in Chariots, and on Horses, they, and
their Princes, the men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this
City shall remain for ever.

DANIEL.
CHAP. 2.
Ver. 37. THou, O King, art a King of Kings; for the GOD of Heaven has given
thee a Kingdom, Power, Strength, and Glory.

CHAP. 5.
Ver. 18. O Thou King, the most High GOD gave Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a
Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor.

19. And for the Majesty that he gave him, all the people, Nations, and
Languages trembled, and feared before him; Whom he would he slew, and whom he
would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down.

JONAH.
CHAP. 3.
Ver. 6. FOr the Word came to the King of Nineveh, and he arose from his
Throne, and laid his Robe from him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat
in Ashes.

7. And he caused it to be Proclaimed and Published through Nineveh, (by the
decree of the King, and his Nobles) saying, Let neither Man nor Beast, Heard
nor Flock, taste any thing: let them not seed, nor drink Water.

8. But let Man and Beast be covered with Sackcloth, and Cry mightily unto
GOD; yea, let every one of them turn from his evil Way, and from the violence
that is in their hands.

9 Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn a way from his fierce
Anger, that we perish not?

10. And GOD saw their Works, that they turned from their evil ways, and GOD
Repented of the evil way that he had said that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

The END of the PROPHETS.
POWERFUL Scripture-Proofs FOR MONARCHY.

Gathered out of the New Testament OF OUR LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.

Beginning with the Holy Apostle St. MATTHEW.

LONDON: Printed by H. Brugis, for the Author. 1685.

POWERFUL Scripture-Proofs FOR MONARCHY, Gathered out of the New Testament.
St. MATTHEW.
CHAP. 2.
V. 1. NOw when Jesus was born in Bethlehem, of Judea, in the days of Herod
the King, behold, there came Wise Men from the East to Jerusalem,

2. Saying, Where is he that is Born King of the Jews? for we have seen his
Star in the East, and are come to worship him.

3. When Herod the King had heard these sayings, he was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him.

CHAP. 17.
Ve. 24. ANd when they were come to Capernaum, they that received Tribute-mony
came to Peter, and said, Does not your Master pay Tribute?

25. He says, Yes; and when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him,
saying, What think thou Simon? Of whom do the Kings of the Earth take
Custom, or Tribute? from their own Children, or strangers?

26. Peter says unto him, Of Strangers. Jesus Says unto him, Then are the
Children free.

27. Notwithstanding, least we should offend them, go thou to the Sea, and cast
an Hook, and take up the first Fish that comes up: and when thou have opened
his mouth thou shall find a piece of Money; that take, and give unto them for me
and thee.

CHAP. 22.
V. 17. TEll us therefore, what think thou: Is it Lawful to give Tribute
unto Caesar, or not?

18. But Jesus perceived their Wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye
Hypocrites?

19. Show me the Tribute-mony: And they brought unto him a penny.

20. And he said unto them, Whose is this Image and Superscription?

21. They say unto him, Cesars; Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto
Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God, the things that are Gods.

St. LUKE.
CHAP. 10.
V. 23. ANd he turned him unto his Disciples, and said privately, Blessed are
the Eyes which see the things that ye see.

24. For I tell you, that many Prophets, and Kings, have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them.

CHAP. 14.
V. 31. OR, what King, going to make War against another King, sits not down
first, and consulteth, whether he be able with Ten Thousand, to meet him that
comes against him with Twenty Thousand.

32. Or else, while the other is a great way off, he sends an Embassage, and
desires conditions of Peace.

CHAP. 20.
Ver. 20. ANd they Watched him, and sent forth Spies, which should feign
themselves Just Men, that they might take hold of his Words, that so they might
deliver him unto the Power and Authority of the Governor.

21. And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou say and teach
rightly, neither acceptest thou the Person of any, but Teach the way of GOD
truly.

22. Is it Lawful for us to give Tribute to Caesar, or no?

23. But he perceived their Craftiness, and said unto them, Why tempt you me?

24. Show me a Penny: Whose Image and Superscription has it? They answered,
and said, Cesars.

25. And he said unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which be
Cesar' s, And unto GOD, the things which be GOD's.

CHAP. 22.
Ver. 25. ANd he said unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them, and they that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors.

ACTS.
CHAP. 45.
V. 10. THen said Paul, I stand at Cesars Judgment Seat, where I ought to be
Judged; To the Jews have I done no Wrong, as thou very well know.

11. For if I be an Offender, or have committed any thing worthy of Death, I
refuse not to dye; but if there be none of these things, whereof these accuse
me, no man may deliver me unto them, I appeal unto Caesar.

12. Then Festus, when he had Conferred with the Council, answered, Have thou
appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shall thou go.

CHAP. 26.
Ver. 2. I Think my self happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my
self this day before thee, touching all the things, whereof I am accused of the
Jews.

26. For the KING knows of these things, before whom also I speak freely, for
I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from thee; for this thing
was not done in a Corner.

ROMANS.
CHAP. 7.
V. 1. KNow you not Brethren, (for I speak to them that know the Law) how that
the Law has Dominion over a Man, as long as he lives.

CHAP. 13.
Ver. 1. LEt every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers: For there is no
Power, but of GOD, the Powers that be, are Ordained of GOD.

2. Whosoever therefore Resists the Power, Resists the Ordinance of GOD,
and they that Resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

3. For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil; Will thou then
not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same.

4. For he is the Minister of GOD to thee, for good: But if thou do that which
is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the
Minister of GOD; a revenger, to execute Wrath upon him that does evil.

5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience sake.

6. For, for this cause pay you Tribute also, for they be Gods Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

7. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom
to whom Custom; Fear to whom Fear; Honor to whom Honor.

I. TIMOTHY.
CHAP. 2.
Ver. 1. I Exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men.

2. For KINGS, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and Honesty.

3. For this is good, and acceptable in the sight of GOD our Savior.

1. PETER.
CHAP. 2.
V. 13. SUbmit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the KING as Supreme.

14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

15. For so is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
Ignorance of Foolish men.

17. Honor all men, love the Brotherhood: FEAR GOD: HONOR THE KING.

THE Conclusion.
1. Timothy, Chap. 2. Ver. 13.
I Give thee Charge in the Sight of God, who quickens all things, and before
JESUS CHRIST, who before Pontius Pilate Witnessed a good Confession; that thou
keep this Commandment, without Spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST. Heb. 10. Chap. Ver. 26. For if we Sin wilfully, after we
have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for
Sins, but a certain fearful looking-for of Judgment and fiery Indignation,
which shall devour the Adversaries. Ephesians 3. Chap. Ver. 14. For this cause
I bow my Knees unto the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, of whom the whole
Family in Heaven, and in Earth, is named, That he would grant you according to
the Riches of his Glory, to be Strengthened with Might, by his Spirit in the
Inner Man; That CHRIST may dwell in your Hearts by Faith; that you being Rooted
and Grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; And to know the love of CHRIST,
which passes Knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of GOD.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according to the Power that works in us; Unto him be Glory in the
Church, by CHRIST JESUS, throughout all Ages, World without end, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, for, to Seducers, Read, to the Seducers.

In the Postscript, for wariously, read seriously.

Page 55. Line 3. for in Salvation, read in thy Salvation.

Page 56. Line 6. for shall not be moved, read, he shall not be moved.


