The high and Mighty Prince Charles by the providence of god king of England
Scotland France and Ireland etc Forne Noue 29; 1600; began his rainge March 27:
1625 p (...) excudit


The Surgeons Mate or Military and Domestique Surgery. Discovering faithfully
and plainly ye method and order of ye Surgeons chest, ye uses of the
Instruments, the virtues and Operations of ye Medicines, with ye exact Cures of
wounds made by Gun-shott, and otherwise, as Namely: Wounds, Apostumes, Ulcers,
Fistula's, Fractures, dislocations, with ye the most easy and safest ways of
Amputation or dismembring. The cures of the Scuruey, of ye fluxes of ye belly,
of ye Collicke and Iliaca Passio, of Tenasmus and Exitus Any, and of the
Calenture, with A Treatise of ye cure of ye Plague. Published for the service
of his Ma.tie and of the com: wealth. By John Woodall Mr in Chyrurgerie.

LONDON Printed by John Legate for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the south entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1655.



TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, CHARLES, By the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
YOur poor Subject in all humility, has hereby presumed to prostrate, as at
the feet of your sacred Majesty (for protection) these his unworthie works
in Surgerie, which contain in them the method and scope of the Military
Surgeons Chest, with all the necessary appurtenances that are useful in
Surgerie for the Wars; which he tendereth, as a poor expression of his duty
and zeal, for the use of your Majesty's service upon all Military occasions
for Surgerie either by Land or Sea; expressing therein the easiest and safest
ways and means of healing the wounds and other great infirmities and diseases
that war usually produces, for the benefit, comfort, and better safety of
your Majesty's valiant Captains, Soldiers, and hardy Seamen; The which his
poor labors, if the Author may be so happy as from your most pious and
unlimited benignity to find a gracious acceptance, he shall with a joyful
heart esteem his endeavors to be highly dignified.

Your Majesty's most humble subject and servant, John Woodall, Surgeon of your
Highness Hospital of St. Bartholomewes, and Surgeon general of the
East India Company.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE MASTERS and GOVERNORS of the mystery of Barber
Chirurgions of London for the time being, viz.
To William Clowes Esquire, Sergeant, Surgeon to his Majesty, and (at present)
Master: M. William Lingham, Master George Dan, and Master Henry Watson, Wardens.
To Richard Watson and Michael Andrews, both Esquires* Surgeons in ordinary
to his Majesty, and ancient Masters; together with the rest of the Assistants,
Examiners of Surgeons, the Livery, and whole fraternity of Surgeons of London.
John Woodall, an ancient Master of that mystery, the Author of the ensuing
Treatises, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting*
BEloved Brethren, public and private salutations are Christian duties imposed
upon all men by the holy Apostle S. Paul, the time or frequency thereof
unlimited: Wherefore my self, even now upon the putting forth of these my
ensuing works, by that precept am taught, and do hereby send you a salutation,
greeting you in the name of the Almighty, giving you thanks for the loving
society I have found and respectively enjoyed amongst you, for forty years
past and more, till this present.

As also for your good likings and well approvings of my former works and
editions yet extant with you; namely, my Surgeons Mate and Viaticum, which now
revised, I have here (with my other works) again published; which were by me
penned in my love to you, for the use of the younger sort of Surgeons, your
servants; who when they had received their first rudiments from you as
Apprentices; yet nevertheless (as might be conceived) were wanting of some
further helps for their proficiencies in Art, to the leading them on in
knowledge; as namely, first to know the office and duties of a Surgeons Mate,
which my self first penned and published, for their instructions; and having
therein proposed unto them the method of a Surgeons Chest, and also opened to
their view the composure and order of the first methodical Surgeons Chest, for
their further encouragement in way of Art, I then gave them a help to the said
Surgeons Chest; namely, I published for them a Viaticum (a book so called) in
Anno 1628. for their journeying, after which (as follows) I have explained
unto them such other documents as may be presumed that by their diligent
endeavors and careful putting them in practice, they may in short time become
good proficients in military and domestic Surgery; men fit and able for the
service of his Majesty, and the Commonwealth, in their Science, upon all
occasions,

And moreover, for as much as that contagious and noisome disease of the Plague
has of late years spread it self into many parts of this Kingdom* which*
though now ceased, may return at Gods pleasure* none knows how soon; my self,
as some of you know, having in my younger days lived in France, Germany,
Polonia, and other foreign parts, for diverse years together, where, for want
of better and beneficial employments. I was forced for my maintenance to follow
the practice of the cure of the Plague: and having emboldened my self thereby,
ever as in an assured hope, that God who had called me to profess the mystery
of healing, would surely protect me therein; I persisted in my endeavors, and
having kept my Papers of receipts and experiments together, which I made in the
cure of that dreadful disease, at my return for England I begun and practiced
in London the cure thereof; first, in the year of the great Plague at the first
entrance of King James of blessed memory, and left not the City when the
disease was at the highest; neither then did I omit to visit and cure any that
desired my help, and ever since in some sort I have been helpful to the curing
thereof: neither will I desist from affording my medicine to the diseased,
whilst God spares me life and ability. And further, I have here for future
public good, although by my own dear experience, searched into the
supernatural and dreadful causes, symptoms, crisis, and cures thereof; the
particulars of all which I have in one of the following Treatises published, to
the help of my younger brethren; nothing doubting but that some of them will by
their better educations and further experiences therein, furnish the following
Ages with better documents then my slenderness can unfold: In the mean time,
since that for this forty years last past, no Surgeon of our Nation has
published any book of the true practice of Surgery, to benefit the younger
sort, these my mean Treatises only excepted, I desire you to accept of my good
will instead of good deeds, at the least not to reject it, till better comes in
place by succession of time.

And so not omitting the continuance of my good affection to all my brethren,
the sons and successors of Aesculapius professed Surgeons, I commend you to
the tuition of the most Highest, resting still yours in brotherly affection,

John Woodall.

THE PREFACE.
Benevolent Reader,
CHriftian duty inciteth every man to extol Gods great mercies toward
mankind, and namely, (which is the scope of this ensuing Treatise) for his
blessing concerning the gift of healing, and for the original or first finders
out of the Science. In the arguing whereof, many ancient and modern Writers
have taken great pains in searching out and describing (for memories sake) unto
posterity, who were the first discoverers of that noble Science or Mystery of
the healing man's body; but not without several and different opinions, and
strong contradict^ons: Yet, giving venerable and due respect unto all, I will
crave leave for my self to think and believe that the original foundation of
Medicine proceeded from God alone; being more then sufficiently explained so to
be by Moses that divine Historiographer, in his sacred History of the first
creation of heaven and earth: For he witnesses that before man was created,
all herbs and plants sprang out of the bowels of the earth, with their infinite
varieties of flowers and seeds, with different odours, sapours, colors and
forms, endued (no doubt) with many and great virtues, Solu^ expraescientia Dei,
only of the foreknowledge of God. Wherefore to attribute so great
excellencies, so many ways in use for the health and wel-being of mankind, to
any other than to the divine bounty of God alone, would seem (in my
apprehension) not much less than blasphemy; for it could never be, that humane
reason could have found out the knowledge and virtues of these things, unless
God himself by his secret prescience had showed them to man.

For God, the Architector of the world, when in the beginning he created Adam,
and inspired him with the spirit of life, made him not only a living creature,
but also endued him with such understanding, that he knew the natures, the
forces, the proper faculties, virtues, and dangerous effects of al things which
the said universal world then contained or produced: so that the glory of the
invention of the mystery of healing of man's body, came from God himself, and
may not be so much undervalued as to be ascribed to humane ingenuitie. Yet
nevertheless (under favonr) we may so far venture to conceive, that the The
gift of healing is no less then one of the gifts of the H. Ghost.
same gift of God, namely the gift of healing, might by his holy Spirit be, and
was transcendent successively on those whom he had preordained, and chosen unto
the medicinal function, to the end that they might be the better enabled to
search out and apply wholesome medicines in due season, according as they were
inspired or taught; for all excellent knowledge comes from above: and this
opinion is also assented unto by holy Scriptures in sundry places.

But withal, complying with our Ancestors as much as may be, touching the
first general professors of this art of Medicine; The most Writers affirm the
Grecians were the first that took upon them to profess the art of Medicine,
and they likewise utter speeches to the same effect, affirming Apollo to be the
first Inventor of Medicine; and by Apollo, it is suggested, that they either
understood the Sun, which through the penetrating heat thereof, produces,
comfort, tempereth and cherishes all creatures as well animal, and
vegetable, as mineral: Or they meant, under that name of Apollo, some Noble
man, who was instigated thereunto through an excellent and divine power (no
doubt by Gods foreknowledge) and also endued with learning and diligence in
that noble art of Medicine, who performed some excellent cures: alluding
whereunto, Ovid speaks thus of Apollo, Inventum medicinae meum est, opifexque
per orbem,
Dicta est herbarum subiecta potentia nobis.


Medicines Inventor and Artist I
Through the massy orb am styled to be:
Fame this attributes to my Deity,
That force of Plants are subject unto me.
And after Apollo the succeeding Inventor is said to be Aesculapius, which ome
Writers style to be his son, brought up in learning by him, who did somewhat
more set forth and polish this Art, being as then rude and rustic, and
therefore he was reputed as one of the gods. Not long after those times (as
Writers report) did flourish Chyron, termed the Centaure, who also excelled in
the knowledge of the medicinal plants.

This Aesculapius (as other ancient Histories witness) had two sons, viz.
Podalyrius and Machaon, who followed their Fathers steps, and professed the art
of Medicine, and cured the wounded soldiers in the Trojan Wars; and these
chiefly practiced that part of healing which is now called Surgery. After them
the knowledge of the art of Medicine grealy increased, though for a time it was
in a hereditary way left by them to their posterity; and through their study
and diligence was that part called Physic which cures inward diseases, also
by a more prudent and diligent search found out.

And further, authors witness, that out of this most learned Aesculapius his
Stock, did spring Hippocrates, begot by Heraclida in the I Will of Ch^os, Prince
of all the Physicians that ever were before him, who perfected the art or
mystery of Medicine or healing, and digested it into a method in the Greek
tongue. And after him six hundred years followed Galen, a man not only
exquisite in the knowledge of Medicines, but also in many other sciences. And
what was left in the writings of Hippocrates obscure and intricate, Galen
faithfully interpred and illustrated it, and put it into many Volumes, and
established universal precepts, and methodical rules, and reduced the Science
into a more perfect Art.

And further, we read in Histories, in the infancy of this art, that it was a
custom amongst the Babylonians and Assyrians, who then were very ignorant in
the art of healing, to appoint the sick languishing people to be carried and
laid in Porches and Galleries, or to carry them into the Market places and
cross Streets, that passengers might counsel and exhort them to those things,
by which they might eschew the like diseases, or had known some to be
recovered: and it was not lawful for any one to pass by the sick with
silence, but he must utter some words of comfort at the least.

Strabo also (a Greek Writer) witnesses, that it was of old a custom amongst
the Grecians for the sick to betake themselves unto the Epida^rian Temple of
Aesculapius, that sleeping there, they might be admonished by the gods in a
dream what was good for their healths: and being freed from their diseases,
they caused those remedies, by which they were recovered, to be written in
Tables, and fastened to the posts of the Temple. Such was the zeal and
superstitious blindness of the heathen people in former ages, and the
ceremonies which they performed in a grateful remembrance for future times.

Also Hippocrates is reported to have copied out all those things, and so from
them first to have amended the medicinal art. And it is likewise by the
ancients reported, that brute creatures have bin much conducible to the first
finding out of some particulars in this art: so that man not only from man, but
also from brute beasts and birds, has learned many good things, which by them
have been demonstrated, as namely, the virtues of diverse herbs, by which they
did preserve themselves from diseases, through the mere instinct of nature, (as
the blindness of the young Swallows is said to be removed by the herb
Celedona, etc.)

Seeing therefore so great and so many good helps have concurred together to
the perfection of this excellent art of Medicine, for the health and wel-being
of mankind, who then needs to doubt thereof, or may say that it did not
proceed, as from the beginning, de praescientia Dei? seeing that man, the most
noble of all the creatures of God, and for whose sake all other earthly
creatures were created, receives such unspeakable comforts thereby: which
caused Herophilus heretofore to term the medicinal Science to be the hand of
God: for (says he) as we having got a fall, do with our stretched-out hand
endeavor to free our selves out of that dirt or pit we were fallen into; even
so we, being at the point of death by the assaults of sickness, do succor our
selves by the salutiferous remedies of good Medicines, and do thereby, as it
were, draw our selves out of the jaws of death; so as Homer, the Prince of the
Greek Poets, does affirm in his verses, that one good man that can heal well,
is more worth then diverse other men ignorant in that art: for what person is,
or can be more necessary, or more useful in any Commonwealth or place, then
the expert Artist, skillful in the divine science of healing? which Science
brings a man in favor with men of all degrees, yea, to be acceptable to
Princes Kings and Emperors, being both profitable and commodious every where to
Prince and people for the preserving of health, and repelling of diseases from
them and their subjects, which also gains to himself honor and riches: for,
as Histories record, unto Hippocrates by King Abderas (for healing of
Democritus his madness) was given an extraordinary great reward; and moreover
the heathen nation, men, women and children, gathered themselves together, and
in a triumphant manner proclaimed him (with aloud voice) to be the saving god,
and honored him with the name of Pater Patriae, the father of their Country.
And the Athenians, because he had freed Athens from the pestilence, celebrated
plays with triumphant pomp to his honor, placing on his head a crown of gold
weighing a thousand crowns, and honored him with the great magnificence of a
King; and likewise built him a statue for a perpetual eternizing of his
wisdom and learning.

It is also reported by ancient Writers, that one Erasistratus, Aristotle's
nephew, received by a voluntary contriburion from King Ptolomie, an hundred
talents of gold, as a reward, for that he reftored his son to health from a
desperate disease: and likewise, that Augustus the Emperor appointed rich
statues to be set up to the honor of Antonius Musa: and that one Quintus
Stertinius received yearly for about 50. years together, out of the Emperors
treasury at Rome, twelve thousand crowns for his great skill in the mystery of
healing: and that if any sick person of sort did call him out of the City for
his advice, he did pay him 50. crowns a day for his skill. Moreover, it is
said, that for curing Pope Honorius the third, he every month received four
hundred crowns out of the Treasury of Rome.

Ancient Histories make mention, that in former times the most noble and
honorable personages (yea, Kings and Princes) were greatly delighted in the
study thereof, esteeming themselves much graced and dignified thereby; and
thereupon, being greedy of getting renown, have given plants denominations from
their own names, as Gentian from Gentins King of the Assyrians; Lysimachia, an
English water-willow, from Lysimachus King of the Macedonians; the composition
of Mithridate from Mithridates King of Pontus and Bythinia; the herb Achillea
from Achilles; Centauri from Chyron the Centaure; Arthemasia from Caria Queen
pf Arthemasia. And further, Writers do affirm, Attalus King of Pergamus,
Solomon King of the Jews, Evax King of the Arabians, and Iuba King of the
Moors, with infinite more (too long to recite) did as it were burn with a
desire of learning the medicinal art, some in the herball part, others in the
searching the virtues of drugs, others of minerals, and did also write and
compose whole volumes in that Mystery, for the benefit of posterity yet
extant; wherein are contained infinite salutiferous Antidotes, by the mixture
of many simples into one medicine.

And whereas there has been a question amongst some of the Ancients, by what
name they may most properly call the Artist; the more learned sort are justly
styled by the title of Physicians, and the more experienced sort are called
Chirurgions, or Surgeons; by means whereof, sometimes there has grown
difference and offense, which I do advise each discreet Surgeon to avoid, and
that they give the Physician his due honor and precedence, comparisons being
odious and unmannerly amongst good men. Also the Artist of old, before the art
was distinguished, was called amongst the Grecians Iatros, and amongst the
Latins, Medicus, and in our countries ancient language, by report, he was
termed a Leech: and all those denominations signify no other thing but one and
the same, viz. A curer of diseases, sicknesses, wounds, apostmues, ulcers, etc.

And whereas all men may judge such infirmities cannnt be cured without fit
instruments, which are first and chiefly by the hand of man, (who does make
ready fit medicaments and applications) to be administered to the foresaid
diseases in due order and time: The first instrumental part of Medicine was,
and is, that which both the ancient and later writers term Chirurgia, or the
Handy part of healing.

The second is Dieta: a special instrument to cure, without which neither
wounds, apostumes, ulcerations, nor tumors against nature (as Hippocrates and
Galen do affirm) can well be cured; for that diet must be prescribed according
to the temperature of the body, and nature of the wounded part: and Galen also
prescribes a diet for those that have ulcerations, whether cancrous or
otherwise proceeding. Wherefore I conceive him to be no just and charitable
Judge, that denies this instrument, namely diet, to belong to a Surgeon as
well as to a Physician: for that reason and experience both do allow and
approve thereof, as an unlimitable instrument, fine quibus esse nequit. And
whereas Galen says, in lib. 3. De methodo medendi, all arts are grounded upon
experience and reason: if any one can declare, either by experience or reason,
a way how to cure ulcers, tumors, wounds, fistulaes and other like diseases
incident to man's body, as the French Pox, the Plague etc. the cures of which
diseases by statute Laws are appointed to Surgeons, and to do it without the
use of diet, and other both inward and outward helps, which these learned men
(as Hippocrates and Galen) used, and have with no small labor found out by
reason and experience, then I will easily yield, and be glad to learn, and will
not only learn, but highly extol it: but if on the contrary, no man can show
me any other way to heal the former recited diseases; then I see no just
hinderance, but that each true Artist, being legally a Surgeon expert, may and
ought freely to make use of diet to perform his cures.

The third general instrument used in the curing of diseases, is Pharmacum, in
Latin, Medicamentum, or Medicine, granted to be of several sorts. Each man
will conceive that medicine is a principal part of healing and curing of sores,
diseases and sicknesses: for who is he that can cure a wound, a tumor, an
ulcer, yea, but an ague with his hand only, without fitting medicines? Surely
no man: Then it must necessarily follow, that Chyrurgia, Dieta, and Pharmacum,
viz. Surgery Diet and Medicines (I mean both outward and inward) are
unseparable companions, and therefore all to be used in the^ art of curing man's
body; and that in the person of one man, and why not in the Surgeon that
practices in military occasions, as in ships and camps more especially? where
neither his Majesty nor the Merchant allows Physicians nor Apothecaries any
place, and there the whole scope of healing the bodies of the bravest and most
valiant warriors and hardy Seamen, are upon all occasions wholly referred to
the skill of the Surgeon. Wherefore it were a very ungodly thing, and in reason
most unjust, to forbid a Surgeon to learn all, or any thing that concerns his
calling: and all those that are of opinion to hinder a Surgeon from using
outward and inward medicines, have quite misconstrued Hippocrates and Gale^,
showing themselv's enemies to art, reason, and true experience, for that it is
manifest, each of these aforesaid three branches of healing, do mightily
further the other, to make the Surgeons cures perfect; for by these three
together, and not by any one of them simp ly of it self and alone, we may
boldly conclude to have healed well and honestly, and as we should do.

I have, I confess, too long insisted upon this argument, but the cause is,
there be some at this day that do endeavor to sever the instruments of healing
asunder, against the public good, for their own private lucre, and would have
inward medicine practiced only by themselves, and confine the Surgeon only to
outward medicine, and outward healing, as one Tragus an ancient Writer makes
mention, affirming, that there were certain sorts of men in his days which did
use the art of curing severally; namely, some by inward medicines only, and
some by outward, and some by diet only, every one according to his education
and profession of curing: all these three contending, and each one affirming
his way the best; in conclusion, their errors were confuted by Hippocrates,
who gave to each of them (as learned Writers affirm) a patient to cure, whom
all of them endeavoring to recover, failed in their performance:
notwithstanding, afterward by the wisdom and skill of Hippocrates, they all
were reconciled and united; for he, having well weighed and considered each of
their weaknesses and errors, willed them apart to set down how long time he,
or they would take, to cure his or their appointed diseased patients; whereupon
he and the rest agreed on a set time; which being expired, Hippocrates found
that although each Artist had showed his utmost skill, yet their patients were
not accordingly cured. Hereupon he with much mildness and kind persuasions (as
is recorded) so appeased and instructed them, that each of them by the very
same means and medicines they formerly took, being all used together to each
party, quickly and perfectly cured their several patients. Whereby also it is
manifest, that it is not just nor safe for the Commonwealth, neither can it be
approved, that the best of the ancient Fathers in Physic and Surgery did, or
indeed could divide or separate these three parts of healing.

But it may be that some will object that Valeriolus, Tagaultius, and some
others say, that a Surgeon ought not to give inward medicines, without the
counsel of a Physician. To clear this, I answer, first it is expedient and
just* where learned counfell may be had, to make use of it, for that by much
counsel there is safety: nevertheless, know, that it is uncharitable to
forbid an expert Surgeon at any time, or in any place, the use of the
in^truments and medicines which are necessary to this art, for the curing of
his patients: for certainly T^g^^lt ius and V^leriolus meant it of them that
practiced the art of Su^gery in those times, being Impostors, and illiterate,
and such as did not understand the principles of their art, nor the differences
of diseases; and those were justly to be inhibited, as in every well governed
Commonwealth it is fit it should be. But as concerning worthy Artists, viz.
Surgeons apprpoed by the Laws of the Realm, they ought to be free to exercise
their art* and the same Author concludes with Mr. Gales comparison (who was a
late good Writer in Surgery) which upon the like difference he then made of a
Shipwright and a Carpenter, who were both of necessity to use one and the same
instruments to perform their several works withal: even so must every honest
Artist, legally bred in the art of medicine, be tolerated to practice, by what
title soever you please to call him. Then, if so, he must by consequence have
the free use of all such instruments and means as may best and with most ease
perfect what he intends, to wit, the cure of man's body: for although the
Carpenter may say unto the Shipwright, Thou art not to use the a^e, the adds,
the saw, the hammer, nor the plain, etc. For that all these tools appertain,
and are proper to me for my art, and I cannot build without them; even so might
the other make a like fair answer, and say, They are also as proper for my Art,
and without them I cannot build. In like manner might the Joyner and other
Tradesmen say. And no less may it be said of the art of medicine: for whether
he be called Physician, Surgeon or Le^ch, or what other name men please to
impose upon him, if they admit, yea and appoint him to cure wounds, tumors
against ua^ure, ulcers, erisipelaes, herpes, the French pox, the pesti^ence or
whatsoever other disease is incident to man's body, it is but fitting that he be
free to have the proper use of all medicines and instruments, most apt and meet
to bring the same his intended scope to pass, yea, and that without offense of
the Law, notwithstanding any by law made by any, for private lucre, to hinder
the prosecution of the well-healing of the diseased people. For who is so fit,
or to whom does the whole use of all good medicines so justly appertain unto,
as to the Surgeon that is expert, who by his Majesty is pressed, and thereby
commanded, as well as by Christian duty tied, upon all occasions to heal
wounded and other diseased persons?

Galen in his third and fourth books De meth^do medendi, does name the Artist
Medicus that does cure ulcers and wounds, etc. and many ancient Writers call
him Medicus Chirurgus: whereby it appears, that the Surgeon is Medicus a
medendo, and retains the name Chirurg^s by performing the art of healing in a
practick way, namely, by the hand; and therefore is rightly termed Medicus
Chirurgus, and thereby is capable to use all medicines for healing. And if so,
of necessity he must not be fo^^idden lawful practice, otherwise how shall he
well perform his scope of healing, when he is either in Ship, in Camp, or but
any where in the Country, where Physicians either are not at hand, or will not
come, as when and where contagious diseases happen, namely, the small and great
pox, or the pestilence, etc. Now here in all conscience the Surgeon is to be
admitted to show his utmost skill for healing men's infirmities, without danger
of any Law, if he be a man lawfully called as aforesaid, to the exercise
thereof: otherwise it were very unreasonable that the Surgeon alone should be
pressed out of the healing of his Majesty's subjects, where no Physician nor
Apothecary is admitted to advise, assist or direct him, and yet to practice
should be held unlawful for him, when he performs his best in any action or
part of healing for his patients good. But God be thanked, there are both
ancient and modern good Laws, Orders and Ordinances, which do manifestly enable
a Surgeon to exercise his science, and to breed up servants to be expert
therein, for the better continuance of the art, and for the future increase of
good and able Surgeons, for the service of his Majesty, and the Commonwealth.
And to manifest the same, his Highness not only allows the use of inward and
physical drugs and medicines to the Surgeons for his own service, but is
further graciously pleased (out of his own Coffers) to pay for them, as
elsewhere in this Treatise more at large will appear.

Thus much in general by way of Preface. Now the Author in this following
Treatise desires to excuse himself, by way of Apology, to the Chirurgicall
Reader, for his over*forwardnesse in the unfolding to the vulgar what he has
hereafter done by his explaining of a Surgeons Chest; which he never intended,
until (nolens v^len^) he was put upon it, who, having in his younger days
spent diverse years in travel in foreign nations* for the gaining of knowledge
and experience in his calling, settled himself in London, where, according to
the weak talent of his education, he endeavored to obtain some answerable
perfection therein, that so by doing good he might give the better account of
the duty of his calling, by cursing of such as committed themselves to his
weak skill; in which endeavors before he was (in his own opinion) worthy
thereof, it pleased the honorable Society of Merchants trading to the East
Indies, in the beginning of the Trade, to make choice of him, and to appoint
him Surgeon general for all their employments, as well by Sea as Land;
reposing in him also the credit and trust for ordering and appointing fit and
able Surgeons, and Surgeons Mates for their ships and services, as also the
fitting and furnishing their Surgerie Chests with medicines, instruments, and
other appurtenances thereunto. Which credit and weighty charge, so nearly
concerning the lives of their servants reposed in him, instigated him to employ
all his endeavors to answer their so great trust imposed on him: For the
effecting whereof, he had no way better to recompense them, then by reducing
their Surgeons Chests, with all the particulars thereof, into an order and
method, which was never undertaken before by any, although very requisite: but
being once done* it would not only benefit them, but also be a perpetual good
for the service of his Majesty, and the Commonwealth: ^or by want hereof the
said East India Company, and many of their servants, as also many other
public actions abroad of great consequence, have suffered much; and namel^, by
unworthy impostors under the names of Surgeons, (to the dishonor of God, and
scandal of the true professors of the art of Surgerie, by many mis^ries
undergone both by the hardy Seaman, and valiant Soldier*) For remedy
whereof, and in want of some more learned and expert then himself, he
undertook the work; the said honorable Company being ever most willing,
without limitation or grudging, to bear the rea^onable charge thereof* and to
give approbation of the Authors weak endeavors, (which otherwise could never
have been done) who (through Gods mercy and their favorable acceptance
thereof) has performed the said charge, and continued their servant (to their
contents) for full twenty four years already: Yet notwithstanding, his
duty (by reason of the trust reposed in him by his said honorable Masters)
wa^ not therein fulfilled; for he was (if he would fabricate a new invented
Surgeons ^he^t) also tied in Conscience to instruct all and every Surgeon (that
was to make use thereof in their services) in the knowledge and us^ of all such
m^dicines and new inventions as were of his production and induction. And
although it well might be conceived diverse of them in knowledge otherwise
exceeded him, yet nevertheless in the true use of new medicine, how good
soever, which he had intruded upon them, not being within their own former
breeding and practice, he was obliged also to instruct them in the uses and
dangers incident by mistakes, (fit to be foreseen) and that by writing. As
also he was further tied (for his own reputation sake) to perform the same in
some methodicall and plain way.

And because until that time no Writer (that he could possibly find out) had
ever handled or written any thing worthy of note of that subject, namely, of
the methodicall composure of a military Surgeons Chest; he was put upon the
toil and study of new inventions, for the fit composure of medicines and
instruments, and that without the help of Authors, yea, and without the help
of the Surgeons themselves, that were to use the said Chests, who (especially
the more ignorant sort of them) for their own private ends, and in part to
cover their imperfections and absurdities, forcibly withstood him. Yet
notwithstanding all such discouragements, after he perceived in himself any
hope or ability of effecting the work, he proceeded on with courage, being
confident of the goodness and usefulness thereof, for the preserving of men's
lives and limbs; and would also in time to come prove profitable both ^or the
service of his Majesty, and the whole Commonwealth, as at this day is
manifest.

For this Work has already turned the whole composure of the Surgeons Chest
into its own form and method, both plain and easy, being free from all
exceptions of absurd fraud or collusion, and also free from the former obscure,
imperfect and ridiculous errors, and impertinent intrusions, whereby every
unworthy ignorant impostor (as under a vizzard of hidden skill* made use of the
art of Surgery, and thereby put up whatsoever they pleased into their Chests,
under pr^tence of extraordinary skill, great secrets, unvaluable,
unsearchable, and not to be prized treasures, (which long time they had
concealed) but being searched into, appeared for the most part faulty,
fraudulent, and full of poor blind ignorance: whereby, as is said, diverse
unskilful persons intruded themselves, not only to be entertained into the
Merchants best ships, but also into his Majesty's service, yea, and that into
his best ships, as great Surgeons, without either judgment, sound medicines,
or once viewing of any their provisions, and without examining any their
abilities in their callings; making their abbettors believe that those which
sought to view their Surgeons Chests, came but to learn some of their (no)
skill, or for some of their (less) money at the fairest.

Finally, though the worst might seem never so commodious, yet not only to
such as before are rehearsed, but even to Sea-Surgeons in general, it seemed
harsh and unreason^ble; and namely (wherein in part they were to be excused)
for that their exceptions had a good show of reason, in that they held it not
fit that one Surgeon should make ready a Chest for another Surgeon, and the
absent Surgeon not versed in the practice of the things made and appointed for
his use: and this was held not only unjust, but ridiculous; and that justly,
had not instructions, namely, the Surgeons Mate been written. And it has since
been observed (the instructions being put forth) that the same absent Surgeons,
after better informing themselves (by the Authors direction set forth in Print)
of the integrity and innocent way thereof, with the fairness of the Work
also, and the utilitie of the said Treatise, have commended it, and approved
thereof: so that by a few years practice of the younger sort of Surgeons, it
is now brought into common use and general good liking; so that it has gotten
credit, and it is with all Surgeons common in use, yea, even in his Majesty's
service, being first made use of in the Rochell Expedition, and the Author then
having the charge of pressing, furnishing, and ordering of his Highness whole
Navic and Land services, with Surgeons, and Surgeons Mates, with all their
provisions.

This present Work, being now the third Edition, as it were of the method of
the Surgeons Chest, the Author entreats (as the former has had) may receive a
charitable Construction upon the egresse thereof* and albeit the benevolent
Reader no doubt) may see and apprehend diverse e^rours and mean passages
therein, (discovering thereby the Authors many weaknesses) yet that he of his
clemency would either amend them, or in love cover them, considering that
Facilius est inventis addere, quam nova invenire.

And further, if any Reader of his own calling, condemn or contemn him, for
so far explaining the hidden mysteries of the art to the Vulgar, saying, By
your rules every young youth may proceed, not only to furnish, but also to
make some use of a Surgeons Chest, though he never truly served for it; The
which the Author will confess to be an error and weakness in him, and
therefore craveth pardon; but withal (for his defense) alleges, That he had
an earnest desire by such an error to do a public good, not only for the
benefit of every worthy young Surgeon but chiefly, and indeed for the
Commonweal, and safety of the lives and limbs of many of his Majesty's loving
subjects: Quia non nobis solum nati sumus:
Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter.


Now, unless the Surgeons Chest had been reduced into a method, could one
Surgeon at sea well have succeeded another in the use of a practice unknown
unto him? For by death all men's thoughts perish, and so does every man's private
inventions and practices; and by consequence, his death might have produced
much damage upon (otherwise) a hopeful design, the want whereof many a
worthy and valiant seaman, by lamentable experien^e has felt, before the
Surgeons Chest was thus digested; because then every unworthie Surgeon (how
weak, as is said, or deficient soever) had power, if he pleased, to practice,
to the dishonor of God, the scandal of that most laudable Mystery of
healing, and the great danger of men's lives, procured by their ignorance and
error: for things known may be indged of, but unknown things stand by hazard
and chance: Cognita judicio constant, incognita casu.

Likewise the explaining thereof has not only much enriched the Profession of
the Apothecaries, by undertaking the making, selling at their Shoppes, and
transporting beyond the Seas, of many Surgeons Chests, for persons (unknown
to them) inhabiting in foreign parts; but also enabled them at their
pleasures to have for sale, and for his Majesty's services, complete, (or in
part) Surgeons Chests ever readi^: unto all which faithful Apothecaries,
the Author wishes prosperity and happiness.

And lastly, it has diverse ways brought advantage and good to the whole
Society of Surgeons; in so much that his Majesty, by the Lords of his
Highness most Honorable Privy Council, has taken notice thereof, and,
observing the utilitie that it produces to the Commonwealth for the saving of
the lives and limbs of his Highness subjects in time of War, has been
graciously pleased to allow a free benevolence, out of his Coffers, toward the
same, for all ships employed in his service: which allowance was never granted
before by any of his Highness noble Progenitors, the Kings or Queens of
England: the particulars and order of which allowances, more at large appear in
the Preface of the Authors Viaticum herewith imprinted, unto which for
brevitie, he refers the Reader; hoping these his endeavors will be well
accepted of the judicious and better disposed sort of Readers. As for the rest
he regards not: and the rather, for that he is hasting to the grave, where
envy has no power: And on the other side, he is not ignorant, that a large
brood of pregnant wits, fraughted with Jeeres, (and good ones as they term
them, such as these times afford) will snarle, though themselves either cannot,
or (be it spoken in the best sense) will not spare time from their pleasures or
profits to advantage others; yet are they so sharp of wit, and can so well
dispute, and so wisely reason, that they will easily make Candida de nigris,
and de candentibu^ atra. Their words seeming as Oracles to their own
applauders, in whose Opinion they only have the keys of Art at their girdles.
But to any such, I say as one of the learned lately did to the like; Cum tua
non edas, carpis mea carmina Leli:
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Sloth sits and censures what the industrious teach:
Foxes dispraise the grapes they cannot reach.


Some have already accused the Author to have lost time in writing of the
Cures of diverse diseases, far better written of by others. Which although he
cannot deny, but that the accusation is Just, yet answers, That if each
Surgeons Mate had experience, with a Library, and judgment to use it, his
labors were then in vain and idle: and to such as have these helps, or that
perfection, the Author intends not these his labors; and to that party in
particular, he answers, That if one wise man in former ages has commended
and well approved of another in writing both of one and the same subject, he
conceives it is as easy for one fool in this age to wink at another faults
and weaknesses, especially in such fools as have neither wit nor will to write
better. As for wise men they will judge like themselves: but who can satisfy a
fool? And so he concludes, with these following verses, taken out of a German
Writer, as a loving answer to all such as shall hereafter find fault with his
Book:

Wems g'libt, gefelt, vnd nutz sein wird,
Demselvig'n sey es preparirt:
Were aber vnwill hat darvon,
Der b'halt sein gelt, vnd lasz es stan.
In English thus.

Who likes, approves, and useful deems
This work, for him it is wrought:
But he that light thereof esteems
May leave the book unbought.
THE OFFICE AND DVTIE OF THE SURGEONS MATE.
HAving an intent to set down Instructions for Surgeons Mates, out of my love
to them, I thought it meet in a word or two to put them in mind also of their
duties. The office and duty of a Surgeons Mate, may (in my opinion) well be
divided into three parts, whereof the first concerns his duty to God, who
sees not as man sees, and who is the searcher of the heart, and knows men's
thoughts long before, whom if he and I have the grace to honor with our whole
hearts and fear, he will direct our ways aright.

The second duty of the Surgeons Mate, is concerning the chief Surgeon,
toward whom he must be careful to behave himself wisely, lovingly and
diligently: and in many respects he is obliged to his* Mate as the wife to her
husband; for he ought to be to him in every point ready to obey his reasonable
will, I mean only in things concerning his calling, dutiful, diligent,
willing, careful, secret, and loving, yea, and to show his love in covering
his Mates weakness: he ought also to be gentle, and kind in speech and actions
toward all: pitiful to them that are diseased, and diligent in ministering to
them such fitting remedies as he shall receive, or be directed to give from his
Mate; but none without his order, for that his Mates order, I mean the Surgeons
order, is his discharge or warrant, whatever happen: yet let him privately lend
his best advise to his Mate, the prime Surgeon, upon every needful occasion,
kindly, submissively and lovingly, ever as under correction; for if comparisons
or opposition take place betwixt them, it is not only dangerous to all the
ships company, but also a disgrace to themselves, and a great scandal to their
calling: for avoiding which, it is fit that the younger obey the elder, and
beware of the contrary, lest it be repented too late. S. Paul advises servants
to obey froward Masters, so I advise Surgeons Mates to do the like to froward
Surgeons: for it shows no excellent thing in a young man to please an honest
quiet man, but to live in love with an ambitious, or otherwise a froward
vicious man, shows wisdom in the sufferer. I would not so stand upon this
point, but that my experience has known too much the great harm that has
ensued by the dissension of the Surgeon and his Mate in Iong voyages, the which
with discretion and love might have bin prevented, if but one of them both had
bin wise. The Surgeons Mate ought also daily to visit the Cabins of men, to see
who has any sickness or imperfection: also to have ready against occasion
lint made, Plasters spread, splints armed, Needles prepared for stitching
wounds, Rowlers and Boulsters, Dorsels, Tents, Buttons, Caps, Pledgents, Tape,
rolling needles, and thread prepared, and each other needful thing for his
calling, ready in their convenient places, fitted against occasion be. Likewise
his care must be to keep all the instruments of the Chest, and of his own Box,
clean from rusting, and to set his Lancets and Rasors as often as need is. It may
be he will say to himself, it is a base office, belonging to mere Barbers and
Grinders, I never gave any mind to it, etc. But let me friendly tell the
Surgeons Mate, it is the credit of a young Artist to take a vein smoothly and
neatly, as also to shave well is praiseworthy: wherefore I wish him to
practice to do it, and to be ever learning; for I am sure he shall never know
half he ought to know, though he do his best.

Thirdly, if he enter into consideration wherefore he goes to Sea, and
hazzardeth his life. I suppose it is to gain, or he is unwise: if to gain, the
chief gain he can intend, being a Mate, is knowledge in his calling. Then let
him consider wisely how he may best apply himself to effect such gains, namely
by observing the whole passages of the diseased people, considering both when
they began to be sick, as near as he can, the causes thereof, what has been
applied either inwardly or outwardly, what operation the medicine had, and so
of every diseased person, and every medicine given; and to keep a Journall in
writing of the daily passages of the voyage in that kind, and that as well of
the unsuccessive applications, as of the successive, he shall find great
benefit in both: Likewise what alterations of operations he finds in each
medicine, and what medicines keep their force longest, and what perish soonest;
also what variety the climate causes, of the Doses as well of the laxative as
opiate Medicines: I heartily wish each Surgeons Mate were careful in these
points. Another good way for him to learn is, to read much, I mean in
Chyrurgery and Physic, and well to consider and bear in mind what he reads,
that as he has need of the help of his Books, he may again find the thing he
once read, which will turn much to his profit: for otherwise what use has a
man of reading, if he forget it presently? If a Surgeons Mate spend his time
wisely in the premises, he may do good service to God, his Country, and
himself, and the benefit will be his, namely, Gods favor, preferment, credit
and reputation in the world will be gained thereby, which will bring abundance
of good things with it, which God grant for his mercy sake. And were it not
that I have intended this plain Treatise wholly to the Surgeons Mate, I would in
a word or two put the young Sea-Surgeon himself in mind of his charge, by
admonishing him of some errors too gross, which I have observed to have been
committed by some, that he might avoid the like in himself.

The first error some young Surgeons are possessed with, from which infinite
others grow, is the want of the service of God, the example whereof to their
Mates is very infectious; and this brings with it a blaspheming the name of
the Almighty, a general deboist and base kind of habit on them, ready for all
unprofitable, idle, and unseemly actions, and unapt for to prosecute any good
thing, either in their callings, or otherwise: and if they seem to be any
thing, it is in bosting and brave phrases, censuring other men in many things,
but not perceiving their own wretchedness at all. Being given and dedicated to
the Pot and tobacco-pipe in such an unreasonable measure, that thereby they
become in themselves base, despising virtue and commending vice; and to their
Mates they show themselves most unkind, keeping that little knowledge they have
from them, not instructing them at all in their Science, and holding them in
more base subjection then their masters ever did in their apprentiship. Also of
a proud lasie disposition commanding them (without due instructions) to do the
whole business, when indeed themselves ought to put their hands even to those
parts of Surgery which they esteem basest; for the most lamentable diseases of
poor men require the most care of the Surgeon, as for example, the ulcerations
and slidings downof Any or the Ars-gut, which some in disdaining to do their
office of fomenting, comforting and restoring thereof to the due place, most
inhumanely have cut it off, when with as good a conscience they might have cut
their Patients his throat: and the same I say to him that is negligent, and
suffers such to perish in their infirmities, without doing his utmost
diligence. I could name some of the parties who have much disgraced themselves
and the noble Science: but I will be charitable, hoping they will amend; and
conclude with an old Grammar verse, worthy the remembrance of al men; Foelix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

Thine J. W.

TO THE CHIRVRGICALL READER.
Loving Brethren,
IF you please to take notice thereof, within this Volume, you may easily
discover the Surgeons Chest three times to be repeated; or rather three
several proportions or explainings of a Surgeons Chest, or of Surgery
provisions for Military uses: The first whereof puts the Reader only in mind,
by way of inference, of particular Medicines, Instruments, and other materials
and needful additaments, useful for a Surgeons Chest, for Sea or Land, to be
provided with* as also such necessaries as by the ship Barbers are fit to be
had in readiness. In the second view of the Surgery Chest, is described (and
as it were set open to be viewed) a Chest fitted for a great Ship upon a long
Voyage for Sea service; as suppose for an East India Voyage. And wherein this
second is not sufficiently explained, the first (if you please to repair unto
it) shall give you further satisfaction. As for the third proportion, it is a
Surgeons Chest epitomized, or a sparing proportion, as suppose chiefly ordained
for the curing of wounds either with Gunshot or other casualties, and
accidents in his Majesty's service for a Voyage on a sudden, to serve upon or
near our own Coast, where additions (if occasion be) cannot be wanting in every
Port Town. Unto all which proportions as each occasion of use shall urge,
relation may be had, in regard each one of them differ in many and diverse
respects from the other. In which my endeavors, if any of the more sharp
witted sparks of the time, I mean any of my younger brethren, shall show his
greater skill, and say, I can yet add many more needful particulars, which
the Author has in his nescience omitted; as an acute verbal youth did not
long since in my hearing, he not knowing me to be the Author: to whom I made a
short, though it may be not a respective answer, that a fool could do as much.
For who that has wit, and is expert in Surgery, can be ignorant, that all
medicines that Art has ever devised or invented from the beginning of times
for the health of mankind, or can any way be produced for the healing of the
bodies of men, the same may be found useful in a Surgeons Chest; whether the
medicine be composed by a Chymicall, Methodicall, or Empericall Surgeon, and
whether made of an Animal, Vegetable, or a Mineral substance, the Artist may
doubtless make good use thereof for Sea or Land service in his Chest: but
nevertheless, the Author by way of introduction held it fittest for him to
express partem pro toto, a part for the whole, (Nam verbum sat sapienti)
leaving just liberty, with room sufficient, for succeeding times to show their
inventions and excellencies, as alluding to the wise saying of Hippocrates in
his first and second Aphorisms, Vita brevis est: Man's life is short, Ars long^
est, Art is long. In which regard the discreet young Artist, that has time
enough before him, is hereby desired to forbear his censure of the weak
endeavors of the Author, until he have effected a better of his own, and more
useful in Surgery, for the Commonwealth.

A note of particular ingrediences for a Surgeons Chest, and of other necessary
Appendixes serving for Chirurgicall uses, whereof these next recited may be
placed on the lidd of the Chest to open view, to manifest he has them, if the
Surgeon will have it so, or he that is to pay for them desire to seethem in vie
w.
INcision knives. Dismembring knives. Catlings. Rasours. Trapans. Trafine.
Lavatories. Head sawes. Dismembring sawes. Dismembring Nippers. Mallet and
chizel. Speculum Oris. Speculum Oris with a screw. Speculum Linguae. Speculum
Any. Cauterizing irons. Storks bills. Ravens bills. Crows bills. Terebellum.
Incision sheers. Probes or flamules. Spatulaes great and small Spatulum
Mondani. For teeth. Paces. Pullicans. Forcers or punches. Crows bills.
Flegmes. Gravers, Small files.
One bundle of small German instruments. Glister sirings. Small sirings.
Cathetor. Wax Lights.
These for the lidd of the Surgeons Chest, till the Surgeon see cause to remove
them.

The rest that follow are no less necessary then the former for their
particular uses: namely.
The salvatory furnished with such Unguents as hereafter in their places are
named. The Plaster box furnished with the due instruments and medicines
thereunto belonging. The instruments for the Plaster box are as follows
ordinarily. Scissers. Forceps. Spatula. A capital instrument. Probe. Stitching
quil and needles. Lancet. Burras pipe. Lavatory. Uvula spoone, etc.
Cupping glasses. Brass basin. Blood porringers. Diet pot. Skillet.
Chafing Dish. Glister pot. Funnel. Cups to give potions in. One board to spread
plasters. Mortar and pestel. Weights and scales. Sieves. Searces. Strainers.
Splints. Juncks. Tape. Towe. Spunges. Clouts. Rowlers. Gray paper. White paper.
Empty pots. Glasses. Thread and needles. Wax lights. Lanthorn. Tinder-box
furnished. Ink and quils. 1 Close stool. 1 Bed stool and a brass paile.
Bricks to heat upon occasion. Pipkins. Empty bags. Skins of lether.
The particulars of such Emplaisters as are most common in use by Sea-Surgeons.
Emplastrum
Stipt. Paracelfi. Diachilum cum gummis. Diachilum simplex. Diacalcitheos.
Oxicrocium. Mellilotum pro spleen. Mellilotum simplex. De lapide Calaminari. De
Minio. Calidum or spiced plaster
Unguents most in use in the Surgeons Chest.
Vnguentum
Basilicon. Apostolorum. Aureum. Aegyptiacu^. Album Camphoratum.
Diapompholigos. Pectorale. Rosarum. Nutritum. Populeon. De Melle and Sapo.
Contraignem. Contra Scorbutuns. Dialthea composita. Dialthea simplex. Potabile.
Mercurii. Linamentum arcei. Aragon. Martiatum. Axungiae porcinae. Axungiae
Cervi. Mel simplex.
Waters or liquors fitting a Surgeons Chest.
Aqua
Composita ex spiritu vini. Coelestis. D. Stevens. Rosa solis. Cinnamon.
Limoniorum. Rosemary. Sassafras. Anniseed. Absinthii. Mellissae. Angelicae.
Minthae. Cardui sancti. Theriacalis.
Rosae Damaski. Rosa Rub. Odoriferae. Plantaginis.
Simple. Falopii. Viridis. Aqua fortis. Lotion.
Compounded. Lixivium forte, and Commune. Acetum Rosarum. Acetum Vini. Verjuice.
Spiritus Vini. Vitrioli. Terebinthinae.
Caustic liquid.
Sal
Absinthii. Gemmae. Nitrae. Lapidis infernalis.
Oleum
Rosarum. Anethinum. Chamomell. Lumbricorum Liliorum. Hipericonis simplex.
Hipericonis cum gummis. Balmi Artificialis. Sambucorum. Ol. Lini. Ovorum.
Laurini. Absinthii. Papaveris. Petroleum. Scorpionis. Amigdalarum dull. Amigda:
amara: Balsami naturalis.
Chymicall Oils.
Vitrioli. Sulphuris per campanum. Gariophilorum. Cinamome. Maci.
Philosophorum. A^nisae. Terebinthae. Juniperri. Spic. Antimonii. Succini.
Absinthii. Origani.
Syrups.
Syrrupus.
Absinthii. Limoniorum. Papaveris. Cinamomi. Rosarum simplex. Solutium.
Violarum. Oximell simplex. Mel Rosarum. Diamorum. Raphanae silvest.
Prunellorum.
Conserva
Rosarum. Anthos. Berberorum. Citoniorum. Luiulae. Prunellorum.
Electuariae
Extract. catholicon purgance. Extract. rudii. Diacatholicon. Diaphenicon,
Diaprunum. Conf. Hameck. De succo ^^^^rum. Diatrion piperion. Theriacei
Londini. Conf. Alkermes. De Ovo. Mithridatum damo. The. Andromace. The.
Diatessaron.
Diaphoreticon Aurum vitae. Opiats. Laudanum Paracelsi. Diascordium. Diacodium.
Philomum Romanum. Persicum. Tarsensi. Aurie Alexandrine.
Succus. Absinthae. Acatie. Licorice. Limoni. Pulpa Tamarindarum.
Pil. Agaricum. Aurea. Chochiae. De Euphorbio. De Cambogia. Ruffi^.
Pulvis laxativus. Sanctus Arthreticus.
Trochiscus. Absinthia. Alhandall. De Spodio. De Minio.

Simples.
Foliorum sena. Rhabarbarae. Agaricum. Scamoniae. Aloes. Hermodactilis.
Polipodium. Dens Elephantis. Cor^u cervi. Euphorbii. Turbith. Mirabulanor um.
Cambogia. Cassia fistulae.
Certain other Simples.
Crocus. Opium. Chinae. Sarssaparillae. Sassafras. Guaicum. Cortex guaiacae.
Cortex granatorum. Licorice. Hordia com. Hordia gallic. Scmen anisae. Feniculi
dulces. Geniculi comun. Carraway. Cumini. Petrocelini. Lini. Fenigrece.
Anethae. Papaveris. Plantaginis. Sem. quatuor frigid. Majoris. Minoris.
Saccarum. Amigdalarum. Uva passa. Amillum.
Spices, viz.
Cinamomium. Macis. Piper. Cloves. Nuces Muscatae.
Gummes.
Guaicum. Opoponax. Bdellium. Amoniacum. Sagapenum. Galbanum. Myrrha. Masticbe.
Laudanum. Storaxcalaminthae. Liquida. Beniamen. Tragagantum Pix navalis.
Resina. Succinum.
Other needful Simples of diverse kinds.
Cera citrina. Mummia. Sperma ceti. Sanguis Draconis. Lupinis. Cantharides.
Camphora. Spodium. Sumech. Galls. Bolus vera. Bolus communis.
Minerals.
Antimonium Stibium. Sulphur. Alumen rochae and ustum. Vitriolum commune.
Vitriolum album. Vitriolum ustum. Lapis prunellae. Cerusa venetiae. Lythargyrum
auri. Viride aes. Tutia. Bacci Juniperi. Lauri.
Ferina Tritici. Fabarum. Hordei. Furfuris. Volatilis. Ammille.

Herbs most fit to be carried.
Herbae
Rosmari^us. Majoranus. Mentha. Melilotum. Salvia. Thymum. Absinthium. Carduus
Benedictus. Mellissa. Sabina. Scordium.
Radices
Althea. Raphani silvestres. Peritrum. Angelica. Consolida.
Album Grecum.
If the Surgeons Mate cannot trim men, then by due consequence there is to be
a Barber to the Ships Company, and he ought not to be wanting of these
following necessaries.
One Barbours ease, containing, Rasours four. Scissers two pair. Combs three.
Comb-brush one. Earepicker one. Curling instruments. Turning instruments and
spunges. Mullet one. Gravers two. Phlegm one. Paring knives two. Loaking glass
one. Aprons three. Shaving towels twelve. Water-pot one. Sweet water one*
Washing bals less or more. Hone one. Whet-stone one. Basins two.
And what else is necessary to the Barbers profession, as the expert Barber
better knows.

Certain brief remembrances touching the particular instruments for the
Surgeons Chest, and the uses of the same.
And first of the Incision knife.
THe uses of the Incision knife are many: namely, to enter the cutis or skin
upon very just cause; wherein Great care be had in Incision.
I advise the Surgeons Mate not to be too forward, or too rash, but to take
good advice, namely, if the Patient may by any better way receive health, that
he forbear incision, if not, let him proceed in the name of God. But note well,
that this instrument is far less used amongst discreet Artists of our time,
Incision by caustic medicines.
then it was in former ages: for it was ever accustomed to be at hand for the
opening of any Apostume suppurated, many of which now are far more
conveniently done by caustic medicines. For in truth it is a gross error in
the Surgeon, and painful to the Patient (ordinarily as some do) to open Tumors
by incision, and put tents into Tumors not to be Incised. Evils attending
Tumors I^c sed.
the orifice, by which occasion in short time the Artist is enforced either to
new incision, or to dilate the orifice with a Sponge, or Elder or Gentian
roots, thereby also including the peccant matter within the apostumated part,
from one opening to another, which ought to have continual passage, whereas
the caustic medicine saves all that labor, with great honor to the Artist,
and no small profit and convenience to the diseased. But as touching small
apostumes in the mouth, Apostumes in the mouth to be Incised rather with a
Launcet, then with a knife.
throat, and gums, incision is best: in which case I hold a fine launcet is
most comely, and much fitter then a larger incision knife: and note that in all
incisions whatsoever are to be made in any part of the body, it behooves the
Surgeon to regard if he incise deep, that he do it as near as he can according
to the length of the Muscles; and also it is commendable in an artist to be
very careful to hide his sharp instruments (as much as is possible) from the
sight of the Patient, for many Cautions in Incision to be observed.
reasons too long to recite. Only in conclusion note, that it is very Two
Incision knives needful.
fit and needful for the Surgeon to have at the least two incision knives, one
greater, one less, and that he keep them sharp and clean; but let them not be
so thin ground in the edge as the Rasour, for then they will deceive the
workman, when he has most use of them. Thus much at this time of the incision
knife.

Of the dismembring knife, and of the Catling.
Their use.
THese two instruments are to be used in dismembring; as namely, they are to
amputate, or to take off any offensive member or part The Incision knife
required in disrumbring.
of man's body: I mean all the fleshie part, or whatsoever may be incised even
to the bone: And also in dismembring of the leg or arm below the knee or
elbow, you shall have occasion to use the incision knife to cut asunder betwixt
the bones or else where, whatsoever the Catling or dismembring knife cannot
come at by reason of their greatness or unfitness; and then proceed to the
saw. To conclude, one of each kind may serve for one Chest, so they be sharp
and fitly grownd, and not too thin edged. They are both very needful
instruments to be at hand upon all occasions in the Surgeons Chest.

Of the Rasour.
The use of a ^asour.
THere needs little to be spoken of the use of this instrument, for that all
men know well the use thereof, which is chiefly to shave away hair where need
requires: only let me put the Surgeons A hoane and a whetstone is very
necessary.
Mate in mind, that if he forget to take in his Chest a good Hoane, as also a
good Whetstone, he may easily lack the necessary use of a good Rasour, when he
has most need of it at Sea; yea, though he Germane Surgeons praiseworthy for
Rasours and Lanncets. Instruments kept clean is commendable withal.
carry ten Rasours with him. In Germany it is a principal proof-piece of
Master-ship in Surgerie, for a young man to take a base and ordinary knife, and
to fit it to shave a beard; and also to make a Launcet himself which will enter
smoothly: and it is a very great commendation in a young Artist to have sharp
and clean instruments of all sorts, and to keep them so, and chiefly Rasours
and Launcets; and it is as great a grace to young Artists to have good Rasours
and Launcets, and the contrary may do great hurt. Wherefore I advise each young
Artist to be practicing often with the worst of his knives and Launcets, till
he be able to make them serviceable.

Negligence blameworthy.
But I find that pride and slothfulness has taken such hold of many young
Artists, that they disdain and neglect the meanest parts of their calling, as
things of too base account for them, which indeed are as behovefull often times
as those which seem of more consequence. I shall never for my part account him
a fit Sea-Surgeon, which cannot, or will not amend his Launcets and Rasours,
which I hold to be an especial credit to him, and no less advantage to his
Patient. Thus much at this time of the use of the Rasour.

Of the Trapan.
The use.
THe Trapan is an instrument of great consequence, where there is just occasion
of the use thereof; but it is seldom well used, and it only attends the
Fractures of the Cranium, and yet scarce one in ten have just occasion of the
use thereof. For we see daily many grievous Fractures healed without it, and
many more would be if no such instruments were; since the perfect use thereof
is not every man's work, neither in every Fracture (as I have said) needful to
be used, because of many dangers attending the unskilful or untimely use An
advertisement whether the Trapan i^ necessary to be used^
thereof. I advise the younger Surgeons to consider well before they set the
Trapan, whether it may not be forborne: but if a Fracture happen in the Cranium,
with contusion and depression of both the Tables thereof, so that by other
conjoined and apparent accidents, as want of some of the senses, great
vomiting, with contraction of sinews, convulsions, or the like just reasons
appear, thou be enforced to use the Trapan proceed warily as follows.

1 If it be requisite observe first the instrument it self.
First, be sure the instrument of it self be good, and of the best making, and
that it be clean from rust, and perfect without faults; for those Trapans which
are brought from Germany are not to be used, nor yet to be tolerated.

2 The place where* it is to be applied. Great care required in the use of the
instrument.
Further, of the place where it is to be used or placed upon. It is not always
directly where the blow lights, but sometimes a Fracture is found a great
distance off: wherefore this work requires no small discretion in the
attempting thereof. Your direction therefore, the skin being not broken, must
be according to the apparent indication of the part, the due consideration of
the complaint of the Patient, together with your own feeling with your fingers
well respected. The place therefore found where the Fracture is, it then
follows that the hair must be first shaved away, or at least (which is not so
good) cut close 3 The hair must be shaved off.
for a good distance about the grief, 4 fingers broad or more; which done, have
ready your medicines to bind up the wound again, as namely, your sponge, your
ligature, with hot water, and each other 4 Have all medicines in a readinisse.
5 Observe the flux.
things necessary for a dressing fit, which in another place I intend to set
down. And if so be that the flux hinder not, use wine and honey to foment the
grieved part after the incision be made, it will do well if it be in the ship
to make also a restrictive ready, namely of bole with water and vinegar, if an
eg be not to be had; but an eg in the restrictive will make it the better. And
further, if that the flux will not be ftaied by an ordinary kind of
restrictive, then take the stronger restrictive powder which in due place is to
be mentioned. And for present applications unto the wound, you have good choice
of 2 sorts; namely, Oil of Roses, and Mel Rosarum mixed warm, or the Linamentum
Arcei, which in speaking of wounds of the head, I will touch God willing) more
largely.

6 Care of the Patient in dressing needful. 7 Incision must be.
All things therefore in readiness, and the Patient placed close and warm from
the air, and having two appointed to stay his head, the incision is either to
be made directly cross, or in the form of a Roman T. and when the cutis is
divided, together with membranacarnosa, or 8. The Pericranium remove.
fleshly membrane, the Pericranium or Panicle, covering the scull, is also to
be taken away, that the fractured part be bare; then set the Trapan The setting
of the Trapan.
thereon, but the pin thereof is always to be set on the whole part of the
Cranium, whereby the most part of the Trapan (by consequence) stands on the
whole bone, but so that almost half may stand on the fractured part of the
bone. This being thus warily set, The piercing with the Trapan.
begin easily to turn about the instrument, till all the teeth have taken good
hold round, then take up your Trapan again, and take out the pin in the midst,
and set on the other part again as before, piercing and turning still, till you
have pierced through both Tables, which is easily to be felt by the piecer:
then gently take out the piece which commonly comes away in the midst of the
instrument, not regarding that all the fractured part be taken out, or all
coming away: Neither shall it always be needful that the depressed part be
presently elevated, except it may very safely and easily be done, for nature
Nature much helps in this work.
will admirably bring to pass the elevating and scaling of the rest of
fractured or depressed bone in due time, if thou follow only a good method of
applying comforting and convenient medicines to the wound, with apt Ligature.
Neither strive in setting the Trapan, A caution in setting the Trapan.
without good reason, to use the greatest head of the Trapan, which has
commonly three or four heads: for if nature only have a breathing, it will
wonderfully help it self by purging the contused blood through the orifice, by
way of matter or excrement. Many worthy Artists there are at this day living,
which have performed great cures in fractures of the Cranium, and yet never
knew the worthy use of this instrument. I have my self with a short carving
knife twice made as good a shift as if I had had a Trapan ready, and thereby
cured two dangerous fractures, by cutting as much of the Cranium away, as that
the contused blood had only vent. The Germane Surgeons use no Trapan, that ever
I could see in my eight years living among them, though they both speak and
write of it. But forasmuch as it is apparent, the work of a Trapan is very
good, I therefore would advise a young Artist to make some experience first
upon a calves head, or a sheeps head, till he can well and easily take Special
skill required in the operation.
out a piece of the bone; so shall he the more safely do it to a man without
error when occasion is.

Note also, that where a fracture is accompanied with a wound, it Note.
shall not be needful to enlarge further then will serve to set the Trapan;
for, as too little breathing is dangerous, so are too great wounds; making the
Artist to be esteemed Butcher-like and hateful, and is often also very
dangerous and deadly.

Further note, the good success of the curing of the fractures in the Note
wherein curation of Fractures consists.
Cranium, as also in all other Fractures, stands very much in good Ligature
and easy medicines, which I wish each young learner with diligence to
practice. Thus much of the Trapan.

Of the Lavatorie.
THe Lavatory is a necessary instrument to elevate the depressed Cranium, The
use.
in which work, as I have written in the former Chapter of the use of the
Trapan, I advise no young Artist to be too curious Cautions to be observed.
or hasty to force the depressed bone too much, where there is no evil
symptoms: for a depressed bone will oftimes help it self, by rising It is very
necessary.
and scaling, admirably; and yet it is many times of very necessary use, and a
fit instrument in the Surgeons Chest.

Of the Head-saw.
The Use.
THe Head-saw is an instrument with which a vent may be given sometimes through
the Cranium, and thereby the use of the Trapan may be happily forborne: and for
that reason this instrument may have a place in the Surgeons Chest: sometimes
also a small ragged piece of the Cranium may so hang, that this instrument may
be used to saw it away. But I wish young Artists not to be over-busie in Good
heed required in sawing.
sawing, plucking away, or raising the fractured Cranium, as is said, more then
of mere necessity they are argued unto, lest fearful and sudden accidents
follow, not to be avoided not stayed: If ought be merely loose, and in sight,
take that away; if not, forbear to pluck much at first, for nature is exceeding
beneficial in eiecting unnatural things in that part, and very froward if
thou use force whilst she is weak her self.

Of the dismembring saw.
Instruments must be ready at hand and kept clean.
THis great and terrible instrument, only ordained for amputation or
dismembring, is fitting to be always ready and clean kept in the Surgeons
Chest, with two blades thereunto, though one good blade well used will serve an
Artist for his whole life: but forasmuch as it is only appointed, as is said,
for the work of dismembring, I refer the Reader to a subsequent Chapter of
dismembring, where I shall at large recite the use thereof, and (having small
leisure) will now haste to the next.

Of the dismembring Nippers, and of the Mallet and Chizel for dismembring.
THese instruments having coherence with the precedent, namely, the Saw, are
merely invented, as the former, for amputation The Use.
chiefly, and are appointed to the fingers and toes, as the other is to the
legs and arms. I need say no more, of them in this place, but that they are
good necessaries upon occasions in the Surgeons Chest, being kept well.
Nevertheless, in want of such at Sea, the Ship-Carpenter No great n^^d of them.
for a need can always furnish the Surgeon in a short warning; and therefore
they may as well be forborne as any other I know in the Chest, if allowance grow
scant.

Of the Speculum oris plain.
The use.
THis Speculum oris is that which takes hold on the tongue and under the chin
at once, and is very necessary to hold open the mouth for the better applying
medicines to the throat: and this instrument This is very necessary.
is of no other use at all in the Surgeons Chest; yet because the work is
frequent at Sea, there is much need of such an instrument in the Surgeons Chest.

Of the Speculum oris with a screw
Frequent in use, and very profitable.
THis Speculum serves to screw open the mouth, which is often very need full
at Sea, as well in the cure of Lethargy and Scurvie, as in many other
dangerous cases; and namely, sometime for conveying nourishment into the mouth
of the Patient: sometime also for the bringing in medicines of several kinds,
too long to write of; wherefore it may not well be missing in the Surgeons
Chest.

Of the Speculum Linguae.
The form of Speculum linguae. The use thereof.
THis Speculum Linguae. is a small instrument which may be carried in a
plaster box: it is formed like a splatter or spatula at one end, only it is
hollow and cut through, and the other being formed for scraping the tongue, is
very fitting in Fevers, and furring of the tongue. The broad end is used to
hold down the tongue at some times as you desire, either to inject any liquor
into the throat, or to apply any other medicine to the mouth or throat; though
some use in place thereof a splatter, yet this instrument is far steddier,
better, and The Commendation of it.
cleaner and being through hollow, as is said, the tongue is not apt to slip or
slide from under it any way.

Of the Speculum Any.
THe Speculum Any declares his use by his name, belonging only The use.
to an^ or the fundament, to open the same as occasion shall be offered, upon
every grief or disease happening thereunto, and cannot Reasons for the
necessity of it.
well be forborne in the Surgeons chest. For if there happen in the orifice of
the fundament any excoriation or exulceration, then can nothing Speculum: An
advertisement for the right use of the instrument. Note 1.
of this instrument without good reason. For if by injection, without it he can
cure the Patient, it is much better so to do, and much easier to the Patient
then to use the instrument. One principal reason is, the Patient has not
always power to help himself by giving way to

Of the cauterizing Irons.
THe ancient Chirurgions of former ages used these instruments far more then in
these our times: The necessary use of them in many cures is now forborne, by
reason the terror thereof to the Patient is The use.
great, yet the use of them is very needful, as namely, to cauterize any vein
or Artery in strong fluxes of blood, which cannot otherwise be stayed. And in
the Epilepsie or falling sickness they are often used with When and where the
use is required.
good success: also they are good to make a funtanel or Issue in the hinder
part of the head, or in the neck; so likewise in the cure of the Lethargy or
Apoplexy, if upon learned and good advice there be held just cause so to do.
But they have been used commonly by the ancient Surgeons of former ages for the
opening of Apostumes; and surely they are better in my judgment for the good
of the Patient in many Apostumes then the Launcet: yet I confess I make no use
of them my The benefit of the instrument, fear and scandal hinders.
self in that kind, because of the fear they put the Patient into, and for
speech of people, who are ready to scandalize an Arti^^ upon each light
occasion. These instruments have likewise been commonly used by the ancients in
dismembring, namely, to cauterize sometimes the whole end of the stump, and
sometimes only veins and arteries, and doubtless with good warrant they may
yet be so used; but in that case they are wholly now forborne, for reasons
aforesaid, and for that a more pleasant course is known both for the Patient
and the Artist; yet I conclude it is very fit the Surgeons Chest be furnished
with diverse sorts of them, if the allowance of the Surgeon will admit it.

Of Storks bills, Ravens bills, Crows bills, Goose bills, and the Terebellum.
The use.
THese last recited instruments have their several uses, to draw out bullets
arrow-heads, broken bones, or whatsoever else of unnatural things are gotten
into any part of man's body. In the use of each of Care in their use is to be
had for diverse reasons.
them great care and respect is to be had, not to use extreme violence on the
sudden to draw out the offending thing, for it is not always necessary to draw
it forth by the way of the first wound, but perhaps it may with far less
danger be thrust quite through the member, and taken out on the other side.
Sometime also the offending thing, as a bullet, may be so fixed in a bone, or
otherwise betwixt bones, that it is far better not to move it, then to offend
the part where it is fixed or seated: sometimes also Nature will better cast it
out then thou can by Art devise to do, and over-forwardnesse does often as
much hurt as good. It happens also sometimes, that the orifice of the wound
is to be dilated, or enlarged to draw out a loose bone, or other thing, In such
a case if it The drawing out of a loose bone.
be merely loose, it is best to take it out the first dressing; but if it be
loose at one end only and fast at the other, except thou without flux of blood
or danger of the member can remove it, forbear and give nature leave to do
her office, and have patience. For otherwise young Artists which are forward to
tear, cut, and search too boldly, do often that harm which is unrecoverable. To
conclude, since experience and God and man are to be sought unto for knowledge.
reason make an Art, if thou have reason be careful to ask counsel both of God
and man, that thou may answer thy deeds both here and in the world to come.
For the subject of thy Art is the most precious of Gods creatures. Thus much
for the use of the aforesaid instruments at this time.

Of Incision sheeres.
THere is in every Art or Science a due respect to observe the having Incision
sheeres are rather for form then necessary use.
of some things for form and order sake; and if any instruments in the Surgeons
Chest may be termed for form sake to be placed there, the Incision sheeres are
of that kind: for they are generally desired, The seldom use of the
Instrument.
but scarce once in a man's like worth the usage. For admit there were an
occasion to dilate or enlarge a wound; it is far better done with the Incision
knife, which justly will obey the Artist his will, without An Incision knife
will excuse the want of the sheeres.
more or less doing then need requires: and this instrument is no way so
justly to be limited. Wherefore though I have here nominated it, I forbear any
persuasive words to urge the use of it, but leave the Artist to his will
therein.

Of the use of Probes of several siezes.
THe use of a Probe, can no way be forborne in the Surgeons Chest: Probes very
needful.
for no Chirurgical work is well and artificially effected, without some
occasion of the use thereof, more or less; as namely, oftentimes it The diverse
manner of their use.
is to be armed with dry soft lint, to cleanse a wound: sometimes again, as is
aforesaid, armed with dry lint and dipped into some lotion, oil, or liquor,
therewith to mundifie, corrode, or heal the grief, according The ends of their
use.
to the due occasion thereof, and will of the Artist: sometime to enquire the
depth of a wound, ulcer, or fistula; in which work many times great wrong is
done by unconscionable or ignorant Surgeons, to their Great danger in the ill
use of the Probe.
Patients, by forcing too far the Probe, thereby to make the grief appear
deeper, which I advise young Surgeons to make a conscience of: for by such
abuse, the Patient is many times greatly endangered of his The use of a long
Probe.
life. Further, some use the longer sort of Probes, with eyes like needles, in
wounds that penetrate through a member* yea, some are so hardy To draw the
Probe therow the body wounded, is evil.
they will put them through the Trunk of the body, the Patient being wounded
through the body; all which I hold to be very idle; for certainly it must be
both very painful, fearful, and dangerous to the Patient and the custom of
such artists is to draw laune or a fine linen cloth, being put into the eye of
the Probe, (or stamule as some term it) and dipped in some artificial balm,
through the member; yea, and some are so wise in their own conceits, that they
leave the said laun or linen cloth in the wound from one dressing to another,
which for my part I utterly mislike, for I know in all wounds nature striveth
to make unition of the parts divided, and whosoever keeps asunder the parts by
such courses, it shall repent him, except he be graceless. My self have had
reasonable experience in piercing wounds, both through the trunk of the body,
and through the outward members, and have ever contented my self, in putting in
to each orifice a short and easy tent, which I commonly make of emplastrum
stipticum Paracelsi, or some other good plaster spread on a clout, and rolled
gently tentwise, and so applied dipped in Balm, the tent being but of half an
inch or an inch long at the most: of which I never yet repented me, except a
broken bone be to come out, and then I alter my intention according as the
occasion enforces, with other answering and methodical courses due to healing
being observed: which in their places (as time will permit) shall be touched
God willing. No more at this time of the use of Probes.

Of Spatulaes great and small.
SPatulaes or splatters, as they commonly term them, are most needful
instruments to spread unguent, and emplaisters withal, and also Their use.
to stir about, and the better to compound any medicine on the fire; Splatters
of wood as well as of Iron necessary.
and to this latter work the Artist may make wooden splatters, which will be
far fitter and cleaner then those of Iron: The Surgeons Chest cannot well be
without both sorts, and variety will do well; wherefore they cannot be forborne
in the Chest.

Spathula mundani.
THis instrument is newly devised by my self, to serve upon any occasion A new
instrument.
of extreme costiveness, which often happens to sea men, so that no purging
medicine neither upward nor downward administered or taken, will work; which my
self have more then once seen, in which The use.
case the fundament, with the speculum any aforesaid, if occasion urge, is to
be opened, and the spoon end of this instrument put in, and the hard excrements
there with drawn out; which in some bodies are so dry that they may be
poudered. This disease kills many, and may by Costiveness dangerous.
the diligent Artist be easily cured as aforesaid. This recited instrument may
be easily forced into the fundament without the speculum any to conduct it,
being anointed or greased, and first warmed a little. This grief comes now and
then to men which have the scurvy, and it often so inflameth, and excoriateth;
yea, and sometime putrifieth the Arse-gut or Longanum, that the party either
dies thereof, or the sharp humidity proceeding by reason of the inflammation
and excoriation thence mentioned, makes passage for the aforesaid hard
excrement, after which follows a most extreme and painful flux of blood,
which for the most part kills them: and yet is it often seen, that the party
being in time diligently attended (by God his mercy) Great care to be had in
the cure of this disease.
may have comfort and remedy for it. These hard excrements taken away, the body
returns to the natural former habit again, etc.

Pacis, Pullicans, Punches or Forcers, Crows bills, Phlegmes, Gravers and Files
for teeth.
ALl these recited instruments, and each of them are needful in the The use.
Surgeons Chest, and cannot be well forborne for the drawing of teeth, forasmuch
as the cleansing of the teeth and gums, and the letting of the gums blood are
often no small things for keeping men in health at Sea, and sometimes do save
the lives of men both at Sea and Land: For we see that from an Apostume begun
under a rotten or hollow tooth, for want of drawing the same, sometimes
proceeds Skill in drawing of teeth required.
great swellings in the face, or in the amygdals and throat, and the party is
suffocated and dies: Likewise by indiscreet drawing of a tooth, either the jaw
is broken, or some other had accident is provoked. Wherefore I hold none worthy
to go for a Surgeons Mateto sea, who is ignorant of tooth drawing; and I esteem
him an unworthy Surgeon (how high soever he bears his head) that can draw a
tooth well, and will upon need at Sea scorn or deny to do it.

The manner how how to draw a tooth aright.
For drawing of teeth, the true manner is, first well to divide the gum from
the tooth; in which work if you be wary, you need not launch or cut the gum at
all, but only with the round sharp pointed end of the The use of a Phlegm.
phlegm, to compass the tooth close, piercing by little and little still
somewhat deeper, but ever keeping round and close to the tooth till you feel
your phlegm be as low as the jaw bone, in which time you may do well then to
consider what kind of instrument you wiltake to draw it, and if it be the
furthest tooth of the jaw either above or below* The use of the Pullican.
or that it be a stump except it be of the foremost teeth, the Pullicans are the
fittest instruments to draw with; if it be any other of the great grinders, and
that there be reasonable hold on the inner side, be it on The use of the Pacis.
the upper or lower jaw, it is best done with the pacis, but you must be wary
you draw not a large tooth with a narrow pacis, for so you hazard the breaking
thereof; wherefore 2. sorts of pacis at lea^^ are needful in a Chest, and the
like of pullicans, and punches or forcers, for you must The use of the Forcers
and Punches.
fit a large tooth with a large instrument. Concerning the foremost teeth and
the eye teeth they are safest done with the Forcers, or punch, provided that
they be upon the upper jaw, and for them of the lower jaw being strong, with
narrow pacis. Note further, that as well the eye-teeth, as also the fore-teeth
are very apt to break in drawing, for that they always are deep, wherefore
there is great care to be had in Respect in placing the Instrument to be had.
the placing your instrument, of what sort soever it be, and you must in
raising the tooth be very careful for fear of breaking the same, or offending
the jaw. Wherefore for one general rule ere you draw a How to place this
instrument.
tooth, forget not to thrust down your instrument as low as you can possible
toward the root of the tooth, and that you gripe it steady hold and stay the
jaw. Beware also you be not too sudden or rash in raising the tooth, but that
you feel as it were the form of the situation thereof in your plucking out of
the same; for some great teeth, being far wider in the lower end then
elsewhere, if you be too rash in raising them from their place, you are sure
either to break them or to damnifie the jaw bone. And in truth in that I have
often wondered at the goodness of God, when I have viewed a tooth with three
large stradling roots or fangs, forced out at a round narrow hole; which Gods
mercy in working that which Art cannot.
fangs are no way flexible: so that it must follow of necessity the ^aw bone
has opened it self (though by force) to let them out; and yet without to harm
to the Patient, or help of Art, closed again, and in three days per^ectly
whole. Concerning the metal your instrument The metal of the Instruments ought
to be respected.
ought to be made of, the forcers or punches, are best to be made of the
hardest steel; the pacis and pullicans of steel softened, that they may not
pinch too sharp: My self have (to my pain) proved experience in A reason drawn
from experience. What fit to be done after the teeth be drawn.
my own head twice; namely, the harm of steeled hard pacis: which pinched off
the heads of two of my own teeth, and left the roots behind; which makes me
the more to commiserate others in that behalf. After the drawing of teeth some
put vinegar, and some put other liquours into the mouth, but vinegar I utterly
mislike: I never use other thing but salt betwixt my fingers, thrust into the
place where the tooth stood, and then with my fingers close again the gum
easily together: For in my opinion vinegar is hurtful in such cases; but if
sometimes the party be not in ease presently* then I use to heat a little of my
ordinary lotion, and give it the party to keep hot in his or her mouth, holding
it on that side where the grief is, which for the most part brings present
ease.

The use of the Crows bills.
Concerning the Crows bills, they are only used to take hold of any snag of a
tooth or bone loose in the jaw, or elsewhere in the body where occasion may
urge.

Another use of Phlegmes.
Phlegmes have not only their uses in teeth drawing, but also to launch and cut
the gums to let them blood, or to cut oftentimes the superfluous flesh of the
gums away, it being too rank, as in cases of the scurvy, the cure whereof (God
willing) shall in another place be spoken of. And for Gravers they are used to
take scales off, being a hard The use of Gravers.
substance which use to fix themselves to the teeth, causing them to become
loose and stink, or be black in the mouth; or to help to scrape or cleanse a
bone in any other part of the body, as just occasion is offered. The small
Files are used either to file a small snag of a tooth, The use of Files.
which offends the tongue or lips, or to abate any end of a bone elsewhere
in the body which is fractured.

One Bundle of small Instruments usually brought from Germany containing diverse
kinds, as Mullets, Forceps, Hamules, or Hooks, Ear-pickers, Sikes, Small
spatula's, etc.
FOrasmuch as the unexpected casualties that happens to a man are innumerable,
I see not how the Surgeon can by his wit devise instruments or remedies for all.

The use of the Germane instruments.
Wherefore for that hair or a mote in the eye, a stone in the ear or nostrels,
a pin or a bone in the throat, a spill in the finger, and diverse like
casualties unfortunately happen on the sudden, it is very necessary for the
Surgeon to be furnished with such like needful instruments, as are commonly
contained in the Bundle mentioned: for this Bundle contains at the least 20.
small instruments of strange forms, at first devised (no doubt) by learned and
diligent Artists, and do well garnish and set out the Surgeons Chest, and are
many ways very needful for any the occasions mentioned.

Of the large Siringe containing one wine pint, commonly called the Glister
Siringe.
THis worthy and well devised instrument so needful in the Surgeons The
necessity of this Siringe.
Chest, I wish each Surgeons Mate were perfect in the use thereof: for it is so
necessary and so comfortable an instrument to him that has need thereof, and
so ready, neat, and easy for the workman, as surely no instrument in the
Surgeons Chest, in my opinion, is like to it. For there are two principal and
capital evils, which chiefly hasten the ends of many of our loving Countrymen
at sea, not only in the East Indies, but also in all hot Countries: the first
and principal is extreme The use thereof.
looseness and weakness of the stomach, and intrals, causing a flux of the
belly; the other is extreme costiveness: in both which this instrument is most
necessary. Provide therefore that you be sure to have one The manner of keeping
the Siringe.
at hand, and that it be always ready: also that you have several pipes
thereto; that you arm it well with good tow; that when you have used it, you
wipe it clean, and hang it up in your Cabin in two parts being drawn out,
namely, the staff and the barrel each by it self; for if it be kept close, it
will be musty and the tow rotten. There is also More pipes them one with a
crooked neck needful.
to be had in readiness a crooked neck much like an elbow, belonging to the
same instrument, that how crooked soever the Patient lie, the medicine may be
administered to him: and therewith also any man may give himself a Glister very
easily, without the help of another.

Necessary rules First of the tow in the Siringe.
The principal things to be observed in fitting the instrument, is that the
tow, within the staff mentioned, be even and full and close put on, that no
drop of liquor can come out behind at the staff's end; which is 2. Of the
Glister pot.
as easy to do as in a small Siringe. And you must also have a Glister pot of
pewter, but one of brass were better, for fear of melting. Your glister pot
should be made with a snout or lip, and containing one pint and a half, the
better to deliver in the liquor at the narrow hole of the 4. Of putting in the
Glister into the Siringe.
Siringe without a funnel. When you would put in your medicine, you must draw
down your staff as low as you can, that there may be the 4. Of stopping the
Siringe filled.
whole room to contain the substance which you have ready, namely, your
Glister, which put in, have ready a cork to stop the hole you put 5. Put on the
pipe.
it in by, then may you lay down your instrument till you be ready to use it.
There is no other thing in the delivering it into the body to be 6. Anoint it
with oil or Axungia.
observed, save that you put on the pipe, anointing the end of it with some
fat thing, or dipping it into the oil swimming in the Siring. And when you are
ready, having some tow about the head of the said pipe, 7 Put tow about the Pipe
wringing it hard in, thrust it to the head, laying the Siringe in an even 8
Concerning the delivery of the Glister into the body.
position if it may be, and then put it from you till all be in the gut: then
let the party turn himself on his back, forcing himself by all possible means
to retain the medicine given him for one hour if he can. Sometimes it falls
out, that by means of the hardness of the excrement in the gut, the holes of
the Siringe pipe is like to be choked Extrement sometimes stops the passage
and hindered from delivering of the medicine; in such a case (the said
excrement being only clammy and not fully hardened) put upon the end of your
Siringe pipe that first enters the gut over the holes of the Note.
same pipe, a thin oily clout that may cover all the holes, and so put it in,
clout and all, thrusting the same up to the head or thick part of the Pipe;
then a very little (as it were) draw back your hand, and deliver your Glister
with some reasonable good force, thrusting the Pipe in the delivery close up to
the body* that nothing come back; the Siringe being drawn out let it be washed,
wiped, and drawn out of the barrel, as I have said, and so in two parts hung up
to be ready for the next occasion. But if you find such resistance in the gut,
that your medicine by the The use of Spatula Mundana required if the Glister
cannot have passage. What to be done if the body through weakness cannot keep
the Glister.
aforesaid means will not enter, then with the aforementioned Spatula mundana,
draw out part of the hard excrements which hinder, and then proceed as
beforesaid to give a Glister. Moreover, many are very weak and unfit to hold in
their bodies any such medicine, except you with some tow, clout, or the like,
will hold it in, they can take no benefit by a Glister: wherefore in such a
case, you must be full of humanity and Christian commiseration; not to be fine
fingered, squeamish, or disdainful, but consider your brother by your self.
Concerning the substance of a Glister, the quantity to be given, and other
necessary observations, of that kind, in the Chapters of the cure of the Flix
and Scurvy I have written; to which place I refer the well disposed Surgeons
Mate: and look what for brevities sake I have omitted, the young practitioner
must as I have done before him, either by reading, inquiring, or practicing,
and sometimes even by erring find it out: and if he know more then my self,
thank God for it, and let him impart some to others, and not scorn this; for to
such I write it not, but to the young and willing learner. Some may marvel, I
multiply so many words concerning the Glister Siringe, and forget to mention
the Glister bag and Pipe, so This Siringe is preferred before the Glister B^g
and Pipe.
good and ancient a work, and so long in use before the other. To which I
answer; this work is cleanlier for the Surgeon, easier for the Patient, and may
be delivered with greater of lesser force, as the Artist pleases; and this
instrument will last when the other will stink and putrify: and yet I deny not
the other to be good, but not to be trusted to at Sea.

Thus much of the Glister Siringe.

Of the small Siringe.
IT might seem a thing vain to mention instructions herein: for what Barbers
boy is not practiced in the use of the small Siringe? Truly few, and yet many
Masters to my knowledge err grossly in the true uses thereof diverse ways,
all which were frivolous in these brief notes Instructions for the use of the
small Siringe.
to touch. First therefore observe that when you use a Siringe, let it be
clean; that it be smooth at the end for galling; that it be even armed with
tow; that it go not by jumps nor too stiff; and that you carry a steady and
even hand in delivering it, and force it not over strongly, except upon great
reason. And if the grief be in the passage of the yard, as in case of Gonorrea,
oftentimes there are excoriations, then in the putting in the Siringe it is
needful to rest thy arms in the delivery thereof on the Patient his thighs, he
sitting somewhat high, or standing bowing forwards, and How to use this Siringe
in the yard.
strive not to fill the Siringe too full at once, for then thou can not
easily and steadily reach it to deliver it: and the first time thou presentest
it thou may if thou please make short work, and deliver it betwixt glans and
praeputium, that is, betwixt the skin and the head of the yard, holding the
forepart of the praeputium close together, if it may be held together, which
serves only to wash without the passage. The second time How to deliver an
Injection.
deliver into the passage so far as well thou can reach; namely, to the end
of the Pipe, if without great pain thou can effect it, resting thy arms, at
it is said, and holding with the one hand the yard (as it were) in the midst
thereof or behind the former part of the pipe of the Siring; namely, not merely
to the head of the yard, nor straining nor pressing thy hand too hard, only
that the water injected may be kept in; for by that holding of the left hand
close, the water being artificially put in, will come to the neck of the
bladder; which done keep it so in till thy Siringe being drawn out, can be
filled once again, and deliver it as the other was, without removing the hand
that holds; and that second time, the water will come into a bladder; and
observing duly this form of injection, thou shall cast in as much water as
thou please into the bladder Errors in injecting manifested.
without pain, with only an ordinary Siringe; whereas casting it in and
holding the praeputium close as is usual, assure thy self the water will never
come at the neck of the bladder, nor further then the pipe is put in; whereas
often the defect is in the neck of the bladder, and thy medicine comes not
there. Also, let not thy medicine be too hot which thou injectest, for that is
dangerous, and cold is also bad; so hot as piss is Mercurial injections to be
rejected.
the true temper, or a little warmer. Beware also of Mercurial lotions, I mean
any which have Mercury sublimate, precipitate, or otherwise prepared in them,
for though they have good qualities, yet they are (upon The evils the case.
my knowledge and experience) dangerous, used by way of injection into the yard;
for they will utterly alter and overthrow the natural faculty of the yard, and
will offend the erection of Virga, and so calcine the same, that it shall
become impotent to his natural work, I know it, and yet they may be with good
success used in curing malignant ulcers twixt glans and praeputium, or
elsewhere upon the yard, as daily use of them declares. Concerning Lotions or
Injections, they shall, God willing, in another place be mentioned. Also,
concerning the general uses of Injections not proper only to the yard. The
necessity of the Siringe.
the Siringe, they are not alone limited to Virga or the yard, nor to venereal
causes only; but they are also of especial good use in wounds, ulcers and
fistulaes; as also for griefs in the mouth and throat, and may not therefore be
omitted in the Surgeons Chest: wherefore I advise at the least two if not
three, each with three pipes, to be ready in the Chest upon any occasion.

Of the Catheter, together with wax lights to search the conduit of the bladder.
The use.
THe Catheter may well be numbered one amongst the needful instruments in the
Surgeons Chest; for if obstructions happen, either in the passage of the urine,
or neck of the bladder, through slime, gravel, the stone, or like accident,
which by the artificial use of a siringe cannot be removed, then is this
needful instrument to be used, as also to make search for the stone in the
bladder.

How to use it.
If therefore there be occasion to use it, put it in gently as follows,
namely with the crooked or dependent part thereof downward, so far as it will
be put in, being first anointed with a little oil of Almonds, or some fresh
grease, or oil for want of the first rehearsed; and being put in as far as
you can without much force, then feel by the root of the yard near the
fundament with thy fore finger, anointed with butter or oil (or the middle
finger of the other hand) where the end of the Catheter rests or bears out,
then put in the Catheter yet further toward the fundament, pressing or bearing
down, as it were, a little the lower part of the said instrument with thy upper
hand which stays the Catheter, then (together with the help of the lower
finger of the other hand) turn the Catheter upwards, putting it also withal
forward a little, and it will slip into the bladder; then draw out the inner
wire, and the urine will come forth, still keeping the instrument carefully
within the bladder till all be run out that gently will come without forcing.
Moreover, you may by putting in the first or longest finger into ^no or the
fundament, the Catheter being in the bladder, and the water drawn out, feel
easily if any stone be in the bladder, the party grieved standing and bending
his body likewise forward.

Of the searching candle.
The use.
THe searching candle is chiefly to be used when there is a caruncle or
ulceration in the neck of the bladder, or passage of the urine, and then it is
used both to find out the place where the said grief is, and also to bring apt
medicines to the place grieved; but that work requires good deliberation well
to effect it: for an expert workman may easily err herein, except he take good
regard. Wherefore when by the candle you have The right end of the candle is to
find out the grieved place, and right passage thereunto.
found the certain place of the grief, which is commonly done by the stoppes
or stays which the said candle finds in the passage, be careful to observe
the just length to the further end of the said stop or place agrieved, and
there if you mark your candle well, you shall by the same perceive the full
length and breadth of the disease: then upon the said light or candle, fasten
your medicine which you intend to heal the The time when the medicine is to be
applied.
grief with; as namely, if the disease be a kind of spungie flesh, as often
The right manner of applying medicines.
it is a very little allumen ustum, or vitriolum ustum, will be fitting
medicines, or what else you know best for such occasions, and print it
according to the depressed part of the wax into the wax candle, and conveigh it
warily to the place, and let the wax light remain for a short time in the
yard, then having a care you keep it not till the wax melt too much, drawing
it out, and do so again; and alter your medicine upon the searching candle, as
you see cause and forget not to use good injections also, which help much. Thus
much for this time concerning the Catheter and searching candles.

These former recited instruments may be placed on the Chest-lid, except the
Glister pot. Their necessary uses being briefly touched, it rests now to
speak next of certain other Chirurgicall instruments and necessaries
pertaining to Chirurgerie.

The Salvatorie and the necessary appurtenances.
Six diverse unguents at the least in a Salvatorie requisite.
THe Salvatorie if it contain six several Unguents, it is sufficient for any
present use, so that they be such are found and good, and most in common use:
such are

Unguentum Basilicon. Apostolorum. Linament of Arceus. Aureum. Diapompholigos.
Dialthea


Light rooms in a Salvatorie not amiss.
But if the Salvatorie have eight rooms, then two more as necessary as the
former may be added; as namely, unguentum Populeon, and unguentum Album;
concerning the several uses of these unguents, in their places somewhat shall
be spoken, God willing.

Of the Plaister-box, and what belongs thereto: And first of the Emplaisters.
THe Plaister-box ought to contain, at the least, three kinds of several
Emplaisters: as namely,

What Emplaisters the Plaister-box should have at all times ready.
Emplast. Stipticum Paracelsi. Diachalcitheos. De lapide calaminari.


For want of Diachalcitheos, Emplast. De minio may serve.

The uses of the Instruments due to the Plaister-box follow next, and are these,

Speculum linguae. Phlegm. One capital instrument. A directorie for enlarging
a strict orifice. Scissers. Forceps. Spatula. Probes. Stitching needles and
quill. Launcet. Barras pipe. Lavatory. Uvula spoon.
There belongs to the Surgeons Mate a careful and especial respect to be
had concerning Scissers; namely, that he have at the least two pair of good
Scissers for to cut hair, that they be well grownd, and kept Surgeons ignorant
of the true use and keeping Scissers and plaister-box, unworthy name and place.
clean; as also in his plaister-box one pair, and that they be at all times
kept well. The manner of using them were lost labor to be taught any Surgeons
Mate: for if he be therein unskilful, he is unworthy of his place. Wherefore I
only recite them for remembrance sake, and likewise for order, having already
spoken somewhat of the several uses of each one of the recited instruments.

Of the Forceps.
The use,
THe Forceps are only used to take off medicines from diseases, or sometimes
to take out a spill, a hair, or a loose bone, or ought else which is offensive,
from a wound, or to draw out ought that may by chance come into the ear,
nostrils, the mouth, or throat, to the danger of the Patient. Wherefore it is
an instrument of continual use, and has many offices in Surgery.

Of the Spatula.
THe use or abuse of the Spatula, as it has his office to take out an unguent
and spread it on lint, can do no offense to the Patient greatly. Wherefore I
will pretermit to lose time in declaring ought thereof.

Of the Probe.
The use.
THe Probe has already been mentioned in another place; but the small Probe,
being a necessary merely belonging to the plaster box, serves not only for
the aforesaid uses, but also to cleanse wounds, ulcers, fistulaes, etc. and is
a very necessary instrument which cannot well The abuse of this Instrument.
be missed: but there is much abuse of this instrument oftentimes by making
probation (as the phrase is;) for some, to show a wound deep, having gotten
once within the cutis, will, by thrusting it sometimes betwixt the coats of the
muscles, sometimes otherwise, ignorantly either endanger Note.
the part, and thereby occasion evil accidents to follow, or otherwise break
the coat of a vein or artery, to the overthrow of the patient, or his great
hazard.

Of the stitching quill, and stitching needles.
THe stitching quill, and stitching needles, have their due place in the
plaster box: wherefore that they may be the more ready on a sudden, as
occasion is offered, forget not to have at the least three ready How many
needles needful Of what siezes. Instructions for stitching.
needles well armed and pointed of several siezes, I mean threded with strong
colored silk, well waxed: and when you stitch, beware you draw not the orifice
awry, oblique or deformed, but that you have great respect to the true beauty
and former comeliness of the wounded part, neither let your stitches be too
near one unto another, neither tie your silk too close, which will occasion the
stitches to break before their time; for nature will not be forced. Also when
you would stitch a wound, let the hole of your stitching quill not be forgotten
to be set to the one side of the lips or sides of the wound which you intend to
pierce, so that it may give a stay to the part when it is to be pierced through
with the needle; and it must be just so placed, that the needle piercing
through the wound, may also come within the said hole; which drawn through,
take away your quill, and set it so to the other side. Sometimes also it
happens in stitching the sides, that the sides of the wound lie so near each
to the other, that both sides may at one time be taken up without drawing out
the needle at all: in such a case the stitcing quill mentioned is not to be
removed from* the first place. A double colored silk is best to stitch with,
being waxed, next that, thread will serve. It is also convenient to wax the
thread or silk, or to use some emplaister to rub it with in place of wax. Note
also, that rolling needles be put into the said stitching quill to be ready:
also thread to sow rolls together for making the readier and more convenient
Ligature in wounds and ulcers, as occasion is. There is also a form of dry
stitching of new wounds, which at this time I omit for brevities sake. Thus
much of the stitching quill, and stitching needles.

Of the Launcet.
ALthough at the first it might be imagined that little were to be spoken to
the Surgeons Mate concerning the Launcet, for without question each Surgeons
Mate knows a Launcet as well as my self; yet when I consider the weakness of
young men concerning the true use, and the abuses of the same, and that I call
to mind how many good men daily hazard, if not lose their lives by the
undiscreet use thereof* I am at a pause with my self, to consider in these few
lines I have to write, what I might say for to furnish the Surgeons Mate with
best and most needful Instructions concerning the Launcet.
admonitions in fewest words. First therefore, methinks, it is not amiss to
advise him, that he carry with him at the least six of the best sort, besides
six more common ones, for an east Indie voyage: that he oil them, or anoint
then with Axungie, and so wrap them in oily clouts, that they rust not: and
that he only bring forth into the air one at once. Also that he have ready
convenient bands to tie the arm; a band made of wosted gartering is the best,
or of a strong fine list; for all Concerning blood-letting necessary
admonitions.
bands made of silk or linen, will slide back. Let him remember also that he
tie not two knots upon the band, for that requires too much trouble in giving
the vein vent: if he use a woollen band, one sliding boe-knot will serve, which
is easy to be loosned or fastened, where you would cause it to bleed more or
less. Note also, that the band be turned twice about the arm ere you tie it:
also that this knot lie aloft on the top of the arm, and on the outside of the
elbow, and not too near the joint or the place where the vein is to be opened:
that he never open a vein but first he have ready a band and bolster to make
it up again: that Of the Lances points. Of the vein opened.
his launcets be not too spear pointed, I mean small pointed: for the broadest
pointed Launcets make the best work: likewise that orifice be large, not deep,
yet not overlarge, for it is overlarge when the blood tumbleth out without a
stream, for that spends too much the spirits, and it is also too narrow when
the stream is small, and the vein is puffed up with wind. Note also, that if
your Patient incline to faintness Of faintnisse in blood-letting with a remedy.
or swounding, you cause him betimes to thrust his longest finger of the other
hand into his throat, and a little provoke himself to casting, it helps
presently; let him reiterate the same work if occasion be. But if he chance on
a sudden, as often it happens, to be gone in a swound, beware you lay him not
on his back with his head too low, as it is usual Of sweunding in blood letting
the remedy approved.
with some to do, for so you may chance to lose him. I have seen the like once
done by an ignorant blood-letter: wherefore remember it, but rather bend him
with one arm forewards, and with your other hand stop very close his mouth and
nostrels, and in very short time you shall perceive wind to come, and it will
gather to his mouth, and he will strive for breath, then let go your hand, and
all is well; and as often as he faints do so. This is a safe course, which
with good success I have used from my youth to this day.

The quantity of blood to be taken away at sea.
Further note, that at sea, especially where fresh food or good nourishment is
not at hand, it is good to be sparing in the quantity of blood to be taken
away, and rather often take blood away, then too much at once, except blood
abound too much; which is not easily judged by every young Artist. For
sometimes the party is idle-headed by distemper of the blood, which by cooling
broths and julips ought rather to be tempered; providing also, that he have the
benefit of nature, I mean a loose body, Remedies for idleness in the head
through distemperature of blood. Phlebotomie not ealwayes to be used.
or be provoked thereto by art; and by this means rather seek to cure, then by
rash Pplebotomy; for you must consider that in the blood consists the life of
man: wherefore, be not rash in that work; and as is said, hold ever this rule,
that if the Patient neither on the day thou would open a vain, nor on the
day before we have had a stool, that thou attempt not to let him blood before
first he has had one stool procured Observe well. Of the vains to be opened.
him at the least, if not more; which is soonest and safest done by a
suppository: the next safest and better way is by a glister. The veins
commonly opened are six in number; namely, one in the forehead, one under the
tongue, three in the arm, and one in the foot: The three in the arm are most in
use, whose names are Cephalica the uppermost, or head vain, so called of the
Greek word Cephale, which signifies a head, and is commonly opened in all
griefs of the head where it can be taken, in want whereof, it is almost as good
to take the middle vein.

The next is the median or the middle vein, it is the second principal vein,
which is generally taken as indifferent for the whole body.

Aspecial observation concerning the liver vein.
The third is the Basilica, or the liver vein, being the lowest in the arm, and
more respects the liver then the two former. But hold this general rule, that
if thou intend the opening of a vein to help the liver, and that the liver vein
will not be well taken, then take the median vein; for thou must know that all
veins have their original in the liver. Some arms have but one fair vein
appearing; then it follows of necessity, thou must take that: for many
learned Physicians are of opinion, that generally the fullest vein in the arm
is best and fittest to be taken, except some special cause alter their minds:
for their words are often quae majus turget, majus urget, which may be
englished, the vein which shows most, is most faulty.

Causes of b^ood letting in the forehead. Under the tongue. In the saphane vein.
The vein in the forehead is also often taken for pains in the head, as
rheumes, distillations of humors, and the like.

The veins under the tongue in the squinancie or angine, imflammations, and
swellings of the Amygdals of the throat, or of the root of the tongue, the
liver vein called saphane, chiefly is taken for woman's sicknesses, not often
seen at sea, though some necessary occasions chance of the taking thereof in
men at sea, for diverting and sometimes for curing of some special diseases,
which for brevity, having spent my limited time, I omit.

Incision knife.
THis Instrument is mentioned in the beginning of the uses of Instruments under
the title, Incision knife.

The Burras Pipe.
From whence it has its original. The use of the Burras Pipe.
THis Instrument thus named, doubtless was by a Surgeon borrowed at first from
some Gold or Silver-smith, and never paid him again; for the Gold smiths use it
daily, and cannot perform their works without a Burras Pipe, but the Surgeons
make other use thereof, (namely, for the most part) to retain corroding powders
in, as Vitrioll, burnt Allom praecipitate; and such other caustic medicines,
which well used perform very much in healing; So also their abuse brings The
danger of the abuse of it.
shame to the Artist, and often unrecoverable damage to the Patient. For it is
common with many Artists, in the healing of new wounds to mix praecipitate
either with a digestive Unguent, or with Basilic^n, and Dorsell or plegents
laid on tents, according to the form of the wound, and An error in healing of
a new wound observed.
to put it in, as they say, either to enlarge the wound, or to help digestion,
to take away proud flesh, to mundifie, and the like; and if not praecipitate,
then must they be busy with Vitrioll or Allom burned, or with Directions for
the cure of a new wound.
some caustic medicine in that kind. But I would advise the Surgeons Mate not
to use any corroding medicine at all in new or fresh wounds, but let the flesh
grow as proud as it will, the ground being clear from whence it grows,
namely, if it be from a wound wherein is no putrified bones, and if so be that
the wound be full of flesh, and then will not cicatrize, a little burned Allom
or Vitrioll, will do well, and then to your former dressing again, remembering
that each third or fourth dressing be merely dry lint, you shall find good
therein; and if you only take lint and wet it in a Coperas water, and let it
dry again, and lay that lint dry upon the proud flesh, sometimes for a
dressing or two, and then again to your former method, doubt not but it will
without pain very well cicatrize any new wound: I write this, for that by the
unskillfulness, yea, Surgeons wilfulness as well as unskilfulnes blameworthy.
and sometimes by the idleness of evil minded and base Empericks, I have seen
men lamed by the needless use of caustic medicines, even in slight wounds; to
which, if an old wife had openly applied her one salve for all sores, no such
thing had happened: yet I am not so simple to deny the just use of such noble
medicines in wounds, ulcers, and fistulaes, or otherwise where need is; but I
only here advise the young Artist, Note.
that he may not be too rash in the use of them, and likewise do advise him,
that having used them once, he first pause again at the least eight days,
namely, till the first Esker be fallen, and certain days after, ere he use any
caustic powder again; for with the use of corroding medicines, Two evils to be
avoided.
one immediately after another, many Ulcers are made more painful and
rebellious then they were, and the bones sometimes made foul which were
otherwise clean; which fault is too frequent now adays: and amongst many
gross faults daily committed by unexpert Empericks, this one is to be
lamented, namely, the use of keeping open penetrating wounds too forcibly and
too long by the use of hard tents, armed with caustic powders, whereby nature
can make no true unition, but is forced into much disorder; which I wish young
men to make a conscience of, and to be careful not to err in that kind.

The Lavatorie.
This Instrument is set down else where.

Of the Uvula spoone.
THis Instrument is made to put pepper and salt in, or fine bole, pepper, or
salt, or some other the like medicine, and to hold the same right under the
Uvula, which is for to blow up into the concavitie behind the same; and no
other great or especial use I know it has in Surgerie, except it may be used
to warm a medicine in.

Thus much of those necessaries which properly deserve the names of instruments
in the Surgeons Chest. Now a word or two of such other Appendixes, which in
their kind are as necessary as the former.

The Cupping-glasses or Ventoses.
The use is diverse.
THere are many necessary works in Surgery performed by Cupping-glasses,
namely, sometimes they are used to set upon a Bubo or botch to bring it
forward, and therein they are very good. Sometimes also to set in the nodell,
and on the upper part of the shoulder-blades, to draw back humors which
oppress the head, the eyes, or teeth: or against Lethargy, or on the thighs
against aches or pains there; or for the cure of the Sciatica, they are very
good; or sometimes to draw blood and spirits to The end why they are set
without scarifying. Why with scarifying.
a member withered or benumbed: in all these and diverse more griefs the
Cupping-glasses are very needful. Sometimes also they are set without
scarifying only to attract humors to the place. Another time (it may be) in
other cases they are used with scarifying, to take away blood and choler, which
offends the part* Some set them on with The diverse setting of them. The best
manner of setting them.
towe, some with a small wax light set under them; some only with the flame of
a great candle, which my self use, and is not offensive nor painful at all:
whereas the other ways the flame excoriateth often the part, and makes new
unseemly work: for the better doing whereof, I use to place my candle close to
the place where the Cups should be set, the place being first wet and rubbed
well with hot water and a sponge, and Note.
the Cupping-glasses also wet. Hold your Cupping-glasses over the flame a
little, and then clap it quickly on the place whilst yet the steame of the
light is in it, and it will be fast, and draw hard; but you must have your Cups
fit, and not too wide for the place you would set them on, or else they will
not take any hold. Further, when you perceive they have drawn well, which by
the blackness and rising of the skin you may sasily Scarification must be
light, and sudden, and with a Lanncet.
see, then (if you hold it fitting) you may lightly and quickly scarifie it
with a fine Launcet, which truly is the best and profitablest instrument for
that use; and then wetting your Cupping-glasses again, with the flame only of
the candle, set them on where they stood before, setting When to take the
cupping-glasses away. What to be done after they be taken away. Deep scarifying
evil.
as many cups, and drawing as much blood as you see good: and when no more
blood will come, and that you think it time to take them away, which is known
by a yellow water which comes at the last; then (I say) it is time to wash the
places with fair water where the cups stood, and dry them with a sponge or
cloth, and only anoint them with Ung. Album once, and they will be whole. The
overdeep scarifying it, is not only dangerous, but also painful, and not
art-like: for if you note well the cutis, it has many capillar veins in it;
yea, and some great veins, and is porous, so that the Artist may by force draw
humiditie sufficient from far, if so occasion be to use their utmost force.
Large and with cups are fittest on the thighs, lesser on the arms, and the
least for the hands or feet.

Of tho Brass Basin.
Friend, learn good by ill.
I Have nothing to write concerning it, but that at the least the Surgeons Mate
have one if not two; and if he find no use for it, let him sell it for good
liquor at Bantham, as a Surgeons Mate lately did one of mine.

Of the Blood Poringers.
The quantity of blood. Imitation with out discretion is idle. Blood poringers
necessary.
BLood Poringers are necessary at Sea, to be the more certain of the quantity
of blood which is let; for since the blood of man is so precious, it is to be
well weighed what quantity is taken. And although the German Surgeons, do ever
let blood into a basin, yet I hold it not good for the Surgeons Mate to imitate
first, except he be of good judgment indeed, to judge of the quantity. The
blood Poringers, which are made for that purpose being full, hold just three
ounces, and The constitution of the body is to be regarded in Phlebotomy.
somewhat more* For my own practice I hold this course; if one chance to come
to me of himself, or by advice of a Physician to be let blood, though he have a
strong body, I never take from him more then two poringers, and a half at the
most, but often less. If the party be not strong, except it be in case of a
Pleurisy, or some like urgent cause, I take less. For in that work except my
reason give me good satisfaction to do the contrary, I will rather offeud in
too little, then in too much Too little rather then too much blood is to be
taken away.
taking of blood away; for I have seen much hurt to have ensued by great
quantity of blood taken away at one time: 7. or 8. ounces I hold a strong body
may bear to lose, having good nourishment to recover it again, and that without
harm: but if you grow to ten ounces, you may many ways do harm in the body,
except your warrant be good. I speak not this to discourage young Surgeons from
a work so behovefull, but admonish them to wariness in a point so dangerous.

Of the Diet Pot.
The use.
THe Diet Pot is not alone to be used in cases of diet drink, seething for the
pox, and not otherwise; for as a learned Doctor upon occasion lately reasoned,
there is difference betwixt the Diet and a Diet, though in both kinds there is
even. Quot homines, tot sententiae, so many men, so many minds. Wherefore
concerning descriptions, of several Diet drinks for the pox, I will refer the
Surgeons Mate to other Authors: for in truth I must defer that point till
fitter oppertunity; I mean till I write touching the cure of that disease. And
yet (methinks) to speak somewhat A docoction for the Calenture.
of a drink is the case of the Calenture, or any other unnatural hot fever, to
be made at Sea to qualify the heat of the blood, were not amiss; which may be
done as follows.

. French barley iiij. Fresh water 2. gallons. Licorice i. Cloves no. 12.
In want of Licorice, tak juice of Licorice half an ounce. In want of french
barley take other barley, or for a need, wheat flower; boil this gently to 4.
or 5. quarts, then clear it, and if it may be, keep it not in How to keep it.
The composition of this drink if the heat be over great, causes headache. The
color and taste of the drink is to be observed.
the brass pot, but in some earthen or glass vessel; and if the party his
heat be great, and have pain in his head, add thereto so many drops of oil or
spirit of Vitriol as will a little change the taste and make it sowerish, but
not too tart in any wise; and if into all his drink, you put of Rose Water, of
wine-vinegar, or Rose vinegar, and Cinamon-water, of each only one spoonful,
if you have it, it will do well to mend the taste; if not, the matter is not
great: let the Patient drink often hereof. Further you The drink composed for a
Laske.
may, if you think good, add surrupe or juice of Limons 4. If it be for one
which is loose in his belly, you may infuse of your succus Acatiae herein some
2. or 3., and (being cleared) let him drink of the drink plentifully as he has
thirst; but you must cut your Acatiae first, and dissolve it in a little of the
drink warmed, and so put it into the rest. Also, in want of Acatia, if you put
therein Galls in powder a little, it will do well.

Of other necessaries.
THe next instruments, in order to be remembered, are these following, viz.

Skillet. Chafing dish. Glister pot. Funnel. Cups to give potions in. One Board
and knife to spread plasters. Mortar and pe^tel. Weights and Scales. Sives.
Searces. Strayners. Splents. Junks. Tape. Towe. Spunges. Clouts. Rowlers. Gray
paper. White paper. Empty pots and glasses. Thread and Needles. Wax Candles.
Lantern. Tinder box furnished. Ink and quills. One close-stoole. One bed
pan. One brass paile. 20 Well burned bricks. Pipkins. Empty baggs.
I shall not need to spend much time, to set down the uses of all these
necessary implements, only two or three of the most needful to be noted, I will
remember, and then to the uses of the medicines within the Chest.

Of Weight and Scales.
Weights and Scales are necessary things, often times lightly regarded, and
yet how many men's lives hang in the balance, it is plain enough. For
Sea-Surgeons familiarly give Stibium by the grain, The use is diverse.
namely, from 4. to 8. grains, yea and to 12. grains by your leave, when in
truth few of them have waights and Scales which can weigh one grain. A great
fault in weights and scales.
It is a dangerous thing for a Surgeon at Sea, to be unprovided of neat weights
and Scales which will turn with half a grain: for how can they give either
Laudanum Paracelsi, Stibium, or other Chimical medicines safely, or almost any
medicine inward without small weights and Scales? Wherefore two pair of weights
and Scales, are very needful for the Surgeons Chest; namely one for ounces, and
another for grains; for larger Scales the ship is furnished. It is also to be
understood here, for instruction of children in Art, that xvi. ounces, make a A
direction i^ weights.
pound; each ounce 8. drams, each dram 3. scruples, each scruple 20. grains:
for the grain, a full barley corn will well serve, or a good wheat corn,
though a large wheat corn be somewhat too big: an ordinary pepper corn will
also serve for a grain.

Of the Close-stoole, with the Paile of Brass, and the Bricks.
ALthough I know before hand, that I am to undergo many witty and Eloquent
flouts from young gallants of my own profession, for mentioning so base an
instrument to belong to the Surgeons charge, as this last mentioned
Close-stoole, with his appurtenances, yet let them Mean things sometimes are of
great moment.
know, that neither can my book blush; neither shall my self, I hope, have
cause; for I nothing doubt to yield each honest young Artist a sufficient
reason for to satisfy him herein: and (in a word) my reason for appointing to
each ship, bound for the East Indies, at the least one of these, is because the
bloody, or other flixes, are so dangerous diseases, and so deadly amongst our
men, that I hold it my duty to advise even the good None worthy to be reputed
^rtists who disdain the meanest office of their profession.
use of a Close-stoole: and I have caused the stool to have one door on the
one side, that thereby either things to foment, fumigate, or otherwise to
comfort the weak part, might be the better applied, the Patient sitting at his
ease thereon.

The use of the Close-stool. The need of it is great.
Also one especial reason, why I have appointed it, is, that a poor weak man in
his extremities, should not continually go to the shrouds, or beak-head to ease
himself; nor by noisome to his fellows, but might by the help of his Mate
through this mean instrument find comfort in his most pitiful distress; whose
miseries I heartily compassionate. Wherefore, I admonish the Surgeons Mate in
general, in the fear of God, not to be fine fingered, slothful, scornful to use
every kind of good manual Observe this, thou have acon^ science.
and other help, to save men's bloods in this fearful disease; for the omitting
of their duties in helping men thus distressed, brings the bloods of those
men without doubt upon their heads; and though peradventure they may carry it
away for a while with men, yet the Almighty, who sees not as men see, will
surely find them out.

The brass paile
The paile of brass, under the stool chiefly appointed for neatness,
cleanliness, strength, and other good uses it has, was always to belong
thereto, and not to any other use: It may also sometimes be whelmed down, and
on the top thereof a hot brick be set, or the brick (if you find it too near)
may stand lower, or be put into the paile; with hot The use of bricks.
brick with wine and vinegar or any other like fitting medicine of experience,
may be sprinkled to comfort the part agrieved withal; for it is found by
experience that the steem of wine-vineger, sprinkled on a hot brick does much
avail in the cure of the flix, and that simple remedy alone The cure of the
flix.
has cured many; but when the Patient rises from the said fume, if then a
cloth be well heated over the said fume or over a fire, and put close to the
part, it avails much; and if you then likewise lay the Patient to rest,
giving him three or four grains of Laudanum, you shall do the better, and by
Gods help, with other answerable good regiment of diet, make a quick and
perfect cure of his disease. But I am not ignorant, that there is use for
twenty close-stooles at once, in some one ship, which work the Cooper and
Carpenter should take care of.

The conclusion.
Thus having briefly run over the most necessary uses of the particular
Instruments, and other necessary appendixes to the Surgeons Chest; it
follows next to begin with medicines Physical and Chirurgical, as well simple
as compound, within the Chest; namely, somewhat, though very briefly, to touch
their most common uses and virtues, for the help of young Practitioners.

ENEMA FVMOSVM, OR A FVMOVS GLISTER.
BEing a new found Art of giving a Glister of smoke, wind, any dry powder
whatsoever in substance, into any man's body, very convenient in many occasions,
experimented, to be not only safe; but also most comfortable, pleasant,
profitable, and easy to be perceived in; being a most profitable Instrument,
and Art for the way of curing many grievous infirmities, which although in all
occasions either Domesticke or Military, it may be very useful and good; yet,
it may be esteemed most necessary and expedient for the Military Surgeon.
Explained Dialogue wise, betwixt the Author and a Military Surgeon; and in
that it is a by-part of Surgery not common, the Author has thought fit to
unfold it by a medicinal riddle.

The Author to his brother, A military Surgeon. Brother Surgeon, being here so
well met, I esteem it will not be time, ill spent, that I explain unto thee
for thy experience, a riddle of an old new medicine, that for sundry occasions
may fall fitting; thy practice in Camp, Ship or else where; and it is made of
strange, not strange material, immateriall, extramarine, domesticke substance,
or subject common to be found, and almost every where ready at hand amongst
good fellows, serving, and useful in Surgerie and Physic, commended highly
for worthiness, and for unworthin esse, as much blamed; being as pleasant as
hateful to many, the substance whereof being a vegetable plant, apt to grow
upon any warm ground, although a S^ercorarium that is well fortified with
soil, being a subject disposed of, and easily dispersed by every motion of
wind; yea, and so from Nation to Nation, of a vagrant, not fragrant, olent,
not reddolent smell, being a volatile uncertain ayrie substance; no sooner
taken into the body, but cast out in a fuming manner yet as an Idol, magnified
by not a few, taken for health, solace, ease, pleasure, profit, comfort,
wantonness, and good fellowship; being esteemed fit for all societies, as also
received in for alement, nutriment; yea, and for especial food in scarcity.
used every way, and any way received into the body (to wit) inwardly,
outwardly, upward, downward, backward, forward, without limitation of time, or
advice of the learned, being also approved of by very many of other noble great
and mavelous virtues, as for the enriching, impoverishing, supporting,
endowing, undoing, maintaining, overthrowing, and raising again of innumerable
persons and whole Families at home and abroad, as well of traders as other
occupiers by Sea and Land: likewise, for the uses and abuses thereof, exposed
and transported to each City, Town-Corporate, Hamlet, Village, Inn, Tavern,
Tipling-house, Goaile, and where not beloved, or abhorred, but here I desire to
conclude, fearing to be held overtedious, if I should further proceed in
arrogating or derogating, amplifying, or eclipsing of that undoubted, excellent
medicinal subject, of heathen production and extramarine importation, and
first birth, becomes native with us, and therefore should not be obnoxious,
wherefore here my riddle is put forth, and is at an end

And perceiving that you my brother Surgeon expect with desire, that I should
unfold this my riddle to you, we will for the purpose step afide in private,
where we may accommadate our selves with a small Gallon of Sack, and a pipe of
the best smooke, and there we will further discourse of our occasions, and I
will unfold the riddle.


The Military Surgeon. SIr, I like well your motion, and here at the sign of
the mouth you may be accommodated, for I long to come to the opening of the
riddle, with also your imparting to me your collections, experiences, and
instructions, arising thereby in military service according to your
formerstruposition.


The Author. BRother Surgeon, I am ready to answer your desire, and that as
brief as possible; for we are come to the period, here you see the choice
materials, before us the wine and the Tobacco the latter, of which unfold the
riddle, if you desire the pipe of Tobacco, take it as your share and the
subject of the riddle; the operative part whereof is but smoke, and therefore
smoke it to the purpose, and I will answer you in the good liquour which
finisheth the first end of our meeting: namely, for the unfolding of the riddle
being finished: Now I do intend to fall upon a brief declaring to you, of
some medicinal uses of the so long spoken of pipe of good smoke, by setting
forth the giving of it Glisterwife in a fume to a Patient reversed in the
Iliaca passio, wherein it excels, as also for many other obstructions,
gripings, tortions, Iliacal, and other distempers of the bowels.

And first for the time and manner of the giving thereof, it is best to be
given if occasion be by tortions, after a former ordinary Glister has been
given; that has emptied the great gut called Intestinum rectum, for so it may
have the freer place by inflation, to force up the fume thereof, for the
opening the obstructed parts, for the better effecting whereof, if the Artist
that administreth the fumous Glister put the pipe prepared into the fundament
as far as it will or can go, with the first short pipe screwed to it, and
depending thereon; remembering ere he put the pipe into the patients body, he
put a thin piece of a wet bladder, or oyled paper, or a fine ragge only on
over the head, I mean or over the holes of the said Glister pipe, the which
pipe being so armed put into the body to the utmost, that it may be passed in
without offense, the Artist being first ready with his pipe, prepared either of
smoke lighted, or of powder put into the socket or appointe^^lace, within the
Instrument, let him that is to administer the fumous or other medicine,
withdraw the pipe that is placed within the body a little back, some half an
inch, that the small piece of bladder or paper, that covers the pipe, may be
thereby put aside, that so the Glister fumous may by inflation be the better
forced up for to perform the duty required of it; namely, to discharge it all
within the body.

The Glister Instrument, fit for the exact giving of a vaporous, fumous, or dry
Glister, ought to confist of seven parts, in order to be put together
(hereafter explained) which in their order and places effected, the fumous
medicine by inflation is to be driven up to the agrieved part if possible, but
howsoever it ought to be put up and to be discharged into the Intestinum
rectum; which is a safe and beneficial course, especially when the infirmity
is in that gut (as is said:) This excellent instrument has a double scope in
his office of healing, the one way in the delivering into the body by
inflation, any torrified or dry powdered medicaments in their powders, the other
in delivering thereinto any vaporous medicaments as is said, and namely, the
vapors of Tobacco, of Nutmegs, Anni-seed, Coltsfoot, Bay Berries, Mi^rha,
Aloes, or what else Art or experience can produce in the one form or in the
other, by way of inflation to be cast into man's body for ease or cure thereof.
But the Artist must in this manner of curing observe some general rules, with
also some caveats in the administering of Glisters by inflation, whether they be
fumous or material substances; namely, first note, that if they be intended
for dry medicines or fumes, that they be given into the body, where looseness
of the belly by a flux or otherwise has proceeded; whereby the Intestinum
rectum, may be hoped to be empty, the better to receive with effect the dry or
vaporative medicine, that it be not impediated by hard excrements, but suppose
it be, and that there be no other preventions ready then as aforesaid, the use
of an oyled paper or wet bladder will do well, which so put up, and the
instrument somewhat drawback, and then by inflation or blowing it in with
fitting continued force, it will effect thy desire.

Much more might be added of the facility, pleasure, and benefit, of this
infasive device if time would give leave, but the whole work of my Treatises,
being almost printed off before I had resolved to explain this inflatious piece
of Art, forces me to use all brevity therein, where I had intended the
prosecution thereof further, namely, by some device of Art to have ordered the
parts of the Instruments, so that a man might have given himself a Glister in
that was, which I will not question, one or another will find out; and no
doubt will add to this invention: yea, and questionless will invent other
good offices that it may be fit for, although perhaps will not willingly
publish it, which I leave to the time unfolder, finisher and the consumer of
all things.

Concerning the parts of this instrument, as well in their particulars as also
in their composure, or ready, being put together and fitted to be used in one
as follows.

The inflative instrument, for the giving of a fumous medicine, or other
medicines within the capacity thereof.
Impri. The stopples thereof accounted as parts, the devidable parts in all are
seven in number, viz.

1 The first is the Glister pipe which ought to be in length ordinary, or
according to Art, a greater and a lesser as the present occasion may urge.

2 The second is the stopple to be s^rewed upon the head thereof, viz. of
Glister pipe.

3 The third is the elbow piece screwed into the one side of the upper part of
the glister pipe, standing Byas, or a scant, being framed so to stand, and that
part ought to be in length two inches and a half, or near three inches, but not
full three.

4 The fourth is a straight pipe of eight inches long in all; all consisting of
four particular parts, if divided or devidable; namely, the long or fistula.

5 The fourth of the seven is a piece of Ivory screwed and fixed into that
lower fistula or pipe, that contains the silver or other metaline part
thereof.

6 The next is the silver bole or cup within the said Ivory head, and
contains the fumous medicine, being to be accounted the sixth part.

7 And the seventh part is the cover screwed on the head thereof, being full of
holes for the better inflation of the smoke, all which rightly conjoined,
makes one entire instrument, which may justly be named fistula fumosum. Unto
which so coniunct instrument, as coherent parts thereunto are to be at hand the
matter effectual and subiunct; namely, the substance for the fume, be it any
of the aforesaid materials, as also a pair of fit forceps, holding fire with a
Tobacco stopper, usual to order it in kindling; and lastly, which should have
been first mentioned, is the ingenious Artist, for the dew administration
thereof in time and place convenient

Thus much of Enema Fumosum; and I conclude, only thus I say in dew
commendations thereof.

ARtificiosissimum hoc instrumenti genus ultissimum, (...), mulierumque
praegnantium morbis secretis, aliisque uteri languoribus uvamen affert
multifarium, praesertim in muliebribus obstructionibus, haemorroicis, fluxibus,
abortionibus, tortionibus, aliisque id genus infirmitatibus, sicut ratio and
experientia sine omni dubio manifestum faciet in futuro.


To his very worthy and entirely respected friend and Brother, Master John
Woodall, in due commendation and attestation of his work and worth.
ALthough that Proverb has for current past,
Let not the Cobbler go beyond his Last;
And that it may to some seem somewhat strange
That I should thus out of my station range,
And of a Surgeon act a Poets part,
And seem to stray from my more proper Art;
Yet seriously considering in my mind,
That in this task which I my self assigned,
The subject whereunto my thoughts I bent
Was wholly versed in mine own element,
Chyrurgery's most ancient noble Art;
I could not chu^e but show my ready heart
To sound (dear friend) thy high deserved praise
In these few Pan-like, plain Poeticke lays:
And therein to the world to demonstrate,
What too long silence once did inhumate.
And bury in Oblivions gloomy grave,
Thy parts (I mean) in Arts and valor brave,
Who forty eight years since, or there about
In those renowned battles bravely fought,
By Francis, Fourth King Henry; Surgeon went
Under Lord Willowbies stout Regiment.
Forty years since lived in Polonia
A Traveller, his practice to display;
After that lived at Stoad in Germany:
In the English Merchants sweet society;
And by them highly honored for his Art
And well experienced stout heroisk heart,
Employed also (whiles he abroad abode)
By some Ambassadors sent o^e to Stoad,
By Queen Elisabeth, then to assist
As their interpreter, acute linguist
IN the Germane language. And returned again
After that blessed Queens death. And in the r^ign
Of late King James was to Polonia sent,
There to negotiate business of moment
Touching the Commonwealth; And for the space
Of four and twenty years enjoyed the place
Of Surgeon General to the East Indies,
And Hospital of Bartholmew likewise:
Was also Master of his Company:
And lastly to his datelesse dignity
Has learnedly composed and set forth.
This his Chyrurgeons Mate, a work of worth
And high esteem, Of which I well may say,
He has so skilfully shown the right way
To all young Tyro's of this noble Art,
And so exactly does to them impart
The proper use of our Chyrurgeons Chest,
How all their Patients must be duly dressed
With Instruments of curious variations
Plasters and plat-formes for fit applications
Of potions, medicines for each malady,
For each health hindering (known) infirmiti^
As ulcers, wounds, fractures, the fistula,
Apostumes, fluxes, passio-lliaca,
Exitus Any, and the Calenture,
Tenasmus, and the Scorbue's careful cure
The Colic and all various dislocations;
The e^siest safest ways of amputations,
Or joint dismembring, yea the Pestilence
All these with such approved experience,
That he deserves Practitioners high praise,
And to be Crowned with never-withering bays.
And since the heavens have so much honored him
With all these fore-recited Trophies trim
Of dign tie, at home, in foreign parts,
I could not choose, hut sound thy high deserts
Fair friend, and brother, and thine honor brave,
On this my plain Pyramidis engrave*
And (thus) to leave unto posterity
This Monument of the sirme amity.
Yours G Dunn.

Eodem Amico.
HE that a long-lived, streight-limb'd, work intends to frame,
Must live-long first, Must have a judgment sound, not lame.
Our lasting solid Perman's Autumn's fruit, We see
That Summers early Birth's, soon ripe, soon rotten be.
There where Experience, with a settled judgment greets,
With these a happy Third, Perfection, ever meets.
A rare Concurrence it is, yet with all Three, you are blessed
As they know well, and do know most, and know You's best.
O thus* who view your leaves, and taste your pleasing fruit
Must say, the Tree is good, that Good is absolute.
A Tree of Knowledge, Wood-all of Life, and yet more
Whose very Leaves do Cures* so far as Sea or shore.
You Have made your Chest, an Arc of Preservation,
Both to your own, and to each foreign Nation.
Both the Englands, Old and New, both the Indies East and West,
Both World's, hoth seek and find Health, flowing from your Chest.
Without that Chest of Yours, What ship so strong to hold
Exotic VVares, Sack, Sugar, Silk, Pearl, Silver, Gold?
All these and more to you Great Britain's Island ow'th.
Then say, How greats their debt, who wear this Kingdoms Cloth?
Truth it is, both we and they, and this whole Globe did want
Your Surgeons matchless Mate. It Is said, 'ile not recant.
If man whilst that he stood, entire stood need ou's Mate,
Need's must the World want Yours, in Fallen and Broken state.
Well Sir You Have Done. And I, there is but oue line remains,
He that dares Check your Mate, wants either Brow or Brains
G. Dun

An exact maker of this Instrument is one John Watson, dwelling at the south
door of St Bartholmes Hospital.


Electuariu^ Diatrion piperion. Pulvis restring. minus. Ung. contra ignem.
Unguentum Martiatum. Theriaca Diatess. Vnguentum Dialtheae. Axungia Cervi.
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum. Theriaca Land. Vnguentum Album. Axungia Porcina.
Vnguentum Potabile. Terebinth. Venetiae. Vnguentum Populeon. Vnguentum Arragon.
Vnguentum Pectorale. Vng. Diapompholigos. Elect. Diascordium. Mel Dupuratum. ^
Vng. Aureum. Conser Rosarum. Rhabarb. elect. Linum. Arcei. Conser. Barbar.
Conser Prunellorum. Oleum Lauri. Conser. Cidonio. Pulpa Tamarindorum. Mel
Saponis. Confect. Hamech. Acatiae. Caustik (...). The lowest part of the Chest.

The present appearance of the Chest with the order of every Medicine as they
are placed, is here demonstrated.

Aqu^c^^ (...) Lapis infernalis Ag. Rosar. Damas. Pull. A^^hr^ticu^. Ol.
A^igdalama^. Pull Alchymistions. Ol. Amidal^dule. Lapis m^dicament. Oleum
vitriol Cocus Marti^ Oleum spica Lixivium capitale. Syrupus Rosarum. Balsamum
artific. Oleum Liliorum. Oleum Limoni. Mel Rosarum. Acetum Rosarum. Oleum
Terebint. Ol. Lumbricorum. Oleum Scorpio. Syrupus Absinthii Diamoron. Oleum
Petreoli. Oleumi Vitrioli. Oleum Succini. Oximel. Acetum Rosarum. Aqua
Absinthii. Aqua Rosaerum rub. Oleum chamonili. Oleum Rosarum. Aqua Angelica.
Aqua Plantagina Oleum ambuci. Oleum Anethi. Aqua Lymoniorum. Aqua Cardui bened.
Oleum Absinthii. Aqua Cinamomi. Succus Lymoniorum. Aqua Menthae.

Vnguentum Basilicon. Vnguentum Apostoloru^. Vnguentum Aureum. Vnguentum Al.
Camph. Vnguentum nutritum. Vnguentum Dialtheae. Vnguentum Populeon. Vnguentum
cont. ignem. Vnguentum Pectorale. Vnguentum Potabile. Vnguentum Arragon.
Vnguentum Martiatum. Linamentum Arcei. Mel Saponis. Vnguen^um Aegyptaci. Sir.
Rosarum. Sir. Violarum. Mel Rosarum. Mithridat. Diascordium. Conf. Hamech.
Crocus Mart. Pilulae Cochiae. Pilulae cambogiae. Note that the particulars
mentioned on each side this place, are usually to be found in the upper part of
the Chest.

The middle part, which cannot be here expressed, I leave to the Surgeons
experimental ordering and view.

Rhabarba. Agaricum. Mum mia. Aloes Myr rha. Mastich. Camphora. Troch.
Alhandal. Hul. Liqueritiae. Vuguentum Diapompholigos. Axungia Porci. Sir.
Papaveris. Sir. Liqueritiae. Mel Rosarum. Theriaca Ven. Theriaca Londi.
Diaphenicon. Conf. Alkermes. Pilulae Agreg. Pilulae Ruffi. Cambogia. Scamonium.
Sperma Coeti. Terra Sigillata. Merc. Sublimat. Praecipit. Eu phorbium. Pull.
Benedictus. Argentum vivum. Axungia cervi. Sir. Limonum. Sir. Prunel. Sir.
Diam. Elect. de ovo. Laud. opiat Prac. Diacatholicon. Elect. Diatr. Pipe.
Pillu. Eupho. Pilulae Aureae Stibium. Opium Crocus. Bolus verus. Cinabrium.
Hierapicra. Sal Nitri. Sal Absinthii. Tutia. T. T. Vng. cont scorbutum. Species
Diarion Piperion. Species Diatesseron. Terebinth: Clara. Conserva Rosarum.
Conserva Anthos. Conserva Barberorum. Conserva Prunellorum. Conserv.
Cidoniorum. Pull. Restrin gens major. Pulvis arthreticus. Pulpa Tamarind. Succus
Liqueritiae. Mithridat.

Loving Reader, this explanation is more for putting the Artist in memory of
what may be, then of what must be in his Chest; for although there may seem
many particulars, yet there wants at the least forty more, that may not in
true method be omitted in a due proportion; as namely, all the instruments for
manual uses and operations, all the most useful of which are expressed in an
Index following the Preface in the beginning of the Book.

Place this Chest, betwixt Fol. 26. and 27.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF The virtues of certain EMPLAISTERS mentioned, which are most
usual in the SURGEONS Chest.
Emplastrum stipticum Paracelsi.
THis composition, devised by the famous Philosophers Philippus, Theophrastus,
and Paracelsus, excels in the cure of piercing wounds and stabs; as also in
the cure of all dangerous wounds whatsoever: it has the precedence as well for
contused as incised wounds; for it asswageth pain, defends from accidents,
discusseth, mollifieth, attracteth, incarneth, digesteth, and consolidates, and
is also good for an old ach proceeding of a cold cause. It is further
especially good for ulcers on the legs, or elsewhere in any part of the body:
it is of temperament warm, and very comfortable.

For approbation whereof you may see Paracelsus his own words, which I have
here inserted.

Hoc Emplastrum est magis vertutis divinae quam humanae. Valet ad omnes plagas,
novas and antiquas. Abstergit, mundificat, carnem bonam generat, consolidat ex
fundo plus una septimana, quam ali^d quodcunque in mense, nec permittit fieri
aliquam putrefactionem and corruptionem, nec malam carnem generat. Valet
omnibus nervis incisis, ut conquassatis and musculis. Valet omnibus inflaturis,
abstrabit ferrum and lignum, and plumbum de plaga, eidem suppositum. Valet
contra omnes morsuras cujuscunque morsurae bestiae venenosae, and puncturas
Serpentis; maturat, sanat omne generatum cujuscunque Apostumatis, superpositum.
Valet in membris generationis si ibi fuerit corruption. Valet contra Cancrum,
fistulas, contra ignem persicum; sedat dolores cujuscunque plagae. Haec
Theophrast Bombast.

Diachilon magnum cum gummis.
THis Emplaister dissolveth, maturateth, and mollifieth hardnesses, and is
principally good in Apostumes: it is of temperament warm, and moist. It was
first devised by a certain Artist named Serapis. Avicenna (as some think)
invented it; but others judge that Mesues was the inventor thereof.

Diachilon parvum.
THis Emplaister is very good to dissolve schirras, tumors of the liver,
spleen, reins, belly, or elsewhere; it is wholly composed of mollifying and
discussing ingredients; it serves generally for hot or cold causes, but
chiefly for hot: For I hold it to be of temperament cold, the rather, by reason
of the much Litharge in it, which, if a mineral may be called*either hot or
cold Litharge, cold it is without question. It was devised by Mesues.

Diacalcitheos.
THis Emplaster mitigateth pain; it is a good defensative against all venomous
humors, and will very well induce a cicatrice in wounds and ulcers: also it
has an especial good quality to assuage the pain in the small of the back,
proceeding from distempered kidneys, by hot causes, as well concerning the
stone, and gravel, as in the Gonorrea: and dissolved or relented with oil of
roses or elders, or of linseed, it is a very good medicine to heal burnings,
and scaldings. It was devised first by Galenus: of temperament it is cooling
and drying.

Empl. Oxicr^ceum.
THis is a very ancient composition, but ascribed chiefly to Nicolaus an
ancient Writer as Author thereof: it is of quality anodine, attracting,
mollifying, and comforting; asswageth pains in the gout proceeding of a cold
cause, and is good in cold Aches, and by that attracting virtue it has, it
draws out vapors per por os cutis, or the sweat vents in the skin, whereby it
often unladeth the body of vicious and noisome humors, which otherwise might
endanger the Patient: of temperament it is hot and moist, etc.

Empl. Melilotum per splen.
THis Emplaster mollifieth all hardness of the liver, spleen, and ventricle;
dissolveth windiness, cease vehement pains provoked by wind; as namely., in
the disease called flatus hypocrondriacus, which is a flatuous or windy pain
gathered near unto the Spleen: it is also generally good against the gathering
together of any congealed cold substance in the stomach or liver: of
temperament it is warm, and comforting exceedingly: It was devised by Me^ues an
ancient writer.

Empl. Melilotum simplex.
THis is good in green wounds, for it draws and heals well: also ^t
attracteth and brings forward a cold Apostume, and is an especial secret, and
the best thing I ever knew in curing kybed heels and chilblains: it is of
temperament hot and moist, and was devised by Mesues.

Emplastrum de lapide calaminari, or Grisium.
THis Emplaster (I may speak of my own experience) is a good healer of ulcers
which are hard to be cicatrized, and has an especial virtue in curing of
buboes, as well venereal as pestilential: It is also the best incarnative of
all the Plasters that ever I used.

Emplastrum de Minio.
THis Minium-plaster is a good discusser of hot humors, a good swager of pains,
mollifieth well, repelleth somewhat, and is very commodiously used upon wounds
and ulcers, to further good healing: it induces also a good cicatrice. In the
tumor of scr^tum, or rather of the Testicles, called Hernia humoralis,
commonly following the sudden stopping of Gonorrae, it is a very convenient
anodine and discussing Plaster. This Emplaster likewise is very good to assuage
pain, in any case, where safely an anodine Emplaster is required; as namely, in
contused or distorted joints: only note, that this Emplastrum de Minio is
meant of the composition set down by that reverent Master Galle in his
Dispensatory, for I make mine according to his description.

Emplastrum calidum.
THis Emplastrum stomachi or calidum, is a composition described by Johannes
Jacobus Weckerus, under that name, page 953. of his Dispensatory: it is only
used where a comforting Emplaster of a very warm temperament is required: it is
a needful Emplaster of a very warm temperament is required: it is a needful
Emplaster in the Surgeons Chest; for it comfort much the liver or stomach
debilitated by cold humors, and helps well digestion; yet in want thereof
Paracelsus Plaster, though not so fitly, may serve.



AN ABRIDGMENT OF The virtues of certain Unguents, most usual in the SURGEONS
Chest.
Vnguentum Basilicon.
THis unguent does digest and incarn wounds and ulcers; and will also prepare
and bring to suppuration an Apostume either hot or cold, being somewhat thick
spread on towe or leather and applied thereto: it also mitigateth the pain and
pulsation thereof, and is likewise very fitly mixed either with praecipitate,
Unguentum Egyptiacum, or the like medicine, the more easily and better to
mundifie and cleanse an ulcer: this unguent is of temperament warm, and it is
ascribed to have been devised by Galen: it is also good for burnings and
scaldings.

Vnguentum Apostolorum.
THis unguent serves well to cleanse and scowre ulcers and fistula's, and to
make a good ground to healing: it is of temperament hot and dry: it was devised
by Avicen; named Apostolorum, for that it consists of twelve several
ingredients joined into one body.

Vnguentum Aureum.
THis unguent serves well to incarn wounds and ulcers, being first well
mundified: it is also to be used as a balm to them to heal them, and is a good
healer of burnings and scaldings, the fire first taken out. The composition
which I do make, is of the practice of Josephus Quer^itanus, whose good use I
have made trial of.

Vnguentum Egyptiacum.
THis unguent serves to scowre; it mundifieth all rotten foul ulcers, and is
best to be put into the grief scalding hot, for then the usual pain and
corrosion it procures will be quickly past: in like manner it is to be used in
any venomous wounds, made either with poisoned shot, or bitten with mad dogs,
or any other venomous creature, or great contused wounds, wherein, for
preventing them from fear of a Gangreen, it excels. It serves also well to
be used alone, or mixed with any lotion for ulcers of the mouth and throat,
especially in the scurvie. This unguent dries vehemently, and is abstersive:
it is of temperament hot and dry, and was devised by Mesues.

Vnguentum album Camphoratum.
THis unguent is very good to cool and heal any hot moist pustles: it cures
excoriations of the skin in any place, but chiefly in the yard betwixt glans
and praeputium: it also heals burnings and scaldings very well, and is good
to be applied to any painful ulcer; for it asswageth pain, and heals well.
It was invented by Avicen: it is of temperament cold, anodine, mollificative,
and attractive, and therefore of very good consequence in the Surgeons Chest.

Vnguentum Diapompholigos.
THis unguent is good to heal painful ulcers in any part of the body,
especially of the yard, or betwixt glans and praeputium, as also any fretting
or painful ulcers of the legs, or elsewhere. I have found it good before all
other unguents in ulcers of the yard; indeed against virulent, painful and
corrosive ulcers, scarce a better composition is known: in Noli me tangere in
the face, I have had good experience of it; and in many other occasions I have
found it a very useful unguent: of temperament it is cold and dry. Nicolaus
Alexandrinus was the Author of it.

Vnguentum Pectorale.
IT swageth the pains and stitches of the breast and sides, eases the cough,
helps expectoration: as also to digest gross humors, and to attenuate them:
it warmeth and comfort a cold stomach. This composition is set down in the
Dispensatory of Augustanus.

Vnguentum Rosatum.
THis is used against inflammations, Ignem sacrum, and all hot pains of the
head: it asswageth the pains of the liver, kidneys, and belly, proceeding of
heat, and has virtue to corroborate. It was invented by Mesues.

Vnguentum Tripharmacon, or Nutritum.
THis serves well to cure an Erysipilas, excoriation or bladderings of the
skin; such also as are termed the Shingles: it is also good for to take the
fire out of burnings and scaldings; and for any moist humor flowing to any
ulcers in any part of the body, being spread upon cap-paper thin, and laid over
the whole distempered part: also against any slight scabbinesse or itching
humor, whence soever it is: it ^^^an especial good defensative against any
scalding or vicious humor, flowing to any ulcer. Of temperament this unguent
is cold and dry: it is subject to divide it self, namely, the Oil, Litharge,
and Vinegar asunder; which if it be wrought together again will be as good as
at the first: and if it be over dry, add vinegar and oil thereto, and it will
be as good as ever.

Unguentum Populeum.
THis serves well to assuage the pains of the Sourvy; by anointing the parts
grieved there with. I may justly say, upon the experience of diverse skilful
Surgeons, and my own also, that as well in hot as in cold countries, it has
been found so exceeding comfortable and behoveful, that scarce any composition
of an Unguent in the Surgeons Chest may compare with it: which some may think
is a very absurd affirmation in reason, but that experience will have it so. It
is good also to anoint the Temples, to provoke rest in hot fevers; as also the
palms of the hands and soles of the feet. It is likewise good to be applied for
swaging of pain in any part of the body, and being applied cold upon a Plegent
where you have laid any corrosive, it eases the dolor of the caustic
medicine. Of temperament it is cold and moist; it was devised by Nicolaus.

Mel Saponis.
MEl Saponis is honey and soap mixed ana, parts aequales, and is a medicine
appointed to be first applied (upon a burning or scalding) to take the fire
out. It is a linament of ancient use amongst our country Surgeons, and good:
but I find it not mentioned in ancient Writers; in want whereof use
Tripharmacon, or an infusion of Vinegar and Litharge: namely, Litharge of gold
in powder 4. wine Vinegar lib i. mix them well, and boil them very gently a
little on the fire, and the Vinegar will become sweet as sugar, and very
anodine: foment the grief therewith, and you shall find present ease to the
party. Or take Populeum and unguentum album mixed, and apply it on soft
cap-paper, first being well rubbed with your hand to make it so: or take
Diacalcithios or Minium plaster, and mix it with Linseed-oyl, or oil of Elders,
till it be a gentle unguent, and so apply it: or Tripharmacon alone will do
well: also Honey alone is a good medicine.

Unguentum contra ignem.
THis composition used that purpose, you shall find in Johann^s Weckerus his
Dispensatory, page 1174. I have found it very good against burnings and
scaldings, as also against burnings with Gunpowder. Where I write the
compositions of my medicines in general, that also shall be expressed. In want
of this composition, the Vng. album, either alone, or mixed with Tripharmacon,
will do very well; which if it be too hard or dry, you may mix oil of Roses or
Linseed with it: and for want of this, you may take Diacalcithios or Minium
mixed or relented with any of the said oils, or any other fitting oil, as oil
olive simple: also unguentum Basilicon is very good in burnings and scaldings.

Unguentum contra scorbutum.
THe composition of this Unguent is recited in the cure of the Scurvy. I have
had the practice thereof, and found it very good to attenuate gross tumors of
the Scurvy, to asswge the pains of them, and by the use thereof to dissolve
such tumors. I use this Unguent in cold causes, and in want thereof, ung:
Martiatum, or Oleum Laurini, or Dialthea: but in hot griefs and very painful I
use Populeum.

Unguentum Dialthea compositum.
THis Unguent Nicolas an ancient writer seems to be the Author of. It is
profitable against pains of the breast proceeding of a cold cause, and against
the Pleurisy: it warmeth, mollifieth, and comfort all the parts of the
body, which are evil disposed through cold infirmities: it is also good against
stiffnesse and pains of the joints in the Scurvy.

Dialthea simplex.
THIs has the properties of the former, but the former is better.

Unguentum potabile.
THis unguent is a sure Balsame for wounds of any sort, or in any part of the
body, either penetrating or not penetrating; in wounds penetrating either
inject it warm, or pour it into the wound. Also upon any occasion, it is to be
drunk i. or ii. at once, or for a dose. It heals wounds within the body. Also
it heals burnings and scaldings without any scar. And further it cures the
wind-chollick drunk with sack: the dose is to be i. without ^ear: but I give
usually but one dram or ii.

Vnguentum de Mercurio.
I Have elsewhere said, and it is too much apparent, that for healing and
killing, Mercury has no fellow; and where I recite Mercury in any of my
instructions, you must understand me Quicksilver, for so it is truly styled by
the Learned, and not without good reason. This Unguent, join with it what
other ingredients you please, yet if Mercury be one, it will show his valor in
despite of the rest, though it have 20. for one odds against it; so puissant
is that volatile and excellent spirit of his, which (I may boldly say) could
truly never be tamed: and yet many worthy medicines are made thereof, which in
their several places I mean to explain as I shall have time, God willing. You
may make this Unguent of Dialthea, oleum Laurini. ana lib. ss. Mercurius vivus,
or quicksilver ii. oleum spice or Tereb. If you have them, ana ss. and if you
see cause in very cold bodies you may add of Euphorbium in powder ii. This
unguent is good to provoke a flux. You may make it of one of these unguents
alone for need. But I wish not the Surgeon to carry any of this unguent ready
made to the East Indies; for the Quicksilver (it is to be feared) will fall to
the bottom: but if he will needs have it ready made, let him add to the
composition, wax, a sufficient quantity; but it must be made as follows. The
wax and unguent must be melted together, which being yet warm, Terebinthinae
clarae i. being put into the bottom of the wooden bowl, or brass basin, not
a pewter basin; and stirring it so long till all the Quicksilver be clean
lost, and turned into a blew salve, no more to be seen; then by little and
little mix it with the former, and being almost coagulated (I mean almost clean
cold, neither liquid through heat, nor altogether cold) work the Terebinthinae
with the Mercury altogether strongly till it be cold. You must use it cold, and
neither let the Patient himself chafe it in till it be warm, or (which is
better) let the Patient stand before the fire and chafe it in. But note, he
which anointeth other therewith, if he use it too often, let him put a bladder
on his hands; for the often use thereof causes many evils. This unguent has
as many virtues as vices, and as many vices as virtues: a whole week may be
easily spent, with good profit to the Reader, in waiting of Mercury: I heartily
wish some learned and worthy man would take in hand truly to anatomize that
subject: I am persuaded, yea, and know well, he might thereby save the lives of
many an innocent soul, who with great infamy perish through the inordinate use
of this unguent; notwithstanding the medicine is good. But I refer the Surgeons
Mate, for the use of this unguent, to Mr. Clowes his book of Surgery.

But concerning the ordinary uses thereof, if you anoint the joints therewith,
it kills the itch; but if you anoint too plentifully it provokes a flux,
sometimes upward, sometimes downward. If you anoint the seams of his shirt
which is lousy therewith, it drives away all the lice: the same it does to
the lice of the eyebrows and secret parts, wherewith many are troubled. Also
for the pills it is a very good medicine; I use it in that case, first to purge
the Patient, and after to anoint him with Vnguentum album, wherein Quicksilver
is mixed; namely, of the unguentum i. of Mercury i. misce, and anoint therewith
daily three times, and keep the place very warm.

Linamentum Arcei.
I Cannot but reverence the Author of this precious plain Linament; whose
desert is highly to be esteemed of by the Commonwealth: for it is as sufficient
a Balm for new wounds, especially in the head, as that a better can scarce be
found out by art. It does all the intentions of healing a wound in the head
merely of it self, the flux being stayed: For it digesteth, mundifieth,
incarneth, and cicatrizeth, it defends from accidents, and is very anodine:
it may also fitly be applied to painful ulcers and fistula's upon occasion.
The Author or manifester of this Linament was Franciscus Arceus, as is manifest
by a small treatise of his, translated by Mr. John Read a Surgeon: It is of
temperament hot and moist.

Vnguentum Aragon.
THis unguent is numbered amongst the four hot unguents. It profits generally
against all cold affects of the outward parts of the body: it much warmeth and
comforreth the sinews: it is good against convulsions and cramps: it is good
to anoint the ridg-bone of the back, and the parts near the kidneys against the
pains thereof: and also to anoint the stomach and belly upon any cold grief: it
is good to anoint the body of them which have the quartane fever, the falling
sickness, the pains of the joints: and also it is good to be used as a Morbus
ointment (according to the common phrase) adding the due quantity of Mercury
thereto; which I account to be of Quicksilver ii. to the unguent lib. i. But I
find it will not retain his virtues above one year, as witnesses Johannes
Jacobus Weckerus: wherefore I forbear this composition in the Surgeons Chest.

Vnguentum Martiatum.
THis unguent, as it is composed of many ingredients, so it is said to be
effectual for many griefs: for (says the Author) it discusseth cold causes in
the head, sinews, and joints: it removes pain from the breast and stomach
proceeding from colds: it prevails aganst convulsions: it helps the
resolution of the sinews, dead palsy, and them that are troubled with the
Sciatica or hip-gout, the gout in the hands, feet, and other joints of the
body: it mollifieth hard puscles and tumors in the flesh: it asswageth the hard
swellings of the liver and spleen; eases the pain in the small guts; it cures
the ach in the reins. It has his name (as Salaritanus says) of Martianus; or
as Ma^lius (which is more probable) says, of Martiatus, a most skilful
Physician, supposed to be the inventer thereof: and it is described in the
Dispensatory by Nicolaus Alexandrinus; who also describes the virtues thereof,
in effect as is here set down.

Axungia Porcina.
IT is called Axungia, of anointing the Axle-tree, to make the wheels turn
easier about, for which cause many use it to this day. It is liquid, flowing
like oil with warmeth: it has a lenifying and anodine quality, and therefore
it is not unprofitably used for mitigation of sharp humors, asswaging of pain,
healing of burnings with fire, and very fitly mixed with Cataplasmes appointed
for those effects.

Axungia Cervi.
THis Axungia is of a hot nature, does assuage aches, resolves and mollifieth
hard tumors in any part of the body. And by experience is found very good,
administered in Glisters, to heal the excoriations of the Intestinum rectum; for
it is anodine and very sanative. The manner to use it, is somewhat touched in
some other my instructions elsewhere.

Mel simplex.
ENglish honey being yellow, the favor and odor pleasant, sharp, pure,
sincere, clear, fast or stiff, yielding little spume in decocting, is good and
very profitable for those that are costive, also for the stomach if one drink
it with water: it helps the bladder and reins: it is good for the eyes:
mundifieth, opens, and heals. As for burnings and scaldings, it cures them
without scar, and is very good to heal ulcers of the ears; and (says
Dioscorides) drunk with water is wholesome for the belly and stomach (it
helps such as are pained in the kidneys and bladder. It is also good to
anoint the eyes with, to clear the dimnesse of sight in them: it has an
abstergent or cleansing force: it opens the mouths of veins, whereby it also
draws out fordid matter or qui^tur from fetide ulcers. But the best honey of
all other, is that which is gathered in Lituania, a Province of Polonia. where
the Bees breed only in high trees, and gather their honey from a certain
flower growing on trees, called in Latin Flos Tiliae or Tili, in the Germane
tongue Lind^n holt. This honey is white, hard, and very fragant or odoriferous.

Of the virtues and uses of sundry Cordial waters.
FOrasmuch as compound cordial waters, truly made of the Spirit of wine, with
the addition of diverse especial costly and medicinal spices, drugs, and other
precious additaments now much in use, have been found very available and
comfortable by many experiences, not only at Sea, and in the very remotest
parts of the earth, either hot or cold, to our nation, and others in their
travels; but also here at home, upon many occasions, have ministered great help
and comfort, both in preserving the body in health from diseases, and also in
curing many great infirmities, especially when they have proceeded of cold
causes; I thought it a thing not unnecessary, briefly to set down the virtues
and uses of some of the principal of them, for the benefit of young Surgeons.

Aqua Caelestis.
MAthiolus in his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, sets down this excellent
water, as a principal Antidote or preservative against all poisons, or poisoned
and infectious aires whatsoever, for that either received into the body, or but
only smelled unto, it helps very much against infections, and that it does
very admirably restore again one fallen either of the dead palsy, or falling
sickness,; and is also good either in the Colic or any gripings of the guts
as also in any the weaknesses of the stomach, and against any cold fluxes of
the guts or belly, two spoonfuls thereof given in a glister, and has many more
especial good uses and virtues there set down, which for brevity I must pass
over.

Dr. Steevens his water.
THis Water needs no man to describe his virtues, being a thing so common and
ancient in use, composed by that learned Physician of worthy memory so named.
Experience has found it to be a notable cordial water for comforting the head
and heart, yea, and all the principal faculties of the body, both animal,
vital, and natural, if it be truly prepared: and of this there needs no
question, if you will but believe the seller thereof.

Rosa solis.
THis Rosa solis, or rather Rossolis, takes his name of an herb so called;
which herb is very medicinable; as namely, against consumptions, it has been
often approved and found a certain remedy. But the Rosa Solis composition being
without deceit made, is far more precious; for it comfort the stomach and
brain, helps digestion, strengthens the appetite, opens obstructions, is
good against the palsy and falling sickness, and has many other virtues.

Cynamon Water.
THis Water does comfort and strengthen the stomach, the liver, the milt, the
lungs, the heart, the brain and the sinews; sharpneth the sight, is good
against venoms, as also the stingings and bitings of venomous beasts; helps a
bad or evil savouring breath; is good against loathing of the stomach: and
where you desire to warm, to open, to attenuate, digest, or corroborate, in all
such cases this precious liquour excels: witness Johannes Jacobus Weekerus,
alleging Mathiolus; yea and diverse other famous Writers, beside experience it
self.

Limon Water
THis is the tincture and chief essence (drawn by the spirit of wine, from the
rindes of Limons) which is a great restorative to man's nature, and a precious
Cordial, which not only aromatizeth the stomach, but much strengthens the
feebled spirits, and is as an healing balsame to all the inward parts of the
body, and does open obstructions and break the wind in the stomach exceedingly.
Juice of Limons is touched elsewhere in the cure of Scurvy.

Rosemary Water.
THis is a great comforter of the brain, sharpneth the sight, helps the
weakness of the stomach, preserves from vomiting, is very good against the
disease Dysentery, or the bloody flix (the cause proceeding of cold) either
drunk, or three spoonfuls taken in a Glister, when you are ready to administer
the same. It has very many other good properties too long here to recite.

Sassafras Water.
THe spirit of this precious root is a great opener, of all obstructions or
stoppings in the body; namely, of the liver, the lungs, the kidneys, and of the
spleen: and thereby it is found by many experiences excellent against the
Scurvy, the French disease, and the yellow jaundise; it is an approved remedy
also against cold fevers, and the dropsy, or for those which are inclining
thereto; for it provokes urine and sweat, in a very mild and natural manner,
and drives out many diseases by the pores of the skin. It has infinite more
virtues ascribed unto it: the best of these roots grow in Virginia. You may
read Monardus of the virtues of this root more at large in his Treatise of New
Spain.

Aniseed-water.
THis water, as the former, and also those which follow, have all their
substances from the Spirit of wine, and must therefore, being truly so made,
retain the manifold good virtues thereof: and besides, having therein the whole
virtues of the Anise-seeds, it is found very excellent against wind in the
stomach or elsewhere in the body, and against Asma, the Tisick and shortness
of breath: it also breaks phlegm, and warmeth the stomach.

Worm wood Water.
NO water whatsoever more grateful to the stomach, then is Wormwood water
truly composed; for it is as balsame thereto. It consumes and breaks wind
mightily, kills the worms, whereunto our Nation are subject in the
East Indies, hinders vomiting, provokes appetite, is very good against pains
in the head proceeding of a cold cause, and is very Cordial

Balm Water.
THis water has a great respect to the heart, for of all other but the former,
no herb is esteemed more Cordial then this, and is of a grateful smell and
taste; yet I hold it more proper to women then men, for it much respects the
infirmities of the Mother, and is, in the times of their pains, very
comfortable to take a little of it for the safer and sooner provoking of speedy
delivery.

Angelica water.
ANgelica water, may serve well in stead of Treakle or Mithridate, for a
preservative against the Plague or any infectious air, for there is no one
thing more commended by ancient and modern Writers in that kind, then Angelica
is, whereof there is good experience: it is also very stomachical and cordial,
and being truly made, will retain his strength and virtues forty years and more

Mint Water.
AQua Menthae does warm and strengthen the stomach, liver, spleen or milt,
helps concoction, stays vomit, and is very Cordial.

Aqua Cardui Benedicti.
CArd^^s Benedictus Water, does ease the pain of the head, confirms the
memory, cures a quartane, provokes sweat, and comfort the vital spirits.

The Conclusion.
AL these waters and spirits rehearsed, though in themselves they be good, yet
if any of the best of them be abused, and immoderately taken, they may as soon
do harm as profit: I advise therefore no man to make a common use of them, or
any of them, which has a young able body, and may have a good diet at his
pleasure: for they are chiefly to be used at sea, where men's bodies (by variety
of the venomous vapors and evil dispositions of the air, or unkind diet) are
in hazard; or where there is a weak stomach, evil digestion, with a loathing
disposition to meat, evil appetite, and too much loosnesse of the belly; also
where by extreme heat and sweat, the spirits of the body are exhausted and
spent, or where (through the extreme cold of the same) the body is much annoyed
and endangered: In all these, and infinite more evils incident to men's bodies
abroad and at home these precious liquors minister present comfort. They also
are very behoveful to aged people after their meats to help digestion, or them
which have weak stomachs, or that are of sad and melancholy dispositions; for
it must not be denied, that wine comfort the heart of man; and these waters
having their original and whole force from the spirit or life of the wine, do
thereby exhilarate man's heart, and give him courage, as well as cure his
infirmities.

If therefore these waters be truly made, they ought also to be strong of the
spirit of wine, otherwise they will not keep long good, neither are they
profitable nor wholesome, and being good, one spoonful at one time is
sufficient, or two spoonfuls at the most, for the preserving of health: they
are best to be taken fasting, one hour or two after dinner, and last at night,
either alone, or with beer or wine; some make a toste fasting, and drop the
same full of cordial water and so eat it, and that is very good.

In gripings of the guts, colic or flixes of the belly, proceeding of cold
causes or much crudity, three spoonfuls or four may be used at once in a
Glifter; but you must not boil it therein, only put it in when it is ready to
be administered; for if you do otherwise, the spirit will evaporate and be of no
force.

Aqua Rosarum Da^ascenarum.
DAmask Rose Water does refrigerate and comfort the heart, is good against
swouning, and causes sleep.

Aqua Rosarum Rubrarum.
REd Rose Water does refrigerate, bind and corroborate the vital and animal
faculties, benefiteth the head, eases the pained ears and eyes, and does good
in inflammations, and is profitable in medicines against Dysentery.

Aqua Odorifera.
SWeet water is very necessary and profitable to aromatize the body, and
refresh the senses; it sweetneth the garments, taking all offensive savours
away, and does much exhilarate the spirits, being well composed of true
Aromatic Ingredients.

Aqua Plantaginis.
PLantane water, is astringent and sanative, good to them that are in a
consumption of the lungs, in a dropsy or that have the bloody flix, good also
against the quartane ague: it cures the ulcers of the reins, bladder, and
excoriations of the passage of the yard, and being drunk, helps against
ardent urine, or the sharpness of the water.

Aqua Falopii.
FOr this water, if you desire the composition thereof, I refer you to the
Author; namely, Gabrielus Falopius, in his Treatise De Morbo Gallico: but
hereafter I mean to set down some several compositions thereof; for the Author
has diverse.

It is a water proper, and is made chiefly of Mercury sublimed, I say chiefly,
for that though the other things for quantity be ten for one, yet sublimed
Mercury will carry no cools, but will ever show his valor in healing or
spoiling: I put not this composition ready made into any Surgeons Chest, but
rather leave the ingredients, and let the discreet Surgeon make it to please
himself; for if I my self should find such a composition made by any, I should
much fear to use of it, and so I wish the Surgeons Mate to do in all Mercurial
Lotions; but rather let him use such other good Lotions, as are set down in the
cure of the Scurvy; unto any of which he may add sublimate, and term it if he
please, Aqu^ Falopii: but I say, let him well understand himself both in the
composition, and administration of any such medicines, or let him crave advice,
or rather forbear them, and use other safer medicines, though their virtues or
vices perhaps be fewer.

Aqua viridis.
THis Green water (which is held a maxim by some Surgeons) has his tincture
from Viridi or Aeris, and likewise his astringent taste and virtue. His chief
use is concerning the cures of Opthalmiae in the eyes, and also against diverse
rheumes, or distillations of humors troubling the eyes, guttatim or drop-wise
adminstred; for the description whereof, I refer the Reader to the rest of my
compositions, where they shall be found together; but I use in place thereof
Lapis medicamentos^s, which in his place also shall be spoken of.

Aqua fortis.
AQua fortis or strong water, I have to satisfy some Surgeons, put into their
Chests; but for my self, I see no reason for it, nor do I know any Chirurgical
use it has, which is not much better performed by oil of vitri^l; whereunto I
refer you rather, for that it is a far sweeter and surer medicine, as at large
shall be spoken of in his place.

Verjuice.
VErvise or Verjuice, made of the juice of Crabs, is a good cooling medicine to
be given in drinks against burning fevers; it helps digestion, causes
appetite, relisheth well meats and drinks, and is cordial, familiar, and
pleasing to the taste; but it will not live above one year in good force at Sea,
yet I give way to the putting it into the Chest, for that it is often desired
by Surgeons.

Lotion.
THis word Lotion, is a general phrase with many Surgeons, as if there were no
difference in Lotions, whereas their differences are infinite: but here I will
use it as the vulgar sort do. A Lotion compounded of vulnerary herbs gathered
in their prime, and decocted with allumen and mel in aqua pura, I confess may
retain a name general as wellas any one outward medicine I know; for if well
prepared, good use may be made thereof; as namely, it is all in all to be used
as an injection generally for griefs of the yard, as well within the passage as
also 'twixt glans and praeputium, and in Gonorrea; which though it cannot cure
the disease, yet it heals the excoriations thereof, and strengthens well
the parts; and so does it in all exulceratious of the same, remembering, that if
you use it within the passage of the yard, if you find it be too tart of the
Allom, you mix it with Plaintane-water if you have it, or for want thereof with
fair water. Note that the first time you begin injection, it be very gently
done, then you may fortify it as you see cause; namely, give it of it self, or
with the addition of a little well dulcified Mercury where occasion is, but
that warily; namely, seldom or never within the passage, 'but twixt glans and
praeputium daily (if you will) upon just occasion; and administer no Lotion
within the passage of Virga cold, but warm ever. Further it has the prime
place, for a Catholic medicine in exulcerations and excoriations of the mouth
and throat, both in Town and Country, and is become in such cases every old
wives medicine: I have touched it in the cure of the Scurvy, wherefore here for
brevities sake, I crave pardon: Only, let me tell the Surgeons Mate, that in
want of such a Lotion, though it be not in all points answerable thereto, yet
he may make a good Lotion at sea of fresh water, Allome, and Honey, provided he
be wary not to be too plentiful of the Allome.

Lixivium forte.
THis is to be understood of capital lees, a very necessary medicine to be at
hand in the Surgeons Chest, to mollify the liquid or white caustic when it
grows dry, and also if need be, by decoction perse to make up a lapis
infernalis, as some term it, or a hard caustic stone: the liquid caustic is
made only of unslaked lime and strong Capital lees, by decoction together to
the thickness of an unguent, and when occasion of application thereof is, lay
on the grief a Minium, or some other cleaving Emplaster, with a hole cut
therein, so big as there shall be occasion to make an orifice, and spread thick
the white caustic thereon, and so let it remain at the least two hours, having
a care to defend the same, that it do not spread any further at all.

The caustic stone if you boil it to a just consistence, and having put it out
(being yet warm) smooth it over with an iron splatter, and then with a knife
cut it into pieces, so you shall have it ready to make incision after your own
will; for any caustic laid on an Apostume may spread further and broader then
you will, to the damage of the Patient, but this kind of caustic you may hold
in your hand wrapped in some clout or piece of plaster spread, and so you may
rule it at your own desire, and yet it makes greater speed with less pain
then the other. Somewhat of this manner of incision I have mentioned in the
cure of Apostumes, and elsewhere, to which I refer you.

Lixivium commune.
FOr this medicine I refer you to the Treatise of Salt in general.

Acetum Rosarum.
Understand that vinegar of Roses is, or ought to be vinegar of wine first, and
then by the insusion of choice read rose-leaves, it becomes the more fragrant
and cordial, so that it is the better to aromatize the stomach, and to refresh
nature weakened, and against the fainting and great weakness of the spirits,
wherein the tincture of roses has a great virtue comfortative.

Yet let not the Surgeons Mate be discouraged though he have not Acetum
rosarum, for acetum vini, or wine vinegar, will serve well in place thereof;
and yet it is better if you have Rose Water to infuse therein upon occasion of
using the odor thereof; or for to be applied to the stomach against vomiting,
or imbecility of the same. In other cases the one may stand for the other very
well, as also for those griefs.

Acetum vini.
Wine Vinegar helps the unnatural swellings of the belly, as also cures the
fluxes of the stomach, the parts grieved being fomented therewith: it stays
the inordinate menstrual fluxes, the region of the liver or the bearing parts
fomented therewith warm; namely with stupes wet therein. It is good against
vomiting, the stomach outwardly fomented with warm stupes wet therein: It also
discusseth and dissipateth violent hot tumors in their beginnings; yea, even
those which are named Panaritiae, or, as some term them, fellons. Good
wine-vinegar excels, used in Cataplasmes, as also in somentations, where
anodine Medicines are to be used, provided the place be not excoriated; as
namely, in Hernia humorali. With bean-meal, and oil of Roses, it is a present
help being well applied, with apt trussings, and good care had. In the falling
down of the fundament it is approved good, sometimes with wine used warm to
foment the part withal; as also to be cast on bricks to receive the fume
thereof. In the hot Gout, and in all inflammations, as the Rose, or Ignis
sacer, or (as some call it) Saint Antonies fire, by way of fomentation with
wine vinegar, it is a precious help; as also made into a sirrupe with honey,
then termed Oximel; or with Sugar, then termed Oxisaccatum; it is very
convenient to a weak stomach; for it causes appetite, and is a help to
digestion, given i. or ii. at once, for it cutteth away phlegm and refreshes
nature, and corroborateth the stomach; also by way of a Gar gerisme, it is an
approved remedy against Squinantia anginae, or any of the sudden inflammations
of Collumelle, or the Amygdales of the throat; and if Roses be put therein, it
is good for all the aforesaid uses, yet more, better, and makes the vinegar
much more Cordial: It is very questionable, whether wine vinegar be of
temperament hot or cold, considering the different effects thereof, for I
should not doubt to give reasonable content to any unpartial Artist, that it
does both the effects of a hot and cold medicine, proving it both by authority
and practice to be hot and cold; yea, even by Galen himself, Tesie cap. 6. lib.
prim. simpl: med. and cap. 20. ejusdem lib.

Spiritus vini.
SPirit of wine of all vegetables is the most precious thing; it is the truest
of all Cordials: the particular virtues whereof, to be duly handled, would fill
a great Volume; It is called, as is said, Spiritus vini, quasi Spiritus vitae;
and the sacred Scriptures testify that wine makes glad the heart of man,
wherefore there needs no further argument to express it to be a true Cordial.
It is odoriferous and of a pleasant taste: It extracteth out Tinctures from
every medicinal subject,

It preserves the body from putrefaction, and in every cold oppression of
Nature it is a true helper; for the cough, and all distillations of rheumes and
fluxes, it is a perfect help: It comfort the stomach, and provokes appetite.

It helps those which are thick of hearing, one drop daily put into the ear.

It preserves a man in health, if every morning and evening he take certain
drops thereof; and defends the body that takes it, from the oppression of
infectious aires, and (being sick) almost in any disease, it may safely be
given as a true restorative medicine. All sorts of the Cordial strong waters
recited, for so much as they contain of spirit of wine in them, as is said,
become thereby (if not otherwise Cordial indeed; for take from them the spirit
of wine they contain, and the remainder is not worth the room in a glass. Much
might here to good purpose be taught of the true use of the Spirit of wine for
the cure of wounds, ulcers, fistula's, and many other infirmities, if time
would serve, which for brevities sake, I purposely pretermit at this time.

Spirit of Vitriol.
FOr this medicine I refer the Reader to the general Treatise of Salt, and to
that part which mentions Oil of Vitriol, where he shall be satisfied.

Spirit of Terebinthine.
THis spirit of Terebinthine is a subtle, volatile, pure, and a Chrystalline
spirit exttacted from Terebinthina, which how much the more noble the subject
is, so much the more excellent will the spirit be. It has many precious
virtues medicinable contained in it; for it is wholly combustible, penetrative,
of a warming and comforting faculty: it is a good menstrum to draw Tinctures
by, either from vegetable or mineral medicines, and chiefly it is to extract
the Tincture from Sulphur, which Tincture is a singular good medicine many
ways, as in his proper place I mean to touch. This said spirit is a true
balsame in the cure of all new wounds, especially of the sinews. It comfort
all the sinewie parts of the body afflicted with any cold impression, as
convulsions, the Scurvy, or the like. It provokes urine very well if 10. or
12. drops be taken in wine fasting, and drives out gravel and the stone. It is
also good to consolidate any inward wound penetrating into the body, a few
drops thereof daily drunk. It is a fit addition for any Unguent serving for a
cold disease to amend the warming force thereof, and to cause it to penetrate
the better. It has many other singular good uses, which for brevitie I must
pass over.

The white Caustic.
THis kind of Caustic takes his virtue from the vegetable salt it contains,
and may well be carried in the Chest, for that it will last well an East India
Voyage, with (some times) the addition of a little capital lees, as need shall
require; namely, when it grows too hard. It is altogether as safe and sure as
the Caustic stone, but not so swift in working, neither so well to be ruled;
for it will often spread three times as wide as it is intended, if it be not
warily prevented: which thing is dangerous to the Patient, and disgraceful to
the Artist. Wherefore if I had capital lees I would rather boil up the
Caustic stone; but then again, except the Surgeons Mate know the true height
of boiling it, and can cut it into pieces one half inch long (as is said) and
with one of the said pieces held in his one hand can perforate the apostume,
otherwise it is all one with the former white Causticks for being laid on, it
will become liquid as the other. It is not sufficiently safe to cut a hole, (as
the use is) in a spread emplaster, of the bigness he would have his orifice,
and so lay it on, and cover it with a like emplaster; for that this course
cannot hinder the spreading thereof; but if he will work surely after that
fashion, I mean with any potential caustic medicine, let him cut from a roll
of some soft emplaster that will cleave well, a piece of one ounce in weight,
or thereabout, and make of it two long rolls, laying one on each side the
place of the apostume appointed to be pierced, bringing them at each end
together, for the ends of a caustic incision ought to be narrow, and the
midst broad, if it be artificial; at least twice as long as broad is a good
form, and rather more. Regard also that your incision be made (as near as may
be) according to the length of the fibers and muscles, and always that it be
so made, that one end be more dependent then the other: But in Bubo's of the
emunctories, it will seldom fall out so, for that you are constrained to follow
the form of the tumor, which commonly lies thwart, chiefly in venereal Bubo's
in inguine, or the groine. Likewise if the tumor be full, and the Patient in
great pain, you shall do him great ease by piercing the Esker in the midst,
so soon as it is made, to discharge some of the matter. But note this as a
general rule, never press out the matter too forcibly, nor take too much at
once out. For howsoever you may justly allege and conceive, it is putrid and
offensive matter; yet know, it contains natural color, and some spirits, and
any sudden evacuation thereof will weaken and perhaps overthrow your Patient.
Wherefore except some extraordinary cause urge you thereto, force not much
matter from a suppurated Apostume, but leave that work to nature only, and
hinder not the due course thereof, by the foolish use of stopping the orifice
with a tent; for so thou shall become an enemy to thy Patient, and not only
hinder his natural help (far above thy artificial help) but also uncharitably
thou will choke him up in his own excrements; which beware of. And for the
furthering the fall of an Esker in an Apostume, where nature has a breathing,
it is mere folly, as I have said in other place. The longer it lies on, the
better I like the work, and if you would use all the art you can, you cannot
keep on an Esker at your will: wherefore forget that work till it be done to
thy hand.

I have much (in my good will) to write of this subject, namely, of the manner
of preparation, keeping, and sundry sorts of applycation of the same caustic,
and diverse other necessary instructions of the several uses of the same
medicine in diverse parts of Surgery, as well as in the opening of tumors,
but my have calls me to the next: Wherefore at this time I crave pardon.

Sal Absinthii, Ge^^^ae and Nitri.
What my leisure has not here permitted me to speak of them or any Salt else,
I have rehearsed in my Treatise general of Salt in their particular places, to
which I refer the friendly Reader. The Index will guide him thereto.

Oleum Rosarum.
Oil of Roses is anodine, and does refrigerate and corroborate, and therefore
is good against hot diseases, as Erysipelas. Also with Mel Rosarum it is a good
Balm for new wounds of the head, and elsewhere; and has diverse other worthy
uses in Surgery.

Oleum Anetheninum.
Oil of Dill is anodine and comforting, it concocteth crude tumors, causes
sleep, mitigateth the headache, refreshes the wearied members, strengthens
the sinews, discusseth wind, is profitable for convulsions, and asswageth
aches, eases pains, and has many other good uses.

Oleum Chamomelinum.
Oil of Chamomil resolves moderately and calefieth, by anointing the parts
grieved: is good for the Colic, stone, weariness, and for aches, fevers, and
for all other things with the former. It is also very convenient in Glisters
for all gripings and tortians of the guts, and yields great comfort to the
intrails by the good odor and warmth thereof.

Oleum Lumbricorum.
Oil of Earthworms helps the aches of the joints in any part of the body,
and does strengthen and comfort well the sinews weakened and pained, and is good
against convulsions and cramps; it is also a good Balm for sinews wounded.

Oleum Liliorum.
Oil of Lilies does moderately warm and resolve, asswageth pain, mollifieth
hard tumors, does much mitigate the violence of diseases, and is very
effectual against pains of the breast and stomach, and allayeth the inordinate
heat of the reins and bladder.

Oleum Hipericonis simplex.
Oil of St. John's wort simple is of a thin essence: it is of temperament dry
and anodine, healing sinews pricked or wounded. Also it is very profitable to
them that have the Sciatica to anoint them against the swellings in the
Temples, Belly, and Legs through Melancholy: and it is of very good use for
cold aches and convulsions, cramps burnings, scaldings and good to cure new
wounds.

Oleum Hipericonis compositum,
Oleum Aparici, or,
Balm Artificial.
THese three several names of oils, or different medicines, according to that
Intend in the Surgeons Chest, are but one and the same medicine. A better balm
then which, to heal new wounds, the Surgeons Mate need not desire to learn or
know. Some Writers call it by the name of Oleum Hipericonis cum gummis, some,
Oleum Aparici, some, Balm Artificial. The composition whereof (with the rest)
shall follow.

It is best to be used in wounds, as hot as the Patient can endure it, and for
the first time rather hotter. It is a sure medicine for all venomous wounds,
all bitings of mad dogs, or of venomous worms, very hot applied, and the parts
about anointed therewith warm; remembering in all venomous griefs a Cordial is
also requisite. In my own practice it is almost all the unctious medicine I
ever use, for the curing of wounds and contusions; and I never repented my self
of the use thereof. In piercing wounds and stabs it is a medicine a Surgeon may
well rely on; it will not disgrace him. It is a very comfortable medicine
against all pains, aches, and witherings of the outward limbs proceeding of
cold causes, using it warm with good friction, and a plaster of Burgundy pitch
spread on leather and applied thereon; or rather Empl. Stipticum Paracelsi.

I speak this of practice, and I could say much more of my own experience,
touching the praise of this worthy medicine, if time would serve: but for this
present accept of this abridgment.

Oleum Sambucinum.
Oil of Elder-flowers does lenifie and purge the skin, is good for the
obstructions of the liver, helpful for the joints and nerves pained, the parts
grieved being anointed therewith: given in glisters, it procures stools,
heals the yellow Jaundise, amendeth bellyach, and eases the griping pains
thereof.

Oleum Lini.
Oil of Linseed is anodine, cures convulsions, mitigateth the hardness of the
arteries, muscles, and nerves, asswageth the pain of the Hemorrhoides: and
helps the unnatural clefts, chaps, and fissures of the fundament.

Oleum Ovorum.
Oil of Eggs cleanses the skin, takes away the filthiness, and all the sears
thereof, occasioned by cuts or bitings, or at the least much diminishes them,
so that they can hardly be seen: it cures burnings, kills ring-worms,
heals excoriations, and is prevalent against any ulcer, chaps, or ill matter
arising out of the flesh, either in the hands, feet, arms, legs, or in any
other part of the body.

Oleum Laurinum.
Oil of Bays is a medicine calefying, mollifying, opening and discussing; it
does much mitigate the Colic, delivered into the body by glister; it is a
present remedy against cold griefs of the brain, nerves, arteries and loins,
the parts anointed therewith; it represseth the violence of a fever, the spina
dorsi, or region of the back bone anointed therewith; it is good for the Palfie,
Sciatica, the hardness and pains of the spleen, and is much used, as well to
cure the scab and ring-worm, as the Scurvy.

Oleum Absinthii.
Oil of wormwood does calefie and corroborate, especially the stomach, raises
an appetite, concoeteth crude humors, dissipateth and disperseth wind, kills
worms, and takes away obstructions proceeding from a cold cause, the parts
grieved being anointed therewith; and likewise it is good in glisters for the
like occasions.

Oleum Papaverum.
Oil of Poppies cures the intemperature of heat in the reins and fevers, and
procures sleep being anointed on the nose, temples, or ears; makes lubrick,
and lenifieth the sharpness thereof.

Oleum Petreoli.
Oil of Peter is hot and dry, and by the tenuity of the essence thereof, does
penetrate and digest all excremental matter: it is used with profit for the
falling sickness, palsy, giddiness of the head; and is good for many other
griefs arising from cold causes.

Oleum Scorpionum.
Oil of Scorpions is of especial use to break the stone in the reins and
bladder; and Manardus commends it against the pestilence, all contagion and
fevers, but chiefly in expelling poison. It is likewise good to assuage the
pains of the back, proceeding by distempered kidneys.

Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium.
Oil of sweet Almonds does lenifie the roughness of the breast and throat, as
also the hardness and dryness of the joints, is good against the consumption
of the lungs: it is also of good use to be drunk in the hectic fevers: it
stays the cough, asswageth the heat of urine, heals ulcers by injection, is
very good in Colica or Iliaca Passio, to be drunk and administered in glisters.

Oleum Amygdalarum amararum.
Oil of bitter Almonds does open obstructions, discusseth wind and vapors; but
chiefly it heals deafness, the hissing and pain of the ears, lenifieth the
hardness of the sinews, and makes the face and hands fair, etc.

Balsamum Natural.
NAtural Balsamum or Opobalsamum, is very good for them that are short winded,
for the obstructions of the liver, and for griefs of the stomach; it helps
the consumption of the lungs, and causes an appetite: besides the excellent
virtue sanative it has, both inwardly and outwardly in the cure of wounds, it
has also many other good virtues.

Oleum Vitrioli.
Oil of Vitrial is exceeding hot and cold, mixed in waters, decoctions,
sirrupes or conserves, makes them in taste, tart or sowrish; and in color,
purple-like, delighting them that are sick of fevers; freeth obstructions,
recreateth the bowels, and is very effectual in the pestilence, falling
sickness, palsy, and stopping of urine. See more hereof in the treatise of
Salt.

Oleum sulphuris per Campanam.
Oil of Sulphur, made from the humide vapors thereof, is good to make the
teeth white, to take away the morphew, cures venereal ulcers, expels
diseases arising from wind or cold, is good against the falling sickness,
shortness of breath, evil affections of the lungs, eases the toothache, and
is, being well prepared, a true cordial medicine.

Oleum Garyophilorum.
Oil of Cloves not unlike to Opobalsamum in strength, does sweeten the breath,
drives away putrede humors, discusseth wind, opens the pores of the liver,
digesteth cold humors, dissipateth the melancholic humors, heals old and
new ulcers, stays the putrefaction of the bones, and asswageth the pain of
the teeth proceeding from a cold cause.

Oleum Macis.
Oil of Mace does calefie and digest cold humors, roborate the stomach,
helps concoction, raises an appetite, and procures many other benefits to
him that uses it.

Oleum Philosophorum.
Oil of Philosophers, or of tile-stones or brick-bats, the eldest is the best:
very like it is to Oleum Petreoleum: in virtue it does attenuate and penetrate
upward, digesteth and consumes all excremental matter, and is profitable for
cold affections of the spleen, reins, bladder, nerves, womb and joints; for the
Lethargy, Apoplexy, and falling sickness, and many other the like griefs.

Oleum Anisi.
Oil of Anise-seeds prevails against the colic arising from wind and cold,
against the Tympany, inflation, and crudity of the stomach, against the
gripings and the crying of the intestines, etc.

Oleum Terebinthinae.
Oil of Turpentine is taken inwardly for shortness of breath, the ptysick,
against the stone, the colic, cold and windy affections of the breast: it is
outwardly used for to heal sinews wounded, or troubled with any intemperature;
also to fill ulcers with flesh, and knit them up, leaving no cicatrice in them.

Oleum Juniperiunm.
Oil of Juniper is commended for the cure of the morphew of the skin, it
provokes urine, and agrees with the cure of diseases of the reins; it is good
to be taken certain drops thereof against any pestilential vapors; for the
stone it is also good, and to be drunk certain drops against penetrating wounds.

Oleum Spicae.
Oil of Spike does calefie, attenuate, discuss, and is very profitable to them
that have the Gout proceeding of a cold cause, or to comfort any member
benumbed: also it is good against the falling sickness and convulsions, the
temples and nape of the neck, yea and the whole head to be anointed therewith,
is very profitable.

Oleum Antimonii.
Oil of Antimony or Stibium, is good for them that have convulsions, or any
astonishing disease, and other evil affections of the brain, four grains
thereof drunk, it asswageth the pain of the gout and colic, cures fevers,
helps the bladder ulcerated, and wonderfully helps the Canker, Fistula
phagedena, the fretting or eating pockes, the wolf, and all other sorts of
ulcers.

Oleum Succini Chimice.
Oil of Amber helps the pain in the head, resolution of the sinews and
falling evil, if one dop or two be taken with water of Betony or Lavender, or
in fair water: it preserves also from poison, and (mixed with parsley water or
Malmesey) is a singular remedy in discussing diseases of the reins and bladder,
bringing forth the stone, and opening the passages of the urine; it profits
in the colic and strangullion. Four drops put into a little Angelica water,
and so given to a woman in travel, refreshes all the weak faculties of the
body, confirms and opens the brain.

Oleum Absinthii Chimice.
Oil of wormwood is good for the stomach, to strengthen it, to stay vomiting,
to kill worms, asswageth the pain of the teeth, and is used in agues

Oleum Origani.
Oil of Origanum cures malancholy, helps the dropsy, and cures the cough,
the quartane fever, and the tooth*ach.

Syrupus Absinthii.
SIrupe of wormwood is said to corroborate the stomach, help concoction, cause
an appetite, discuss wind, open the veins, and to move urine, kill worms, etc.

Syrupus Limonum.
SIrupe of Limons is Cordial and refrigerating, and I may say calefying too; it
does please and profit the appetite, and comfort all that are sick of the
pestilence, continual and contagious fevers, as also all diseases on which
exceeding great heat attends; cheareth up the heavy heart, and dispelleth
sorrow therefrom, and against all obstructions of the spleen it is a good help,
and also well approved in the cure of the Scurvy.

Syrupus Papaverum.
SIrupe of white Poppies has an astringent quality; it procures fleep,
helps the cough, hinders the humors which distill from the head into the
throat tickling, and is of precious use against the Palsy, if it be used in
the beginning thereof.

Syrupus Cinamomi
SIrupe of Cynamon is commended to be very good to old men that are cold and
weak, and to them whose vigor, humidity, and natural heat diminishes: it
nourishes much, begets blood, and quickneth all the vital parts.

Syrupus Rosarum simplex.
SIrupe of Roses simple does quench thirst, especially in fevers, mitigateth
their heat, refrigerateth the stomach and liver being very hot.

Syrupus Rosarum solutivarum.
SIrupe of Roses solutive, is used as a gentle and safe purge both to old and
young, when they are molested either with burning or pestilent fevers, or any
hot distemperature of the body.

Syrupus Violarum.
SIrupe of Violets does break the acrimony of melancholy, tempereth the heat of
the bowels, brings down the belly by purging it, helps the diseases of the
throat, as hoarsenesse and the dry cough, and is a chief aid to the curing
inflammations of the breast, against the pleurisic, and quenches thirst in
fevers, and is cordial.

Oximel simplex.
OXimel simple is in great use for the cure of inflammations of the lungs and
throat, helps expectoration and difficult breathing, cutteth and attenuateth
thick and slimy humors, purges the entrails without trouble, and is good both
in cold an hot affections.

Mel Rosarum.
OR Honey of Roses, strengthens and cleanses the stomach, purges clammy
humors, helps concoction with the temperate heat thereof, allayeth and
stops hot fluxes, the phlegmon of the mouth gums and jaws, is singular good
with oil of Roses for wounds in the head: These two (with Aqua vitae) are very
good to cure wounds in joints, where the joint* water gleeteth out.

Diamoron simplex.
OR Diamoron simplex, not unlike Mel Rosarum, is profitable in Gargarismes,
against the eating ulcers of the mouth, as aforesaid, cutteth away phlegm, and
cleanses the mouth and throat; and by reason of the pleasing taste thereof is
the more comfortable to the diseased.

Syrupus raphani sylvestris.
OR Sirupe of wild Radish, breaks the stone, mundifieth the reins, provokes
urine, is profitable for the King's Evil, and is an approved medicine for the
Scurvy to be drunk daily.

Syrupus Prunellorum.
OR Sirrupe of Sloes, does refrigerate and comfort the stomach, stops
fluxes, heals the excoriations of the intrals. The dose may be ii. at once.

Cons. Rosarum Rubrarum.
OR Conserve of Red-roses is good for the heart and head, strengthening and
comforting both; as also the bowels, mitigating their heat, and stops
fluxions, and is much the more profitable in any grief if a few drops of oil of
vitriol be mixed therewith, but beware of too much.

Conser: Anthos.
OR Conserve of Anthos, or Rose-mary flowers is of much use in physic, because
of the force it has in comforting the brain, and corroborating the sinews, and
is given with good success for the falling sickness, Apoplexy, Lithargie,
dead and shaking Palsy, but it will not keep long at Sea in hot Countries.

Rob. Berberies.
OR Conserve of Berberies does refrigerate, and is astringent, it quenches
thirst, and the heat of the stomach, and bowels, it causes appetite, removes
the waterish humor of choler, cures the bloody flix, the flux of the liver,
the often gnawing and wringing of the guts caused by choler, heals the small
pox, and resists drunkenness.

Rob. Citoniorum.
OR Conserve of Quinces does bind, comfort the stomach, is good for choler,
stops all kind of bloody fluxes and helps digestion.

Conser: Luiule.
OR Conserve of wood sorrel does recreate and comfort the heart, removes
putride humors, refrigerateth and profits much in continual and contagious
fevers, being very cordial; but will perish in hot Countries: great store of
this herb is found in Soldanie at the Cape of Good-hope as I am informed.

Conser: Prunellorum.
OR Conserve of Sloes is of a comforting stiptick force, very profitable to
comfort a weak stomach oppressed with crudities, good against all fluxes of the
belly, and also good to heal all inflammations or excoriations occasioned by
the same, either taken on a knife in form of a Bolus, or given in Glisters.

Electuarium Diacatholicon.
THis Electuary Diacatholicon does purge gently all humors, it is conveniently
used in fevers, and other diseases which arise from a certain evil disposition
of the spleen and liver: the dose is i.

Electuarium Diaphenicon.
DIaphenicon purges easily and safely phlegm and melancholy: it helps the
belly-ake, chollick, continual burnings fevers, and all evils proceeding of
choler and phlegm: the dose is i.

Diaprunum simplex.
DIaprunum simplex is commended for a gentle laxative, not only against
continual and hot intermitting fevers, but also against all hot diseases, and
against the vices of the lungs, throat, reins and bladder: the dose is i.

Confectio Hamech.
COnfectio Hamech purges choler, melancholy, and salt phlegm; and is therefore
with great benefit used against diseases arising from the same, the Canker,
Leprosy, or dry Scurfe, Madness, Ringworm, Itching, Scabs and the like: the
dose vi.

Electuarium de succo Rosarum
THe Electuary of juice of Roses is powerful in purging of yellow choler: the
dose is i.

Extract. Catholicon purgans.
THis extract is a laxative medicine (being drawn from the most excellent of
vegetable laxative ingredients) fitting to be ever ready at hand in a Surgeons
Chest, or else where in Surgery. The dose is small, namely, 15. grains at the
most: the taste pleasant, not nauseous nor bitter at all; neither causing
tortions, nor gripings in the bowels: It is a medicine that will keep good for
seven years without putrefaction, the virtues whereof have been by the Author
(for many years well experienced) both at Sea and Land approved of. Now for
that it is the honor of every expert Artist, Cito, tute, and jucunde sanare;
that is, quickly, safely, and pleasantly to perform his scope in the comforting
and curing of his patient, I have therefore thought fit to recommend the use
hereof to the Surgeon, to be practiced by him, as well in military, as
Domestic occasions.

And this medicine that here I commend to the reader, answers fitly those
fornamed attributes, by reason of his gentle and easy operation in safe
purging per secessum, or downward; It exceeds other purgatives therein, the
dose being duly observed; for it purges the head, the stomach, the belly and
liver of all gross offending humors, either phlegmatic, choleric, or
melancholy; also it purges watty and slimy humors, and takes away the
chollick or gripings of the bowels; and withal, it comfort the stomach;
yea, any child, or woman with child, may safely take hereof. It is best to be
taken fasting in a morning, and to eat in three hours after the receipt
thereof, only the party may take drink, or rather (which were best) warm
broth, or in want thereof posset drink, or beer for a need somewhat warmed; and
the party that takes it; were best he keep within his Chamber, and not to
sleep in the time of the working of the medicines; but if he goes out, urged
by his necessities, being careful to keep himself warm he is in no danger
thereby, although I confess to keep in were better.

And whereas Paracelsus says, that every good laxative medicine, ought to
contain in general three operations or faculties as proper to it; namely,
First, that it purge nature without offense of danger; Secondly, that it
strengthen nature being debilitated or weakened; Thirdly, that it do comfort
nature; yet the said Author is of opinion, and that justly, that the excellency
of purgative medicines is not always to be judged of by the numbers of stools
it provokes, but much more for the Artanum thereof, or hidden specifical power
it has in the curing and rooting out of diseases, although they be inveterate.

And moreover this medicine is very safe to be given in cases of the plague, or
small pox, where, and when, by advice a purge is fitting to be given.

Diatrion Pipereon.
DIatrion Pipereon does help the stomach, and is good against belching,
quartans, cold, and all flatious diseases, or wounds: of the species thereof
you may i. honey v; put them together being well mixed, and keep the same to
give upon occasion to a weak stomach fasting, or at any time, it will warm and
comfort him much: when men feel their stomachs oppressed with obstructions by
reason of cold, now and then a little thereof given them will much comfort
them, and preserve them well from fluxes of the belly.

Theriaca Londini.
THis conposition was heretofore appointed by the Doctors of the Physicians
College in London, as a thing very requisite, for that the price should be
reasonable for the poorer sort, the ingredients thereof being nevertheless
Cordial, and yet such as are easy to get. It may be used well in place of
Mithridate: and in truth I had rather put my self upon it, as a good Cordial,
being fresh made, then upon the Mithridate we buy from beyond the Seas; for it
is by the Hollanders so uncharitably sophisticated that a man may fear to take
it in his need: my self chanced in Holland into the house of a Bore (as they
term him) to lodge, who lived by making of Mithridate and Treakel, he confessed
to me, his Mithridate had but nine simples in it: he had also pewter boxes
marked so artificially as no man could discover them to be other then right
Venice ones.

I have appointed to the Surgeons Chest some of the Species of the London
Treakel ready powdered and dry, that the diligent Surgeon at his will may
compose a London Treakel at Sea; namely, by taking honey iii. and of this powder
i. and heat them together, stirring them well till all be incorporated, and
give it as need shall require.

Confectio Alkermis.
COnfectio Alkermis preserves from Apoplexies arising from cold and melancholy
humors, does very much comfort the brain and heart, and is sometimes used very
profitably for them that languish away through long sickness, and are subject
to swoundings.

Electuarium deovo.
Electuarium de ovo is very much commended for prevention, and cure of the
plague, and all pestilential diseases, in expelling the infection from the
heart.

Mithridatum Damocratis.
MIthridate of Damocratis is in quality and virtue like to Treakel, but more
hot and forcible against the poison of Serpents, mad Dogs, wild Beasts,
creeping things, being used as a plaster or drunk; it cures all the cold
affections of the head, helps the melancholic, or those that are fearful of
waters, them also that have the falling sickness, Megrum, pain in the bowels,
ears, toothache, and weeping eyes, heals the evils of the mouth and jaws
being plasterwise laid to the temples; by discussion gives ease to the
troubled with the Squinancie, Apoplexy, cough, spitting of blood, Impostumes,
or inflammations of the lungs, or any griefs within the body, and is good
against the bloody flix, flux of the stomach, obstruction of the guts, and
against wringing and tortions in them, being taken with aqua vitae and the
decoction of baulastians, it remedieth convulsions and palsy, helps the
middriffe flatus, Hypocondria, the pains of the reins and bladder, breaks the
stone, provokes urine and monthly flowers, expels other vices of the
matrix, yields a singular benefit for the Gout, profits not a little in
quotidians and quartanes, or a quantity drunk in wine being first warmed, and
then taken an hour before the fit.

Theriaca Andromachi.
ANdromachus Treakel does the effects of Mithridatum Damocratis, and is also
good against the hoarsnesse of the voice, against the Jaundise, Dropsy, for
wounds of the intestines, to bring forth the young birth dead, to expel and
take away the Leprosy, and measles, to revive every decayed sense, to confirm
wounds healed, to kill all kinds of worms, to dissipate wind, to comfort the
heart and stomach, and to keep the body incorrupt and sound.

Theriaca Diatesseron Mesuis.
THis Diatesseron is an ancient composition devised by the ancient Grecians,
and had beginning from Avicen, and Mesues. or one of them; and according to the
Greek word so named, for that it is made of four simples, viz. Gentian roots,
Bay Berries, Myrrha, and Aristolachia rotanda, four precious and very Cordial
simples, full of medicinable virtues. And for that I would have it kept in time
of need, I have thought meet to have ready powdered the said 4. simples together
to be composed into a Treakel as occasion shall move thee. Only note this,
that to one ounce of the said species 3. of honey is to be added, and well mixed
on the fire, and so it is ready for use. By some Writers this composition is
called Theriaca ad pauperem, the poor man's Treakel.

The virtues of Diatesseron are said to be as follow.

It is good against poison drunken, and against the bitings of venomous beasts
or worms. It is also good against all the cold affects of the brain, as
convulsions, resolutions of the sinews, morbum Comitialem, the Spasme or Cramp,
the inflation of the ventricle or stomach, against defect of concoction
therein, and against venomous wounds both inwardly drunk, and outwardly
applied. Also it opens the obstructions of the liver and spleen, thereby
preserves the body from the disease called Cachexia or stomacace, which is the
Scurvy. Test Pharmacopoeia Augustana, and aliis.

Dentes Elephantini.
DEns Elephantinus, or Elephants tooth has an astringent force, heals
fellons, and is good for white fluxes of women, the Icteritia Flava or the
yellow Jaundise, Morbus Regius, worms, and continual obstructions.

Laudanum Paracelsi Opiatum.
IN the Treatise of the fluxes of the belly, it is handled at large, to which I
refer the friendly Reader.

Diascordium.
DIascordium is helpful in fevers, as well contagious, as penstilential: good
for the headache, and universal plague, whose dose is from half a dram, to one
dram and a half, according to the occasion or strength of the Patient.

Diacodion.
DIacodion removes subtle Catarrhes, which distill from the head to the
breast, helps the cough, and procures rest, the dose is from i. to i.

Pbilonium Romanum.
PHilonium Romans magnum is given for the Pleurisy, Colic, and any internal
pain or grief; it causes sleep, stays Haimorraea or the flux of blood in the
inward parts, and sneesing, allayeth the griefs of the belly, spleen, liver,
and reins, caused by cold, wind, and crude humors, and takes away the hicket:
the quantity of i. is the usual dose, and it is augmented or decreased as the
years and strength of the Patient is.

Philonium Persicum.
PHilonium Persicum is invented against the abundance of blood of women's
monthly terms, of the hemorrhoides, and for the overmuch flux of their courses,
the flux of the belly, against vomiting and spitting of blood: it does also
consolidate ulcers and veins.

Philonium Tarsense.
PHilonium Tarsense is of the same faculty as Pbilonium Romanum.

Aurea Alexandrina.
AUrea Alexandrina is effectual against the cold defluxions of the head: good
for weeping eyes, the toothache, and headache, consumption, colic, cough, and
spitting of blood: it eases the pain in the reins, and profits intermitting
fevers. But the cause why I have not appointed this good composion, nor any of
the three last mentioned Philoniums to the Surgeons Chest (though I know them
to be good medicines) is, because they will not keep an East India voyage; and
Laudanum opiale Paracelsi is sufficient for ought the other can do: Wherefore I
rest satisfied therewith.

Succus Absintbii.
SUccus Absinthii, juice of wormwood is good for digestion, kills the worms,
benefiteth the stomach, and differs much from the virtues of the herb; this
being astringent, the other abstersive.

Succus Acatiae.
SUccus Acatiae is a foreign medicine, for which we use the juice of Sloes: it
does refrigerate, bind, and repel: it stays all fluxes of the belly,
heals excoriations of the intrals, strengthens much the stomach; helps
appetite, heals ulcerations in the intrals, either used in Glisters, or eaten
in agelly. The dose whereof may safely be i. at one time, or 2. cannot offend:
but I hold the infusion thereof, or the decoction of it, to be the aptest
medicine, because of the grossnesse of the sustance thereof.

Succus Glycirrhizae.
SUccus Glycirrhizae, or juice of Licorice in all his qualities is temperate,
but exceeding in heat: somewhat it does lenifie the throat, and mitigate the
asperities of the arteries: cleanses the bladder, and is good for the cough:
moves expectoration, and is very profitable against all vices of the lungs and
throat.

Succus Limonum.
SUccus Limonum, or juice of Limons expelling and refrigerating, clears the
skin of morphew, kills handworms; and is of special use to bridle the heat of
melancholy: to help sharp and contagious fevers: is good to cause a pleasant
taste in potions, etc. and Cordials. It is very cordial of it self, and the most
precious help that ever was discovered against the Scurvy to be drunk at all
times; for it mightily opens all obstructions, and refreshes and restores
nature.

Pulpa Tamarindorum.
PUlpa Tamarindorum, the pulpe or juice of Tamarinds is a medicament excellent
and well approved of against Scurvy, as well for opening the obstructions of
the liver and spleen, as for comforting and refreshing the blood and spirits
decayed or stopped. Also, it purges choler: allayeth the heat and fury of
blood: cures sharp fevers, and the Kings evil: extinguisheth thirst, and all
heat of the stomach and liver: stops vomiting, and is good for the Chollick.

Pilulae Aggregativae.
PIlulae Aggregativae, so called either from the Agaricum or the aggregation of
many virtues that are said to be therein: for they are profitable for many
affections of the head, stomach, and liver: they purge phlegm, choler, and
melancholy; and therefore are of very good use against continual fevers, and
inveterate diseases. It is described by Mesues; whose dose is from two scruples
to a dram and a half. But beware of the use of these pills where the flux
reigns; for Agaricum in such bodies as are incident thereto, is a dangerous
medicine. I speakthis of experience, wherefore remember it.

Pilulae Aureae.
PIlulae Aureae, or golden pills, being in color like aurum, or gold, because
of the saffron in them, they are cholagogall, attracting choler, yea, and
phlegm too, from the inferior and superior venture; and therefore purge the
head, senses and eyes, and restore the eye sight. They were first made known by
Nicolaus Myrepsus, who was the first inventer of them; their dose is like that
of the pills Aggregative.

Pilulae Cochiae.
PIlulae Cochiae deriving their name from a Greek word (...), a grain (pills
being formed small and round like grains of Cicers) do purge both choler and
phlegm from the head, the liver, and from all other parts wherein such humors
are contained, and are found described, first, by Dr. Rhasis, who is their
supposed Author. The dose is diverse as before, sometimes great, sometimes
small, but i. is the ordinary dose.

Pilulae de Euporbio.
PIlulae de Euphorbio, pills of Euphorbium (receiving Mesues for their Patron)
are virtuous against the dropsy and Scurvy, for they calefie the stomach and
intrails, purge water abundantly, prevail also in removing the cause of
tumors, and bring aid for the pain of the loins and gout, proceeding from
too much humidity: they are effectual in the quantity of one scruple, or half a
dram, and may be mixed with Pilulae Cochiae.

Pilulae Cambogiae.
Pills of Cambogia, are good to cleanse the head and refresh the sight, to purge
choler, phlegm or melancholy from the stomach or spleen, they open
obstructions, and thereby profit well in the cure of the dropsy and scurvy,
and for the cure of Icteritia flava or the yellow Jaundise, they are very good.
This Cambogia is much used in Holland and Germany: and Doctor Harvey of St.
Bartholomews Hospital, calls it purging saffron, and gives it in pills per
se, in which manner given, it purges both ways forcibly; but the pills here
mentioned, purge only downwards very gently, their dose is ss. their
composition shall be mentioned in his due place.

Pilulae Ruffi.
PIlulae Ruffi or Pestilentiales Ruffi (subscribing to Ruffus their inventer, a
famous Physician, and fitting for the pestilence and plague) do rather prevent
infection, then cure the infected: for by reason of the aloes the body is freed
from excrements, by myrrha from putrefaction, and by Saffron the vital
faculties are quickened; but infection once possessed, is not always by such
light cordials and gentle laxatives removed: their dose agrees with that of
Pilulae Aureae, they are very stomachal, for they refresh much the stomach, and
in any oppressions of the stomach where gentle purging is required, they excel.

Benedicta laxativa
BEnedicta laxativa, or the blessed laxative, does mightily open obstructions,
purges choler, phlegm, and all clammy humors from the joints, reins, and
bladder: and is termed Benedicta, because it benignely loses the belly. The
dose is ii.

Pulvis Arthriticus Paracelsi.
THis is a laxative powder, made only of four vegetables, and one Animal
simplex, with the addition of sugar, to give it the more grateful taste: the
dose is to i. at the utmost, besides the sugar: I can speak of the pleasure and
profit I have had by this mean purging powder; I say pleasure, for that it is
so pleasant and easy to be taken; and profit to me many ways; for it is my
general purging medicine, when I would purge downwards upon any repletion of
the body, or general cause of evacuation downwards; and I find it indifferent
in purging any offending humor, according to the commendations the Author
gives of it; I can no more miss this plain and harmless ready purge, then I
can miss my Salvatory. Oswaldus Crollius, a most learned late Writer, has set
down this only purge for the cure of the Podagra, giving it this brief
commendation. It purges safely and gently all podagrical defluctions: and in
truth, whosoever shall have occasion of the use thereof, will have cause to
commend it, and knowing it, will find small need of Pulvis Hollandicus or
Pulvis sanctus, whose dose at sea must be at the least two drames, being
nauseous and unsavory, whereas ss. of this will do as much with great
facility, and without tortions or gripings of the guts, which other
compositions cause. I use to give it to strong bodies in white wine, to weaker
in sack; but at sea for a need it may be given in fair water, and some sirupe
to help the taste thereof, which neverethelesse is not ungrateful of it self.

Trochiscus de Absinthio.
TRochiscus de Absinthio, or of wormwood (says Mesues) takes away the
obstructions of the stomach and liver, and intermitting or chronical fevers
sprung thereof, strengthens the bowels, and causes an appetite.

Trochiscus de Alhandal.
TRochisci Colocynthidos, or Alhandal (as the Arabians speak) do bring away
thick phlegm, and all glutinous juices from the brain, nerves, and other more
remore parts, they help the colic proceeding from a glassie tough phlegm, the
Apoplexy, Squinancy, falling sickness, short breathing, cold and gouty
diseases, which scarce give way to common medicaments, and is described by
Mesues; the dose is gra. 4.

Trochisci de Spodio.
TRochisci de Spodio, says Mesues, have their use in bilious fevers, which
bring also a flux of the belly, they allay the inflammation of the stomach,
liver, and continual thirst.

Trochisci de Minio.
TRochisci de Minio, or the Trochisks of Minium, consume pruod flesh, mundifie
sordid ulcers, as also callous or hard flesh, and wonderfully cure fistula's*
look more thereof in Johannes de Vigo.

Folia Senae.
FOlia Senae are hot and dry in nature, they are an excellent medicament for
purging the belly; it scoureth away phlegmatic, tough, and melancholy humors
from the brain, lungs, spleen, liver, stomach and bowels, as also cleanses the
body from a dust and salt humor.

Rhabarbarum.
RHabarbarum or Ruberbe, is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second, of
an astringent nature, and is good for the stomach and liver, and against the
bloody flix, purges downward chollerick humors, and therefore very profitably
used against hot fevers, inflammations, and stoppings of the liver, etc. i. is
the full dose.

Agaricum.
AGaricum or Agarick, is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second,
purges phlegm, freeth from obstructions, attenuateth, cleanses, and
dissipateth wind, and helps all diseases which spring from gross, cold, and
raw humors: the dose is i. But beware of the use thereof in the curing any
fluxes of the belly.

Scammonium
SCammonium is hot and dry in the second degree, purges downward in vehement
manner choleric humors, and therefore is good against diseases arising from
the same, but if it be taken either too much in quantity, out of time, place,
or unprepared, it is very dangerous, excoriating the guts, provoking bloodly
excrements, procuring Dysenteria, causing wind, offending the stomach, and
distempering the heart and liver: the dose is eight grains.

Aloes Cicotrinae.
ALoes the best is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third degree,
removes cold, phlegmatic and choleric humors, by purging, digesting, and
driving them out: it is a sovereign medicine for the stomach.

Hermodactili.
HErmodactils are hot and dry in the second degree, they do effectually draw
away phlegm, and other slimy humors from the Joints, and therefore are very
profitable for the Gout in the hands and feet, and the Sciatica.

Polypodium.
POlypodium is dry in the second degree; opens the body, and brings away
black choler and phlegm, helps the colic and the griping of the belly, and
also the obstructions of the spleen.

Cornu Cervi.
Hartshorn is to be numbered among Cordial simples in the highest place, it is
given in want of Unicorns horn, and not unfitly; it comfort the heart, is
good against poison, provokes urine, opens obstructions, eases the colic,
disperseth wind, kills worms in the body, is good against pains of the reins,
or bladder, and being taken upon each occasion in liquors proper to the former
griefs, it is much the better in force: Thus much is meant of Hartshorn
unburned; And being burned, the powder thereof is very good against the bloody,
or any other fluxes of the belly.

Euphorbium.
EUphorbium is hot and dry almost in the fourth degree; and besides his extreme
heat and notable acrimony, it has a certain faculty of purging, whereby tough
and cold phlegm, with choler and water are taken away.

Turpethum Cathapsaris.
TUrbith is hot in the third degree, is good to purge phlegm, cho^erick and
thick humors from the stomach, breast, joints, and other remote parts, and
helps the colic and cold aches.

Mirabolanes.
MIrabolanes (whereof there are five kinds, the Citrine, Indian, Bellerick,
Chebule, and Emblick) have peculiar virtues: some purge choler, others
melancholy, others phlegm; but as they purge, so they bind again, comforting
and strengthening the heart, stomach, and liver, and therefore are fit purgers
of the body in dysenterie upon any occasion: their dose is ii.

Cambogiae, or Guttigambe.
CAmbogiae is a purging medicine, newly found out in the East Indies, and
thence brought, to us; it is not much unlike Stibium in working: it is already
in use by diverse reverend Physicians, amongst which, Dr. Harvy uses it in
Saint Bartholomews Hospital, and calls it Crocus purgans. I find by my
practice it purges well the head, and that it is good to open obstructions,
that it is also good against the yellow Jaundise: It opens well the spleen
and liver, and purges more downwards then Stibium does: the do^e is 12.
grains. The recited Doctor gives it in pills: my self, for that I see it
purges the head, have mixed it with pills for the head; and I so give it, and
it works gently downward only.

Cassia fistula.
CAmbogiae fistula is hot and moist in the first degree, tempereth immoderate
heat, purges gently choleric humors, and is good for the reins and kidneys,
driving forth gravel and the stone.

Crocus.
CRocus, or Saffron, is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, is good
for the brain, quickneth the senses, cheereth the heart, causes digestion,
helps the diseases of the breast, lungs, and liver, it mollifieth all
hardnesses, and ripeneth all tumors.

Opium
Opium is cold and dry in the fourth degree, asswageth inward pains, causes
sleep, stops the flix, and requires care in the use thereof, for otherwise
it is a deadly poison.

Radix Chyna.
RAdix Chyna, Chyne-roots, prevail much in the cure of Lues venerea, and are
good for the giddiness of the head, takes away the pain of the stomach, and
obstructions, and are profitable for the dropsy, colic, and gripings of the
belly, moves urine, causes sweat, and are helpful against convulsions, the
palsy, and pains of the joints, and a singular remedy against a consumption.

Sarsaparilla.
SArsaparilla is of a hot quality, causes sweat, especially extinguisheth the
heat of venereous poison, and is good for the articular diseases, ulcers, and
phlegmatic humors, and principally it is good against the French pockes.

Sassafras.
SAssafras is of a hot and dry temperament in the second degree, commended in
taking away obstructions, corroborating the inward parts, helping the
Asthmatick and Nephretik, cleansing the reins from gravel, discussing wind,
good for women's diseases; and against any kind of fluxion, and in the Morbus
Gallicus or French pox, it is a good medicine.

Gnaiacum.
LIgnum Gnaiacum does exsiccate, attenuate, open, purge, move sweat, resists
contagion and infection, and does wounderfully cure the morbus Gallicus, old
ulcers, scabs, and ring-worms; the best use thereof is by decoction in fair
water.

Cortex Gnaiaci.
COrtex Gnaiaci has the same virtue as the Lignum Gnaiacum has, but
exsiccateth much more.

Cortex Granatorum.
COrtex Granatorum, seu malicorium, is astringent, stops the laske, and
bloody flux, heals the gums moist and weak, fasteneth the teeth loose,
stops the bleeding of green wounds, and helps the corruption of the
stomach* bowels* and the bursting or falling down of the guts.

Liquiritia.
LIquiritia is in all qualities temperate, yet enclining more to heat, it is
agreeable to the lungs and breast, rotteth phlegm, moves expectoration, cures
the cough, helps breathing, and is profitable for the reins, taking away the
sharpness of urine, dissolveth the stone, and heals the sores of the kidneys
and bladder.

Hordeum.
HOrdeum commune (in English said to be Barley) is cold and dry in the first
degree, digesteth, softeneth, and ripeneth all hard swellings, is good for
inflammations, excels against the soreness of the throat, refrigerateth,
comfort, strengthens, is abstersive, and provokes urine.

Hordeum Gallicum.
HOrdeum Gallicum, more used inwardly then the hordeum commune by the
Physicians in medicaments, is of the same nature and virtue as the other is.

Semen Anisi.
SEmen Anisi or Anise-seed, is hot and dry in the third degree, does discuss
the windiness of the stomach and bowels, stops the bloody flix, laske of
the belly, moves urine and monthly terms, breaks and brings away the
stone, helps obstructions of the liver, amendeth the breath, and is good for
the falling sickness.

Semen foeniculi.
SEmen foeniculi or fennel seed, is hot in the third degree, dry in the first,
corroborateth the stomach, opens the obstructions of the lungs, liver, and
kidneys, and causes abundance of milk in women's breasts.

Semen Cari.
SEmen Cari or Caraway seed, is of the same nature and virtue as Semen Anisi
aforesaid.

Semen Cumini.
SEmen Cumini or Cummin seed, is hot and dry in the third degree, attenuateth,
digesteth, resolves, discusseth wind, dissipateth phlegmatic tumors, and is
good against the chollick and tympany.

Semen Petroselini.
SSemen Petroselini or Parsley seed, is hot in the second degree, and dry in
the third, is given to them that have the stone or Jaundise, as also to provoke
urine.

Semen Lini.
SEmen Lini or Linseed, is hot in the first degree, temperate in moisture and
dryness, softeneth all cold tumors, ripeneth and breaks Impostumes, draws
out thorns sticking in the body, expels wind, and gripings of the belly,
and cleanses the flesh from spots.

Semen Fenigraeci.
SEmen fenigraeci or Fenigrece, is hot in the second, and dry in the third
degree, does mollify, discuss, and mundifie: helps cold, hard swellings,
impostumes, and gout in the feet: wastes and lenifieth the hardness of the
milt, mitigateth heat, is profitable for the matrix in women, and cleanses the
skin from many evils; as, itch, scurf, pimples, wheals, and the like.

Semen Anethi.
SEmen Anethi or Dill-seed, are hot and dry in the second degree, provokes
urine, prevail against the gripings of the belly, and inflations thereof, take
away the Hicket, increase milk, attenuate, resolve, and digest humors.

Semen papaveris albi.
SEmen papaveris albi or white Poppy seeds, are cold and dry in the fourth
degree, provoke sleep, take away subtle humors, catarrhes, rheumes distilling
from the brains upon the lungs, and help the cough.

Semen plantaginis.
SEmen plantaginis or Plantane seeds, are cold and dry in the second degree,
stop the flux of the belly, and any flux of blood, are good also for catarrhes,
old and new ulcers, either of the body or mouth.

Semina quatuor frigida majora.
THe four cold seeds, named Semina quatuor frigida majora (viz. Cucurbitae,
Cucumeris, Citrulli, Melonis) are cold and moist in the second degree. The
first whereof extinguisheth the fervor or heat of blood, choler, and fevers.
The two following are profitable to the stomach, move urine, help the ulcers of
the reins and bladder, extinguish thirst and choler. The fourth and last has
all the virtues of the former.

Semina quatuor frigida minora.
SEmina quatuor frigida minora or the four cold feeds, (viz. Lactuc^;
Portulacae, Cichorii, Endivae) the first whereof is dry and cold in the third
degree, refrigerateth the head, liver, spleen, reins, bladder, and limbs,
prevails against the Gonorrea, and heat of Venery, moisteneth, lenifieth,
slaketh thirst, and and causes sleep, Ren. Wick.

Saccharum.
SAccharum, Sugar is hot in the first degree, loses the belly, is convenient
to the stomach, does cleanse, digest, take away the asperity or roughness of
the tougne, and siccity, thirst, or drought in fevers, helps the reins and
bladder, and is profitable for eyes dim of sight.

Amygdalae amarae.
A Mygdalae amarae or bitter Almonds, are hot in the first degree, dry in the
second, they are abstersive more then sweet ones: they do open and purge the
lungs, liver, spleen, kidneys, and passages of the reins, and bowels, and are
good against spitting of blood.

Amygdalae dulces.
AMygdalae dulces or sweet Almonds, are hot and moist in the first degree, do
extenuate, purge, and cleanse the bowels, draw spittle from the breast and
lungs, are good for the cold and dry stomach, clear the skin from spots,
pimples, and lentiles, stop spitting of blood, and engender choler.

Uvae passae.
Vuae passae seu Corinthinae, or Currants, are hot in the first degree, or
rather of a temperate quality; and by a special faculty they have, they prevail
against the vices of the breast and liver, move and purge the belly, strengthen
the stomach, purge the head, lenifie and cleanse the breast and lungs.

Amylum.
AMylum or white starch, is moderately hot, levigateth the parts exafperated,
it is effectual against the defluxions of humors into the eyes, against
pustles and hollow ulcers, it fills with flesh, stops spitting of blood,
helps the roughness and soreness of the breast and throat, and eases the
cough: It is very good in the fluxes of the belly to be given in glisters,
against inflammations and excoriations in the intrails.

Cinamomum.
CInamomum or Cinnamon, is hot in the second degree, warmeth, comfort,
concocteth, mollifieth, and wonderfully cheareth up the heart, and all the
faculties of the body, as well animal, as vital and natural. It is very good
against the fluxes of the belly.

Macis.
MAcis or mace, is hot and dry in the second degree, strengthens the stomach,
helps concoction, discusseth wind, and comfort the heart.

Piper nigrum.
PIper nigrum or black pepper, is hot and dry in the third degree, expels
wind, is good against all cold griefs of the breast and lungs, against poison,
agues, and squinancy, dissolveth and wastes hard tumors, causes digestion,
and aromatizeth meatsr.

Cariophilli
CAriophilli or Cloves, are hot and dry in the second degree, and are
Aromaticall, and beneficial to the heart and brain, help the liver, and
stomach, make the breath sweet, good for digestion, quicken the sight, stir up
just, and take away obstructions.

Nux Muschata.
NUx Muschata, or Nutmegs are of the same complexion with Macis: helps the
stoppings of the liver, milt, stomach, windiness of the belly, laske,
weakness of the kidneys, and stopping of the urine: comfort the heart, and
aromatizeth the stomach.

Zinziber.
ZInziber, or Ginger is hot in the third degree, helps concoction,
strengthens a cold and weak stomach, breaks wind, and preventeth sour
eructation.

Gummi Guaici.
Gummi Guaici, the gum of the Guacum has the same virtue as the wood and bark
aforesaid called Lignum Guaicum, and drunk in powder is approved a good remedy
in Gonorraea.

Opoponax.
OPoponax, is a gum hot in the third degree, and dry in the second (if bitter,
white within or yellow, fat, tender, easily dissolving, and of a strong smell,
it is good) it does mollify, digest, attenuate or assuage, dissipate or
disperse wind, and is laxative.

Of Bdellium.
BDellium does warm and mollify hard tumors in the throat, and discusseth
Hernia's in their beginnings, provokes urine, and is good aganst the cough.

Amoniacum.
AMoniacum (a gum so called) is hot in the third degree, has the force of
mollifying so effectual, that it dissolveth Tophoes or hard stones grown in the
flesh, easily discusseth other pustles, heals the spleen hardened, and being
given in drink, takes away many obstructions, provokes the monthly courses
and urine, drives out the stone, dissolveth the King's Evil, is very profitable
for aches occasioned by cold: that which is pure thereof is formed like Thus,
and in taste like Castoreum.

Sagapenum.
SAgapenum, or Serapinum is hot in the third degree, dry in the second,
brings down women's courses, is profitable against the suffocation of the
Matrix, resolves, attenuateth, dissipateth, moves, dissolveth, and purges
(though slowly) thick phlegm, and clammy humors: it is esteemed excellent, if
clear, yellow in color without, but white within, quick in taste, light in
substance, and easy in dissolving.

Galbanum.
GAlbanum is hot in the second degree: it is good if it be full of drops pure
like frankincense, fat, not full of sticks, strong in smell, neither moist nor
dry in substance: it extracteth, discusseth, brings away the courses stopped,
and the birth, takes away biles, hard kernels, and knots in the body, and
helps the cough, short breathing, convulsions, and ruptures.

Myrrha.
MYrrha, chosen, fragil or brittle, light, spendent, of little drops, bitter,
sharp, which smells sweet, full of whitish veins being broken, is hot and dry
in the second degree: It opens the womb, procures the courses, brings
forth speedily the birth, and is good for the cough, stitch, flux, and bloody
flix: it kills worms, amendeth the breath* closes up wounds, confirms the
teeth loose, and stays the hair from shedding.

Mastick.
MAstick sweet in smell, white, spendent, brittle, old, and very dry, brought
from the Isle Chio, is hot in the second degree: It helps concoction,
stops vomiting, confirms the power of reteining sustenance, is abstersive:
it is profitable also to them that spit blood, or that are troubled with a
cough, it attracteth phlegm from the brain, and is good for the breath.

Gum. Ladanum.
LAdanum is hot and dry in the second degree, does calefie, and mollify: it
opens the pores of the veins, keeps the hair from falling off the head,
stops the laske, provokes urine: it is used seldom in the Surgeons Chest,
except in making a grateful odor, as when a fume of Cinabrium is to be
prepared, for the cure of the pox.

Styrax.
STyrax, Calamita and liquidus are both hot in the second degree, do mollify,
concoct, cure the cough, distillations, hoarsnesse, pose or stuffing of the
head, matrix stopped, are good to procure the monthly courses of women,
cordial, exhilarating, oppose to poison, and do discuss hard cold tumors the
knots of the sinews, and the struma. The best comes from Gyprus, Sidon, and
Pisidia: the Calamita Styrax is yellow, fast, rosen like in glistering
fragments, continuing its smell; though old; and (being dissolved) of a
hony-like color, if commendable.

Belzoin.
BElzoin, called vulgarly Benjamen, is hot in the fourth degree, comfort the
heart, and all the faculties thereof, and has the same power as Styrax
Calamita aforesaid: the reddish, clear, full of white drops like frankincense,
and of a sweat smell as Xiloaloes burned, is chosen.

Tragacanthum.
TRagacanthum, a temperament hot gum, is good for the cough, roughnes of the
Artery or windpipe, hoarsnesse and defluxions, being taken with honey, or with
Sugar, and is commended to be good for the eyes; also it is good to be
swallowed down whole, or eaten in powder against the flux.

Pix Burgundiae, of some Pix Graeca and Colophoniae
COlophonia or Pix Graeca, is all one thing, and is a kind of Rosin of the Pine
tree: it is hot and dry, cleansing and healing new wounds, mollifying hard
tumors or swellings, and is very profitable against aches of the limbs,
proceeding of a cold cause.

Pix.
PIx Navalis, or stone pitch, is hot and dry in the second degree: it
discusseth, conglutinateth, mollifieth, maturateth, suppleth the hardness of
the matrix, and hard tumors, cures ulcers, fills them that are hollow up
with good flesh, and helps cold aches.

Resina.
REsina is hot, mollifying, discussing and cleansing, and (being taken
inwardly) is good against the cough, mendeth the breast, provokes urine,
concocteth crude matters, loses the belly, expels the^ stone and gravel,
and is excellent for the cure of green and fresh wounds.

Succinum.
AMbra citrina seu succinum is hot and dry, prevalent against the white flux of
the womb, flux of blood, running of the kidneys, distillations of the head,
stopping of the matrix, monthly terms, difculty of urine; being powdered and
drunk, helps immoderate cough, and strengthens the intestines, and is good
to be cast on coals to receive the fume thereof, to comfort the Arse-gut
fallen, as also to fume a ship or house in time of infectious aires, as the
plague, or when general fluxes are to be feared.

Cera Citrina.
CEra Citrina, or yellow wax, does mollify and heat, moistneth temperately: it
is good to amend the milk in the nurses breasts coagulated, it asswageth pain,
heals wounds and ulcers, and has commonly a place in all good unguents and
plasters: It is a good medicine to be drunk or eaten, and so swallowed down
for to cure the exulcerations of tht stomach or intrails in fluxes, where
inward exulcerations are to be feared.

Mummia.
MUmmia is astringent, helps fluxes of blood, the bladder ulcerated, and the
inward distempers of the yard; as also it provokes urine, and is very good to
be drunk in powder against great contusions or coagulated blood within the body.

Sperma Ceti.
SPerma Ceti, or Spuma maris, or the spawn of the Whales, is sour in taste,
spungie and white in show, unsavory in smell, and weighty, having a sharp
quality: It is of a cold faculty, cleanses, and digesteth, and is sometimes
used of women to clear the skin from spots and morphew: It is good also against
bruises inwardly, taken with the former, namely, Mummia, and also outwardly
warm, to anoint the parts contused therewith, and a Paracelsus emplaister, or
of Pix Grecum put thereon.

Sanguis Draconis.
SAnguis Draconis is cold and dry in the first degree, it is of an astringent
quality: it closes up wounds, and confirms the weak parts, and stays the
fluxes of outward wounds.

Lupines.
LUpines are hot and dry in the second degree, digest, make subtle and
cleanse, kill worms, drive away the freckles and spots like lentils in the
face, asswageth impostumations and swelling, the sciatica pain; digest consume,
and dissolve Morbum Regium; ripen and open wens, botches, biles and
pestilential sores.

Cantharides.
CAntharides are used outwardly to cause a blifter, and sometimes inwardly to
move urine; but so they are most dangerous, for they will bring the disease
Priapismus upon the Patient in a violent manner: I once knew it given, but it
killed the party the third day.

Camphura.
CAmphura or Camphora of a mixed quality, refrigerateth and calefieth, asswageth
the pain of the head, inflammations of ulcers, wounds, cures Erysipelas or St.
Anthonies fire, is effectual against the Gouorraea, the white flowers of women,
bleeding of the nose: it is also good against venoms and poisons, it preserves
the body from putrefaction, and is commended for many other virtues, for
brevity here omitted.

Spodium.
SPodium an astringent simple, is cordial and good for fainting or swounding,
inflammatious of the stomach, trembling, melancholy, and other affections
arising thence.

Sumach.
SUmach is wonderfully astringent, dry in the third degree, and cold in the
second: it is good for the Dysentery, all bloody fluxes, and women's fluxes,
especially the white, and the Hemorrhoides, preserves also ulcers from
inflammations and exulceration.

Gallae.
GAllae or Galls are cold in the second degree, and dry in the third; they
cure fluxions of the gums, help the ulcerations of the mouth, stay the fluxes
menstrual, and help the mother falling down, make the hair black, consume proud
flesh in wounds and ulcers, and induce a good healing to them.

Bolus verus.
BOlus Armeniae vel Orientalis verus is very dry, and astringent: it is a good
medicine in resisting the fluxes of blood, helping the Catarrhe, Dysentery, and
ulcers of the mouth, prevailing against pestilence, and all other like
infections.

Bolus Communis.
BOlus communis, common Bole, has the same effects as the former Bolus.

Stibium.
ANtimonium, seu Stibium, used in due time and place, produeeth very good
effects, wrestling well with many kinds of strong diseases: commonly it is
given in a Tertian, as also to the troubled with colic pain, it purges
upward and downward forcibly, and causes sweat, it is a good medicine, given
with careful respect; but it kills many by the violence thereof, unadvisedly
administered: I lament to call to mind what fearful accidents I have seen follow
the use thereof; wherefore I advise the Surgeons Mate to administer it with
great care. The dose (being five grains) is best taken by infusion. It cures
fevers, is good against pestilential fevers in their beginning: For it cures
such at once taking; and in any other fevers it may be given, the body being
strong.

Sulphur.
SUlphur or Brimstone is hot, concocting and resolving, it profits the
asthmatical, cough, colic, grief, and resolution of the members: takes away
itch, breaking out of all the body, cures tetters or ringworms, and the
scurffe, and cures rheumes and distillations: Seek further hereof in Sal,
Sulphur and Mercury.

Allumen.
ALlumen, or Alum, is astringent and yet purging, mendeth putrefied ulcers,
dries the moist, consumes proud superfluous flesh, takes away the itch, and
cures the scab, and is very profitable in lotions for ulcerations of the
mouth, throat, or elsewhere.

Vitriolum.
VItriolum seu Calcanthum, or Coperas, is hot, astringent and dry, kills the
worms of the belly, helps against poison, keeps the flesh moist and from
putritude, consumes, contracteth and and purges ulcers. Seek more of this
subject in the Treatise of Salt.

Vitriolum Album.
SEek in the Treatise of Salt, in the end of Vitriolum for white Coperas.

Cerusa.
CErusa or Venice seruse, refrigerateth, dries, binds, extenuateth, gently
represseth excrescences, and brings deep wounds to a skar or ciccatrice, and
is very good to be mixed a small quantity at once with Plantane water, against
the heat and excoriations of the yard, I mean within the passage of the yard.

Plumbum Album.
PLumbum Album, or white lead, is cold in the second degree, it is an excellent
remedy against inflammations, stiff and hard ulcers, cankers and fluxions of
the articles.

Minium.
PLumbago, or red lead, has the force of binding, mollifying, filling up
hollow ulcers with flesh, bringing down proud flesh, refrigerateth, closes up
wounds, and induces a cicatrice.

Plumbum ustum.
IS astringent, fills up wounds, eats away their excrescences, stays the
rheum of the eyes, and is profitable against the ulcers of the fundament,
hemorthoides, and their inflammations.

Lithargyrum.
LIthargyrus, or Litharg^rum auri and argenti, and plumbi, Litharge either of
gold, silver, or lead, do all refrigerate, bind, repress, stop, fill up hollow
places, cleanse, induce a cicatrice or little scar, and prevail against the
galling of the thighs. The litharge of gold, of silver and of lead, are all
but one thing though they are of several names. colors and differences of
operations, by reason of their different preparations: they are as Minium is,
all the sons of Saturn, and are even lead and no other thing.

Aes Viride.
AES viride, or verdigreace, has a sharp quality, digesting, attracting,
extenuating, corroding and is abstersive, stops fretting and spreading
sores, and eateh the callous hard flesh of fistula's, good in ulcers and
Ophthalmies of the eyes. It is the rust either of copper or brass.

Tutia.
TUtia is a gentle drier, good against the distillations of the eyes,
astringent, cooling, cleansing, stopping, and filling up. It is the scum of
brass in boiling.

Arsenicum.
White and yellow Arsenicum, called Arsenicum album and Citrinum, are enemies
to the life of man or beast: Taken into the body, this mineral kills any
living creature, and is of a corroding quality, outwardly applied, it causes a
hard crusted scab with vehement burning, eats away superfluous flesh, and
takes away hairs. It cureeth the morphew, the skin anointed with water of the
infusion thereof.

Argentum vivum.
ARgentum vivum does corrode, kill the itch and lice, wounds the intestines,
suppresseth urine, swells the body, hurts the stomach and belly, resolves,
penetrateth and purges. But of this see more in the particular, Treatise of
Mercury.

Mercurius sublimatus.
MErcurius sublimatus, made of Argentum vivum, is excellent against the Morbus
Gallicus. This medicine truly perpared, is a laxative, a Diaphoretice, a
Diauretice, a vomitive, and the best and worst corrasive medicine that can be
devised. Quaere the Treatise of Mercury.

Mercurius Praecipitatus
MErcurius Praecipitatus, is very good to further digestion in ulcers evil
disposed, and to dispose them to better healing, by cleansing and digesting
them; and because it is Mercury or Quicksilver, I have no time for it in this
place, but must refer you to my Treatise of Mercury.

Cinabrium.
CInnabaris is astringent, hot, extenuating, and has the virtues or vices of
Mercurius or Argentum vivum. It is of two kinds, either natural, which few
know, or artificial, and then it is compounded of Quicksilver and Brimstone,
and so is that we buy in the shops.

Flores Anthos.
FLores Anthos, or Rosemary flowers, are hot and dry in the second degree,
comfort the brain, heart and memory, and other senses, amend the speech, help
digestion, mollify, cleanse, and cut away phlegm.

Flores Balaustiarum.
FLores Balaustiarum, or flowers of Pomgranats, are cold and dry in the third
degree, they are also astringent; close up, and stop, they cure the bloody
flix, bleeding of green wounds, they are good in lotions for moist and weak
gums, kill worms, and fasten loose teeth.

Rosae rubrae.
ROse rubrae or Red-roses are cold and dry in the first degree, refrigerate,
and are astringent, they purge choleric humors downward, open, strengthen,
and cleanse the liver from obstructions, comfort the head, stomach, and heart,
help against consumptions, and inflammations, cause sleep, and stop spitting of
blood.

Flores chamomillae.
FLores chamomillae Camomile flowers are hot and dry in the first degree,
provoke the monthly terms, and urine, are good against windiness, the
colic, gravel, stone, aches, fevers proceeding from obstructions, cure
wearied parts, also they open, loose, mollify the hard-swollen and stopped parts
of the intrails.

Flores Melliloti.
FLores Milliloti or flowers of Mellilote, are of a dry and hot quality,
digest, consume, dissolve, and maturate, prevail against all hot swellings,
provoke urine, break the stone, assuage the pain of the kidneys, bladder, and
belly, ripen phlegm, and clear the eyesight.

Flores Centaurii.
FLores Centaurii or flowers of Centory, are of a hot and dry complexion in the
second degree, purge choler and gross humors downward, open the obstructions
of the liver, kill worms, cause the course of flowers, are good against the
Jaundice, hardness of the spleen, griefs of the sinews, clear the eyes, heal
wounds, and drive forth young fruit.

Flores Hyperici.
FLores Hyperici or flowers of Saint John's wort, are hot and dry in the third
degree, break the stone, provoke urine, bring down women's flowers, stop the
laske, drive away fevers, are good for burnings, and cure old and fistulated
sores.

Flores Sambuci.
FLores Sambuci or flowers of Elders, are hot and dry in the third degree, open
the belly, purge slimy slegme, and choleric humors, and are good for hot
swellings and tumors, and for the asswaging the pain of the gout.

Baccae Juniperi.
BAccae Juniperi or Juniper berries, are hot in the third degree, dry in the
first, and astringent, are good for the stomach, cough, windiness, gripings of
the belly, venomous bitings, infection, contagion of the air, help the lungs,
liver, kidneys, and bladder, and provoke urine.

Baccae Lauri.
BAccae Lauri or Bay Berries, are hot and dry in the second degree, they resist
poison, help deafness, contracted and wearied parts, and the pain of the
breast, cut of phlegm, and take away the scurfe.

Farina Tritici.
FArina Tritici or Wheat flower, is hot in the first degree, stops spitting
of blood, distillations of subtle humors, helps the cough, roughness of
the sharp artery, dissolveth tumors, and cleanses the face from lentils and
spots, appeaseth hunger and thirst, and is the principal natural upholder of
the life and health of man.

Farina Fabarum.
FArina fabarum or Bean meal, is cold and moist, dissolveth all swellings, is
very good for ulcers, evils, and blastings of the genitories, and takes away
inflammations of women's paps.

Farina Hordei.
FArina Hordeacea or Barley meal, is cold and dry in the first degree,
dissolveth hot and cold tumors, digesteth, softeneth, and ripeneth hard
swellings, stops the laske, and humors falling into the joints, discusseth
wind, is good against the scurfe and leprofie, and allaieth the inflammations
of the Gouts.

Furfur Tritici.
FUrfur or Wheat bran, is good against the scurfe, itch, and spreading scab,
dissolveth the beginnings of hot swellings, does slake and swage the hard
swellings of women's breasts, and the decoction thereof is singular good to cure
the painful exulcerations in the intrails, given by glisters, as is montioned
in the cure of Dysenteria.

Farina Volatilis.
FArina volatilis or Mill dust, is used in compositions to stay fluxes of
bleeding wounds.

Rosemary.
ROsemary is hot and dry in the second degree, cures the Jaundice, and the
Regius morbus or King's Evil, comfort the brain, memory, and inward senses,
and restores the speech lost or broken.

Menthae.
MEnthae or Mints, are hot and dry, do profit the stomach, appease the hickok,
stop vomiting, cure chollerick passions, griping pain of the belly, and the
inordinate course of menstruall issue, ease women in their travel of
childbearing, soften breasts swollen with milk, and keep the milk from curdding
therein.

Millilotus.
MEllilotus or Mellilote, is hot and astringent, it does assuage and mollify
hot swellings of the eyes, matrix, fundament, and genitories, heals the
scurfe, and putrified ulcers, dissolveth apostumes of the stomach, is good for
the headache, provokes urine, breaks the stone, helps the pain of the
kidneys, bladder, and belly, and takes away the web and pearl of the eye.

Salvia.
SAlvia or Sage is hot and dry in the third degree, and somewhat astringent,
stops the bleeding of wounds and bloody flix, opens the stoppings of the
liver, cures the cough, breaks the stone, provokes urine, comfort the
heart, asswageth the headache, and pain in the side.

Thymum.
THymum or Thyme, is hot and dry in the third degree, is good to cleanse the
breast, ripen flgme, and for the Asthma, purges choleric humors, corrupt
blood, brings to women their natural terms, expels the secondine, provoke
urine, discusseth wind, extenuateth cold swellings, and helps the cure of the
falling sickness.

Absinthium.
ABsinthium or Wormwood is hot in the first degree, and dry in the third; it is
bitter, sharp, and astringent, cleansing, purging, and comforting, excellent to
purge the stomach, liver, and reins from the choleric humors, and to stay the
weak stomach from vomiting, cures the Jaundice, resists pestilent infection,
helps the dropsy and splenetick, and kills worms in the body.

Carduus benedictus.
CArduus benedictus or the blessed Thistle is very bitter, and hot, comfort
the heart and vital parts, moves sweat, resists poison, is of much use in
pestilent diseases, mitigateth the pain of the reins and sides, kills the
worms of the belly, and prevails against bitings of Serpents.

Melissa.
MElissa or Balm, this herb is hot in the second, and dry in the first degree,
does bring down women's terms, helps against venom^ of scorpions, spiders and
dogs, comfort the head, increases the memory, and refreshes the vital
faculties.

Sabina.
SAbina or Savin, is hot and dry in the third degree, provokes urine with
blood, moves the flowers, drives forth the secondine, living and dead birth,
cures ulcers and eating sores, and cleanses the skin of lentils.

Radices Altheae.
RAdix altheae or Hollihock roots, are hot and dry in the first degree, they
are profitable for the gravel, stone, bloody flix, toothache, Sciatica, and
cough: they cure new wounds, dissolve cold tumors, wennes, hard kernels,
impostumes, sores of the mother, and chaps of the fundament, are good for
cramps, burstings, and trembling of the members.

Radices raphani sylvestris.
RAdices Raphani sylvestris or Horse-redish roots, are hot in the third degree,
dry in the second, are good for the stomach eaten before meat, cause wind, and
desire to vomit; but after meat, digest, purge phlegm, provoke urine, break the
stone, help the dropsy, liver, sickness, old congh, stopping of the reins,
lithargie, colic, and hardness of the spleen, stay fretting, and festring
ulcers, cause hair to grow, and cleanse the face from spots.

Radices Pyrethri.
RAdices pyrethri or Pellitory roots, are hot and dry in the third degree, good
for cold diseases of the head and brain, falling sickness, and apoplexy,
mitigate the toothache chewed, bring forth much waterish phlegm, help the
resolution of the sinews, and cause salivation or a flux of spitting

Radices Angeilcae.
RAdices Angelicae or Angelica roots, are hot and dry in the second degree,
they do open, attenuate, digest, cut and discuss gross humors, they are
adversary to poison, help pestilent diseases, cause the flowers, comfort the
heart and vital powers.

Radices consolidae majoris.
RAdix symphiti magni, seu Consolidae majoris, or Comfry roots, are hot and dry
in the second degree, they do help spitting of blood, the breast and lungs,
cure inward wounds and ruptures, are glutinative, mitigate hot tumors, and
heal fresh wounds.

Calx viva.
CAlx viva or unslak'd lime, is hot and dry in the fourth degree, having a
fiery, sharp, and burning force: it concocteth, mollifieth, dissipateth, and
cures corrupt stinking ulcers, very hard to be cured, and brings them to a
cicatrice or skar.

Album Graecum.
STercus caninum, seu Album Graecum, is hot and astringent, stays the laske,
cures the Squinancy, helps the Dysenteria, and drives away fevers that come
by course, and is very good to strew the fundament fallen withal, for it
cures the slipperinesse thereof, and causes it being gently put up to stay
up; and being mixed and boiled with sallatoyl to the thickness of an unguent,
is very good to cure the painful Hemorrhoides.

The Conclusion, touching what has been spoken of the virtues of Medicines,
Simple or Compound, for the Surgeons Chest.
THe virtues, uses, and doses of all the precedent medicines here noted, have
been gathered from such Authors as either were the Inventors of them, or
formerly have taken them upon them; to whose works I refer the Reader: which
thing if any well disposed Artist upon good ground shall question, I doubt not
to satisfy him. The Authors I have used herein, are these following;

Galenus. Mesues. Avicenna. Tagaltius. Vigo. Paracelsus. Josephus Quercitanus.
Renodeus. Johannes Jacobus Weckerus. Dodoneus. Valerius Cordus. Riolanus.
Rulandus. Oswoldus Crollius. Dorncrellius. Augustanus. Montanus. Matheolus.
Fernelius. Dioscorides. Franciscus Arceus. Monardus. Nicolaus Alexandrinus.
Serapius.
And some others, whose names sometimes I have remembered and noted, sometimes
for haste pretermitted: wherein I confess I have done them hard measure, like
him which in have sleighteth his good friends; a fault too common.

OF WOVNDS.
A Wound is a recent solution of a continuity; or a division of that which was
knit together, without putrefaction; and Definition of a wound.
is common as well to the soft and organick parts, as also to the harder: it
may (though seldom it does) arise from an internal cause, as the malice of bad
humors; but more commonly it comes from an external cause, namely, by the
violence of some instrument. For which cause a wound is said to differ in his
denomination: for sometimes it is called a thrust or punction, which is made by
stabbing with any thing sharp pointed, as a Dagger, Rapier, or the The diverse
appellations of wounds.
like: sometimes it is named a Contusion, when by a weighty thing offending (as
timber) falling down, or violently cast down (as a stone) the flesh is bruised
and broken: sometimes also it has the appellation of Incision, or incised
wound, for that it is done by an edged instrument, as a knife or sword. And
these wounds are either simple or compound: the simple are only in the upper
skin or flesh, without detriment or loss of substance, which also have their
several species or kinds, because of their diverse forms; some being greater or
smaller, profound or superficial, long or little, straight, round or crooked,
of a facile cure, of difficile, or mortal. And for the sounder judgment and
better cure of all wounds, (which are either external, or internal and
penetrating) there are several signs (of ancient tradition) with much
diligence to be had in remembrance, which daily practice also verifieth.

The several differences of all external wounds are discerned by sight or
handling.

The places of internal wounds.
Those which are termed internal and penetrating wounds, are either in the
head, breast, or inferior venture, and are discovered likewise by sight, by
feeling, or by searching with an instrument into them.

The hurt or ruption of the membranes or brain is accompanied with sneesing,
vomitting, bleeding at the nose or ears* raving and the like: but if the
substance of the brain be hurt, those signs are increased, and a bilious or
sharp vomitting is seen; also a fever, dull understanding, with alteration of
favor and countenance do ensue; stupidity also and dumbness signify the
brain contused.

The breast is observed to be wounded and penetrated, when air comes forth
of the wound, or when the person sick has in his mouth a sense of the things
applied to his grief.

It appears that the lungs are hurt, if the respiration be difficult, a a
rattling sound in breathing be heard, and the excrement which is voided from the
mouth be spumous, pale, and crude.

The Pericranium hurt has sometimes sudden and often swounding for a sign,
though some nevertheless having the Penicranium wounded or contused, have no
evil symptoms extraordinary to other mean wounds of other parts.

The Heart wounded has the refrigeration of all the parts, extinction of
natural heat, and death attending thereon.

If the great Veins and Arteries in the breast be offended, and immoderate flux
of blood, defection of virtue in all the faculties, a cold and an unsavory
sweat does ensue, and death within a few hours.

The solution of continuity in the sinewie parts of the Diaphragma, causes
convulsion, difficile respiration, an acute fever, raving, and death: but if
the fleshy part only be agrieved, it is capable of remedies, and suffers not
such dangerous symptoms.

If the recurrent Nerves be wounded, there follows loss of speech immediate
motion and sense also is suppressed, and that without recovery.

In the wounds of the Liver appear vomiting, bloody dejections, much pain, a
continual fever; and if they be deep, fainting, resolution of the spirits, cold
sweat and death follow,

The Spleen offended is as the Liver affected, save that the symptoms are in
the right side, the other in the left.

The Ventricle is demonstrated to be wounded by the voiding of chylus, frequent
vomiting, swounding, fainting, and death.

When the excrements are retained in the belly, and issue out of the wound very
unsavory and putrefied, and hot by the natural place, it is plain that the
intestines are hurt,

The sign of the Reins or Kidneys wounded, is the suppression of urine which
causes a sore pain in the groine and testicles, with inflation or swelling
even to death.

The accidents of the Bladder offended are one with the reins, unless the
sinewie parts thereof be grieved, and then distention of the belly, pissing of
blood, vomiting, voiding of urine at the wound, suppression of the faculties,
doting, and death follow.

When Spinae Medulla, or the Marrow of the back bone is hurt, there follows
the resolution of the sinews (which hinders the function of the sense and
motion) voluntary evacuation of excrements appear, and for the most part death
is the immediate conclusion.

The solution of a Vein is known by blood of red color and thick substance.

The testimony of an Artery hurt, is blood somewhat yellow, subtie, thin, hot,
beating and leaping, or violently issuing, and as it were by jumps.

The Tendons, Membranes, and Ligaments wounded or incised, bring the same
symptoms as the Nerves do.

The Cure.
Wherein the cure of wounds in general does consist.
THe Cure of wounds is either by the help of nature or medicine: if by nature,
the strife is at an end, the Artist may save a labor: if by medicine their
cure consists both in the reduction of parts disjoined and dislocated to
union, and in consolidation and true conglutination of them: therefore it shall
be necessary to consider, that if any thing hinder consolidation it be removed:
that reduct on be rightly and skilfully wrought, lest the parts adjoined fall
into relaps, and that the substance of the part with his natural temperament be
conserved: and lastly, that the symptoms be prevented, and carefully cured as
they arise.

The first intention in curing of wounds is to take away whatsoever is besides
nature, as Iron, wood, lead, or ought else with fit instruments, and that
without pain (if it may be) to the diseased, that consolidation may the better
be effected. In wounds* of the head, to take away the hair, or what else might
seem to hinder the good application of medicines to the grief, is the first
part. Strive also to set well the veins and nerves displaced, that the beauty
and due office of the member be not diminished, and that it may conglutinate
the easier, and being united, keep them so by Ligature, future, and other due
and artificial means.

It is requisite also that the natural temperament of the part be carefully
preserved: and that is done by a certain careful regiment of the body, which
is universal or particular.

The universal regiment consists in purging medicines, as Potions, Glisters,
a sober and frugal diet, abstinence from wine, venery, and all kinds of meats
which may move or attenuate humors, and moderate use of good nourishing
sustenance, all which helps the poor Seaman is not capable of in long voyages.

The particular Regiment is in remedies which confirm and strengthen the
natural heat of the member debilitated, and which hinder and avert fluxion:
such are Unguentum Nutritum diapalma, I mean Diacalsithios dissolved in Oil of
Roses, Ceratum Refrigerans, Rosat. Messue. Ungu. de minio, or the like.

The general accidents most to be feared that affect the wounded are Haim rrea,
dolor, tumor intemperature, a fever, faintness of the heart, convulsions,
specially where a sinew is wounded.

The cure of Ha morrea.
Haimorrea, or flux of blood is stayed by medicaments astringent, fitted and
applied with convenient future or ligature; and sometimes by medicines caustik,
either actual or potential, touched in the Treatise of amputation or
dismembring.

A Tumor is an unnatural increase, exceeding the natural state in the body,
and inducing an offense of the actions of the same, the cure whereof is touched
elsewhere.

Intemperature is either over much heat or cold, and his remedy is by
opposites, as namely, to too hot imtemperature (apply a cold medicament etc.

The intemperature of the Liver chiefly consists in oppilation or debility of
the faculties thereof, and is helped chiefly by wholesome nutriment: the
lamentable want whereof at Sea, is the cause of many the grievous obstructions,
and other evil effects in Seamens bodies: so that ofttimes a good Artist shall
not be able to heal a mean excoriation.

The Accidents common to the wounded heart, as is said, are swounding,
palpitation thereof, a hot burning fever, and many other.

Syncope is a solution of the spirits which forsake the heart, whose remedy is
Cordials, if God have appointed life.

A Fever is a heat in the heart more then natural, infused and dispersed
through the whole body, whose cure is by purging, bleeding, and good government.

A convulsion is a dangerous disease of the brain, which oftentimes is a
forerunner or a messenger of death.

The diseases in the brain are either in the membranes, substance, or
ventricles, and passages thereof; whose species and symptoms are many, and for
the most part very dangerous, and of difficult cure: For if the substance of
the brain be offended, the functions thereof are impedited, whence proceeds
doting, melancholy, foolishness, slothfulness, Lithargie, frenzy, madness,
loss of memory, deadish sleep, giddiness, apoplexy, Paralysis, and diverse
other like accidents formerly recited. And if the ventricles of the brain be
wounded, then the motions and senses thereof be grieved. Wherefore for the
better cure of these wounds in the brain, desiccation and cicatrization in due
time is needful, either by simple medicaments, (as Spiritus vini, b^l^s
Armeniae, Terra sigillata, Lithargirum, Cerusa, Tutia, Adust lead, Burnt paper,
Allom water, Burnt Vitriol) or by compound medicines, (as Vng: desiccans rub:
Diapompholigos, and Diapalma.)

Diverse Accidents will have diverse medicaments.
And as you see the accidents of the wounded are diverse, so the remedies are
not all alike: but some are general, others more peculiar

Those that are only in the skin or flesh have no difficile cure: for
oft-times Nature with some easy remedy, or a Ligature only does help them:
but those that are compound, offending many parts, need a methodical and
convenient order of curation, which is diverse, as is said, according to the
diversity of the parts affected: for if contusion or ruption be only of the
flesh under the skin, there is required consolidation by easy comfortation,
and desiccation; and no suppuration, which is effected only by nourishing and
preserving the natural heat or humidity of the member, as in other wounds.

But a contused wound, if it be be great, requires purging Glisters, potions,
or pills, phelbotomie, a wholesome diet, perfect evacuation of the humor that
comes from the veins, and suppuration of the contused and livid flesh; which
two last, are affected at the first by mean remedies; as oil of roses and
mirtles, and sometimes by a Paracelsus plaster. It will desire also
suppurating medicines, fitting the greatness and nature of the contusion. It
may be healed in the manner of an apostume; and if putrefaction be feared, the
use of a good Lixivium, of cupping Glasses, and light scarification, is most
necessary, that the humor about to putrify may be evacuated, so shall the
wound be better cured: but when the wound shall be with loss of substance,
then let thy endeavor be (by renovation and regeneration of the substance
diminished, or the intemperature Another note for the removing of that which is
besides nature in a wound.
carefully by convenient digestive medicines to produce laudable quitture, and
that the part affected be kept in his natural temperament and faculty, for
thereby it does concoct and digest the matter flowing unto it; as also consider
diligently the excrements of the wounds, their substance, quality* and
quantity, these will show thee what is superfluous, not natural, and what
hinders the action and duty of nature, that it may be corrected and taken
away by fit and convenient remedies. The medicaments incarnative, or for
regeneration of the flesh, are the flower of Barley, Beans, Lupines, or Orobus,
Myrrh, Aloes, with Aristolochia and Ireos, which are usedeither by themselves,
or mixed with turpentine, Mel Rosarum, Syrup of dry Roses, the yolk of an egg,
or the like: also Basilicum, Unguentum Incarnativum, are good incarnatives, the
Emplastrum gratia Dei, made of juice of herbs, the Emplaister of Betony,
dissolved with Axungia porcina: and follow the general rule, Let the dry be
more humected, and the humid more desiccated.

How to cure venomous wounds, which are either internal or external.
The cure of wounds caused through the biting of venomous beasts (as mad dogs,
scorpions, vipers, serpents, bees, fishes, waspes, hornets, swine, or other the
like, is performed first by taking away that which is virulent, extracting,
dissipating and consuming the poison; which work requires internal as well as
external medicaments. The internal must be such as comfort and confirm the
parts diseased (as Theriaca, Aurum vitae, Confectio Alkermes, Bole Armenick,
Conserve of Borage, Buglosse, Rosemary flowers, and the like) that so the
virulent vapor may be abolished, which otherwise will infect the whole body.
The external must also intend to extinguish the venomous vapor (and such are
cupping glasses and scarification, also all hot medicaments attracting, as
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Emplaistrum Diachilon and divinum, a
fomentation made with the herb Dragon and Mugwort boiled in wine, Triacle,
Garlic, Onions, Fimus columbinus, and the like) which being done, the cure
shall be after the manner of other wounds of the same magnitude: but in mine
own practice, I heat Balm artificial feething het, and apply it for the first
dressing, if I fear venom: and if I fear a Gangreen, I use Aegyptiacum as hot
as may be, and over the wound I apply a Lixivium: slender and wholesome diet is
also good, that may neither increase melancholy, nor heat much the blood; and
abstain from bleeding, unless the noble parts be tainted, and then thou may
not safely purge, but rather sweat, which is best known when the animal
faculties are offended.

The cure of wounds in the arteries.
The wounds in the Veins and Arteries, bring with them commonly a flux of
blood, which to stay is a special business, consisting chiefly of astringent
remedies, good application, future, ligature of a vein or artery, if it may be
done conveniently, and sometimes caustic medicaments; yea, incision,
phlebotomy, the use of cupping glasses and ligature on the parts opposite;
which three last are not always to be presumed upon as safe courses, but upon
need, if so be the vein or artery wounded be great: many things are of force
put in practice, which otherwise seem very harsh. The astringents simples to
make compounds, are Bo^e Armenick, Terra sigillata, thus, Aloes, Mastick,
Myrrh, Sanguis Draconis, Flower of wheat, barley, mil-dust, and diverse sorts:
likewise Alum, Vitriol, Precipitate, Man's blood dried, and sundry more,
sometime to make a ligature upon the vein, wound, or artery, which is the
binding of each end thereof, being first caught and holden with some fit
instruments; and tied with a sure and strong silk thre^: but oft-times it
happens that the ends of the veins or arteries wounded cannot be found, in
which case an actual caustic remedy, or a potential caustic medicament, which
induces an esker, and stops and covers the orifice of the vein, is
convenient: some also lay their thumb on it so long, until it be somewhat of
its self stayed, and then bind it up, which is good in mean fluxes: I have
often prevailed so. Now after that the flux of blood is stayed, let the sick
party be contained in a place neither too hot nor too cold, and dark, speaking
little, that the cure may be accomplished with more ease to the patient.

The wounds made in the nerves, tendons and ligaments, whether by The cure of
wounds in the nerves and ligaments.
incision long or overthwart, a thrust profound or superficial or by contusion,
great, little, or mean, require a good diet, such as is, meat easy of
digestion, refrigerating and causing little blood; but the choice of such
things at Sea must be forborne: also that the body be kept open by Glisters,
moilifying and cleansing, and (if need be) by potions easy and gentle, that
the humors be not too much stirred to inflammation: blood-letting is sometimes
needful, likewise anodine medicines which resolve and extract corruption by the
pores of the skin, strengthen the part affected, and have an infinite, or a
certain property to comfort the sinews: such are Turpentine and the oil
thereof, oil of Euphorbium, Rue, Worms, Yolks of Eggs, Rosin, Pitch, as also a
Cataplasme made of bread crumbs, milk, and a little Saffron, the like made of
Althea roots two ounces, Mallows and Sorrel of each an handful, flower of
Beans, Lupines and Orobus, of each two ounces and an half, red Rose leaves
powdered half an ounce, common honey two ounces, Chamomile oil one ounce, all
made into a Cataplasme according to Art. But if pain and inflammation be in
such wounds near to an article or joint, apply a cataplasme made of bread
crumbs, with the juice of Hyoschyami, or cool herbs, or Ung. nutritum, populeon
album, or some of those, that the burning heat may be extinguished; or of
oat-meal sodden in water with a little oil: But if convulsion happen to a sinew
wounded or pricked, cut off all the sinew, for if the nerve shall be wholly
abscised, lesser symptoms, through impotency and deprivation of action ensue,
then if the middle or any part be wounded: the cure (and note it) is not so
safe to sew it up together, as some think, because his adunation is uncertain.

The cure of a nerve contused.
If a sinew be contused without any wound, let it be corroborated by
medicaments strengthening and astringent. The cure of the wounds of the head is
not always to be presumed upon, though small, nor yet despaired of, though
great. Consider therefore diligently whether the brain it self be hurt or no;
if the brain be offended, it is to be known partly by the inflammation, dolor,
apostumation, retraction, convulsion or deprivation of the functions of the
senses, and death also is suspected presently, or within a few days to follow:
and if the palsy possess the opposite part, it being sound and whole, it is
doubtful, and the sympathy of parts will cause oft-times an abscesse in the
Liver and Messenterium, and an intemperature of the vital faculty, with a
continual fever and death. It shall therefore be necessary for the wise artist
to know the manner of the hurt, that he may wisely prognosticate the danger:
for if only the Pericran. be hurt by incision, without any contusion, and far
from the commissures or seames, it is not dangerous at all to be cured, and the
cure to be wrought, is as in other wounds: but if it be much wounded by
punction or contusion, and symptoms arise with a tumor in the head, then
dilatation is needful, that the contused blood which is between the Cranium
and the Pericranium may be extracted; and let it be quickly done, so shall the
symptoms cease and the cure will be easy: but and if the offense of the
Pericranium be in the suture or seam, it is more dangerous, because the brain
does sympathize with it. If the Fibers passing through the sutures of the
Pericranium from Dura matter be wounded or contused, it exceeds the other in
danger; therefore to resist putrefaction, let the wound be mundified: and if no
fracture of the bone be (the wound appearing only in the flesh, without any
offense of the Pericranium) the cure shall be as in other wounds. But if a
fracture in Cranium chance, Special observation if the bones of the head be
br^ken
there is required great care, namely, let the form and magnitude thereof be
well considered, observing also diligently what bone it is, and in what part it
is hurt, and whether the fragments are great or little, or sharp, pricking the
Membranes or not, which, of what sort soever they be, they are diligently to be
drawn out with as much ease as may be to the Patient; and if they cannot, being
broader within then without, let the trapan be carefully used; the use whereof
is touched in the book of instruments, under the name trapan. Sometimes there
is only a depression and then a levatory instrument will excuse the use of a
trapan, and take away the spils and fragments which are upon the membrane and
the blood also which shall issue out upon the same may by a sponge be taken
away: keep it likewise from cold, and of a temperate heat, and the place hurt
being well cleansed, pour mel rosarum warm into the wound, or 2 parts of honey,
and one part of oil or syrup of dry roses, or common honey with turpentine,
with the yolk of an eg, which are remedies mundifying, and grateful to the
membranes, and ought to be applied warm, but above all others the linament of
Arceus is the chiefest balsom for wounds in the head. The general remedies for
wounds of the head must neither overmuch refrigerate, nor overmuch calefie, but
be of a moderate or temperate calour. The general manner to proceed to the cure
of the wounds in the head, is as follows.

First, let the hair be shaven away; the next, if any loose bons be, take them
out; the next to be done, is, if a depression of Cranium be, strive with the
elevatorie to raise it; the next is, to stay the flux of blood if any be,
leaving of the grief undressed for two days, that the veins may knit; then
inquire of the Patient if he have the benefit of nature, if not, procure him
one, not many stools, and only see he have natural stools once a day, or in two
days, not by potion nor pills, but rather by glister or suppositorie. At the
second opening of the wound, if occasion serve, use the Trapan, or take out any
spils or bones that seem to offend, if Instructions very needful in the bead
wounded the second time open^d.
they be very loose, not else; force nothing out of the wound, except the
Patient his great necessity force thee thereunto; for nature is kind, and ready
to do wondrous help in the cure of the head. For the second application, have
ready of the noble linament of Arceus, never sufficiently commended, and being
somewhat hotter then the party would willingly bear it, anoint the wound
therewith in each place, with a little soft lint on a Probes end, leaving the
said lint therein, and with plegents of lint dry fill up the orifice, and after
anointing about the edges of the grief, apply a plaster, either of Emplast.
Betonicae, Stipticum Paracelsi, Minium, Mellilote. or Diacalsitheos. In want of
Arceus linament you may take oleum rosarum, and mel rosarum, which are not much
inferior to the former, being warm applied; some use therewith also a digestive
of Turpentine, and the yolk of an eg well mixed, ana alike quantity, wherewith
they spread plegents, and then dip them in the warm mel and oil mentioned, and
so apply them, which is very good and the most ancient practice in curing
wounds of the head.

In want of oil of Roses oil of Olive will do well, and common honey for mel
rosarum, though not so well: and if cause be, some Artists mix spirit of wine,
or good aqua vitae with the former medicine, and it comfort well the brain,
and very much furthereth good and speedy healing: good bowlstring, and ligatu
re do much avail to the cure of the head: also it is good to keep the party
lying and in a dark place, till the greatest danger of accidents be past,
remembering withal that the overstrict keeping him in, may also be very
offensive to the sick.

Let good diet strictly be observed, if occasion be, and the use of Glisters
likewise upon good reasons is also to be approved; and it is good to open the
Cephalike vain if the brain have been long uncovered, or yield a spumous white
and thick excrement, which seems to be a portion of the substance of the brain:
likewise to purge the body, mundifie the wound, and corroborate the brain with
Cordials, and fomenttations fitting, the chiefest is good wine and honey to
foment with; but I seldom use any Fomentations my self, having cured diverse
Fractures in the Cranium without any Fomentations at all; for the use of them
at Sea, I know is troublesome and dangerous, except great Diligent observation
of the accidents of a wound required.
cause. Be careful also to observe the danger of thewound, according to the
accidents thereof; for if it be little and superficial, it is cured as an other
wound, but if it pierce the second table, it must not be passed lightly over;
for if you be occasioned to use the Trapan, it is to be applied the third,
fourth, or fifth day after the hurt at the farthest; but the choice of the day
is not material, as some suppose, where there is apparent necessity, except on
the day of the full of the Moon, and then there is danger more then at other
times, but necessity has no rules,

The cure of wounds in the face, would if it were possible be done without a
cicatrice, but that cannot be performed without a dry stitch with also a most
artificial, and convenient binding the lips of the wound together with also a
sure natural balm: wherefore I will not stand to teach the dry stitch here,
for it is not proper at sea, it fits the land bettet. In the work of suture or
stitching, take heed that the skin and flesh be not overthick which you take up
with your needle, and let not your stitches be too close. A true ligature of
the face is somewhat difficult to be performed, because of the cavities
thereof, which are to be filled with linen clothes, or tow, or lint, the
better to keep the ligature to the wound.

Where ligature is needful.
The Nose and Ear wounded require good and careful ligature, and Emplasters
that will cleave fast to the grief.

The wounds of the eyes are dangerous by reason of their affinity, as well with
the Pericranium as the other Membranes of the brain, so that they are for the
most part full of bitter pain, causing loss of sight: wherefore by Glisters,
blood letting, cupping Glasses, Purgations, and sober diet, the accidents are
to be stayed. The medicines outwardly which I have used ever with good
success, are the artificial Balm with fine lint warm applied on the eye lids,
and a Paracelsus plaster over that, and therewith I have done great cures in
wounds of the eyes; but I never dropped any medicine into the eye it self.

The wounds of the neck are healed as other are, unless the hinder part
thereof be hurt, which has like symptoms to the brain.

If the shoulder be wounded, it is cured as other wounds, except the wound be
in the joint-bone, ligaments, and nerves, which needs a suture; and if it be
overthwart, a convenient Fascia, or Ligature for the sustentation of the arm is
to be carefully provided, for without good ligature those wounds do not well:
For ought else their cures are common to other wounds.

The cures of the arm are sometimes dangerous, chiefly if the bone, and
ligaments, or the muscles with veins and nervs be incised thwart; let the
remedies therefore be such, as are proper and agreeable to the nerves; as
namely, the artificial Balm very warm applied, and a Paracelsus plaster with
ligature fitting.

But if the hands be wounded, and the tendous ligaments, and sinewie parts
thereof offended, diverse abscesses in many places, with Inflammations appear
sometimes, and exceeding sore: Sometimes pains arise, which may occasion the
use of purgations, blood-letting, anodine medicaments, and a spare wholesome
diet. In these cures the artificial bearing up of the arm is a chief part of
the cure thereof, and keeping the hand in one even position.

The wounds of the Thorax external, suffer to be covered with flesh and to be
healed as other wounds; but wounds that penetrate the inward patts are
dangerous; namely, if any great quantity of blood lie in the capacity of the
Thorax, which cannot be evacuated by the wound; but if it can be evacuated
there is hope, otherwise it is desperate* Also, if the blood may be extracted,
and no internal part seem hurt, heal up the wound and be careful the air get
not into it; but if the external orifice be little, and the internal great, and
wide, the Membrane being burst, and a rib uncovered, as it often times falls
out, it is to be judged incurable, and a Fistula will remain their continually.
And if the former part of the Thorax be struck through even to the latter, but
not through both, if the wound be little and slender there is some hope of cure,
otherwise not, but it is commonly past cure, yet neglect not thy duty, nor
despair, for God is merciful: Let thy cure be attempted with good diet, as is
said, cly sters bleeding, syrup of Violets, and Hysop and the like, unguentum
potabile drunk fasting ii. or 3 for a dose, and such local Medicines as are
mentioned; but if pain or the like accident shall be in any part of the Thorax,
use anodine medicaments as well as sanative, lest pain hinder rest and
overthrow all.

The outward wounds of the belly do nothing differ from the general method of
other wounds, touching local, Medicines, only in stitching they differ much,
but the inward differ, as the parts offended may be diverse: as namely, when the
Omentum comes out, with all have put it into its place lest it corrupt, and
the air alter it: if it shall be put in cold, it will putrify, and bring
grievous Symptoms; it were better to make a Ligature about so much as is out,
and cut it off, being careful of the guts: If the intestines pass out by a
wound, the wound being very little they will hardly be reduced, unless they be
pricked, for they will swell with wind: but if the substance of a gut be
wounded, sow it together and consolidate, it; and if the liver, spleen,
stomach, kidneis, or bladder be wounded, let nature work its part, for there is
small hope by art to prevail.

The wounds of the Scrotum are cured as other wounds of the sinewie parts.

The cure of the Hyppe wounded agrees with that of the shoulder before
mentioned.

The Knee wounds also are cured as* other sinewie parts wounded are. The ancle,
foot, and sole thereof wounded are hard of cure, because there are many bones,
ligaments, tendons, and finewie parts among them: they are also placed in the
lowest part of the body, and therefore are subject to defluction of humors.

Of Gunshot wounds.
VVOunds made by Gunshot are always compound, never simple, and are the more
difficult of cure by reason of a certain Wounds by Gunshot are compound.
humor without the veins found near them, inclining to coruption; the quality
thereof being changed by the sudden violence of the blow. The composition of
which wounds for the most part consists of loss of substance, contusion,
fraction of many sinewie fibers, veins, arteries, membranes and bones; yea,
often shivered into diverse pieces, being in The diverse form ofwounds by Gunshot.
form different, as some round, narrow, and wide, and in figure cuniculous,
triangular, quadrangular, fistulous, etc. at the first bringing with them no
Hemorrhea or flux of blood, although the veins be broken and open, the blood
returning back through the fearful violence of the strok. The first curative
intention of these wounds is dilatation, where by the enemy to nature may by an
open orifice be expeld. The symptoms of such wounds are Hemorrea, furtive, or a
stealing flux of blood trickling out by little and little, Gangrene unawares
assaulting the part: also apostumation, dolor, and the like. Wherefore as an
entrance to the cure, let an universal regiment of the sick be carefully
observed, namely, that as much as is possible he use wholesome aliments, such as
resist putrefaction (as sour and tart things) and which are grateful to the
vital faculties: and when he eats, let it be sparing and often: let him drink
very little wine. If you fear venomous vapors may be gathered, give him of
good Mithridate, Venice Triacle ss. or Diatesseron ss. These rules at Sea are
not so well to be observed as at Land; wherefore let the Sea-Surgeon therein do
his best: let his ordinary drink be Ptisans, or Barley water: conceal from him
the magnitude of his wound, keep him loose only with Glisters, or
suppositories, let him blood if need be, and yet but a little, lest poison or
venom settled in the outward parts, be thereby drawn in back into the more
noble parts: and abstain to give him remedies calefying the humor, especially
at the first.

In these wounds often appear exudations of clammy humors, supposed by some to
proceed from membranes, and sinowie Ligaments bruised and broken, being changed
from sound to unnatural and vicious: those humors are to be evacuated, or
their dangers prevented by good alterative remedies; namely, abstersive
medicines, as a good Lixivium, or by suppurative, mundificative, and
desiccative things having faculty of confirming and strengthening the parts
affected. Therefore the fear of a Gangreen being taken away, suppuration must
be intended in the flesh contused, but if in the parts contused there be a
vicious humor, and the flesh about do putrify, in such cases it is convenient
to help suppuration with all speed.

But first of all let a good Alexipharmacon or Preservative against poison be
given the sick, if you see cause; namely, a little Venice Triacle other Triacle
on the point of as knife, if it be right and good: but if you do fear the
virtue thereof to be doubtful, as often it is, give it dissolved in spirit of
wine, Cinnamon water, or good aquavitae, whereunto add certain drops of Oil of
Vitriol, for it exceedingly resists putrefaction. You may for a need give
Mithridate, London Triacle, or Diatesseron alone: or if the party be of a cold
constitution, then give him Diatrion piperion (or good Rosa solis a little. And
if he be strong, after he is dressed, you may lay him to bed to sweat, and
procure: him thereto by a dose of Diaphoreticon given in Triacle or Mithridate,
regarding, as is said, that the sick have the benefit of a natural open body;
yet not many laxative stools for fear of danger: Let care also be had of his
diet, as is said, so much as the time and place can permit. Which effected, in
the next place consider by the view, of the wound, what manner of local
medicaments are most fit. And for the first intention of curing, it were fit
the Surgeon at Sea were never wanting of a good Lixivium, to foment the parts
percussed or contused; let it be such a Lixivium as I have described in the
cure of Fractures, but somewhat sharper; to which for brevity I referr the
Surgeons Mate. Also have ready Ung. Aegyptiacum, and the Caustic stone, if it
may be: also the Artificial Balm, Oil of Vitriol, a good Restrictive powder,
good Ligatures of all sorts, stitching needles ready, with all other fit
instruments not far off if occasion should be, as tents, splints, dorsels,
spunges, clowts, rollers, tape, tow, lint, plasters ready spread, and the
like, that when an occasion happens, he might be ready to perform his duty.

The most notable differences I have ever observed betwixt wounds made with
Gunshot, and other contused wounds, is only a furrive Hemorrage, and a
dangerous disposition to a Gangreen; which two accidents warily prevented, the
cure of such wounds differ nothing from ordinary wounds contused.

In the curing of wounds of the head, as is said, Arceus Linament is the
chiefest Balm: the next thereunto in common use, is Mel Rosarum and Oleum
Rosarum mixed, then Honey and Mel mixed with good Sp. vini, if the party be not
too hot of constitution, Unguentum Basilicon is a good healing Balm; also the
Unguentum Incarnativum, or Unguentum aureum, is generally a good healing Balm;
you shall find it no less. Ung. Necot^anum is also a good healer of new
wounds; but the best is the Artificial Balm. For dangerous wounds, Oil of
Terebinthine is very good; but Venice Terebinthine alone is much better; and
common Terebinthine is not to be despised; and no more is the ordinary
Digestive of Terebinthine and the yolk of an egg, of each a like quantity well
mixed together.

And yet I would not doubt at all without all these recited medicines, to find
sufficient healing medicines in the Surgeons Chest for double the occasion that
can be imagined, which if time would permit me, I would write of.

Directions how to prevent putrefaction to great wounds incident by ^ Gunshot.
And whereas putrefaction, as is mentioned, always attends great wounds made
with Gunshot, all care in time is to be had to prevent the same. Let therefore
your first local application, if you fear putrefaction be Unguentum Egyptiacum
mixed with Wine or Sp. Vini, or alone; being also very hot injected into the
wound, or applied on lint. And if you fear it will require yet more exsiccation
or cauterization, add some bumt Vitriol, and foment somewhat the outward parts
of the grief with a hot Lixivium, and apply a hot stupe wet in the Lixivium,
and wrung out round about the member: but if the outward parts about the wound
be altered in color, or grow either stinking or insensible, make scarification
and foment well with strong hot Lixivium, and inject thereof into the wound
very hot; and after such fomentation, scarification, and injection used, as is
said, then if you yet see cause, you may use the former mentioned Egyptiacum,
with a hot stupe, and remove not that dressing without extraordinary cause, I
mean the Egyptiacum, in less then 48. hours, but rather, if you have caused a
good Esker. The next dressing after the Esker procured by the former dressing,
it is likely you shall find digestion though imperfect, namely, durty and foul,
and the wound will also be very tender and sensible, and subject to alteration
by the air, if care be not had. Wherefore all things for your next intention
of application being first ready, ere the wound be opened make a very short
dressing, and of as gentle medicines as may be. I have used an Arceus Linament
warm, and with soft lint applied, and the edges or parts near the wound
anointed therewith, and gently filled the wound with lint, then over that a
Paracelsus plaster, and moreover a large hot stupe wet in a good Lixivium, and
wrung out, with also convenient, soft, and warm Ligature, which is a great help
to healing.

The third dressing, I would leave Arceus Linament, and betake me to the
Artificial Balm; which Balm I would apply warm, anointing the parts about
therewith; applying also thereto some good emollient, discussing, anodine
plaster; as namely, Paracelsus plaster I hold chief; next that I hold Emp.
Betonica described by Arceus; then Diacalfithios, Minium, Gratia Dei, or
Mellilote, any of which, as thy discretion and store affords, is proper. The
rest of the Cure I refer to be proceeded in with balm and plasters, as is
said, in ordinary form: and if any loose bones be, remove them: only force
none out before their time without great cause: if no bones be imagined, strive
not to keep the wound open, neither keep any hard tents wirhin the wound open.
Many by a custom keep tents to the bo, ome of the grief so long, till they
make the disease incurable: you need not be too vigilant in keeping new wounds
too long open; for the fear of putrefaction being once put away, and digestion
procured, and no bones to come out, the sooner you can heal, the safer. Many
Surgeons also have a gross custom of arming tents, as they term it, with
precipitated Mercury, or other the like Caustic medicines, and put them into
wounds to mundifie, and also the better to digest them, as they imagine; but I
may boldly affirm, that (as is said) if neither fear of a Grangrene be, neither
broken bones to be taken out, there is no cause of any Caustic medicines to
applied for the curing of a new wound at no time. And I find by practice plain,
that Caustic medicaments within ulcers or fistula's have no other use but to
take away a callous substance commonly in them, to alter the viciousness of
the humor, and dispose the grief to a good healing; which healing after
follows chiefly by the benefit of nature, together with gentle and sanative
applications, for (subl^ta cansatollitur effectus) the cause removed, the
effect cease, and so fo wounds.

An admonition to Surgeons.
It is a shameful error of many foolish Empericks still to be too busy with
Caustic medicines: for how apparent is it that thereby they lame many, through
ignorance? They will not see a wound incarn and red, and good flesh to grow,
but straight they slander it of pride, and call it proud flesh, like their own,
and then must at the fairest Precipitate, or Vitriolburnt go to work; yea,
though the Patient be lame for it, or at the least the grief put back again.
Truly the abuse of good Caustic medicines, brings much slander to the Art
of Surgery. In the cure of Ulcers and fistula's and else where, I have noted
down my opinion of the true use of Caustic medicines, to which I refer the
Reader.

If therefore wounds happen with Gunshot, which give no cause to fear a
Grangrene, then begin the first dressing with Balm Artificial very hot applied,
the next dressing reasonable hot, and so to the end of the cure, using
emplaisters and Ligatures convenient.

Of Burnings.
Of burning by Gunpowder. Necessary Rule^ for the Cure.
BUrning by Gunpowder (which wants no grievous accidents) oftentimes is
incident in Arms to Soldiers and others; therefore be ready at all times with
remedies fit and effectual to assuage them. And beginning thy work with
Lotions, as namely, either a fomentation made with oly and water, or with a
decoction of the seeds of Quinces, or of Mallows, March-mallowes, Violets, and
a little Purslaine seed; these and the like take away all the powder that
sticks in the flesh, for it hinders the cure. And to assuage both the
dolor thereof, and the vicious humors, Mel Saponis is an approved remedy, for
it takes the fire out: And to make it more easy for suppuration, use Anodine
Medicaments (as Ceratum refrigerans Galeni, Poputeon mixed with a third part of
Unguentum album, or a third part of Triapharmacon and oil of Roses, or Oil of
Eggs, or of Roses mixed with the white of an egg, Axunglaporcina washed in the
juice of Plantane, or the juice of Solanum, or in water; also the fat of rustie
bacon washed in Rose Water, or the ^^ke. Also a decoction of wine vinegar lib.
i. Litharge in powder s, and gently fomenting the part therewith, takes away
all pains. But to perfect the cure, let good sanative medicines be applied; as
the Unguentum co^^^a ignem, set down in the Chest, whose composition shall be
manifest hereafter.

Observe also, if occasion be, that blood-letting be used, which is very
requisite to avert fluxions, and to avoid putrefactions of humors. But abstain
from purging potions, and the like at the first. With these recited helps,
administered in their due time and place, with also a good diet, the Surgeons
Mate shall perform much in short time, to the praise of the Almighty and his
own comfort.

The Cure of Apostumes.
First what an Apostume is.
The Definition of an Apostume.
AN Apostume is a tumor composed of three kinds of diseases, as Avieen
affirms, namely, Intemperature, Incommoderation, and Solution of continuity,
all gathered into one magnitude: and Tagaltius in his institutions affirms,
every tumor against nature is an Apostume: The differences of tumors are
many, and are by many learned Writers handled at large, of which my leisure
will not permit me now to write.

The times of an Apostume are four.
The times of Apostumes are also at large handled learnedly by Mr. Gale,
Johannes de Vigo, Ambrose a Paris, and diverse other good Writers, and are noted
to be in number four, as namely, Beginning, Augmentation, State, and
Declination.

What the beginning of an Apostume is. A good rule.
The beginning of an Apostume is noted to be the first collection of humors,
extraordinarily intruding into any one part of the body, at which time with the
Chirurgions care, the proceeding of the disease is easily hindered, according
to that old Poetical verse, Principiis ob^^a, etc. The next time of an Apostume
is the Augmentation, when the disease has taken root, and is not so well to be
put back, neither is it always necessary nor safe to attempt it: for it may be
nature has determined to send it out, and this second decree or time of an
Apostume is sometimes known by heat, and pulsation increases a distemper
generally of the body, and an inclining to a fever, especially if the Apostume
be hot, or have malignity therein: but the augmentation of cold Apostumes have
often no other signs notable: but only an appearance of increase, without any
other distemper of the body for a long time together.

what the state of an Apostume is, and the signs thereof.
The third time or degree, which is the state or ripeness of the grief is well
to be known diverse ways, as namely, the Apostume by this time is come to
perfect maturity, and the pain is either wholly or partly assuaged, and the
matter being near the skin, each child in Surgery may judge what is next in
Art to follow, by the beating out and discoloring of the skin, for usually it
is discolored blacker, or is very soft, and if the Apostume lie deep by
feeling, you shall also sensibly perceive whether there be perfection of
maturation or no, also by depressing the cutis a little with your finger.

When an Apostume will suppur^^e H^ppocrat. cap. 2. lib. 47.
Mark also out of the words of the Ancients, to know when an Apostume will
proceed to suppuration. Hippocrates lib. 47. cap. 2. has these words, that
whilst Pus is in making, pains and fevers do afflict: but Pus being made,
pains and fevers do decline: And to Tagalt. Instit.
confirm the former words, Tagaltius in his Institutions, cap. 3. has these
following verses.

Duritia longa pulsus dolor and calor aucti
Signant pus fieri: sed facto dicta remissa
Sub digito undans albescens pars and acuta.
The fourth time of an Apostume.
The declination of Apostumes, I cannot stand to amplify, but I refer you, as
before, to Mr. Galls Institution of a Surgeon, as also to Johannes Vigo,
and other good writers, for a more ample doctrine in that point, only note
that when the tumor or apostume is ripe, mine opinion is rather it be opened
by a potential caustic medicine, then by actual incision, when it may be as
conveniently effected, and that for many good reasons, and one sufficient
reason in mine opinion is, if you use incision, you must needs put in tents
dossels, or the like with medicines, to keep open the orifice, and also to
enlarge it, which doing you stop the passage of natures true evacuation twixt
each dressing, offending the parts adjacent, and hinder the unition of the
disjoined parts, against conscience, detracting good healing: yea, and thereby
hazard diverse evil accidents to follow, as fistulaes, etc. from Caustic
incision commended.
all which by caustic incision you are freed, and fear not at all the
application of a convenient potential caustic medicine in due time and place,
especially the impostume being ripe, and the skin thin, for you can pierce no
further then through the cutis, though you would* for being only through the
skin, the matter will choke your caustic or corrasive medicine; neither doubt
at all, that your work shall succeed otherwise then well, for nature will
provide remedy speedily, easily and safely to heal your patient: provided you
be also careful to use your endeavor with good warm medicines duly applied,
and with also the use of good ligature, which is one principal good help, good
diet and other reasonable means likewise had, for I have ever observed in my
practice, that a hot tumor in any outward part of the body, growing either by
repletion, obstruction, fever, or by the evil disposition of the blood, for the
most part: yea, even in pestilential and venomous Fevers in good bodies, not
being pocky nor too too old, are easily healed by any understanding Artist,
that can join reason and experience together, many several ways, namely for
one, if you perceive a beginning, or (...) of humors together in any part of
the body, consider what might be the cause thereof as near as you can: if you
find it to be fullness of the body, or costivenesse, you have diverse present
remedies that way to fly unto, Laxative Medicines fitting.
viz. at the first make the Patient a suppository, then give him a glyster if
need be, and a Laxative medicine, also according as you shall see cause,
regarding the quality and quantity of the humor abounding: but remember where
the body is costive, you were best to begin, as is said, with a suppository
first, and that having caused one stool, proceed with a purge, if you see
further cause, or a glyster, for often only one suppository does what you
require: also good fomentations that may by the pores of the skin help to
breathe some part of the matter, will do well, and so the rest by discussing
and mollifying medicines the easier be cured. If the grief begin in the head or
throat you may use phlebotomy either under the tongue, on the forehead, or on
the arm in the head vein, or median vein: but if you perceive that by emptying
the body artificially, and cooling the blood with convenient medicines, as also
answerable slender diet, and opening a vein, that the collected peccant humors
will not be discussed nor put back, then may you proceed to attraction and
suppuration as you see cause; for it were most gross to seek to detain that
which Nature has resolved to cast forth: wherefore if you see cause to bring
forward any Apostume, you may then consider by the quality thereof what course
to take, namely, by attractive, alterative or suppurative Medicines; as
touching attractive medicines, good attractives at Sea to be had are Gum Elemni
of it self, spread on lether, and (...)
applied; and Galbanum also is very good, provided it be dissolved in wine, and
not in vinegar: Mellilot plaster will well bring forward an Apostume hot or
cold, and helps suppuration: Commonpitch is a good attractive: Burgundy pitch
is also good: Of these the discreet Chirurgions Mate may use the fittest in his
discretion, and if he desire violent attraction of any slothful cold tumor,
let him set a large cupping glass thereon. Maturatives, or alterative
Medicines in the (...)
Chest and Ship to be had are very many, yea more then I can call to mind at
this time, wherefore to be brief, Emplastrum Diachylon cum Gummis I put for the
principal, for it is for that purpose only; Para^elsus Plasters applied thick
spread, the place first anointed with oil of Lillies, will do well. But where
time and place is convenient in my opinion, a mean Cataplasme warm and thick
applied suppurateth best and easiest, viz. make a decoction of Althaea roots or
Line seeds, and the cause being cold, add Fenigreek a little to this decoction,
add Bean or Barley meal, oil of Camomil, Dill and Lillies of each a small
quantity, Dialthaea a little, or Axungia porcina, and apply it warm, and shift
it twice in 24 hours. Or flowers of Camomil, Mellilote and of Elders an a M.
ss, Wormwood, M. ss, Althaea roots bruised ss, make a decoction thereof in fair
water a sufficient quantity, adding of Bean meal, or Barley meal M. j. and
being boiled into a due form of a Cataplasme, add oil of Camomil or Dill iiij.
Axungia porcina ij. In want of some one of these flowers another for need will
serve, and if none of them were to be had, yet there is many other meaner helps
to bring forward an Apostume, which time will not now permit me to rehearse.
When you have an intent to bring any tumor to suppuration, you must neither
purge nor bleed your Patient, neither appoint him a thin diet. When you would
an Apostume should go back, if it be above the navil in the breast, back, or
head, then let your purging Medicines be such as purge downward only, but if
it be below the navil, or in the arms, or legs, vomitive Medicines do best,
except some especial hindrances, as Asthma or the like: And to those uses none
are so effectual as those which are of Mercury truly prepared, for that they do
not only duly evacuate, but also divert and draw back the humors from the
place offended which in truth is a great help to nature. Also blood letting
where occasion is; may be used for diverting and mitigating a stubborn disease,
but after the use of Mercurial purges it is held of many not to be good to open
a vein, of which opinion I am, without extraordinary reason urge the contrary.
And further if you intend to repel an Apostume you may make use of this
following Cataplasme of Bean meal, or wheat meal boiled with water and vinegar
a convenient quantity that it be not over sharp, adding a little Terebinthine
and very warm apply it, with also good close ligature, and shift, renewing the
medicine every sixth or eight hours, but observing as it is rehearsed, that to
repel an Apostume slender diet with convenient evacuation of the belly, and
Phlebotomy are as principals to be used. Also a safe Cataplasme to repel an
Apostume in the beginning is, farina fabarum or Bean flower and castle soap,
ana j. wine vinegar as much as will suffice, boil these one quarter of an hour
together, and you may mix a little water with the vinegar for fear it break the
skin, and apply it warm. Note further, that to an Apostume broken by a
causticke I commonly use no other thing then unguentum basilicon warm, from the
first to the end of the cure, or my artificial balm which I much rather commend
upon my long experience, except some dressings now and then I apply to it only
dry lint, and if nature be not beneficial to incarn and help healing to my
desire, I use a gentle absterfive medicine, namely a little precipitate mixed
with the said basilicon or else unguentum Aegytiacum very hot, but that only
for one dressing and one time, and then to my former course again for certain
days together, namely, till the Esker be fallen, and at the least three
dressings after, which if it give me not good content in hope of amendment,
then I proceed further one degree, namely, I use for one dressing of oleum
sulphuris per campanam, or oleum Vitrioli, with which I only touch the Ulcer
within: I also give a purge, thereupon if the Patient be strong, and then to my
old form again, till nauure be at rest, I mean as is said, till the Eskar be
clean gone, and yet five or six days further: but if then I see it be still
stubborn, I proceed to the next step or degree, and crave help from my honest
old friend Mercury who if he fail me judiciously applied, then I confess I am
almost to seek, but he seldom failed me performance, if my Patient were not the
cause, the disease being by Art curable. The mercurial medicine I most use in
such cases you shall find to be rehearsed in the cures of Fistulaes and Ulcers.

If an Apostume be opened by a caustic medicine the Apostume of it self being
concavous, I mean having a great hollowness, going deep this way or that way,
strive you not at all, either with tents, plegents, or dorssels to fill the said
concavities, and to divide the parts asunder which desire unition, but only
dress the outward or superficial part with warm basilicon, artificial Balm or
the like convenient medicine, putting it a little within the entrance of the
orifice of the Apostume upon a little lint on the end of thy Probe, until the
first, second, and third dressing after the opening be past, and if thou have
any of thy Cataplasme remaining with which thou did ripen the Apostume, apply
the same very warm, if not, apply some good Emplaster over it, anointing it
with balm artificial, and tpplying daily thereto a good balm or basilicon warm,
and fear not if thou make thy applications warm, and use good rolling and
boulstring which is a principal part of the belly where thou see cause, but
thou shall heal comforably, only forget not if occasion be, that sometime thou
make injection into the concavity of the Apostume with some fitting
mundificative or abstersive medicament, namely, with a fitting Lotion it will
do well, but use it warm, and charge it not often with it, not at all except
great cause, yet upon due occasion if an Apostume turn to a moist watery
concavous Ulcer, thou may then add to thy Lotion Aegyptiacum, but be not too
busy with such medicines. It may be also thou may think how shall a good
healing follow where the sore is not searched, and with tents, and like
medicines A Caution.
healed first at the bottom: my loving Brother in that thou shall behold the
excellency of Nature in our bodies, which being once eased of the burden of
that vicious and offending humor, which was the cause of the disease, it will
at first seem admirable to thee being a divine work, for nature intends healing
without thy help, first by little and little she avoideth the dregs of the
disease, and ever as fast within by Gods providence incarning new flesh as the
quitture is outwardly avoided, not by means of thy incarnitives I must tell
thee, whereon I advise thee not to trust, albeit they be never so good:
experience will show thee that Abstersive medicines, namely, such as have
virtue to scower and exiccate or dry, leaving a certain st^pticknesse behind
them, do best incarn judiciously applied, yea and those medicines which are
most caustic of all, are truly most incarnative, for I speak this upon my
known experience, that upon the true and judicious use of them the Ulcer will
soon incarn, only with the use of dry lint far more then with any unctious
Medicine whatsoever, yea though it be Unguentum aureum, for it is an infallible
rule in An infallible rule.
that divine mystery of healing, who so can dry well, can heal well: if thou
with thy over many causticks following each other, or by keeping the parts too
much asunder hinder it not, for too much exiccation or drying will make work,
not heal, which beware of.

Some Artists have in use long hard tents, this way, that way, or dorsels, or
plegents for perpetual keeping open an Apostume, for say they; I will see a
good ground, and a sound healing at the bottom ere I take out my tents, and
then I will begin to shorten them: I say such are unworthy Surgions, yet I deny
not an Apostume or Ulcer may be in such a part of the body, as namely, in the
corner of the eye, or in ano, which in no wise will safely suffer healing, till
some caustic medicine have well searched, yea, and as it were seared the
bottom, which once effected, go on, in the name of God, with your precedent
courses of healing again, namely with all soft, gentle, and speedy healing
means, as before said.

For Natura naturans naturat omnia, and mark it, for by this reason an old wife
oftentimes exceeds a great Artist in healing, for she wrestleth not with
Nature as great masters do, and Nature pleased An old wives medicament better
then an unwise Artists medicine. E^^ours in Chirurgions worthy reproof.
with her mild and simple means is appeased, and by divine providence the
disease often easily made whole: for I know it for a truth, and by too much
experience of my own, as an eye witness in other men's work I have seen as
great harm done, and as gross faults committed by unworthy Chirurgions for
want of mature judgment in over-doing, as by old wives, or fools in
under-doing. For many Chirurgions never think they have played the workmen till
indeed they have made work: Some by error for want of judgment, others for
base lucres sake, prolonging and aggravating with things not only contrary,
but also dangerous to nature oftentimes, laying bare the bones, and by fouling
them with their caustic medicines when there is no need, presaging wickedly
before hand upon unperfect grounds, bones to be foul, when to their shames they
have made them so themselves, as is said, either for want of honesty, or want
of true judgment to consider: wanting charitable and Christian reasons, or not
being capable what the benefit and force of Nature is able to effect* whereas
if they would proceed mildly, and with slight Medicines they might oftentimes
effect far more then they do, or can. Nam natura paucis contenta, and sublata
causa tollitur effectus: Nature is content with small things, and the cause
removed the accidents or effects cease. I wish rather a Surgeon should heal
gently, yea though he should hazard the breaking out again of the grief, which
will not easily be if he rationally follow the precedent method, rather then by
keeping the the grief open long to give occasion of deformity, lamenesse, loss
of limbs, fistulaes or the like, which very many in the height of their great
conceited skill procure; which were it but only the guilt of conscience, if
they feared God, they should not dare to do. These and the like gross errors,
unexcusable before God and man, have brought to the Art a scandal, and a
sensible feeling of want upon many virtuous Professors hereof, so that the
guilty and unguilty are censured both alike by the common sort, and the one
smarteth for the others fault. But those which for gain or otherwise will
prolong the health of those that commit their lives, or limbs to their mercy,
or approve of it, the Lord pay them ten fold as much to their shame: and so for
this time I conclude concerning Apostumes, only let me give thee this caveat
concerning Precipitate Mercury, or of any kind of Turbith mineral, use them not
much near any bare bones without very great judgment, for they will black the
bones, neither use any of them in any new wounds, as is said, for if you do,
they are very apt to procure lamenesse, or shrinking of the finewes. All swift
healing in new wounds I esteem best, yea without any caustic medicines at all
if it may be, which the Artist need not doubt of where neither bones broken,
nor other just thing of like kind hinders the work. Thus much concerning the
general curing of tumors, to the praise of God.

Of the Cure of Ulcers, and Fistulaes.
FOr, haste I have mixed Ulcers and Fistulaes together, for that they are of
affinity in show and cure: whose several definitions I also forbear for want of
time, and enter into the Cure at the first. Wherefore note as follows. If you
chance to have in Cure an Apostume, that by the malignity of the humors, or
other evil disposition of the body changes it self into a rebellious Ulcer,
concavous, fistulaes, or into any the like height of malignity; or that such an
Ulcer come to thy hand Ulcers Cu^es.
from another Artist, be not out of hope to cure the same. For if nature be not
utterly thy enemy, the member being not pierced through Prog^ostication.
in the joint, and so the ligaments rotten, and perhaps the ends of the bones
also, or some other apparent token of incurability, proceeding as follows,
thou shall be able to cure the disease, by the help of God.

First, therefore entering into due consideration of the age and strength of the
Patient, with other reasonable respects had, give him a dose of ij. or j. of
pulvis Arthreticus, and 3 days after of Aurum vitae a dose, viz. grains 8.
which he shall take whilst he is yet in bed, and cover him warm, and yet but
ordinarily, and it will cause him gently to sweat some 2 or 3 hours: then let
him wipe himself and rise, and after noon he will feel himself very much
refreshed. Then the next day, or two days after, apply to the Ulcer a little
Aqua benedicta, that it may come to the bottom, and into each part of the
Ulcer, namely with a little lint on the end of a Probe wet only therein, and so
leave the linte sticking in the mouth of the orifice for two days, dressing it
only with oil of Roses till the Esker remove, with also a Minium plaster over
it, this will cause some pain, and produce a strong Esker, which being fallen,
fill the orifice full with dry lint, for the first and second dressing, putting
the same very gently in; for it will be Second dressing.
exceeding tender. I am of opinion that it is mere idleness to apply any
medicine suddenly to provoke the fall of an Esker, as I have mentioned
elsewhere. For I dare affirm it furthereth nothing good healing: for when the
time of nature is come, it will fall without thy help, thou can not keep it
on. And I hold it as a hopeful sign of good healing, when the Esker is slow in
removing. Wherefore the third Third dressing.
dressing after the natural fall of the Esker, having for two dressings, as is
said, used only dry lint, take of the white Aquilla laxativa a little, I mean 3
or 4 grains, and mix with it Plantain or fair water, or an ordinary Lotion,
only that it be as a very thin Unguent, and wet well the wound therewith
warmed, and fill it with dry lint, and give the party in to drink of Aquilla
vitae 4 grains upon the point of a knife. This will cause him to vomit, and
make a strong diversion of the humors, and then proceed in the cure with
drying ordinary medicines, namely dry lint only some 4 dressings, and some one
dressing now and then, with Fourth dressing.
a little Aquilla Laxativa upon any lint, only to touch the Ulcer within: this
causes no pain at all, or little some dressings. Also I apply Basilicon,
either alone warm, or sometimes mixed with a little of the powder of Aquilla
Laxativa strewed thereon. And when I use this dressing, I let the dressing
remain for 24 hours at the least, and then to my dry lint again: and perhaps
if I perceive the Ulcer or Fistula to have any other secret cavities, and see
that it be not fully touched in the bottom, I use once more my Aqua benedicta,
and give a second vomit of Aquilla vita.

Other Rules for the finishing of the Cure.
Also I observe it for good in the conclusion of each sure cure, to give such a
vomit, where the strength of the Patient will bear it. Furthermore I prescribe
the Patient a strict drying diet, where I see good cause, not otherwise. But
remember this principal rule, that what day he either takes vomiting, purging,
or sweating medicine, that the same day he forbear his diet drink. Further
beware that you prescribe not over slender diet to him which is already pinched
with weak diet, either at Sea or Land: or whose diet is of bad nourshment, as
too oftentimes it happens amongst poor Seafaring men in long Voyages. Thus
using this before prescribed medicine judiciously, you may cure any pockie
Fistula, or inveterated Ulcer whatsoever, if they by Art are curable. And for
any pockie Ulcer on the virga, I mean either upon glans, or praputium, or
'twixt both, only touch it but once with the aforesaid Aqus benedicta, and give
the party one dose of the Aquilla vitae, and without question you shall cure it
afterward as if it were a green wound, but remember it will cause Virga to
tumifie sometimes much, but be not afraid, for by the use of Lotions mixed with
Plantane or fair water daily warm, and cast it in twixt Glans and Praeputium,
it will soon amend. It cures also any warts of the virga by only touching
them, and that if they be touched but very gently: for it is a strong medicine,
and procures some pain, but not in warts, yet honest it is and sure, for it
will not fail: and if once you acquaint your selves with the parts thereof, you
will never afterward use Trosses of minium nor Mercury sublimate again; and yet
let me speak my Conscience, both Trosses of minium and Mercury sublimate are
worthy Medicines, their whole force and healing virtue being indeed only the
quicksilver and spirits of salt, and no other thing, whose companion was never
found out for healing and killing. I have often cured desperate Ulcers, yea and
Fistulaes with Trosses of Minium, as also sometimes with only a Tent made of
Mercury sublimated, and put into the orifice. And how excellent it is inwardly
given being truly prepared, I will for this time forbear to speak, till I write
of the preparation of such medicines, as I have here divulged under strange
names. Thus much of Ulcers and Fistulaes to God his glory, and the help of the
weaker sort of young Practitioners.

The Cure of Fractures.
THE first Intention in the Cure of Fractures is performed by restoring the
bones disjoined, and taking away any loose pieces or fragments of bones if any
be.

The second Intention is performed by keeping the parts together, namely, the
ends of the bones formerly displaced and fractured by violence.

The third Intention to be done, is the curing of the wounds or contusions
incident to fractured bones.

The fourth, to prevent or remove the accidents.

The first part of this work, namely, the restoring, or rather bringing to
their places, the fractured ends of the bones, is performed by extention, and a
skillful and ready hand touching the extention: let it be done paulatim, by
little and little, as the term is, with even hands, The first work.
not by jumps or on the sudden, and yet with as much force as is requisite,
namely, till the Artist standing by with his hands upon the grief, perceive he
is able to set the ends of the bones into their place; which done, it is then
required that they be kept so.

The second curative intention of Fractures, is performed by keeping the ends
of their bones placed in their right form and place.

This part is chiefly done by good Ligature, wherein I am willing to impart to
young Artists my practice in curing Fractures in the thighs and legs, and
understand I use no rowlers at all, but clowts, splints armed and tape, my
reason is, it is a great disease and disquiet to my Patient, yea though I have
two assistants to hold the member to come so often about the member as to roll
it, and endangereth much the disjoynting of the bones again, and causes pain.

And it is manifest that in simple Fractures, the placing of the bones and
keeping them so, is the most work of the Cure, and nothing cures a fractured
bone so much as rest: wherefore when a bone is newly placed, and shall be
troubled much with lifting and rolling, it cannot but hinder unition, and
procure some accidents offensive, my form of Ligatures in Fractures is to have
next the member one fourdouble clowt in length, I mean above and below the
Fracture, so long that the ends of the splints I intend to use, may have a
resting place on the clowt. And if I intend to cure the Patient by a Lixivium,
I apply it on this said clowt, appointing the medicine ever to be next to the
grief, then I have another like great cloth to come over that again under the
splints, which being close and smooth brought about the member, I then put
under the first splint of a good breadth and length well armed with tow, and
under that I lay four or five strong tapes, then I tie one of the said tapes
gently, and thurst all the rest of the splints under the same tape, namely so
many as may compass the fractured member, lying close, but with some small
distance, that they touch not one another, then I tie the rest of the tapes,
drawing them close, till the party fensibly seel them to bear in all places,
the splints I appoint commonly so long as the member can bear without galling
or troubling the next joint: these things so done, if either the leg or thigh
be fractured, I appoint him juncks, as some term them, namely bents rolled up
in canvasse to come above his knee, and down to the foot, yea, though only the
leg be fractured, it is fit these bundles of junckes be as thick, and thicker
then the member fractured, for that they may defend it in bed from wrong, and
they are gently to be bound to the member, that they may turn with it if
occasion be; to these junckes also a cloth may be fastened, which may be brought
under the foot to stay the same up, to his due position, which is a great ease
to the patient, and believe me, if once you be but perfect in this form of
Ligature, you will never desire a rowler in the Cure of fracture: I used
rowlers till I saw the fufficiency of this form of binding, which now I desire
not to change.

The Cure.
The third intention is the Cure, wherein the inward and outward course of the
Cure is to be considered of. Touching the regiment of the body: concerning
sustenance at Sea, the Patient need to have it no thinner then the Sailors
ordinary, and touching medicine let him have the benefit of Nature, that is
only every day, or the second day, a natural stool or an artificial help by
suppositories or glysters, if there be great necessity not otherwise; and if a
Fever happen, give him a barley water, with a little oil of Vitrioll therein,
and if that help uot, open a vein on the contrary side, and if you fear
putrefaction of humors, give him a little Diatesseron, Triacle or Mithridate,
or the like, if he complain much of the pain, search the cause, namely, see
that the ends of the bones lie right, and that the splints gall him not, also
that there be no wrinckles in the clouts applied, The ingredients of a
restrictive, the manner of composing it.
and that it be not too hard or too soft bound, all these things duly
considered. The Medicines I use are as follows, either I use a restrictive
stuff, which is as follows.

Bole iij. Aluminis. Thus ana. ss. Radix Consolidae in powder ij. Lapis
Zabulosus i ss.
These all made into fine powder, and mixed with the yolks and whites of two
eggs together, if they may be had, adding wine vinegar, and mixed as much as
will serve to make this medicine into the form of a Cataplasme, and in want of
eggs use water and vinegar only so much as is needful, also if Comfry roots
be not to be had or Thus; they may be forborne, you may in their places for
need, though not so very well use Bean-meal, I have done very well many times,
only with Alum, Bole, Eggs, water and vinegar, though Bean flower is also very
good or Wheat flower, and as for the medicine called Lapis Zabulosus here
recited, it is a medicine found out in the Archduke of Brandenburg his
Country, named in the Germane Tongue, Bc in broucke, which in our language is
a broken bone, being in substance like chalk and in form like a bone, some
pieces like ribs, other like fingers, others like legs or arms, bones of
nature so growing. This medicine I know to excel many other in healing
Fractures both outwardly applied in Cataplasmes, and inwardly taken daily the
quantity of j in fine powder in wine, beer, or water, the patient fasting for
two hours after the taking thereof. In great Fractures the Germane
Chirurgions, prescribe this aforesaid medicine daily to be taken for twenty
four days, if they see cause so long to use it: The other form of application
to Fractures used and commendable, as I have said, and from which I am
digressed is a good strong Lixivium made with fresh water and ashes till it be
slipperie, namely, let the water be made seething hot ere the ashes be put in,
adding if th ey be ready, or may be had in the Ship these herbs following: St.
John's wort, Wormwood, Centaury, Rosemary, Sage, Camomile and Mellilote flowers,
or at the least some of them, also you may add Lupines thereto: but howsoever
though there be no herbs, add salt good store when it is cleared, but not
before; and then though you have neither herbs nor lupines, it will be of good
force, for it is the vegetable salt in the ashes, which is the best healer, the
next best is the mineral or Sea Salt, wet the clowts rehearsed therein, and
wring them out hard, and apply them smooth, close and hot about the member
binding it so up: this second form is esteemed of most Artists the safer, for
avoiding Gangrenes, which fractures are much incident unto by reason of great
store of contused blood gathered, that can hardly be discussed on the instant,
which thereby causes obstructions, whereupon follows inflammation and pain,
and consequently a Gangrene, and surely the first is not inferior to this: for
by the means of the Alum and the Vinegar it swageth pain, tempereth well the
parts, and yet repelleth and discusseth the blood gathered, and being once
baked to, it fortifieth mightily the member, by sticking close and hard to it,
I have used it long without repcntance, and the other sometime: but for that it
helps of it self to keep the member to his straightness, I the rather use
it. Observation; for the cure of the great bone of the leg fractured.


These things ready, I mean the one or the other form, suppose then the greater
fossill or bone of the leg were fractured, make true extention (as is said)
that both ends of the bones meet together, namely, let one strong man take the
one end of the fractured limb, and another the other end, thy self standing
free, and let them draw out the member, directly when thou art ready, and not
before, neither by jumps, but leisurely and together: likewise if they bear
their hands too high or too low in drawing, they cause great pain to the
Patient, How to know when the ^^ds of the bones meet ar^ght.
and likewise cause the bone to lie unapt to thine hand to reduce it. It is
known when the ends of the bones meet, for that not only the member is
returned to his former beauty again: but also by it much of the pain is eased,
for it is a sure rule, if the pain abate not, all is not well: The bone, I say,
first well reduced, bring your stuff formerly rehearsed and put it under the
leg, the parties that extended, not forsaking their hold, and lap it about
smooth and close as you can, without wrinckles, lumps or seams, and that the
ends may also fold smooth one over the other, wrapping it double and smooth
over the shin bone* the cause why I use to fold it double on the shin bone,
leaving it there to be opened, is that if it chance there be a wound it may be
dressed the better without undoing all: but if no wound be, yet it fortifieth
the bone the better, by the doubleness thereof being smooth, then lay your
next cloth broader and longer then the first, over the first, being wet in
water and vinegar if there be cause, and wrung out. Let the second cloth, I
fay, as also the first, be longer then the splints, that the ends of the
splints may rest thereon, and not on the bare leg, placing the splints in their
order about the leg, till you have compassed the leg, laying them (as is said)
not too close together, that they ride not one over another, neither touch each
other, nor come upon the joints, remembering to put all your tapes under
together, in number it were fit to have five or six, namely, two on each end,
and two for the midst: Also if there be a wound, you must so order the matter,
that you may daily apply to the wound necessary medicines, whereas otherwise if
there be no great cause, namely, through much pain or the like, you may well
forbear six days, or ten days, provided that you see the leg be straight and
well laid in an even position or form; and that it may lie the safer, it were
good to be provided with the afor esaid bundles of reeds or bents, as thick as
the leg or thicker, to come from the foot, and one hand breadth over the knee,
which should be wound and wrapped in canvasse, and bound to each side of the
leg artificially with four long tapes, and at Sea you may take for a shift two
billets bumbasted with a little Ocum wrapped in an old piece of a sail. Further
in Fractures with a wound, if you use unctions and liquid things, as oils; you
hazard putrefaction of the bone and apostumation: herein also great care must
be had, that the leg must be kept steady, for disquiet therein will bring
apostumation, and mortification, and death also: beware likewise of over hard
binding, for it brings astonishment and hazard of a sudden Gangrene and
death, it is a general fault of diverse young Chirurgions, for many think they
have never bound hard enough, and yet too loose is a fault, but easily may be
amended, and I advise thee to look to thy Patient often, that his splints gale
him not, for that brings* want of rest, and diverse evil accidents depending
thereupon, I speak this of my own experience, not to my praise: let him have no
wine except he be weak, let him once in two days by Nature and Art have a
stool, holding these rules with little trouble it is hard for him that will be
careful to cure any Fracture: for indeed as is mentioned, the bone restored,
rest is the chiefest medicine to cure a Fracture, yea, it will effect it almost
without medicine, the member being only artificially bound, and splinted
orderly; the inward medicines for Fractures I say need not to be many, only
give him in beer daily, in wine or water, as thy discretion shall move thee,
the mentioned Lapis Zabulosus j. for ten or fourteen days if you have it:
sometimes if need so require, a lenitive glyster may be given: Also the best
local medicine to wounds with Fractures in my opinion is good Basilicum or
Arceus Liniment being warm applied thereto sometimes as you see cause; Also you
may use an Abstersive or Corroding medicine, as Allumen Combustum: Aegyptiaeum,
Vng. mixtum, or the like: but in these things reason must instruct the Artist
more then precepts, but beware of the over-use of A special Ca^tion.
sharp medicines near the bone, for thereby often a bone is made foul, which
before was clear, this error is too frequent, both in young, yea, and many old
Surgions also, who apply sharp medicines often without true judgment, not
only in Fractures, but also otherwise, and as for simple Fractures, I have
cured them often with only a sear cloth made of wax iij. rosin and sheeps
suet, of each j. dipping a course canvas therein in form of a sparrowdrope,
and so have wrapped it warm and close about the limme, that it might reach at
the least three fingers above, and as much below the Fracture, with apt
Ligature, as I have recited in the manner of the application of the Cataplasme:
This in Fractures of the arms is as good as any, and A uec^sarie Rule for best
or exco^iation of the member fractured.
from the first to the last this searecloth may be used. Remember also in any
Fracture that if either by the galling of the splints or heat, or other
distemperature of any medicine or itching humor excoriation or heat appear,
that you apply next the grief for one dressing, ung. Triapharmacon spread upon
paper, and your other usual medicine thereon, and it will become well with one
only dressing, being taken ere it grow too far.

Thus much concerning Fractures, not writ from any man's authority, but truly
and plainly as I have done the like in my practice, for which let God be
praised,

Amen
Concerning the Cure of Dislocations.
ALthough I have seen diverse skillful men perform good works in Dislocations,
and read somewhat, and for many years practiced my self, yet know I not in
this part of Chirurgerie by words to describe ought to the purpose, which might
serve at all assayes, or upon all occasions for the help of young men, for as
much as so many unexpected observations and strange occurrents happen in and by
Dislocations, as would ask much time to explain or but to touch all, yet in a
word or two, I hold it not unfit to advise them somewhat concerning Luxations
or Dislocations. First, therefore it is a general rule that you must use
extention almost to every Dislocation, especially in the shoulder, in the
huckle bone, in the knee, and in the ankle, for I may boldly say, where the
Artist finds a member longer then his due form, he shall hardly do good on
it, namely if it proceed by evil disposition of nature, or that by the
abundance of vicious or viscous humors it have extended it self, or that it
have been over much extended and thereby is longer. Extention is therefore to
be carefully made, Imean as I have said in the Cure of Fractures, not on the
sudden, nor too forcible, but yet with strong and steady hands, for in the
extention is exceeding great respect to be taken, and it is the principal
work, yea, and much Charity is to be used therein, for too far extending
weakneth much, if not overthrows the true use of the member, even so too
little extended, produces not the effect intended, I mean it serves not to
restore the bone Dislocated; even so the extenders raising their hands too
high, or putting them down too low, hinder the coming of the bone into his due
place, and cause greater pain to the party: furthermore, it Certain Rules for
the cure of Dislocations.
were good when the Artist takes view of a member Dislocated, that the other
side were also uncovered, that thereby the true form and situation of the
diseased limme, being well regarded, and compared together with the whole
joint, the better judgment, and truer indication might be taken: I mean if one
shoulder or elbow be out of joint, let the Artist make bare the other side
also, for that there is often great difference in the natural proportion or
situation of men's joints: having therefore first viewed, and then also
sufficiently extended, and the form of the other side also, as is said, seen
and kept in remembrance t then seek to reduce or place the bone by those means,
which in thy own reason seem fittest considering and well weighing the natural
form, and true situation of the Dislocated bone, as is said, which in truth is
unpossible in my opinion by letters to explain: this done, for the most part,
yea, and in very great Dislocations, the work thou may account is done, and
the fear at an end.

My self have set diverse strong men's bones, I mean the shoulder bones chiefly,
which have done labor the same day, nevertheless I deny not but it is good
and very necessary to apply to the place things discussing, anodine, and
mollificative as reason shall induce the Artist unto: you may therefore anoint
the place with oil of Roses, Camomill, Dill, or Earthworms as you shall see
fittest, and apply thereon a Plaster of diacolon diccalsiteos, Paracelsus
plaster or the like and so roll and bind up the member artificially as shall
be most fit, and let it have rest: if thou fear furrher accidents, thou may
also give the party some laxative. The bone I have said is never truly
restored, if the pain continue. Again, if there be a great tumor in the place
dislocated, so that thou can not therefore well reduce the bone, then may
thou lay the party to rest, and the member also to as good rest as thou can,
and by things mollifying, and discussing seek to assuage the tumor, in which
case a good Lixivium described in the Cure of Fractures were good to foment it
withal, or a good Cataplasme made of Oat-meal and Linseeds boiled in beer or
water, with a little oil of Elders would do very well, but take this for a
rule that if thou be called to any dislocation where a tumor is, if it be but
a tumor of one, or two, or three days gathering, attempt thy best to reduce
the bone notwithstanding the tumor: for if by extention and pains taking thou
can get the bone into his place, thou need not to fear the tumor, for it
will quickly be gone: whereas on the other side if by thy other applications
thou can not in reasonable time dissolve the tumor, a callow or strange
substance may be fixed in the place that thou shall never be able to dissolve,
also the Ligaments and heads of the Muscles will be grown hard and shrunk, and
thou may fear a lamenesse and withering will The sooner extention is wrought
the better.
follow to that member: wherefore with a careful consideration seek to reduce
any bone, the sooner the better.

I use an instrument in dislocations which I learned the practice of in Polonia
whilst I lived there, which I call by the name of a Commander, for that
rightly placed and used it will surely command; and I have used that one self
same instrument to the shoulder, wrist, Huckles bone knee, and ankle with good
success. I may truly say I have set with it above 500. joints at times, and
never once repented me of the use therefore: and to show thee how I use it mark
a little my words, for I must be brief: If I see just cause of the use thereof
and with my own hands and some others to help me I cannot without much pain to
my patient bring the dislocated bone to his seat, if this dislocation, I say,
be in his shoulder, I place the button of the instrument being somewhat flat on
both sides, not round, just into the armpit, or hollow place, I mean under the
upper round end of the adjutory bone, or betwixt the said bone and the body,
and directly under the Os humeralis, or O^ Scapula, as close as I can, the end
of the recited button being well armed with tow bound on with a cloute: which
done, I put on the Iron ginne which belongs thereto at the lower end of the
Commander, where are certain holes with one Iron pin for diversities of lengths
of limbs to be extended, this ginne having a resting place for to stay it to
the pin recited, and another for to take hold of the end of a soft towell to
be tied about the wrest of the dislocated arm, which wrist bound about, and
the lower part of the towell, or some strong lether, band, or coard, fastened to
the said towell, and also fastened to the upper part or teeth of the iron
instrument, let then some garter also be gently tied about the party his arm
betwixt the elbow and the wrest to stay the arm to the instrument. It were also
good that the Instrument, I mean the wooden Commander, were just of height with
the party, I mean from the place where it is to be placed to the ground, but
because that cannot always be expected, let the party diseased stand in that
order, or so under set the instrument that it may fall out so: and understand
further, that the party forany bone of the arm dislocated must be standing
whilst it is placing. And for the thigh, knee, or ankle lying. Having placed,
tied, and fastened the parts together, as is said, let one for thee stop to turn
the extending instrument, and turn it gently till all be reasonable stiff, the
commander standing up right close by the Patient his leg: and let some one
strong man stand on the other side of the Patient, with his arms about the
Patient his neck to keep him upright to the business: these things ordered as
is said, with thy own hands seek to reduce the bone: I have often found when I
have extended but to a just length, the bone has of it self returned to his
place, thou will wonder at the facility thereof, if thou proceed orderly, I nor
no man else can teach thee by written words half so well, as by practice, with
once using it, thou will find it out.

And when thou will use it to the huckle bone, note the button on the top must
be taken off, and a cushion bound on the place thereof; the party must also be
so placed lying, that his huckle bone, thigh and leg must hang over the beds
feet free from the bed, or so laid on a table, that all those parts may be
free, and his leg below the knee must be gently bound to the Commander, as is
said of the arm: In all this work neat ligature, true extention and a careful
industrious hand must perform the business, and practice must be the mean; for
my self I have no time to amplify further: this which is said is practice, for
the which if thou find profit by it, give God the praise.

Of Dismembring or Amputation.
AMputation or Dismembring is the most lamentable part of Surgery, it were
therefore the honor of a Surgeon never to use dismembring at all if it were
possible for him to heal all he undertaketh; but necessity has no law, the
Patient will declare in his natural desire to live, the comfort that he has
by it. Since therefore it is of necessary use, let the discreet Surgeon be ever
prepared for it, and to that end let the Dismembring saw be always in a
readiness, well filed, and clean kept in oily clowts to save it from rust, let
it also have two blades well filed ere you put it into your Chest, for that one
tooth Certain Rules before thework to be practiced of the Patient.
in a Saw may break. If you be constrained to use your Saw, let first your
Patient be well informed of the eminent danger of death by the use thereof;
prescribe no certainty of life, and let the work be done with his own free
will, and request; and not otherwise. Let him prepare his soul as a ready
sacrifice to the Lord by earnest prayers, craving mercy and help unfainedly:
and forget thou not also thy duty in that kind, to crave mercy and help from
the Almighty, Other Rules which concern the Surgeon his preparation for the
work.
and that heartily. For it is no small presumption to Dismember the Image of
God. This done, have thy other Instruments ready, namely, a good
Dismembring-knife, a small Incision-knife, two great square stitching needles
armed with very strong thread waxed, which some use, but may also be forborne,
and one needle also and thread of the ordinary sort to sow rowlers: likewise
have ready long clouts, lesser clouts plegents of tow greater and smaller,
dorsels, and bu^to^s of tow, three broad strong rowlers or four, of four yards
long each, with also a form convenient for to place the Patient on, with a
large boul and some ashes therein to recieve the blood, let it be set under the
end of the form, then wet your clouts, I mean your beds or boulsters in water
and vinegar, and wring them out hard, which done, make ready your medicine, I
mean your restrictive powders of both sorts: have also ready strong
wine-veneger, or other good vinegar, and the white and yolk of an egg together
mixed if it may well be had, or else vinegar only, spread your plegents ready
with the restrictive stuff or Cata^ lasme following, have ready the stronger
restrictive powder mentioned, namely, the ordinary restrictive j. and of burned
Alum j. Vitriol burned and of Precipitate of each i ss. all these mixed
together: This mixture I have termed the strong* restrictive powder, for that
it forcibly restrains Fluxes, and makes an Eskar: have ready also one
plegent made no bigger then the end of the member; let it be spread with this
recited strong restrictive, mixed with an egg and a little vinegar, which
done, strew it thick with some of the said strong powder mentioned, having
another plegent ready, broader then the former spread with the ordinary
restrictive mentioned and mixed with an egg as the former: also, take of the
buttons of row some four or five, wet them in the strong restrictive to be laid
on the ends of the great veins and arteries when they are absized: This done
and ready, place the Patient on the mentioned form with one strong man set
behind him, and another to stand before him, bestriding his thigh close to his
body, compassing strongly with both his hands the member which is to be taken
off, and holding it exceeding fast some two fingers above the place where you
intend to take it away, and let another hold up his foot. It were not amiss
also to have ready a swines bladder which has been somewhat wet and dried off
again: which after the stuffes the first bed and first long rowler is spent,
draw on the Bladder, and proceed to roll again to the full end of the work, in
the name of the Almighty, the sharp Instruments being as near as you can, ever
hidden from the eyes of the Patient; the two ministers or helpers also being
ready, and having hold on the member one above, another below, and also one
sitting behind, as is said on whom the Patient may lean backward, and rest on:
then take your dismembring knife, and with a steady hand and good speed, cut
off flesh, sinews and all, to the bone round about the member, which done, take
a smaller incision knife and divide the panicle called the perioste^n, from the
bone, it is a tough thin skin, covering all the bones of the body; also thrust
your said incision knife betwixt the fossels or bones, cutting away whatsoever
is to be found there with the like expedition: the party that holds the upper
part of the leg with all his strength, griping the member^ together to keep
in the spirits and blood: It were also very good that the said party holding
the member the flesh and sinews being cut ^asunder, should immediately draw or
The use of the Saw.
strip upward the flesh so much as he could, keeping his hold, that thereby the
Saw may come so much the nearer, which would occasion a quicker and better
healing, the flesh being thereby made longer then the end of the bone: then if
you approve of that course of stitching, The manner of stitching the stump.
as some good men do, take the two strong square needle and threads mentioned,
and presently after the member is taken away, stitch the skin through on the one
side, and just over on the other side, and with the other needle do likewise as
it were cross over the member the other way, and draw the said threads so close
as you think convenient, the better to stop and choke the great veins and
arteries, then tie them fast and presently put buttons to the heads of the
veins and arteries, then apply the restrictive Plegents together, the lesser
spread with the strong restrictive lying on the brother, spread with the ordinary
stuff: this brother plegent must come at the least three fingers over the stump,
and a linen bed with them presently following, laying a flat hand close on the
end of the stump, and holding it so till another standing by draw up the said
plegents with the saidbed smooth and close; then let a third mango on with the
rolling, till the first rowler be spent, then if you will, draw on a Swins
bladder, which is no evil course, for being once dry, you need not fear any
flux of blood, my self have used it and found it good, but your rolling must be
very Artificial in such a case, or all will not serve, for^it exceeds all
medicines. And there is a second great care to be had in the holder, that he
hold well* also remember ever in rolling to keep a hand to the end of the stump,
thrusting up the medicines close, and keeping them so, excepting ever as the
rowle^ passes by to make way warily for it, and stay it again, and ever where
you see the blood springing out, there lay a slender dorsel of tow, and roll
over it again, continuing rolling till the blood appear no more: The first
dressing being ended, lay the party to bed with the stump high, and a pillow
under it, appoint him a slender diet, namely, no flesh: let him have a
comfortable Caudle for the first, if you see him weak, and afterward Broths
and Pannadons and light things, and in small quantity. It shall not be amiss to
defer the second dressing until the fourth day and no longer, only visit the
Patient daily and ease or take away some one towler, or as you shall see cause.
Moreover, in dismem bring the leg, you are to understand that though the foot
only be corrupted, it is best to take off the leg some four inches below the
lower end of the rotule, or round bone of the knee, the pain is all one, and it
is most profitable to the Patient, for a long stump were but troublesome. This
work of dismembring is best to be done in the morning, do it not willingly the
sign being in the place, neither the day o^ the full Moon, never take off any
member in the joint: yet A caution.
Petrus Pig^rius a late learned Writer affirms it safe and good of his own
Practice: and M. Richard Wood a worthy Father in Surgery confesses the same
in small joints to be good, but not in the knee. Note also it is convenient if
the occasion of dismembring grow by reason of a Gangrene the body of the party
and spirits not wasted before with long sickness, to let go some reasonable
quantity of blood in dismembring, because it is supposed to be venomous, but in
a spent weak body, who has had a long pining disease, preserve his blood and
spirits as careful as if they were thine own, and yet remembering this one rule,
which all the London Hospital Chirurgions hold, there is more hope in a weak
spent body, then in a full body: note further, that if the leg be taken off
above the knee, there is the more danger, also there is great care to be had to
the great vein and artery, namely, that thou take them up, and pierce them
through, and make strong ligature about them, which must be speedily done, if
thou can do it: but at first I fear thou will miss, yet be not discouraged,
nor stand too long to seek them, but go on with like hope: Also if the occasion
of dismembring proceed of a Gangrene, by reason of an inward cause, it were
requisite to take the member off four fingers above the Gangrene at the Least,
if the member will bear it, and let the Patient have some cordial potion:
furthermore in dismembring, where there be two bones, as namely in the leg, it
is not amiss to set the Saw first on the outward part of the leg, that both the
bones might be cut at once, for the less thou shall shake the member, the
better and the more ease to the Patient: moreover concerning the second The
composition of M. Galls Vaguent, and the good use of it.
dressing, M. Gall teaches this unguent following, if occasion be, as a good
remedy to swage pain and cause the Eskar to fall, but for my part, except pain
did cause me, I should never respect the hasting of the Eskar to fall, for I am
of opinion, as I have said in other places, that it is frivolous to hasten the
fall of any Eskar whatsoever, which Eskar was forced by caustic medicines, and
yet I deny not this or the like unguent may be found to be of good use, to
swage pain, therefore I have set it down, and it is as follows, Terebinthine
ij. Butyrir^ce^tis iiij. Cera i ss. Ung. Populeon lib. ss. melt these together
and it is made then being warmed, dip plegents therein, and apply them, but in
want of this ungue^t a good digestive of T^^ebinthine and the yolk of an egg is
as good, Erplastrum de minio mollified with a little oil of Roses, Ung.
Basilicum or Arceus Liniment are likewise good remedies: the rest of the cure
differs little from the ordinary cure of ulcers, only a great care must be
had that all your dressings be warm, and keep the cold from the end of the
stump as much as you can, and chiefly from the end of the bones, to which
purpose warm oil of Roses daily applied to the ends thereof, will do well,
further to foment it with a good Lixivium, wherein is strong wine, is good
after some fourteen days, sometimes also it will do well to make one dressing
with Aqua vi^^e, wherein a stup hot wrung out of the same, may be warm applied
to the grief, and then warm clothes and convenient rowlings, and sometimes also
one dressing with dry lint, or of soft tow is likewise good, and sometimes
unguentum mixtum, viz. Basilicum and Aegyptiacum ana. parts aequal.

The compositi^^ of the Cataplasme.
The defensative Cataplasme or stuff often mentioned, is made of the ordinary
restrictive powder prescribed in the chest, mixed with the white of an egg and
wine venegar: the strongest restrictive of all is already set down, but in
ordinary fluxes in wounds Bole may serve very well. Thus much for this time
touching dismembring, being according to mine own practice.

Of the Scurvy called in Latin Scorbutum.
The Preface.
Marine^s most subject to the Scurvy.
THis lamentable disease, which has so long and so fiercely assailed Sailors
and Seamen of all sorts more then Landmen; It is strange in so many ages past,
that no one Surgeon of our country men, has out of his experience taken in
hand sincerely to set down to posterities, the true causes, signs and cure
thereof, neither left any instructions, caveats or experiences for the
prevention or cure of the same, yet it may be some may say the cure thereof is
common, and we have in our own country here many excellent remedies generally
known, as namely, Scurvy-grasse, Horse-Reddish roots, Nasturtia Aquatica,
Wormwood, Sorrel, and many other good means: the truth is we have so, but mark
how far they extend only to the Cure of those which live at home, or else it
may be said, they also help some Seamen returned from far, who by the natural
disposition of the fresh air and amendment of diet, nature her self in effect
does the Cure without other helps, as daily it is seen.

This thing therefore being so, what should I spend my time in teaching that
Method, or those medicines to the Chirurgions Mate, which will not be had at
Sea, neither if they could be had, will suffice for the Cure thereof, where the
disease raingneth fiercely?

This Treatise most concerns Seamen.
Having therefore very small time, I must constrain my self to go briefly to
the business in hand, namely, to enform the Chirurgions Mate how he should
demean himself to comfort his Patients at Sea in that most dangerous disease,
neither will I here strive to give the curious Reader other content then this,
that if he like it not, let him amend it himself, which I should heartily
rejoice to see any good man do, knowing mine own weakness. A learned Treatise
befits not my Pen, and to declare those good medicines, which cannot be had at
Sea, is but time lost.

What the Disease called the Scurvy is.
Definition of the Scurvy, and the nature thereof.
THE Scurvy is a disease of the spleen, whereby it is sometimes wholly stopped,
sometimes only distempered, sometimes also appearing with hard Scyrros,
swellings, beginning and showing themselves in diverse parts of the body, but
more particularly on the thighs and legs, causing them to seem of a Leady
color, the sharpness of which infectious humor often offends the mouth and
gummes of the diseased, and causes the flesh thereof to rot and stink.

The names of the Disease.
The diverse appellations thereof.
THe Scurvy is called of some Cathexia universalis, of other Sceletyrbe, and of
some Stomacacen, it is a Chronical disease, not simple but compound of many
other diseases.

The causes of the Disease.
FIrst the Disease comes, as is said, by obstructions of the spleen, and by the
thickness of the humor, not the multitude.

Some judicious Writers do affirm this sickness to come by the multitude of
Melancholic humors gathered in Vena Porta, by which it is said the Milt does
draw unto it Melancholy humors, and so transporteth it from the Milt into the
Ventricle.

But truly the causes of this disease are so infinite and unsearchable, as they
far pass my capacity to search them all out; some men conceive this disease
happens to Seamen only, through long being at Sea without touch at land, as
it is seen in East India voyages; our men have it betwixt England, and the Cape
de bon spera^ce, as they term it, and at their coming on the land there they
presently grow Air and fresh food helps well this disease in Seamen.
strong again, and are by the very fresh air and fresh food cured without much
other help; and likewise twixt the Cape and the Indies, they are touched with
it again, and as aforesaid the fresh air of that land, the next they come on
and good diet together, cures them with small physical helps, and the same
again home-ward bound. The chief cause whereof is the continuance of salt diet,
either fish or flesh, as pork and the like, which is not to be avoided at sea,
as I suppose by the wit of man; another cause is want of sufficient nourishing
food, and of sweet water, and also for want of Aqua vita, wine, beer, or other
good water to comfort and warm their stomachs, which by contrary winds men are
two much incident unto in long voiages, howsoever the Merchants are careful,
provident, and bountiful in that point.

An other cause of this disease to the ordinary sort of poor men, is want of
fresh apparel to shift them with, which indeed amongst poor Sailers, especially
a sort of them that are careless and lazy of disposition is too frequent,
partly also by the not keeping their apparel sweet and dry, and the not
cleansing and keeping their Cabins sweet, this also ingendreth and increases
the infection. Some charge Biscuit as a cause of the Scurvy, but I am not of
their opinion: Some say inordinate watchings are cause therseof: Some say
extreme labor wanting due nourishment: Some also affirm cares and grief to be
some cause thereof, others affirm the very heat of the (...) resolving the
spirits; but what shall I amplify further? for it is (...) true that they
which have all the helps which can be had for money, and take as much care as
men can devise are even by the evil disposition of the air, and the course of
nature, struck with a Scurvy, yea and die thereof at sea and land both: yet
this gives no warrant to the Surgeon, or his Mate to leave their duties
unperformed, for the bloods of those men which either by their wilfulness or
slothfulness perish under their charge will surely be required at their hands.

But it is plain that this grief is a lazy foul disease with obstructions of
the liver, or spleen, or of both; as also it appears that the head is much
diseased, and that there is great obstructions in the brain, for that the eyes
not only look evil colored, but also the gummes putrify, and the teeth grow
loose, and all the sinewy parts of the body bear their part in the disease, for
the shrinking and withering of the sinews with the great pains the party has,
declares no less.

Of the Scurvy or Scorbutum the signs.
THe signs of the Scurvy are many, as namely, a general laziness and evil
disposition of all the faculties and parts of the body, saving the stomach and
the appetite, which oftentimes is greater then ordinary with them a long time.

A discoloring of the skin as if it were fouler then ordinary, with spots
darker colored then the rest, and sometimes also darkish blew spots.

A fever at sea commonly ends in the Scurvy, wherefore by the way beware of too
large purging* or phlebotomy, which increase often the grief, and make it
incurable: I speak this because I have noted there is a fault in young Surgeons
of forwardness in taking too much blood at Sea.

Also itching or aching of the limbs are signs of the grief.

Sometimes the legs falling away, and drying the calves of the legs growing
hard and dry, as also immoderate swellings of the legs: also the legs and
thlghes discolored into frekels, or spots of a durty brown sad color much
like the color of a gangrenated or mortified member.

Stinking of the breath.

Great obstructions of the liver, or spleen, or both, and in the exercising of
the bodies, their limbs and their spirit failing them.

Shortness and difficulty of breathing, especially when they move themselves,
but lying still find little grief or pain.

Their eyes of a leady color, or like dark violets.

Great swellings in the face, legs, and over all the body; paleness, or a foul
pale color in the face. Swellings of the gums, rottenness of the same, with
the issuing of much filthy blood and other stinking corruption thence,
looseness of the teeth: Also some are troubled with an extreme costivenesse,
that for 14. days together they go not to stool once, wherefore the Surgeon
is constrained with an Instrument to take out the excrements to avoid death,
after which extreme costivenesse often follows a great flux of blood, and a
painful: also many have stoppings of the urine, or at least making less water
in two days then the party drinks in one day.

A coldness and stiffenesse of the sinewy parts, chiefly of the legs.

Some also have their Muscles, yea and sinews of their thighs, arms, and legs,
so wasted away, that there seems to be left only the Certain signs of the
Scurvy by the dead opened, discovered.
skin covering the bones.

Also it is manifest that diverse of those which have been opened after death,
have had their Livers utterly rotted.

Others have had their Livers swollen to an exceeding greatness, some the Spleen
extremely swollen, others have been full of water, others their Lungs putrified
and stunk whilst they have lived, these and diverse other signs, too many for to
be mentioned here, do afflict poor Seamen, which often are past man's help, in
such place and time as they happen, the Cure whereof rests only in the hands
of the Almighty. And yet to any man of judgment it may seem a wonder how a
poor miserable man, coming on Land from a long Voyage even at the point of
death, namely, swollen sometimes to an unreasonable greatness not able to lift a
leg over a straw, nor scarce to breath by reason of strong obstruction, yet in
a few days shall receive the fullness of former health, yea with little or no
medicine at all.

The Cure of this disease, as a famous Writer named Johannes Echthius in a
Treatise De Scorbuto affirms, consists chiefly in four things, namely, in
opening obstructions, evacuating the offending humors, in altering the property
of them, and in comforting and corroborating the parts late diseased.

Remedies touching the Scurvy.
Johannes Vierius another famous writer ascribes the whole cure of the Scurvy
to the herb Spoon-wort. One Olivar as a Sweden writer, in his fifteenth book,
and fifty one Chapter, entreating of this grief attributes the whole cure
thereof to be in Absinthi^ or wormwood, namely, to drink much of the infusion
thereof, and also of the salt of the fame: and one chief part of the cure of
the Scurvy (says he) consists in good diet, but the seamen are enjoined to
that only the Ship affords, which the better and sounder their provisions of
victuals are, the more their men stand to health; and the contrary not only
brings many diseases, but makes the diseases which happen very hard to be
cured, therefore I may spare labor in writing what broths or herbs serve best
where no fresh food can be The Chirurgions duty in this disease at Sea.
gotten: the Surgeon and his Mate must therefore, seeing he is at sea deprived
of one principal help in that cure, namely, fresh meat and good drink, be
diligent to call for such for comfortable things as are by the great care and
bounty of the Merchants provided for sick men, or those which incline
thereunto, whereof in each Ship is a good I mean in the Kings service, or of
the East India Company.
proportion both of wine, sugar, spices and other comfortable things, and to
see they have it in due time and measure: and likewise to complain to the
Governors if they be withheld from the same, or if any man abuse himself by
mis-dyet: yea and the Surgeon ought morning and evening to seek for weak and
poor men in their Cabins, or so soon as they are missing at their messes to
inquire for them, and to see their Cabins be sweet, and their provisions
according, or to move and entreat the Master, or Governor of the Ship for
redress in such cases, for fear of a general infection. And whereas the first
part of this Cure is in the opening of obstructions, it is therefore fit in the
beginning of the grief to give a lenitive glyster, then the next day if the
party be strong open a vein, but beware, as is said, of taking too much blood
away at once, especially where the Liver is weak or stopped, and where men want
good nutriment, for many evils ensue thereby. The next day following his
bleeding if he can bear it, and if that his disease be with a swelling or
fullness, give him a doss of the pills of Euphorbium or otherwise of pibula
ruffi, or of Cambogia, and make him some comfortable spoon meat, such as you
can make at sea; namely, an Oatmeal caudle would not be amiss of a little beer
or wine, with the yolk of an egg, and a little Sugar made warm and given him
to drink, or any comfortable broth made with Currants and other fruit, or
Spices moderately taken* or with Sugar, or as the Ship can afford, a Barley
water for his ordinary drink were not amiss, with some few drops of Cinnamon
water therein, and also some juice or Syrup of Lemons therein, or a few drops
of oil of Vitriol, and some Sugar, and give him in his drink by way of
infusion, dried Wormwood good store, for it is very wholesome.

Further the Surgeon or his Mate must not fail to persuade the Governor or
Purser in all places where they touch in the Indies and may have it, to provide
themselves of juice of Oranges, limes, or lemons, and at Banthame of Tamarinds:
Also sometime though a man be well, a comfortable caudle made with some Wine,
Spices, Sugar, and the yolk of an egg were very good; for these are helps in
that case as well to prevent the disease, as also to help it when it comes.

The excellency of the juice of Lemons, Limes, Oranges, and Tamarinds.
And further experience teaches which I have often found true, that where a
disease most reigns, even there God has appointed the best remedies for the
same grief, if it be his will they should be discovered and used: and note for
substance, the Lemmons, Limes, Tamarinds, Oranges, and other choice of good
helps in the Indies which you shall find there do far exceed any that can be
carried thither from England, and yet there is a good quantity of juice of
Lemmons sent in each ship out of England by the great care of the Merchants,
and The Merchants care for Seamen.
intended only for the relief of every poor man in his need, which is an
admirable comfort to poor men in that disease: also I find we have manygood
things that heal the Scurvie well at land, but the Sea Land medicines for the
Scurvy ^^ad sea medicines.
Surgeon shall do little good at Sea with them, neither will they endure.
The use of the juice of Lemmons is a precious medicine and well tried, being
sound and good, let it have the chief place, for it will deserve it, the use
whereof is: It is to be taken each morning, two or three spoonfuls, and fast
after it two hours, and if you add one spoonful of Aqua vitae thereto to a
cold stomach, it is the better. Also if you take a little thereof at night it
is good to mix therewith some sugar, or to take of the syrup thereof is not
amiss. Further note it is good to be put into each purge you give in that
disease. Some Surgeons also give of this juice daily to the men in health as
a preservative, The juice of Lemmons a good preservative.
which course is good if they have store, or otherwise it were best to keep it
for need. I dare not write how good a sauce it is at meat, lest the chief in
the ships waste it in their great Cabins to save vinegar. In want whereof use
of the juice of Limes, Oranges, or Citrons, or the pulp of Tamarinds: and in
want of all these use oil of Vitriol as many drops as may make a cup of beer,
water, or rather wine if it may be had, only a very little as it were sower, to
which you may also add sugar if you please, or some syrups, according to your
store and the necessity of that disease, for of my experience I can affirm
that good oil of Vitriol is an especial good medicine in the cure of the
Scurvie, as also in many other griefs* the which in another place is noted.
Further a decoction of Biscuit, and therein Almonds ground, adding Cinnamon and
Rose Water a little, and some sugar, were very comfortable now and then to be
taken to refresh the stomach. And as touching the Tamarinds brought from the
Indies they are to be eaten of themselves as the substance of them is, namely,
to eat them as you would prunes, and being made into conserves, eat them as
other conserves, on the point of a knife sucking out the substance, and putting
forth the stalks or stones thereof; some dissolve them in wine or water, and
work out the substance of them therein, and cast away the rest, taking only
that which is pure: one may use this medicine so often as he please without
danger or harm, only if he fear a flux of the belly, or have a weakness in the
reins, let him not eat too much of the Tamarinds. Also the Tamarinds must be
used sparingly if a flux be feared. Elect. Diatr^onpiperion.
Electuarie Diatrionpiperion given each morning a little on the point of a
knife fasting, and last, namely at the party his going to bed, is a great
preservative; for it does warm and corroborate the stomach, and preserves from
the Scurvie, and is very comfortable to be given to any one that is diseased
with the same, or subject thereto And the Theriaca Diatesseron is yet better,
for it has an especial virtue in curing that disease. Also Venice Treakle,
Mithridate, and London Treakle preserve well from this disease daily taken
fasting, and so does conserve of Roses and Berberies mixed with a little oil of
Vitrioll, and given on the point of a knife.

Green Ginger is also very good to comfort the stomach, and so are all sorts of
Myrabolans Condite, and also all sorts of strong Cordial waters, but chiefly
good Rosasolis and good Wormwood water, yea, and very good Aqua vitae helps
well, Currants and Reysons of the Sun are likewise very good.

Also all kinds of Spices moderately taken are good, and so is good wine a very
good preserver of the body from this disease, with also the continuance of
fresh diet, which is hard to be gotten at sea, the excess of which good things
is as dangerous.

The principal Laxative medicine which I would advise in this case is pills of
Euphorbium wherewith the body being swollen and watery, you may at your pleasure
make evacuation thereof: these purge also by urine very well the dosse being
ss, or at the most ij. These are the fitter for that disease, because they
purge not alone water, but also by their great warmth, they comfort and warm
the stomach and intrals.

A caveat for the dose.
These I advise the Chirurgions Mate to use, as it is said, where the body
abounds with overmuch cold and crude humiditie, but let your dosse always
respect the strength of the patient, for any strong purging is not good in the
Scurvy: all sudden and strong evacuations are to be avoided. Also Aquilla
Laxative is a very good purge in this case, namely eight or ten grains thereof
taken in a cup of wine. It cures also all worms of the body, and kills them
wheresoever they be. But if the stomach only be oppressed with the grief in
this disease, I first give a dose of pills called Pillule Ruffi, namely j. you
shall find them to be very good.

Note further, that if any dose or any whole mass of pills in the Chest, such
time as you would administer them be grown too hard, then you may dissolve them
with any syrup you have, or with good honey a very little, namely one only
drop will serve to dissolve one How to compose them in a fit consistence if
they be oversoft.
dose at once, if the mass prove too liquid, you may roll it in some of the
Pulvis Arthreticus till it be hard enough. Also the moderate use of Verjuice,
Vinegar, or Oxymel has been found very good in this case.

Furthermore, if you see cause, certain days after you have given of any your
former Laxatives, you may give a sweat to the patient in his To sweat is an
other singular remedy. Means to procure sweat.
bed, namely you may give him a scruple of Mithridate, Venice Treakle, or
London treakle, or Diatesseron, and mix therewith if you have it eight grains
of the Aurum vitae Diaphoretice, and being but ordinarily covered, he shall
sweat sufficiently if he stir not too much. Also the sweating in moist bathes I
confess to be good medicines in this case, though not well to be performed at
Sea for the ordinary men. And whereas one accident dangerous in this disease is
extreme Costivenesse as is mentioned, with also stopping of Urine: the remedies
for the Costivenesse, is first that you attempt to move the belly by a lenitive
glyster as is said, made rather of a slimy decoction or medicine which might
leave no sharp Astringent or desiccative quality behind it, yea though it
purge not much, for the sharp Purgers after their working cause often a more
Costivenesse then was before, or by their violence cause a weakness in the
stomach and intrals, whence follows a flux, wherefore for glisters at Sea in
great Costivenesse, where the Apothecaries shop and Cheapside is not at hand,
make a slimy decoction of Altheae roots, or Comfery roots, or in want thereof,
How to make a glyster in case of necessity for the Scurvy.
of Linseeds and Fenogreek bruised, of each ss. in want thereof, of Bean ij. to
the decoction being strained, add of species Hiera Pigra, ij. of salt half a
spoonful, of honey as much, of oil two spoonfuls: all these put together, let
the decoction mentioned be so fitted that all may be but one wine pint, and
administer it with the Siring, being of a just temper in warmth, but if you
intend it not to have it purge much, leave out the species Hiera Pigra, and it
will give 2. or 3. stools. You may for an ordinary glister well also take one
quart of the broth from the beef kettle, adding thereto of Linseed ij. Comfry
roots and March mallow roots if they may be had, a small quantity of Aniseed
and Fennelseed, Ana ij. boil these half an hour, then add honey and common
oil of each a spoonful, and give one wine pint of this for a glister: but if
you see it work not but come away without excrement, the former recited will do
well, or make another stronger, namely, ad colaquintida ij. in the beginning of
the decoction to the aforesaid decoction, provided there be no inflammation in
Longanum, or intestinum, nor any excoriation, which by the Patient his
complaint is known: this decoction being boiled, and ready to be administered,
you may yet add of the species Hiera ij. thereto, or of the A special
observation in giving these aforesaid glysters.
Pulvis Arthreticus j. rather, for it inflameth not, it were best in my opinion
to strive in this disease by glisters to give but one or two stools at one
time, for sharp glisters offend much. Therefore though I show what you may do,
yet be well advised in doing of it. Also of pills of Euphorbium, have a care
you give them not where there is an inflammation or inward heat in the guts, in
such a case, the Aquilla For heat in the Intest^nes use. Aquilla Laxativa.
Laxativa will be a better medicine, which will both temper the inward heat and
help to heal the intrals, and yet will purge him well, and does not bind him
again presently, and provokes also urine very well, for Aquilla Laxativa will
often cause natural looseness, certain days after the taking thereof, and
will purge water very much both by stool and urine: and because as is said,
extreme costivenes is great hurt to the body, the Surgeon must by his best
care to the Patient, seek to prevent it, both by teaching him to do his best
for his own health, and to amend the same by observing good customs and diet:
by customs, namely that he fail not daily* once a day at the least to offer
himself to stool, and do his best to urge some excrement to come, and
somewhat to force his body thereunto if occasion be, and to keep one and the
same hour daily as near as he can: I know by proof it helps much, and for
diet to use also as near as he can those things which he finds procure an
inward slipperines and looseness in the guts, pease, oatmeal, and rice do
somewhat thereunto, provided A caution.
they be very well boiled, and the adding currants thereto is the better, and
oil and butter are good helps, but at land where The third rule cease, the
Marrin^r, ^^ shore.
it may be had, all kinds of fresh diet almost are good in that case, for by
the leaving only Sea diet, the body refreshes it self suddenly through
benefit of nature and the fresh Air, and easily becomes naturally loose, and
then the difficulty is ended. The eating of East India Tamarinds is likewise a
good thing in that case.

What I have written here plainly, touching mean and simple glisters; I would
not be mistaken, as if I did it out of ignorance or disdain of better
medicines, for I were worse then foolish if I would reject, detract or dissuade
from the good use of decoctions of herbs, seeds* etc. with the additions of
Electuaries, Laxative Syrups and the like which I have in daily use at home
upon each just occasion: yet many of the ancient Artists of worthy memory
which I could rehearse, have in former ages used for glisters only water and
salt with oil, and some other have added honey, and it is manifest that new
milk alone is a good comfortable glister with the yolke of an egg, and a
little course sugar added.

And you may also many times save a labor in giving a gli^ter by a
suppositorie, which is either to be made of a long piece of Alum scraped
smooth, or of a candles end, or of a piece of hard soap, or of honey and salt
sodden till it be so hard that it will break being cold, which being yet hot
may be rolled and made up of the greatness of a finger, and administered: of
any of these, I say you may make a suppositorie as long and big as a finger or
less, and thrust it up into Ano, and let the party keep this medicine one
hour at the least in his body (if he possibly can.) Further note this general
rule concerning glysters, The quantity of a glister to be regarded.
let a glyster never exceed the quantity of one wine pint, let it rather want
one quarter, especially when you give it to a costive body, or a full body, he
shall be much the abler and the willinger to keep it the The true temper if the
glister to be administered.
just time. Further, beware it be not too hot nor too cold, for the guts are
tender parts, so hot as piss new made, or a very little rather warmer is the
true temper. But if you perceive the Intestinum rectum or Arse-gut, to be
excoriated or inflamed, in such a case use no salt, nor salt broaths, nor
strong Laxatives, as Euphorbium Agaricum, Hiera, Pigra, Col^quintida, or the
like. If you find the Longanum or Arse-gut How to deliver a glister of the
Long^num be stopped.
to be clung, or hard stopped with excrement, you may put a small greasy or
oily clout on the end of your glister-pipe only over the holes thereof, when
you put it into the body, and thru^t it into the head of the pipe, then draw
back a little your hand and deliver in your medicine, and if you see cause, and
that it will not easily deliver, force it somewhat. Also when your medicine is
all in, and that you would draw out your instrument again, do it quickly, and
let the party turn him on his back, and he shall keep the medicine in the
better. In cases of excoriations or inflammations of the intrails, in glisters
use A glister for inflammation and excoriation in the guts.
Deer suet ij. for one glister, and in want thereof Axungia ovini vel porcini,
I mean sheep or swines fat, and let the decoction whereof the glister is made,
be only of bran, and without any other addition, and give now and then such a
glister, I mean once a day, for two or three days, after you may add thereto
some sm^ll astringent medicines, as Succus Acatiae j. or Gales ij. or
Balustians ss. or Myrabolans, iij. even as you see cause, for these help to
heal the guts well.

Of Lotions.
COncerning Lotions to the mouth and throat of the diseased, they must be sharp
and very astringent, I mean them especially which concern the cure of the gums
in the Scurvie; if the gums therefore be swollen, that they hang over the teeth,
stink, or be putrified, they must be very well lanced or scarified, and after
hard rubbed with a The cure of the gums much swollen, st^nking and putrified.
linen or woollen cloth, wrapped about the fore finger, and wet in some strong
restringent or Stiptick Lotion very hot, as is the ordinary Lotion of Alum,
Honey and Herbs, adding thereto a double quantity of Alum, and a little
Salt*peter, or gunpowder for a need is good, and if it be not sufficiently
strong, make a stronger decoction of coperas in water, adding Saltpeter with a
little honey, if you have it, or Mel Rosarum, with also a little strong
vinegar, you may also put oil of Vitriol a little thereto, but that it has
one evil quality in hurting and softning the teeth, wherefore beware of it,
and if you use it, do but only touch the gummes with it once and no more, and
it will do much good: and if you please, also Aqua Fallopie is good, but because
it is made with sublimed Mercury, it is not without danger, and is also a
loathsome taste to smell, and offends the stomach very much, but I know it to
be held by many for a great secret, but as for my self for reasons rehearsed, I
us^ it not, but advise rather that which is strong either of the Coperas,
Alum, or Saltpeter, for they hurt not the teeth at all as does the oil of
Vitriol, and so does Aq^a fortis very much, or you may make a Lotion thus:
Coperas, white, green or blew ij. water one pound or there about, Honey one
spoonful, boil these to the consumption of one third or half, then take of
Lapis Medicamentosus, or Saltpeter ss, and if you have no Honey, take Sugar,
or juice of Licorice, or Licorice boiled therein for to make it pleasant in
taste, or without for a need you may well use it, or the Lapis Medicamentosus
dissolved into fair water, makes an excellent Lotion for the putrified gums.

Outward ^emedies for the S^urvy in gen^rall.
Touching good outward remedies for the cure of this grief, bathes,
Fomentations, with also good oils and unguents, cerates, cataplasms, or
empla^ters, are each necessary in their due times, provided they be of
comfortable ingredients, namely those which minister warmth and nourishment to
the diseased parts, and open the pores obstructed, all such, I say, are most
fit, provided they be always applied very warm, and the party be laid and
kept warm upon it. Further, if it be If swelling grow in any part a Lixivium is
good. Of what the Lixivium is made.
a swollen member, then this following bathe to ^oment the member, will be good,
namel^, a Lixivium made of fresh water and ashes, and being only but
reasonable sharp, (for too sharp of the ashes will over heat, yea, and
excoriate) this done and cleared, boil some hot herbs, flowers and seeds
fitting therein, such are Cammomile, Mellilote, Dill, Wormwood, Balm,
Rosemary, Thyme, Sage, Bay Leaves, Bay Berries, Juniper*berries, Annis-seed,
Fennel, Co^iander, Carraway, Dill seeds, or the like: these ingredients, or
those of them which may be had use, and let them be boiled a little therein,
and either stupes of woollen or linen clothes wet therein or put the
ingredients into bags after the decoction is made with them, and the place
well fomented therewith, and so laid to sweat with some of the herbs in the
same bags well wrung out and hot applied, till the next dressing. But if the
disease proceed with stiffnes and hardness of the sinews, then forbear the
Lixivium, I mean put no ashes thereto, and make the decoction of the mentioned
ingredients, boiled in the broth of the beef-kettle, in wine, beer, or water
for a need, adding some salt; and likewise, if you have it, Linseed oil,
neats-foot oil, sheeps-foot oil, or oil of Almonds, oil of Camomile, Dill
or earthworms, of Bays, of Lillies, or some one of them.

A bath of blood very good.
Also where you can have it, a good bath of the blood of beasts, either cows,
horses, asses, goats, or sheeps blood is exceeding good, The manner how to
bathe in this bath of blood.
namely, to put the legs of the Patient, yea and his body too, if it may be,
into a tub made fitting, and the blood kept warm, part thereof being still kept
hot on the fire, and renew therewith the bath still, as it cools with the
warm blood, for some reasonable time, this restores A bath of milk
and comfort mightily the decayed spirits. Milk of it self is also good to
be used in that kind where it may be had.

Of Oils thereto.
Oils good outward helps, and what they be.
Oils good to anoint, which are Oleum Chamamillae, Laurini, Anethi or
Lumbricorum, with a little Spike oil, oil of Turpentine, oil of Nutmegs pressed
out, oil of Peter, oil of Exitor, or oil of Juniper, Much and hard frication
very beneficial.
or one of the same mixed with them, or some good Aqua vitae, and to use strong
frication with warm soft hands long continued, helps much.

Unguents.
What Unguents are herein helpful.
GOod Unguents to help these griefs, in my opinion, are every warm and
comforting unguent in use in the Chirurgions chest, but I have had especial
trial of an Unguent, the composition whereof Two principal Unguents of
sovereign virtue against the Scurvie.
shall be hereafter described, which is named Contra Scorbutum, as also of the
Vnguentum Populeon, I mean the same composition Valerius Cordus has described,
for I find it to be very good: but you may well say, how does he contradict
himself, which even now advises warming Unguents, and presently recites
Populeon for one, which is known to be cold, but though I have haste, let me I
pray thee answer for my self in that one point, which I know to be a principal
Arcanum in Many ^edicines (...) show that which in effect they are not.
healing not looked into: many a medicine has a seeming show to be cold, and
yet does contrary effects, witness Quicksilver, juice of Lemmons, Vitriol, oil
of Vitriol, Saltpeter, Alum, Sorrel, and diverse others which I could recite,
all which may easily be proved, either hot or cold, by their several strong
operations and effects which they perform: as for example, to begin with
Quicksilver, it is affirmed What Quicksilver is in show and in effect.
to be extreme cold of infinite Writers, and his repercussive quality shows
the same, as also in repelling and cools hot tumors: with also the variety
of cold diseases and contractions Podagrical and Chirurgicall, procured thereby
to diverse Artificers which work much therewith, as namely to Guilders, Foilers
of looking-glasses, and the like Tradesmen, which shows the same to be cold.
It also shows it self to be hot diversely, as namely in that it is so extreme
subtle and penetrative, so invisible to enter the body (per poros cutis) and
being in the body, so volatile and busy, so caustic and corrosive, so extreme
Laxative, so diaphoretick, so diaveritick, so mundificative, so incarnative and
so sigillative or siccatrizing, as the like medicine by the art or wit of man
was never found out: juice of Lemmons was ever reputed a cold medicine,
prescribed and given daily by the Physicians The different virtue of the juice
of Lemmons.
in burning and pestilential fevers, and that with good reason, and good
success even to this day, and yet to that notable, and cold, and terrible
disease of the Scurvie, how excellent has it been approved, how then in these
two recited medicines holds the old Axiom, Similia conservantur similibus and
contraria contrariorum remedia sunt? even as true as vox populi vox Dei, or
pepper is hot in the mouth and cold in the maw; if I would desire truly to cool
and temper the boiling of the blood inwardly, which I my self would take, yea
were it upon the safeguard of my own life, I would take five or six drops of
good oil A singu^a^ and approved good medicine to temper the boiling of blood
of Vitriol in a draught of fair water with a little sugar, a drop or two of
Rose Water and as much wine vinegar, mark well my words, if thou know not
these medicines they are worth knowing, or j. of saltniter, which is also
called Lapis prunella, in the like liquor, and for want of the sugar,
Rose Water or vinegar of it self, or with the water only for a need: I have
often proved them so true coolers that they have stayed the Hemoragie or
bleeding at the nose, the latter whereof shall To stop bleeding at nose good
rules.
seldom fail, if you by outward means proceed rationally by applying to the
forehead cold and astringent things, as also to the nape of the neck: also a
large sponge wet in cold water and applied to his secret parts is good, or let
him hold or put his members into a boul of cold water, also binding hard the
arms and legs is very good to stay bleeding at the nose; and one of the
surest remedies, but last to be attempted in Hemoragie or bleeding at the nose,
is to open a vein in the arm on the same side. Thus it may plainly appear that
two of the recited medicines are cold: now to prove those two hot, I will not
spend many words, call to mind that of Vitriol and Saltpeter Aqua fortis is
made, which by his heat and penetrating force, What opposite virtues Vitriol,
Saltpeter, and aqua fortis have.
teareth to pieces and dissolveth the strongest metals presently, devoureth and
utterly destroieth clothes woollen and linen, or put but good oil of Vitriol
into an Ulcer, or to the whole skin, and tell me half an hour after what a
cold Fever the Patient had: or put fire to The like in Salt-piter.
crude salt niter alone and mark the conclusion, namely, it will prove it self
wholly combustible, and therefore hot: as I suppose likewise the herb Sorrel,
it is a cold herb esteemed at least in the first if not in the second degree,
and yet consider well if you seek quickly to ripen and bring to suppuration an
Apostume; you shall As also like different operation in Sorrel
find it a most excellent speedy remedy: I conceive therefore that it is not
by his coldness it does that effect, for that is not common, nor rational, and
therefore to conclude my digression as A saying of Oswaldus Crollius
Ozwaldus Crollius, a late learned Writer says in his Preface Admonitorie to
his Book called Bazillica Chymica, Simplicium qualitates non semper
considerandae sed earum arcana, The simple and apparent qualities of Medicines
are not always alone to be respected, but rather their mysteries or hidden
virtues.

Gods providence to be observed in Physics operation.
Thus much in difference of the temperament of some private Medicines working
strange and several effects, wherein the mysteries of our God in his divine
providence far do excel whatsoever things else, showing man's wisdom mere
foolishness, wherefore to him for evermore be praise, Amen.

Where the unguents are to be applied.
The warm Unguents are to be used where you see apparent need by reason of the
coldness of the part, the Populeon where there is pain though no manifest sign
of a hot disease appear, and doubtless it will work good effect to your
comfort, yea though you think the disease be not cold, and therefore need a
more warming Medicine, Vnguentum Dialthea is one of the best Unguents, and
Mariatum is another, Oleum laurini is also good, and if you list to add some
more califying oils, take of oil of Speek, of Terbinthine, or Petreolum, but
good warm application and strong frication is the means, and warm keeping. Of
medicines to be applied to the Spleen, Liver, or stomach outwardly, the unguent
pectorale described is very good What outward medicines the liver and stomach
require.
warm to anoint those parts, whose description with the rest you shall find,
and to lay also over the whole part agrieved the Emplastrum millilote pro
spleen, whose description is expressed in the Dispensatory, for want of which
plaster Emplastrum cumini is good. Also the well anointing with oil of
Nutmegs, or Mace, adding a few drops of oil of Cloves Chymicall does ^much
comfort, keeping the grieved part extraordinary warm.

Of Ulcers in those that have the Scurvie.
THe Ulcers which happen to them which have this disease are many ways
different from the general forms and differences of ordinary Ulcers in bodies
not touched with this disease, the several definitions of all which I have
here no time to Two strange effects the Scurvie ^^useeth, the first an
Hydropicall inflation of the whole body.
amplify. But because this disease has two general and principal
differences of appearance, namely, some men diseased with the Scurvie are
swollen exceedingly, even as in the Dropsy: and others have their outward limbs
withered, comsumed, and dried up, their sinews shrunk and grown hard, though
the Ulcers in the one and the other should be like in show, yet doubtless the
healing of the* Ulcers will be found very A second is consumption of the body.
much different, wherefore for one general note remember that the Ulcers in
the full and hydropicall bodies will require more desiccative medicines, as
namely the Vnguentum Diapompholigos, de minio. Vnguentum album Camphoratum and
the like: And the other kind the Vnguentum basilicon incarnativum, and the
Arceus liniment and the like to those. Some Sea-Chirurgions have commended to
me of Experience the best prayser.
their practice the use of Vesicatory medicines; namely, Cantharides in
painful swollen limbs, which I leave to the practice of others further to
commend the same, my self having received it as a great secret from a
Surgeon my friend, but made no such experiences thereof my self.

Obstructions of the Liver must be removed before the Ulcers can be cured.
And further touching the Cure of Ulcers in this disease until the
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen be removed, those Ulcers give no place to
good healing; wherefore since notwithstanding they must be carefully attended
for conscience sake, I advise that all sharp and violent medicines be shunned,
and all soft and anodine things applied that you know or can learn, provided
they be warrantable medicines, for otherwise they not only strive against a
stream, but A Caveat.
put your Patient to needless disquiet, and thereby increase this disease.

I have here in part showed the Chirurgions Mate my opinion concerning the cure
of the Scurvie, to which he may join his own and other men's experiences, where
he can gain instructions worth following, together with his own daily practice,
which if he be wise, he may likewise set down, only let me advise the young
practitioner that How to help the body extremely bound through the Scurvy.
sometimes (as my self have experienced) the Scurvie produces such extreme
costiveness, as neither suppositorie, glister, or any Laxative medicine
whatsoever will avail, but that the excrements must be drawn out of the
Longanum, or the Intestinum rectum with an instrument, for they will be like
dry lumps of clay, or hard Sheeps treckles, as they term them, the which
instrument I have invented, and is an easy and a fit instrument, called by me
Spatula Mundani, which instrument being a little warmed, is then to be anointed
with oil, and so gently put into Ano to draw out the excrements, and to make
way for the glister-pipe, which, when it has cleansed some four inches, or
five inches, you may assay by a glister again. Furthermore, it sometime
happens, that by the long remaining of the excrements in the Longanum, the
gut is either excoriated, or at the least inflamed. In such a case you may take
notice that you forbear Salt, as is said, and all sharp heating things in your
glisters, as Coloquintida, Hiera pigra, Scammony, Agaricum, Euphorbium, and the
like; and content your self to What must be done for the cure thereof. A
glyster.
administer for the first, a glister made only of a decoction of Bran alone,
or of Mallows, or of Comfry roots small cut, or Lintseeds bruised with ij. of
Deer suet, Vnguentum Diapompholigos, or as much Aquilla Laxativa.
Populeon or Vnguentum album, as is said, and rather if you find that help not,
give a dose of Aquilla Laxativa which will purge easily without any offense at
all, and help to heal the gut, and this course is better then by sharp glisters
to purge, which will offend the gut, and after the said purge it will not be
amiss if you see occasion, to give a like The aforesaid glister repeated
glister again as before, and note that if in the glister some of the
ingredients should be wanting, you may nevertheless proceed with the rest with
good profit, provided if you have better you use them, neither do I here intend
strictly to enjoyne the Chirurgions Mate to my rule, but if he have better, let
him use it, and forget mine in the Name of God.

Moreover, if the Patient his disease be in the form of a Consumption* The cure
if the body be consumed by the Scurvy.
the body being dried up as it were, or with shrinking of the Sinews: then if
you intend to purge the party, give him pills called Pillulae* Ruffi for the
first remedy, but if he complain much of pains in his joints, then a dose of
Pulvis Arthretieus will do best, or purge him wherein the virtue of Aquilla
^axativa consists.
with Aquilla Laxativa, it is also a general good purge at all times, and
almost in all cases, though best in the French Pox and Dropsy. And though I
have formerly touched the forms of some Cataplasmes, yet for that there has
been much good found in the application of this Cataplasmes excellent in this
case. How to make the Cataplasm
Cataplasme made, being of warming, conforting and anodine medicines, I thought
good to note it, which is as follows the flowers of Cammomil, Mellilot
flowers, Worm wood, also Hipericon and Balm, of each M. j. Bran M. j. ij.
Linseed, Fenigreek, of each ss. Comfrey and Mallow roots, of each ss, Barley
meal ij. bruise the herbs, and boil these in milk, beer, or water, then add
of oil of Cammomil, Dialthae, oil of Dill, of each ij, Axungiae ij. apply it
warm: note likewise, that where you have not all these recited ingredients, yet
that you take so many of them as you have, and try their force, for if a few
will do the business, as sometimes it will, it were vain and waste to use
many.

Sometimes for a need you may make good use of a decoction of Biscuit in Wine or
Beer, which warm applied will wonderfully comfort a weak limb, and assuage the
pain, for sometimes the very good warmth with good ligature avails much:
fattie things must be forborne in some cases; namely, when the pain is sharp and
quick, lest Sour things better then fatty in this disease.
you cause putrefaction and suppuration of humors against your will, yea and
rather use Acetosous medicines, and Anodine sometime, also musslagy medicines
are to be forborne, for like reasons: in all which cases, confer with other
Writers: ask counsel of thy Elders, and keep ever in writing thy own good
observations from time to time.

A word or two to conclude for the young Chirurgions concerning the cure of
this disease, when they come upon a coast where they may have some helps, let
them use some one of these following, they shall find them good upon trial.

Counsel directing what to be done if means may be had.
. Absinthiae, Juniper Berries of each M. j. Goats milk, lib. 4. boil this
together, the herbs and berries well bruised till a third part be consumed,
then strain it, and add of Saffron in powder j. stir it on the fire till it
have boiled a very little, and set it to clear, and give the sick thereof three
times a day at the least, viz. morning, noon and night, this drink has cured
many in great distress: if you have no Goats milk, Sheeps milk, or for a need,
Cowes milk will serve.

Another.
Another good drink.
. Water Cresses, Sorrel, and Wormwood, of each one handful, bruise them well,
and boil them in three quarts of Whey or new Milk, and add thereto a little
Sugar and Saffron, and let the sick drink thereof as often as he will.

Whey sodden with diverse herbs very profitable.
Whey drunken of it self is very good, but better if the juyces of
Scurvy-grasse, Sorrel, Coclaria, Wormwood, Watercresses, the greater or lesser
sort, Brooklime, Scordium, Spoonwort, water Jermander, or of some of them be
mixed therewith, for that they are all approved good medicines, and doubtless
some of them are to be found in other Countries and Coasts, as well as in
England.

Also an infusion or gentle decoction of the roots of the herb Rhaphanae
silvestris, or horse-reddish in vinegar, or mixed with beer and drunk, is
exceeding good, or eaten of it self with bread.

Eay-berries also and Juniper Berries are good.
Bay Berries, and Iuniper-berries are also wholesome boiled in Whey against this
disease, for they open obstructions: likewise from these former herbs may many
other good compound medicines be made.

And generally note, that bitter and sour medicines prevail most to the cure
of this grief, amongst which sour medicines you have Sour medicines very good
that are approved good thereto, these that follow as chief, juice of Lemmons,
of Limes, Citrons, and Oranges.

Oil of Vitriol, oil of Sulphur, spirit of Salt, vinegar of Wine, and the
spirit thereof: also the Syrups thereof, so many as are in use, and the rather,
for that they cut away the rough and gross ^^egme, and have power also to open
obstructions. In like manner, the juice or pulpe of Tamarinds has a great
acetositie, and is found a precious remedy against this disease, the use
whereof is noted already.

An observation.
Also note further that there are few diseases at Sea happens to Seamen, but
the Scurvie has a part in them, the Fluxes which happen chiefly proceed from
the Scurvie, and I suppose if Seamen could be preserved from that disease, few
other diseases would endanger them.

The Conclusion.
THese recited medicines for Christian charity, I thought not amiss to
publish, admonishing young men to be wise and careful to make right use of
them, and as near as they can, to respect in the use what is bad in a
Surgeon and ought to be avoided.
thereof, Time, Place, Age, quantity, quality, temperament, strength,
climate, cause, and what else is fitting to be regarded for the good of the
sick, and credit of themselves, and let them avoid slothfulness, avarice,
envy, fear, pride, or what else may hinder these duties, that God may give a
blessing to their labors, and then the praise and comfort shall return to
themselves, which God grant.

And for the elder sort of grave Artists, I crave their charitable censures of
my weak or undigested instructions, which I no way mean to them, but to babes
in Surgery, and so I conclude to the honor of the Almighty, concerning the
Scurvie for this time.

Concerning the Fluxes of the Belly.
THe principal Fluxes of the belly by a common consent of diverse ancient
Writers, are chiefly referred to three kinds, namely:

Leienteria. Diarrhoea. Dysenteria.
What Leienteria is.
Leientaria is distinguished to be that Flux which either passes the
sustenance taken, wholly digested, and that without any blood at all, and
without great pain, or as it were half digested. The true causes of Leienteria
proceed chiefly through imbecillitie and weakness of The causes of Leienteria.
the stomach, which may be occasioned many ways, whereby the virtue retentive
is weakened; yea and sometimes the stomach by some Crudity a cause
Apostumation is either wholly weakened, and cold or broken, or otherwise by
crude humidities is oppressed, and must be strengthened, both inwardly and
outwardly, by things that corroborate and warm the same, as is Syrup de
absinthio, or olean^ absinthii; Chimice 3 or 4 drops thereof in wine, or beer
for need, and I have found it good to a strong body, at first, namely, in the
beginning of the disease to give him a vomit of the infusion of stibium, or
rather of A vomit at first.
Salvitrioli, ten grains if it may be had, or of Aquila vitae four grains, or
of Cambogia twelve grains, and so the medicine having done working, To
corroborate.
let him presently sleep fasting, if he can; if not, give him a little
Cinamon-water, or a little sanguis prunellorum, if you have it, or a draught of
good Aligant, or conserve of Sloes, or Quinces; and shortly after, namely three
hours, if he cannot take his rest, give him An opiate.
three grains of Laudanum in a pill, and so appoint him to rest; but if you
conceive, or fear the disease to proceed of Apostumation in the stomach, then
beware of giving any vomit before perfect suppuration of the same, for it is
deanly, but outwardly you may apply then Stomach comforted.
to the stomach, a bag with Wormwood, Mints, or sweet Majoram, nd warm being
sprinkled with Rose water and Vinegar, or else a Biscuit bedued well with Rose
water and Vinegar, being steeped, must Pecteral unguent.
be applied to the stomach; or anoint the stomach with unguentum pectorale, or
with oil of Nutmegs made by expression: also Theriaca andromachi, or theriaca
Londini i ss. is very good given him upon the Co^^^als.
point of a knife, or Marmalad of Quinces is also good: Mithridate is very fit
and approved, or grated Nutmegs is very good, and Cinnamon in powder taken in
meats or drinks is good likewise, if these things answer not thy desire, thou
may proceed to medicines more astringent, Astringent medicines.
such as follow in the cure of Dysenterie, one very familiar and good Medicine
is sanguis prunellorum aforesaid, the dose is j. or ij. with Mint or Wormwood,
or Carduus water, taken going to rest, or taken of it self. But your mentioned
Laudanum in all Fluxes judiciously Cordial water*
administered is the only sure help, nevertheless in this grief try other
good things: first all Aromatized strong waters are convenient in this case,
moderately used as well to avoid further fluxes, as also in these fluxes to
comfort the stomach, stiptike wines serve well for it: likewise, Theriace
diatesseron j. now and then, also electuarium diatrion piperion ss. on a knifes
point given is very good, for it mightily Diatrion piperion.
warmeth and strengthens the stomach. But sometimes it happens that not
only the meat passes away by stool, but also other undigested matter with
it, in which case Petrus Bayrus in his Veni mecum, folio 273. advises to use
things sour with meat, as Verjuice or the juice of sour Pomgranats and the
like, in want whereof the juice of Lemmons is good, or rather syrup of Lemmons,
or syrup de Agrestis, or oil, or spirit of Vitriol taken in some fitting
drink, as Card^us water, or fair water, wine, or Barley water, the oil of
Vitriol. 3. Syrup of Lemons. Oil of Vitriol.
drops taken with conserve of Roses is also good in this disease; also keep
warm the region of the stomach and Liver, and inwardly as is said, it is good
to use all good comfortable helps that warm.

Of Diarrhoea.
DIarrhoea is a flux of the belly which is either merely watrish, or with
humors and with slime mixed, for the signs of the disease are manifest, the
causes too many for my leisure to note unto you, concerning the cure of
Diarrhoea if you see that the Patient be strong, there is no great have of
stopping this disease, for that it is many times a benefit of Nature, whereby
she avoideth superfluous, or venomous, or Stop not at the first.
otherwise vicious and offensive humors: but when you shall perceive that it
has continued certain days, and that the party is weakened thereby, then
begin the cure as follows: First give him ij, of Rubarb dried as they use to
dry Tobacco, and poudered either in wine or Carduus, or fair water, or the
infusion thereof without the substance, A purge
and after the working thereof, a gentle glister will do well, which may
likewise leave a stiptick quality in the guts, but not too strong, such as
hereafter shall be mentioned, and let the party be laid to rest very warm
covered, and warm clothes applied to the belly and fundament of the party; and
if that helps not, you may give him Warmth is very good.
within three hours three or four grains of Laudanum, and let him again
incline himself to rest, and by Gods help he shall be cured: but if he have a
Fever give him an opiate first, I mean the Laudanum. Good helps to the cure of
this disease and all Fluxes of the belly, are Laudanum.
these following, first to refrain and resist as much as is possible the
motions of going to stool, not to strain or force the body being at stool, not
to sit long being at stool, in rising to remember to put up worth the observing.
the fundament with a clout, and that if it may be with a warm soft clout: to
sit as hot as the party can, namely if it may be often to sit upon an oaken
board hot is very good, hot trenches, or pieces of boards heated and applied to
the belly are very good, and to take the fume of wine vinegar sprinkled on a
hot brick, or iron, and sit over it on a close stool is approved very good,
and to sit over the fume of Franckincense Manual help.
or Amber with a chafing dish, and a few coals in a close stool is likewise
very good: this disease in our climate for the most part by skilful Physicians
and Surgeons is well and speedily cured, but in the Indies it is very hardly
cured, in so much that many have To sit (...)
died of it* partly by the great wilfulness and disorder of the Patient, and
by your leave also by the ignorance of the Surgeon being a thing they had not
been warned of before, nor practiced in, and by not having good remedies and
instruments fit at hand to give men help, wherefore let young Artists have a
care to these before mentioned rules and medicines, not scorning them.

A fume.
And among other needful instruments for poor Seamen in fluxes, never be
unfurnished in the ship of one or two close stools with doors to them, and
Brass pailes, that poor miserable men in their weakness may be eased
thereon; and not to be constrained to go to either the beak-head, or shrouds
(as they term it) for that not only increases the disease, but also causes
the falling down of the care to be bad.
Ano or Arse-gut, a fearful accident, except the Surgeon be very careful,
diligent, and ready handed, in which cases all niceness, laziness, and
disdainfulnesse (too much cleaving to some young men) must be laid aside, for
the very omitting of his duty, in reducing the gut fallen A dangerous accident
may easily be the death of the Patient; whose blood will cry to God for
revenge. Wherefore young Artists that profess to fear the Almighty, ought to
be compassionate to the meanest creature in this disease, as they would others
should do to them in the like case, and not even otherwise.

Petrus Bayerius an ancient learned Writer, alleging Galen in his second book,
de locis affectis, defines this disease as follows: It is, says he, termed
Dysenterium, whereas variety of substances are sent out with the excrement,
producing excoriation with dolor and pain, as if somewhat were shaven from the
small guts, and that shaven, says Admonition to young Artists.
he, proceeds from the choler and turns to ulceration of the guts and is
complete in two weeks, or proceeds of a glassie colored substance, and has
its termination in four weeks: or proceeds of a Melancholy humor, and is in
perfection in forty days: first begins the flux, then follows the
excoriation, etc. But to trouble the Reader much, or my self with long
definitions, either of the causes or signs of this disease, my leisure will
not permit me, and the rather will I not insist thereon, for that in reading I
find diverse learned and reverend Writers that have entered into long discourses
of the signs and causes of this grief, prescribing diverse methodical rules;
and yet Ambiguity impertinent.
they conclude of the cure of Dysentery, for the most part of them with a kind
of Emperical form of curing, namely, some reciting one, some another medicine
for the general cure of this disease: many of them ending without any rational,
or methodical form at all, which argues in my opinion that it is impossible
either to find out all the causes thereof, or to prescribe any one true form
for the general cure of the same, but the discreet Surgeon must be armed
with judgment in these following principles; namely, that if he perceive it to
proceed by fullness of blood or humors, to seek the health of the Patient by
sundry the most rational and fittest evacuations; as namely, Advise to the
Art^st.
bleeding, purging, and slenderness of diet: then also, to proceed to
medicines which take away the acrimony, and heal the inward parts, then to
those which are Anodine, and do cause rest. A learned French Surgeon named
Guillemeau, writing a Treatise of this Guillimeau his opinion.
disease, in his conclusion says as follows: The Empericall Medicaments
which the methodical Physicians so disdain and esteem of little worth, are
those which we through our experience, and through the diuturnal use of them,
have found to be most excellent, which being used with judgment, are not to be
disdained, seeing that Galen Ground of Arts.
himself testifies, that the Physician must be established on two foundations,
to wit, reason and experience, whereof reason is as it were the soul of the
same, which measures and pondereth all things, and experience the body as a
provident Tutour and Schoolmaster; Rubarb pray sed.
wherefore seeing that experience teaches us that Rubarb in what manner soever
we administer the same, (but especially the infusion thereof) is very
commodious and profitable in this disease, as likewise is Spiritus Vitrioli
with Rose Water, and Plantane-water, and also being administered with
Cinamon*water, says Guillemeau, there is a sugarlike dulcor or sweetness
extracted out of Lead, which never deceived thehope of the right reverend
Master Duion a very learned Physician, where of I have attained the best of
these discourses: the tincture of Coral and of yellow Amber, extracted with
Aqua vitae, is in operation admirable, also Crocus Martis, or flos Surphur is
being in season administered with the Conserves of Roses, Marmalet, Citron
rindes, Saccbaram, Sa^^^i.
with other such like things are very commodious, because among natural things
I know nothing exsiccateth more, and opposes it self more against all
corruptions. To conclude, there are innumerable sorts of remedies which we must
so compound, that they may have one similitude, or one Analogy with the
disease: finally, we must in extreme Dysentery for the last remedy endeavor
t^^^itigate the pain with narcotical things, as is the Oleum Jusqui^^^
mandragorae, the cold seeds, the Philonium requies Nicolai, and many other such
like compositions which are unto this disease used, and which may not be
administered except great judgment and advise had thereon. Thus much what
people most subject t^ this disease, and where.
out of Guillimeau. This disease chiefly afflicts Soldiers in Wars, and
Seamen in long Voyages, and namely in hot countries, chiefly when after short
and hard allowances they shall happen on the sudden to get great store of raw
fruit, fresh meat, flesh or fish, or any other great change of pleasant diet,
in which cases reason and judgment, as the principal helps are to be used, as
for instance, this disease is incident much to such as change the place of
their abode for a far hotter or a far colder Country, but chiefly into
hotter, witness the mortality through that disease which has often befalne
our Soldiers in the wars in France, etc. As also now at Bantham, how much does
it afflict them that live there. Moreover, as is said, if it proceed of
repletion, evacuation, and thin diet, is the mean to proceed in the beginning
of the cure thereof: if it proceed of an acrimonious fretting humor, then one
of your first helps must be a present purge, if strength will bear it, namely
of Rubarb, as is said in the cure of Diarrhoea, or a Decoction of myrabulans
and also a good Barly-water; the second good help is a Glister, which may be
proper against sharp If the Patient want rest, give him a Glister.
humors: and after to conclude the cure with a dose of Laudanum Paracelsi, but
if the party be in great weakness and want of rest, give him some comfortable
glister first, next that an Opiate, I mean the Landanum one dose: you may begin
in weak bodies first with Opiate medicines, in that there is most need of ease,
and if you find after rest it help not, use a Glister or a purge as you see
cause, for though the Laudanum at first cure not, yet it gives rest, whereby
the party afterward, it is likely, will be the stronger to endure cure by
other reasosonable The often repeating of Laudanum r^quireth this caution.
medicines, which done, if that answer not thy desire, thou may return to
Laudanum again and again, always remembering, as is said, there be four hours
at the least distance, betwixt each dose, and if the disease proceed of heat,
seek to cool the blood by a decoction of Plantane and cold herbs or seeds if
they be to be had, or at Sea with such medicines as are used to quench heat,
and are not merely sharp, and yet Oil of Vitriol is much commended to be taken
certain days together in any kind of distilled waters, either Plantane,
Sorrel, Straw-berries or the like, whilst the said waters are good and sweet,
or with Aqua Sparnolae, if it be at hand, also a Barley water with a little
Alum or Galls in powder is singular good, so is Bole, but the finer the Bole
is the better, and Terra Sigillata, Syrup of Quinces is good also in that case,
and so are all the medicines Laudanum laud dignum.
made of sloes, after some due evacuation, as in thy discretion thou shall see
reasonable; but to conclude, a dose of Laudanum Opiate, is best to finish the
work, for that goes before, or rather exceeds all other medicines in fluxes,
for that swageth all pains and causes quiet sleep which often even alone is
the true perfection of the How to restore the patient very weak by Disentery.
cure. And further, if it (...) appear, that this disease have so gotten the
upper hand that the (...) is grown very feeble, his blood being wasted, appoint
him (...) that may warm and comfort the stomach, namely, at land if it may be
had, Broths of chickins or the like, with some Spices therein, and Eggs and
Sugar, and a little Rose water, but not Honey, for that increases gripings,
and cawdles with eggs, wine and spices, according to good discretion will do
well, if they may be A glister against excoriation.
had, and give him, if thou see cause, a glister, if there be fear of
excoriations in the guts, namely, a decoction of Barley or Bran, or of Bran
only with Deer suet ij. let not your decoction be too slimy of the Bran, and
add if you can get it, the yolk of one egg, for eggs comfort much and swage
pain, the yolk of the egg must be well beaten with the decoction by little and
little, so taken very warm, or if the party have gripings in his guts, make
this glyster following, and for want of Bran take a little wheat flower, and
with camomile, Centaury Wormwood, St. John's wort, or some of these, make a
decoction adding A glyster for grip^ng through Dysentery.
also Anniseed, Fennel, Dill ^or Cummin-seeds, or the like, or some of these at
the least, adding after the boiling, some two or three spoonfuls of Rosasolis
or good Aqua-vitae, or some strong cordial waters, if you see there be cause to
comfort and warm, and adding also, as is said Deer suet ii. with wax ss.

Another glyster.
Also glysters of milk and eggs only are very good to swage gripings and
pains, where they may be had; also as is said, warm cloths to the belly and
fundament applied are very good, and note still that rest procured is a
principal help in curing all fluxes.

Another glyster.
For excoriations of the guts, make a glyster with a decoction of dry Centaury,
Hipericon, Wormwood or Balm, with barley, adding of Deer suet ij. and a little
dried Galls in powder, or cut in slices, or succus acatiae or Cortices
granatorum or dried red roses, if you have them, or Balausties, which are
flowers of Pomegranats: Note what powders so ever you give in glysters, let
them be exceeding finely powdered, otherwise they are very dangerous, and fear
not to administer an opiat, as I have said, provided that there be four or five
hours distance of time twixt each dose: also you may give a dose of Rubarb,
namely, ii. or ss. parched and powdered fine, for so it does best, taken either
alone, or with Sanguis prunellorum one small spoonful in wine, and a little
Cinnamon water, or in any other convenient drink, as the prsent state of the
sick shall cause thee, or for want of wine, beer or water, you may give the
sick also conserve of roses or quinces, after which, if cause be to give the
Laudanum again, you may safely do it. Furthermore in this case, as also in all
kind of fluxes, fumigations are very good medicines, namely, sitting over a
close stool, provided the sick be very warm kept, and not too hot, to which
purpose a well burned brick heat very hot and put under the stool, laying two
cold bricks under it, for burning the stool, and then sprinkle often the hot
brick with vinegar if the disease be hot, or with vinegar and Aqua vitae mixed
if it be cold, and for want of bricks some great pieces of old iron will serve,
as it is already rehearsed, also a decoction of cinnamon or cloves, or both
together, or nutmegs set under the stool, that the warm steam of the spices may
come up into the body of the patient, is very good. Note further, that where
you fear a flux of the belly may follow, that you purge not the party with
Coloquintida, Trochis de Alhandal, Agaricum, nor Diagredion. And remember ever
when you give Rubarb, that you give cinnamon, or ginger, or anniseeds, a little
there with, which corrects the flatuous diposition thereof. If this disease
of the flux shall show it self to proceed of any contagiousnesse of the air,
as sometimes it does, this is certainly the All diseases proceed from God.
most fearful of the rest, for although all diseases have their original from
the hand of the Almighty, yet then we have all reason to call to our
remembrances, the words which the Prophet David speaks God must be sought
unto*
in the Psalms, whither shall I fly from thee O my God? when therefore the
air which we are forced to receive into our bodies shall threaten us, then if
ever, it is high time for Surgeon and patient to cry unto God for his help
and mercy, and yet not to mistrust, but to use all artificial means, referring
the success to the Almighty. Wherefore in this case I hold nothing better then
a good purge of Rubarb, and then to take three or four grains of Laudanum
Paracelsi, then after The cure of a flux through the contagion of the air.
there may be given him one scruple of the best Treacle or Mithridate, or
London Treacle, or merely Laudanum alone. You may give the party also a little
Cinnamon water, or Aqua Theriaculis or Carduus water laying him to rest: It were
also to be confidered whether the body stands in need of bleeding, purging,
or a glyster: but when as the disease proceeds from contagious and venomous
air, and is fierce, I hold it the safest course to forbear bleeding or
purging, for If the flux be fierce and, sudden what to be done.
fear of drawing back the venom to the principal parts, and rather to fly to
Alexipharmacons or Preservatives, as Venice Treacle, Mithridate, Diatesseron,
London Treacle, or the like: And presently after, or immediately with it, as is
said give a dose of Laudanum, which of it self is a perfect cordial, and a good
preservative.

Many learned writers are of opinion that this disease is infectious, The flix
through the air is infectious.
and that the breath and excrements of the sick man may easily infect a sound
man, affirming also that from putrified and diseased bowels, infections vapors
do ascend and descend, and partly the rather by a kind of sympathy our bodies
have each with other, but lest that opinion of mine uttered may perhaps offend
the courage of young Artists, Infection should not daunt Chirurgions called
lawsully to the cure of any disease whatsoever.
whom I seek by all possible means to embolden, let them take this rule from
me, in the fear of God, I hold no disease infectious to me, in that I have a
lawful calling, and I am therefore bound to visit the diseased, which who so
neglects, God will find him out with that disease or a worse. Now a word or
two of such medicines as are belonging to the chest found in the ship, or at
the utmost may be found in the East Indies, or that are likely to be found
there, I intend to set forth some instructions for the Chirurgions Mate: and
first The cure of Dysentery at sea, and of Lientery.
note, I have cured many, both in Dysentery and Lientery, with burned
Hartshorn, or in want hereof, I have found that only the hard bones of Beef
or Pork calcined or merely burned till they be white, for so they must be, and
it may easily be done in any wood or coalfire, being not a fire of sea-coal,
and then being powdered fine, and given continually in the ordinary drinks,
during the time of the sickness it helps much, and you may assure your self,
that if you take much or little of it, it can do no harm to be taken, and with
some few drops of Cynamon water, if it may be had, it is the better, or a
little Nutmeg and Cynamon in powder therein, also I have givenit sometime with
Rosasolis and fair water mixed, of each two spoonfuls and j. of the powder of
bones.

Another secret which has cured many of the flix.
Wheat flower, and thrust it veryclose together into an end ofa clout, and so
bind it up hard, and close like a bullet, and put it into boiling water, and
boil it three hours or more, and you shall find it will be very dry and hard as
chalk, and powder it, and give of this powder ij. or more in any liquid
substance fitting, and it is a very good midicine for any flux of the belly,
either white or red: this medicine has been often proved, and found sure at
sea and land, yet it helps the virtue of the medicine well, if the vehicle or
menstrum you give it in be also good, namely, if you give it with some liquid
medicine proper to the grief, also Crocus Martis i. given in red wine, Aligant
or French wine, or with beer or water for a need, adding certain drops of
Cinnamon water, it is a very good medicine. The same also is given with Venice
Treacle, or London Treacle, or good Mithridate is likewise very good, but to a
weak person give it alone with Sugar, it will please his taste better then with
other strong medicines. The cure, if the disease proceed of worms.


But if you perceive the disease proceeds of worms as often it does, then give
the patient a glyster of a decoction of Althea roots, with a little wormwood,
adding Coloquintida ij. where there is no great acrimonious A glyster.
pains in the guts, but where there is great dolor in the guts, rather put
some Bay Berries, namely ss. in your decoction; which decoction you may
alsomake merely of the brain, if you please, and make it not too slimy, I mean,
put not too much bran or roots therein, then add, if you have it, of Aquilla
Laxativa, 12. grains, Deer suet ii. or three ounces, and give it stirring well
the powder therein, The means to kill worms.
this Aquilla Laxativa, certainly will kill any worms, and give present ease:
also almost all bitter things kill worms, as Aloes, Agaricum, Coloquintida,
Wormwood, and the like, but principally Aquilla Laxativa does it sure, and is
safe to be given, the dose by way of glyster is to 10. grains.

Mr. Edwards his medicine for the flux.
. red-rose water ij. spoons full, Cinnamon ij. Almonds of vallence iiij.
unblanched, the Cinnamon is to be bruised and boiled in iij. pounds of water
till ii. pounds be consumed, then reserve that decoction, and add three pounds
more of fair water to the former Cinnamon and boil it as before, reserve both the
waters together, then beat or rather grind well your Almonds, and being well
ground and beaten add thereto some little quantity of the water mentioned,
grinding the Almonds therewith: and again beat the said Almonds and so often
beat and strain them with more of the said liquor or water till all the
substance of them be in the decoction which will be in the form of an Almond
milk, then add rose water ij. spoonfuls, and as much sugar as to sweeten the
said drink, give the Patient thereof to drink so often as he please.

Gluttony a cause of the Flux.
Let such as fear the flix not overgorge themselves, for the evercharging and
straining of the stomach of^ brings this sickness, chiefly when the body is
weak, as also if the food taken be crude or not well boiled or roasted, and
merely fresh without any Salt. Also the use of eating Tamarindes brought from
Bantham if you use them overmuch by their acrimony may easily cause a flux,
although their virtues in preserving from the Scurvy, are unreproveable and
very good indeed.

The signs of the places aff^cted with the Flux.
The higher toward the stomach the disease has his beginning the more
dangerous it may be adjudged. By the complaint of the sick you shall know
partly in what part of the body the disease is, though not always: if the
small guts be in the fault there is always great pain about the navil, but if
it be in the gut Duodenum colon, or rectum, then the chief pain is in the lower
parts of the belly, according to their places.

The causes of the Flux with the signs of death.
This disease proceeds sometimes by Apostumation of the small guts, and then
it is exceeding painful before it come to a Flux, neither can any anodine
glyster prevail at all to give ease till the full suppuration of the guts be
perfected, and that the Apostume be br^ken.

If this disease proceed from a former great obstruction either of the liver,
of the lungs, or the speen, there is small hope of life to be had.

Also when convulsions of the sinews, singultas, and vomitting, or any one of
these signs, especially the two first appear, then commonly death is at hand.

One learned Writer rehearsing Hippocrates for his Author, says, that usually
before death in this disease a black or bluish spot will appear behind the
left ear of the sick, which I also have seen observing it of late: you shall
find Plantane water to be a very good liquor to give any dry medicine in for
the flux, especially where there is any complaint of Plantane water, and seeds,
and roots, are very good for the flux.
heat, or excoriation, Plantane seeds are also good, and so is a decoction of
the roots of Plantane very good for that use, or for glysters where it may be
had. The purging medicines which are called Diauretick, or that provoke urine
are also praised by Writers: but I leave them to be done with great judgment,
only if you use any medicine to cause urine, the powder of yellow Amber is a
sure one, and without any manifest hot or offensive quality, so is the powder
of the Seahorse peezel and the morse tooth, of any of which if you give j. for
one dose you may safely do it, but is sufficient at once Oil of Terbinthine and
of Amber are good diau^^tick medicines, and much more fotceable then the
former, but not so fit in this disease but rather good to drive gravel from the
kidneys, and serve well touching the The giving of vomits require great care
and a good judgment.
cure of many cold and slothful diseases, as the Dropsy, Scurvy, Lethargy, and
the like. A vomitive medicine is not amiss in Fluxes whilst the party has
strength, but the young Artist may easily make an error, small in show, which
notwithstanding may quickly cost a man his life, wherefore if he attempt in
such eases to cause vomit; as one principle let him have care to the true dose
of his medicines; but first let us have good confideration, whether it be
convenient to use any such medicine, or no, for where easier medicines will
cure, never attempt greater; but mistake me not, I speak these things of love
only to children in Art, and not to grave Artists, from whom I would gladly
learn my self. Further, I advise the younger Artists not to strive to stay a
Flux, as is said in a full body, till nature be first unburthened, partly by
the disease, and partly by medicines fit.

But as concerning Phlebotomy rehearsed as necessary in the cure of this
disease, do it not without great discretion, and judgment; for the Patient
weakened formerly with so terrible a sickness, and his spirits spent bleeding
by a vein, not advisedly done may suddenly overthrow and kill him, yet again I
must confess that rule holds not generally.

CERTAIN SIGNS, PROGNOstications, and instructions which I hope will not be
unprofitable for YOUTH concerning Fluxes
The signs preceding the flux.
THe Signs of the disease are always manifest of themselves, the signs,
afore-running or demonstrating of the instant disease are these following: Pain
and torture of the intestines, or ventricle. Galen testifies cap. 2. locorum
affectorum, in the very beginning of a Flux, says he, sharp choler is sent
forth, wringings, and as it were offscouring, or off-shavings of the
intestines appear, then after there follows a little blood, and then
begins the disease Dysentery, and by the relation of the Patient it will
often appear if the pain be above or below the Navil. A painful slow expulsion
of the excrements of the belly with small fragments bloody and fatty do argue
the higher intestines to be affected, but if the grief be lower, a pain below
the The excrements in fragments and fat therewith.
Navil shall torment the Patient, then you shall see much fatness with
fragments, and those fragments of the lower intestines will be more gross and
less mingled with the excrements. A Dysentery slaying popularly and killing
many, may be adjudged contagious, and is thought to follow a pestilential
constitution, and if in the times of a general infection by the disease
Dysentery, or Lientery, a white Flux called Diarrhaea with Tenasmus appear in
the Patient, that party a little after shall be afflicted with the Dysentery.
The Ulcers of of the small intestines are more dangerous then the ulcers ofthe
greater.

Difficulty of the intestines, if it proceed from a black choler is held
mortal: Aph. 24. Sect. 4.

Mortal signs in the Dysentery.
Long difficulties of the intestines, hunger and weariness are evil signs,
and it is so much the worse if it be with a fever: ^ph. 3. Sect. 6.

Every Flux especially if it be Dysenterial, happening after a long sickness
is mortal, but chiefly if it be sudden, because it argues a sudden corruption
of humors and great debility.

A Flux drawing to a languishing dropfie is mortal.

If in a Dysenteria a blew blew spot appear behind the ear, the Patient shall
dye,

The Fluxes that are from the beginning waterish, and afterward like an
unguent, are evil.

In all Fluxes of the belly, and in all other diseases, of weakness of the
appetite, inconstancy of the mind, heaviness in sleep, imbecility of the
legs, a hoarse and barking voice, a weak pulse, beating often, pains over the
whole body, chiefly about the belly, blackness of the face, or of a deadly or
leady color, and coldness in all the extreme parts: theseafore-said signs
foretell evil, but the signs contrary to these aforesaid are healthful.

The Hicket after an immoderate flux of the belly is mortal.

A good sign.
Belching following a Flux of the belly is good, because it is a sign that
nature has received, or again begun concoction.

A bad sign.
A flux of the belly which is not appeased by fit remedies, is pernicious.

A pestilent flux of the belly beginning with lienteria Dearrheae, or Tenasmus
is worse in children then in ancient men, as experience teaches.

If that by the difficulty of the Intestines, the excrements come forth like
pieces of flesh, it is a deadly sign, Aph. 26. Sect. 4.

Another good sign.
In fluxes of the belly, changes of the excrements is a principal good sign,
unless the change be made worser, Aph. 14. Sect. 2.

In perturbations of the belly and voluntary vomiting, if such things are
purged thereby that ought to be purged, it is good: but otherwise the contrary,
Aph. 25. Sect. Aph. 3, Sect. 4.

A Dysentery which proceeds from yellow choler is not altogether mortal, as
Galen affirms in his second book of natural faculties that General rules for
the cure of the flux.
many are cured of it. Lientery after Dysentery is mortal: these Canons
following belong to the particular cure of any flux of the belly.





Dysentery, let astringent things be given before other meats, that they may
the better be retained.







Avicene applied four hours to the belly stay the fluxes of the belly.

Avicene are to be avoided in fluxes of the belly, notwithstanding Chestnuts
hurt not, as the same Author affirms.



Touching the particular cure, if the disease come of a hot cause, let there be
a lentive glyster administered before the fourth day, which is this. Aqua hordei
xij. Mellis rosati ij. mingle it, and let it be made a Glyster, twice
reiterating it afterward, let the choleric matter be purged thus:. Rosarum
ru^earum violarum, ^. ^. ^. let them boil A glyste
only one walme, and in the straining, infuse them the space of six hours,
then add these things:. Corti^es mir^bal: cit. j. tragac. ij. A Purge.
strain the medicine, and let it be so given: notwithstanding warily, for
indeed many of our ancients did abstain altogether from purging medicines in
fluxes: whereupon Avicene 41, capite 3. says, that it is dangerous to loose
the belly upon a former looseness.

If the matter be sanguine, and the sick of reasonable strength, you may let
the lower vein be opened, to repress the acrimony of the humor, to pluck back
and cool the boiling of the liver, witness Avicena 4 ^rimi chap. 20.
Phlebotomy does bind the belly very much, and amongst many is held for a great
secret: for a certain man of 70. years of age laboring with the Dysenterie the
space of a month, when no other means would help, him he was cured by letting
of blood, yet I confess my self should not easily do the like.

If the excrements begin to grow thicker, and the gripings begin to cease, the
token is good: if in the excrements scraping as it were of the guts seem to
appear, it is no token of death.

I read that the ancients used caustic Glysters of Arsenicum, aes vestum,
Alumen and Calx vivum, but these later Pysitians use rather astringent and
narcotick medicines as these, Cortices Th^ris, Masti^ts Boli Armeniae
Sarcocollae, and the like.

The'ulcers of the small guts are worse to receive healing then those of the
great guts, for the greater are fleshie, and therefore they receive
consolidation so much the easier. The ulcers of Jejunum, or the hungry gut are
of all the worst, because it is smaller then the other, and because sharp
choler does suddenly happen into it, i^ has more veins in it then the rest,
and is next to that noble part the liver, and further one reason of doubt is,
for that medicines taken to bind and consolidate, cannot long remain therein.

In the Dysentery what must be refused.
In the Tenasmus and the Dysentery coming after it, the patient must abstain
from all sharp, salt, and bitter things; because by using of such things, the
excrements become sharp, and cause excoriation.

Hot things restrain the flux of the belly because they, make the meat digest,
penetrate, cause urine, and provoke sweat, which is found in the drinking
moderately of pure wine, as Avic^ne witnesses, besides that, it provokes sleep
and helps digestion, notwithstanding it is to be abstained from in fevers, and
when the flux proceeds from hot and choleric humors.

A Dysentery proceeding from obstructions will never be cured with Astringent
medicines, but rather with penetrating medicines, by adding a little vinegar
which opens more forcibly then wine, and mollisieth obstructions: for if
Astringent medicines be mingled with de^icatives, they increase the obstruction.

Although some say that in the Lienteria the meat taken in does come forth in
the same color and quantity as it was when it was taken in: this
notwithstanding is to be understood that the form and color of it is of
necessity changed, but it does not wholly alter it, for they are altered
somewhat according to the majus and minus, because it is an impossible thing
that the nourishment being conveyed through so many intestines, should come
forth without any alteration at all.

There are some also which judge the Dysenteria and the Tenasmus by motion of
the pulse, that the patient has a fever if the pulse be moved swift; yet it
seems to me the contrary, although there is an over heating or boiling in the
blood by reason of the hot humors, the great motion of the body, want of sleep
and abstinence: yet with the flux only stayed, the fever has an end.

It is formerly said that the ulcers of the great intestines are to be cured
with Glysters, and the ulcers of the small intestines to be cured with
medicines taken at the mouth: notwithstanding it profits to take fit
medicines at the mouth for ulcers of the great intestines, and Remedies for
Vices in the intestines.
in ulcers of the small guts to inject glysters, which sometimes ascend to both
the ventricles, as experience teaches: and so also are ulcers in the great
guts sometimes cured by medicines taken at the mouth; wherefore let no
convenient helps be omitted in case of necessity.

And though Avicena says, it is dangerous to purge the belly upon a looseness
thereof, yet the same Avicena, Gerardus, Cremo, Serapio, Jordanus, de Turra and
other later Physicians of ^ound judgment prescribe in the cure of fluxes
Purgative medicines; therefore they appoint things according to the patients
strength, when a Dysenteria Galen s rule if the Dysenteria proceed from humors.
proceeds of mauy humors; or having and ill quality, the cure as Galen
witnesses, has one chief and most common intention, to that which is contrary
to the disposition to be taken away; Therefore let there be given Myrabolans,
which in this case are most excellent, for they correct the acrimony of the
humors, and strengthen the ventricle, and the intestines; in want whereof
Rubarb may be as well given, being dried a little. But if the flux be
pestilential, let the matter be purged presently by sweating, as is said, not
respecting the concoction of humors.

Of Laudanum, Opiat Paracelsi, and the Virtues thereof.
THere are many diseases which can hardly be cured without Anodine medicines,
therefore in the Cure of such diseases, I mean where want of rest through
extreme pain or other, the great disquiet of nature does foretell an imminent
danger of death, if rest be not speedily procured, in all such cases Anodine
medicines may doubtless with great reason and good warrant be inwardly given.
To procure therefore safe and quiet rest, shows great skill in the Artist,
and to the Patient is more precious in his grievous infirmity then much
treasure, but in no one infirmity have such medicine more showed their
admirable virtues, then that noble medicine The chief virtue of Laudanum.
called Laudanum Opiat Paracelsi has done in the cure of that lamentable
disease called Dysenterie, or the bloody Flux, as witnesses diverse of our
Nation coming from the East Indies upon good proof, as also being no less
approved of, not only by ancient and modern Writers, but by every expert
Surgeon coming from those countries of their own, too many experiences
thereof have been made.

The virtues of this precious Anodine to be, I mean here recited, as they are
noted and set down very learnedly by that famous Writer Oswaldus Crollius, late
Physician to Matthias the third Emperor of Ozwaldus (...) Crossi^e (...) of
the virtues of Laudanum.
Germany in his book called Bazilica Chymica, and not by him only, but also by
diverse good Authors of credit, which have written of the same medicine before,
which virtues being very many, may seem almost incredible, though many of them
my self am witness of to be true, out of my daily practice only; they are
meant by the true composition, according as Theophrastus Paracelsus has
prescribed it, and is the same composition which the said Writer mentions.

Touching the virtues of the Medicine.
Ozwaldus concerning Laudanum.
THis Laudable medicine (says Ozwaldus Crollius) deserves rightly his name,
although thou call it Laudanum, for in all sharp pains whatsoever hot or cold
within the body or without the body, yea, even when through extreamitie of
pain, the parties are at deaths door, or almost mad with the vehemency of the
same, this precious medicine gives ease presently, yea and quiet sleep, and
that Laudanum more effic^cious if the body be soluble.
safely, but much better the body being first soluble, either by nature or Art,
and you may give it safely, provoking first only one stool^ by a suppositorie,
or a glister were better: in the colic with Mintwater, it eases the gripings
forthwith. In the pains and gravel of the kidneys, likewise it gives present
ease. In the plurisie it presently and safely gives ease. In pains of the
joints it is very good. In the staying of rheumes, as toothache and other
like defluxions in the beginnings, it is a singular good medicine, as namely in
the toothache, dissolve four grains thereof in Plantane water, and put it
into the ear on the aching side, and take three grains into the body, and lie
to rest, it is a sure help. In all fluxes of the belly, whether they proceed of
sharp or slipperie humors, or whatsoever else offending cause taken with
mastick, Terra Sigillata, fine Bole, or with any other appropriate good
medicine, it is exceeding sure, for it fortifieth the other medicines, and
doubleth their forces, adding his own also thereto. In extreme watchings and
want of rest, either inwardly or outwardly taken, it is profitable if outwardly
you would use it, take four or six grains, with three drops of oil of
Nutmeggs, which is pressed out mixed together, and bind it in two little
clouts, and put it into the nostrils, it will marvellously assuage pains in the
head, and cause quiet rest. In the extreme bleedings of the nose called
Hemoragie, it is an approved secret, that sixteen grains thereof divided into
two pills, and thrust up into the nostrils, into each nostril one part, helps
the same. In all kinds of Fevers it is good to be given with water of
Wormwood, or pill-wise alone, and if the heat remain after six hours, you
may give it the second time, and after that again in like time safely, not
exceeding the dose: yet let your own experience lead you, that where you see
three grains will not cause rest, in the next potion you give one grain more,
and so increase paulatim, but increase not but upon good deliberation.

In burning Fevers it asswageth thirst, and provokes sleep chiefly in those
Fevers, in which the party seems to have some show of rest, with tedious
dreams and slumbrings mixed.

In the disease called Asthma, and in the Tysick, if it be used in water of
Hyssope, it will preserve the diseased Patient a long time.

It conserveth the natural heat, strengthens the spirits, repaireth strength
lost: It is also effectual to be given to melancholy people which are void of
reason, and are troubled with the passions of the heart. It is likewise used
with good effect against vomiting, and the Hickcock proceeding of wind,
faintness, or debilitie of the Ventricle.

In the superfluous defluxions of the excremental or menstrual blood, it is an
excellent remedy with Crocus Martis, or red coral.

In phrensies and madness, both in wardly and outwardly it is good mixed with
Aqua vitae, and the temples anointed therewith.

In the falling sickness with spirit of Vitriol, or the quintessence of
Camphire, with also oil of Almonds, it is usually taken. The dose of this
opiate medicine, is two, or three, or four grains, if there be loosnesse of
the belly, as is rehearsed, it works much the better. Note that in some parts
of the world this medicine in the mentioned dose will do no ease, wherefore
when you find that by experience, in the next Patient give more, but not to
the same Patient without great reason. It is best given in any occasion
accompanied with waters or The best way to administer it.
other medicines which are most appropriate to the diseases, land parts
diseased, and yet may very well be given alone in a pill, which I willingly do,
for that the Patient then is least troubled with the taste thereof.

A caution remarkable.
But beware you use not this medicine to any, which are feeble through a great
cough being oppressed with tough phlegm and shortness of breath, for there it
is not good: if the disease be violent, as I have said, one dose may be given
after another, with six hours at the least distance, very safely, but Ozwaldus
Crollius says, within four hours, as is said in the Cure of Dysentery.

The cause of this description of Laudanum.
In a word this Laudanum passes all other medicines in the cure of Dysentery,
for which cause I have published it to the benefit of the younger fort of
Chirurgions, which adventure their lives toward the East Indies; I know it is
presumption in my self and deserves blame, that I should handle medicines of
this nature so copiously, for which I crave pardon from that grave and learned
Society of Physicians of London, whom of right I ought to reverence and do:
excusing my self that I have done it merely for the benefit of young
Sea-Chirurgions in the remote parts of the world, where they otherwise have
used Opium in common, without understanding the danger or dose thereof, to the
loss of many men's lives. It behooves young men to be careful to carry with
them such balance, as the beam will turn at one half of a grain, with weights
and grains fitting, and to keep them warily and always ready at hand for all
occasions, for he is an unworthy Surgeon, which is at any*time unready with
such needful instruments. This Laudanum I esteem so sufficient a medicine
truly Not^*
prepared in all causes, where an ^piat medicine is required, that if I were
upon my life to morrow to undertake a Voyage to the East Indies in any great
Ship, I would renounce all other compositions of that kind whatsoever, rather
then miss it: yet am I not ignorant of diverse other good compositions of Opiat
medicines in daily use, as namely Philonium Persicum Romanum, nit. and mes
Roman sen Tarcenci, Athanasicamagna, Aurea ^lexandrina, Trifera magna nic.
Diacodion, Diascordion Laudanum excels all other Opiats.
and many more: before all which I only would take the true Laudanum Opiat
Paracelsi, for when the rest had fully fermented at Sea, and were void of all
their supposed virtues, which their preparers had challenged them to have had,
yea and had been turned to crawling Animals* even then and twenty years after
their deaths, may any man r^lie upon the foresaid Laudanum, as a true medicine,
which medicine notwithstanding, I know it is unpossible for the Chirurgions
Because of his duration.
Mate to prepare at Sea, yet for that he should be the better satisfied, when
he has occasion to use it, I thought it not a miss to set down the
ingredients, with also the true form of the preparation thereof, his verbis out
of Ozwaldus Crollius being one of the best I ever found or read.

Laudanum Paracelsi Laudatissimum, and the true preparation thereof.
. Opii Thebaici uncias i^es. Succi Hyoscyami debito tempore collecti, and in
Sole prius inspissati unciam unam and sem specierum Diambrae and Diamos^hi,
fideliter dispensatarum ana uncias duaes cum dimidio mummiae transmarinae and
selectae unciam sem. Salis perlarum. Gorallorum ana dram. iij. Liquoris
Succini Albi per Alcohol Vini extracti. Ossis de cord Cervi ana drachmam j.
Lapidis B^zoartici. Unicorni animalis vel mineralis drachmam unam. Moschi.
Ambrae ana scrupulum J. In defectu genuini auri potabilis nullis corrosivis
inquinati addantur, Oleorum Anisi. Carui. Arantiorum. Citrorum. Nu^istae.
Cariophyllorum. Cinamomi. Succini ana guttae 12.
Fiat ex his secundum artem Chymicam, massa, sen extractum, ex que a^
necessarios usus, possint pillulae efformari.
Observations in the preparation of this Medicine.
The time of gathering them
The roots and rindes of the younger Hemlock, casting away the inward woody
part thereof: the time of the gathering thereof is the Summer, the Moon being
in the sign Aries or Libra, and before the full of the Moon, and if it might
be done it were best to be gathered in the very hour the Moon is entered into
one of the said signs: The preparing of the juice expressed.
this observed, let the juice thereof be pressed out, and filtered, and
coagulated, then set in the Sun to harden, which done, extract the tincture
thereof per spiritum vini: the Opium ought o be purged in some distilled water,
as of Hyssope or the like, as Aloes is used to be purged, and after, the
tincture thereof to be extracted per spiritum The preparation of the Species
Diambrae.
vini, the tincture of the Species Diambrae is to be extracted also per
spiritum vini.

The juice of Hioscyami, or Henbane with the extract of Opium mingled, together
with the spirit of wine, whereinto they are extracted before, is to be
evaporated from them ere that they be mixed with the rest of the ingrediences.
Also the opium and juice of Henbane must be digested in Chemical manner for a
month at the least, that thereby their sulphurous, venomous, and dangerous
vapors they have may be well corrected, which vapors have a yellowish froth
or scumme seen in the superficial parts of them, and are very obnoxious and
dangerous, which I thought not amiss to advise the studious and industrious
Chemist of.

A special observation.
Let all the extractions be done in the true spirit of wine well rectified, and
then the longer the extract remains in the digestion, the better will be your
medicine.

He that intends any part of this composition for women, must forbear the
musk and ambergris, and use with it rather four grains of good castoreum, I
mean in that one dose he intends to give A dig^ession.
the women; but in this I digress from my scope of the Sea practice, where
women in long voiages are rare creatures. Wherefore to the business in hand:
the feces of the opium hioscyami, specierum ambrae, etc. after their tinctures
are extracted from them, are to be calcined and Extraction.
brought into salt, namely by infusion in some fitting liquor, after
calcination, with all due filteration, evaporation, and coagulation with
Calcination.
Cohobs convenient, and add to the rest of the composition.

And concerning the tinctures mentioned to be extracted in spiritu vini, after
one month digestions the spiritus vini is by balneum mariae to be evaporated
till the residence be almost of the thickness of honey: Evaperation.
which done and gathered clean into one convenient glass, porringer, or the
like instrument, then add the salt corallorum, perlarum Mummia beaten fine,
and also the Bezar, and the cornu cervi, muscus and ambra, The manner to fiuish
the composition.
all in fine powder, and well mixed with the said extracts, then add the
aforelaid salts of the recited feces, and also the former recited oiles, all of
them first mixed together with the Liquorice and Succini shaken well together
in a glasse-violl with a few drops of spiritus vini, for that the said spirit
of wine causes the recited oiles well to incorporate, which done, and that
they are mixed all in one and added to the former, the Laudanum is ready,
only if you could forbear your Medicine so long that it might afterward stand
in a small Alimbeck of glass, with a blind head one month, it would be much
the better.

To compose this Opiate aright is b^rd to a Bungler.
This Medicine though it would put many that profess much knowledge in the Art
of the Apothecarie to their trumps truly to prepare it, yet to an artist which
is a true preparer of Medicines it is plain and pleasant to be done, and once
done, it is for his whole life a sure medicine, and will do the work-master
credit that uses it.

I have the rather explained this medicine for that so many gross and
dangerous compositions are daily hatched up, and uttered abroad for current
under the name of Laudanum Paracelsi opiati, to the extreme hazard of the lives
of very many, and to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth, from the danger
whereof God deliver each honest Christian. And for that the younger sort of
Artists should not easily be deceived with false compositions, though I confess
it is Marks to discern the false from the true Laudanum.
not possible to epsy some cunning deceits which may pass in far plainer
compositions then this is, yet take these few notes following when you would
buy it, for remembrances. First note, that the medicine is false, if it be
uneven, I mean if it have any course or gross thing in it, so that it will not
all clearly dissolve as a juice of Liquorice well made will.

Notes of the true Laudanum.
For this is an infallible rule, extracts are the pure parts of things, and
will wholly dissolve, or be dissolved. Further note, that if either honey or
sugar be found in the medicine, it is false.

Also if it be more liquid then the ordinary bals of Liquorice made up in
London, it is false or foolishly made, and will not keep.

Also if it retain the loathsome smell of Opium, it is not to be trusted.

Also if it be not merely of one color, so that you see nothing of the
ingredients appear at all, it cannot be good.

For assure thy self this composition truly made must be smooth, and well
smelling, of such an indifferent hardness, that without additions you may
roll it into pills, and is not greatly ponderous or heavy, but it is of an
unpleasant taste, I must tell thee, and therefore I use to give it, as I have
said, in a pill, except necessity by weakness of the Patient when he cannot
swallow a pill, urge the contrary, or that I use it in outward griefs, as to
othache, etc.

Iliaca Passio.
ILion, or Iliaca Passio is a most painful disease, proceeding from an A
fearful vi^^^ation.
obstruction of the small guts, which suffering nothing to pass downwards
causes a great wringing and pain, so that many which are oppressed with this
dis^ase do perish, and die a very miserable death, ending their days, with
their feces, or their own excrements issuing out at their mouths, and it is
many times noted for a disease infectious.

Iliaca and Colica differ in place.
This woeful kind of belly-ache or Iliaca Passio, differs from the Colic in
the situation, in that it has his place and being in the small guts, and the
chollicke only in the great guts, so that a vomit sometimes gives ease
herein; but glisters seldom or never give any help, for that seldom any thing
will be brought forth downwards though the glisters, be never so strong: but
herein the help that is to be hoped for by glisters is far better effected by
the glister Siringe, then by the glister bag, for one may deliver it with that
Instrument with as great force as you please.

Causes.
THe causes of this disease are almost one with the Chollick, both which are
obstructions in the small or great guts, and proceed chiefly of three causes,
as says Dominic^^ L^^* namely

1 The dryness of the ordure, or excrements.

2 Abscessus, or a b^le, or a botch in the guts.

3 Thick and dry humors.

Also this disease sometimes comes by distemperature of the air being very
cold, also by a blow or bruise upon the gut ^lion, the inward causes may be
very many, namely by drinking of poison, or cold water, meats of hard
digestion, binding of the belly, and such like.

Signs or tokens.
THe signs or tokens whereby this disease is known, are as Galen affirms, 7.
Aphoris. 19. is an intolerable pain and wringing in the upper part of the guts,
and no excrements descending downward. Sometimes it moves heavy and sore
vomits, so that the very feces are vomited upward, of which disease or grief
scarce any in that kind do escape, as Galen witnesses, lib. 6. cap. 2. I have
seen the like in a A fearful vomiting.
Rupture by reason of a part of the gut Ilion that was fallen through the
Peritoneum into Scrotum that could not be reduced, the sick vomited his
excrements, and died the second day. Also much watching sometimes causes great
pain in the small guts or Ilion, unrest, strong Note.
Convulsions, cold in the extreme parts, and if any feces be gotten forth of
the fundament by any means they being put into water will swim aloft. Item if
this grief come of poison drunk, then the Patient will suffer Tremor Cordis,
soundings, debilitie of the faculties of the body and vomit, do commonly go
before the pangs, and all these aforesaid signs are usually more vehement and
stronger then in the Colic.

Prognostica.
When the Iliack comes with distilling or dropping of urine, the party dies
within seven days, Galen aphoris. 44. except an Ague happen, so that in the
mean time sufficient quantity of urine do come.

Item, vomit, the Hicket, foolishness or idle convulsions are evil^ signs,
Avicen upon the 7. aphor. 10.

A deadly sign.
The vomiting upward of the excrements, deadly, yet young folks escape in this
disease sooner then old folks.

A good sign.
The Ilion, where the pain does change from place to place, is of least danger:
because it depends or proceeds of wind, which is easily rosolved.

Another.
The breaking of wind upwards or downwards, and stinking much is evil and
deadly: as also the excrements much stinking is the like.

Cure.
Promise n^ cure.
IN the cure of this disease no Physician or Surgeon, respecting his credit,
will take upon him absolutely the cure thereof, especially if the Scurvie be
confirmed in the patient, but with protestation of death if the Patient do
vomit the feces or excrements upward, but if the Promise no cure.
Scurvie be not yet confirmed in the Patient, then the cure of this disease
differs little from the cure of the Colic, and may be indifferently used,
and is all one, but that only the stronger medicines, and greater diligence is
to be used in the Iliack, then in the Colic: which if it were on shore or
land, much more good might be expected, Observations.
where air, diet, place, and many other helps, observations, and
considerations according to the quality of the disease, with advice also of
the learned Physicians observed, all which the Sea affords not.

Certain brief and speedy notes for the Chirurgions Mate at his need, when
neither Doctor, Surgeon, nor Apothecarie is to be had.
Iliaca of poison.
FIrst, if the disease come of poison exhausted, a vomit with warm water and
then warm oil, or some fat broth is to be administered, and after a day or two
some good treakle to be used.

If the cause come of crude meats remaining in the stomach, or that the disease
come of crude and raw meats, a vomit is to be used.

But if there be no crude meats yet remaining in the stomach, then all means
must be used to disperse the wind, and to draw the excrements Of potions and
glisters.
downward, either by potions, glisters or such like: and first with glisters to
supple the guts, and to evacuate the obstructions of the lower parts: make
therefore a glister of common oil, or Linseed oil, and give him, or a
decoction of March-mallow roots, Comfrey roots, Linseeds and Fenigreek, adding
Bay Berries and oil of Dill, and Pulvis Arthreticus, or species Hierae Pigrae
j, give this glister with the great Siringe, and put it up with good force,
remembering to add salt, one small spoonful thereto. Also you may use
Suppositories and all other helps which are proper in the cure of the Colic,
or a mixture of honey and salt Peter, or Niter to anoint the fundament
therewith, and use foments with spunges, etc. as in the Fomentations.
Colic. Also Phlebotomy may be used, especially in young men, and that in
Summer, or warm Countries, and namely, where the disease comes of an Apostume,
or botch: Purging potions are also good, as Pulvis Arthreticus j, in wine or
beer, or Aquilla Laxativa 12. grains in a pill or in beer dissolved.
Moreover, Resolution of the matter is to be made with foments, with cloth or
woollen stupes wet in oil, wherein Dill, Camomill, Rue, Hollyhocks, etc. have
been boiled, and applied very warm. Also Cataplasmes made of Barley-meale,
Cummin, Rue, Linseed, Fenigreek, Dill-seeds, Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds,
Bayberries, and the like, are very convenient.

Cataplasmes.
Also the Patient is to sit in a Bath made of oil and water, wherein are
boiled Camomil, Mellilot, Dill, Althea, or Hollyhock, Rue, Bayberries and the
like, all these are good helps.

A strange medicine.
Nota S^ercus L^pinum is a remedy in the Iliaca passio, even as album Gracum
is in the angina.

Also old Treacle and Mithridate are good helps for those which cannot hold
their meat, and you must give them to drink the powder of Thus or Frankensence,
and Cumminseeds in warm oxymel.

To conclude these brief notes, I wish the young artist in this miserable
disease, to try by strong glysters and purges and every other good means which
is warrantable, and not strictly to rest upon these short instructions, in
cases difficult and dangerous.

Collica passio.
The pain described.
COllica passio is called in English the Colic, and it is called a passion,
because the pain therefore is so great and vehement, that many times the
patient desires rather to die then to live in that vehement pain. This disease
has his name of a gut called Colon, and happens very often when the
excrements are retained beyond their natural times and customs.

How it happens.
This infirmity is engendered of ventorsitie, or wind in the gut Colon, and
cannot get out, sometimes it proceeds of colerick humors, and untemperate
heat which dries up excrements, and hinders the due evacuation: also it
comes sometimes of cold and dry distemperatures with increase of fatness,
making strict the passages of evacuation of the excrements, and weakneth the
expulsive faculties. Also this pain proceeds sometimes from the humors of
the stomach, gathering wind from the liver and milt, sometimes from the reins
of such as have the stone. Also from an Apostume in the womb, and sometimes it
proceeds from all the parts of the whole body of man, as in fevers, where the
humors are expelled from the veins to the guts, and proceeds of hot and dry,
or cold and dry distemperatures but never of moist, as says Dom. Leo.

Signs.
Vomiting a sign.
THe signs or tokens of this passion are both general and special. General
signs are vomiting, lothing of meats, great pain, retention of the excrements,
unrest, grief or pain in the forepart of Costivenesse a sign.
the belly, constipation so great, that it will go neither upward nor downward.

The special or proper accidents that do always accompany the Colic are
continual thirst, vomiting of choler, watchings, by loose Continual thirst.
or choleric, excrements, a straining or wringing pain, though not long
enduring, and young persons in the Summer are most subject to a loose colic:
but the tokens or signs of the state of a cold body in old age, are
slothfulness and laziness, much desire after gross and cold meats, rawnesse
Nausea, or quesinesse of the stomach, ready to cast, but cannot, Pituositie or
slimie vomits, little thirst, the pain more remiss but longer continuing.
Rumbling of the belly, desiring Beware of cold drink.
to drink cold water, or small drink. Longing after all manner of fruits, and
white meats. The pain changing from place to place, and the feces to swim
being put in water and very many such like signs too tedious to trouble the
Chirurgions mate withal at Authority.
this time. Avicenna says, that amongst outward signs of this disease, if the
patient sick of the Colic have certain small whelks or pushes arising upon
his belly, about the bigness of a bean, ulcerating and continuing above two
days, it is a sign the patient will die of the disease: Also when the
Chollick does not give place to Glysters, Foments, Motions Cataplasmes, and
such like good remedies: you 2. Authority.
may then with Galen 12. Methodi Medendi, judge that biting humors do possess
the tunicles of the guts, but if the disease yield or give way thereto, then
the matter of the disease is contained in the cavity or hollownesse of the guts.

The Colic still continuing with vomiting, cold sweats, often sobbing or the
hicket, and not giving way to remedies administered, is deadly.

A pestilentiall Colic, or contagious Colic, does almost always kill.

A Colic with feces voyding slimy substances, though an Apostume be in the
greatest guts, yet it is curable.

The Colic proceeding of wind is easily cured. An easy or good breathing,
or taking breath is a good sign in the patient that he may be cured, but
difficult breathing shows the contrary.

The Cure.
Method of the cure.
THe manner of curing the Colic is effected by renewing and taking away the
cause, and then the pain vanishes: But to remove the cause, many things are
to be put in practice; as preparing the humors by evacuation, remission and
resolution, all which require some long time, and therefore other means are
first to be used to take away the pain, or at least to mitigate the same with
Anodines first.
Anodine medicines, and the due application of convenient helps of warm and
moist temperatures, which not helping, you must again Necrotical medicines if
need.
have recourse to Necroticall and Stupifying things, which indeed are not to be
used, but in great extremities to give the patient some present ease.

Anodine medicines are to be adminstred so well inwardly as outwardly; as first
inwardly, namely in glysters consisting of moist and fat substance, as the
decoction of Camomill, Dill, Linseed, Mellilot, Mallows, Hollihock, Fenigreek,
Bayberies, or some of these, with one ounce of the new extract of Cassia, and
some sugar, with Linseed oil and butter administered. Outwardly, these are to
be applied, either Unctions, Cataplasmes, Fomentations, Baths, or some such
like convenient medicines, as time and place best fitteth.

But if these should not help, then in great extremities, you are to fly yet
again to Necroticall or stupifying medicines, as namely Landanum Paracelsi,
which exceeds all Necroticis: or Philonium Romanum is also a good medicine;
these are only to be used in causes proceeding of heat, and never of cold
causes; for in cold causes that were rather to confirm the disease, and yet in
the judging whether the cause be hot or cold, sometimes a good Artist deceives
himself. If the Colic come of wind, then you must apply warm resolving
medicines, I mean dissolving and dispersing medicines.

Notes to be considered of by the Surgeon in the beginning tf the Cure of
the Colic.
A caveat.
and turned into excrement, no loosing medicines are to be administered, but
rather a small and spare diet, and in the beginning to begin with mollifying
glysters, and then afterward to proceed with more sharp and stronger. But
before all things, if the Patient have a full stomach, and withal queasie,
after a glyster, then a vomit is principally Glysters and vomits.
to be administered.



Agarick is to be used in any of your medicines for the Colic, because that
cleaves to the guts, and most brings terrible pain and tortions, yet
Stokinus a learned Germane Writer, does Beware of Agaricum.
highly extol the same to be put in Glysters to give it present ease.

A caveat.
overmuch heat of the ointments, cataplasms, and fomentations which are
usually applied to the parts agrieved.

A second caveat.
especially, if the Colic proceed of the dry feces; for thereby they be the
more dried*



Specifical remedies.
Specifical things that cure the colic are very many, as horse-dung drunk in
wine, hares-dung or hen-dung drunk in Oxicratium, where such may be had. Also
the powder of Hartshorn, corral, cockel-shels burnt, or swines hoofs burnt or
Calcined till they be white, and such like, according to the diversity of the
causes. Further in the particular cures of this disease, there are very many
things observed by the learned Physicians, according to the diversity of the
causes, which were too much to trouble the Chirurgions Mate withal at this
present as the air, diet, and diverse other good helps to the cure of this
grief, which cannot be observed at sea, only fish and water-fouls are to be
avoided as much as may be.

The Cure.
To cure the Colic which comes by means of the feces remaining, and being
dried up, which happens most commonly at the sea in long voyages, and
especially in hot countries: there are three sundry intentions to be observed.

The first, to mollify the feces, and supple the guts.

Secondly, in Evacuating, to discharge the belly.

Thirdly, to remove or take away the cause of exsiccation, or drying up of the
feces or excrements.

The first is performed with glysters made of common oil or butter, with the
decoction of Mallows, Violets, Beets, etc, and by drinking oil of sweet
almonds, or a decoction of Polypodium.

The second thing which does bring forth the mollified feces or excrements is
Cassia fistula or Manna, or Diaphenicon, or Hiera, or sharp glysters.

The third intention curative, if it could be attained to at Sea, were to
remove first the external causes of the disease; as over-warm air, over-salted
dry meats, and small quantity of food, fasting, watching, melancholy, and the
like, inwardly to help the weakness of the expulsive faculty, with Treakle,
Mithridate, Conserva rosarum, or the like cordial helps, helping also the
expulsive faculty with glysters and such like good things: For further inward
remedies you may use the aforesaid glysters, or half a drachme or j. of Sulphur
vivum drunk in warm wine, and the belly well covered with warm clothes helps
somewhat.

Item, Carraway seeds made warm in wine, but not boiled therein, being drunk
helps.

Item, a glyster made of Soap and Honey is a present remedy.

Item, a bag stuffed with bran, and made very warm sprinkled a little with
vinegar, and applied to the belly is good.

Item, Goats milk, or other milk, boiled with honey, and applied to the belly
with a sponge, or cloth warm, in manner of a foment, heals the Colic, and
drives away worms, and cease the pain.

Item, the gall of a bullock, Salgem, Aloes, common oil, ana parts equales,
mingle them and make an ointment thereof, wherewith anoint the fundament
before the fire, that loses the belly, and brings forth the hard feces.

Tenasmus.
The definition of Tenasmus.
TEnasmus or Tenasmus, as Hippocrates calls in his sixth Aphorism and in the
seventh book, is a disease, of extention, or straining out of the right gut
called intestinum rectum, being oppilate or stopped, and of some English
writers it is called Costivenesse. This disease as Galen says in his second
book De methodo medendi, is when a man has an extraordinary provocation, lust
or desire, and a vehement straining to go to the stool, but cannot void any
thing at all, except sometimes some small quantity of slymy matter, which now
and then is mixed with blood or a bloody substance, and the extraordinary
desire of emptying or going to the stool ceasing.

The causes of Tenasmus outward and inward. Outward as Cold. Heat. Drought. A
corrupt asire. Bathing in cold w^ter. Necrotical ointments. Inwardly as salt
humors.
This disease preceedeth of diverse causes and accidents, both outwardly, and
inwardly.

Outwardly by cold, coming accidentally to the hinder parts, arsegut, as the
long sitting upon a cold stone, upon iron, a board, upon the cold ground, or
any hard thing, whereby the Sphincture or round muscle compassing the straight
gut is pressed or bruised. It comes also by intemperate heat, and drought, and
corruptnesse of the air and weather: sometimes by long bathing in cold water,
and sometimes by much using narcotial ointments, and such like. Also inwardly
this disease proceeds of salt biting humors abounding throughout the whole
body of man: also by means of some hot or cold impostume, or after a Dysentery
or Flux, whereas some choleric matter remains behind in the right-gut yet
unevacuated. And sometimes too happens here in our Country, as some English
Writers affirm, by little drinking of Beer or Ale, and sometimes it comes by
drinking Too much drinking of wine. Nature of Tenasmus.
too much wine, and by eating of costive meats, and superabundance of choler
adust. This disease is of the nature, or disposition of a Dysentery or Flux,
but that the Dysentery paineth the Patient with grievous tortions through all
the guts, but Tenasmus paineth the Patient usually in the right gut only, as
appears by Galen in his third book De causis Symptomat. And Trajanus in his
sixth Chapter, and Gal. de causis and sympt. lib. 3. Trajan. cap. 8. lib. 6.
The signs of Tenasmus.
eighth book, who affirms the same, saying, Tenasmus recti inte^tini est
effectus, etc. The signs and tokens of this disease are chiefly to be known by
the Patients relation of the temperature of the body, slender diet, and
egestions, whether it be hard or costive, or else thin or liquid.

The pain described.
In Tenasmus the pain does not ascend so high as the navel, but is chiefly felt
with heat, pricking, and burning with a desire of emptying in the end of the
sphincture, the excrements being of a yellowish color Another sign.
in young men (like their starching now adays) but in old persons the
excrements are of a more pituos, slimie and bloody substance.

If the disease proceed of an Impostume, the Patient will feel a continual
pain, and the more augmented and grievous when he goes to the stool.

Prognistica.
Tenasmus after a Dysentery is most hard to be cured.

Necessary observations.
Tenasmus in a woman with child causes oftentimes abortion, sobbing, vexing,
or the hickoke, and is very pernicious, and betokens much dryness.

Tenasmus long continuing, brings the Collica and Iliaca Passio: or Swoonding
and diseases of the head.

Tenasmus is not numbered amongst long nor sharp diseases, for that it is soon
cured; and if the Patient do eat and drink well, there is no danger.

The cure.
How to cure Tenasmus proceeding from cold.
Tenasmus is cured by taking away the causes thereof, from whence it does
proceed; as if it come by outward cold, then let there be applied to the Ose
pecken, and hippes warm, resolving fomentations and applications, as bags of
millium with salt, being roasted or fried, or sacks with bran sodden in wine, or
water, and so applied as hot as may be suffered, and the fundament and parts
anointed with oils of Rue, Lillies, Bays, Vnguentum martiatum, and such like:
Alexander in his sixth Chap. and eight book says, Tenasmus is cured with
foments of Fenigreek and the roots of Altheae, being boiled and injected into
the belly, and also the Patients hinder parts well suffumigated with the same
decoction, the Patient being compassed about close with clothes, and so set
over it, and then the fundament afterward anointed with oil of Roses, fresh
butter, or goose grease, with wax dissolved, Bears and Capons grease, and such
like.

Item, A fume of Frankencence and pitch, being cast upon burning coals, and
the Patient set close over the fume, helps presently.

Item, To give present ease to that pain, let two bags be filled with
wheaten-bran, and steeped in boiling vinegar, and the Patient to sit thereon so
hot as may be suffered, and to change them continually, as the one cools to
take another.

Note that in this disease of Tenasmus, no cold things are to be applied A
special instruction in administering a glyster for Tenasmus.
at all.

Item, such glysters as are used in this disease should not exceed half a
pound, and the glyster-pipe to be put into the gut not above two fingers breadth
at the most in length within the gut.

Concerning exitus, vel progressus, vel procidentia A^i, in English, the
falling of the fundament.
THis disease for the most part is accidental to our Nation in hot countries,
and that chiefly after or in the time of a great flux of blood or humors,
although it is manifest it also happens in all Children more subject to this
disease then old people.
countries and places, both to young and old, but chiefly to children upon
diverse several occasions, which I list not here to amplify, having no intent
to set out my work in painted phrases, for I would only arm the Chirurgions
Mate how to proceed in the cure thereof at Sea, and yet I know the same will
take good effect also at land where that disease happens.

The Causes.
Causes of the falling of the fundament.
THe causes of this grief are too many to be named, the sign thereof is
manifest, that it is a resolution or a relaxation of the muscles of those
parts: whereby the gut slippeth or slideth down lower then the natural place
thereof, namely, out of the body.

The cure of this grief is for the most part short, and likewise if the Patient
at Sea be careful and go not out to the shrowds or Beakhead of the ship to
stool, neither in going force the expulsive virtue of his body over much, it
will not easily fall down again.

The Cure.
It is cured as follows, namely, at the first going out, use no other remedy
then a warm soft clout and thy hands, and gently return it into his due place,
and let the party after it is reduced, sit on a hot board, or have a very hot
napkin doubled and applied to his fundament, and another to his belly: but
whereas this disease for the The cure if it proceed of the fluxes of the belly.
most part proceeds from the fluxes of the belly, in such cases you must
proceed to the cure of such fluxes of the belly, and that effected you shall
hear no more of this accident; but if it usually fall out, it is The cure if it
uses often to fall down.
the more dangerous, then you may proceed as follows* set the party over a
close stool, and fume the place as warm as he can suffer it, with a fume of
Thus, Mastick, amber, rosin or pitch, or any one of these, and being fumed well
and very warm, bestrew the gut fallen down with Album Gracum well powdered and
fine, for this is precious, though a homely medicine, but therewith this
disease is cured, and many other infirmities also; but there is a great care to
be had to the powdering and well searsing of the same, for that it is often
full of sharp pieces of bones very dangerous: I say therefore this being The
putting of it up.
carefully prepared, and applied with warm soft clouts and warmed The Patients
help required.
hands put it up, and let the party as it were endeavor to draw in his breath
in the doing thereof, for it will with ease be brought up: and being thus put
up, into his place, it falls not easily out again; the same effect has
burned Hearts horn powdered, or any other hard bones burned into white powder,
are very good, powder of Gall-apples or Gals is thereto a good medicine strewed
on as the former; Pomegranate Pills powdered does the like, and Balausties or
Sumach is also good, being powdered and strewed thereon. Also a fomentation A
Fomentation.
very warm of stiptick drying things are good, as for example. fresh water,
heat and quench pieces of iron or steel often therein, if it can conveniently
be done: if not, only fair water, a convenient quantity of about a quart,
boil therein the quantity of one large Gall, put to it a little Alum about
ij. a little Succus Acatiae some ss. or less, cynamon if it may be had ss, or
pomgranate rinds j. if you have them, or Baulausties a little, and therewith
foment well the part, and after fomentation let it be very gently put up to his
place, but French wine or Aligant were better then water for the fomentation.
Further, have a great care that whatsoever you use by way of fomenting A
special caution.
or otherwise, each thing be actually very warm you apply, or they will
endanger him. It will likewise not be amiss, if you add a little good Aqua
vitae or Rosa solis to your fomentation after it is boiled, especially if your
decoction be water. Bean flower is also good to strew thereon, when you go to
put it up, but Album Graecum is the best thing you can use, Mastick in powder
is also a very good medicine to strew thereon, use as little force, as may be
in putting it up, and have ever ready a Chaffendish with fire, when you go
about that work, to warm clouts, and your hands also. And The Patients help
very needful and profitable to himself. Let the Patient beware.
if you find it difficult to be reduced, let the party be set on his head and
hands, with his legs abroad and it will help somewhat, but beware he stand
not so too long, but rather let him rest and begin again, or kneeling on his
knees and elbows is also good, only let him remember that he draw in his
breath, as I have said, for that avails much, and let him not seek to close
or draw together his fundament as little as he can, till the gut be reduced to
his place. If upon occasion of the flix you be constrained to use confortative
o^ restringent How to prevent it in the time of the flix afflicting.
glysters with also your Laudanum, you shall not need to fear but it will keep
up: or if these things help nothing, I fear he is hardly to be cured, but they
have never failed me; and so I conclude to the honor of the Almighty
concerning this disease.

Of the Callenture.
THe Callenture by all my experience, or what I can gather from What the
Callenture is.
others is no other thing then a contagious fever, for the most part suddenly
assaulting Seamen, sometimes it is with paroxysmes, The quality of it.
sometimes coutinuall, and has fits hot and cold in some, and that very
violent, even to the loss of senses and life also.

The Causes:
The causes thereof.
THe causes thereof are diverse, as namely the intemperature of the Climate, or
degree of the world causing an evil habit in the bodies of men, when they come
into such contagious aires, the evil nutriments the Sailers have at Sea, strong
obstructions, the abuse of themselves in diet and customs, and diverse other
reasons too long to insist upon.

The Signs.
The signs.
TO be breife, the signs are a strong fever, a general and sudden distemper
often times both of body and mind at one instant, or an inclination thereto,

The Cure.
THe Cure confisteth chiefly in Cordials, Alexipharmacons or preservatives; The
curation wherein it consists.
that the animal, vital, and natural parts may be defended from the venomous
danger of the disease in evacuation, and in regiment of diet, all these being
as suddenly put in practice as time will serve, the disease being sudden and
fierce in it self. An excellent remedy thereunto is a dose of Aurum vitae, and
sweat upon it also.

Of Cordials.
A Cordial p^tion for the Callenture.
A Present Cordial medicine fitting to be given in the Callenture is Venice
Treacle or Mithridate j. London Treacle, or Diatesseron ss. with Syrup
Limoniorum j. Plantane water or fair water, iij. oil of Vitriol six drops, or
so much as to make the drink tart, and one hour or two hours after give him
another dose thereof, and forthwith also let him have a suppository or glyster
given him and so soon as he has had one stool therewith, let him blood
reasonable largely if his strength will bear it, let him also have for his
diet no other thing for two or three days but thin broathes, pannadies or the
like; and if it be thought fit to take it, after the suppository, a glyster
were not amiss to be given him, namely, decoction of March Mallow roots in
water, adding in the end of the decoction of Saltniter iiij. of Species Hierae
ij. Oleum Sambucae ij these will cool him well and cleanse him.

And if further need of purging be, give him a dose of Aquilla Laxativa, or
Aquilla vitae, a dose, which in this disease has been approved very good.

The Aquilla Laxativa is usually given in iij. of Plantane or fair water with
Syrup of Violets or Lemmons j. the Aquilla vitae with Conserva Rosarum, with
Diatesseron Liquorice-powder or alone. If you see these courses reasonably put
in practice, do not give content, I mean the body being open, then in the
name of God give him a dose of Laudanum, you shall find it often to procure
perfect health without His ordinary drink what it must be, and of what it is
made.
further help. For his drink let him have a decoction of French or commou
Barley, whereunto so much Liquorice, or Succus Liquoricae may be added, as to
make it of a grateful taste, as also for the smell, a small quantity of Rose or
other vinegar, and Rose water a little, and thereto so much oil of Vitriol; as
to give it a taste somewhat tart but not too much: Syrup or juice of Lemmons is
also very fitting to be put thereto if it be to be had in any plenty. But let
me advise the Chirurgions Mate in all the precedent courses, that he, Good
Chiru^gion take notice.
use good discretion and moderation, for over purging, bleeding, much thin diet
will be very dangerous at Sea, and will surely turn Two principal observations.
your Patient unto the Scurvy: for note this for a general rule, that almost
every sickness at Sea ends in the Scurvy: and the Scurvy By Gods mercy
miseries are prevented, and Art in curing blessed.
and skilful hand of the Chirurgions Mate, which that he may the better be
enabled in all difficult cases to practice and perform his duty, the God of
all glory assist him with his grace.

Amen.
A Treatise of Salt in general: And first of the Antiquity thereof.
Salt sure in vegetables.
SAlt was created with the world in the beginning, for that it is easy to be
proved, that neither herb, bud, nor tree whatsoever grows, which contains
not in it self a proper and peculiar Salt, which is easily and apparently by
Art to be separated from the other substances thereof, and Health from salt by
Gods providence.
through the wonderful providence of our Almighty Creator, each Salt has some
needful virtue contained in it for the benefit of his creatures. A further
testimony of his Antiquity, the Sea which took his beginning, as Scriptures
testify The Sea and all creatures contain salt.
Scriptures testify, before mankind does produce the substance thereof being
wholly salt. And not only the Sea, but also all other creatures of God
whatsoever under the whole heavens, whether they do consist of Animal,
Vegetable or Mineral parts, cannot, nor ever did subsist without a natural
inbred salt in them, whose nourishment and increase proceeds from the earth,
water, or air, where the said creature breeds and grows. Therefore since
it challenges a place with the most ancient and first creation of all things,
I need use no more demonstrations, but conclude that the Antiquity thereof, is
undeniable, and as clear, as the Sunshine is at midday: thus much of the
Antiquity thereof.

Of the kinds and differences of Salt.
TO entreat of all the kinds and differences of Salt, is a work so difficult
and long, that no man whatsoever in the whole time of Frivolous to write of all
salts.
this short life, can make sufficient relation thereof, wherefore to avoid
tediousness, I will take a shorter course: namely, I mean to do something
therein, and leave the rest for others of better capacity, that shall come
after. Note therefore that there are three kinds of Three kinds of salt.
Salts in general, to wit, animal Salt, Vegetable Salt, and mineral Salt and
ere I digress or go any further, let me interpret my self in plain terms,
to young practitioners in Art, whom alone I desire to benefit.

The animal salt is understood to be that salt which proceeds The three sals
explained.
from creatures that bear life, and have sense and feeling, or moving
whatsoever, under which are comprehended all beasts, fish, fowl, and worm,
etc. under the name of vegetable salts, are comprehended the salts of trees and
herbs, and whatsoever else may grow by sowing or planting, or any other
industry of man, as well the seed as the fruit or the plant it self, or any
part thereof. And under the name of mineral salt is comprehended the salts of
all metals, as of Saturn, Juter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, or Luna: as also
the salts of all stones, with also all earths and their juyces and extractions,
as likewise all other Mineral and Terrestrial salts whatsoever, without name.

Thus much in brief for explaining the three principal kinds of Salts, each of
which have a threefold several substance contained in them, viz. A volatile
salt, a fixed salt, and a Caput mortuum, named also Terra Damnata, otherwise it
may be termed to contain a Phlegm, a spirit, an oil which again is called,
Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, each dividable plainly and easily by Art: Some may
here object, that they will draw more then three substances, each being a good
medicine from any one subject, either Animal, Vegetable or Mineral, as for an
instance from Mercury, you may extract infinite several medicines, inwardly,
and outwardly serviceable, as namely you may have from Mercury Laxative,
Vomitive, Diaphoretick Diaureticke, cordial, preservative, and sundry other
needful medicines to be ministered with great safety and comfort to the
diseased, as elsewhere of Mercury is noted: which speech may seem very strange
to Answer.
some that all these, yea and many more varieties and diversities are found in
any one Mineral: but though one substance make many medicines, yet it
confounds nothing the tria principia, for every medicine is not one
principal, neither is there any principal tied to Salts good in meats, are of
three sorts.
to make but one medicine. But to return being digressed, I say the kinds of
Mineral salts used at tables, and for seasoning meats, are to be esteemed three
in number: one kind is the Bay or Sea salt, dried merely from salt Sea water
by the heat of the Sun. The second sort is that salt which we have from the
Sea cost, or from salt Springs at home, made by decoction. The third is the
salt that grows concrete, bard and pure in the bowels of the earthsuch is the
Sal Gemmae, and this last is held the best, both in meat and medicine, it is in
color like Cheystal transparent and grows in great quantity, in Polonia,
near the City Cracovia, my self having gathered of it in the Mines there.

Of the necessity of salt, and of the general utilities thereof.
The necessity of salt in all things.
NO one thing which the Almighty Creator has made for man's use, excels
Salt: as well for the sundry and most necessary uses it has, as also for the
abundant virtues thereof, without the which, nothing which is created under the
Sun, as is said, could subsist in his kind, beauty or vigor: as for example,
man the excellentest of Gods creatures without salt presently putrifieth, or at
the least falls Example*
into some extreme disease, yea a small distemper in the Animal salt of man is
able to kill the strongest man, which the simplest may in his own reason
comprehend and know. And who lives which at some time or other has not tasted
his own blood, either from his How to discern salt in man.
gums or his nose bleeding, or otherwise, whereby he is able o^ affirm the same
blood to be salt. I think none will deny it, but if any will be so simple or
obstinate, then let him taste his own urine, and there questionless he need
not doubt to find it salt: but without contradiction, the whole mass of man's
body is full of salt: and if thou will not by all this reason be persuaded to
believe it, then search artificially, and thou shall find, yea two kinds of
salt in man's blood, and so in all other creatures which bear life and have
blood as well as man, namely, a Volative salt, and fixed salt, which salt I say
wanting in the body, that living creature which wants, it presently
putrifieth. Certain evils befalling man wanting salt.
Some also we see that by a salt rheum in there eyes lose their sights, some
by a sharp saltness in the urine, dangerous accidents ensue: some fall into
the Scurvy, some have the Dropsy, some the Leprosy, with infinite other the
like offenses happening by the distemper or want of the Animal salt: the examples
are very common, Nihil sale and sole corporibus hominum utilius, says
Paracelsus; nothing is more profitable Salt preserves from putrefaction.
for man's body, then the Sun and salt. It is the most precious Balsam for
man's life in health, it maintains health and keeps man's food from
putrefaction in sickness, sores and aches, few medicines to be compared to it:
Mineral salt being brought to an examen in the fire, first from it is by Art
exhausted a thin Mineral Phlegma, called the Mercury or fleagme thereof: which
past, then there arises a most fragrant spirit which opens Mineral bodies,
and breaks up gold and silver to make them potable, or otherwise according to
the will of the discreet Artist, in which spirits is comprehended the chief
medicine: the residence whereof contains the fixed salt, and the feces
thereof: the feces are merely good for no use at all, that I know, and
therefore of Chemists are called Terra Damnata. Paracelsus speaking of the
necessary uses of common Mineral salt affirms it to be the true Correcter of
all kinds of meats, and says further, that meat, though being of mean
nutriment, yet if it be well salted nourishes much: for he is of opinion, that
whatsoever meat is either eaten without salt, or but meanly salted, turns for
the most part to the offense of man, and breeds diseases, as the falling
sickness Salt helps digestion, and comfort.
and other great griefs: for, says he, salt mightily helps digestion, and
concoction, and likewise comfort all the faculties of man's body, it is the
Balsam of the earth, whereby men's bodies are Salt the Palsamum of the earth.
preserved alive, and so of all creatures which contain blood in them, yea and
all insensible creatures also, as Vegetables and Minerals have their peculiar
salt, which keeps them in their vigor and strength from common putrefaction.
Josephus Quercitanus affirms salt to be a spur to all medicines, both outward
and inward, with which it is mixed, stining them up and quickening them, the
better to perform their offices, and the longer to retain their virtues, by
preserving them from outward putrefaction of the air.

Temperature of Salt in general.
The temperament of common Salt.
COmmon salt by the most opinions of the learned writers is hot and dry, some
affirm in the second degree, some in the third, this being spoken concerning
common salt as it is used in meat and medicine without any further preparation:
but let no man attribute to all salts one temperament, which I suppose none
which is discreet will, because then he should mistake himself; for without
all contradiction, Diverse Salts diversely qualified.
no temperature can be named, but some salt may easily be proved of the same
temperature, wherefore it is said concerning ordinary salts for meat used,
whether they come from sea, or from salt water by decoction, or from the ground
without man's Art as salt Gemm does, or from the salt springs within the land,
as our Worcestershire salt does: yet all those have no manifest differences in
their temperature, but may be said to be hot and dry, and yet according to the
strength of them they may one exceed another more or less in degree.

But salt Peeter which is of excellent use for medicine, as also for very many
needful occasions otherwise whose substance and quality The quality of
Salt-Peeter.
are wonderful being considered, yet it is apparent that the temperament
thereof is cold by the effects, for it does cool the violent boiling of the
blood, no otherwise then if a man should cool fire with water, and yet his
chiefest substance is spiritual, volatile, and The substance of Salt-Peeter.
combustible, if it be pure: but in truth all minerals show themselves in
operation to be specifical, and not truly to be distinguished by their heat or
cold: and as for the spirit of common salt the medicinal effects thereof are
cooling the blood, quenching thirst, corroborating and refreshing the stomach,
etc. the taste thereof being almost like the oil of Vitriol, or rather like
good juice of Lemmons

Further, the salts of animal and vegetable creatures may very well be said to
have their several temperaments and differences, each according to his one
kind, as the salt of wormwood is esteemed hot and dry like the herb, and so of
many other herbs in like manner may be understood.

Somewhat of the healing virtues of common salt.
COmmon sea salt, boiled in the strongest beer to the consumption of three
parts of the same beer, and being made salt as brine, is an excellent bath to
ease the pains of the gout, as my self have proved Good for the Gout.
often. It is also good to cure the Serpigo of the hands, Tetters of hard
curation. Paracelsus speaking of the virtues of salt says as follows.
Serpigo. Tetters.
All those which are vexed with any disease, proceeding of gross crudity, or
natural humidity, as rheumes, itch, scurfe ringworms, or the like noisome
griefs: let them make a bath of common sea salt, and strong bear boiled
together to a third part, and as warm as they can possible endure it fit in it
and sweat therein and after go to a warm bed and sweat again, and doing so
sundry times they shall feel help thereby: I have had credit by it when diverse
greater medicines have failed me, especially in the pains of the Gout and other
aches, I have done much good with it; and further, it is so harmless a Good
for cold Aches.
thing that none need to fear the use thereof: whereas many other kinds of
bathing although they be good in one kind, yet hurt in another but this is
merely harmless to any, provided withal, before the The body to be purged
before it be with a salt has bathed.
use of this bath, a due preparation and purgation of the body be thought upon.

Moreover, there is an ordinary Lixivium, made by expert Chirurgions, for the
healing Ulcers, which is Mundificative, Abstersive, Discussive, and very
Sanative, performing much in Surgery, the chief ingrediences whereof is
vegetable and mineral salts made by decoction with vulnerary herbs in fair
water to a just consistence: The virtues of this Lixivium.
this Lixivium in Tumors, Ulcers, Fractures, Dislocations, as also in great
Contusions, Obstructions, Gangrenes, and many other like infirmities, is a very
good and ready medicine, the description whereof is set down in the cure of
fractures.

The Caustic stone is made of salt.
Also the causticke stone, called commonly Lapis Infernalis, is no other thing,
then merely a vegetable salt, the virtues and making whereof, is not proper in
this place to be spoken of, but shall in another place be mentioned. Thus much
at this time concerning common salt.

Of Vitriol or Copperas in General: And first what is Vitriol.
VItriol called in Latin, Calcanthum, in English Copperas or Vitriol, but more
commonly called Copperas, is a mineral salt which for the worth and Virtues
thereof does far excel many other kinds of salts, so that not without great
reason, that worthy Theophrastus Pvracelsus, who had truly anatomized that
salt, affirmed and often repeated that the fourth part of Physic was contained
in this Mineral salt, from whence the same author also, not unfitly, does
compare A comparison between Copperas and wood.
it to wood, of which diverse forms may be formed, and diverse instruments also
may be made for diverse operations and effects, for out of this salt many
substances may be extracted and prepared, and many good medicines may be
compounded, quite contrary in operation, and utterly disagreeing in effects
from each other; as for example, out The diverse virtues of Copperas both inward
and outward.
of this Mineral salt, medicines of great efficacy may be made, as well in
purging as also sudoriferous or diaphoreticks, Cordials, Anodines, Narcotick,
Stupefactive, Stipticke, Corrosive, Abstersive, Repercussive, Mundificative,
and Sanative medicines, as also against the Epilepsie, or falling sickness and
suffocations of the Matrix, good medicines are to be prepared thereof, and how
these or some of them may be made by Art, and of their virtues, as time shall
serve, by Gods help I have determined briefly to declare heareafter.

But I confess I am not able to discover the fourth part of the great virtues
of this worthy salt, for I daily meet with some new medicine therein worth the
noting.

Of the different kinds Of Vitriol.
VItriol or Copperas we may have in England of six, or at the least of five
kinds, namely Vitriolum veneris, or Copperas made of Copper, which in diseases
of the head far exceeds others as writers affirm, and this kind may easily
be prepared and cheap, as hereafter shall be set down.

The next thereto in virtue is that kind of Copperas which grows in Hungaria,
which to my knowledge we cannot well have in England, though some will affirm
they have of it.

The third sort of Copperas that is praised is the Roman Vitriol or Copperas,
in a place whereof we do buy a kind of blew Copperas in London, which is not
the true Roman Vitriol.

The fourth kind is brought from Gosler, a Town in Germany near to the City
of Brunswich.

The fifth kind is commonly brought from Dansk and is somewhat yellowish.

The sixth and last, or worst, is our own common English Copperas. These are
all the sorts ordinarily to be bought.

Copperas of diverse Colors.
Though indeed many ways, and of many colors copperas may be made, yea and of
many substances, as well from mineral stones as earthes, which if time would
serve, and that it were to the purpose should be further showed; but to be
short the Copperas I would choose for my use, is that which comes from Gosler
in Germany, it is to be had in London, and is not dear, and sufficiently good
to draw a spirit or oil from, or to make any medicine for inward uses, but for
outward ordinary uses, the common sort of Copperas will serve well, and so it
will do reasonable well for oil, but not yield so much.

What Copperas for outward uses best.
Note that the best Copperas as is said, is made of Copper, or of the Mineral
of copper. Note further, that all copper and brass will wholly be converted
into Copperas, yea and turn again into his own first substance, namely into
copper or brass again, though with loss. Also iron and silver will make good
Copperas, so will diverse sorts of stones and earths be converted into good
Copperas, and springs near copper mines, they do make Copperas of, much after
the manner that salt-peeter is made.

The way to make Vitriolum Veneris or Copperas of Copper, is as follweth.
THin plates, or rather filings of Copper, what quantity you please, and
Brimstone of each a like quantity, powder the Brimstone, and mix it with the
Copper, put these into an earthen pan unglazed, and place them in a char-coale
fire in a Chimny, and let them gently heat together till the Brimstone take
fire. Then with an iron stir it a little to and fro till all the Brimstone be
consumed: then take it from the fire, and being cold cast it into a gallon or
less quantity of fair water, and it will make the water green, and in taft
like Copperas; pour off that green water, filter and keep it, and set the same
Copper to be made dry again on the fire, which done, mix it with more
Brimstone, and burn it, and quench it as before, continuing such work, till
all the Copper be consumed and turned into a pleasant blew or green water: then
mix and boil the waters till half or more be consumed, and set them to cool,
and being cold, if it be A note of the true height of dection.
sufficiently boiled, you shall find Copperas therein; if not boil it more,
and the Copperas will appear: then take away the said Copperas which you find,
and lay it to dry, and boil the remainder of the water again, and there will
be more Copperas: take still the Copperas each time out, laying it to dry, and
doing so till all be made into Copperas. This is the best kind of Copperas, it
is in color of a pleasant blew, and is easily to be made, and will yield a
good quantity, namely, one pound of Copper, if it be artificially prepared,
will make three pounds of Copperas.

Of Phlegma Vitriol, or of the first water drawn from Copperas.
The rules in this work.
PHlegma Vitrioli is made as follows:. Copperas, put it into an Alimbecke and
place it according to Art in the highest degree of B. M. namely, in a boiling
water, drawing thereby from it all the humidity which by B. M. will be
exhausted, provided you fill your Alimbeck but two third parts full of
Copperas, when ye put it to distill. The virtues of Plegma Vitrioli.
This liquor as Angelus Salus a late Italian writer affirms, is good against
pains of the head, proceeding from heat, namely the dose being two drachmes
taken fasting for certain days together. It swageth also the burning and
boiling of the blood. It strengthens all the bowels. It confirms the brain
weakened with superfluous heat by the daily use thereof in the Spring time, the
stomach being purged a little before. Also it makes a moist brain temperate
This first medicine of Copperas was by the Ancients not known: my self I must
confess have made no great use of this medicine, only I have used it as a
cooling water against the heat of the stomach, and sometimes The Author his
experience thereof.
have found it good, as also to foment warm with it for any sudden
inflammation in any outward part of the body due Evacuation first considered
of. The said Author ascribes many more virtues to this first Phelgma, or water
of Copperas, which, for that I would be loath to waste time I will not trouble
the Reader with.

Of the preparation of the second water of Vitriol, commonly called Spirit of
Vitriol.
Rules in the work.
THis first recited water being well rectified, separated, and kept apart: then
take the glass, Alembeck mentioned, containing the Vitriol, from out of the B.
M. and place it in Arena, or a furnace with sand according to Art, the Vitriol
within being first made into fine powder, and distill it therein so long till
all the rest of the Humidity shall be drawn from it which the B. M. had no
force to exhale. This second water, you shall perceive to be a clear and
odoriferous water, only remember that thou force not the water over strongly,
but do it by a gentle fire.

The effects.
This liquor is good to purge the reins: it appeaseth inward fretting and
gnawing pains, taking one drachme thereof in the morning fasting with flesh
broth.

It also causes store of urine, and moderately provokes sweat. It cease the
inflammations proceeding of blows or stripes taken in warm broth, and
mitigateth the pain thereof, but if your fire be too strong, your liquor will
come over so strong, that your dose must not exceed j. at the most: wherefore
be wary thereof, for a good A Cau^io^.
medicine evil handled, may do much hurt, and so will this if you want
judgment to use it. In times past they were wont to calcine Vitriol till it
was red, whereby it was deprived, not only of the first, but also of this his
second moist and most spiritual substance, but How the Ancients prepared this
Vitriol for the spirit.
that was used by them chiefly, when only they intended to prepare the
sharpest spirit, or strongest oil of Vitriol, which strong oil of Vitriol has
all the virtues hereafter recited and many more.

The virtues of the strongest oil of Vitriol.
IT helps the infirmities of the Lights, with the water of Fennel or fumitory
It cutteth away the melancholy humors from the stomach, with Balm water, and
comfort the stomach after a wonderful manner, and does defend the whole body
from inward Apostumes and inflammations, and therefore it is used with good
success in the Plurisie, as also in vulnerary drinks it is approved good, for
it attenuateth the blood wondefully, and defends the parts grieved from fear
of Gangrene or putrefaction of the blood: It conglutinateth ruptures as well of
bones as veins, and does exceedingly corroborate and comfort all the parts of
man's body, and may well be numbered as a principal amongst cordial medicines. It
is also a very good medicine not only in preventing the Scurvy taken inwardly,
but also It helps the Scurvy.
in the cure of the Scurvy many ways, both inwardly taken with any comfortable
wine, or with beer for need, or to make a Beverage therewith, and daily to use
it in small quantity, namely, four drops for a dose In the Calenture it
excels all other medicines taken in Calenture.
Plantane, Sorrel, or any other good cooling water, or only in fair water.
Other convenient courses judiciously held, as namely, to A Caution.
procure to the party by suppository, glyster or potion some looseness of body,
with also phlebotomy in due season, and quantity according to judgment.

And likewise observing that a dose of Landanum is in such cases a fit help,
laying the party to rest: a loosenes of the belly, I say, first had by nature
or art. Moreover, for the overgrowings of the gums in the Scurvy, Vitriol or
Coperas has no fellow, namely, a strong decoction of Vitriol, with a little
mel, or mel rosarum, and the gums The gums overgrown.
after they are let blood well rubbed therewith very hot, helps well. Also if
a stronger lotion be required, you may touch the rotten gums warily once with
the oil it self, but beware you touch not the whole skin with the oil recited
or strong spirit, for if you only but rub A Caution.
the teeth therewith, it is hurtful, for it will offend and much decay them,
although I confess it makes them white, I have had the experience thereof, as
well by making black teeth white, as also in lotions for the teeth: wherefore I
know that the much use thereof consumes Vlcerations of the mouth and throat.
the teeth, in ulcerations of the throat or mouth that resist ordinary cure, by
other good lotions usual; touch the ulcerated part warily but once therewith,
and the ulcerations will heal very fast A Caution.
afterward with any ordinary medicines and helps, remembering as cause shall
require, to use due evacuations or Phlebotomy. Also this strong spirit is good
for inflammations of the throat, namely, against Inflammations of the throat.
Squinancy or Angina used certain drops in a fit Gargarisme or Lotion, namely,
to make it somewhat sower, and then gargarize warm therewith, for it mightily
quenches inflammations, and tempereth well the blood, and being likewise a
little thereof given to drink, namely, six A Caution.
drops in such a case, it is much the better, always remembering that all such
diseases require looseness of the belly, and sometimes phlebotomy.

Ulcers and fistula*s.
Moreover in ulcers and fistula's scarce a better medicine is found, to enlarge
a strict orifice, remove a callow, or truly to correct and prepare any
inveterate Ulcer to good healing, only by touching it with lint on the end of
a Probe, thereby putting the medicine to the Purging medicines.
place where the cause is. This strong tart spirit or oil of Vitriol is almost
generally in all purgative medicines, a notable corrective, and, as it were a
good help to them to do their office, for it comfort the whole body, and it
gives a grateful taste almost to any medicine.

A bad appetite.
It is also good to a weak stomach oppressed with phlegm or slime, and helps
appetite taken in conserve of roses, it has infinite other virtues, too long
here to relate, and indeed above my reach to search out.

Pestilential fevers.
There is no medicine more precious in pestilential fevers, then this strong
oil or spirit is, my self have often used it to others in that case, and taken
it my self with good success.

The true and utmost dose is only so much thereof, as may make the vehicle or
medicine wherein you give it somewhat sower, but not too tart, for no man can
say justly, give five, six, or seven drops, for that one sort is five times
stronger then another: but when either your purge or other medicine is ready
tobe administered, add certain drops thereof to alter only very little, the
taste sower like, but in the Callenture, strong fevers, or pestilential fevers,
a greater dose may well be taken, according to discretion and judgment; but
take this caveat for a farewell in the use thereof: note that if you put it into
a medicine liquid, it will sink down to the bottom, so that when you give it
shake it, otherwise you may leave the most of it in the glass behind, and
when you mix it with a quantity of Barley water or Julep, whereof you intend to
make many doses, deceive not your self, for if you never shake and stir it, the
last dose will be unreasonable to be taken, and dangerous.

Of white Coperas.
W^ereo^ and how it is made.
White Coperas is easily made of other kinds of Copperas, it is generally
called Vitriol, or white Vitriol in English, as if it were worthy a higher or
more particular name, or respect, when in truth, as white wax is made of yellow
wax, by the bleaking it in the air, and washing it often: so is white Coperas
made of green Coperas, White Copera*s weaker then green.
and is thereby, in my conceit, the weaker, only the superfluous humidity is
thereby evaporated, and it begets a new kind and shape, in all lotions it
may serve in place of the other kinds of Coperas, but to draw spirits from, it
is weaker then any other coperas that I know The virtues thereof, for the eyes
excel any other medicine.
.

The chief uses I have made there of, is for Collyriums or lotions for the
infirmities of the eyes, namely against itchings, akings, smartings,
defluxions, and ophthalmia's of the eyes, wherein I find it to exceed either
Lapis Calaminaris, Tutia, or Camphire. The salt thereof makes also a singular
vomitive medicine, which I first learned out of The Salt is vnmitive.
the daily practice of that worthy and famous Physician Dr. Peter Turner
dwelling in St. Hellens, who highly commended it to me, and I have found it
worthy his commendations in many great infirmities, the dose is from ss. to ss
and jj. it is safely given.

The effects of the Salt are for the falling sickness. Fevers. Stomach.
It may very well be taken in Betony water with sugar, or in want thereof, in
fair water with Rose Water, one spoonful. It is good against the falling
sickness, and in diverse occasions of purging the head, also in fevers
proceeding of crude and undigested humors. It Provokes appetite. One receipt
of my experience for outward infirmities of the eyes, I will here bestow upon
the Chirurgions Mate made of white Coperas, which is as follows. Vitriolum
Album in powder j one new laid egg, or sound egg, boil the egg hard,
Arecti^ for the eyes ill affected.
shell it, and cleave it through, and take out the yolke, and in place thereof
put the powder of coperas mentioned, and let it so remain closed together two
hours or more, then put it into a clean soft ragge, being still so closed
together, and strain it hard, and a water will come out which is green in
color, keep it in a glass close stopped; and when occasion is, drop one drop
or two at once into the grieved eye. It is good in many infirmities of the
eyes, and it will keep seven years without putrefying. It cures all itchings,
smartings, immoderate rheumes, the Ophthalmias in their beginnings, with many
other infirmities happening to the eyes, and it strengthens well the fight.
Thus much for this time of white Vitriol or Coperas.

Of burnt Vitriol.
THis is made as burnt alum is, ofany sort of coperas, and is of great use in
Surgery, namely, to abate spungy flesh in Ulcers, The use of it*
and also in all restrictive powder for staying of fluxes, and it helps well
with other fitting simples to siccatrize, and also in Lotions and Gargarismes;
as is said, it is of good use.

Of Liquor, or rather Mel Vitrioli.
THis Liquor, or rather honey prepared from Copperas, so called, because it is
in thickness and color not unlike honey; It is an The virtue.
excellent remedy against any lacrimous or weeping ulcers, or fistulas, Whereof
it is made.
to stay defluxions of humors in them, for it is very astringent, and does
well fortify a weak member, it is made of calcined Vitriol infused in spirit of
wine, and the tincture of the Copperas thereby Other effects.
drawn out, and then spirit of wine evaporated per B M and so it is excellent
for to cure rotten gummes, or any putrid or corrasive ulcers of the throat or
mouth, or elsewhere, and has many other special virtues, which when I set
down the preparation and use of my other chemical medicines shall be further
handled.

Of Colkethor or Dead-head.
The kinds.
FOr want of time I here come to the last medicine of Vitriol ere I have
touched the fourth part. This Colkethor is of two different kinds, the one is
from the feces of Aqua fortis, and the other from copperas, after the strong
oil is extracted from it. The first is most in use amongst Chirurgions, and
indeed is most fotcible, because therein The force or effect of Colkethor.
is a great part of the fixed salt of Salt-peeter, and of Alum mixed with the
Coperas; it is a medicine astringent by reason of the coperas and alum, and
abstersive by reason of the Salt-peeter, and therefore it is good for to
prepare stubborn ulcers to a ciccatrize. Thus for this time I conclude of
Coperas.

Sal Absinthii.
SAlt of wormwood is a cordial medicine, and is very necessary in The dose for
a pestilent fever.
the Chirurgions chest. It is very good against the heat of a burning and
contagious fever, ss. thereof taken in a decoction of Centaury best, or in
Plantane, or fair water, to which for to amend the taste, you may add sugar a
little: give the party at the least three doses of The dose for the Dropsy.
the medicine at several times, and sweat thereon* you shall find it an
excellent help also in the dropsy or swellings of the Scurvy, j. thereof given
first and last on a piece of tosted bread for five days together. The quality.
It is good and fit to add a few grains thereof into every cordial, for it is
Diaphoretick, Diauretick and partly Laxative. It is a The dose for a Quotidian.
Good for stoping of the urinal passages.
very good medicine against a quotidian fever, j. thereof taken in
Centaury-water, or rather in a decoction of Centaury, and sweat thereon. In all
stoppings of urine, it is a sure good medicine taken in wine. Thus much for
this time for Sal Absinthii.

Sal Gemmae.
SEarch in the differences and kinds of common Salt for Sal Gemmae.

Sal Nitri.
The purity.
IS the Chrystalline salt purified from gross Salt-peeter, known to be pure
by that it does contain no common salt therein, being also wholly combustible*
of temperament, it is either hot or cold, as is The Nature.
plainly seen by his office and virtue: do I say virtue? yea and vice; both I
may say, for in truth for wounding and killing salt goes beyond Mercury, this
is the dangerous part of gunpowder, which gives it the force of piercing to
the heart, which God deliver all Christians from feeling it, and accursed be
that hellish Germane Monk Germane Monk. Europs Doct rs. Sal Nitriof two sorts.
which taught it first in Europe. This Sal nitri is either animal or vegetable,
or both, and may also not unfitly be termed mineral, growing in mines, and it
is every where, for every creature living may be said to have a part thereof:
man and beast, I am sure has a great part The spacious kingdom of Sal Nitri.
of it. It is a most medicinable subject as any is in the world, and no man can
live without it, for our blood and urine has it in it, yea, and our very
excrements are mixed therewith, it is also in caves, in mountains and plains,
and where not?

The inward virtue of Sal Nitri. The dose for Hemoragie.
But to leave such discourse, whereto I have not appointed this little time, I
say, Sal nitri in the Chirurgions chest is a worthy medicine, and the purer it
is, the better it is for all uses: Touching the inward uses thereof, it is good
against Hemoragia, or bleeding of a vein, whether it be by the nose, or any
inward vein of the body, taken j. dissolved in plantane or fair water.

Helps the Calenture.
In the Calenture it is approved good to cool the boiling of the blood taken
as aforefaid, the dose for a need, if the heat be great may be given every
four hours, or the party may have a barley water rather made, wherein two
drachmes or more may be dissolved to drink at will, it will not offend him,
only if he take too great a The dose.
dose at once, it may cause him to vomit, but it will not hurt him. It is the
best thing I do know for the furring of the mouth and the throat in fevers, the
place gently washed therewith dissolved in water, it presently brings away
all the whiteness and furring without offense. Cleanses the mouth furred,
used in water. The mouth cleansed, a Lotion needful.
It is not ungrateful of taste: but so soon as you have taken such furring
away, I advise you that you have ready some gentle sanative lotion to inject,
to take away the acrimony thereof, for it is abstergent, and yet without
violence or danger; you may use therefore the ordinary lotion one part, fair
water two parts, and so inject to cleanse the mouth after the use thereof. I
have expressed other uses of Sal Nitri proper in the cure of the Scurvy, to
which I referr the Reader.

Certain plain Verses for the use of Young Chirurgions by the Author gathered*
in praise of SALT.
SAlt with the world did begin,
whose end exceeds time:
In it lie hidden secrets rare,
which no tongue can define.
Our Savior his disciples dear,
to Salt did often allude:
Who by their blessed voices filled
the earth with spiritual food.
Salt many jewels far exceeds,
salt guides health and life:
Salt Author is of all increase,
against salt there is no strife.
Salt and his force, his place, his time,
his power in life and death,
His choice, his change, his actions strange,
admire we may on earth.
What living creature can want salt?
what plant or tree may grow?
What metal perfect does endure
if salt it do forgo?
His several kinds are infinite,
his virtues without number:
His quantity so large in all,
as to man seems a wonder.
The air, the earth, the Ocean deep,
with salt are seasoned so:
As wanting it, fowl, beast, nor fish,
nor man could breath I know.
And for one instance, do but note,
in blood what taste you find:
Note urine eke how salt it is,
if it digress not kind.
Yea sweat and spittle though they be,
but excrements indeed,
Have store of salt, which thing we find
by nature so decreed.
The earth produces salt in all
her creatures more and less:
Yet different each in some degree,
exeperience does confess.
Both hot and cold, yea moist and dry,
is salt in temperament:
Yea volatile and fix also
observing each intent.
Some sour, some sweet, some sharp is sound,
some bitter eke in taste:
Yea liquid, solid, corrasive,
and purging salt thou have.
All colors strange in salt are seen,
true healing therein stands:
And poison strong abounds in salt,
salt loses metals bands.
The spirit of salt makes liquid Sol,
and Luna at thy will:
That potable they may be wrought,
a work of worth and skill.
By salt are cured many griefs,
thongh hidden and profound,
Yet the exceeding use thereof
is certainly unfound.
Salt does preserve the food of men,
that travel far by sea,
And seasoneth well our meats at home,
which else would soon decay.
Of gain that does thereby arise,
all people have a part:
It makes barren land bear fruit,
which cheers the Plough-mans heart.
The Merchant is enricht thereby,
and all that fish in lakes:
Great store of food is gained by salt,
all things it savory makes.
In Physic and Surgery,
it has the greatest part:
It does contain an essence true,
which glads the fainting heart.
It causes appetite at need,
it quenches thirst at will:
It cease pain of raging gowts,
it fevers hot does still.
Thereby are bleeding wounds made well,
and that without delay:
Yea, sordid Ulcers it makes sound,
and tumors takes away.
For meat and medicines there is not ought,
with salt compared may be.
Wherefore I Will cease to praise a thing
above capacity.
God grant we all may seasoned be,
with salt devoid of strife,
That while we live we may do good,
and gain eternal life.
Sal metallorum, est lapis Philosophorum. OF SVLPHVR.
Sulphur is taken in general three manner of ways
SUlphur is generaly taken for every fatty, oily, or any way combustible part
of any creature, whether it be Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral, namely, in animal
it comprehends Adeps, Axungia, Pinguedo, and what else is combustible. In
Vegetables it includes Rosine, Terebinthine, Gum, Oil, Wax, Vinum Ardens, or
Aqua vitae. Touching Minerals or Metals, it includes all sorts of Bitumens,
with also the oils of Metals, as of Gold, Silver, Iron, or any other, together
with all sorts of Brimstone. Also it comprehends all sorts of Minral salts, I
mean their oils, as the oil of Vitriol, of A special observation. Example. A
general rule.
Allom, or of common salt, etc. And further it is to be considered, that every
Animal, vegetable, or Mineral substance whatsoever, is said to contain his own
pec liar and different Sulphur, as for example in wine or beer, or any other
liquid thing Vegetable, that spiritual part which is combustible, though it be
liquid, is termed the Sulphur thereof, viz. Aqua vitae is the Sulphurous part
of Wine, and so also of Beer is to be understood.

Of Sulphur in particular.
What it is.
SVlphur in particular is that usual Sulphur or Brimstone which with us is
common, of which Artists make diverse exellent medicines, viz: Flos, Oleum, Lac,
Arcanum, and Balsamum Sulphuris, as also Essentia Sulphuris, with many other
profitable preparations.

The diverse appellations of Sulphur.
This Sulphur or Brimstone is termed the Balsome of the Earth, of some others
it is termed a Mineral Terbinthine, of other some a Rosin or Gum of the earth,
and is plentiful in all the world, for if you The plenty of Sulphur.
but note for one mean instance, the Sea-coles, as we term them, which we burn,
even they are full of Brimstone, whereby they kindle so soon, and burn so
noisome, that were they not burned in Chimnies, none could live and endure
their Sulphurous fume. As also the Turfs in some places used for fuel, and
generally all the earth is replenished with Brimstone.

Moreover note, that there is no M ttal, whatsoever it be, as is said, but
contains a natural Sulphur in it, oath rwise it were no Metal, for Sulpher tht
Father of Metals
in truth many of the ancient Writers do affirm that Sulphur is the Father of
all Metals, and notwithstanding all Metals contain a part of Brimstone or
Sulphur in them; yet we see Sulphur or Brimstone also to be an ordinary
substance of it self without the help of any Metal to it. Further it is
apparent that Sulphur or Brimstome is of many different kinds as is said, and
thus much briefly of Sulphur or Brimstone.

In praise of Sulphur or Brimstone.
THis Sulphur from the Horrid deep,
dame Nature did ordain,
A fearful scourge for sin to be
as Scripture does explain.
A taste whereof we may perceive,
for his infernal fire
Has millions slain in town and field,
by Mars his furious ire.
Yet though it seem most merciless,
our God will have it so,
That from the self-same subject shall
great choice of medicines flow.
Yea it one chief amongst three is held
in all that live and breath,
And Vegetables it maintains,
yet burns in Caves beneath.
A Father it is of Minerals,
Philosophers say so,
By help whereof they are made concreat,
from Chaos whence they grow*
The Sulphur that is in Animals,
in fatness chiefly stands,
Each odor be it good or bad,
is linck't in Sulphurs bands.
The Vegent Sulph'urs many are,
each answering to his kind,
Some Gummy, Oylely, watery
and airy eke inclined.
Yea Sulphur vini glads man's heart,
his courage it does whet,
And many a strong man it pulls down,
it can inebriate.
I mean the sulphrous spirits of wine,
Sir Barly-corn also
Has showed himself a man at Arms
each plowman that does know.
But to return being wide digrest
from what I have in hand,
The mineral Sulphur was my scope,
well known at Sea and Land.
Which Brimstone crude against itches tried,
in country and in town,
And to kill worms in man and beast
is used of every clown.
The oil of Sulphur well prepared,
a jewel is of price:
His Balsam precious is also,
these are no new device.
The quintessence thereof is pure,
and cheers each vital part,
Yea, being prepared faithfully,
it does revive the heart.
The flowers serve against pestilence,
against Asthma and the Murre,
Against Fevers and against Plurisies;
to appetite a spur.
Unto the Lungs a Balsam it is,
the Colic it does cure,
From falling sickness it defends
and is both safe and sure.
In Physic and Chirurgerie
great help it does produce,
To him that has it well prepared,
and rightly knows his use.
But Chymick medicines are to fools
like swords in mad men's hands,
When they should aid, often times do kill,
such hazard in them stands.
Let Surgeons Mates to whom I write,
be warned by me their friend,
And not too rashly give a Dose,
which then is too late to mend.
For many a good man leaves his life,
through errors of that kind,
Which I wish young men would avoid
and bear my words in mind.
Though Sulphur, Sal, and Mercury,
have healing medicines store,
Yet know the have poison and can kill,
prepare them well therefore.
MERCVRIVS.

My shape and habit strange you see,
my actions best can witness me:
About the world I take my way,
with Sol in circuit once a day.
From earth to sky with often returns,
from substance to a blast:
From good to bad and good again,
hence winged I fly in have.

OF MERCURY in General.
Mercury commended and dispraysed.
Mercury is generally taken by Chemists for one of the three principles
whereof each complete creature is framed by nature, and it is also the first
which forsakes his fellows, being assailed by Vulcane; it is in truth a
fugitive vagrant substance, which in the preparing of diverse simple medicines,
is scarce to be esteemed worth the glass which contains it, it being also the
faintest and weakest part of the three, for performing any good thing it self,
yet if you pass higher in Art then to a simple work, and that you would make a
true essential medicine, in such a case it is worthy of equal respect with the
rest: namely, either with the Salt, or Sulphurous part of the medicine. It is
of some Artists termed a Phlegma, a water or a dew, as being the watrish part
of a medicine, it is so easy to to be exhausted from his fellows, that the
very warmth of the Sun will raise it, yea warm air without fire or other
help in some simples is sufficient to dry their humidity, though not always
wholly: but A special observation.
note this that all the humiditie, in medicines is not to be termed Mercurial
or Mercury: for any humiditie, though it be not oily, yet if it be combustible,
it is termed Sulphurious, to wit, Aqua vit^ as is said, even so much thereof as
will burn is held Sulphur Vini. Thus much of Mercury in general.

Of Mercury in particul^^.
MErcury is a special name which wise Philosophers of ancient time have thought
meet to grace Quicksilver withal, the reason whereof in my opinion was, for
that Quicksilver is an unstable or Mercury taken for Quicksilver.
Quicksilver. very medicinable.
uncertain Metalline substance fugitive, and not well any way to be made fix
or faithful, as trial will teach thee to know. And yet of Quicksilver is made
many several sorts of medicines, each in their names and operations much
differing, according to their virtues, several uses and effects which they
perform: Sublimed Mercury is called Mercury sublimate white Mercury. Whereof it
is made.
only by the name of Mercury, and by the vulgar speech, some call it white
Marcary and Markry. This corrosive medicine is made of Quicksilver, salt, and
the Colcother of Vitriol only by sublimation or distilling them together with
the Quicksilver, which Quic-silver flies up to the top of the helm or head of
the Still, together with the spirits of salt, leaving the substance of the
salt, as also the Colcother in the The subtle quality of Quicksilver.
bottom of the glass which is thereby said to be sublimed, yet nevertheless
though it seem easily to be made, let none attempt to make this medicine
without good direction or experience, for there is no small danger in the
working thereof, and yet it is a good medicine well used, and has much helped
the Surgeon in the outward cures of desperate diseases, as namely fistulaes and
rebellious ulcers.

Of Precipitate,
How Precipitate is made.
PRecipitate is also Quicksilver distilled in Aqua fortis, which by reason of
the strong spirits contained in the violent and fierce vapors of the Aqua
fortis or strong water, it is colored red, or glistering, or yellowish, as
experience shows* the vapors proceeding from this kind of preparation are
also dangerous, and so are the medicines made therewith being often without due
respect admi^nistred, yea j. of Praecipitate one dosse often Pil^ wise by
E^pe^icks. And again some others which would be esteemed more excellent for
invention have this medicine a little removed. And then they style it Tur^^th,
mineral, attributing thereto the perfect cure of the Pox* persuading themselves
none can do like wonders to themselves, but they are children in understanding,
and know i^ not, only they are opinionated and The subtilty of Mercury.
bold, and more often kill or spoil* then heal, as their consciences know; for
mercury is a fox, and will be too crafty for fools, yea and will often leave them
to their disgrace, when they relying upon so uncertain a medicine, promise
health, and in the stead of healing make their Patient worsethen before.

Of Sinabar.
Whereof Sinabrium is made, and the use and abuse thereof.
SInabar which is used in fumes for the Pox, is a deadly medicine made half of
quicksilver, and half of Brimstone by Art of fire, I mean by distillation: I
know the abuse of these three recited medicines has done unspeakable harm in
the Commonwealth of England, and daily does more and more, working the utter
infamy and destruction of many an innocent man, woman, and child, which I would
my wits or dili^gence knew to help, for every horse-leech and bawd now upon
each tri^^e will procure a Mercurial flux* yea many a pitiful one, whereby
diverse innocent people are dangerously deluded, yea perpetually defamed and
ruinated both of their good names, goods, healths and lives, and that without
remedy. Me thinks I could spend much time if I had it, even in setting down the
good and bad things of quicksilver, and yet I confess I am too weak to to
describe the tenth part of his wonders.

In Laudem Mercurii: OR IN PRAISE OF Quicksilver or Mercury.
VVHereto shall I thy worth compare,
whose actions so admired are?
No medicine known is like to thee,
in strength, in virtue and degree.
Thou to each Artist wise art found,
a secret rare, ye safe and sound,
And valiantly thou plai'st thy part,
to cheerup many a doleful heart.
Yet make thy patient seem like death,
with ugly (...) with stinking breath:
But thou to health him soon restores,
although he have a thousand sores.
The perfect'st cure proceeds from thee,
for Pox, for Gout, for Leprosy,
For scabs, for itch, of any sort,
These cures with thee are but a sport.
Thou humors can force to sublime,
and them throw down when thou see time.
Yea from each end diseases fly,
when thou art pressed thy force to try.
Sweat to provoke, thou go before,
and urine thou can move good store,
To vomit for diversion best,
in purging down thou guid'st the rest.
Man's body dry thou can humeckt
performing it with respect,
And being too moist thou make it dry
who can that secret cause descry.
Quid non men term thee, wot's thou why?
thou can be faithful, yet wilt lie:
Thy temperament unequal strange,
is ever subject unto change.
For thou art moist all men may see,
and thou art dry in the highest degree:
You Are hot and cold even when thou please,
and at thy will giv'st pain in ease.
Yet thou have faults, for I dare say,
thou heal'st and kil'st men every day,
For which I will not thee excuse,
nor hold them wise that thee abuse.
But for my self I do protest,
as trusty friend within my breast,
Thy secrets rare most safe to hold,
esteeming them as finest gold.
And why? thou art the Surgeons friend,
his work thou can begin and end:
For tumors cure, yea hot or cold,
thou art the best, be it new or old.
For recent wounds who knows thee,
has got a peerlesse mystery:
A Caustic thou art strong and sure,
what callous flesh can thee endure?
In maturation where it is dew,
thou art the best I ever knew:
For repercussion thou win'st praise,
by dissolution thou giv'st ease.
What Is virulent thou do defy,
and sordid Ulcers do descry:
Yea fistulaes profound and fell,
thou searchest out and curest well.
No ulcer can thy force endure,
for in digestion thou art sure:
Mundification comes from thee,
and incarnation thou have free.
To sigillate thou do not fail,
and left strange symptoms should assail
The grief late healed, thou can convay,
the offending cause another way.
The Alchymist by Vulcan sought,
from volatile thee fixed to have wrought:
But thou defiest his trumpery,
and changest him to beggary.
Had I but all thy healing Art,
it would so much advance my heart,
I should not doubt equal to be
In wealth to Lords of high degree.
But from thy ve nemous vapors vile,
thy corrosive sting that bones defile,
Thy noisome savors full of pain,
God give me grace free to remain.
For when thou ragest, Bird, nor Tree,
nor fish, nor fowl can withstand thee:
What mineral so stout can say,
she can withstand thy force one day?
In Saturns breast thou seem to dwell,
by Jupiter* foyl thou do excel,
Thou Lion-like surprisest Mars,
rich Sol thou make as pale as ash.
Thou Venus beauty can allay,
thou Hydrage do Elipse Luna:
And though thou seem to wrong all six,
not one without thee can be fix.
Thou art their Mother, so says Fame,
which gives them cause to adore thy name:
Ready thou art as women be,
to help poor men in misery.
Humble; to dust, and ash at will
water and oil from thee men still:
Tossed up and down in fire thou art,
yet subtle Mercury plays her part:
Meek as a Lamb, manly cake,
soft as the Wool, Tiger like:
Millions in one, one in a Million,
Male and Female in thy pavillion.
Thou Hermaphrodite as Fathers know,
seeming solid, truly not so:
Thou Wilt be in all, none rests in thee,
thy boldness brings Cal^mitie.
Thou Idol of the Chemists old,
who shall thy secrets all unfold?
Swift is thy wing, none can thee stay,
when thou seem dead, you are flown away.
If thou be in all things as men say,
daily produced and fled away,
Up to sky, down to the grave,
a wonder like thee, where shall men have?
But mend thy faults or thou shall hear,
I Will blaze them out another year:
For many a guiltless man thou have lamed,
and many a modest wight defamed.
And yet it is sin to wrong a thief,
the Impostors fault therein was chief;
For he that would be bold with thee,
'twere meet he knew Philosophy.
For thou to such art known and true,
but hate fools that men undo,
Handling thee without due cause,
thou being not subject to their laws.
Now to conclude, one boon grant me,
I will requite it gratefully:
If the old wife kill thee with fasting spittle,
survive to make her patient cripple.
For well I know it is in thee,
to cause disgrace effectually:
His throat and nose see thou defile,
For thou thy Father can beguile.
Force out his teeth, close up his jaw,
and leave scarce entrance for a straw:
Yea deaf, or dumb see thou him make,
with ache and woe, with palsy shake.
Regard not thou though he should curse,
whose griefs thou have changed from ill to worse.
It Is known by thee there is many sleep,
for whom it is now too late to weep.
I Will leave thee lest thy anger rise,
thy favors let no man despise:
For as sword drawn, I know you are pressed,
men to offend, or yield them rest.
To any moved at these mean rimes,
I answer 'twas my idle times,
And love to youths in Surgerie,
urged me to unmask old Mercury.
If Zoylus deem I stretch too wide,
in praising thee what here is descri'd,
I nothing doubt to prove each line,
to him that quarrels, in-due time.
A word or two touching the four Elements. The four Elements are Fire, Air,
Water, and Earth. But the division which the Chemists of these times plead for
touching the Elements, Josephus Quercitanus expresses in these words
following: says he, The whole world is The whole world contained in two
globes. What is comprehended in the superior Globe. What the inseriour
contains.
divided into two Globes, to wit, into the superior Heaven, which is
Aetheriall and Aerie, and into the inferior Globe which contains the Water,
and the Earth. The superior Globe which is Aetheriall, has in it fire,
lightning, and brightness, and this fiery Heaven is one formal and essential
Element; the water and earth are the other two Elements* so he concludes, there
is but three, and with him all the Chemists of latter times subscribe,
affirming that number most perfect which agrees with the everlasting Trinity.

Paracelsus in a Treatise of his, called Meteorum, cap. 1. mentioning the
difference betwixt four and three Elements, has these words. Touching fire;
says he, fire which is esteemed* one of the four Elemente, can stand with no
reason so to be: but as touching the Earth, the Water, and the Air, they are
truly Elements; for they give Element ^o man, but as touching fire, it gives
no Element, it has no part in the breeding of mankind, for it is well
possible for a man to be bred, and to live without fire; but neither without
air, water, nor earth can man live, for in truth from the heavens, by help of
the other two Elements does proceed Summer and Winter, cold and heat, and all
nourishment and increase whatsoever without the help of fire. Therefore are the
heavens the fourth Element, yea and the first, for the sacred Word shows us
that in the beginning God made Heaven and Earth, showing that Heaven was the
first made, and in the outward heavens are included the water and earth, which*
says Paracelsus, may be compared to wine contained in a vessel, for wine is
not gathered and prepared without a vessel first had and ready, proving also
many ways that the fire is included within the Element of Air, and is no
Element of it self. To prove the like opinion, touching the four Elements, I
could rehearse the names of many famous Writers if I had leisure, and that the
occasion were worth it, but the question little concerns the cure of diseases
by young Chirurgions, wherefore I will conclude this point my self, intending
neither to quarrel for to prove three, nor four, let there be four or three,
either of both shall contentme.

Certain Fragments concerning Chirurgerie and Alchymie.
To the Chirurgicall Reader.
LOving Reader, I held it not altogether impertinent to acquaint thee as by the
way with some customs which I have observed concerning Chirurgions in foreign
parts in my younger days travels, and chiefly in the Germane Empire, as
touching their manner of allowing or approving of Chirurgions in those parts,
if by accident any young Artist should affect to make trial by travel thither
for his better experience, as I my self have done, he may take notice hereby
for his instruction.

Imprimis, their orders there generally are, that every City, Town Corporte, or
place privileged, has a constant rule, as by ancient tradition of the
allowing of only an usual accustomed number of Chirurgions thereunto
appertaining, so that for one instance if the City of Hamburge has twelve
Chirurgions belonging thereto, although a thousand pound should be tendered in
any way to produce a freedom for a thirteenth Surgeon, it could not
prevail, nor would be taken there; as likewise generally it is so all over
Germany, and each Surgeon is bred and must be a Barber, and so are all
Barber Chirurgions; and if any one die, his Office, Art, and place rests in the
power or disposing of his wife, to the use of her and hers, so that who so
marries her, or compoundeth with her, of what Nation or Country soever he be
that shall exercise the place, it is alike provided he be brought in by the
widow, as her husband or agent for her, he is capable of a place void, having
first made his masterpiece, and performed some Manual exercises usual with
them in his art of Chirurgerie, thereby to give a sufficient testimony to the
world of his answerable skill in his Art or Science, as namely, either by
grinding, and setting a delicate lancet, and therewith opening several veins
smoothly, for the more manifest effecting whereof to the brethren of his
calling, one will lend him his vein, namely, one on the thumb, one on the foot,
and one on the arm, one other on the forehead, as also by the neat and exact
making an artificial Emplaster, Unguent, or the like: which done, being by rest
of the Masters of the City approved of, and some other rites and ceremonies
answering to his calling by him performed, according to the custom of the
place that he intends to reside in, he is then being esteemed a Regular
person, and also having made the Brotherhood of the place and himself well
drunk once, twice, or thrice, he is, I say, (ipso s^cto) admitted to be a
brother, and freely to use his Function, and i^ styled by the name and honor
of a Master of his profession. Thus much of their custom. But our customs are
different from theirs, and are far better, namely, our Company of Chirurgions
of the City of London, in the Hall of the Society, have a more commendable
custom, for we not only examine Chirurgions, and try their skils in that way,
as being of ancient time used and practiced amongst us, but also we have
profitable, learned and experienced Lectures read amongst us, having two
laudable ends and effects in them, the one in testifying their own, I mean the
Readers sufficiencies; the other in seasoning and instructing of their
auditors, namely, the younger sort of practitioners in the Art they profess:
and yet they have a third good end, namely, they serve for the public good of
the whole Commonwealth, by training up, and breeding of able Chirurgions upon
all occasions. No^^ Medicos tantum facit experientia doctos:
Qui facit artifices, usus ab art venit.
And of these our laudable customs and exercises in our Hall, my self have
been both an eye and ear witness to diverse worthy Artists at their Lectures
there, that have showed themselves Masters indeed in their Arts to their due
commendations (Virtus landatur ab illis) as also at the Lectures of diverse
learned Doctors in that place: but as for my self, although I have there as I
may not deny exercises by public reading of Lectures in my turn and place, yet
my ambition at the highest has been openly to deliver my self to the world to
the Chirurgions Mate, as aspiring to soar no higher, (Ne suitor ultra crepidam.)
In which being, first I have explained to the world a Model of the Military
Chirurgions chest, with the instruments and medicines fitting thereunto, as
elsewhere is recited, thereby to intimate to the younger Chirurgions in some
sort how they may make use of them in all public services for the better
performance of their duties in their callings, upon all military occasions, for
the more speedy curing of such infirmities as Seamen and Soldiers are most
incident unto, and having finished my intent therein, at the entreaty of some
of my good friends, I thought it fit, though in brief, to write somewhat by way
of addition to my former edition of Sal, Sulphur and Mercury, and, namely, how
they are made the more known and useful unto us by the Chymick art, or the art
of Alchymie which the Chirurgions ought to be versed in, and which in brief is
thus defined.

De definitione Alchymiae.
Alchymia est ars corpora naturalia mista solvendi, and soluta coagula^^^ ad
medicamenta gratiora, salubriora and tutiora concinnanda.

The definition of Alchimy.
Alchimy is an Art dissolving natural congealed substances, and again
congealing substances dissolved, for the more grateful, wholesome, and safe
preparing of medicines for man's body.

Secunda definitio.
Oswaldus Crollius
Alchymia est ars perficiendi magisterii and essentias pur as and mistas,
separato corpore extrahendi.

A second definition thereof
Alchymie is an Art which produces magisterial, and essential medicines from
mixed bodies.

The parts of Alchymie.
Libanius.
The parts thereof by ancient Writers are accounted two, namely, Encheriae,
Alchymiae.


Encheriae is said to be that part which performs the operative parts of the
Art.

Alchymiae is termed the mixing and finishing part of the said Science.

Of the antiquary, the first inventers, and worthiness of the excellent Art of
Alchymy.
IT is recorded by ancient Writers that the first inventer thereof was Tubal
Cain, spoken of in the holy Scriptures, who as some Writers say, was called
Vulcan, Is enim primus in metallurgia laborasse scribitur. That he did first of
all men work in Metals, which is within the scope of Alchymie, and not the
least part thereof.

After him as Records witness, Hermes also called Mercurius Trismegistus, an
Egyptian king, was a worthy Inventer or founder of Alchymie, being famous in
his days for the transmutation of metals, whereby certain instrumental parts
belonging to the hidden mystery of Alchymie bear their names, that is to say,
Vas Hermetis, Pellicanus Hermetis, Sigillum Hermetis, etc. This Hermes as is
said by Husius an ancient writer lived king of Egypt about the year of the
world 2646. so also in the learned Mesues works is mentioned Pill. Hermat.
Hiera Hermetis, etc.

The Art of it self is also called Ars Hermetis, and for the transmutation of
metals that is also understood with Gebreus Mauritanus to have proceeded from
Hermes, the which in this work the Author intends not at all to handle, but
only of the inventers of this Art: some writers say, the Arabians, and others
the Persians, are thought to be the first that have prepared metals fit for
medicines, and also have practiced the distlling of Liquors: whence Avicen of
Sansano is said to have studied Alchymie, and he makes mention of Sublimation
and precipitation. Also many other Princes and Philosophers moved thereunto no
doubt de prescientia Dei, esteemed themselves exceedingly graced by the works
they performed in that Art for the curing of many infirmities.

Amongst which one of the most famous and so most truly worthy was that
excellent Philosopher for art and experience Philippus Theofrastus Bombast,
otherwise named Paracelsus, who descended from a princely family in high
Germany, in the country or Province of Helvetia commonly called Switherland;
upon whose monument, to his perpetual fame is engraven the verses following.
Divinus tali est Paracelsus in art mon archa,
Secula cui similem nulla tulere virum.
And whose engraven Motto was: Alterius non sit qui suus esse potest. And
Bazillius Valentinus seconded him, who having his lights from the former
exceedingly beautified the Chymick Art, by composing medicines of unspeakable
worth to future ages, far exceeding their worthy predecessors as is manifest;
for what comparison can there be betwixt medicines made of vegetables,
decocted, contunded or mixed how artificial soever, if compared with Elixers,
Quintessences, Tinctors, and like extracts of price, which are not only
dureable for many years without change, easy and pleasant to be received into
man's body in his greatest weakness, but also they excel all Galenistical
compositions for the eradicating inveterate maladies, as experience more then
sufficiently manifests. For example, suppose a sweat provoking medicine were
to be used of four, six, or eight grains, being a Diaphoretick of gold, or
suppose but of Sulphur in or with a fitting vehicle given, as, namely, in a
little Mithridate, Conserve of Roses, that by causing a gentle sweat would
extinguish a pestilential fever: were it not far easier for the sick to receive
into his body then a decoction made of sudorifick herbs, as Carduus Angelica,
or Centaury with Mithridate and syrups justly composed, as in that form is
usual, or that an Extract being a Catholicon purgans ten or fifteen grains
whereof being extracted from a vegetable, which without any offensive nauseous
taste, or bitterness at all, does work effectually to the desire of the
Artist, suppose you it shall not be as much to the reputation of the Artist,
and to the content and profit of the patient, as if he had taken a dose of
Diaphenicon, or confectio Hamech, with the usual additaments of decoctions or
syrups thereunto as vehicles added.

Or that a dose of a Panchiagagon of 20. grains be not far more grateful to a
sick stomach, then an ounce of Diacatholicon de succ. Rosarum, Confectio
Hamech, or the like, it being daily manifest that the very sight of large doses
of medicines, although good, are nauseous, and abhorred of the weak stomach,
yea that many Patients will endure the disease rather then the medicine;
whereas on the contrary true prepared Chymick medicines are not only grateful
to be received into the body, but also, as is said, far excel the others in
virtue and potent operation: and whereas the Surgeon cannot at all times
advise with the learned Physician, as fitting and most requisite he should in
cases of Physic, where such may be had for the health of his patient, as
namely, the Surgeon being at Sea, and upon long Voiages, or at land in the
Camp or Country, where learned advice cannot readily be had, they have
especial reason if they be men provident to be furnished with such medicines as
are small of dose, and light of portage, being also such as do not putrify,
nor in one year change their accustomed natures and virtues, no nor in any
Voyage how long soever: all which Chymick medicaments do well perform, yea
though they be carried in ships and pass the line more then once.

Whereas few medicines made of Vegetables that are in common practice, though
sound from the Apothecaries shops, will be found serviceable upon just occasion
if they go but a six months voyage, as daily experience shows, and as the
Reader may easily conceive: wherefore then how needful, precious, and how truly
valuable such medicines be, let any indifferent person judge, that being truly
made, duly administered, and their doses and uses observed and known.

A further explanation of Alchymy containing a division of Natures whole works
into three parts, viz. Animal, Vegetable and Mineral.
OSwaldus Crollius a learned writer, as also Beguinus, and diverse others with
him of that sort do affirm that tota natura inferior sub Sole in tres parts
dividitur, viz. Animalia, Vegetabilia, and Mineralia. The whole inferior work
of Nature under the Sun is divided into these three principles, viz. into
Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral creatures. The Animal Creatures are termed or
said to be all whatsoever contains life: the Vegetable creatures are termed
or meant to be all that which grows. And under the Mineral part is included
all metals, stones, minerals, and whatsoever it be that neither vegetateth,
upon the upper face of the earth, nor lives:and from each of these three, by
learned Authors is taught, and by experience is found out, that there is again
a threefold substance to be extracted, and perfectly to be made apparent in
every of these creatures; and these threefold substances are called Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury: and beginning with the last first, their further
definitions follow.

A brief definition of Mercury.
MErcury is a liquid substance sower, or sharp, volatile, penetrable, ayrie,
and most pure, from which all nourishment proceeds, as also all sense,
motion, strength, and color, and the keeping back old age from man, chiefly
next the divine operations of God rests therein, and it agrees well with the
elements of air and water; for to the former it is subject upon every offered
occasion to vanish into the soft air: to the latter, in that it is very
difficultly contained in any straight or certain bound, but easily in a vaste
or wide capacity. Likewise there are that define Mercury to be a liquid
substance, that is Eger, Porous, always moveable, often mutable, and ea^ily
penetrable, and a body that is most pure and heavenly, most subtle, and of a
lively and spiritual substance, being the food of life, and yet a shape, that
is also most mutable, concerning his several shapes of all other creatures;
whereupon Phalopius terms Mercury, Miraculum naturae mundo, The miracle of
Nature in the world. In which definition, if the Reader may suppose I speak
this of the vulgar Mercury, viz. Quicksilver, and the wonderful Imps of his
production, he takes me off too short by figure. Wherefore I here conclude the
definition of Mercury, and pass to Sulphur.

A brief definition of Sulpur.
SVlphur by the ancient Writers is said to be the balsam of Nature, it is
sweet, oily, and clammy, preserving the natural heat of the body, being the
instrumental cause of all strength, of all increasing or generation, of all
transmutation, and the fountain and wellspring of all sents both sweet and
stinking: and it is compared unto fire, by reason of the flame which it easily
gathers, as other gummy and oily bodies do, and this one thing is proper to it,
that it has force of making fit and conglutinating the greatest contraries;
and Beguinus a famous late writer, gives an example thereof: For, says he,
thou can^t never make a fit clay with water and fand, unless thou mingle Lyme
or some other conglutinating body with it, so neither fleeting Mercury, nor
fixed Sal, can by any means be forced into one substance, and framed into one
body, but by a band and fetter of Sulphur, which participates through the
clammy and viscous substance thereof with both the natures of Sal and Mercury,
and so joyneth them into one, to wit, it makes a true accord betwixt the
dryness of Sal and the moystnesse of Mercury, by the thickness and
viscousnesse of Sulphur, and so conjoyneth them both jointly into one body,
neither may this Sulph^r be taken to be merely Brimstone, but rather which in
truth it is the fatty and combuftible parts of the body, or substance from
which it is drawn, be it of what quality soever.

A brief definition of Salt.
SAlt has a body that is dry, savourie, and bitter, defending both the mixed
and unmixed parts from putrefaction; it exceeds in the faculties of
dissolving, and discussing, coagulating, evacuating, and scowring; and yet from
Salt is all the virtue of the two last recited principles borrowed, with their
tastes, and infinite other excellent properties it have, so as the analogy of
it answers the earth, not because it is merely cold and dry, for in truth
Minerals generally have no certain temperaments, nor can be confined truly
under the attributes, hot, cold, dry, or moist, for that a Mineral is an
elementarie body that is of it self firm and fixed; and therefore for his
operative excellency is unsearchable, specifical, and incomprehensible, not to
be limited or subjugated to any one temperament, neither to be comprehended
within humane capacity. This may seem unto the Reader but a strange Paradox,
except by a plainer definition it be explained, as namely, whether that the
Salt here mentioned is ^eally Salt, such as is commonly used for salting meat,
and also to declare that Sulphur is really Brimstone, and that Mercury has the
name of Quick*silver generally: Unto all which I answer, They are; And yet as
is said, they are not merely so, ^or that as concerning Salt, each creature
has his peculiar Salt, and each peculiar his appropriate and different
faculty and virtue. And here I desire t^ inform the younger men that are
Chi^urgions, by way of digression, for their better knowledge in avoiding of
dangers, that they be exceeding cautelous and wary in the inward use of all
Mineral medicines, whose preparations they are not t^uely versed in, but
chiefly of that great and wonderful Idol Mercury, not in regard of the great
good it daily does by the judicious use thereof, for it is a gracious good
thing; but rather I speak in respect of the great hurt and mischief it daily
produces by the abusive preparation and administration thereof: but for as
much as Mineral medicines have their due denominations according to the seven
Planets, it will not be impertinent for the younger sort of Chirurgions, that
in brief I write somewhat of the seven prime Metals ascribed to the seven
Planets.

A brief Chymicall Narration concerning the seven principle Metals,
denominated according to the seven Planets.
MAny of the prime Authors of the Chymick art have, and that not unfitly,
ascribed the seven principle Metals into seven Planets* as namely, they have
ascribed Gold unto S^l, ^ilver to Luna, Copper to Venus, Iron to Mars, Tynne to
Jupiter, Mercury to Quicksilver, and Saturn to Lead, and have nominated them
accordingly; and so in generalll explanations of all the learned Chemists, they
stand to this day known by the aforesaid attributes. The an^ient Philosophers
Chvmists also have ascribed to each of these seven metals, or rather to the
medicines made of them, a certain specificall or more peculiar operative power,
or faculty in the curing of the diseases of some one part of man's body more
then of another, and namely, unto Sol or Gold and his medicine, is ascribed a
specificall faculty or hidden virtue, more exquisite in the cures of the
disease of the heart, unto Luna or Silver, the cures of the infirmities of the
head, and chiefly of the brain are ascribed; and to Jupiter or Tin, is referred
the help of the diseases of the Lungs, unto Mercury, or Quicksilver, is
ascribed an especial privilege in the cures of the disease of the Liver; unto
Saturn or Lead, is appointed the healing of the infirmities of the Spleen; Mars
or Iron, is said to cure the grief of the Kidneyes best, and unto Venus or
Copper, is left to heal the defects of the Genitals, and this is not only so
esteemed, but also practiced accordingly, and that by Authority of many famous
Writers ratified, as of Josephus Quercitanus, Tho. Muffetus, Jacobus
Swinglerus, and very many other worthy Authors in that Art, the number of which
it would be tedious to repeat, in regard that all and each of these Minerals
have their several medicines proceeding, or made out of them, which although
they all do not always bear the proper name of the Original Metal from
whence they proceed, yet in some sort they do, and namely, from Sol or Gold
proceeds, Elixer vitae, Aurum Potabile, Aurum Tinctura.

Aurum Solutivum,
Aurum vitae Meum.
Aurum vitae Theophrasti and many more.
And from Saturn or Lead proceeds Oleum Saturni, lac virginis, Saccarum
Saturni.

V^guentum Minii.
Emplastrum de Minio.
Lithergerie Auri Argenti and Plumbi Sacc^rum Saturni.
Plumbum album.
Cerusse, and many other good Sanative medicines.

And the like of the rest of the seven Minerals in use, too long to repeat: and
here as by the way you may take notice concerning Saturn or Lead, that all
sorts of Lithergie, they are no other thing then Lead merely, and to be reduced
into Lead again; even so Mercury or Quicksilver, which has these following
medicines, and many other profitable preparations descending from it, viz*

Essentiade Mercurio. Turbith Minerale. Mercurius vitae, which is vomative.
Balsamu^ Mercurii, a sanative. Mercurius Diaphoretic. provoking Sweat.
Mercurius Diaureticus, provoking Urine. Mercurius Laxativus, purging per
secessu^. Beazor Minerale, which is different two ways. viz. Laxance, Vomative.
Mercurius Dulcis, Specifical in operation. Mercurius cum Jove, Lac Mercurii,
Sublimatum, in it self Corrosive, desiccative, Pracipitatum, suspected to have
been the death of many a man Aqua Mercurii ex Mercur: Sublimat: and ex
prae^ipitat. Ablutio Mercurii vitae. Oleum Mercurial: Sinabrium: and diverse
other preparations.
And yet to all these apparently in use may be added diverse waters, oils,
liquors, etc. proceeding from this wonder of nature, Mercury; and yet
nevertheless there is scarce one of these medicines, but may be reduced or
turned again in his prima substantia, that is to say, those that are really of
Argent^m vivum into plain Quicksilver, in despite of the old wife that killed
it with fa^ting spittle; And Sinabrium is a Dog of the same Mercurial kind,
being made of Brimstone and Quicksilver sublimed together, and therefore a
Coarse and far more dangerous medicine then the medic^nes of mere Quicksilver
in my apprehension, for by the only once subliming thereof with Sulphur it
begets a Corrosive or venomous quality, as all experienced Artists well
know Mercurius sublimate does, and that a fierce on^: therefore though some
have counseled to themselves, that supposed safe but most pernicious medicine,
that they have found as a rare devised secret by the mutation of Mercury into
Sinabrium, let them know, be they old or young Artists, that it is a divellish,
deadly, coarse medicine, no way safe nor fitting to enter in, or to be put into
man's body. I fear I may trouble your patience in dwelling too long upon this
false fellow Mercury, whom fully to discover with all his miraculous effects,
especially if I should unfold all his perfidious clusions and treacheries
against the poor Patients that are under his dominion, that only subject
would fill a large Volume, and yet I must ever confess, as I have said
elsewhere, I have found him my good friend many times at a pinch* yet let no
Artist that truly fears God be too bold with him: for that Mercury (under
the Rose be it spoken) is a cruel Man-slaier, and has wounded, defamed, yea,
and murdered thousands in corners, yea and does play the Devil daily both in
City and Country; and that under a vizard of virtue, yea and sometimes under
the Rose does it Cum privilegio Magistra^is, upon whose guiltless corpse so
transferred into Abraham's bosom no earthly Jurie passes. For it is then too
late to call to mind whether Art or Nature were too blame, or by which the
error proceeded: for, under favor be it spoken, sometimes it is cast upon the
knave Mercury* which then he ever retorts it upon the Imposer: and he the
Impostor, like a jugler, blames poor Venus with the cause, but how true God
knows* yet she, pretty poor shamefast soul, being amazed and abashed,
knowing her self to be a sinner, yet conceiving it unmercifull that her sweet
lover and friend should die by the cruel hand of a murderer Mercury, for a
little sweet pleasure; she has no wit to lay it where truly it should be, but
plead Ignoramus, conceiving yet dares not say that some of the greater Planets,
as Sol, or Luna, by their gliddering shows wrought with some body that perhaps
ignorantly put that Idol Mercury by Vulcans means, to play the Dragon. And so
no more of that, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, etc. leaving
suggestions and conceits, and may be's.

We will again to our intended scope, namely, to speak of better things,
concerning the secrets of the Art, and leaving the errors of Impostors with
all their base and dangerous elusions and abuses, and proceed to the
information of the well disposed younger artists. And in this place considering
that Mercury is appointed and appropriated, as formerly is expressed, to the
cure of the diseases of the Liver. I cannot but put the Reader in mind to
admire the exceeding deep wisdom Prove. 7. 6. to the end.
of that most prudent King Solomon, as appears in the Proverbs, in his
description of the whorish woman, who after his setting forth of her dangerous
wiles and cunning inticements for the intrapping of the foolish young man, he
thus concludes: The young man goes after her as an Ox to the slaughter, or as
a fool to the stocks, till a dart strike through his Liver; or as a bird
hastes to the snare, not knowing it is for his life: and concludes, her house
is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. In which attributes of
Mercuvie, as aforesaid, to the healing of the Liver, it seems to me Mercury is
as it were by God and Natures appointment prefigured and enjoined for the
healing of the foolish young man that had the dart stricken through his Liver;
for I am confident that dart was by Solomon meant the contagious disease of the
French pox, which by coitu vel contact^, the poor fool gained by his folly from
the whorish woman; for that the learned and expert artist, not only by the
pulse and the urine, but by the complaint of the Patient, yea and by his very
countenance may gather his disease, and that Solomon's Dart has stricken his
Liver even with the pox. For in the perfect cure whereof, the Liver is first to
be rectified, for the which work I had almost said Mercury is beyond
comparison, if he be well guided by the experienced artist: But if otherwise,
Mercury is a Dragon, who for healing and killing has no fellow, as I formerly
have denoted more then once. And whereas it is vulgarly alleged that Chymick
medicines prepared of Minerals, and namely of Mercury, are dangerous and
deadly, it is not denied but that they are so, if that by art (puru^ ab impuro)
the pure from the impure be not separated; but this advantage the true Chemist
says he has, that in the preparing of his medicines he can take the pure from
the impure. Whereas even by the books of Hippocrates, Galen, Diascorides, and
very many of the most reverend ancient Writers it is manifest, witness
Antidotarium Mirspitium, and many other works and dispensatories which testify
that they themselves have not at all, so much as undertaken to separate purum
ab impuro, but have made and administered many Mineral medicines being of crude
and unpurified substances amongst the rest. Bondeletius used to give crude
Mercury in pills to robust bodies to kill worms, and for the pox: and Crato a
famous Physician to three Emperors, is said to have used to administer
Zinabrium for the giddiness of the head. Julius Alexandrinus, Matthrolus and
Gesnerus, these all used to give crude Copperas in Fluxes, as witness
Beguinus, and Falopius used crude filings of Iron in menstruous obstructions,
also in the Jaundise; and crude Sulphur in the effects of the Lungs. The
premises therefore considered, judge then if the true prepared Chymick
medicines given with judgment be not far more noble and worthy in themselves
then they aforesaid, and the rather to be embraced, in that it is daily
manifest, that the Galenistical preparations of vegetable medicaments fail much
in their ascribed or prescribed virtues, especially with our Sea Chirurgions,
as is said in foreign parts, to the danger, yea and to the loss of many of
their Patients; yet not in the least excusing of the abuses by false prepared
Chymick medicines, and the harm they produce by their unskilful preparations,
and the absurd administration of them, alluding whereunto diverse worthy and
famous Writers have mentioned caveats, and namely, Laurentius Hofmanes, a
learned German Chemist in his book entitled De vero us^ and sero abusu
medic^mentorum Chymicorum: he uses these words following as an instance of the
danger of a false Chymick medicine.

An History.
A false Chymick medicine prepared unduely, and so given (says he) may not
unfitly be compared to certain dangerous subtle Rats in India, which by nature
do watch the Crocodile of those parts, which usually sleeps with his mouth wide
open, and these Rats being smooth and soft in their entrance, do not awake the
poor Crocodile at all, but go in at his mouth very smoothly, and easily without
troubling him by taste, touch, or smell; yet nevertheless, after they are got
quietly into his bowels, forthwith they with their divellish sharp small teeth,
begin to bite the poor Crocodile, and in a small time they do so corrode his
entrals, that they make their own way out at their pleasure, by the killing the
poor creature, and that if not immediately, yet by a languishing deadly
disease, they perform their divellish end by perforating his entrals, and so
that improvident creature dies.

The occasion of the aforesaid Author, his alleging this comparison, proceeded
by reason such an Indian Rat, or rather in truth by a false Mineral medicine
put into the body of a Brother of his, as he affirmed, which very smoothly went
in at his mouth, but within a short time had cruelly effected the killing of
the party. Also to the same purpose, one Forestus of Paris a learned Writer
affirms upon his knowledge, that thousands of people in that city, have dyed
by taking of dangerous, and not well prepared Mineral, and for the most part
Mercurial medicines, and one Crato an ancient Writer also affirms, that he
kept a note of above eighty persons, which to his knowledge had been killed
absolutely in one year in the City where he dwelt, by one Impostor, and that by
the only giving of Turbith Mineral, and yet of these but very few, but become
or seemed for a month or two, to have been well cured of their diseases, and
yet after a small time they languished away and dyed, some of Consumptions,
others of more fearful accidents by that most pestiferous Indian Rat, be it for
Sal, Sulphur, or Mercury, unduly prepared.

And Cardanus, an ancient worthy Writer, reports of a woman sometime his
Patient, who dying of a vehement pain in her head, after the receiving of
diverse Mercurial medicines, which being dead; himself took out ij. of crude
Mercury, from within her scull.

And he also relates of another, who after a Mercurial unction taken, vomited
up Argentum vivum in drops at the mouth and dyed thereof, and my self in Saint
Bartholomews Hospital having been there a Surgeon 23. years, have observed
very many, to have most pitifully been abused that way by Empericks, foolish
women, and by base Impostors, who after in short time have dyed by bad Chymick
medicines.

It is reported of Cardanus, that in his time he would say, he was confident,
that if he might have for every man, woman, and child, that precipitate had
killed, the value of one shilling, he should be richer then any living man, in
the City where he lived.

And Andreas Libavius, does report of a certain Medicaster of his time, which
gave his Patient two pills of Mercury, of the first he fell into an Apoplexy,
and of the second into a Lethargy, and so dyed immediately.

He also speaks of another, who had the wind Colic, unto whom a Barber
gave three Mercurial pills, who purged thereby continually until he dyed.

Also Adu^pius, a Physician of Strausburge reports of another Physician
dwelling in Strauburge in upper Germany not far distant from him, who in one
year was known to have killed 80. Patients, which had been under his Cure, by
the use of Mercurial medicines.

Also of medicines of Antimony evil prepared, and worse taken; infinite many
have ended their days untimely: and here I cannot omit to deplore the
unchristian audacious boldness of the wicked Imposters in these days, who
without any fear of God, or compassion to mankind, do rashly rush upon the
cure of any infirmity (how incurable soever) promising cure, taking money in
hand, and thereby engaging themselves to the Patients to cure them; but yet
when with the best ordinary means they know, they have not effected their
desires, I will judge charitably so far, but then they boldly proceed further,
and put the Indian Rat to work, which as aforesaid, goes smoothly down into
the stomach, but when it is in, then it begins to show what house it came of.

Now a word or two touching the true preparing of excellent medicines by this
art, wherein I admonish all men who have not convenience, I mean a convenient
house and room convenient for the work with learning, Judgment, Leisure,
wealth and other additaments fitting; as also an able body and a spirit to go
through therewith that he or they refrain from the preparing of mineral
medicines as also from their vapors for avoiding thr burthening of his soul
with the guiltiness of blood* yea and perhaps of his own blood by evil vapors
proceeding from Minerals in their preparations, but for the man that is fitly
qualified* let him in the name of God go on, the work is good, unto which to
encourage him I intend to show the producing of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury from
Animal, vegetable and Mineral creatures by a most plain and true Art, and that
at easy rates.

The way to draw Sal, Sulphur and Mercury from an Animal part.
. Cranium hominis alicujus Justificate xij. (more or less) rasp it small, put
it into an Alembick of glass well luted S. A. with a receiver joined
thereunto, place it in Arena (ut mos est) distill it first, lento igne, and
there will be found in the receiver a pure water for the first which by Artists
is called the flegma or mercurial part thereof, which when by a gentle
distilling no more will be had, change the receiver, and increase the fire, and
a fatty Oil, which the Artists term the Sulphur thereof, will appear; and
when by fire no more fatness will come over, all things being first cold of
themselves, take out that which is in the bottom of the Still, I mean the
feces; and calcine them, and after inbibe and filtrate them, and having
cleansed the salt thereof, evaporate the humiditie, or phlegm there from, S. A.
in Balnea, and you shall find in fundo a perfect salt, then rectify the
Mercurial and Sulphurous parts, each per se* and put all the three medicines so
purified together, and you have ready a perfect good medicine for the
Epilepsia, and diverse other infirmities: and by this infallible rule, you may
make true and perfect medicines from any members or parts of an Animal
creature, either of the flesh, the blood, or bones thereof. But if you fail in
your art, and namely in the artificial proceeding, in the aforesaid process,
then blame not him that shows you a plain way, but begin again, and beware
amongst the rest, of that misery which commonly attends the poor Alchymist,
namely, that his glass breaks, le^t you lose the first labor, and be to begin
anew.

The way to draw Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, from a Vegetable substance.
. Lignum Guaicum made into gross powder, or small chips, three pounds or
thereabouts (more or less) put it into a retort of glass, likewise well Luted
place it, S. A. in a furnace in Arena, then add a fitting receiver of glass,
likewise well Luted to it as aforesaid, let it have a gentle fire, for some
eight or ten hours, in which time an odoriferous clear flegma, or water will
come over, being the most volatile part of that subject, which by Artists is
termed the Mercurial part thereof; which being come off, change the receiver,
and increase the fire, and a fattie oil will appear and come over, being
wholly combustible, which is the Sulphurous part thereof, all which being drawn
of, and the furnace and all being cold, take out the feces and calcine them a
little, then put fair warm water thereto, and extract the salt per filtrum, the
which salt water being purified, filtrated and evaporated, you shall have in
fund^ a perfect white salt, and if you then please to rectify the Mercuriall,
and the Sulphurous parts each per se, and join them all three together, you
have a true good medicine in the cure of Morbus Gallicus, and diverse other
diseases.

An example to take Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, from a Mineral Body, and
namely, from Salt it self, which may perhaps seem strange, though true.
R. Sal, Communis, six pound more or less, the stronger the salt be the
better, put it into an earthen pot made to endure strong fire, and let it have
a narrow mouth, and be in capacity three quarts, or more, put in the salt and
put a receiver, S. A. thereto, Lute them both together, place that in a strong
reverberating Furnace, and put fire thereunder, first gently until all the
Mercuriall, volatile, and subtle parts thereof be drawn over, which done,
change the receiver, and increase the fire gradati^n to the fourth degree as
the Artists term it, but by order paulatim, and you shall draw over a strong
oil, fattie in feeling, and forceible and fierce in operation, which is able
to dissolve and open the purest, and most principle Mineral: even Sol or gold
it self to make it potable, and after all the aforesaid strong spirits be drawn
forth that will be forced out by the strength of the fire, withdraw or decline
the fire, and all being cold, gather your first liquor by it self, then the
spirit, or rather the Oleum salis into a second glass by it self, the which is
a most excellent medicine, and in the bottom of the earthen Instrument, you
shall find the true salt; of salt though but light in substance, and small in
quantity, which having each part: then if you please to make use of these
medicines, each per se not joined; for so it is the better, for that each of
these particulars have different virtues in the Art of healing as experience
will teach. And amongst the rest the spirit of Salt, will dissolve Gold to make
it potable, it is also singular in Fevers, for the quenching of thirst, and
refreshing the spirits, and for the curing of many other diseases.

A PREFACE TO THE TREATISE OF THE CHARACTERS AND TERMS OF ART FOLLOWING.
COurteous Reader, considering with my self that young men in long Voyages are
full of leisure, I thought it not lost labor to add these Treatises to the
former, for that they not only contain profitable instructions for youth, but
by their novelty and varieties do partly refresh the mind of those Readers as
delight themselves in that part of Practice. It was part of my gleanings in the
time of eight years travel by Land in foreign Regions. If the matter and form
thereof be not worth the acceptance, yet I pray thee accept the good will of
the Giver.

I. W.

CHARACTERS AND THEIR INTERPRETATIONS.
And first of the seven Planets.
Sa^turnus. Plumbum. Lead Cold, desiccative sweet, discussing, mollificative,
anodine, sanative, laxative, mundificative, and yet full of deadly vapors.
Jupiter Stannum. Tin Diaphoretick, laxative, desiccative, sanative, etc. Mars
Ferrum. ^ Iron or Steel. The greatest shedder of blood a sure medicine for
fluxes of blood, and a great opener of obstructions. Sol. Aurum. ^ Gold A great
and sure Cordial, for it comfort the heavy hearted, and is reputed the best
medicine. Venus Cuperum. Copper Makes sundry needful medicines for man's
health, Physical and Chirurgical, viz: Oleum spiritus, and terra cum multis
aliis. Mercurius.. ^ Quicksilver Is hot, cold, a friend, a foe, healing,
killing, expelling, attracting, corroding, and quid non? Luna. Argentum Silver
A medicine never too often taken, a good restorative, a comfortable, and an
anodine medicine, etc.

Other Characters Alphabetically. Acetum. ^. ^ Vinegar of Beer Good against
inflammation, discussive, defensative, comfortable, anodine, etc. Acetum Vini.
^. ^ Wine Vinegar A discusser, a cooler, a heater, a piercer, anodine, a
consumer, a caustic, and a vesicatory medicine, etc. Acetum Distillatum. ^. ^
Distilled Vinegar. Is a vehicle that opens mineral bodies and extracteth
tinctures, etc. Aer. air. AR One of the 4 Elements Without the which no
creature subsisteth. Alumen. Alum Crude Desiccative, astringent, corrosive,
mundificative sanative, refrigerative, etc. Alumen Combustum. ^. ^ Alum Burnt
An easy and a good corrosive medicine, which also induces a good cicatrix.
Alumen Plumosum. ^. ^ Alum Plume A secret in restoring a withered member by a
certain hidden specifical virtue it has. Albumen Ovorum. ^. ^ Whites of eggs
Cold, defensative, mollificative, healing, and good in restraining fluxes, etc.
Amalgama. ^. aaa A putting things together, or a term of Art for putting
together, viz: fiat Almagama, but more particularly it is meant of Mercury,
with any other metal. Antimonium. antimony. ^ Antimony Vomitive, laxative,
sanative, diaphoretick, diauretick, anodine, caustic, and full of deadly
vapors, if it be not prevented, yet exceeding precious in healing, being
discrectly used. Antimonii Vitrum. ^. ^ Glass of Antimony or Stibium. A
forbidden medicine, and yet in common used, and praiseworthy, if not abused.
Antimonii Regulus. ^. ^ Antimony Precipitate This is but half a medicine, which
afterward is used to be converted to Flores, Tincture, or some other good
medicine. Annus. ^. ^ One year From March the 25. till the return of the same.
Aqua. {water}. Water One of the four elements of quality coldd and moist. Aqua
Fortis. ^. ^ Strong Water Made by Vulcans Art of Coppperas, Allome, and
Saltpeeter, and diversely other ways. Aqua Regis. ^. ^ A water to divide Gold.
This is made as the former, adding common salt, or rather Sal Armoniacke. Aqua
Vitae. ^. ^ Aquavitae. of Wine. Aquavitae distilled out of Wine is of excellent
use for healing, and the chief cordial in cheering the heart of man. Arsenicum.
^. ^ Arsuick In taste not unpleasing, in trial deadly, yet a good outward
healer many ways. Auripigmentum ^. ^ Orpiment In taste deadly, yet used of
some inwardly for the cough, by fume with amber mixed, and outwardly used in
many medicines profitable. Autumnus. ^. ^ Harvest Or as it were an entrance to
the Winter quarter. Auriculum. ^. ^ A chalk that contains gold. Also gold
calcined into powder being an entrance to Aurum Potabile. Aurum Potabile. ^. ^
Potable*Gold A Principal cordial medicine, but very often adulterated, which
being true is precious. Aestas. ^. ^ Summer This character is sometimes used
for Summer and sometimes for heat. Aes. ^. ^ Brass This is but Copper mixed
with Lapis Calaminaris and prepared by Vulcans Art. Balneum. Mariae. MB. BM
Balnea Mariae. Is an Artificial distilling by a glass Still, set into a
furnace in a Kettle of water, by the boiling of which, the subject contained in
the glass is distilled. Bolus Armenus. ^. ^ Fine bole Is cordial, desiccative,
restringent, sanative, refrigerative, etc. Borus Communis. ^. ^ Common Bole.
Imitating the former, but far weaker. Borax Venetiae. ^. ^ Borax This is a
great opener of obstructions of young women, and is excellent to lute glasses*
and as a second hand to goldsmiths.

Calidus ^. ^ Or rather W^rm* Neither hot nor cold, Calx ^. ^ Lime Is
abstersive, desiccative, caustic sanative. Calx Ovorum. ^. ^ Lime of Eggesb^ls
Is sometime used in strong restrictives, etc. Calx Vive ^. ^ Vnstaked Lime
Chiefly used in Causticke medicines. Chalybs. ^. ^ Steel The most valiant
son of Mars, it opens obstructions, and stays the fluxes, etc. Calor ^. ^
Heat This Character serves not only for fire, but also for great heat.
Calcinare ^. ^ To Calcine Sometimes to burn to powder, and sometimes to
prepare by fire to a certain height and color. Cementare ^ ^ To Cement Is by a
mixture corrosive to add to any metal pure, as Gold or silver, a higher
tincture, and also to purify the same yet further. Cerussa Venetiae. ^. ^
Venice Ceruce. One of the offspring of Saturn, sanative, cooling, anodine,
desiccative, etc. Cera ^ ^ Wax A blessed medicine outward and inwards, of a
temper neither exceedingly too hot, nor too cold, mollificative, sanative, etc.
Cinnabrium ^. ^ Cinnabar Found natural and also compounded of Sulphur and
Quicksilver, and used in Fumes, it spoyleth many, and heals by chance some
one in killing ten. Cineres Ligni ^. ^ Ashes of Wood. Hereof are prepared many
different medicines of value, in Physic and Surgery, amongst which the
caustic stone, the ordinary Lixivium, etc. Corallus Corallus Albus. ^. ^ Coral
white Is Cordial, cooling, drying, and being prepared Chymically, has
wonderful virtues confortative. Corallus Rubeus. ^. ^ Red Coral This is as the
former, but in virtues it far exceeds it. Paracelsus ascribes virtues
infinite and wonderful to red Coral, if it be perfectly red. Colcothar. ^. ^
Burnt Vitriol, or Colcoth. A good causticke medicine, and also cooling,
exsiccating, sanative, mundificative, etc. Crocus Martis. ^. ^ Safron of Iron.
Good against dysenterium, Gonorrer, Di^rrh^^, and generally all fluxes. Crocus
Veneris. ^. ^ Safron of Copper. Or refined Verdigrease, as some affirm, but
more truly is refined Aes Ustum, it expels, dries, mundifieth, and heals.

Decoctio. ^. ^ Boiling Is the boiling or decocting any medicine. Digestio ^. ^
Digesting Good digestion presageth good healing, but Chemical digestion, est
gradus spagyricus similis ventriculo, per quem gradum materia coquitur melius
ut puri ab impuro separatio fieri posset. Dies Et nox. ^. ^ Day and Night.
Containing 24. hours. Distillatio ^. ^ Distilling Is the separation of the
pure, from the unpure, performed by sublimation, and precipitation, but after
many kinds and fashions.

Elementa. ^. ^ Not one of the four Elements But a pure medicine made by
Chemical Art, out of any good thing either animal, vegetable, or mineral, Quere
La^avii, lib. 2. Alchym. cap. 49.

Filtrum. ^. ^ A felt This filtring with a felt, is a kind of preparation of
medicines liquid, to purge them from their terrestrial parts. Fimus. Equinus.
^. ^ Horsedung Chemists use to set their medicines in Horsedung to putrify,
and is an ancient and worthy work rightly used. Vicarius ejus est, BM. Balnia
Maria. Fixatio. ^. ^ Fixing, or perfecting This is that al^ good Chymickes
desire in their works, but few truly attain it, but in stead of fixatio, they
find vexatio satis, and ultimo mendicatum ire. Flos Aeris. ^. ^ Verdigreas
Called commonly viride ^s, and Verdigrease being the rust of Copper, it is a
good astringent, disiccative, and corrosive medicament.

Gradus. ^G1. ^G2. ^G3 A degree first, second, or third, as you see them
described with their several figures. Gummi. ^. ^ Gum. Of any kind is so
described, but the single Character is most used.

Hyems. ^. ^ Winter This Character is also used for cold by some Writers

Ignis. fire. ^ but the first is most in use. Fire. As well natural
asartificiall, actual as potentiall

Lapis Magnetis. ^. ^ The Loadstone. A jewel precious for value far exceeding
the Diamond, of the Tribe of Mars, in quality attractive and sanative. Lues
Venerea ^. ^ The venereall disease This is a Catholic plague containing almost
all diseases in one, being seldom perfectly healed. Luna Crescens. ^. ^ The
Moon increasing* Or the first and second quarter of the Moon. Luna Decrescens.
^. ^ The Moon decreasing Of the two last quarters of the Moon. Lapis Prunella.
^. ^ A stone made of Salniter This is good against toothache and inflammations,
and for sores of the mouth and throat, and also against ^ot fevers inwardly
taken. Lapis Calaminaris. ^. ^ Calamint Stone. Is a stone which changes Copper
into Brass, it is desiccative, and excels in Lotions for the eyes, etc.
Lapis Hematices. ^ ^ Blood stone This stone is used to stench bleeding inwardly
and outwardly, and has many other virtues medicinable. Lapis Sabulosus. ^. ^
This is a great secret in curing a fracture being daily given the party, j. and
also mixed with the outward medicine, and applied to the grief. Lapis Granutus.
^. ^ The Granat Stone This is a Jewel precious in medicine, but not commonly
used. Lateres. ^. ^ Stones. Or Bricks for farnasis or otherways. Lateres
Cribrati. ^. ^ Powder of Bricks It is often used in preparing medicines as well
to make good Lute, as also for diverse other needful uses. Lucinium Lixivium. ^.
^ Lie made of ashes. This is many ways used very profitable in healing
outwardly and inwardly, and for caustic medicines it is the best. Limatura
Martis. ^. ^ Filings of Horn Used for the making of Crocus Martis. Lutum
Sapientia ^. ^ Lute used of the Philosophers Some suppose that the pinching of
glasses together is it, but it is taken for a man, and so meant by diverse
learned men. Lutum Commune. ^. ^ Lute. Common Made of good Clay, with flax of
wool, and salt commonly, but there is as many several Lutes as Chymicks.
Lythagirus Auri. ^. ^ Litharge of Gold One of the sons of Saturn, and is partly
so termed, for that the tests that refine Gold through Lead, after are made
into Litharge, I mean the Saturn into them. Lythagirus Argenti. ^. ^ Litharge
of Silver One of the sons of Saturn, supposed proceed of Luna to as aforesaid,
but indeed these and the first are sent daily from Holland, made only of Lead.
Lythargirus Plumbi. ^. ^ Litharge of Lead One other of the sons of Saturn, and
is made by every Plumber out of that part of Saturn which wastes to a
hardness in melting.

Marchasita. ^. ^ Unprepared Minerals Of any kind, as we vulgarly say Silver
oar, or Lead Lead oar, etc. Mercurius. Quicksilver The hottest, the coldest, a
true healer, a wicked murderer, a precious medicine, and a deadly poison, a
friend that can flatter and lie. Mercurius Sublimatus ^. ^ Quicksilver
sublimed. This fellow has deserved much praise and dispraise, as till more
scope I omit, for he has done me both credit and shame. Mercurius
Praecipitatus. ^. ^ Quicksilver precipitate. A worthy medicine, of true Artists
with praise used, of Empericks shamefully abused, for healing and killing he is
known. Mercurius Solis. Mercury of Gold Hic labor, hoe opus: quod supra me
nibil ad me, true Philophers only are capable of this mystery. Mercurius
Lunae.. Mercury of Silver. This and the former have one way of preparation, or
not greatly different, but are past my reach. Mercurius Veneris.. Mercury of
Copper I have heard many brags of this medicine, and to be precious, but I
never could see it, etc. Mercurius Martis.. Mercury of ^^on. It is said that
with this medicine, the virtue of the Loadstone is strengthened above measure.
Mercurius Jovis.. Mercury of Tin. This is reported able to make of Lead,
Tin; but I have not seen it. Mercurius Saturni.. Mercury of Lead. This is
easily drawn from Lead in a good quantity, per se, only by Art of fire, as
Writers affirm. Mensis. ^. ^ One mone^h Containing 28. days, and 28. nights,
or four whole weeks. Minium. ^ ^ Or red Lead Is one of the sons of Saturn,
cooling, drying, repelling, healing, mollifying, discussing, etc. Minutum. ^. ^
One Minute The sixtieth part of one hour. Mel. ML. ML Honey Honey is Laxative,
mundificative, mollificative, sanative, etc.

Oleum. ^. {oil} Oil of any kind And sometimes taken for Sulphur, is as if you
would say, take from Guaiacum his Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, by his Sulphur you
must understand his oily part, etc.

Phlegma. ^. {water} A Plegma It is used for any distilled water which is void
of Spirit, as Rose Water. Piger Henricus. ^ ^ Slow Hemick An instrument for
distilling, so called, for his exceeding slownesse. Plumbum Philosophorum ^. ^
Philosophers Lead This preparation is mystical and above my reach, the same
Character is also used for the Philosophers stone. Pulvis. ^. ^ Powder of any
thing Any fine powder, and sometimes it is taken for subtle flores, and fine
spirits of any medicine. Purificare. ^. ^ To Purify Either by sublimation, or
by precipation, or any kind of purifying or cleansing. Putrefactio. ^. ^
Putrify Is dissolving or, opening of mixed Minerals bodies by a natural, warm,
and moist putrefaction, namely, by fimus equinus, vel ejus Vicarius, M B.

Quinta Essentia. ^. ^ Quinta Essentia A permanent Essential well digested
medicine without gross superfluities, drawn from any subsistence either
Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral. Quinta Essentia vini. ^ The Quint^ssence of
Wine. This is also called Aquavitae, and Aqua Coelestis, and Alcole vini, and
Aqua Ardens, with many other names.

Realgar. ^. ^ A kind of Ratsbane A thing seldom used in healing, though
sometimes used in Alchymy. Reverberatio. ^. ^ A preparation Chemical by fire.
Retorta. ^. ^ A retort of Glass

Sublimare. ^ ^ ^ To sublime. Or to cause to ascend by fire or Art of
distilling very many ways. Sulphur. {sulphur}. ^ Brimstone. Discussive,
sanative, desiccative, anodine, repercussive, etc. Sulphur Philosophorum. ^. ^
Perfect Sulphur, vix c^gnitum A true essential, perfect, and unisal medicament
out of Sol. Sal Communis. {salt} ^ {salt} Common Salt Discussive,
mundificative, sanative, and most precious for the life of man. Sal Gemmae. ^.
^ Precious salt like Crystal. A Chrystaline salt, naturally growing in mines
in Polonia, near the City of Cracovia, etc. Sal Petrae. ^. {nitre} Salt-Peeter
A Salt of a wonderful kind and breeding, with effects admirable both good and
evil. Sal Amoniacum. {sal ammoniac} ^ {sal ammoniac} Salt Amoniack. Grows
naturally in Turkey, but is commonly made of Sal Alkali, common Salt, Urine,
etc. Test Andrea libavio. Sal Alkali. ^. ^ A Salt of an heard called Kali. A
kind of vegetable Salt, but Paracelsus terms every vegetable Salt Alkaly. Sal
Colcotharis. ^. ^ A salt out of Deadhead. A Salt drawn from the Caput mortuum,
and commonly called Deadhead, which is exceeding astringent and drying. Sal
Tartari. ^. ^ A Salt of Argall The Salt of Tartar or wine Lees a medicine of
many great virtues, both of it self, and also for making other medicines.
Succinum Album. SVa ^ SVa White Amber Comes from Prutia and is a Cordial
medicine, diauretick, diaphoretick, laxative, and generally opening all
obstructions. succinum Citrinum. Src ^ Src Yellow Amber Like the former, but
not so good, yet from this is an excellent oil drawn, serving for many
especial medicines inward and outward. Spiritus Vini. ^. ^ Spirit of Wine. A
pure and essential substance, cordial, and of infinite other virtues, Liquid,
yet wholly combustible. Sapo ^ ^ Soap A good medicine attractive,
mollificative, etc. Stratum Super Stratum. ssst. SSS Two medicines laid one
upon another. A term of Art often used, viz. fiat stratum, super stratum, that
is, first put in of the one, and then of the other till all be in. Solutio ^. ^
Opening The opening of mineral bodies diversely by Vulcans Art. Sigillum
Hermetis. ^. ^ Hermes his Seal A kind of Luting or sealing of Glasses by a
more excellent manner.

Terra. ^. earth Earth Commonly taken for potters earth to make Lute of.
Tigillum. ^. ^ A melting pot. A pot wherewith Goldsmiths and other Artists use
to melt metals or medicines in, called also a Crucible. Talcum X. X Talk This
mineral is scarce well known yet the oil thereof is much extolled for
beautifying the skin. Tutia ^. ^ Tutty A medicine commonly known, and is
made of the scum of Gopper, or of Copper by combustion. Tartarus ^. ^ Argall Is
the Lees of wine dried, which makes many profitable medicines, artificially
prepared. Tumores ^. ^ Tumors And also any Apostume, or swelling, wheresoever
in man's body. Turbith Mineral. ^. ^ Turbith Mineral. This with some additaments
artificial, well prepared, is precious in the cure of the French pox.

Vlcus ^. ^ An Ulcer This is the ancient Character for an Ulcer, and some
authors, have used the same for a wound. Vitriolum vitriol. ^ Coppera^ It is
best which is made of Copper. Vitrum ^. ^ Glass It is used for a Glass Still,
and also for any other kind of Glass. Vrina. ^. ^ Urine Man's urine or
childrens urine, it is commonly used in Alchymie, and some use it in
fomentations, and otherwise in Surgery and Physic.

Certain Chemical Verses, or Good Will to young Artists, from the Author.
SOme Verses plain at vacant times,
I framed and laid aside:
Intending youths which leisure have,
might view what I have tried.
And as occasion them should lead,
might search, yea find and know
The principles which follow here,
from which great treasures flow.
Three principles the Chemists hold,
each creature does contain,
And four the Methodists have taught,
and learnedly maintain.
Three must I needs confess I find,
confirmed all by reason:
And yet from four to vary ought,
I doubt it is petty treason.
Upon this Theme two scholars might
well seven years good time spend:
Continuing still in argument,
until the time had end.
Wherefore ambiguously to wade,
within a sea of strife,
I like it not for fear of knocks,
I love a quiet life.
All worthy Artists I adore,
and duty binds me so:
Yea thankfully I Will learn of each,
the thing I do not know.
And ere I Will seem once to contend,
my will shall be so even:
I know there is three, I yield there is four,
to make the sum up seven.
But will you know why Chemists call
their principles but three?
With heavenly number it agrees,
from all Eternity.
A Trinity in Deity,
most sacred and moand;st sure:
All should confess in unity
is, was, and shall endure.
From which, as from a perfect guide,
each man his work should frame,
And in his conversation true,
always respect the same.
In honor of which Deity,
true Chemists daily find
A tripart substance for to be
of all things following kind.
Which in the earthly sphere are found,
each one in his degree.
And these by Artists styled are
Sal, Sulphur, Mercury.
Who calling unto reckoning all
that Animals do seem,
Of Vegetables in their kinds,
they make no small esteem.
Likewise from minerals each one,
great medicines they derive:
Which do root out inveterate griefs,
and keep men long alive.
The Mercury that is volatile,
the Sulphur burns like fire:
The Sal in fundo to remain,
as Christal's their desire.
Each of these three to three again,
the Artist can produce,
Which done and joined the medicines pure,
and fit for each good use.
Thus have I in one Period
anatomized plain:
True medicines how thou may prepare,
if thou will take the pain.
But if that any further seek,
in true Philosophy:
The Minerals fix and pure to make,
that is no work for me.
I to my Latchet will return,
and rest me in a mean:
Good medicines only to prepare,
I hold sufficient gain.
And unto young men that have mind,
in Alchymie to venture:
I Will show them to the Labyrinth,
which who so list may enter.
Foul hands and face he must not scorn,
if ought good he would find:
With coals and fime to be besmeer'd,
it is the Chemist kind.
The trowel, brick, with hammer often,
and shovel he must use,
The cliffes, the tongs, and bellows eke,
he no way may refuse.
His grates of iron he must fit,
his rings to cut his glass:
With pots of iron, brass or clay,
his furnace he must pass.
The Retort and the Alembick safe,
with lute he must defend:
And vaprous ventils have in care,
those must he often mend.
And why, in vain he makes a fire,
which cannot rule the same:
For therein rests all the Art,
the pleasure, gain, and fame.
Yet that is not all he ought to know,
that would a Chemist be.
A thousand things are yet behind,
as he shall find and see.
But he that takes delight in ought,
regards not the pain:
So he may have the thing he seeks,
although it be but vain.
A Chemist that would duly work,
must readily define
The characters, which he shall read,
and spells of ancient time.
Each Mineral he ought to know
his malice, force, and might,
Or he may soon beshrew himself,
if he mistake the right.
The twelve signs of the Zodiac,
he ought to know by heart,
Conjunction, Opposition too
of Planets, though in part.
The Sextile, Trine, and Quadrile eke,
the Dragons head and tail,
The Planets orders how they reign,
and where their force may fail.
In terms of Art, which diverse are,
instructed he must be,
Amalmagate, alcolizate,
and cohobate must be.
To calcine and for to cement,
to circulate also,
To colliquate, coagulate,
and congelate, I trow.
To colorate, to corrodate,
conglutinate likewise:
Coagmentate, coadunate,
whereby to win the prize.
Sometime digestion needful is,
and deliquation too,
Divaporation is a work,
the Chemist wise must do.
Where distillations do prevail,
Distraction takes the head,
Then by Elaboration,
wise men may be mislead.
Election needful is in all,
evaporation too,
Expression and extraction are
two things that he must do.
In exhaltations he must strive,
and Ebullitions make,
His fermentation oftentimes
will cause him to awake.
His filterations many are,
his fumigations eke,
And most in his fixations,
the good man is to seek.
Gradations then are thought upon,
and granalation more,
Incorporation has his time,
Ignision pincheth sore.
And Levigation has his place,
and Liquefaction use:
Then to Lutation have a care,
therein be no abuse.
For all mortification
can do, or else can say,
I hope multiplication,
the cost and pains will pay.
He suffers Masaration,
and Maturation both,
Embracing putrefaction foul,
which many a man would loath.
Precipitation was forgot,
purgation goes before,
And by projection he shall find,
if he be rich or poor.
But if his hopes yet chance to fail,
Reduction thought upon,
Restrinction, Reverberation,
and Resolution strong.
Then Repurgations often had,
with Segregations fine,
Some Sublimations duly used,
may well become the time.
Stratifigations in due place,
Solutions eke in time.
Subduction never wanting is,
a Chemist to define.
Of Torrefactions he has store,
Vivifications hope,
But finds vitrification,
or vani^^^ all in smoke.
What shall I say? this is not all,
the Chemist must abide
This Labyrinth out, his glass then breaks,
his patience there is tried.
Yet grant to this although it were more,
there is no man ever knew,
A work so slight and cheap as this,
such rare effects to show.
In gaining health to sick and sore,
preserving men from woe:
Yea sundry ways expelling griefs,
which in man's body grow.
By true Elixirs of much price,
by Quintessenses high,
And many famous medicines more,
which I for haste pass by.
Though once a Gallenist ill led,
devised a slanderous rhyme,
Which he in Latin verse put forth,
I know not well the time.
And this it was that follows next,
which if it prove a lie,
I Will no way seem him to excuse,
you have't as cheap as I.
Alchymia est ars sine art,
cujus subjectum est pars cum part,
Proprium ejus probe mentiri,
and ultimo mendicatum iri.
But lest I should be deemed one,
amongst birds that file their nest,
I Will leave this doubtful verse as it is,
and haste to end the rest.
Common it is with Chemists true,
their house-doves them withstand:
Fearing all will be spent in smoke,
time, goods, yea house and land.
A noise domestic shrill I hear,
and I dare stay no longer:
Good friends adieu till further time,
I must obey the stronger.
You Chemists wise that wived are,
be warned here by me,
Search not into this mystery,
except your female 'gree.
For I have found to my great smart,
when she list to contend,
Then down goes pot, yea glass and all,
and I vow to amend.
And need says yield, there is fault in him,
that stubbornly stands out,
Till breech and jacket all be torn,
by searching secrets out.
Vale
THE Terms of Art, Recited formerly in Verse, are here again repeated
Alphabetically, and more plainly interpr^ted.
ALbation is the abstraction of dust, moths, great, adhering to a thing with an
Hares foot, feather, spather, knife, or the like.

Ablution is exaltation, cleansing unclean things by often infusion, reducing
them to purity.

Alcolis^us is an operation by calcination, ribellation, and other means, which
reduces a matter into Alcool, the finest powder that is.

Amalgamation is the putting together, solution, or calcination of familiar
metals, by Argentum vivum, etc.

Ar^matization is an artificial manner of preparation, whereby medicaments are
made more suaveolent and odoriferous for the oblectation and strength of the
palate, and vital faculty.

Attrition is a certain manner of preparation, like grinding on a convenient
stone with some humidity, whereby Lapis Judaicus, Collyria, and the like are
prepared.

Buccellatio is dividing into gobbets, or by peece-meals.

Calcination is solution of bodies into Calx or Alcool, by desiccation of the
native humidity, by reverberate ignition, by Amalgamation, by Aqua fort is, the
spirit of salt vitriol, Sulphur, or the like.

Calfaction is a certain manner of preparing simple and compound medicaments,
not by boiling or burning, but by the moderate heat of the Sun, fire, ^imus
equinus, vel ejus vicarius.

Cementation is gradation by cementing.

Cementum is a mineral matter like lute, and penetrating, wherewith metals
spread over are reverberated to cement.

Ceratio is the mollification of an hard thing, until it be like wax at the
fire.

Cinefaction is ignition converting Vegetables and Animals by a very vehement
heat into Cineres.

Circulation is the exaltation of pure liquor, as spirit of Wine by circular
solution, and coagulation in a Pelican, a moderate heat forcing it.

Clarification is the expurgation of sordid gross matter from liquid
medicaments.

Coad^nation (sometimes termed by the name of a more excellent species,
Coagulation) is a perfect and skilful working, whereby disagreeing things are
united,

Coagmentation like to glutination, is by liquate things, to which dissolving
powders are cast, and afterward are made concrete by laying them in a cold
place, or by evaporating their humidity.

Coagulation is the coaction of things agreeing in nature from a thin and a
fluid consistence into a solid mass, by the privation ^f moisture.

Coction is the alteration or commutation of a thing to be boiled.

Cohobation is frequent abstraction of liquor oftentimes a^^used upon a dead
head or dry feces by distillation.

Colation is the transmission of that which is humid through a strainer, that
the liquor may be had separated from the dryer substance.

Colliquation, or Colliquefaction, is the conjunction of many fusils or
liquables to make one compound by eliquation on the fire.

Coloration is, whereby the perfect color of gold, silver, Philosophers Lead,
etc. obscured by any sulphurious vapor, is renovated and illustrated by
maceration, frequent ablution, in sharp liquor, as Salt, Argal, spirit of wine,
wine vinegar, or by an acute paste laid on the said metals.

Combustion is ignition, converting bodies by burning them into Calx.

Comminution is the reducing of any matter into such fine powder by dilution,
filteration, exiccation, contusion, calcination, cribration, or any other
means, that no roughness or corpulency be felt, as Alcool.

Complexion is the nature of a part hot, cold, moy^t, or dry.

Composition is the codunation of diverse things.

Concretion is divaporation of humidity in fluid things, by gentle decoction on
fire,

Confriction is a certain light Attrition, by which pulverable things, with the
rubbing of the fingers, or a more solid body, are quickly levigated, as Cerussa
Amylum, etc.

Confusion is properly a mixture of such liquid things as are fluid, and of one
and the same nature (as of diverse waters by themselves, and so of oils:)
liquid things (as wax, rosin, pitch, etc.) may likewise be confused, but by
Eliquation.

Congelation is often performed by a precedent decoction of things to a certain
height or just consistence, which after set into a Cellar or cold place, do
congeal into a transparent substance, not unlike ice, as is seen in the making
of Copperas, Salt*peter, or the like.

Conglutination is the ^errumination or compaction of metals, jewels, glasses,
etc. by gummes, glue, whites of eggs, and the like, the nature of the
conglutinated remaining,

Contusion is the beating of gross bodies into smaller or very subtle parts.

Corrosion is calcination, reducing things coagulated, by the corroding spirits
of salt, sulphur, wine-vineger distilled, Aqua fortis, etc. into Calx.

Cribration is the preparation of medicaments by a sive or scarce.

Deliquation is the preparation of things by melting on the fire.

Deliquium is the liquation of a concrete (as salt, powder calcined, etc. set
in an humid an frigid place (external humidity, resolving the siccity) that it
flow, having a watery form, as is apparent in the preparation of salt of Tartar.

Descension is when the essential juice dissolved from the matter to be
distilled, is subducted and does descend.

Despumation is when spume or froth floating on the top, is taken away with a
spoon, feather, or by colation.

Distillation is, whereby an essence is extracted in the form of liquor, and
being coagulated, is carried by the stillicidium translated out of the vessel
of the matter, into the excipulium sublocated.

Difflation is, wheu through heat, spirits arising, are with a kind of folles
blown into the adverse camera, and there are found congulated.

Digestion is simple maturation, whereby things uncocted in artificial
digestory heat (as food by a natural heat in the stomach) is digested.

Dissolution is a preparation of medicaments simple, and compounded by some
convenient humidity to a certain consistence.

Distraction is a certain divulsion or disunition of diverse things before
united and agreeing together (no respect of one existing or comprehended in an
other had) every one remaining in its own nature.

Divaporation is exhalation by fire of vapor, remaining in liquid substances,
till all aquofity be consumed, or in more dry but fumed by torrefaction.

Dulcification is the correction of mineral medicaments by ablutions, and the
like.

Duration is either when things mollified at the fire are set in a cold place
to harden: or by boiling to an high consistence or admixtion of dry powder with
them, do wax hard.

Elaboration is a manual operation, whereby we extract from a substance the
most excellent matter, the ignoble parts removed.

Election is of simples according to time and season wherein they are gathered,
and according to the region wherein they grow, that so the best may be had, and
their vigor appear in use according to expectation.

Elevation is* subtiliation, when spiritual parts from the corporal, subtle
from the gross, the not fixed from the fixed, like smoke by the force of fire
are elevated, and adhering to the cold concaves of the Alembeck, do thicken and
convert into water.

Elixation i^ coction in humid^ by a moderate heat.

Elution is the preparation of common Bole, Tal^um, Crocus Martis, Terra
Lemnia, etc. by pulverization, calcination, lotion, etc.

Evaporation, See Divaporation.

Exaltation is an operation, whereby a medicament changed in his affections by
gentle dissolution, is produced to an higher ^ dignity of substaance and
virtue, and a greater degree of purity.

Exhalation is, when the spirit of any matter solid, or in powder (being put
into a platter, or any other convenient vessel set on coals) is elevated
through heat, and vanishes into the air.

Expression is extraction by a press, wherein herbs, amygdales, etc.
compressed, pour forth their substances (as juyces and oil, into a liquid form.

Extinction is the suffocation of a matter fiery and hot into some humidity.

Extraction is a segregation of an essence from a corporeous concretion, by
digestion in Balneo, his feces left in fundo, as Rhabarbarum in spirit of Wine
infused, manifests.

Fermentation is the exaltation of a massy substance, by the admission of
Fermentum, which does penetrate it wholly (his virtue distributed by a spirit)
and inverteth it into his own nature.

Ferrumination is the joining together of a fracture in one and the same Metal,
or of diverse Metals, by a Mineral flux.

Filteration called percolation, by Filtrum a Chemical colum is subduction of
thin aquosity in humid things, the thick and oily substances resisting.

Fission, see Section.

Fictation is the assuefaction of volatile and spiritual bodies to fire by
calcination, gentle and continual decoction, frequent sublimation, solution,
and coagulation often iterated, or by addition of a matter fixed, that so they
may endure fire and not fly away.

Fraction is the breaking of some matter with ones hand, or with an instrument.

Frixion is the preparation of some medicaments, with oil, butter, wine,
vinegar, etc. in a convenient vessel, for the correcting of bad qualities in
them.

Fulmination derived of fulmen a Latin word, signifying fire breaking out of
the clouds, causing a sudden light great and bright, is a metallicall
gradation, with excoction to an absolute perfection in Cinerition, whose purity
is declared by an effulgent splendour.

Fumigation is calcination of metals, by the sharp corroding vapor of Mercury,
Philosophers Lead, etc. boiling in a crucible, the metals cut into plates, and
either laid over the Orificium of the crucible, or hanged over the fume.

Fusion is liquation by heat violent or moderate, for the separation of the
pure from the impure.

Gradation is an exaltation of Metals in the degree of affections, where by
weight, color, and constancy they are brought to an excellent measure, but the
substance unaltered: so Gold is rubified, fixed, and purified.

Granulation proper to Metals, by infusion on fire, and effusion into water is
their comminution into granula, or very small drops like Grana Paradisi.

Humectation, see Irrigation.

Ignition is calcination, the fire reducing violent bodies into Calx.

Illiquation is the commistion of terrene bodies with Metalline (as of Lapis
cadmia with cuprum) but so as each retains his own substance.

Imbibition, a Philosophical operation is ablution, when liquor adjoined to a
body is elevated, and not finding vent, does fall back upon the same, and often
washes it with Humectations, so long as it being coagulated, can no more
ascend, but remains wholly fixed.

Imbution, see Infusion and maceration.

Inceration is the mixture of humidity with that which is dry, by a gentle and
not hasty combibition to the consistence of mollified wax.

Incineration, see Cinefaction.

Incorporation is a sudden addition of so much humidity to exiccate matters as
is required in the true consistence of a mixed body, past, or a mass.

Infusion is the preparation of medicaments, cut or bruised in some humidity
convenient for the purpose, a lesser or longer time, whether it be an hour, one
day or many, a week or a month, etc.

Inhumation is the setting of two pots (the head of the uppermost being very
well covered and luted, with his bottom boared full of little pinholes, and
sure fastened to that which is underneath in the ground, and burying them with
earth to a certain depth, having a circular fire made for distillatory
transudation per descensum.

Insolation is the preparation of simple or compound things by the heat of Sun
in the Summer, or a gentle fire in the Winter, or in Balneo, or in fimo equino.

Irrigation not much unlike immersion, is an aspersion of humidity upon things
that are to be dissolved, that so they may the more easily deliquate.

Levigation is the reduction of any hard and ponderous matter by comminution,
and diligent contusion into fine powder, like Alcool.

Limation proper to Metals (as Steel, Iron, Brass, Lead, etc.) is a
preparation with a file, whereby they yield dust for diverse uses.

Liquation is when as that which shall be made into one body, is dissolved,
that it can flow abroad like waves.

Liquefaction is the dissolution of a Mineral body, by the force of a very
gentle fire.

Lotion is a preparation of medicaments by water, or some other liquor to
remove some evil and hurtful thing, and to procure some good and profitable
quality in them.

Lutation, right worthy the name of Sapientia, is a medicine thin or thick
according to the heat and continuance of the fire, which stops most exactly
the orificium of the vessel, that no vapor pass out.

Maceration is preparation of things not unlike to Humectation in the manner of
working, but in time, for some are infused three, four, or more months, and
some a shorter space.

Maturation is exaltation of a substance, rude and crude to that which is
mature and perfect.

Mistion is such a composition of bodies, as inceration, incorporation,
colliquation, and contusion do declare.

Mollition is the beginning of liquation, yet some things are mollified (as
cornu cervi, Corral, Ivory, Ungulae, etc.) which cannot liquate.

Multiplication by projection, is of a body amalgamated from 7. to 10. from 10.
to 50. from 50. to 100. etc. according to the force and quantity of the
tincture.

Mundisication is the purgation of any matter by few or many operations from
that which is sordid and vicious, that only the most excellent may be admitted
to the work in hand.

Nutrition is the permistion of humidity by little and little, for the
alteration of the quality of the medicament.

Precipitation is when bodies corroded by Aqua fortis, or Aqua Regia, and
dissolved into water, Salt Armoniack or Mercury cast upon them, either by the
abstraction of the corroding vapor, are reverberated into Calx, they are made
perfect medicines.

Probation is the examination of any matter, whereby we discern what is
excellent and perfect, and what corrupt.

Projection is an exaltation chiefly in Metals, by a medicine cast upon them,
which will suddenly penetrate and transfigurate them, giving them another
tincture.

Prolectation is extraction by attenuation of subtle parts, so that by the
inclination of their rarefied nature, they may be altered from the more gross
parts.

Purgation like to separation, is the clarification of impure liquor, having a
thick sedement and spume by decoction.

Putrefaction is the resolution of a mixed body by a natural putritude in calido
humido, or fimo equino, etc. whereby it may be made more excellent.

Quartation is the separation of Gold and Silver mixed together, by four unequal
parts.

Quinta essentia is an absolute, pure and well-digested medicine drawn from any
substance, either animal, vegetable, or mineral.

Rasion is the scraping or paring of a thing, either for expurgation of that
which is unprofitable, or for easier pulverization.

Reduction common to many operations does restore a thing changed to his former
estate and condition.

Repurgation is, whereby metals and other substances are purged from super
fluities of another nature, adhering to them.

Resolution (the way to most excellent operations of Alchymie, causing both
elements and celestial essences to separate from their elementary composition)
of things commixt, is when they part one with another.

Restinction is a gradation, whereby metals or the like, candified by fire, are
restinguished in liquor of exaltation, and thereby made more noble, by how much
a more excellent tincture and gloss is set upon them.

Reverberation is ignition reducing bodies (the fire quick reverberating and
reflecting) into a very subtle Calk.

Section is the cutting of things great into lesser parts, for the present
occasion.

Segregation is the solution of that which was whole and perfect into parts
divided, which flow not together as colliquables dissolved.

Separation is, whereby parts distracted are separated every one alike having
his several being in himself.

Siccation is the drying up of excremental humidity in bodies, before the fire,
Sun, in the shade, or the like convenient place.

Solution, a principal part of Chemical practice, whereby the incorporation of
things coagulated, is dissolved and attenuated.

Subduction is an abstraction of juyces, oils, and other liquid matters
downward by percolation, filteration, and the like.

Sublimation is when that which is extracted is driven to the sublime part of
the vessel, and there subsisteth, or when as between that which is sublimed,
and the dead head an aerie space does intercede.

Subtiliation is dissolution, separating the subtle parts from the gross.

Stratification, or stratum superstratum well known to Chemists, and used in
cementation, is strewing of corroding powder, or the like, upon plates of metal
by course.

Torrefaction like siccation, but more violent, is an operation drying
speedily, parching and scorching that which is to be dried before, or over the
fire.

Transmutation is the mutation of a thing in substance, color, or quality.

Transudation is, when in descensory distillation, the essence provoked,
sweateth through, and is carried guttatim into the receiver.

Vitrification is Combustion, converting Calk and Cineres into transparant
glass.

Ustion is a preparation of things for easier pulverization, mutation of
color, faculty, etc. by burning them in a crucible, or in the fire.

The Epilogue.
Gentle Reader,
I Had intended much more in my love to young men, to have written by way of
instruction, namely, a Dispensatory touching the precedent particulars, with
somewhat also concerning the Cure of the French Disease, with symptoms
thereof, namely, the Gonorea, the Bubo venerea, the Hernia Humoralis, etc. But
time has overtaken me, so that now I am forced to conclude, having run through
the cares of sixty nine years; old age being an enemy to study, for my sight
being weakened, my memory much impaired, and my capacity utterly unable to
perform so hard a task, which will ask both large time, and much study to
fulfill, and other occasions best known to my self, and some special reasons
elsewhere expressed in my precedent and subsequent work, to which I refer you,
for the further satisfaction; I rest ready to do good so long as the Almighty
pleases willing to be,

Thine in the Lord, J. W.

FINIS.
VIATICUM, BEING THE PATH-VVAY TO THE Surgeons Chest. Containing, Chirurgical
Instructions for the younger sort of Surgeons, employed in the Service of his
Majesty, or for the COMMONWEALTH upon any occasion whatsoever. Intended
chiefly for the better curing of Wounds made by GUNSHOT.

First published by Authority, Anno 1628, and now revised and enlarged by the
Author, JOHN WOODAL Mr. in SURGERY.

Omnia terrena per vices sunt aliena. LONDON. Printed by J. L. for Nicholas
Bourne, 1653.

The PREFACE.
LOving Brethren, for as much as in times of war, as well as of peace, men of
our calling should be ready Ad omne quare, for the service of their King and
Country: We and our Country have been long happy in a blessed peace; and yet
even now having rumors of war, it is not amiss to be prepared for the
contrary: Wherefore from the wise heathen Philosopher, let us all learn as
follows (Jam tua res agitur, para cum proximus ardet:) Our neighboring
Nations are and have been long in combustion; it is therefore wisdom for us
to be ready, and the rather we ought to take it into our better consideration,
because at the first composing and writing hereof, namely in July, 1626. when
as I published it, there were then, and now are rumors of Wars, and our
Company of Barber Surgeons were then commanded by His Majesty's Authority
forthwith to provide sixeteen of the best Surgeons as the then time afforded
for his especial service by Land, such as were men most expert in the healing
of wounds made with Gunne-shot; and generally for the most part, by reason of
that long and happy peace that our Nation had enjoyed, many good Surgeons being
put to it at the first, were likely to have been found somewhat to seek
therein; how much more then our younger men? wherefore the charge of providing,
preparing, and fitting His Majesty's whole service by land and sea, being by
his Highness referred to our Corporation and our Company, having for that time
made choice of my self, and deputed me to the work, I held my self in
conscience and duty tied to do somewhat, although I confess it was little, to
the better enabling and encouraging of younger men unto their duties in that
point. But here under favor I must desire pardon for a little digression;
namely, that before my entrance unto any further discourse, I acquaint the
younger sort of Surgeons my Brethren with those especial favors, which it then
pleased our most gracious King Charles, to bestow upon our Corporation in
particular above and beyond his ever blessed Ancestors, for the good of his
Soldiers and Seamen, and our encouragements thereby, to animate and enable us
the more heartfully to serve him: And namely.

First his Highness was graciously pleased, when also he increased the sea-mens
wages, to augment the monthly wages of each Surgeon and Surgeons Mate in his
service by sea and land, to above a third penny from former custom; namely from
nineteen shillings four pence a month to thirty shillings. He has also bin
graciously pleased to give a free benevolence to the Surgeons in all his sea
services, which never was given them by any of the former Kings nor Queens of
this land before as follows, viz. To all Surgions that serve in his Highness
own ships, I mean toward the furnishing of their Surgions Chests with Physical
drugs and medicaments, I say for each of them ten pounds; and to each Merchants
ship five pounds, and to each Newcastle-ship or Colliarsship serving in his
Highness his affairs three pounds. And, nevertheless all the Surgions in his
Highness service have as formerly by the head of all men that are in pay in any
of his ships or land-service two pence of each man by the month: And for the
surgeons in his Land service, he allows to the Surgeon Major of the whole
Camp five shillings a day; and for his two Mates or servants four shillings a
day. Also his Majesty allows to each Surgion two shillings and six pence the
day, which is three pounds and fifteen shillings the month, and to each Mate
three pound a month, and more over allowed, and gave to each Surgeon appointed
to 250. men, a surgery Chest of 17. pounds value free of account: And moreover
his Majesty allows to the Surgeon Major a store Chest or Magazeen Chest of
48. pounds value, for a supply to furnish upon all wants and occasions: And His
Highness was yet further well pleased to give authority unto the Masters and
Governors of our Society, for to have the making, compounding, fitting, and
ordering of all the medicines, as well Physical as Chirurgicall, together with
all other provisions belonging to the Surgeons chest. And further His Highness
has referred to the ancient Masters and the Governors of our Society, the
pressing of all Surgeons and Surgeons Mates or servants to Surgeons and
Barbers; with also the taking up of any instruments, chests, or ready made
medicines in His Highness name for his service, if occasion be not otherwise.
These favors and privileges our Corporation have received from His Highness,
together with a new Charter, wherein he has likewise graciously been pleased
to confirm all our privileges formerly granted unto us; and has given us
diverse new privileges for the better subsistence of our said Corporation in
future times; as also we had never been denied as formerly, to have moneys
imprested before hand, for the providing a chest with surgery Instruments and
salves. In regard whereof, and for that Surgeons should with the better courage
be instigated faithfully to perform their duties; I have presumed in this
Preface to explain His Highness former favors, as aforesaid, whereby our
younger brethren may from age to age the better keep it in remembrance; and to
that end I have also further under favor I hope without offense, presumed to
set down the effect of the order of the then Lords of his Highness most
honorable Privy Council, with the day and year in which some of the recited
privileges were granted and ordered, as also in part the form and order how
his Majesty's Officers of his Navy have interpreted, dispensed, and disposed
of his Majesty's said free gift, according to the several burdens, ranks and
orders of the ships of His Highness his Navy respectively, which are as
follows.

A List of the different rates of several of his Majesty's Ships, concerning
His Highness free gift and impressed, to each of them, namely, as they were
heretofore rated by the Officers of His Higness Navy, in the year, 1626.
Great Ships of the first and second rank were rated all alike, viz. Mer.
Honor Triumph Anne Royal Saint Andrew Saint George James Repulse Charles
Defiance Nonesuch Unicorne Victory Hen. Maria Vanguard Rainbowe Swiftsure Red
Lion Con. Reformation With the rest of the like.
Free gift -- 10. li. -- 0 -- 0 Impressed -- 7li -- 10. -- 0 In all -- 17. li. --
10 -- 0


Ships of the third rank. Assurance Guardland Bonaventure Entrance Leopard
Convertine And so of the rest of the List.
Free gift -- 7li. -- 10 -- 0 Impressed -- 5li. -- 0 -- 0


Ships of the 4. rank. Adventure Mary Rose Blake George
Free gift -- 5li. 0 -- 0- Impressed -- 3. -- 10 -- 0


Great Merchant men in His Majesty's service at the rate of his Majesty's great
ships, viz. 10 li. and 7 li. 10. s. ordinary Merchant men at the rate of his
Majesty's ships of the fourth rank, aforesaid, namely 5 pound free gift and 3
pound 10 s. impressed.

Ships of the 5. rank. Each Lions Whelp viz. First Whelp Second Whelp Fourth
Whelp Fifth Whelp Tenth Whelp
Free gift -- 3 li. 0-0 Impressed 3 li. 0-0


His Majesty's Pinaces. Greyhond Roe-buck Or any of like account.
Free gift 3 li. 0 -- 0 Impressed 2 li. -- 10-0


Newcastle Ships or Colliers, at the same rate with His Majesty's Pinnaces.

The Preface.
The day of the grants of the aforesaid order touching benevolences, was to my
best remembrance the 10 of July, 1626. at White Hall, by the Lords of h^s
Majesty's Privy Council, being then by them ordered to be paid unto the Masters
and Wardens of the Surgeons, ever from time to time before hand, and upon all
services for his Highness; and for the better performance thereof, the said
Noble Lords were pleased to pray the Lord Treasurer to take knowledge thereof,
and to cause the moneys accordingly to be forthwith issued as aforesaid, as for
a supply for the providing of Physical drugs and medicaments. And further the
said Honorable Lords were then pleased to order, that all such other moneys as
usually had been allowed by way of impressed to any Surgeons in His Majesty's
service, toward the providing and further fitting of their Surgery-Chests,
should together with the former moneys be likewise paid into the hands of the
said Masters and Wardens, ever for the time being in dew time and before hand;
who for the better effecting of the intents and service aforesaid, were ordered
to see the said moneys faithfully and frugally bestowed, and should for the
surer performance of it, orderly have the making, ordering, fitting, and
compounding of all the medicines, as well physical as chirurgical; as also all
other provisions belonging to a Surgeons Chest; or to appoint such others for
the effecting the work, as they should at their perils answer for their
faithful performances: All which Chests and provisions whatsoever therein so
fitted and provided as aforesaid, being ready, the Master and Wardens are by
the said order commanded to see every of them to be safely delivered under lock
and key, unto His Majesty's officers whom it may concern at Tower-wharfe; that
all things therein provided and enclosed might the safelier come on board the
ships, for which they are designed: All which allowances, Injunctions,
Privileges and Commands, were then by the said most Honorable Lords thought
fit to be for ever hereafter continued to all ships or Fleets in his Highness
future services, as is more plainly manifest by the said order; the which no
doubt is extant, and unto which if occasion require, relation may be had.

Thus loving Brethren, having acquainted you with these his Majesty's favors
unto our Corporation, it follows in my duty that I should acquaint the
younger sort of Surgeons with the use of the Surgeons Chest, I mean the
medicines in this Viaticum contained; in some methodical manner, according to
the ensuing expressions of the following Treatise, were it not that time
hastens me to an end, before I begin: Yet nevertheless I have shrained of time
to lend the younger sort a word or two in this Viaticum, not to al as a Teacher,
but as a loving remembrance to the elder, which I pray you to peruse as you
have occasion. And so in Gods name without painting of phrases or collecting of
great Authors for my ^ouchers; my Method you know by the plainness of the
style; the which Method is no other then the old beaten Pathway of all
Surgeons, wherein each Artist ought to be experienced. And If any Artist by
forgetfulness err, desire to inform his memory: And as for the younger
sort, I know it is Charity to show them, for they have need, and ought
to-desire and seek knowledge, according to an old Doctrine of that sweet
Lilly, in his Grammatical instructions, videlicet.

Qui dubitat, qui saepe rogat, mea dicta tenebit;
Is qui nil dubitaet, nil capit inde boni.
In English to this effect.

Who doubts, enquires, and knowledge seeks, does Lillies rules make good;
Whilst he that is wise in his own conceit, puts on the Idiots hood.
And to conclude, I well knowing you could not always have the advice of the
grave and learned Artists at hand, in military affairs, I therefore presumed
to the utmost of my latchet, hereby to afford you my following helps, which I
hope by the friendly Reader will, if he want better, be taken in friendly part.

Vale in Christo
An Epitomy of a Surgeons Chest, and of the Contents thereof, for his Majesty's
service, by addition or omission of any the particulars, to be altered
according to each several Ships proportion, time, or different occasion, upon
any voyage.
Composed and published by John Woodal, Master in Surgery, August the 11. 1628.
Instruments.
DIsmembring Saw. Dismembring knife Incision knife. Head Saw. Tresine. Glister
Pot. Pipes.
Small sirings with pipes. Cathetor. Speculum oris. Cauterizing Buttons.
Flamula. Forceps straight. Forceps crooked. Paces. Forcers or punches. Crows
bills. Spatulaes. Weights and scales. Mortar and Pestill. Strainers. Spunges.
Skillet. Chafingdish. Pannikins. Mallet and Chezel. Blood Porringers. Cupping
Glasses. Potion Cup. Spoon lrage. Towe. Funnels. Cap-paper. Leather skins.
Splints and Tape. Skillet large. Clouts and Rowlers.
Emplastra.
Stipticum Paracelsi. Diachalcitheos. Oxycroceum. Deminio. Meliloti. Cumini.
Unguenta.
Basiliconis. Viride. Populeonis. Album. Triapharmacum. Dialtheae.
Diapompholigos. Aegyptiaci. Linimentum Arcei. Digestive. Mel Saponis. Axungi
Porcini. Costicum Liquidum.
Olea.
Cautulorum. Hipericonis cum gummi. Rosarum. Chamomillae. Anethi. Lilliorum.
Lini. Pulvis Registringens majus. Defensat.

Simplicia.
Bolus verus. Mastick. Myrrh. Pix Greca. Lapis Calaminaris. Bolus.
Praecipitatum. Sublimatum. Lupines. Cantharides. Alumen Crude. Combust.
Vitriolu^ Album. Viride. Combustum.
Farina Fabarum. Hordei.

Herbs.
Wormwood. Mint. Rosemary. Time. Centaury. Hipericon. Scordium.
Electuaria.
De Ovo. Discordii. Mythridat. Phylonium pers. Theriaca Andromachi.
Londinensis. Diatesseron.
Confectio Hamech. Alkermes.
Diatrion Pyperion. Diacatholiconis. Diaphaeniconis. Lohoch Sanum. Laudani.
Aquilla vitae. Aurum vitae. Extract. Catholicon purgans. Succus Liqueritiae.
Lymonum.

Syrupi.
Violarum. Limonum. Menthae. Rosarum salutivi. Dimoron. Oximel. Mel Rosarum.
Conservae.
Rosarum. Prunellorum. Barberorum. Cochleariae.
Philula^*
De Euphorbio. Ruffi. Cochiae. Aureae. Pulvis Sanotus: Arthreti^.

Aquae.
Caelestis. Cinamomi. Rosarum. Menthaesimplicis Cum Vino Card. Benedict.
Plantaginis Aquaevitae Angelicae Lotion Spirit. vini Acetum vini
Olea.
Vitrioli Terebinthinae Origani Mel Depurat
Simples.
Aloes Succotrinae Senae elect. Rhabarb. elect. Colycintis Opii Cornu Cervi
Rasura Combusta
Cerussae Mu^^^^^ Sperma Ceti Cortices granatorum Galla Radices Liquiricae
Semen anisi. Faniculi Lini Cuminae Faenum Graecum Flores Comomillae Melilotae
Baccae Lauri Juniperi
Terebinth. Hordei excort. Com. Stibium Cambogium. Bladders Bags Pots Glasses
The Chest A padlock Petty charges.
WOODAL'S VIATICUM: A Help to the Surgeons Chest.
The first dressing of Wounds, made by Gunshot.
AFTER extraction of unnatural things, forced into the wound with the Bullet,
which ought with all circumspection, care, and possible ease to the patient, to
be effected for fear of hurting the offended Arteries, veins, and nerves, etc.
And also all such fractured bones greater or less broken by force of the
bullet, be taken out; I say of all Draw not fractured bones out at the first,
without caution.
such of them, as may without danger of Life or Limb be immediately removed for
the first dressing; wherein note, that a fractured bone, though wholly divided
from the greater fixed part thereof, is not as by a general rule always to be
cut or forced out at the first dressing, except it does apparently endanger a
Gangrena, or other fearful accidents, by pricking of Nerves or the like; for
by amoving it, a Flux may Tarry if you may while nature helps.
be induced, or some other offense, but you should do well rather to forbear
such bones for the first dressing at the least, and until nature, or other just
reasons in the true Art of healing do compel, and to proceed to the dressing.

In the more simple sort of Gunshot wound, as follows, I mean in wounds,
where no Gangrena may be suspected, neither immediate Flux, nor furtive
hemorrhage, dress the Patient either with Artificial Balm, or Oleum
Hypericon: cum Gummis de Apericij, Oleum Cattulorum, Balm in the Chest.
or Arceus Linament, or one of these, and apply it warm, and somewhat warmer
then the Patient would willingly suffer it, and cover the wound with an Emp. of
mellilot stiptic: Paracelsi, Minium, or any other good Empl sitting.
Emplaister, that is according to Art, and namely according to the temper of
the grief, ever to make choice of hotter or colder Emplaisters, not omittng
convenient bandage, I mean due ligature, and so Order in cnring.
proceed in Gods name, as in all contused wounds is most convenient to the end
of the work, that is to say, first to suppurate and digest, then to mundify,
and then to incarne, and so on to sigillate, or siccatrize with due respect, if
occasion be, by Laxative or other remedies, to temper and fit the body by good
Regiment of diet, as by purging, Spirit of wine.
bleeding, etc. And for one particular, observe that in Gunshot wounds, almost
in all dressings, the spirit of wine does well with some of the aforesaid
balmes, until the wound be well mundified at the least.

But in wounds, where great danger of a Gangrena is to be feared, the Dressing
of great Wounds.
Surgeon has nothing more safe, for the first dressing, then (...)
Aegyptiacum, and a little spirit of Wine, somewhat too warm, put it upon soft
Linte, or fine towe pledgents, or by a Siringe, to be carried in at first, into
the bottom of the wound* which done, with some good astringent defensative
medicine, and fit bandage, let it be bound up, and if the Surgeon be not forced
thereunto, let not the wound be opened again until 48 hours be past, upon the
first dressing, and so also upon every Causticke application. Then at the next
dressing, if Fluxes, hinder not, have ready,) if it may be (white wine and
honey, for a fomentation, or fair water, and Mel for necessity, if better
cannot be had, and with a little Aqua vitae added, if you think fit, with
stupes, very warm, foment the wounded part a pretty space, then apply until
full digestion one of the a forenamed Balms, warm, or with the ordinary
digestive of Terebinth, vitellum ovorum etc. and cover it with an emplaister,
and embrocate the part about, with Oleum Rosarum Camom. Aneth or the like,
without urgent necessity, but fail not to Time of dressing.
dress it once every day, and bind it up, and after dress the wound but once
a day, and more, if the Surgeon see cause.

But I hold it fit that the Surgeon leave off Oleum Hypericon Cum Gummis in
time, for that it has Oleum Terebinth: therein, and so may be too quick, and
rather change from that, and use Vrceus Liniment, Oleum Catulorum, or some
digestive of your own practice, until perfect digestion. And if accidents
chance not, the Surgeons Method may be to proceed as in all contused wounds,
only as is said, I advise the Surgeon to make use of pure Aqua vitae, or
rather spirit of Wine, with Aegyptiacum, where he finds not a just cause to
the contrary.

Cautions, Advices, and Instructions for the Younger sort of Surgeons* in
Wounds of Gunshot.
Conceal from the Patient the great danger of the wound, except just cause
urge thee to acquaint him with it.

Fomentation.
Fomentations are very good medicines in wounds with Gunshot, but foment not
at any time, except you can have convenient fire at hand, and let ever your
Fomentations be very warm applied.

Foment not too long at any one time, neither use it but upon urgent occasions.

Embrocate often, if no Gangrena be at hand, whether you have fire or not.
Embrocation.


Let all your Vehicles for your Medicines, as tents, dorsels, plegents, etc. be
soft and pleasing to your Patients, as much as in true Art may be, and cram not
the wound too full at any time, especially Wounds incised for hindering unition
of parts.

Also, if you can conveniently come to the work, enlarge not, especially
Enlarging of Wounds.
in contused wounds, where danger may be feared, otherwise do it warily;
observing that you do it not to thwart any member, neither any Vein, Artery,
Nerve or Muscle, as near as you can possible.

Gunshot wounds over compound.
No wound of Gunshot can be said to be a simple wound, neither ever was there
any Artist, that could truly say, that he healed any gunshot wound by the
first intention of Unition, without due suppuration, no nor any contused wound
whatsoever; for the composition of Gunshot wounds, are ever real and very
substantial; witness the poor patient, where Fibers, Nerves, Membranes,
Veins, Arteries, Bones, and quid non, suffer together so, that such wounds, in
their recency they resemble Ulcers rather then wounds; and the differences of
these from other contused wounds is, That other contused Difference of contused
wounds.
Wounds for the most part suffer but by way of contusion only, and these by
contusion and dilaceration, if not fraction of bones etc. whereby all the whole
member suffers together, and also the parts adjacent, and that in a high
degree.

If discoloring blistering or other apparent shows of a Gangrena appear,
give the patient a Diaphoreticke cordial, then scarify gently at the first, and
deeply afterward as cause shall urge, and have ready a Lixivium made of water
and ashes, to the height of an ordinary Lee that women use to drive bucks with,
and put a reasonable quantity of common Salt into it, and when it is cleared,
if you have herbs, as Scordium, wormwood, Centaury, Hypericon, Camomil,
Melilot, or the like or Lupnies, make use of them according to Art, it will be
much the better, if not, use it without, and apply it very warm, with stupes,
often shifted, and wrung out, and if that cannot be had, use salt water for a
fomentation very warm, rather then want a medicine: Aqua vitae is also precious
in all Lixiviums against Gangrens, but you must boil the Aqua vitae without
error, for the spirits will evaporate and the virtue rests in them.

Observe in great lacerated wounds, as follows, viz. If you find by the
wound, the one half of the member to be taken away, there is no hope to save
on the rest, but you are rather to make present Amputation, Just cause of
amputation.
especially if the patient upon information of his danger be willing, for that
the rest is contused, and must therefore admit by consequent, some loss of
substance, by suppuration ever in a contused wound, and then the remaining part
can do no service to the body but will much endanger the life of the patient,
by the expense of blood and spirits in the striving to save it, and be but a
hindrance: and I dare say, that if but half any member be taken away, with the
fracture of the bone, it is impossible to save the rest of it on, to do any
service* If you have haemorrage, I mean bleeding, or furtive bleeding, or
weeping of veins or arteries, in your work, search for the vein or artery
that bleedeth or gleeteth; and try if you can make ligature on it, if you
cannot, make ligature, which seldom or never you can in Gunshot wounds, then
apply to the end of the vein that weepeth an actual cautery, a small one will
serve, but apply it like it self very hot, and apply it not all over the
wound, only to that vein, if you can, that bleedeth, you may if the flux be
not great, use burning hot Egyptiacum, upon a button of lint dipped, and quickly
and neatly brought to the place, whilst it is hot, and then well boulstred.

Actual Cautery.
But a small actual cautery is the safer, and makes better work, or the
Surgeon may use restrictive powder, adding thereto burnt Vitriol Restrictive
Powder.
a little or burnt alum, and precipitate mixed which makes a strong eskar,
and often restrains a great Flux, being applied thereon artificially, only
precipitate will surely make bones soul in contused wounds, for which cause I
affect it not.

To take heed of an old error.
But ever take heed to avoid the old received error of unwise practitioners,
whose use is to cram the wounds, be they incised wounds or contused wounds, as
is said, full of bole or restringent powder, or some other stuff, and then
thrust in pledgents or dorsels into each corner of the wound, yea sometimes
forgetting to take all out at the next dressing, yet think they have done all
workman like, and very artificially not considering the harm, that often
ensues thereby. I dare say, that in contused wounds of Gunshot, by such
errors, they force and draw a Gangrena, if not death thereby, by hindering
natural unition, by obstructing the parts, and grieving the patient, in keeping
the woundded parts from healing. It is a safe and fair way at the first
dressing, ever to strive to join together the parts of all recent wounds, and
unite the wounded parts if it may be with this caution, to order that fit
breathing be left to evacuate the peccant humors, whereof there is small fear
in lacerated wounds, and then to apply apt and fitting astringent medicaments
outwardly over all, together with apt and due ligature; and by that course to
stay a flux, but in contused and lacerated wounds of Gunshot, the Surgion has
not that benefit, but must trust to other helps not so ready, namely, as is
said in the lesser wounds, to very warm Balmes, astringent defensatives, and
good ligature, and in greater wounds, to caustic medicaments, Cauteries and
forcible helps to repel fluxes, etc.

But in the Surgeon his careful desire to restrain fluxes, let him ever A
Caveat.
beware of over hard ligature, as much as is possible, which is also a common
dangerous error, and certainly draws on evil accidents, as Plegmon
Gangrena, etc. as daily experience tells.

Likewise one the other side, over-slack binding is also bad, due, comely and
smooth ligature, with the due composing the parts wounded with soft and smooth
boulstring, greatly honoreth the Artist and cures the patient almost as much
as the medicines do.

Observe also, that you put never one Caustic or Escarotick medicine after
another too soon, namely, not until the first eskarre has been gone at the
least three days. If in a contused wound of Gunshot any slough or putrid part,
as proceeding from the heads of the muskets, arteries, veins, or the like,
appear in a contused wound which needs an Escaroticke medicine, and the
Surgeon do desire to cleanse that part, let him use an artificial Caustic
medicine, namely, hot Egyptiacum, or an actual Cautery, if you can apply it
only in that place, and not all over the wound, for in truth the use of them
is very good in contused wounds made by Gunshot; and yet Over drying medicines
dangerous.
you are to consider, that as too much gleeting, weeping or experience of
humidity from wounds of gunshot is dangerous many ways, so too much use of
drying medicaments in wounds made with Gunshot, is no less dangerous by
stopping the pores and repelling the peccant humors, by reason of the contused
blood collected, being choked in the wound, aptly indangering a Gangrena, and
other deadly accidents incident thereunto.

Advise touching the general regiment of wounded men.
Now a word or two in want of the grave Physician, how the young Surgion may in
part demean himself being put to it, for the more happy performance of the
cures made with Gunshot, which are very much regulated by the government of the
Patient, touching his diet, as also in the careful keeping his body in temper
from much Diet.
costivenesse, and also to stay in ordinate fluxes, thereby to prevent
accidents, as Fevers, etc.

And further also to meet with an help to cure evil accidents when they
happen, to the effecting whereof, good diet and other fitting helps are to be
wished, might attend valiant men, which fight for their countries honor and
defense, which failing, much with brave Soldiers, and valiant Seamen, at
Camp and Ship, there the Surgeons must take it, as they can have it, and make
use in necessity of what the Surgeons chest affords viz. If the patient
before his wound had not a loose body, let the Surgeon give him a Suppository
or Glyster, and if he seem disposed to a fever, though he has bled by his
wound, yet if his strength be answerable, open a vein on the contrary side of
Supposi^ory or Glyster.
his grief, but purge him not being wounded without very just cause, rather
keep him by gentle means, to have the benefit of nature, either by Glyster or
Suppository, if once in two days he have not a stool; and further, if he be
distempered with heat, make him a Fresh water often wanting at Sea.
Barly-water, viz. Water two gallons, Barley 6. ounces, Liquorish one ounce, or
juice of Liquorish two dram's, boil it gently a little, then cast away the
first waters, if water be plentiful, else not, and boil it in fresh water, till
one third part be spent, and being boiled and clarified to the said decoction,
add some few drops of oil Vitriol, to make it some what sower in taste, but not
too much, but if to this 6. grains of Confectio Alkermes, with one spoonful of
Rose Water were added, the drink would be much the more grateful in taste, and
more profitable.

I conceive it will be needless to urge a course for a sparing diet for
Soldiers, or Seamen at Sea, for I fear gluttony will not be their sin. But
if fullness of body be a hindrance, the Surgeon has means to evacuate, as for
a vomit by Stibium, the infusion of 4 grains, if such a medicine be thought
fitting, as in able bodies may be borne, or by laxatives, as Confectio Hamech,
six drams for a dose, Diaphenicon or Diacatholicon, the dose to an able body is
a full ounce. Pills.
The Pills in the Invoyce in this Surgeons chest; upon their several occasions*
one dram is a dose of any sort of them. Also of Pulvis Sanctus may be given two
drams, or Pulvis Arthriti^ns one dram; and if Cordials be required, the Surgeon
has in his chest to provoke rest iu Fevers several ones, as more particular,
there is Diascordium, which he may give to the full of two drams for a dose to a
strong body either in wine or water, as he please, or in a Bolus or lump of it
self.

Use of Laudanum.
Also he has Laudanum, which he may give safely 3. or 4. grains to assuage
pain in painful wounds; to give rest in Fevers, to stay fluxes, and in diverse
other cases being used with judgment, and provided, that the party which takes
it be not costive.

Likewise in fluxes of the belly, accompanied with crude nauseousnesse of the
stomach, as also against venomous or pestilential infection of the blood, there
is in the chest Phylonium Persicum, of which the Patient may take from one
scruple to half a dram, and to one dram safely in a reasonable body, and this
is a safe medicine, which causes rest and corroborateth the stomach, and
mightily prevails to stay a flux of the belly, and does also correct venomous
and malign humors, and is therefore very fit to be used in fluxes that be
contagious or pestilential, after some fitting evacuation if occasion be. What
I here write, it is of mine own practice, you may take it on my word for
truth, for you shall find it to be so, if with due caution you make use of
them. These three Cordials, as is said, assuage pain (viz.) Diascordium,
Laudanum, and Phylonium, or either of them also they serve well to cool or
contemperate the blood. Cordials to swage pain. Of Cordials in general.


The Surgeons chest contains also diverse other Cordial medicines, which may
be profitably administered, each upon due occasion. viz. Confectio Alkermes
either given alone, or to aromatize any purgative or Cordial medicine, from 4.
grains to a scruple for a dose.

Aqua Caelestis, and Cinnamon water to refresh the spirits, half a spooneful or
a spooneful for a dose, and so of Spirit of wine, and also Aqua vitae made of
wine, which so much as contains of the spirit of wine, is quasi spiritus
vitae. Also the Surgeons chest has against contagion, and the Plague,
Mithridate, There. Londinens. Diatessar. Elect. de Ovo, as also Diascord. Aurum
vitae, and Laudanum mentioned, all these being proper for pestilential
occasions, the uses and virtues of which I desire to touch, though but in a
word. And for example, if the Surgeon desire a Cordial to be made to cause
rest, it is made either of L^udanum to three grains, or to 4 grains as it is
said, or Diascordium 2 drams, or Phylonium to one dram, mentioned. And note
that Laudanum is best to be taken in a Pill, because No^e.
of his ungrateful taste, and Phylonium in a Bolus or lump, for the like reason,
and so also may Diascod. be used well, and especially in war, where neither
the advice of the learned Physician, nor the help of the expert Apothecary is
at hand, but if the Surgeon be occasioned, and that he would have Diascor. to
be given in a potion, then let him take of Diascor. 1 dram, of white wine or
fair water 3 ounces or four, of Sirrup of Violets half an ounce, Confect.
Alkermes eight grains; Oleum Vitrioli gutt. quatuor, and let the Patient
drink that potion and incline himself to rest.

Cordials comfortive.
And if a Cordial to comfort the spirits be required, then the aforesaid
Cinnamon water, Aqua caelestis or Aqua vitae of wine is at hand, without mixture
or addition, or with some addition, half a spooneful, or a spooneful for a
dose.

If against the malignity of the blood or any pestilential contagion be feared,
then in such a case the Patient may take as follows, R. Diatessar two drams,
Mithrid one dram, Elect. de ovo one scruple, dissolve or mix them together and
take it in white wine, claret, or sack, or in Carduus, or fair water for need,
of any the aforesaid, to the quantity of four ounces, and sweat thereupon, and
if the contagion be fierce, the Patient may reiterate such sweating medicine
each eight hours, safely for three times, or Aurum vitae gr. 8

These or any of these other Cordials, may be given in other waters, and other
mixtures, according to the discretion of the Surgeon, the time, place, and
different occasion considered, and for need, the aforesaid Cordials or any of
them, may be taken in a Bolus or lump. Likewise Mithridate or Audromaches
Treacle, a dram or two drams of either of them, in white wine, in Carduus water
or in beer, or water for a need, may safely be taken for a Cordial, or in a
Bolus, if the Patient like it so. For tortions or gripings of the stomach or
bowels.


Also Therica Diatessaro^, three drams for a dose may be taken, either as it is
in a Bolus or lump to be swallowed down, and even so taken, it is an excellent
Cordial to provoke sweat, to remove tortions, stitches or gripings of the
stomach or lower belly, or against any pains therein, also it resists all
putrefactions and pestilential vapors, and is the most ancient Treacle of all
others, my self have had very much, true and good experience of it, and would
trust my life upon it, though not before the two aforesaid Alexifarmiks, and
London Treacle in like manner is to be used, and is a very good Cordial:
Elect. de Ovo, is also of it self a sure good Cordial, a scruple I mean,
twenty grains thereof in a Bolus or lump, or in wine given, it resists
pestilential venom, and refreshes the spirits, and either A Cordial.
alone, or as a foresaid mixed with other Cordials; Aurum vitae, as also a true
Cordial, for it comfort the heart, provokes sweat, and by the pores of the
skin expels poisonous vapors, I have had good proof thereof upon my one
body, when I was stricken with the Plague.

Conser. Rosarum, is used to refresh and strengthen the stomach, either alone,
or if you intend to cool and contemperate the blood, A contemperative Cordial.
to purpose, add a few drops of oil of Vitriol, to a little thereof, and i^
to warm the stomach, mix a little Methridate or Treacle, one part, and
Conserve of Roses two parts, and give it so in a Bolus.

Of cooling Juleps.
Conser. Barberies may be profitably kept, either to mix with cooling Barley
waters, or Juleps, to refresh the appetite and the feebled spirits in fevers,
or sometimes to give little of it in a Bolus or lump, or to give a relish to
the mouth, to cause appetite in Fevers, and to expel nauseous distempers.

There is also in the chest Oxymel simplex, which I use in the Surgeons chest,
in want of sirrop Diamor, as being nothing inferior thereunto, for Lotions in
the mouth and throat orderly used, it cease inflammations, as also for the
other virtues it has exceded Diameron, as namely, in the swaging of tumors
and pains, this is a singular medicine, and Cure of Hernia humeralis.
also in Hernia humeralis, being tumors of the testicles and scrotum, it
excels them, if it be mixed with a Cataplasme of Beane-meale boiled in beer,
with a little oil of Elders or Roses, and a little wax, so that the whole
quantity of the Cataplasme being by guess two pound, if so then, put about
six, or seven, or eight ounces of Oximel thereunto, and boil it to a body, and
it is an admirable good medicine, for it discusseth and safely repelleth such
tumors in their increase, with the help of Phlebotomy and a vomit, where the
patient is strong, which tumors by the patient his delaying of time, or by
^rrour of the Surgeon, will otherwise come to suppuration, and prove fistulaes
incurable, but he that will cure such tumors, must have an artificial
sacke-trusse, and be sure that the grief be truly and easily borne up at all
times of the whole cure, and Oximel inwardly administered, purges the stomach
and intrals, opens obstructions, and yet without any manifest sign of heat,
and thereby helps much in fevers engendered of gross phlegm.

Of Lotions generally used in the Surgeons Chest, the most common is of
Sanative herbs made in the Summer with water or wine or both, and honey, but
at Sea if a laxative or washing lotion in need be Lotion at Sea for a need.
required, fair water with as much Alum therein, as will make it tart, and so
much honey as will give it a grateful taste, and there is a lotion for a shift,
or if in the diseases of the Scurvy a lotion be required, then use Copperas
instead of Alum, or sometimes Unguent. Egyptiacum, which is a most fit
medicine for Ulcers of the mouth, or throat* the grieved part being touched
very hot therewith, and being applied with a Probe armed with Lint.

And to wash and cool the mouth in fevers, I often take fair water, four
ounces, of Rose water half a spoonefull, a little sirrup of Violets, or Mel
for a need, and a few drops of Wine Vinegar, or Oximel, or Oil of Vitriol a
few drops only to make the Medicine tart, I mean the Lotion. I have bin taxed
that my proportion has not sufficient medicines contained therein for wounds
of Gunshot, but if any please to look into the particulars, and well consider
them, he will find that the whole scope of the Surgeons Chest, is of purpose
contrived to that end, and that there is not any one Medicine therein, A true
Idescription of a wound with Gun shot at the first view.
but upon the main, or upon the by, tends that way: for a wound of Gunshot at
the first view represents a wound, an ulcer, a Fistula, yea and sometimes a
fracture, and a dislocation, and by accidents calls unto it a fever, an
Apostume, a Gangren, and quid non, yea without Gods Mercy joined, and the great
care of the discreet Surgeon, death follows. Judge then if ought be in the
Surgeons Chest, which in such a wound upon some occasion may not be found
useful.

And for an instance, the Chest contains for the first intention curative of
burnings with Gunpowder, Vng. populeon, Album triapharm^c. Dipomphol. Mel.
Saponis, Oleum Lini, Cerusa, Meldep^ra^* being all directly fitting for the
first intention, namely for taking out of the fire, and yet the Chest has
diverse other helps; as for an example: a linament may be made of Minium
Diacal^itheos, and Oils either of Linseed, or Roses, very profitable for that
use,

And for all the rest (as is said) of wounds of Gunshot, so I say of Ulcers
made by Gunshot, the whole scope of all the Sanative Medicines in the Chest,
according to their several intentions, and times, suit fitly to finish the
cures.

But say, some others, the proportions is very much wanting of restrictive or
astringent Medicines, to stay Fluxes, or to amputate upon occasion; wherefore
to satisfy the young benevolent Surgeon desirous to be informed; I answer
first, that there is Pulvis restringens M^gis, a Astringent, ^estringent, or
restrictive Medicine.
sufficient proportion, also Bole, Wine Venegar, Mirrh, Alum, Crude Vitriol,
Vitriol combust, Mercury Precipitate, sublimate, Bean and Barley Meal, Gauls,
Pomgranate Rinds, and whites of Eggs.

Besides good Ligature and boulsters ready, all which with Judgment, and
discretion used, I dare say are sufficient; and for one instance namely, that
three pound of the strong restrictive powder is sufficient, in quantity for a
reasonable Sea-Chest. Upon the 24 of July 1628, I took off two members, being
both legs, whereof one above the knee, with one ounce and a half of the powder
to both, and had a fourth part to spare of the made medicine. There is also an
astringent defensative powder, prepared and made ready for use, as hereafter
follows.

And if all what is said, with also the help of Phlebotomy, ligature, actual
and potential cauteries, will not suffice, then I am I confess mistaken.

Common practice.
Note in burnings with Gunpowder, that if the face or hand be burned, I have
found it best from the first to the last, namely, to the end of the cure, to
use Vng. Album, either mixed with Populeon, or with A note in the cure of
burnings in the face.
Linseed Oil, or Vng. Diapomphol. is fully as good made into a very thin
linament, and warm, laid on the face with a feather and no clouts at all, nor
ought else to cover the face, this heals excoriation s or scorchings best* or
that the Surgeon take Ceruse, grown'd in a mortar, with linseed oil, and apply
it as the former, I have approved it to be very good. Tripharmac. is also very
good so used.

I speak but now of honey for burnings, and who shall prove it shall find it
safe to take out the fire, and after to heal the grief, but is somewhat more
paineful then some other medicines are, it is only once a day to be applied
upon brown paper, the paper being first rubbed soft, and the Medicine spread
thereon, and in that manner applied, it heals without any scarre very
quickly. Also Mel Saponis and all other medicines appropriate may be applied
upon paper at Sea, partly for sparing Linen.

Of the knowledge of weights and measures.
Moreover, I find a great weakness in younger Surgeons, that I have just
occasion to question, in that their Masters that bred them have not taught them
thetrue knowledge of our usual weights and measures, but chiefly they fail in
their weights, which does bring great danger to their poor patients, whose
lives hang dangerously in the balance by a grain too much given, where the
Surgeon knows not how many grains are in a scruple, or in a dram, no nor
scarce, that there is a weight so called: wherefore young Surgeons note as
follows. The Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, have two sorts of
weights in use, namely Troy-weights, which likewise are the Goldsmiths
weights, and that contains twelve ounces to the pound, and Haber-de pois
weights, which contains 16 ounces to the pound, and is that common weight
which the Grocers and all other tradesmen use, and indeed which we most use,
for though my self sometimes buy Musks, Civet, or Ambergris, and other
forts of Drugs, by Troy-weight, yet I dispense and administer all by Haber-de
pois, which is 16 ounces to the pound* so much I will only for brevity sake
speak thereof.

A pound of Haber-de pois weight has 16 ounces, an ounce has 8 Drams, a Dram
has three scruples, a scruple has twenty grains, and by that account a dram
has two grains, and a full grain of Barley is a reasonable Grain, and a
pepper Corn or wheat Corn may be used.

And our measures agreeing with our weights most usual are as follows, a wine
Gallon of water contains 8 pound, a pottle 4 pound, a quart 2 pound, a pint 1
pound, and of ordinary sallet oils, 7 pound and a half is accounted a Gallon.

Of Cataplasmes.
OF all other necessaries in the Surgeons Chest, I confess my deficiencie
there in; for I ought to have had dried herbs of all sorts fitting, some
store: but I pray you accept of my excuse. For at the Edition of this Ex
temp^re, I had Surgeons Chests and parts of Chests, 60 at once to prepare, and
had but ten days respit admitted me to make and to fit them all; and yet
notwithstanding, the said Chests contained herbs of diverse sorts, as also Bean
and Barly-meal, Linseed, Fenugreeke, Camomile flowers, Cuminseed, Fennel seed,
and diverse other things, that are helps that way. But what shall I say? To some
foolish, contentious, vainglorious persons, my best things fall too short for
them; but to benevolent understanding Artists, they can make and find many
ways and helps of fitting things in a Ship, and not always charge the
Surgeons Chest. Viz. If my self were at Sea, and put to it, I would find wast
crumbs of Biscuit, and I would boil them in Ship-Beer, and with some fat of the
Beef Kettles, or of the Porke Kettle, I would make up a suppurative,
Cataplasme; and if it had not a fit consistence or body, I would deal with the
steward for a little Meal, or take some of my own stores, and according to my
store, enrich that with other helps from the Chest: And if I need a discutient
Cataplasme, and the Chest had not to help me to my will, being put to it, I
would, as I said, make my ground of the Medicine to be of crumbs of Biscuit, or
of soft bread decocted in Beer; adding, when it had well sod, Vinegar and
honey, a fit quantity: these things, with other rational additions, according
to several occasions, do much comfort the weak patient, and also grace the
Artist: Nam frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

And to put young Surgeons in mind, what other Suppurative Medicines are in the
Surgeons Chest, there are either Unguents, Oils, or Emplastick Medicaments
diverse, which my time will not admit me to inform you of, though I confess I
should advise young men in their necessities. But to be short, they shall find
Unguent Basilicon spread thick and applied to an Apostume, does well help to
suppurate; and the better, if the grief were first embrocated with some Oleum
Lili^rum, Lini, or the like: and you shall find, that Arceus Linament is right
good to suppurate a tumor, and likewise Empl. Meliloti: and who knows not,
that Ship-pitch and a little fat mixed ripeneth a tumor, duly applied; or Pix
Graeca, with fat or turpentine; and diverse other the like good things may be
found, where the discreet Surgeon is put to his shifts. But no more of that;
for whereas Bees may suck Honey, even there Spiders will convert a plain style
into Poison and Gall.

Non omnibus dormio.
A ready defensative powder to be applied where Just cause is for a
defensative, either for wounds with Gunshot, or other Wounds, which I have
made use of, and will impart the secret to young practitioners, and is as
follows.

R. Terra sigillat. Alumin. Vitriol. Tartar. Cerus. ana 1 li. Bol. Armen. 2 li.
Aquae. 1 li. ss.


Take a new earthen pot of almost a Gallon and a half, put the water into the
pot, and thereunto put the Allom and the Copperas, then powder the tartar, and
put that in also, and then have ready the other ingrediences in powder, put
them in by little and little, stirring them very well, until all be
incorporated, and without seething keep the Medicine on the fire till it be
hard, and if you cannot make it hard enough in that manner so that being cold,
it will powder, then put it into some dreppin Pan, or the like, and into an
oven, when the bread is drawn, and it will be hard, then being cold powder it
and keep it to your use, for it will not decay, nor alter his Virtue in many
years.

And when you would use it for a defensative, take of this powder, about half
an ounce of Posca, I mean water and Vinegar mixed, four ounces, put the
powder therein which will almost melt, then dip clouts therein, and apply them.
This medicine with moderation used, is a true and excellent defensative, and a
very anodine.

Also it heals all itchings, smartings, gaulings, or any Erisipelas or other
excoriations speedily and safely, and dries it mightily, preventeth from
accidents, either in great wounds, or fractures and being in small quantity
used with fair water to ulcers, it cleanses them well and heals them.

And if you have whites of eggs, mixed with a Posca, it* were the better, or
in fractures with yolks and whites together it is very good, only let the
care of the Surgeon be, that he apply it in his true nature, namely as a
defensative in fit time and touching the rest of the uses thereof, he may
presume he has a very good Medicine, and so for this time I take my leave.

Vale in Christo Jesu.
A Description of the Trafine, and the necessary uses thereof, especially for
Military occasions for young Surgeons.
HAving had sufficient trials of the facility and of the Trafine, I have
thought fit to commend it and the use thereof, for the future, to the younger
Artist, upon some of their requests, not detracting ought from the worthiness,
and due commendations of the Author of the Trapan, concerning that excellent
invention, yet by way of addition to my former Edition, I thought fit here to
describe the Trafine, it being an Instrument of my own composing, which
experience will show, is more compendious, and of more facility in the use
thereof, for young practicioners in Surgery then is the Trapan, the which
Instrument, although it may be said to be derivative or Epitomy of or from the
Trapan; yet well observed, it performs as much as the Trapan in every degree
and more, and for that it was so fashioned, and first practiced by my self, I
thought fit to put the name of a Trafine upon it (a tribus finibus) from the
three ends thereof, each being of several uses, and being as it may appear
triangular or three cornered, each corner there of performing the part it
seems to undertake, so that it fully supplyeth and makes good all the uses
of a Trapan, with the one end, and that with more facility as is said, and
safely then the Trapan does, or can do, and it supplyeth with the second end
all the uses of a smooth Levatory, and supplyeth the necessity of a Jagged or
toothed Levatory, with the third end, the said Levatories being all necessary
adjutors in helping to make and finish the Trafine or (tres finis (and who so
shall please to make a judicial experience thereof, not being prejudicated,
will find that it far exceeds the Trapan in all his uses; in the compendious
and safe performance of the works, as well of the two Levatories, as of a
Trapan recited which the former can no way be said to be.

Secondly, the Trapan cannot be well managed without both the hands of the
Artist viz. the one for the work of erosion by the Artificial motion thereof in
turning it ever round for the better penetrating of the Cranium, the other hand
must be used to keep it steady upon the affected part, and yet the upper part
of the Instrument, must nevertheless, as of necessity rest upon the Surgeons
breast, yea and the Surgeon must for that purpose order his body in a fit
posture; and further yet, the Surgeon must have a second man for an assistant
of necessity, that must be employed to stay the Patients head, whereas with
this Instrument (I mean the Trafine) the whole work is performed by the two
hands of the Surgeon only, with far more dexterity and quicker, then with
the Trapan as is said, yea, and that with much more comfort, both to the
patient and to the Artist, as the practice therewith will plainly show: and
again, there is no such danger attending that Instrumentas does the Trapan;
for the heads of the Trafine are made all taper, to wit, wider above then
beneath, and also cut both ways, and cannot therefore easily be said to offend
the (Dura Matter) by an error to be suggested, to happen in the use thereof,
without stupid ignorance in the Artist.

Thirdly, the Trapan of old had ever the heads as wide above as beneath, which
heads were many ways both very dangerous and uncertain, especially when the
Instrument by turning round, had clean pierced through the Cranium, and
thereby after the same head had fully perforated the Cranium round, it was very
apt on the sudden to slip down upon the (Dura Matter) by error and
improvidence of the Artist, either upon oblivion or omission diverse ways, as
namely for one, if the Artist did not truly, equally, and strongly fasten the
small screw, being an iron or rather a steel pin, that stays and fasteneth
the said head of the Trapan, which the Artist pierces with for the gaging
thereof, either by have, which though otherwise he might adjudged a careful
Surgeon, yet upon his eager proceeding on his work, might unhappily be omitted,
and even that small error might cause danger to the life of the Patient, and
sometimes proved the irrecoverable cause of his death; whereas this Instrument,
the Trafine, has all the heads thereof made taper, as is said, namely wider
above then below, piercing every way alike, and therefore there needs no rule
or gager, especially in the being performed without turning it round about, but
is done by the only moving or agitating of the hand to and fro, yea with the
only moving of the wrist of the hand, and which is another manifest benefit
thereof, it can go no lower then it is, by agitating and extreme pressing
urged, and when it has penetrated through it, for the most part detaineth and
brings forth the piece of the bone with it, and puts the Patient to no
pain nor danger thereby, no nor color of danger or pain at all.

Fourthly, by reason that the Trasines taper heads are made and framed, to cut
every way alike, as is said, the work is easier and sooner performed therewith,
then with the Trapan, as by the proving it upon a Calves head you easily shall
make the experience, provided as is fitting in the time of piercing, you
sometimes take out the Instrument, and wipe the teeth thereof that it furre not
too much, and thereby hinder the due penetration: also thereby you easily may
consider how far you have penetrated, and what remains unpierced, that you
may do what is just in the work of penetration and no more.

Yet I will never deny, but do acknowledge that the Trapan has deserved great
praises from former ages, for that it has been an Instrument that has
preserved many a man, woman and child's life, from the eminent danger of death,
and whereby they have bin restored to good and perfect health again, and if
that any by omission or error in the use thereof have dyed, they are at rest by
it; and if the younger Artist do by his experience, find that this my addition
deserve ought, let God have the praise in his mercies to weak men, for the
comfort they find thereby in their woeful distresses, and as for this my
Addition of invention, I must confess is not much, only good will, for all
men may well conceive, that it is more easy to add to another man's invention,
then to invent a new thing of his own.

The next observation considerable in the fitting of the Trafine duly to the
work is, for the regulating the center or point of this orb or circumference,
I mean of this Trafine head, it is first to be well considered, that the pin
thereunto belonging being placed truly in the center be artificially made of
good steel, and that it be triangular, also that it be sharp each way well
pointed, and stand fast in the Instrument, and also that it stand no lower, but
always somewhat higher then the circumferent teeth of the head of that
Instrument do, for because the said pin in the center guides the
circumferent tooth-head-saw, to the beginning of the work, and in the agitating
and moving of the Trafine with the hand to and fro in this work, the said pin
may first take hold, ere the teeth of the Instrument touch the scull, for that
the said pin is not only appointed as a rule and guide, but also as the stay
to the work, which done, namely, when the tooth head orb or saw, has taken
hold round, then the sooner the better the Artist is to take up the Instrument,
to wipe and cleanse the teeth thereof, and draw out the said pin in the center,
the which he may no ways omit; which done he is by the agitation of his hand
only to and fro to pierce, and having pierced as it were half through, he is
again to take up his Instrument and cleanse it, and then again to proceed in
piercing by the motion of the hand to and fro, until he have in all parts gone
through the Cranium, which if he diligently regard in the tender observant
motion of his own hands, I mean he that pierces shall sensibly feel when the
bone is penetrated through on each part, which considered, then drawing off his
Instrument, he shall find the piece of the Cranium so removed, fixed within the
head of his Instrument as is said.

But note nevertheless, there is great care to be taken by the Artist in the
manner of the piercing and taking out the piece of the fractured bone diverse
ways.

And first let him be sure, ever to place the broding head of the Instrument
that pierces, so that the triangular pin in the center thereof be set upon a
firm part of the Cranium or scull, yet always provided it be near the
fractured part thereof as may be.

Secondly the Artist is to consider, that as he which pierces the Cranium with
a small straight head, such as the Trapans were accustomed to have as is said
by the giving way of the small screw that fastneth the head of the Trapan, the
Patients life may be endangered, namely if the Cranium being throwly pierced,
the Instrument casually should slip down upon the (Dura Matter,) as my self to
my grief once saw: even in like manner he that uses a ragged taperhead of a
Trafine, how safe soever, may be guilty of indangering his Patient, if he be
not careful in the manner of his piercing, namely, that after the Instrument
has taken hold round with the teeth, if he either leave the pin untaken out,
the said pin being longer then the teeth of the Instrument, he may wound the
Panicle (Dura Matter) before the piece intended to be taken out, be pierced
through in each part, or that he do not at the least twice or thrice in the
time of his piercing the Cranium, take up and cleanse the teeth of the
Instrument with a clout thereby as it were to mistrust himself, as fearing
whether it have in all parts pierced through or not, or how much, or in which
part he is wanting for fear of going too deep, otherwise he may kill his
patient ere he does find or perceive he is through, for a work so seldom used,
and the errors thereof being of so dangerous a consequent, the Artist, although
otherwise discreet, by omission, oblivion, or other improvidence be wanting in
some observation, highly worthy of regard; wherefore it behooves him to suspect
himself and be cautious, for that a man can never be too wary in such a
business; for although the piece every way may be pierced and removed out of
his place, yea, and contained within the Trafine head, yea, and stick in the
fame, yet the Artist may by his hand be mistaken, and think it not to be
through, for that the Instrument sticks as firmly, and as fast in the place,
when the piece is out and within the Orb of the Trafine, as it did ere it was
divided, and as if it had not gone through: hereby if the Artist observe not
his intermissions, by forbearing now and then his piercing, as is said, and
sometimes view his work, and cleanse the teeth of the Instrument ere it be
through, he is subject to go too deep, and wound the (D^^^ Matter) by the
continued motion of his hand, notwithstanding the piece of the Cranium is
completely removed, and res^eth within the head of the said Instrument:
wherefore all these observations, as I conceive, under favor, are but necessary
for the young Artist to have in regard, Nam nimis cautla non nocet: To be
exceeding wary is not hurtful.

And further, let the Artist be sure that his Trafine be truly made of good
steel, I mean the head of the pin or center, and the ends of the levatories,
and that the pin stand fast on, and directly in the midst of the head
thereof, namely in the true center of the Instrument, and also that the Artist
have three heads of several sizes in readiness by him is likewise very
fitting, with also an Instrument called a Lenticular at hand, to cleanse away
all small shivers and raspings of bones, justly proceeding in the operation of
excision, as also for the removing whatsoever else may seem by consequence to
offend the Dura Matter, or that way else might hinder healing.

And further, I advise that every young Artist take some convenient time before
hand, to make trial of his Trafine, as is said, upon a Calveshead, or the like
subject, before he put it in practice upon a man, for a good Surgeon may err,
even in a small omission in such a business to his grief and reproach, if he
be not exceeding cautious; and for that cause I advise every young Surgeon (as
is said) to suspect himself, and warily to consider that the precious life of
man so depends upon the care, wisdom, and artificial skill of the Surgeon in
his work, as that upon a small omission or error of forgetfulness, or but a
very little mistake, a man is in a moment slain by art, for want of art, when
it will be too late for the Artist within himself, to ruminate of the things
that most conduced to the mischief; and upon all occasions, or omissions
whatsoever befalling the Artist, let him ever be fearful and careful of entering
too deep, for fear of wounding, or but scratching of the (Dura Matter) for those
transgressions often produce fearful accidents and deadly.

Again, as in speaking elsewhere of the use of the Trapan I have mentioned,
let every Artist be very well advised and fully resolved of the just necessity
of the use of the Trapan, and so of this Instrument, before he attempt to use
it, and not lightly upon suggestions, or for vain ostentation sake, nor above
all, for base lucres sake, to put his patient upon the use of either of them,
for that it is apparent, many great concussions, depressions, yea and some
fractures are cured without any such Instrument; I have sometimes also
observed, that young Surgeons upon a rashness of their opinion, and now and
then, for foolish vain glory and ostentation sake, have been overforward in
that point, of putting themselves upon the work of piercing the Cranium, not
attending the true time of nature, and by waiting to see what she can or will
perform of her self, as in truth he ought to do, for that the Surgeon being
natures handmaid, not her guide, ought judiciously to attend her Crisis, and
to procced by the advises of ancient grave Artists, that are experienced
Surgeons in those works; for sometimes there are dangerous symptoms that
cease, without the use of the Trapan or Trafine, by making of a wound, or by
the only competent enlarging of the wound, in which work it is good to be very
sure in the making incision upon the head, that he do well divide the
Pericranium so far as he intends to set his Trafine, at the least wheresoever
there is cause of enlarging or incising any would of the head for the Trafine,
or otherwise for the only dividing that Membrane, is in many cases sufficient,
and serves instead of the intended work of piercing the Cranium: and further
touching incision observe, that as too small incision is not good, that the
Surgeon ever have regard to preserve the beauty of nature as much as may be; as
suppose it were in any part of the face, to make too large an incision there,
especially when it falls out to be near the temporal muscles, or on the
forehead.

Now a word or two more, and an end of that business, concerning the Trafine,
and I will conclude, there is yet a necessary Instrument, which of a kind of
necessity, ought to be at hand whenever the Trafine is put to work, for that
there may be unexpectedly use of it, and it is as formerly named a Lenticular,
or a cleanser, which immediately after the eroding part of the Trafine, has
performed his fitting office and is removed: this Lenticular or smoother, being
a little warmed, is to be put into the wound, where the eroding part stood, and
with a gentle sensible hand to be passed to and fro upon that most tender
panicle, I mean the (Dura Matter) thereby to bring away any small erosions,
scrapings, dust, spills of bones, or what else soever might be imagined, could
give offense to that most sensible and noble Panicle.

This, with the premises well had in regard, I leave the young Artist to Gods
blessing, and conclude this Chapter with a loving admonition to the younger
sort of my brethren, for their imitations; that like as our blessed Savior
said to his Disciples, in his spiritual Discipline to them, when he sent them
forth into the world, to preach the glad tidings of salvation, he admonished
them, and no doubt infused power sufficient into them, to be wise as Serpents,
and innocent or harmless as Doves, and withal, willed them to beware of men;
and even the like premonition do I give to my Brechren of the younger sort,
concerning the great ttust of the precious lives and limbs of men, referred to
their skill, trust, and care, and namely, that they with the utmost that in
them is, and even as they would answer it before their living God, who sees
not as men see, that with innocent hearts, they without any sinister ends,
truly and faithfully perform their charge, in healing those whom they take into
cure, and charge, and that in the obedience, and in the fear of God, their
innocence may appear before God, and be witnessed by their Works.

A TREATISE Faithfully and plainly Declaring the way of preventing, preserving
from, and curing of that most fearful and contagious Disease called the Plague.
With the PESTILENTIAL FEVER, and other the fearful Symptoms and Accidents
incident thereunto. According to the long Practice and Experience of John
Woodal, Master in SURGERY. Surgeon of his Majesty's Hospital of S.
Bartholomewes, and Surgeon General to the East India Company: But under
benedicite (namely) as imploring and ascribing all the Honor and Praise unto
God alone, for his favor and mercies touching the salubrious effects thereof.

Chirurgi peperere manus, Jovis acta salubres,
ex cujus pendet nostra favore salus:
Sin Deus auxilio morbis languentibus absit,
frustratur medicus, deficit artis opus.
LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Nicholas Bourn, 1653.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
Such is Gods manifest miraculous hand in his various and unsearchable ways of
afflicting Mankind in that most noisome disease of the Pestilence, that it is
not only wonderful, but also impossible for the wit of any man, how wise or
learned soever he may esteem himself, or by others be esteemed, to give a
sufficient reason, with also a general and methodical Cure for that most
contagious, noisome, and killing disease of the Pestilence, for that it is
apparent it passes man's wit to comprehend or to avoid the most subtle
invasions and assaults thereof, as having in it (aliquid divinum) to be
considered of, it being one of the three great and terrible Arrows of the
Almighty, whereby according to his Divine Will he has usually cut off sinners
from off the Earth almost in all Ages, and in all Nations, as we may gather,
and is at large read in holy Scriptures, and in the Writings of good men, and
daily experience declares no less; all which, for brevity, I will omit here to
repeat.

And his most usual great and fearful Arrows declared, are Wars, Famine, and
Peftilence; and the most merciful of these three, which the Prophet David
chose, was the Pestilence: which, although his mighty, fearful, and terrible
hand be in it; yet for as much as his mercy is exceeding great, yea, over all
his works, and that he has not forbidden, but given us leave, with
understanding, and some judgment, to make use of all lawful means to preserve
our frail bodies in health by all our best endeavor, so long as we trust
chiefly on his mercy, in the use of the means.

In regard whereof, I weighing with my self how just and needful a thing it is
at all times, but chiefly in contagious times, for all men, especially for men
of my calling, to show their endavours for the help not only of themselves,
but also of their Christian Brethren, as well by directions as by preservative
and curative Medicines; I esteemed it not amiss, by this following weak
Treatise, to show forth the fruits of my many years experience, touching the
general knowledge of this disease, as also the best means I had experienced
both for the preventing and curing of the same, when and where occasion may be
offered, either Domestic, Marine, or Military. And first, as by the way, take
it into your consideration, that this disease holds not one certain rule,
figure, nor order in seizing on man's body, no, nor in one and the same house or
family; neither are men generally taken sick alike, no, nor directly, as in
other times of the Plague they have been, but each time of Contagion has
different assaults, and difference in the symptoms. For in Anno 1625. we had
many signs contrary to the Plagues in other times; yea, and many did dye
daily, without any signs or marks on their bodies at all: and also sometimes,
as is too manifest, the Plague begins in Winter, and that as well with us as
with our neighbor Nations, as namely, Germany, France, the Low Countries, and
other parts of the world it has done: whereas for the most part, heretofore
the Plague with us has begun in Summer, and was commonly most fierce,
predominate, and untractable to Medicines in the heat of Summer, and chiefly in
Harvest, which is the unseasonable time that we do usually call the Canicular
or Dog-dayes.

But the sickness of the yea^, 1636. held not that rule, but increased in some
Towns in Winter: wherefore since it is evident, that the Almighty has the
ordering thereof, and calls us unto him, as is said, by extraordinary forms,
when, where, and how he pleases;

Let us with unfeigned humility of heart prostrate our selves with true
repentance and hearty prayers, showing lively fraits thereof in a Christian
conversation; and then, without all question, his Rod will be taken away from
us and our Land, and also I advise all such as it may or shall concern, to
repair unto such good means and learned Counsel, as at the instant may be had,
for the preserviug of their lives, and for the curing this fearful disease, and
that without dangerous presumption, by delays, overmuch timorousness, or
fearing, for in both these extremities we offend God and our neighbors.

And know, that all flesh is subject to this disease, for it spares no age,
sex, nor degree of Mankind whatsoever.

And amongst many evils, this one great misery attends it, and is incident to
the vulgar people sick of this disease, that when the disease reigns, the
Learned and most skilful men, together with the best Divines and most able men
of estate, which with their relief should comfort and administer unto them both
spiritual and bodily comforts, as also many of their most near and chiefest
friends, are wanting and fled, and in their places spring up unworthy,
unskilful, impudent, yea, and vagrant wretches, as I may term some of them,
that in such times usually take npon them impudently the charge of many good
men's lives; who also then are incident to be committed to the hands of wicked
and unskilful Nurses, and I had almost said merciless Keepers, which make
their cases yet more lamentable: of which, my self have had full experience,
when I had the disease.

And for as much as in those times very many of the chiefest Traders of our
Citizens of London, as also of other remote parts of the Country, fly from
the City, which commonly set the poor on work, the case of the poorer sort is
made yet more miserable: all which miseries, with many more attending this
noisome disease, is no way to be diverted from mankind, but by the tender mercy
of God: So that each man for himself and his neighbor, especially in such
times, is justly obliged to call unto God, and say, Lord have mercy upon us:
And so in brief, I conclude my Preface.

DE PESTE, OR The Plague.
And first what the Plague is.
The definition of the Plague.
THe Plague is a disease venomous and contagious, loathsome, noisome, fearful,
and hateful to Mankind, yea, and deadly for the most part, being accompanied
with variety of grievous sores, as Carbuncles, Botches, Blaynes, and also
producing spots and discolorings of the skin, by Ancient Writers called
Pestities, and vulgarly with us, although unproperly, called Gods token, for
that the pestilential Bubo and Carbuncle are by far more manifest signs of the
Plague then the spots are, for that the like spots are seen in fevers, which
cannot truly be called pestilential.

The Disease may fitly be called, (Flagellum Dei pro pe^catis mundi,) The rod
of God for the sins of the world; and even the word, Plague, if derived from
the Latin word Plaga, which is a wound, a stripe, a stroke or a hurt, is a
just definition of this horrid disease, for who so has this disease, he is
wounded, he is plagued, he is stricken* yea, and that by the Almighty. In
brief, it is a killing disease, fearful to Mankind, for that at unawares, it
seiseth upon, invadeth and possesses man's body, as well sleeping as waking,
and being once entered in, it produces diverse fearful and deadly accidents, and
that with great celerity: so as Theophrastus Paracelsus, amongst others a
learned Writer, describing this disease, calls it (Basiliscus elementorum)
alluding it to that (Basiliscus The Plague compared to a Basilisk.
Olymphi) who as the Latin Maxim has it, Solo visu interficit hominem, only
by his sight kills mankind, but, faith he, with a limitation, as not simply
done, Actualiter per se, and per speci^m visibilem, not by the act it self, and
visible species of the creature, but by reason of the aqueous and humid
substance thereof.

Moreover, the body of the Creature, being as the Author affirms very porous
and hollow; there are sent out of it such vapors, as infect the air, which
infected air, so soon as it is drawn into man's body, it does immediately kill
him; in like manner, this Monster in mankind, the Plague, kills those whom it
breaths upon, so that no man can account himself safe, the disease proceeding
from the influence of the Heavens, as many of the most learned Writers testify
it does, so that by their great distemperatures, the air being poisoned and
infected, which we are enforced to receive into the secret closets of our
bodies, which undoubtedly has its original, De Praescientia Dei.

What safety have we then, or what can be a more fearful enemy to mankind then
l*estilential Vapors, which seize upon mankind as a Thief, and invade him at
unawares, which lurk in every corner of the house, yea in his most secret
chambers, threatening to take away his life when he least mistrusts, yea when he
is in his quiet sleep, as is said? such is this horrid disease, from the which
God of his infinite Mercy deliver us and our land.

Of the parts of Man's body, that this Disease chiefly invadeth.
Of the parts of man most subject to infection.
The parts of the body of man that this Disease chiefly delights to invade or
seize upon, are the three principal and most noble parts of man, viz, the
Animal, vital, and the natural faculties which have their Three parts
especially.
several seats in the brain, the heart, and the liver, upon one or all these
principal parts, this infection uses to take hold, and being on entered
therein, as it were in a moment of time, it surpriseth, subjugateth,
captivateth, yea and triumphs over the whole body of man, and over all the
faculties thereof, to his utter ruin and destruction, if God be not the more
merciful unto him in his preservation; and howsoever, as it is said, that the
disease chiefly does seize upon the three principal parts of man's body
aforenamed, yet having first so done, it fears not to show his subtle fury
all over the body, and sets its mark every where, without order or control.

Whether the Plague may be called a Fever or not.
There has been much dispute amongst ancient Writers, whether the Plague be a
Fever or no, by reason of the subtility and unequality thereof, but for what I
can gather by my experience, I am out of doubt, The Plague a Fever.
that he which has the plague is not without a Fever* neither is he ever freed
from the danger of that Fever, until one, or more then one Crisis happen, for
until either Botch, Carbuncle, Blayne or Spots, called pestities, do manifest
themselves, no just indication can be had what will become of the patient, but
that he is always in expectation of Death, the distemper continuing.

But if upon production of any the former Symptoms, a digestion in nature
follow (as is said) namely the Fever cease, the sick person take moderate
rest, a Botch come to good suppurati^n a Carbuncle to separation, or a Blayne
to yield his us^al ^nindigested quitture, Symtones of recovery.
with mitigation of the dolor, or that the Blaynes drying and withering by
Gods mercy, through cordial Diaphoreticks or the like, that a cheerfulness in
the sick appear, or but some one of these good signs showing it self in a
favorable manner, there is great hope, and the fear is almost past.

And let no man so much flatter himself, in his own coneir, in the time of
contagion, when he perceives the air to be manifestly infected, the disease
being popular, as to think with himself that because the Disease perhaps at
the first, begins slowly, and the distemper yet dull and not much outwardly
apparent upon the patient, that he has no fever nor danger, and that he may
take time till the next day to consider wheather he will use remedies or no,
let no wise man so presume, for I have seen very many stricken even at the
heart, when the disease could not be adjudged dangerous, neither by the pulse,
urine, nor any other certain indicateon, save only by the complaint of the
patient, who under favor in that disease, is not always sensible of his own
danger; and again, how many have at the very first, an apparent fierce Fever,
which can no way be removed, but by some of the former ways of digestion, or
by Death, whereby it is manifest, the Plague is never without a Fever, and so
all men will adjudge it, that either have had it, or that have followed the
cure thereof in others.

Of the supernatural causes of this Disease.
The first cause Six.
The material causes thereof, as is already declared, are in part, and in the
prime place esteemed to be our sins, which draw Gods wrath upon us, as
witness the Prophet Amos, where he says, Shall there be evil in a City, and
the Lord has not done it? etc. Whereby we may justly gather, that when the
Almighty will show him self in his fury, against dust and ashes, he can put
the Host of Heaven in his order to fight against us, in which case we have no
way to escape his judgment, but by Prayer, or unfeigned Repentance, and as for
all other natural or efficient causes, they have as their subordinated
dependances and effects from the former, and are constellated, put on, and put
off by Divine Providence, viz. ex Praescientia Dei By the foreknowledge of God.

Nam astraregunt homines, regit and astra Deus. As the Poets say; and the very
Heathens conclude no less, that the stars govern man's body, and God governs
the stars; and also experience tells us, that when any of the four seasons
of the year prove unnatural, men's bodies accordingly become unnatural, as
sometimes by pestilential diseases* wherefore to multiply words further of the
primitive causes of this disease, were but to detract good time, and the truth
thereof is manifest to all men, in that this furious disease as it were
disdaines any general Method or order of cure, after man's intention as it is
said, when it is in Rage.

Quicquid facimus mortale genus,
Quicquid patimur, venit ab alt^.
Which may be thus Englished.

That whatsover man does, or whatsoever man suffers, all proceeds from
above.

Of the natural causes of the Plagues by the judgment of the most ancient and
modern Writers.
The terrestrial causes thereof, are by common consent of most writers, as
follows: Venomous and stinking vapors arising from Fens, The causes of the
Plague.
standing ponds or pooles, Ditches, Lakes, Dunghils, Sinckes, Channels, Vaults,
or the like, as also unclean slaughter-houses of Beasts, dead carcasses of
men, as in time of War, and of stinking fish, fowl, or any thing that has
contained life, and is putrid, as also more particularly in great Cities, as in
London, the unclean keeping of houses, Lanes, Allies, and streets, from those
recited and the like infectious venomous vapors, by warmth of the Sun exhaled,
are apt and able to infect the living bodies of men, and thereby to produce the
Plague, which once produced, is too apt by infection to spread it self, The
corruption of the Air a cause.
and become popular, as experiene too much shows: and as by corrupt meats and
drinks, men's bodies are corrupted and infected, even so by corrupt air (as I
have said) which we can no way avoid, to draw into the secretest parts of our
bodies; the spirits are likewise infected and poisoned, to the production both
of sickness and death (if God be not the more merciful unto us) for where the
disease once begins, there are many unhappy evils incident, as causes
conducing to Want of food a cause.
the increase thereof; besides Vapors, and one not of the least is, it brings
scarcity of food with it, and that brings emptiness of the belly, and where
emptiness is, there evil air is not wanting, and that abounds too much
with the poorer sort; and also where food is wanting, all kinds of food, how
infectious or pernicious soever, is used in necessity, namely all raw fruits,
as plums, peaches, yea musty Corn, and many things of far wilder condition, and
so by consequent, lack of food, is a great cause of the increase of the Plague,
so that in the V^wholsome food a cause.
sickness time, it is by experience daily found, that far more of the poorer
fort usually have dyed, then of the richer; for where emptiness and unwholesome
food is in use, as is repeated, there the corrupt air does the most harm.

And likewise genreally observe, that where war is for the most part, there is
famine, and those two conclude to make up a third evil, namely the pestilence
which God be praised we have bin long freed from the two first. Thus much in
brief of the Terrestrial causes of the Plague.

Of the precedent and accidental signs of the Plague.
The precedent and accidential fignes notable in the Disease of the Plague, are
various and uncertain, because in truth they are seldom in any one person as
in another, but to speak, as of the most general first appearance of the
Plague, it begins cold, and with pain in the head and stomach, and sometimes
in the back, and if so, then it is commonly taken for an Ague, and therefore
at first little feared.

Again, some begin to complain of pain in the back, and such kinds of
beginning, are more generally hopeful of healing then, when it begins hot
(in my opinion) in some also it begins hot, with pain and giddiness of the
head, and pain in the stomach: others at the first stroke or touch, find a
general discouragement and weakness over all the whole body, others at the
first being taken in the head, their senses are stupefied and dulled: in others
it begins with a raging and fierce fevour, so that their countenance is
changed, their speech failing, or fainting, their eyes strangely turning to and
fro, in a fearful manner.

Again, others complain of an extraordinary pain, with extreme heat inward in
the stomach and intrals, when the outward parts are chil and cold, and ready to
shake: again, some in the beginning complain of great thirst; others complain
of shortness of breath, and pain in breathing; others swelling and soreness
of their throats which being sought into, no cause appears: Others have the
Almonds or Glandules of their throat much swelled and inflamed.

Also many are taken with great defire to sleep, and with frequent yawnings,
and it is unsafe, in my judgment, to permit such to sleep before a Diaphoretick
or sweating Medicine have by the patient bin taken, and that it has breathed
out some of the venomous vapors by sweat, with keeping them waking, till the
medicine have wrought his effect.

Others are subject to great watchfulness, and commonly those are in their
slumbers oppressed with grievous and fearful dreams and fantasies. Others it
begins with sweatings, with pain of the back, and a stinking of the breath,
and such are ever of very doubtful cure, and in my opinion such have inward
Carbuncles. Others have swellings in the breast, some also have loss of
appetite, evil digestion, and faintness, and some are troubled with deep
hickcoks and hollow belchings.

Others from the beginning to the end of their sickness, and till death, have
neither swelling sores nor spots* also upon some at first there appear diverse
spots of a duskish color, their countenance of an unequal aspect, the one
cheek red the other pale: Others with sweat drops on their noses, a fierce
countenance with grinding of the teeth.

And to be brief, touching signs, and accidents in this most fearful
disease, I persuade my self, that no man can speak of any No symptom of any
disease, but is incident to the infected of the Plague.
terrible symptom, sign, or indication of any disease whatsoever, that has
befallen any man, but that the like has been seen and observed in some one
person, or more sick of the Plague: for the fierceness thereof in some
persons, forces Hemorrhage both from the greater and lesser veins; and some
it afflicts with a Dissenteria, Diarraea, Lienteria, all these from the
belly; and from the head, it produces Apoplexia, Paralysis, Lythergi, Vertigo
Mania, with diverse other symptoms also from the throat, Squinancia, Angina,
etc. Also obstructions of the bowels, retention of Urine, Colica and Iliaca
Passio Singultus, Gangrena, Convulsions, Contractions of Nerves and what not,
this fierce disease produces to devour poor mankind by: and surely, for that
cause I am persuaded it is vulgarly called the sickness, as comprehending and
including all other sickness in it self.

Accidental signs, which in this disease commonly presage death to the party,
are these that follow.
Signs that presage death.
Namely, when the Patient is possessed with sounding and faintings, with cold
and clammie sweats, often changing of the countenance, vomiting of slimie,
sharp, and ill-coloured phlegm, either greenish, yellowish, blackish, or
bloud-coloured sanies; or avoiding of Excrements disordered, and discolored,
either fattie, blackish, unctious, or unnaturally, stinking, Convulsions,
Contractions, of the Nerves, graveling and pidling with the fingers, plucking
up the Bedclothes; a sudden flux of the belly of stinking matter, of rustie or
greenish color; a sudden going back of an Apostume, Carbuncle, or Bubo; also
when the Patient is insensible of the departure of his Urine, and Excrements.

And yet to Gods glory I here affirm, that notwithstanding the aforesaid
signs, or some one of them, I have seen, I say, some one or more of the
aforementioned symptoms appear, and that the sick has even in man's judgment bin
as at the point of death; and yet nevertheless, by breathing of a Vein, or
giving of a good Diaphoretick Cordial, the party has bin recovered, and
lived. Wherefore I would advise the discreet Surgeon, that dare adventure his
person in such cases, not to leave doing of good to his Patient by all
rational administrations and applications, so long as life appears.

The convenience of th cure.
And one comfort is to the Patient and Surgeon in this disease before and
beyond all others, that having once overcome the Fever so that the blessing of
health but appears, by appetite and competent rest, or the like cheareful
fignes: no sores heal faster then Pestilential Sores do. And yet per contra, I
have also had too much experience in the curing of the diseased of the Plague,
that it is generally the ungratefulness recompensed of all other diseases, to
the poor and hardy Surgeon: Namely, fot that he when he has recovered his
Patient, for the most part is loathed, shunned, and avoided, not only of his
Friends and Patients, but for his hazard, cost, and care, is so under-valued,
that sometime, but for presuming The inconvenience.
to tell his Patients, after he has recovered them, that they had the Plague,
he hazardeth the future loss of their favors, yea, and sometimes, under
favor, has his own house shut up, to make him amends withal.

Wherefore such ungratefulness has made me, in my old age, to call to mind
the motto of Paracelsus, that most famous Artist, formerly repeated.

Alterius non sit, qui suus est potest; Let him not be another, that can be
his own. And yet I confess, I neither can nor will refrain in one good way,
or another, to be doing good in my calling, by Medicines or Advice, both in
general and particular, in that or any other disease, so long as God does give
me life and health, with strength thereunto, maugre the ingratitude of the
unworthiest sort of them.

Quia nos non nobis nati sumus; Because we were not bome for our selves. And it
is just and laudable for every worthy Surgeon to be known, by walking fairly
and blameless in his Calling, and namely, by doing good at all seasons,
although with some personal hazard now and then, for that he is therefore
ordained by the Almighty to be ever ready, ad omne quare, upon every occasion;
which who so truly observes, shall be blessed.

For to this end every Artist, yea and every Christian man is ordained, and
also commanded by the holy Apostle S. Paul, in these words, to do good, and
distribute; Forget not, for with such sacrifice the Lord is well pleased: and
S. James says, that it is true Religion, to visit the Fatherless and widow in
their adversities, etc. And even the excellency of the Calling of Surgeons
should incite them to zeal where they can, as well without reward as for
reward, where poverty is, and need requires.

Of the three chief and most principal outward signs or indications of this
Disease, vulgarly called the Plague: and of a fourth.
THere are only but three most notable certain external Three certain signs
of the Plague.
signs of the Plague apparent to all, and those fail not to testify the truth
of the disease: and by those, each old Wife by her experience, may maintain
her report of the disease, as amply and well as the skilfullest Doctor, in
times of contagion; and they are as follows.

Of the first outward sign of the Plague.
IMprimis, the Bubo Pestilentialis; which, as I may ever justly affirm The
^i^st sign Bubo.
of mine own experience, was to me the happy Botch, sent upon my own body by
Gods mercy, and was the sparing of my life; for I had it twice, namely, at two
several Plague-times, in my Groyne.

These Buboes, Boyles* or Pestilential Botches commonly happen The first place
where the Plague shows it self.
in the Emunctories, sincks, or cleansing parts of the body, as the Artist
terms them, and seldom elsewhere (if they be pestilential) namely, they come
in the glandulous parts, under or behind the The Brain.
care, if the Brain be oppressed, which is the place by which the Brain, if
Nature be able, drives out and discharges her self of the Venom or poisoned
Infection, which otherwise would kill the animal spirits, and by that, the
whole body also.

The second place.
Or it comes sub axillis, under the arme-holes, as it is usually called, where
also are certain small Glandules, or Kernels; and to that The Heart.
part the heart sends out the venomous vapors, or offending matter, either
by force of Nature, or Art which suddenly grows there to an Impostume, Botch,
or Boil.

The third place.
The third and last place, where commonly a Pestilential Bubo comes, is in
the Groine, which the Artist calls Inguen; where, The Liver.
when the Liver is oppressed, and Nature strong, she sends forth the disease
or Botch thither, and that is the third part where the Botch appears: And, as
by the way, to the Artists of the younger sort a word two of my practical
observations, by way of distinguishing the difference betwixt the Venereal and
Pestilential Bubo; wherein a young Artist may be mistaken, to his prejudice.

Wherefore let the Artist observe, as common practice shows, that the
Venereal Bubo, although it ever appear in the Groyn, it is slower in his
progress then the pestilential Bubo is, for the Pestilential comes for the
most part with a Fever: and although the Venereal sometimes in his
augmentation in younger persons has a ^mal fever for a day or two, when it is
almost at state, it being always thwart upon the dependant part of the Belly,
called Imus venture, or the lower belly, namely in Inguen upon or over Os pubis;
But the Pestilential Bubo or boil comes ever furiously on, and as in a rage
of a Fever, and as being in haste, sometimes it lights on or near Inguen
thwart, but more often lower upon the thigh, pointing downward with one end,
the upper and toward the belly, being commonly the biggest or the fullest part
of the Bubo, the whole thigh being also inflamed, which if it does not hold,
ever to come right in the place where the venereall Botch does as is said, but
as near the Emunctories as it may, yet

Howsoever by the fury and uncertain seat thereof, the pestilential is ever to
be known from the venereal, and the more certain by his furious coming, or
when the Plague reigns, and it happens to children, which cannot be said to
be venereal, and yet nevertheless, even in contagious times, a venereal Bubo
is not to be forbidden by any Surgeon to happen, if his Patient please to have
it so.

But to conclude this point, the discreet Surgeon at the first sight, the other
forenamed circumstances well weighed, may easily know to make a true
distinction sufficiently, if he be a man of judgment: and thus much of the
first outward sign of the Plague, viz. The Bubo, Botch, or pestilential Boil.

Of the second outward sign of the Plague.
THe second outward sign in the Disease, is the most fierce burning Carbuncle
called Anthrax, or the burning coal, which happens his and ubique, namely in
every part of man's body, without order, rule, or control, within the body, as
well as without, The second sign Anthrax.
and at the first appearance thereof (if visible) it does appear commonly
inflamed and hard, and (...) the midst thereof, with a burning pain
afflicting the sick, like to burning fire, yea and will sometimes blister even
with the ardent Fervor thereof, and in others The effcte of it.
it will itch very much, which if it be scratched, there will come forth a
sharp reddish yellowish, or sometimes a dusky colored Ichor.

The description of it.
And to some again, the pain is so fierce and great, that the Patient will
grow to to be mad with extremity thereof.

The description of it.
The shape or figure of this Disease is most commonly somewhat round* and the
color uncertain, according to the predomination of the humor infected or
infecting, or sometimes it is pale, though the party be in a feavour, sometimes
reddish, sometmies black or purple, or greenish, and the two last colors are
most fearful, and this disease* is seldom healed, without so much loss of
the musculous flesh and skin, as it takes first hold of, in what part soever
it happen, except by sweating medicines in the beginning of the disease, the
fury thereof be changed; but it is a very good sign of life when it separateth
it self so, that the Fever cease, for the Carbuncle comes seldom or never
to suppuration as does the Bubo: But it will admit separation, and come to a
kind of unperfect digestion many times, and after will come to fall out as a
gangrenated part does, where Nature is strong, and it usually will separate and
come away in one entire piece from the sound, but if it grow black and separate
not, nor any circular digestion be, and the Fever abate not, then it may
befeared Death is at hand, for little hope of recovery is in the Patient.

The danger of it.
And again if it appear greenish, the party commonly dies; also you shall
see some Carbuncles smooth as glass, and of a black shining color, not
unlike pitch, with intolerable pain, and the member whereon they are fixed,
will be ponderous and unwildy to move to and fro, and seeming to the patient,
as if it were heavily overburthened, or as though it suffered by hard ligature,
and I have seen Patients that have had Carbuncles within the body, whereof one
has been within the stomach, and some have it in their liver, and there
principal parts, but such live not many days. I have taken out the whole eye
from one, by a Carbuncle seated therein, who recovered, and from another the
half nose, from another the half of the beard, with also the lip whereon it
grew, which of it self fell off by separation, and from the third, one of his
testicles, I mean one of his stones, with the purse and all, and that man was
with the half of his Scrotum, living at the writing hereof, as in my other
Treatise elsewhere is mentioned. Thus much of the second principal sign or
apparent Demonstration of the Plague, namely the Carbuncle.

Of the Blaine.
The third sign a Pestilential Blain.
THe third manifest and demonstrative sign of this Disease is the Pestilential
Blain, whereof some infected have many, and diverse have not one: and this
Disease is a painful angry push, somewhat like the small pock, but yet in
color more red or The descripion of it.
cloudy, seldom transparent, as a small pock usually is, but far more
paineful: some have them somewhat less, some bigger, with a small head, of an
angry blew or reddish color, sometimes of a lead color, and somewhat hard or
fleshy, and as it were growing upon a large root, or stool, this Disease is
found in every part of the body, but this Blain seldom kills, or hinders
the cure of the diseased, but it rather serves for a demonstrative sign of the
Disease, then otherwise, and helps to breathe out the venom, as I gather.
For if by virtue from above, or of good Medicines, or by strength of nature,
the feavour The cause of it.
be overcome, the Blain dries away, and requires no other cure: For, as I
conceive, it only proceeds (ex ebullitione Sanguinis Venenosi) of the
ebullition or boiling of venomous blood, which being thrust out, either by the
immediate work of God, or Art, or Nature, health easily follows, and the
blains vanish, unless by natures weakness, or through the undue use or want
of Phlebotomy, or of purging medicines, or for want of following the cure, by
Diaphoretick medicaments in season, the venom be repelled from the supe^ficies
to the center, as too often in the cure of that disease it happens, and in such
a case, eminent death is to be feared: And so I conclude of the third notable
sign, the Blayn.

Of the Marks, or spots, commonly, though neither properly, nor always truly
called, Gods Tokens.
The fourth sign, Gods tokens.
The fourth apparent outward sign of the plague, is the marks or spots
appearing upon the skin, usually called Gods tokens, but not as being ever
certain tokens of the pestilence, and so of death to the patient, as vulgarly
they are taken to be, by ignorant people Of the ignorantly mistaking them.
in their unexpert conjectures and opinions, for that it is daily manifest,
many have spots of several forms and colors, when venomous feavours reign,
and yet have not the Plague: and again, many have suspicious and fearful spots,
which the vulgar term Gods tokens, and recover, and live many years after* my
self have cured not a few in that kind* that are now, to Gods glory, living;
these spots are upon some bodies like Flea-bitings, in others larger, in some
again as big as a penny.

Of the several colors.
In some bodies there are very many, and sometimes they are like freckles, and
they are most commonly found upon the breast, and sometimes upon the back,
arms, and legs of the patients; they are in some of a color bluish, or of a
sad red, and some are like lead-colour, and others purple, some are of a
pale-blew, and these spots are ever without pain: but the very appearance of
any spots, to any in the Plague, cause sudden fear to the Patient; which,
though the marks be insensible, yet through sudden fear, they produce
faintings, Their effects caused by fear.
swoundings, trembling of the heart, and death following thereupon, although
neither the Patient feel pain, as is said, neither always the Artist can
judge, by reason he sees just cause of sudden death to his Patient, the reason
being secret with God, as inwardly afflicting maukind, de Praescientia Dei,
namely of the foreknowledge of God: So much of the marks, spots, or tokens, in
some appearing, in the Disease of the Plague.

Certain Caveats by way of Advice, for the preventing of the Sickness.
AMongst which Cito, Long, Tarde, are by many good Writers prescribed and much
insisted upon, as in the first place, and Flight an uncertain remedy.
their meanings are, that people fly quickly, fly far, and tarry long from
the danger of the infected air, where it reigns. And I deny not but they are
good rules; but even they, daily experience shows, are also most uncertain,
Quia Deus ubique est, for our God is every where, and returns some home (I
will not say with a vengeance) neither can all men make use of those rules, how
good soever, neither is it fit that all men should flee, for many reasons too
long to be insisted upon.

And let him that flies, for the first, wheresoever he lives, beware of
provoking God, by surfeiting, either by fullness of eating or drinking, even in
the best air, how good soever the Meat or Drink be; for fullness in contagious
times menaceth danger.

Omne nimium verti^ur in vitium. Every fullness is uneasy for nature to
digest, and therefore may Diverse meats to be avoided.
prove vicious: Also, in contagious times let him beware of raw Fruits, of
Oysters, Muscles, new Wines, or the like novelties, as Melons, Musk-Melons, but
chiefly avoid the excess of them.

Seasonable times to be observed.
Also beware of being abroad too early or too late, in times of contagion, and
observe a good custom with your own body: do not suffer your body to be too
costive, or overmuch bound; neither is it How to order the body in time of
infection.
safe, to keep a man's body daily in purging, no, nor in daily looseness, for
extreme looseness is not good, nor safe, in contagious times: neither bleed
but by good advice (if it may be had,) neither before nor after the time of the
Sickness, for that fearful dangers ensue often by unadvised bleeding or
purging in contagious times; for thereby, in seeking to avoid danger,
contagious and venomous vapors are often drawn from the superficies, or
outward parts of the body, to the Center; and namely, to the Liver, Heart, or
Brain, or to one of them.

Also if any purge or bleed by advice, let the blood be removed, and put away
instantly, and likewise his close-stoole have cold water therein, and not to be
kept in the room, wherein the patient lodges, longer then necessity
constrains.

Beware also that no man that has any Pestilential tumor or rising, be it
Botch, Carbuncle, or Blain, do open a vein without very sound advice, nor
purge, and if he do want such advice, then let the vein be opened on that
side he most complains of, and not otherwise, as he tendereth the patients
life: it is also good not to be thin clad in contagious times, for that the
sickness, with the most begins cold, neither to lie too cold in bed,
sweating is far safer for any man in health, for preventing diseases, then
quakings.

Also beware of too violent excercises in such times, for taking of sudden
cold, and beware of all provocations to the extremity of fear, care, anger,
grief, watching, extremity of Venus lust, or extremity of heat or cold, and
also of delaying of help in due time, which has cost many a man dear, as
elsewhere has been certified.

Preservatives for corecting the Air in Houses.
PReservatives are put before curative Midicines in the Disease of the Plague,
by most good Writers: the reason I take it, is as well concerning the sick, as
also their friends and attendants, wherefore I hold it not amiss to begin with
those things which are fittest to preserve from the infection, and one is as
much as may be to correct the evil disposition of the air in houses, as
namely for one cheap remedy.

Receipts of preservatives, by purging the ay^.
Take Bayberries grossly beaten, and laid upon a hot fire-shovel, and carried up
and down each room of the house, is very good and steeped also in wine
Vinegar, being strewed upon Embers in a chafingdish, and carried to and fro in
rooms: or take Franckinsence, or pitch, or tar, or Rodion wood, Cedar, or
Juniper, and do in like manner, so used, I mean the wast of such as is used
for beads, and knife hafts, is very good against any infectious air, and most
particularly against the Plague, also Juniper or the berries thereof, or bay
leaves, Lavender, Sage, Rosemary, or any one of these dried, and laid upon a
hot fire-shovel, and carried to and fro in a Room: Also let the houses be kept
clean, where the sick are, and no less where the whole are, to preserve them
in health: Also wine Vinegar, wherein Roses, Rue, Angelica or wormwood, or one
of them has been steeped, or wine Vinegar with Rosewater therein, taken and
sprinkled upon a hot fireshovel, and carried up and down the rooms of the
house, all these or any of them are very profitable to correct the evil air,
and where it may be done, let the casement or windows of houses, opening to
the South or West, but chiefly the South light be kept shut or for the most
part, and rather open the North and East lights, for they bring in the purer
and safer air.

Other receipts of Fumes.
Also for the wealthier sort, to make a Fume of Storax Labdanum, Mastich,
Benjamin, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mirrhe, or of Lignum Aloes, all or any one or more
of these together, are very good for those that will go to the price thereof,
and are cordial smells, and do resist putrefaction, and the evil disposition
of the Air, and thereby prevent from the Plague.

A cheaper, and yet a very good Fume, to fume rooms in contagious times
TAke small coals dried, and powdered, three ounces, Storax, Calamint, two
ounces, Benjamin, one ounce, Cloves in powder half an ounce, rub or beat the
Gums, and make the rest into powder and mix altogether, and with Gumwater make
it up like paste, then divide it and make it up into small, but long pieces,
that will stand alone, and dry it, and when you will take occasion to fume your
houses, kindle one of these pieces at the upper end, and it will burn of it
self, and last near one hour; and the composition will burn the better, if
you add thereto of small coals in powder, one ounce.

Preservatives for the fuming of apparel.
FOr fuming of appparel to them that are of means, and will go to the price
of it, there is is no better Fume, then as is said, the Fume of Lignum Aloes,
Cloves, Storax, Benjamin, Labdanum, Myrrh, Mastich, Cinnamon, Amber, or some
one or more of these, for they are all good and yery fitting, and correct the
air well, and resist venomous Vapors, and thereby they prevent the infection
of the Plague, also the Fume of the saw-dust, or chips of Ceder-wood, which are
in London to be had, and are cheap and singular good for the fuming of rooms,
or of apparel.

A good composition for fuming Bedding, Apparel, or the like, and the whole
House if they please; and is not very dear.
TAke Bayberries, Juniper Berries, of each. 4. course Myrrh and course Aloes
of each. j* of the Turners chips, or shavings of Lign. vitae, Juniper, or
Cedar, and of white Saunders, of each. j. fe. Frankincense, storax, Calamint,
Time, Labdanum, of each. ij. make all these into gross powder, and lay thereof
upon the embers, and fume with them.

A Caveat concerning fuming of Houses, Chambers, or Garments, with Brimstone.
THis one Caveat I desire the Reader to take notice of, and to be warned,
touching a gross Error by many used in their Fumes for Houses or Apparel,
which I have often observed; namely by the burning of Brimstone to fume Houses
and Apparel with; which, in my opinion, as well they might prescribe the fuming
with Cinaber, Mercury, Arsenick, Rialger, or Antimony; for I am sure, and can
maintain it, that the vapors are all venomous and deadly the one as well as
the other.

The Fume of Brimstone dangerous.
And I can speak it of practice and proof, that I my self have seen killed
Cocks, Hens, and diverse other Birds and living creatures, as Bees, Gnats,
Flies, etc. with the only smoke of Brimstone; and upon good grounds, I will
not let to show any man the practice for his learning: and that it most
artificially kills Fleas, Flies, Lice, Gnats, and Bees, I need not prove.

Wherefore beware of it, for the fume of Brimstone is venomous and deadly, I
know it; and that it is an enemy to the Brain and will quickly confound the
animal faculties. My self have bin from my youth delighted in Alchymy, and
have opened the bodies of diverse Minerals and farmiliarly of Sal, Sulphur,
and Mercury, to my no small cost, and now and then some danger; and therefore I
wish all wise men to beware of them: But if any one will teach his Neighbor
the practice of fuming his House with Brimstone, let him first fume his own
Bedchamber well with it certain nights together, and shut his door, the
Room being filled with fume, and go to bed; or any small Room that is close,
where he would have the true force of the fume, then brag how he likes it, it
perhaps may cost him too dear.

And for his apparel, if it be either of wool, or Silk, or of Linen, it
will surely do hurt to it, as well by rotting them, as by staining them.

There are some parts of the world, where there are great Mines and mighty
Mountains of brimstone perpetually burning: and it is affirmed, and for truth
observed, that no Man, Beast, Bird, nor other living creature can live near
them, nor within the compass of the vapor of them. Therefore I believe the
author of the invention of fuming with Brimstone, can never be able to make it
good; that the vapors of Brimstone are safe, nor so much as friendly to the
life of man: witness all the workers in like sulphurous Metals, whose very
countenance will witness, that though the substances of Metals, are most
serviceble to be used, yet their sulphurous, Mercurial, and Arsenical vapors of
them are often proved to be most deadly; yet will I not deny, but that
Brimstone is many ways medicinable, and so is Quicksilver, to be taken into
man's body, duly administered and prepared artificially; but not their crude
vapors, by way of fuming. Thus much of Brimstone, by way of fuming Houses or
Apparel.

Preservatives to be carried about a man in his pocket, or in his hand.
TAke an Ivorie or Wooden Box, with holes in it, and fit a Sponge into it, wet
in Wine or Rose Vinegar, wherein some cordial herbs or spirits have been first
infused or steeped; as Angelica, Rosemary, Sage, Rue, Wormwood, Balm, or at
the least, some one or more of these; and when the wine Vinegar in the Sponge
waxes dry, wet it in the same Liquor, and put it into the Box again, weakly
renewing the aforesaid Liquor.

Or if a Lemon stuck with Cloves alone be carried in the pocket or hand of a
man or woman, it is very good to preserve from contagious air.

It is fit to have something cordial and preservative in a man's hand or in his
pocket, to smell unto, for the refreshing of his spirits and his smelling
senses, or at the least in the corner of an hand-kercher; as namely Myrrh,
Angelica Roots, Enula Campan. Roots, Oil of white or yellow Amber, Zedoarie
Roots, Calam. Armat. Wormwood, Rosmarie, Time, Balm, Germander, Rue, or any
of these things, is good against the venomous disposition of the Air.

A good Pomander to be ^orn, to preserve from Pestilential vapors, for men of
ability.
Preservatives from the infectious air.
. Storax, Calamint, Ladanu^, Benjamin, Irios, Calam. Aromat. Zedoarie. of each.
ij. make this into powder, then take Camphir and Storax liquid, of each, j. and
mix these well together, adding in the end Musk and Ambergreece, of each 4. gr.
and with Rosewater and Gum Aarabick, or Dragag. as much as is fitting, make
it into Balls; and if you please, put it into a Box with holes, to smell unto
it: Also a good Civil Orange stuck with Cloves, and worn about a man or woman,
is a good Cordial to be smelled unto.

An excellent preparation of wine Vinegar, to prevent from infectious Air.
. Myrrh and Aloes, of each. j. se. Card. Benedict. Marjoram, Zedoarie,
Cynamon, Calam. Aromat. Penny-ryall, wild Time, Rose leaves, of each three
handfuls, white Saunders. j. se. Juniper berries se. lib. Camph.. se. Let all
these be beaten into gross powder, and steeped in about three gallons of Wine
Vinegar, and the same made warm twice a day for three days, then use it, to
wet the face and nostrils sometimes, and carry thereof in a Sponge in some Box,
to smell unto often.

Also the smelling unto Oil of Amber is very good; I mean not Ambergreece, for
that were too dear for the meaner sort, and not so well warranted by authority,
for that use: But of that Amber which in Latin is called Succinum, and is that
whereof Beads are made, and is gathered in the Seas, in Prussia, in the East
Countries; I say, the Oil of such Amber, whereof some is white, some is yellow:
But that of the white is more excellent, and precious. If a Sponge, or any The
virtue of the Oil of white Amber.
other fit thing be wet in Vinegar, and certain drops of the said Oil added; or
only a dry Sponge, and certain drops of this Oil dropped into the Sponge, and
put into a Box, and smelled unto it, it preserves from any infectious air, and
comfort the animal faculties of the body exceedingly, and is likewise good
against Apoplexies, and other Cephalic diseases. It being held one of the most
precious remedies against the Plague of all other, and is not dear to be
bought: And the same Oil, one, two, or three drops taken fasting, either in
white Wine, or Beer, is a very excellent Preservative against the Plague.

Of Cordial and preservative Medicines inwardly to be taken.
THe several Medicines in this Treatise to be taken into the body for
preservatives, are also Cordials, being indeed such Cordials as have virtue to
open the pores of the body, and by sweating to give breathing to nature, and
thereby to defend man's body from Contagion, being such also as heretofore have
been prescribed to be taken by men of the best judgments in Physic, for the
defending, curing, and driving out the disease from the principal parts
Sweating Medic^^es the best.
by sweat: for without all doubt, no Medicine can be generally so safe, for the
first intention and entrance upon this cure of the plague, as is a true
Diaphoretick or sweat-provoking Cordial Medicine, whether it be taken by way of
a Preservative, or as a curative Medicine, as ancient Writers testify.

Galen's Opinion of Diaphoretick Medicines.
And namely, Galen, the Prince of Physicians, attributes unto Antidotes the
whole Cure of the disease of the Plague; and by Antidotes, he means Medicines
Cordial and Preservatives, such as by opening the pores, provoke sweat.

But as there is no general rule, but may admit an exception; even so this
excellent course may not be always safe and warrantable at the first, in
respect of the wonderful varieties this fearful disease produces, as well in
the beginning, as in the progress thereof.

Sweating sometime to be ^^itted.
For it may upon occasion, as of fullness, or of obstructions of the body, so
come to pass, that evacuation general or particular must as in due course
precede, either by Blood-letting, Vomit, Purging, Glister, or Suppository, or
some one or more of these; I say, where just cause is, they may as of necessity
precede: for which cause, it will ever be safe to use expert advice, if such
may be had; only remember by the way, what is said of purging Medicines, and
their danger, if first taken, in the Cure of the Plague.

Here following, I mean to set down several sorts of the chief of the compound
Cordial Medicines mentioned in this Treatise following, or otherwise in
frequent use, which are inwardly to be taken into the body, to prevent the
coming of the disease; or being received by sweating, best for the expelling of
the Venom so received into the body, with the dose orquantity reasonable of
each of them to be taken by way of preservative, to pre vent the disease before
it comes; as also what quantity may be fitly taken for the safe provoking of
sweat, when any one feels himself evil disposed, and vehemently suspecteth
himself to be fallen* or entering into the disease, by any of the symptoms or
signs before expressed, or otherwise.

The chief Cordials in general use, are these that follow.
Cordials against the Plague.
THeriac. Andromach. or the true Venice Treacle, and not inferior to it is
Mithridate, Democrat. both of which are now truly made in London.

Also London Treacle is a very good Antidote or preservative well approved, and
Electuar. d^ Ovo, or the Electuary of the Egg is also a very sure good
Cordial: also Theria^. Diatessar. by the ancient Writers, called the poor man's
Treacle, by my self much experienced, and approved to be good, all these and
every of them in their natures, either mixed, or given each perse, or by it
self, are very good, being Diaphoreticks, or Medicines provoking sweat, more or
less, and thereby opening obstructions, and by evaporation expurging venom,
and refreshing nature, and so by consequent, curing the Plague.

Purgatives useful.
Hereunto may also be well added, some appropriate purgatives to be taken, both
as preservatives, and as curatives, where just occasion is, namely, Pilul.
Pestilentiales R^ffi. and Pil. Praeservan t Joh. Bahini, one dram of any one of
them, for a purge, is a just quantity for an able body, and he or she may
safely take it any time, either at night or morning, when there is just reason;
and for the dose or quantity, by way of preservative to be taken at one time,
is one pill about the bigness of a Pease, or in weight about 12. or 14.
grains, or at the most 20. gr. which is termed a scruple, once in a day, or
once in two or three days, either at evening, or in the morning, but I
conceive it is best to bed-ward; and he or she who takes it, ought to observe,
that if it make him or her have but one loose stool, it is sufficient.

Much lax^ty unsafe.
For it is not safe for any person to keep his body loose always, in times of
general infection or contagion, for that that is recited elsewhere; for where
emptiness is, evil vapors have place of entrance* Also, as touching the first
of the forenamed Cordials, one dram for a Dose, and namely, of Andremach.
Treacle, or Venice Treacle, and a like Dose of any the other three spec^fied
Preservatives, to be taken by way of a Curative course, but by way of a
Preservative, at any one time, for a strong body, 20 grains may suffice, and
may be taken without offense, which is one scruple; or a less quantity to a
weaker body: and to a strong body infected, to provoke him to sweat,. j. and
se. or. ij. by a strong man, of any of them, either in Cordial waters, or
Wine, as is said, may be safely received into the body. Except of the Electuary
of the Egg, the Dose whereof is one Drach. at the utmost.

And whereas diverse Writers prescribe such Antidotes to be taken in distilled
waters, as of Carduus, Angelica, Dragon-water, or the like, which in time of
contagion are not only scarce, but fraudulent, and seldom, or by few truly
made: But yet IN must say, being truly How to administer preservatives.
made, they do excel many other Liquors. Yet for reasons aforesaid, in their
wants, I hold it safe to administer Mithridate, London Treacle, or Diatessaro^,
or any such Medicine, in good French Wine, and sometimes in Spanish Wine, if
the disease begin cold* or in possetdrink, made with wine, or without wine, as
reason shall guide.

And note, that it would ever be fittest to give these Medicines, or any of
them, in the most cordial Liquors that may be had: but if the sick will as
willingly take them in a Bolus, I mean, in a lump, namely, as it is of it self,
he may safely do it; yet if the stomach of the sick will not so admit of it,
then it may not be amiss, to give him a draught of warm posset drink, made
with Carduus Benedictus, Burrage, or Buglosse, or Sorrel water, and a little
Sugar boiled therein, or in want of those herbs, a plain posset, and three
spoonfuls of Spanish wine added thereto, where the Artist shall see it so
necessary; which may time enough be added, when the Posset is taken from the
fire, if the Patient be taken cold, as is said: but if the Disease begin
burning, then let Sorrel, or Violet leaves, or Strawberry leaves, or some other
cordial roots, Herbs, or Flowers, as is already rehearsed, be put into the
posset, and some fitting sirrup, as of Sorrel, or Wood Sorrel, or three or four
drops of Oil of Vitriol, if it may be had, be added thereunto, in such a case
being very Cordial, and good* and in want thereof, plain posset drink alone,
reasonable warm, will do well, where the recited are not; and for a need give
it in white Wine, as is said, or in Beer to the poorer sort: or if the party
take this Medicine alone, being in haste, in want of means, it will do well, by
Gods Mercy, if he be not too much doubtful.

And for the discreet Artist, or the attenders of the sick, let them take what
they have ready presently, and let the sick be laid down to sweat; and where
you can have learned counsel, refuse it not, as is said, and delay not; for by
want of advice now and then, able men dye, to save charges, which is a
lamentable folly.

AN Approved Cordial Medicine against the Plague, of the Practice of Doctor
Burgis, Verbatim, or in the very words as be writ it in his Book; with also his
addition in the commendation thereof.
Medicine of Dr. Burgis, against the Plague.
TAke three pints of Muskadine, and boil therein a handful of Sage, ^and a
handful of Rue, till a pint be wasted, then strain it, and set it over the
fire again, then put thereto a penniworth of long Pepper, half an ounce of
Ginger, a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all beaten together, and let it boil
a little more, then put thereto two penniworth of Treacle, four penniworth of
Mithridate, and a quarter of a pint of the best Angelica-water you can get.

Keep this as your life, above all worldly treasure, take of it always warm,
both morning and evening a spoonful or two, if you be already infected, and
sweat thereupon; if not, a spoonful a day is sufficient, half a spoonful in the
morning, and half a spoonful at night, all the Plague time: under God trust to
this, for there was never man, woman, nor child, that this deceived.

This is not only for the common Plague, which is called the Sickness, but
for the small Pox, Meazles, and Surfeits, and diverse other diseases.

This Medicine, as you may read, is praised to the full, and no doubt may well
deserve praise; and yet were I to put my life upon a medicine, I would not
choose the aforesaid Medicine for many reasons. First, that the composition
thereof is uncertain, namely by penniworths, and the Angelica water doubtful
whether it be of it self simple, or drawn of Wine, the Treacle not declared
whether common or no: and further, in my judgment, take it in the best sense,
the composition is rude, and too hot, fitter rather to inflame, then cure. But
yet I leave it for them that have tried it, or that list to try it, to make it
up, and use it in the Name of God, who gives his blessings beyond measure to
mean things.

A Composition of an Electuary De Ovo, of mine own long experience and
practice, which I know to be very good, and is not dear.
The Composition of Elect. De Ovo.
TAke Saffron 5. and a Scruple undryed; then tease it, I mean, pull the parts
thereof asunder: then take one reasonable small new-laid Egg, and make a small
hole in the top of it, and let the white run out; then fill up the Egg with
the said Saffron, putting it in by little and little, till it be almost full,
ever gently mixing the yolk with the Saffron; and in that manner of doing, one
reasonable Egg will contain all the prescribed Saffron: This done, with part
of the white of the Egg mix a little Wheat flower, to make a paste* then break
another larger Egg only for the shell, which you may use as follows.

First, strike off the top as whole as you can, to cover the hole in the top of
the former mentioned smaller Egg, and with the paste aforesaid paste up the
hole, and set it near the fire, only to dry; and after that, spread a fine rag
with some of the said paste, and again, cover the hole and the piece of the
shell lying thereon, and dry it before the fire; then put this Egg into a
wider Egg-shell, namely, that which was emptied before, and so set it up to the
top in an Earthen Pot filled with Sand on a gentle fire, till the sand be so
hot, that the Saffron in the Egg smell; then for fear of burning it, take the
Pot or Pipkin from the fire, and take the Egg out of the hot sand, and put it
to cool; if you find*it be but reasonable dry, and not burned, then need it not
be put any more to the fire, for it will easily burn, without great care had:
then being well roasted, take all that pasted away, and take all the substance
contained therein; bear it, and work it so long together, until no part of the
Saffron appear, but be all into one body; then weigh what the whole substance
weighs, which will be about one ounce: Which done, take of Diptam. Alb. of
the roots of Tormentil, of Butter-burre, called Petacitis, of Angelica and
Zedoary roots, of each. j. of My^^he and Juniper Berries, of each. ij. all
these being made into fine powder before, and ready; then take of Mithridate of
the best,.ij. of the finest purified Honey,. ij. make this up, According to
Art, into a stiff Electuary* which is done by strong and stiff beating and
working of it altogether, at the least three or four hours: And if there want
humidity to work it up into a just consistence, add Syrrup. Limoniorum, qua.
sa. est.

The Dose of this, is at the most. j. se. But for that it has an unpleasing
taste unto some delicate palates, when I have it ready, I use to take thereof.
se. and of There. Diatessaron, or London Treacle, or good Mithridate, of any one
of these,. j. se. and mix them in white wine, with also a few drops of Oil of
Vitriol, namely, four or five drops at most, with also one ounce of some
Cordial Syrrup: as of Buglosse, or Sorrel, of Citrons, or Limons, or
Wood Sorrel, when it is not to be appointed to delicate personsr And all that I
give at once to a man or a woman, and lay the party to sweat gently at the
least for three hours. Or in want thereof, I put only a quarter of a pint of
white Wine, with a little Sugar to it, either mixed as is said, or. j* se. of
the said Electuary alone in a bole or lump to some, for it needs no other
mixture for the adding virtue thereto, for it is a most excellent Cordial alone.

And I would advise those which cannot have all the ingrediency of this
composition, as namely in the Country, that they make ready the Egg and
Saffron (as is said) and take only a double weight of good Mustard Seed
thereto, and with about one ounce of good Honey work it well into an Electuary,
and use thereof. j. se. at a time, in Posset Drink, or Wine, according as the
sickness takes men: if it take them cold, I hold it better given in Wine, or
Possetdrink made with Wine, if it may be had, then with the usual Cordial
Waters, which is but a mere Fl^gma distilled from the bar herb at the best,
and often not truly so good: for I well know, that Wine is a true Cordial. and
gladdeth the heart of man; which I must believe to be so, for that the Book of
God does so testify of it. And I know also it resists putrefaction, in the
very nature thereof.

Wherefore, in my opinion, if it were not in some who apparently have a fervent
burning Fever, where reason it self would advise me to forbear Wine, I would
use Wine before either Angelica, Carduus, Dragon-Water, or any of the like
kinds, in the case of the Plague, as I have diverse times elsewhere recited.

The Dose of Elect. de Ovo.
This Medicine either taken alone, a Drach. or four scruples, to a strong
person diseased, is excellent, if it be taken with Syrrup of Citrons,. j. White
or Claret Wine,. iij. or iiij.. and four drops of Oil of Vitrol, and the
diseased laid to sweat upon it, being orderly attended, it is a most precious
Medicine, by my self very often tried; I having often made the aforesaid
Receipt, and used it out with good success.

Another Composition of Electuarium De Ovo, being plain, cheap, and good.
ELectuarium de Ovo, or the Electuary of the Egg, as it was made and
prescribed for public use in Germany, by the Physicians of the Emperor
Maximilian, in the time of a great Plague there, in A^^^ Domini 1600. being a
most excellent Preservative against the disease, and also a good curative
medicine, as follows.

Take a new Egg, and make a hole in the ^oppe, put out the white, and fill the
place with Saffron undryed only teased, and the flakes opened asunder, mingle
it in the shell that it be like a paste, the yolk of the egg and the saffron
together, and stop the hole being filled, and boil or stew it, or rather bake
it gently in the Imbers, till it may almost be brought into powder, but without
burning of it; then add unto it of the roots of Tormentil, Morsus Diab.
Angelica, Pimpernel, and Zedoary, of each ij. make this into powder, then take
ij. of old Venice Triacle, and in want thereof so much Mithridate, and with
water of Scabious, make it into an Electuary, and give at one time for the
largest dose or quantity, one Drach. and a half to a strong body to provoke him
to sweat, if he have the sickness. It will provoke sweat plentifully, but if
it be by way of a preservative to prevent sickness, then give him but the
weight of 3 d. or 4 d. or 6 d. at the most at one time, and let the Patient
upon the receipt thereof be laid to sweat for three or four hours, and it will
produce an admirable effect of health, if it be with good order and discretion
administered.

The Composition of the ancient Treacle, Theriac. Diatessar. or the poor man's
Treacle.
TAke chosen Myrrh, good Bay Berries, hulled well, Aristolochia roots, and
Gentian roots *of each 1.. dissolve the Myrrh in Sack, and gently evaporate
some of the Sack away, and make the other ingrediences into fine powder, then
take xij. of pure honey, and according to Air, incorporate it, and mix all the
aforesaid things with it, make it boil a little gently, and make an Electuary
thereof, and give a j. s. or two ij. of this Electu. at a time to a strong
body, yea, a strong person may safely take iij.

The dose of There. Diatess.
And lay the party to sweat; you may give it in white wine or claret or sack,
if the disease begin cold, or in Beer, Ale, or posset drink, and I have found
by much practice, that it is a sure good Cordial, and Children may take it.

This medicine I my self would take upon the defense of my own life, as soon as
one of the greatest and dearest compositions in the Apothecaries shop.

And I further well know, that the Apothecary may honestly afford The price of
There. Diat^ss.
this kind of Diatessar. truly made for 4* d* an ounce, and that an ounce
thereof may be sufficient at several times, given to cure a man diseased of the
Plague, God giving his blessing to the means, and by way of preservatives
given, it may defend many from it; But I confess it is some what a bitter
Medicine, and so (as I have said) are most all good Medicines in practice for
that disease; wherefore whosoever m^s^keth a good Medicine for the bitterness
by his nice refusal, may find his disease far more bitter.

Nam dulcia non meruit, qui non gustavit amara.
The virtue of it for other diseases.
This medicine is also excellent good against pains and gripings of the
stomach or belly, taking the quantity aforesaid, or less, and for the disease
of the Colic, or any windy pains or gripings of the small guts, it is the best
medicine that ever I knew.

A Caveat for administering of There. Diatess.
But beware it be not given to women with child, for to such it is not
grateful, nor very safe, because of the Myrrh, but to any woman which wants
the due sickness of her seasons, it is an excellent medicine; and otherwise,
for any person diseased with the Plague.

A Cordial Confection or Preservative for women with child, children, infants
and tender people.
The receipt.
TAke chosen roots of Set-well called Zedoary, the purest of them half a pound,
put them one whole day to infuse in Rose Water and wine-vineger mixed, then let
them dry gently, which done, with fine Sugar and Rose Water preserve them, and
give a small quantity of the same, half an ounce or thereabout fasting; the
like you may do with Angelica roots, or with Enul. Campan. roots, or with The
great virtue of the root of the Butterburre.
a root called Butter-burre, which is one of the most excellent roots for the
cure of the Plague that ever was found out by Art: this root the Germans name
Pestilence root, as being held the best preservative, and also cure for the
disease of the Plague or Pestilence.

Another good Cordial for women with child, children, or delicate people.
TAke a Lemon or a good Citron, ^^ew it in Rose water and Sugar cloven first
into four parts, and when it is half stewed, add The recei^.
some Cynamon in powder thereto, it is a singular good Cordial so taken; and
for a preservative for tender women with child, and dainty people, the quantity
of a Nutmeg thereof in a morning, for such as are delicate and tender, and
cannot take medicines well that are The dose of it.
bitter. Also for women with child, if they take sometimes a toste sprinkled
with rose vinegar, or ordinary wine vinegar, then spread it with butter, and
strew a little powder of Cynamon thereon, and eat it fasting, it is a Cordial
and a very good preservative for them.

Pil. Pest. Ruffi.
And amongst the rest of good preservative Cordials, Pil. Pestilent. Ruffi. is
not the least, for it is a preservative and purgative, yea, and a curative
medicine, of great virtues, and very highly commended by diverse ancient and
modern Writers, and which of mine own long experience, I have found singular
good.

The dose of it.
Of which take fasting the quantity of a scruple, which is 20 grai. or near the
weight of 3 d. as a preservative, and the ingrediences thereof are fine Aloes,
Myrrh and Saffron by Art made into pills, and the reason The reason of its
virtue.
that the learned do ascribe so great virtues to the aforesaid ingrediences, is
for that they suffer not the body of man to putrefie, for Myrrh, as Galen,
Avicen, and many other ancient Writers affirm, and experience shows them,
resists putrefaction, so that a dead corpse preserved in Myrrh, neither
alters nor stinketh in a long season; and also Aloes, its virtue.
Aloes has an excellent quality in purging Choler, and comforting and
corroborating the Ventricle, and in preserving it from putrefying: and Saffron
by the consent of all the Learned is a true cordial medicine; and, as Avicen
testifies, it never alters humors to the worst, but refreshes, amendeth,
and purifieth the putrid, and conveyeth with it other medicines to the comfort
of the heart, and other principal parts of the body.

And one Johannes Hartmannus an ancient reverend Writer, in his Treatise of the
Pestilence, writes in commendations of these Pills, these very words following:

Non immerito his Pillulis magnam adhibeo fidem, in septem constitutionibus
Pestilentialibus, quas tempore meo vidi, nemo ipsis usus, Peste interiit. In
English thus:

Not unworthily do I put great trust in these Pills, for seven seasons of the
Plague, which my self in my time saw, there was not one man dyed that used
them, meaning the said Pills; and the quantity prescribed by the same Author,
to be taken by way of preservative, as is recited, was 20 grains, which is
about the weight of 3 d. and I my self upon my own experience affirm, that in
curing the disease where a purge is required, there is no purgation within my
practice, safer nor surer then this Pill is, and to purge, the dose is j. which
although I confess in some bodies it purges but slowly, yet in the disease of
the Plague generally it is most requisite and safe, to be very sparing, and
indeed well advised in giving way to any purging medicines at all.

A good safe medicine, for any whose complaints begin with a fullness in their
stomach, with nauseousnesse and desire to vomit.
BEing taken, the first day that a man finds himself so to be infected, and
to such the medicine has at once taking perfectly cured many; and it is a
medicine which my self would as soon take at the first as any medicine, if I
felt my body upon fullness diseased, for it purges away the venom, both
upwards and downwards, before nature be overcome thereby: but I must crave your
pardon to deliver the medicine in Latin; for that I hold it not fit for any to
undertake the making or preparing of the ingrediences thereof, for the avoiding
danger, but the discreet, faithful and understanding Surgeon or Apothecary.

Satis examinata.
Rec. Antimonii clarificat. Hyacinth. modo Pellucidi, gr. 4. Conser. flor.
Borag.. ij. Specier. Liberan.. se. Mastich. gr. 5. Misce and fiat bolus.

The ^^s^.
Give this whole quantity to a strong man at once: but I hold it best, at the
time of the taking of it, that he lie on his bed in his clothes, I mean, till
the Medicine have done working, and that he drink warm Posset Drink after each
Vomiting: and then, and not before, if he find himself not well, let him go to
his naked bed, and fasting, take a nap, (if he can) and then when he awaketh,
give him some small Cordial, as namely,. j. of Mithridate, or of Diatessaron,
or of London Treacle, in Posset drink, and gently provoke him to be in a
sweating manner, not to sweat too strongly, and that for three or four hours.
Which done, there may be given him a cup of Beer, with a toste, if he desire to
drink, and give him to eat some light digesting food, and I doubt not but he
will do well very quickly.

But this kind of cure is only for the beginning of the disease, and to be
given, as is said, to a full body, which has a complaint of fullness of his
stomach. And so herewith I will conclude further repetition of Purgative
Medicines, in cases of the Plague; advising all discreet Artists to use them
with all possible care, caution, and counsel of the Learned, where it may be
had, as they tender the lives and healths of their Patients, well weighing the
following Instructions and Caveats.

Cautio e Petri Sibyllenii Medico insigni Germaniae in usum Medicinarum
Catharticarum in curanda Peste.
A Caveat in the use of Purgative Medicines, in cases of the cure of the Plague.
QUod vero aliqui Medici sentiunt solutiva Medicamina in principio hujus
acutissimi morbi convenire, and venenosam materiam eorum vi, and calore e
corpore educendam esse, horum sententiae Galeni and Avicennae testimonia and
firma argumenta supra exposita valde adversantur, quorum authoritaeem
Hippocrat. Lib. 4. de ratione victus in morbis acutis confirmat, cum inquit:
Ubi in morbo venae sectio and solutiva Medicamenta necessaria sunt, venae
incisio praecedere deb^t. Et Avensoar. Lib. 3. de Theisi^ dicit, Sed antequam
fiat purgatio aliqua, praecipiatur, ut fiat evacuatio universalis, and hoc cum
Phlebotomia, etc. Et quia Medicamentorum laxantium in boc casu usus gravis,
infensus and periculosus propter multas evidentes caus^s, corpori esse solet,
Eapropter imperitorum, barbarorum, and circumforaneorum Medicorum curam, qui
violentissimis Pharmacis causam morbi expellere opinantur, utpote Mercurio
praecipitato quem rubicundum pulverem falso praestantem pradicant has dial cto
modo adscribam. Cathartica sive purgantia Medicamenta, magnam vim caloris in se
continent, qua velociter attrahun^, and humores in venis commovent, simulque
expellunt, quaque commotione natura regetiva totius corporis in sua Crisi and
conatu obtunditur and prosternitur, and plerunque evenit expulsio symptomatica
morti vicina, quare non conducunt in hujus Pestis initio. Praeterea omn^
Catharticum movet mat^riam ad interiora, hoc est, a superficie ad Centrum, quod
est Cor: In omni autem venenosa materia hoc improbatur, materia entm venenosa a
Centro ad superficiem expelli debet. idcirco Pharmaca in initio morbi exhibita
plus incommodi quam commodi adferunt.

Huc accidit quod Cathartica hujusmodi Medicamenta quae fortia and acuta sunt
per se venenosa censentur; non est autem venenum veneno apponendum, omne enim
tale addituns suo tali (ut est communis Regula) facit illud magis tale.

Major probatur ex Joh. Mesue de consolatione Medicinarum, ^bi inquit, Omnis
Medicina laxativa est de genere venenosarum rerum, cujus excessum Natura non
patitur, nullo propterea Cathartico Pestis tempore corpora vacuanda sunt.
Quandoquidem Medicus pro suo officio and doctrina quam profitetur minister,
custos and imitator Naturae dicitur. Natura aut^m in Peste a Centro ad
superficiem conatur ve^^num pellere, ergo Medicus ri^e imitatur Naturae ductum
juxt^ Aphorism. Hippocrat. Libr. 21. Aphorism. 1. Quo Naturae vergit ad loca
conferentia eo ducere oportet, etc.

Et quia Cathartica innata sua vi and crudelitate Naturam regetivam totius
corporis prosternunt, qua ob Pest is quoque acuitatem and impetum languida and
infirma est, virtus vero hoc t^mpore conservanda qua prestrata periclitatur
aeger, ergo nullum Pharmacum dandum est.

The precedent Caveat touching purging Medicines Englished, is in effect as
follows.
ONe Petrus Sibyllenius, a learned Physician of his time, in his Treatise De
Peste does write touching the use of Catharticke or purging Medicines, in the
case of the Plague, as follows, and recites his reasons and authority for
the same in these words.

Solutives forbidden in the cure of the Plague.
Concerning the opinion which some Physicians hold, that solutive and purging
Medicaments are convenient in the beginning of this most sharp sickness, the
Plague, and that the venomous humor is to be driven out of the bodies infected
with the Plague, by their force and heat: The censures of Galen and Avicen, by
strong arguments, are repugnant to their opinions. And Hippocrates confirms
their anthorities in his L b. 4. de Dieta, or of Diet, which is to be used in
sharp sicknesses; where he says, when in any sharp sickness the opening of a
Vein or solutive Medicaments are necessary, the Vein is first to be opened. And
Avensoar in the Lib. 3. de Theisir says, before But in our Climate that Rule
is not in g^^^ral g^od, but is list to fit occasion and due time.
any purgation be, he would advise that a general evacuation might be made;
meaning, that letting blood is fit to be done. And because, says he, the use
of laxative and purging Medicaments are ill, hurtful, and dangerous to the
body, by reason of many evident cases; therefore he likewise condemns the
error of the unlearned and barbarous Physicians and Mountebanks of his times,
which would drive away the cause of the disease by violent purging Medicines,
as namely with Mercurius praecipitate, which red powder they call falsely a
precious Cathartick or purging Medicine; which having a great force of heat in
them, they do draw forcibly and swiftly both the blood and humors which are in
the Veins, and do drive them out, to the prejudice of Nature: by which
commission, Nature which governs the body, is disabled, stupefied, and beaten
down in her endeavor, touching her Crisis, her working and contending with the
poisonous vapors, so as for the most part it happens, that thereupon
proceeds a symptomatical expulsion, which is not far from death it self. And
therefore such Medicines are not fit to be used in the beginning of the
sickness, namely, the Plague. Moreover, all purging Medicaments draw the
humors to the inward parts, that is, from the superficies or outward parts to
the center of the body, which is the heart, and the effects follow deadly; for
in venomous diseases, the venomeought to be driven from the center to the
outward: therefore Cathartick or purging Medicines being ministered in the
beginning of this sickness, do more hurt then good. And in this further is to
be added, that such purging Medicines as are so strong and sharp, are esteemed
to be venomous of themselves, and there is no venom or poison to be put to
poison; for every such thing as is added to his like, as the general Rule
says, makes that more such.

The Major is proved by Joh. Mesues de consolatione Medicinarum, where he
says, that all laxative Medicines are of the sort of venomous things, whose
excess nature cannot endure: therefore in time of the Plague, the diseased
bodies are not to be made empty by purgations, The Office of a Physician.
seeing that a Physician is called, by reason of his office and Learning which
he professes, a Minister, a keeper, and an imitator of Nature.

The help of Nature in the Plague.
Nature in the Plague, endeavors as much as in her is, to expel the venom to
the superficies of the body: Therefore a Physician ought to follow the tract of
Nature according to the Aphorism of Hippocrates, 21. Lib. 1. Aphoris. Where
Nature aims his course, thither it behooves the Physician to intend his
Artificial help.

A reason of the danger of laxative Medicines.
And because Cathartick means, by their innate force and cruelty, do overthrow
Nature, the ruler of the whole body, which also is made weak, by reason of the
sharpness and force of the Plague, Nature is to be preserved, and no laxative
Medicine to be given.

Of variety of particulars for Brothes to be made for the sick, according to
men's several abilities, or necessities, and as the time and place has to be
added more, or in part forborne, upon each just occasion.
Of herbs convenient for Brothes.
ANd first, for herbs fittest to be used in Brothes in this disease, they are
Buglosse, Borage, Endive, Succory, Strawberry leaves, Marigolds, Parsely,
Betony, Violet leaves, Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Plantane, any of these are very
good, and so is Rosemary and Time, so that you take not too much of any of
them, remembering also for the seasoning and relishing of Brothes, as also for
Sauce, you may safely make use of Sugar, Cynamon, Currants, Citrons, Oranges,
Limons, juice of Limons, ripe and unripe Grapes, preserved Barberries,
Cherries, and Prunes, Wine Vinegar, Verjuice, Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron,
and Wine, if occasion be, to refresh the spirits; for, as I have said, I esteem
it far above any the simple waters of herbs for a Vehicle, in the disease of
the Plague.

Necessary meats to be boiled in Broth.
Also you may make your Brothes either of a Cock, orrather of a Cock Chicken,
or of Mutton or Veal, or for the meaner sort, of what else their means will
reach unto; for many things that be held unsavory, nauseous, yea, and
dangerous to the dainty, are found to be very conveniene, wholesome,
comfortable and precious to the poorer sort; as Garlic, Leekes, Onions,
Chyves, Wormwood, Centory, Angelica, Bay Berries, Gentian, and diverse others,
whose tastes are harsh.

A Cordial Drink to cool and contemperate the blood, being a China broth, if
the Patient please to be at the cost.
The Rec^i^ of it.
TAke the roots of China, cut into small slices. 3. infuse them 12 hours at the
least in five quarts of fair water, adding of Burrage and Buglosse, of each
half a handful, of Cloves in number three, with a like weight of Cynamon, and
Mace, boil these gently, till one third part be consumed: and, if you please,
add one spoonful of Rosewater, and some little Sugar to make it grateful in
taste, and also three spoonfuls of juice of Lemons, and in want of juice of
Lemons, so much good Wine Vinegar; you may give the Patient at one time, to a
quarter of a pint, and he may take of this decoction four The Dose.
sundry times in a day safely at the least, and oftnet if he like it.

Also remembering that the sick have some other Cordial prepared for him, if
need be, to provoke him to sweat the second or third time, and some odoriferous
thing in his hand, or near at hand by him, often to smell unto, such as are
elsewhere set down, or some other of the like nature.

And in want of China roots, take the double part of Sarsaparilla, and in want
of that, a large crust of the best bread of Wheat, for the poorer sort; this
also is good to contemperate the blood after sweating: and further, it is of
ancient Writers esteemed, as a very good Cordial medicine, to give the party
the quantity of a drach. or. i. s. of the finest Bolus Armen. in a cup of white
Wine, with half a spoonful of Rosewater, and a little Sugar if you please; and
in want thereof, give it in posset drink.

Moreover, if you see occasion, and can have them in your posset drinks, or
distilled water, that you use as vehicles or liquors, in which you give your
medicines, you may put the quantity of one or two ounces of syrup of Citrons,
or of Lemons, or of Sorrel, or Woodsorrel, or of sour Pomegranates: also it is
very good in every sweatprovoking Cordial drink, that you add oil of Vitriol,
three or four drops to a dose, but no more for offending; yea, in all Julips, a
few drops thereof are both cordial and warrantable; and in want thereof, in a
cooling Julip may be added Sal Prunellae, so that the quantity exceed not. ij.
per haustum unum.

Another Julip for the Diseased of the Plague.
The Receipt.
TAke French Barley, or in want thereof, English Barley, about one good
handful, fair conduit water, or spring water, three quarts, boil the Barley
about half an hour in the water, and then cast away the water, then take about
three quarts of water again, and of Mace and Cloves, of each half a scruple, or
20 grains, which is a scruple, and boil the said Barley and the rest, one hour
or more, till one third part of the liquor, or thereabouts, be consumed; then
clear of this Barley water into a glass: and to each quart of water, if it may
be had, add of Syrup of Wood Sorrel, of Citrons, of Limons, of Violets, or of
any one of these,. 3. of Rose water one spoonful, of Wine Vinegar two
spoonfuls, of oil of Vitriol ten drops; and if you can get no syrups at hand,
use Sugar to make it pleasant of taste, and in want of oil of Vitriol, use two
more spoonfuls of Wine Vinegar: A caution in using oil of Vitriol.
and note, that whenever you put oil of Vitriol into any liquor, and that you
would give it the Patient, that you shake the glass ever, when you put our
any, for the Oil will fall to the bottom, and the last draught will be very
dangerous, and too sharp to be drunk.

Against Thirstinesse.
Diverse qualifications of Thirst.
WAter and Vinegar mixed, and often held in the mouth, and put out again is
good, juice of Lemons, and water so used, letting some part down, is also very
good; also preserved cherries, and stewed Prunes are good to hold in the mouth,
and to be taken in Quinces, or conserve of Barberries, or Tamarinds from the
East Indies; or it were good the Patient had by him often to suck from a
liquorish stick some cordial syrup in a glass, as of Woodsorrel, of Citrons,
Limons, of Violets, or syrup of Vinegar, or of some such like; also as is
repeated, Sal Prunellae. ij. and some 3 ounces of Plantain, or Strawberry water
does well cool thirst, and is cordial.

Against faintings and swounings, which happen in the sickness.
Medicines against swounings.
LEt the sick have something to smell unto, that has Rose-Vineger, with a few
drops of Rose water in it; also give the sick, either some Treacle water, or
some good Bezar, or Cynamon water, Angelica water, or Mint water, distilled
with wine, or a little good Aqua-vitae, or a little good claret wine, mul'd
with a few Cloves, and Rosemary, and Sugar therein; any of these are good
Cordials: or let him hold a Lemon stuck with Cloves, as is said, in his hand,
or have some cordial Pomander in his hand, and to wet his temples and forehead
with Wine Vinegar, and a little Rosewater mixed, where it may be had.

A good Posset Drink in the sickness, if the Disease begin hot.
MAke an ordinary posset with Ale and Milk, purify it from the curd, and boil
gently therein (if you desire to have it cooling) Sorrel, Strawberry leaves,
Plantain leaves, Violet leaves, or some of them, adding a little Wine vinegar,
and some Sugar, and a little Rosewater, if you please; and this will be a good
drink for the Patient to continue with in the time of his sickness.

Also the juice of Lemons or Oranges, wrung into the posset drink, is likewise
very good, and the best of all to make it tart, and not over sour, therewith,
is a little oil of Vitriol; for that no medicine is so Oil of Vitriol.
precious against the pestilential Fever, as the oil of Vitriol, it being
warily administered.

Another good Posset Drink to give a sweating Medicine in, if the parties
sickness begin cold.
MAke a Posset first with Ale and Milk, in an ordinary manner, unto which add
Marigolds, Burrage, Buglosse, or some of them, and gently boil them in the
Drink, and to a quart thereof, add of good Sack a quarter of a pint; and to a
draught of this drink, put any cordial medicine to provoke sweat, and give it
warm, if the disease begin cold, as is said: but if it begin hot, leave out the
Sack; for, as I in this book have often repeated, I hold Wine better and safer to
give a cordial with, Wine the best for preparing a Cordial with.
in the Plague, then any simple water distilled, although it were distilled
either from Angelica, Dragon, Centory, or Carduus Benedictus.

A good Cordial Medicine for the poorer sort, though it were to women with
Child; for they may take it softly.
The Receipt.
TAke Bayberries, cleanse the husks, and dry them, until they will be made
into powder, then powder them, or for a need grate them, as you do Nutmegs, and
give a small spoonful thereof in a draught of white Wine, Ale, or Beer, and let
the party be laid to sweat, The order in administering of it.
and forbear sleep, it is a good and a safe Cordial, to which may be added
Sugar, or cordial syrups at pleasure: and note, that even Galen, the Prince of
Physicians, as I said, Attributes unto Antidotes, meaning the preservatives,
that open the pores, and provoke sweat, the whole cure of the Plague, which
this mean medicine mightily and The several virtues of it.
safely does. It also is exceeding good against the wind Colic, and all
tortions and disturbances of the bowels.

Another good Cordial for the poorer sort.
The Receipt of it.
TAke of the best Walnuts in number 20, chosen Figs 16, Rue,. 1. se. Wormwood
leaves, and seeds picked, half a handful, Gentian roots,. 2. round Aristolochia
roots,. 3 long Aristolochia roots,. 1. Torment. Diptam. roots, of each half an
ounce, Bayberries half an ounce, common salt,. 3. Mithridate. 2. mix all
artificially to gether, except the Mithridate; then weigh the whole lump, and
take three times so much pure honey in weight, as all the ingrediences are, and
being first all well wrought together, add the Mithridate, and mix it also.

The Dose of it.
Keep this close covered, and give for a preservative the quantity of a Nutmeg;
but by way of cure to provoke sweat, give as much as a Walnut thereof, and
sweat well upon it: this is an approved good Medicine, and not much unsavory
to be taken, if it be truly made.

But if any person, for the unsavourinesse of a medicine, will refuse help, let
him forbear, and expect, and take of what follows: and further note, that it
will not be amiss, as I have said, that after any cordial medicine be
swallowed down without liquor, that a cup of good wine be given; or in want of
it, warm Posset Drink, or Beer.

Another good Cordial for poor people at a mean price to be had.
The Receipt.
TAke the kernels of Walnuts, of the herb Rue, and of chosen figs, of each. 1.
of common salt,. 2. of Saffron. 1. let all this be very well beaten together,
with as much Wine Vinegar as will work The Dose.
them up into the form of an Electuary, and take thereof fasting daily the
quantity of two Drachmes.

Certain Rules and Observations to be regarded, concerning the curing of the
infected of the Plague.
Directions for the infected.
IN which, the first point is, that he be put in mind of his duty to God, and
that with penitent heart he crave mercy of him.

Secondly, that he take the advice of the best learned he can have, and that he
follow their directions: but if he want better counsel, let him observe as
follows.

How to order the bodies of ^he infect^d.
First, if his body be very costive, namely, if he have had no stool in two
days, or at the least the day before he falls sick, let him in the first
place take a Suppository; and if it procure him not a stool, let him take
another within one half hour; and if that do no good, let him take a very
gentle Glister: but beware of taking any Purgation or Laxative whatsoever by
the mouth to be received, as I have in several places said, at the beginning of
the disease; Pu^ging dangerous.
but open a Vein rather, if learned advice order it: or, which is safest, take
a Medicine to cause sweat; and if he be scanted of time, sweat first, and take
a Suppository after the sweating Medicines have done, for it is dangerous to
delay sweating any time. And if Sweating not to be delayed.
he have it let his Cordial be Aurum Vitae, eight grains.

But in case the disease prove to be the Plague, if the party be full of blood,
and the sickness begin with him hot, and have but newly taken hold of him, and
also that he be courageous and willing thereunto, Letting blood necessary in
some respects.
open him the fullest Vein you can find in his arm, on that side he most
complains on, and take six, seven, or eight ounces, if no rising appear, and
lay him to sweat within one hour after, forbidding him to sleep, as he tendreth
his life: but if he be fearful, dull, sleepy, shivering, or yawning, or have
any such signs Sleeping dangerous after bloodletting.
before the bleeding, or that any Tumnur appear, then forbear Plebotomy at the
first, and presently give him a Diaphoretick, or sweat-provoking Medicine, or
antidote, one of those formerly named; and let him be laid in Bed, and well
covered over head Observations in sweating.
and all, and so provoked to sweat, by all the reasonable means that may be:
And in any case, let him not be suffered to sleep, Not to sleep in sweating.
during the time of his sweating, no, not in two hours after the taking of his
first Cordial, without you see extraordinary good signs of health in him.

Of the time of sweating, how long.
And you may continue him sweating gently three or four hours, or less time,
according to his strength, and then withdraw the clothes How to be ordered in
sweating, and afterward.
by a little and a little: but yet keep him in a breathing manner warm, though
not sweating much, somewhat longer; which done, dry him and shift him with
fresh clothes, well warmed: And if he keep his Medicine, and sweat well, there
is very good hopes, or rather little fear of him at all; but if he cast it,
there is not so much hope: yet give him another sweating Medicine, and a third,
if he cast the second, striving to please his taste in what you may with his
Medicines; and when he has sweat well, and is reasonably cooled, then may you
let him sit upon his bed, and give him some Possetdrink, or a small cup of Beer
warmed, or some Broth, or some few stewed Prunes, or some conserves, as of
Quinces, or Barberries: then if you find him not lightsome, and his headache
and complaints not eased, give a second sweating Medicine to the former, after
four or five hours distance, and keep him lying in bed, and in a breathing or
gentle sweating manner almost half a day after: and aboot ten or twelve hours
after his Cordial given, or sooner, if you see reason, you may suffer him to
sleep; but first, it is not amiss to give him some warm Broth, as is said to
refresh him.

Means to provoke sweat.
And if the Patient be unapt to sweat, let Bottles of very hot water be filled,
and put to his one side, and at his feet; or hot Bricks, somewhat quenched wirh
water, and then wrapped with wet clothes, and laid to his side and feet,
covering as well his face as any other part, leaving him but a sufficient
breathing place only; and be sure he sweat lying on the one side, and not on
his back: and he must be very careful to lie still, and keep his arms in bed
all the time of his sweating; or that he have warm sleeves to defend them from
cold,

A second Diaphoretick to be administered. Yet by unwarranted fear be not too
forward to reiterate ^ sweating M^di^ines too quick.
And yet again, if any evil signs appear to you, give him as before, more
Diaphoretick or sweating Medicines, until you see by the lightness,
cheerfulness, and good signs in the sick, with good persuasion, that the
venomous vapors which caused the disease, be almost or altogether spent; or
that the Botch, Blain, Carbuncle, or spots come forth: For if the outward
signs appear upon his sweatings, or that he be cheerful, and that no outward
marks do appear, in either of these two cases there is great hope of his
welldoing.

Wherefore I wish, as if often rehearsed, that all men begin betimes R^midies
not to be delayed.
to use Remedies, whilst strength of Nature is ready at hand.

For those which do take a good Cordial, that causes sweat at the very first,
seldom have any outward Sores or marks at all; and if they have, they are
light, small, and easily healed: and when you find the danger of the person
past, or venom of the sickness is spent, and the party cheerful; then, and
not before, may you, having good advice, purge; but I hold it safer to forbear
Laxatives even then also.

A note of the danger of purging.
For you must note, that if you purge, if there be any venomous quality in the
body at all left, as is said, you draw it to the center of the body, namely, to
the heart, and so double the danger; and for the rest of the cure, no man can
prescribe what in each body shall be fitting by any one general rule, for that
one person is seldom taken as another, in that fearful disease.

Only take this one thing for a rule of comfort in general, that this disease
commonly is swift, and is short, and does begin and end in a month commonly at
the utmost; for it is termed but the disease of one Moon: if the party be
likely to live, and the danger of death for the time over, no Apostumes,
Boyles, or Sores whatsoever do heal Of the sudden care of the Plague.
faster, nor sooner, then those of that disease of the Plague do, when the fury
of the Fever is once past. For the disease is a Fever, like to a furious
storm, short and terrible; but the fury once over, it is the calmest of all
contagious diseases whatsoever, and the easiest to be healed, far better then
the French Pox.

And moreover, note one thing elsewhere mentioned; in all cordial Medicines and
Julips, there is not a safer nor better thing to resist the putrefaction and
venom, to comfort the head and the stomach, and Of the good use and danger of
Oil of Vitriol.
to quench thirst, then is Oil of Vitriol, so you use it warily; but you must
be very wary, that to one draught of Drink, or Julip, you put not above four,
or rather but three drops; and using it but a very little at a time, you may
use it the oftener, and the safer: otherwise, there is some danger therein.

The choice of it.
You shall know the goodness of this Oil, by the clearness thereof, and by
the weight thereof, for if it be as clear as Rock-water, and ponderous almost
as Lead, then is it very good. By my will, I would never give any Purge, nor
any Cordial without it, if I could have it; for I have found it, by much
practice to be very precious.

Also, if you do take the quantity of one ounce of conserve of Roses, and about
eight small or single drops of Oil of Vitriol, and mix them exceeding well* and
give the Patient a little thereof to eat, or at the least to keep in his mouth
now and then, in the time of his sickness, it is exceeding cooling and
comfortable for him, and quenches thirst singular well.

The virtue of Salt of Wormwood.
And you shall find much the more profit in it, if you add Salt of Wormwood
thereto (as is said elsewhere) either one Scruple, or half a Drachme for a
Dose, according to the strength of the sick, and vehemence The Dose.
of the disease; for it mightily increases the force of the other Medicine, in
provoking of sweat, and refreshes the spirits. Sal-Niter is also good, if the
disease proceed of a not cause, a like Dose given.

Things to be observed by the attenders of the sick.
And note further, one observation generally to be had in mind by the attenders
of the sick, that they give the Patients leave ever freely to put their arms
out of the bed both night and day, except in the times of sweating; and to that
end, be careful to provide them Wastcoats, Sleeves, or, at the least, the legs
of old Hose, or any mean thing to the poorer sort, to keep their arms warm.

For my self know by experience of my own body, when I had the Plague, and so
since of many others that have been under my cure, how comfortable a freedom it
is for a sick man to have leave to spread and cast out his arms; and how
uncomfortable a thraldom and imprisonment it is for a poor weak man, by his
Keeper, to be forced to keep his arms in the bed, or in any one certain
position: Wherefore the attenders of the sick ought to have judgment and
commiseration, I mean, a fellow-feeling of the infirmities of the sick, and
chiefly, in this most fierce disease of the Plague.





Andromach. or Venice Treacle is a good Medicine, as it is made, by the view
and order of the College of Physicians of London; and in want of it, which my
self would as soon take, good London Treacle, if it be also truly made,
according to the prescription, and by the view of the said Reverend Doctors of
the College of London: I hold it a most fit Medicine; The Dose of Theriac.
Andromach, to a child.
and the rather, for that it is of taste easy to be taken in: but the quantity
at a time to be taken of it, must be as is said: to the strongest may safely be
given,. ij. which is about the weight of eighteen pence in money at a time; and
to a Child, about 3 pence, or 6 pence, or 9 pence weight, according to their
several ages and capacities: and also, if you can, and that you have
convenience, it is good that you remove the sick Patient sometimes from one Bed
to another, where convenience, means, and ability is; and that you use
sprinkling the Rooms with Wine Vinegar sometimes, as is said, where it may be
had.

Of such Diet as is fitting for the sick of the Plague to take.
FIrst note, that a very sparing Diet in general is the most fir, if the
Patients have full bodies, but in this disease, commonly all appetite is
forgotten with the Patient: yet when you find, that the danger of death by the
disease is over, and that the Patient amendeth, then good refreshing and
nourishing food is best, using it sparingly.

Fitting meats to be eaten by the sick.
And first, for the delicate, and they which may have it, let them in the Name
of God eat Pheasant, Partridge, Quail, Chickens, Rabbits, Capons, Veal, Lamb,
or Mutton; any of these are very good, taken with moderation. And so are all
field-Birds, which are used to be eaten, excepting those which live upon the
Water, as the Swan, Unfitting meats.
Goose, Duck, Plover, Wigion, etc. Also generally the most kind of Fresh Water
Fish may well be eaten of, except the Eel, the Tench, Meats forbidden.
and the Salmon: Playce, Flounders, Whitings, Soles, Smelts, and such like, are
good, moderately taken; also Perch, Roch, Stone, Gudgeons, Breames, Trouts.
Fresh Beef and Pork are excepted against; and I think it fit to avoid it,
where there is no want of other things. But on the contrary, where there is
scarcity, let thy ability be thy guide; and in the Name of God, in want of
others, let none be so unwise to refuse Beef, nor the Broth or pottage thereof,
for experience sufficiently approves them good; neither eggs poached, nor
soft sodden; no, nor Bread and Butter, when their stomachs will bear it; for
these all nourish well, very moderately taken.

And remember, that if your Patient begin to amend of his disease, and that his
appetite grow, deny him not competent food in a sparing manner, and let him
have, as near as may be, that which is of light digestion, and not too much at
once, but give it him often.

For understand, that after once the mass of blood has been corrupted, and
that Nature, by Gods mercy, with the help of good means, has again gotten the
upper hand, the body will require good nourishment, and often to be supplied.

The use of Verjuyce is very wholesome in the disease with Meats, and also in
Possets, where inward heat is, and thirst withal, but not where cold is: and
the use of Goose-berries, of unripe grapes, Preserved Cherries, Prunes, sour
Pomegranates, and the like, are very good, as is elsewhere mentioned; and no
less good is the use of Oranges, Lemons, Pome-Citrons, and Pomegranates.

The cure of Angina Mendosa, or a false Squinancy, being a species of a
contagious touch, happening when the Plague reigns.
Being a pain in the Neck, or lower parts of Gula, or of the Muscles of the
Neck and Throat, in which sickness there is generally small or no External nor
Internal appearance, although there sometime is in both, and therefore is
called Angina Mendosa.
Phlebotomy needful.
MAny begin the disease of the Plague with the aforesaid complaint, for which
one good remedy is Phlebotomy at the first, not under the tongue only in that
case; for that if you do it, suffices not in so fierce a disease, but that you
must also be forced to open a vein in the arm: Wherefore let the Surgeon, if he
be urged thereunto, take the fullest vein of the arm of that side, which the
pain or complaint inclines most unto, but concerning general evacuation by
Phlebotomy, in Pestilential Feavours, never do it when any indication of a
Crisis, by the disease appears, for fear of offense; and if so be that one
side suffer not more then another, then take it on the right arm, and take a
reasonable good quantity of blood, namely from The quantity of blood to be
taken.
a man, 6 or 8 ounces, or ten ounces; not more, for fear of dejecting the
spirits, and a lesser proportion to a weaker Patient, and make a reasonable
large orifice, which in such a case is best, and if after apparent need be,
which seldom is, open the veins under the tongue: but howsoever I would begin
with the arm.

And for a Gargarisme, use Barley water, with Diamoro^, and a little Ordering
of ^argarismes.
of Syrup of Vinegar, or a little Sal-niter is very good, and for outward
application, take a small handful of Camomil flowers, of clean ashes of wood
without coals or dross, a handful, and a few Rose leaves, and two spoonfuls
of oil of Roses, with as much of wine Vinegar boil it with small beer into a
Cataplasme, and very warm, apply it, and shift it morning and evening, if the
rose leaves be not to be had, or the Camomil flowers, use Elder leaves in
place, it will do well, and ordinary oil or butter for a need will serve, where
oil of Roses is wanting, or the old Medicine of Mel, and Album Graecum, with a
little Vinegar mixed, is right good: and the next morning after Phlebotomy,
give the patient a Diaphoretick of Aurum Vitae, eight grains, and appoint him
to sweat four hours* and no doubt but the disease will be therewith soon at an
end.

Of the use of Phlebotomy in the aforesaid disease, I have had experience
oftentimes this year, and even upon my own Son, who being in a violent burning
Feavour, with an Angina Mendosa, and being very unwilling to be let blood under
the tongue, first for fear of loss of time, I caused to give him a
suppofitory; then after within ^three hours I gave him a Cordial Diaphoretick,
Gr. 8. of Aurum vitae, which he did sweat upon for three or almost four hours
very plentifully, and was somewhat revived, and reasonable cheerful,
nevertheless he still finding a great fullness of blood, entreated me to open
a vein for him in the Arm, the which I did, and took from him, as I conceived,
ten ounces of blood, he being of a full able body, and about twenty years of
age, and without any more medicines, or time of complaint, by Gods mercy, he
came to his perfect health again the second day from the beginning of his
desease.

And I may truly to Gods glory affirm, that in this year, 1638, I have cured
very many of Feavours, with also complaints of swellings in their throats,
merely by that Diaphoretick of Gold, of my own practice, called Aurum vitae,
and that with only one dose given, and no more, and the parties became thereby
perfectly whole the very next day, without the taking any other Medicine, and
by the same medicine, and only by the once giving, I also have healed very
many of the Plague in one day, whereof some had risings of tumors, which by
their once sweating, spent without further care.

Outward Medicines for the asswaging of the pains of the Head, in the sick of
the Plague.
TAke good Unguentum Populeon, and anoiut the Temples, and forehead therewith,
it is good against the Headache, or oil of liquid Mace, the Temples anointed
therewith, or oil of nutmegs, pressed from the Nutmeg, or a great turnip
roasted in the imbers, and cut through the midst, and very warm applied to
the temples, takes away the pains of the head.

Also a piece of red rose cake laid on a pewter dish, and set on a chafing
dish, with a small fire, and then bedewed with wine vinegar, and a little
Nutmeg grated and strewed thereon, and so applied to the forehead and temples,
asswageth the pain thereof very well, being (as aforesaid) artificially
prepared and fitly applied.

Of the ^ea^^ Archa^gel.
Likewise, in the Country where these things cannot be had, there is an herb
called Archangel, partly like a Nettle, of no good smell, by some called a dead
Nettle; the same being beaten soft and thick, applied cold to the forr-head or
place grieved, asswageth the pain thereof very strangely.

The dangerous using of Opi-^um.
Also Ladanum, grains 4. but rather 3 grains only, be not too bold with this
medicine, nor any other opiats whatsoever in the disease of the Plague, and
when you use them, do it with advice, and only in extremities of unsufferable
pain: For that medicine will do the deed, and safely, if the Surgeon be
discreet, and not too bold therewith, which if he be, he loses his Patient,
yea, I had almost said, he kills his Patient,

A preservative for the poor, and a good Cordial.
Crocious, f. 193.
BAyberries, the husks being taken away, the quantity of a drachme, or the
weight of nine pence, either grate them to powder, or beat them, and take the
same powder in stale beer, stale Ale, or in white wine, and go to bed, and
strive to sweat therewith, and Preservatives.
that fully; it provokes sweat well, and thereby cures the disease, and may
be taken again and again, three or four times, if occasion be, for it is a true
Cordial against th Plague.

True oil of Amber beads is also excellent for the preserving from the Plague,
three or four drops taken fasting, dropped upon a piece of Bread, or in any
drink, and for the curing of the Plague, twelve drops at once taken.

Also Beer of the infusion of Wormwood, and Rue is very good, and to eat of the
herb Sorrel, or of Wormwood, is likewise good to preserve from the Plague, and
also used in sauce, it is very good and cordial.

Also the outlandish Angelica roots are very good chewed in the mouth, and so
kept in the mouth a small root thereof, for the preserving from the infection
of the Plague.

Of outward Medicines to be cured in the curing of the Symptoms of this
Disease, to draw forward a Bubo, or Carbuncle.
By living fowls.
IN the beginning of the coming forth of a Bubo or Carbuncle, take a Cock, a
Hen, a Pigeon, or a Chicken alive, pull it bare about the rumpe, and vent, then
strew a little salt thin upon the Botch, then bind the Birds legs and wings as
easily as may be, and let her sit thereon, I mean the Botch, until she dye;
then let her be buried, and take another, and use her as the former, until
three or four be killed thereon; and it has been by experience found, that
when all the venom is drawn out, the last bird will live, if it be not hurt by
plucking or binding; which done, then apply some attractive remedy to draw it
forward; in which cupping*glasses, with and without scarification, as occasion
shall require, are convenient and good to bring forward a Bubo.

By Horse-leeches
And Horse-leeches are also very good to be set on the place; and if the
Leeches will take, it is a good sign of health: for which purpose, if you wet
the Botch with a little fair water and Sugar warmed, and somewhat wiped off
again, they will take the better.

By Pigeons dung prepared.
Also Pigeons dung warmed, and made into a Cataplasme or Poultis, with a little
Swines Fat and Turpentine mixed, and very warm applied twice a day, or Hens
dung in the like manner prepared, are very good attractive Medicines, in that
disease.

By live Fishes applied.
Paracelsus much commends the application of any like Fish to a Bubo, for the
drawing out the venom, the Fish being living, then suddenly slit open, and put
to the Bubo, where it may be had, as namely, either a Tench, a Carpe, Pike,
Roche, or Peach, three or four Fishes one after another, each kept three or
four hours on the place; and afterward some good attractive Cataplasme applied
thereunto, as namely, one of the herb Scabious.

A good Emplaster for the first, to ripen and to break a Bubo.
Receipts of Emplast. to be applied.
TAke Figgs and Raisins stoned, of each. ii. Sal Niter. iij. sour Leaven. iii.
Honey. i, with Oil of Camomile. iii. and of Milk vi.. make these into an
Emplaster; then spread it thick, warm it, and apply it to the Botch or
Carbuncle, it is a singular good attractive.

Another more forcible drawing Medicine, to draw out a Bubo or Carbuncle.
TAke the herb Crowes-foot, made into a Cataplasme or Poultis, only by
brusing it very soft with a Pestle in a Clout, and applying it, it is singular
good to draw it forward; but it will draw forceably, and blister the skin: Also
Mustard Seed and Pigeons dung well beaten together, with a little Swines fat
mixed, and very warm applied, do vehemently heat and attract forward a Botch or
Carbuncle.

A Cataplasme for a Carbuncle, very mild, Anodine, and very effectual.
Receipt of Cataplasmes.
TAke Plantane leaves, or roots in want of leaves, a good quantity, shred them
very small, then bruise them very well, and strain out the juice, and with
crumbs of household leavened Bread, boiled in the aforesaid juice, or in the
juice of Sorrel, is as good; make a Cataplasme thereof, adding in the boiling
some Barrowes grease, and apply it very warm to the place, and shift it three
or four times a day, it swageth mightily the pain, and draws unto it and yet
evaporateth the venom mightily: and the same does the juice of Scabious done,
or the herb Scabious stamped and boiled in new milk with crumbs of Bread.
Provided always, that in the making up thereof, or of any suppurating
Cataplasme, you forget not to put some fatness to it, as Oil of Lillies,
Camomile, or roses, or at the least Butter or Swines fat for a need: any one of
these are good, and may serve; but the first is best, and so the next: and be
ever sure to apply all Poulteses very warm.

Another Cataplasme to a Bubo.
Rec. OF the greater Comfrey hacked and beaten and boiled in Milk, with crumbs
of Bread, to a Cataplasme; then add a little Butter and a few Pruines boiled
therein, taking out their stones: the which Medicine does speedily digest and
suppurate a Bubo.

Anothnr attractive Medicine, to ripen a Botch.
Rec. A Great Onion, and having made a hole in the top thereof, and part of the
Onion taken out and filled with Mithridate, or Treacle, and roasted in embers,
let it be very warm applied to the Botch, and use it in form of a Cataplasme,
it is a very exceellent Anodine, swaging great pain, and proper for the
disease, to draw forth the venomous humors, as also utterly to quench the
malign power thereof.

I will here conclude touching outward applications in the cure of the Plague,
having at large elsewhere often recited, that concerning all The conclusion of
the Treatise.
the accidents pertaining to that noisome disease of the Plague, as Buboes,
Carbuncles, and Blains, that the Pestilential Fever being once removed, all
those symptoms do heal far sooner then any other Boyles or Sores do: for the
effecting whereof, the Reader has in this Treatise many good sovereign
Medicines, diverse of them of the Author his own long experience, whereon the
Surgeon may rely, if God please to be merciful to the Patient, in adding his
blessing to them: to the which end, let the Surgeon and the sick jointly
together, and each for himself, call upon God for a blessing upon the means,
and doubtless he will hear, and have mercy: for in truth, Ni Deus addiderit
viresque infunderet herbis,
Quid prodefl ditamus vel panacea juvat?


The Epilogue, or Conclusive part of this Treatise: Wherein the Author
relates, of his own sufficient experience, yet one Antidote more, for the
whole Cure of the Plague; being a Cordial Powder made of Gold, and by him
called Aurum vitae; whereon, by Gods mercy, the Patient may rely, as upon a
safe Antidote.
A Cordial Antidote, called Aurum vitae.
THis Medicine, at one only time given, takes away the Pestilentiall Fever,
and thereby cures the Plague, that the Patient is oftentimes well the next
day, it being given upon the first day of the Patients complaint, with the
observation of certain easy rules hereafter prescribed, concerning the order
of administering thereof, and it is an easy and safe Medicine, insomuch that
any infant, although it suck upon the mothers breasts, may safely take it, yea,
and easily may be induced to receive it into the body, for that it is of a very
small Dose, and is without any offense in taste or smell to any: also, it may
safely be given to any woman that is great with child, whereof diverse trials
have been had, with safety and comfort.

The Dose of Aurum vitae.
The dose or quantity sufficient thereof for a man or woman to take at any one
time, is but eight grains; and by that proportion, any discreet person may
gather what may be given to any younger person: viz. A child of two full
years old, may safely take two grains; and a child at four or five years old,
may take three grains; and one about eight years old, may take four grains;
one of foureteen years, or thereabouts, may take fix grains; and one of
eighteen, nineteen, twenty years old, or more, may safely take the full of
eight grains.

The effects of it.
And note, that this Medicine performs its operation only by Sweat, which is
the truest and safest way of the entrance upon that Cure (for the most part)
and also it does it without any moving the body either upwards or downwards;
namely, it causes no Vomits nor Stools, neither is it at all nauseous to the
stomach, nor any ways causing extraordinary thirst nor faintness, as some,
yea, and most of other Mineral Diaphoreticks do: But, on the contrary, the
Patient, when his sweating is over, shall manifestly feel cherefulnesse, as
being much refreshed thereby, with also an abatemant of his pains, and his
Fever will utterly be gone at the only once taking thereof.

The order in administering of Aurum vitae.
Neither shall the Patient need to be over-burthened with too many Clothes, to
force him or her to sweat, for the Medicine of it self sufficiently performs
that duty; only he may be ordered to have somewhat more to cover him, then the
ordinary Coverings he usually lies under; and the Room likewise ought to be
kept very warm, with a good fire therein, for that cold air in time of
sweating is obnoxtious and dangerous.

Of the continuance of its virtue.
And further, this Medicine may be kept seven whole years, and longer, if be;
for it being truly prepared of Gold, is permanent above other medicines, and it
loses not his virtue as vegetable Medicines do: but as Gold, that most
excellent Mineral, excels all other Minerals in price and true value; even
so does the truly prepared Medicines thereof as far exceed all other Mineral
Medicines in their virtues, as well in the preserving and defending man's body
from diseases, as also in curing their infirmities, when by Gods permission
they seize upon the bodies of men.

And whereas other Mineral Diaphoreticks commonly work two ways at once,
namely, both by Sweat, and also by Vomit, whereby they firecely distract the
Patient, and produce fearful symptoms, as if Death it self were at hand, by
the oppressing Nature in too violent expulsions at one time; yea, often times
by a third, viz, by purging also downward. But this most truly safe and easy
sweating ^itnesse Hippocrates Lib. 21. Aphor. ^. Quo natura vergit ^d loca
conferentia co ducere oporter.
Medicine performs as much as it promises pleasantly and without rigor, or
nauseous offense, as well in the Plague, as also in other contagious diseases,
where Nature striveth to thrust out her venomous enemy per poras cutis, or by
the sweatholes; and that course of curing, is of all other the safest, in a
contagious disease, at the first entrance, which then consists rather of
poisonous vapors, then of putrefaction of humors; in which regard, the
aforesaid course is safest: for it is a fearful course, yea, and a desperate
one, to purge in the beginning of this most contagious disease.

For Agues or Fevers that are contagious*
This Medicine is also approved good to be given in the beginning of any
contagious Ague or Fever, hot or cold; and for the most part, it cures it at
once giving, whether it appear to be Tertian, Quartane, Quotidian, or
intermittent Ague.

The course to be held in the taking of this Antidote.
FIrst, the Patient is to be demanded, if he had any stool that day, Nam mora
trahit periculum.
or the day before, and if yea, all is well, if otherwise, let him have only a
Suppository, that may move him once: and when he has had one stool thereby,
proceed without any delay to the administering of the Antidote, for delays are
dangerous. Wherefore, without any further protraction of time, go on to take
the antidote.

And the party that takes it ought to lie in his warm bed, fitted with
sufficient coverings, before he take it in, then let him take his medicine,
either mixed with some cordial thing, as a little Mithridate, ture Treacle,
conserve of Roses, or Quinces, or give it only mixed with the pap of an apple,
and so it is easiest taken in by infants, as I suppose, for it needs no
addition at all, to add virtue to it, only the addition chiefly serves, as a
vehicle to carry the Medicine without wasting into the stomach, for that it is
a powder small in quantity, and therefore subject to be wasted in taking.

Necessaries to be provided before the taking
Also the party that is to take it, must have ready made before hand, an
ordinary posset drink, of Ale and milk, to the quantity of a quart, very warm,
and when he has taken in his medicine, shortly after let him drink a
reasonable full draught of his posset, well warmed, and then lying on the one
side, let him be warm covered head, face and all, leaving full breathing scope,
and so in Gods name let him lie still, and sweat gently, if he can bear it 3 or
4 hours, were best, and ever as he thristeth, let him freely take warm posset
drink, which were best to be given him in some Cruet, or spout pot, that he
take no air, raising himself up in drinking, and when he has performed his
due sweating, let him be wiped dry, and shifted, and then give the patient some
warm broth.

And the next day he may by Gods mercy safely, as for himself, go abroad, but
for the day of his sweating, let him keep within, and give him food competent,
in a sparing quantity, such as is of a light digestion: and deny him not drink,
so that it be somewhat warm at the fire.

Thus much for those which take the medicine within 24 hours of the first
conplaint.

Item, unto such as the disease has taken greater hold of, namely that before
the receipt of the aforesaid medicine or Antidote, the patient have outward
tumors, as Botches, Carbuncles, or Blains not yet broken, nor ripe, if he take
the medicine as aforesaid, and sweat well upon it, the venom of the sores,
shall through Gods mercy, be so evaporated by his sweating, that they shall
decline of themselves, and not at all come forward, and if any after do break,
as being formerly suppurated, before the medicine took place, they shall as
ordinary boyles, easily and quickly heal, with every mean medicine.

Of two or three times taking if the disease require.
And notwithstanding, generally, one sweating serves, yet nevertheless, if
occasion be, the patient may safely take a second dose, or proportion, yea and
a third without danger, as diverse have done; and so he may be the more
confident of answerable success, namely, of the full and safe recovery of his
perfect health, by Gods mercy: nevertheless, if he find his desire by the
first, of reasonable health, let him not take a second, and if by a second, not
a third.

When any person, desirous to take the benefit of the aforesaid medicine,
having an Ague, or Fever, with paroxismes or fits, let him not take the
medicine in the time of the fit, but one full hour before the fit, and
rathermore, but if the Fever be continual, give it at any time in manner
aforesaid, although the patient be in distemper, and burning, for if he take
it, and his burning change into sweating, which the virtue of this Medicine
usually produces, the fear of death in the Patient, is half over.

And further of a truth I can affirm, that I have cured some by this last
mentioned antidote, that had the pestilence, or spots of the Plague, vulgarly
called Gods Tokens upon them, and are yet living witnesses.

And whereas our blessed Savior, as appears in the Holy Scriptures, by a
Parable declares, that a certain man gave to sundry of his servants, Talents
to trade or occupy with, to one more, to another less, and afterward (as He
might justly do) He exacted an account from each of them, highly blaming that
servant who had not profited his Master by his Talent, but had hid it in the
ground.

Also, in another place He shows his dislike of lighting a Candle and putting
it under a bushel, advising us rather to put it on a Candlestick, that it may
give light to others.

And further, we are commanded not to forget to do good, and to distribute, and
that whilst we have time.

All which precepts, together considered, I esteemed it my duty (as commanded)
to employ my short talent of healing, which God has lent me, to the utmost for
his Glory, and the good of others; and for that reason, as in part I have
thought fit here following to publish by testimony, what good the aforesaid
antidote has done already, only in Westminster and Northampton, not
accounting at all whom without testimony it has healed, which has bin very
many, more then by testimony is fitting for me to produce.

THE Copy of a Certificate, concerning the Virtue of the last precedent
Antidote, called Aurum vitae; from the Justices, Minister, and other the
Officers of the Parish of S. Margarets Westminster, as it was by them presented
to the Right Honorable, Henry Earl of Manchester, L. Privy Seal, etc. which by
his Lordship was presented to the rest of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
We the Inhabitants of the Parish of S. Margarets in Westminster, whose names
are here under written, do most humbly certify your Lordships, and that upon
our own knowledge, that in this time of visitation of the Plague, Fevers,
Agues, and other Diseases, which have been very grievous and great afflictions
unto us: It pleased Almighty God, by the hands of one John Woodall, Surgeon
of the East India Company, and of his Majesty's Hospital of Saint
Bartholomewes, in London, a learned, judicial, and expert man, which said John
Woodall, about five weeks before Michaelmas last, delivered unto some of us,
who were Officers in this said Parish, an Antidote composed in Pills, which he
had made up, with direction how they should be administered to such as had the
Plague, Fevers, Agues, or any such violent Diseases, that then remained
amongst us; which said Pills have been employed very carefully, according to
his said directions, and administered to threescore several persons, some of
this new Feavour, some of the small Pox, some Agues, and some other Diseases,
but most to them that were visited with the Plague, which had Risings, Sores,
Carbuncles, Blaines, and were certainly known to have that fearful Disease, all
which Persons recovered, and not one of all them that has taken the said
Pills, dyed, (thanks be given to Almighty God) neither can we do less, then
publish the great skill, judgment, and charity of the said John Woodall, by
whose industry and care, this Antidote has wrought so good effect, and did
bestow them freely, without one penny of recompense for the same.

Westminster, the 6. of October. 1638. Pet. Heywood. Robert White, sub-Curate.
Thomas Mar. Richard Protter. Church Wardens.

Copia Vera.

William Hawkins. Edward Martin. Tho. Kirk.




A Copy of a Certificate, from the Mayor and Justices of Northampton, with a
further Reference to the Report of one M. Wyly, an experienced Surgeon of the
said Town.
Villa Northhampton.
We the Mayor and Justices within the said Town of Northampton, in the County
of Northampton, whose names are here under written, do hereby certify, that
upon due examination and inquiry taken within this Liberty, we do find, that in
the late Visitation of the Plague, Fevers, Agues, and other Diseases, which
have been very grievous and heavy unto us: It pleased Almighty God, by the
hands of one John Woodall, Surgeon of the East India Company, and of his
Majesty's Hospital of Saint Bartholomews in London, a learned, judicial, and
expert man, besides others: Which said John Woodal sent in Summer last to one
William Wyly, a Surgeon in Northampton, an Antidote composed in Pills, which
he had made up, with directions in Print how they should be administered to such
as had the Plague, Fevers, Agues, or any such violent diseases, that then were
violent in this Liberty; which said Pills were employed to diverse persons very
carefully according to his directions, as we find, and administered; and that by
means thereof diverse recovered, and none of them dyed (thanks be to God) there:
As by a Note of some particulars, under the hand of the said William Wyly may
appear.

In testimony whereof, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this three and
twentieth day of January, 1638. Richard Fowler, Mayor. William Eollis. Francis
Fisher.


The Copy of a Report of one M. Wyly, a Surgeon of Northampton, concerning the
former Certificate.
Good Sir,
WHereas about the beginning of July last, when our Town of Northampton was
much visited with the Sickness, you sent me a Cordial Powder, of eight Grains
to the Dose, for the Cure of the Plague, desiring from me an account of the
operation thereof; I thought fit to signify unto you, that I have found it
exceeding good for the said Disease, far above my expectation, having
administered the said Powder to the parties hereunder named, and diverse others,
too long to recite.

And first, I gave it to one Symonds son, a Plummer, who was dangerously sick
of the Plague, and by once taking of that powder, was perfectly cured.

His Mother presently after falling sick of the Plague, and in great danger,
was cured by taking it twice.

Likewise to one Brownes daughter, her Father and Mother being dead of the
Plague, and she her self dangerously sick, and prayed for in the Church, who by
once taking of it was perfectly cured.

Also one Widow Allets Maid, her daughter being dead before of the Plague, and
the Maid dangerously sick, by the taking of one Pill was cured and well the
very next day.

Also I gave one Pill to a Boy of James Fairnes, and it cured him.

Likewise, I gave one Pill to one Good-Wife Jackson, a very old woman, and she
was cured therewith.

Likewise, to one Brownes Wife I gave a Pill, and she was cured therewith.

Likewise, to a Child of one Taubots I gave a Pill, and he was cured therewith.

Likewise, I gave a Pill to one Mistress Huicksmans daughter, and she was well
cured thereby.

And to a Maid of M. Hills, who had a putrid Feavour, and was cured thereby.

Likewise, to one Mistress Coopers son I gave one Pill, who was cured of the
Plague thereby the very next day.

Likewise, to M. Smiths daughter, being very sick of the Plague twice, and was
twice made well the next day following.

Likewise, to one Spooners daughter, being sick of the Plague, and she was made
well the next day.

And to a Child of one Packwoods I gave a Pill, being sick of a putrid Feavour,
who voided Worms of above half a yard long, and was cured.

To one Goody Smith, a Maulsters Wife, I gave two Pills, she being very sick of
the Plague; by the first, she had a Swelling appeared; and the next day I gave
her another of the same Pills, which provoked her again to sweat, whereupon the
Swelling vanished away, and she became thereby perfectly cured.

I could recite diverse other Cures in like manner by your Powder performed, but
for troubling you with tedious repetitions: Wherefore I will thus conclude in
the commendations thereof; that I administered it unto many, and of all those I
gave it unto, that either had the Plague, or any contagious or putrid Feavours,
it cured them, and none that took it dyed under my Cure,

Yours to be commanded, William Wyly.

To the Reader.
IF the Reader perhaps, as by a former promise in part made at the first
Edition of my Surgeons Mate, do expect a description of every the Cordials,
Antidotes, and other the Compositions in the former, and also in (...) his last
Edition mentioned; the Author desires to be excused for his omission therein,
for that since that first Edition there has been, by Authority of his
Majesty, a public Dispensatory put forth, called Pharmacopeia Londinensis,
containing all such Medicines as the learned Doctors of the College have
selected, as fittest for their practices in London: in which learned Work, most
of the Medicines by me in this Treatise mentioned, are to be found very truly
and exactly set down the Compositions of them; to which, he is now, as
necessitated, forced to refer the Reader: and yet in this Treatise the Author
has presumed to explain diverse good Receipts. But the Work being on the sudden
to say, (aut nunc aut nunquam) hasted to the Press, there could be no
alteration admitted, neither time for addition. But nevertheless, for the
prescribed Antidote, called Aurum Vitae, the Author will be ready, whilst God
permits him life, and as also he hops that his Posterity after him will not
fail to prepare and have ready the said Antidote, for any person that shall
please to make use of it, ready prepared, put up, and sealed, at such
reasonable rates, as no private man can afford to make it so cheap, although he
knew the Work: and so he takes leave, committing the Benevolent Reader to Gods
protection.

From his House in Broadstreet, London, at the time of the first Edition
hereof, JOHN WOODAL, Master in Surgerie.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF Gangrena, and Sphacelos: BUT Chiefly for the Amputating or
Dismembring of any Member in the mortified part. Against the Doctrine of the
most ancient Writers, being approved, safe, and good. According to the long
Practice and Experience of John Woodal, Master in SURGERY, Surgeon of his
Majesty's Hospital of S. Bartholomewes, and Surgeon General to the East India
Company: But under benedicite (namely) as imploring and ascribing all the
Honor and Praise unto God alone, for his favor and mercies, touching the
salubrious effects thereof.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Nicholas Bourn, 1653.

A PREFACE TOUCHING The definition of Gangrena.
Courteous Reader,
HAving in part engaged my self by promise to my good Friends, before the
Edition of this my work, to explain to the World, amongst other parts of
Surgery, the manner of Amputating or cutting off, of putrid members, in the
mortified part: I after considered with my self, that I could not properly
proceed therein, except by the defining of a Gangrene, in the first place,
because a Gangrene is ever the fore runner of a Sphacelus, and the material
cause of Amputation, either in the general body of Man, or in any the
particular parts thereof, and from the which, no Animal creature, no not Man
himself can decline from.

Ab initio statutum est omnibus semel mori. For from the beginning, all men are
constituted once to dye, and yet there is an interim for each man, of not being
in health, neither really dead, but quafi moriens, vel semi mortuus, dying, or
half dying. In the which i^terim, or intermission of time, a man may by an
accident be said to be in such a distemper, as he may be gangrenated, or in a
Gangrena, as the Artist terms it, either in part, or in all; and yet by the
permission of God, and by the help of Art, that supposed dying man, or member
of man, may receive cure, and be hea^d again, although in man's judgment, not
well versed in the mystery of healing, he be supposed to be at the gates of
death: Even so a Gangrene, presaging a Sphacelus, may in some cases be cured,
as daily experience shows, that diverse Gangrenes receive cure; so that to
conclude, a man that has a Gangrene, in one or more parts of his body, until
it be taken away, that man is ev^r as it were, under the Shadow of Death.

Nam Mors sequitur ut umbra, Death attends us as our shadow. Thus much
briefly, by way of Preface, touching the Gangrene.

A Treatise of Gangrena.
A Definition of a Gangrene, and the several causes thereof
A Gangrene in his progress, may justly be termed an effect destroying nature,
and therefore against nature; it is a disease woeful, painful, horrible, and
fearful to mankind, and justly so, for that it often ends in Sphacelus,
which is the destruction of the part affected, if not of the whole body.

Causes.
The causes thereof are infinite for number; but to speak in brief, in one
general term for all, how the d^sease comes first to invade m^ns body, it
ever proceeds ex intemperie, which is, of distemper, ever by force invading
nature, this intemperies or distemper, may be said generally two ways to be
taken, either

Externally, or Internally.

Externally.
It may be termed external, or from without, as well when it proceeds by
external violence of the air, by thunder and lightning, or otherwise by the
mighty and immediate hand of God, as it does to many, or by feavours violent,
contagious, or pestilential, as Anthrace, the small Pox or the like, whose
secret causes with the reasons thereof, are hidden in God, and therefore ^y
man's wisdom are not to be found out, although some affirm, the Conjunction or
Opposition of the Planets have power or give cause hereunto, according to the
Poet, Astra regunt homines, sedregit Astra D^us: The Stars govern man's body,
and God governs the stars; or it proceeds of outward violence, namely,
sometime by man's hand, his intention or invention as by great wounds; whereof
great hemorrage, and so as by a just consequent a Gangerne follows, as also
by a violent contusion given, either by violence of weapons, as by wounds made
by Gunshot, Swords, Spears, knives, etc. And oftentimes by obstructions in
the blood, sometimes caused by stripes, etc. whereby fractures of bones,
distortions of joints, contusious, inflammations, Convulsions, great and sudden
fears, and other distempers proceed, among which great accidents, Gangrena is
to be feared will be one, and not the least, although it may be called one of
the last, and it may also happen by the fall of a house, a tree, any weighty
thing, yea, by a tyle, a stone, by the bite of any venomous Beast, of a Dog,
and innumerable other accidents, according to Gods secret appointment or
permission.

Nam Accidit in puncto quod non reparatur in anno. That may happen in a moment,
that cannot be repaired in a year. And further a distemper may fall out to be a
disease of the similar parts, deprived of their natural and proper
temperament, this deprivation 1. What a distemper is. Simple distemper.
Compound distemper.
is caused two ways; either by a simple distemper, by reason of the excess of
one quality, viz. of heat, cold, dry, or moisture; or by a compound distemper,
by reason of the extuberance or over bearing of the two qualities together, hot
and moist, hot and dry* cold and moist, and cold and dry: again a distemper is
either a fault of the mere quality Phlogosis.
alone, viz. an inflammation, or it has an adju^ct f^ult of the humors, as a
Phlegmon; again many times a Gangrene proceeds Phlegmon.
from a surfeir, or a distemper of fullness, or inanition which may proceed
Intemperies.
by starving, or recessus of dew nutriment to satisfy nature.

A second definition of a Gangrene.
Second definition of the Gangrene.
A Gangrene is a beginning of putrefaction, being a dreadful Symptom of a
disease in any member of the body, and shows it self for the most part by
inflammation with great dolor, the grieved How to know it.
part often appearing of a sad, dusky, reddish color or livid, though not
always, and being for the most part tumifieed or swollen, the pain being to
the judgment of the Patient so intolerable, as if there were a fire-coal
burning therein, or the like in effect. and for that reason the German Writers
call this by the violent heat of the disease the Heisbrant, or the hot burning
coal, for in truth a Gangrene is of a burning, sudden, fierce, destroying
nature, and therefore against nature, being a disease dreadful to mankind, as
is said, and justly so, for that it menaceth to the part affected, if not to
the whole body, eminent destruction, yea, death it self, except speedy remedy
by Gods mercy be at hand.

The causes of this disease, as aforesaid, are many, for number whereof The
causes of Gangrene.
I will set down but part, viz. It may proceed either from great hemorrage
mentioned, that is, exceeding effusion of blood and spirits, or by a distemper
of the four humors, proceeding either by Repletion, or Inanition.


Or by extreme erosion or corrosion of caustic Medicines or corrosive humors.
By imbecility of nature, as by weakness of infants and old age, by a venomous
and poisoned blood, as in contagious times, and namely when the small Pox or
Plague reigns, Small Pox or Plague may pr^duc^ Gangrena's.
causing sudden putrefaction of humors: also it may proceed by great burnings
and scaldings, by overmuch hunger and thirst, by the pricking of a nerve or of
nerves, by a Feavour precedent, by a Frost, and also by extreme cold; by the
bitings of venomous Beasts, or Worms, or mad Dogs; by want of good concoction
or humors, by obstructions of, or from any the principal members of the body,
as the Heart, Brain or Liver, causing Convulsions, Palsies, Dropsies, Scorbutes
or the like, which oft-times termine in Gangrena, and after a further time they
conclude in Sphacelus.

Also Gangrenes proceed by great inc^sed wounds, and namely, amongst other
wounds, contused wounds, chiefly I mean those of Gunshot, also sometimes by
fractures and dislocations, also by Fistulaes and inveterate Ulcers, by
unreasonable stripes; as with a Bulls Pisle, or a thong cut from an Elephants
skin, much used for correction in Poland, Hungary, and the Turkish Dominions,
finally from all interceptions, intersections or interruptions of the spirits,
what, or wheresoever may produce a Gangrena.

De Gangrena, A third Definition gathered from learned Authors.
The third Definition of Gangrena.
A Gangrene is a partial mortification of a member, commonly by reason of a
phlegmon, it may be said to be partial in that the part affected, so long as
the member is not thoroughly dead, but has in it self still a sense and feeling
of pain, and therefore not altogether desperate, although yet it be tending to
mortification, and so unless there be some sudden help in the staying thereof,
it will soon turn to a total and perfect mortification, after which it may no
more be termed a Gangrene, but is called of the Grecians (Sphacelus) (...),
because of the extinction of Sphacelus.
the natural heat therein, and of the Latins it is called (Sideratio)
Sideratio.
a total and perfect putrefaction, and moreover of the later Writers
(Esthiomenon) in that it is so sudden piercing and penetrating unto Esthiomenon.
the bone, and does as it were overcome the whole man, so as again it may be
concluded, that the difference between a Gangrene and Sphacelus, as is said,
is; a Gangrene is truly termed an unperfect Dif. in Gang. and Sphacel.
mortification in the fleshy parts only, but Sphacelus is a perfect and total
privation of sense, being a mortification, not only of the fleshy parts, but
also of the nervous parts, even unto the very bone, yea, and of the bone it
self also. The causes of a Gangrene Causx Gangr.
by some learned Writers are reduced to three; the first, is when as a member
cannot receive the vital spirits proper or natural due to it from the heart by
the Arteries, by reason of a dissolution in the mixture or harmony of the
member, caused externally by extreme frigidity, as sometimes it chances to be
in a very cold and sharp Winter, also by the inconsiderate and too too
immoderate and rash refrigeration of a Phlegmon, as also extreme calidity, as
by scalding Liquor, or through some poisonous disposition in nature, invested
in the parts affected, all or any of which do or may sufficiently extinguish
the natural heat thereof; if wholesome remedies in time be not applied, a
Gangrene may justly be expected to follow.

Another cause is, when as the vital spirits in any member are obstructed,
suffocated, and finally extinguished, by reason of some obdurate, schirrous
hardness and constipation of the Veins, arteries or pores of the skin, as in
venomous or pestilential Apostumes or Carbuncles is often seen, so that little
or none of the venomous matter contained in the Apostume or venomous tumor,
can be digested or receive discussion, nor be brought to suppuration by apt
Medicines, whereby Nature being above her strength oppressed, and Art not
sufficiently succouring, a Gangrene is produced.

Another cause may be by extreme strong ligature, through the indiscretion of
unworthily termed Artists, or of unexpert Artists, as too often is manifest,
and sometimes by compressions, or other interceptions of blood or spirits, by
which the vital spirits should be transported to the member grieved.

The signs of a Gangrene, are these; an extinction of the lively Sign of Gangr.
color which was in the precedent Phlegmon, grievous pain and continual
pulsation in the diseased part, apparent by the Arteries, being at the first
very sensible, but afterward declining their due force, the part agrieved
seeming for the most part, in color to be blackish, bluish, or of a duskie or
livid color, yea, sometime putrid, and being opened, a filthy Ichor and of an
unsavory smell proceeding from it. Thus much of the signs.

Of the Cure of Gangrena.
Cure.
TO the performance of the cure of this disease, there must be Symptoms
thereof; and lastly, of the removing the cause, which if Axiom of the
Philosopher, Abla^a causa, tollitur effectus; but that must be expected in his
due time, in which there must be first considered, What to be considered in the
cure of a Gangrene. Diet to be used for a Gangrene.
whether the disease proceed of repletion, and if so, then a general evacuation
with a cooling and spare diet must be prescribed the Patient: Viz. Water, with
the milk of Almonds, and thin brothes with cooling herbs, as Lactuca,
Spinachia, Portulaca, Sorr^l, or the like; as also advising with the learned
Physician, where time and place serves: Barley waters also are good, and the
sick must be forbidden all wine and strong drink, and must be contented with
posset drink, Barley water, and small Beer: it were also fitting that there
were prescribed to the patient some preparative medicaments, as these, Syrup.
Acetos. Preparatives necessa^y.
Simp. Syrup. Endiviae, Syrup. Citri, Violar. any of these mixed with waters as
may be convenient in such a disease, and after these preparatives, may be used
such purgatives as may purge and cleanse the blood, viz. Confect. Hamech. Caria
costrirum, Diacatholicon, Cassia fistula, or some one of them, being according
to Art performed.

Phlebotomy useful.
And if you perceive further occasion, you may reiterate the use of any of
them: and further, you may not omit the use of Phlebotomy, scarrification and
application of Ventoses, Leeches or Vesicatories upon or nigh the part
affected, and according to the Patient his strength, let him blood moderately:
and observe, that in scarrification regard is to be had, concerning the
gangrenated part, whether it penetrate or be superficial, and so accordingly is
scarrification to be used: as for the application of Leeches, it may be done
upon any part thereto adjoining, or upon the part affected it self: and further
note, that if a Gangrene follow a contusion, for the most part it proceeds
either by the vehemence of the contusion, whereby eruption of the capillar
veins, yea, and the larger veins also, blood is forced into the Muscles
confusedly, as by the Echymosis may appear of the evil disposition of the
Patient; or it may also proceed for want of a Surgeon to apply fit and
artificial applications in due time: not seldom, under favor, by overhard
ligature.

But if the Gangrene appear to have proceeded by inanition, that case is
pitiful, and the cure very doubtful; but nevertheless, where it so falls
out, all nutritive and comfortative remedies are to be appointed, as namely, if
it proceed of cold either in frost, or by want of due and sufficient food,
consideration is to be had by adding warmth of food and raiment, with cordial
and comfortive remedies: also the Artist must truly inform himself, whether
this disease be a Gangrene, or a Sphacelus, whether a partial or a total
privation and mortification, with the utter loss of the sense of the fleshy
and nervous parts; and if he find sense in the parts, there is life and hope.

Rulis to be observed if the Gangrene is caused by venomous diseases.
But suppose a Gangrene proceeds of a venomous cause, as many times it does,
and namely, in time of contagion, as of Carbuncles in the Plague, the small
Pox, or by other malignant Fevers, when as the Artist may neither purge his
Patient, nor open a vein safely, but with fear, except he may be well
warranted, either by good and grave advice of the expert, where such may be
had; in want of which, the Artist ought to search by authority of the most
ancient Writers, that he can come at, for the avoiding of the eminent danger of
death, to ensue upon his Patient, and to go warily in the want of better
advice: What to be observed if it be caused by fulness^.
viz. If the grief proceed of fullness, which seldom it does at Sea, or in
Camps, then his first rule in Art must be, as is said, that a thin diet and
cooling be prescribed his Patient, and that he be admitted no wine nor strong
drink: also that he may be appointed some cooling Julep to be made him, namely,
if the Patient be in Ship or Camp, he is there confined and constrained to the
Surgeons Chest, and then let the Surgeon examine his provisions; and if he find
he have any cooling waters and Syrups fitting thereunto, he may proceed to take
as follows:

A receipt to be administered to the Gangrenated.
. Aq. Lactuc. Acetos. Endiviae, Buglos, Borag. Frag. Plantag. Lujulae. or some
one or more of the most fitting aforesaid waters, viz.

. Aq. Lujula, 2 l. Sir. Limon. vel Violar.. ij. Ol. Vuri^l. gut. 12. The Dose
of it.
Misce, give the Patient every two or three hours, two or three spoonfuls
hereof, the glass being ever shaken when it is poured out; and if he has not
been at stool that day in which he is to take the Julep, you may give him a
Supposi^ory: and having had one stool, give him a The Receipt of a Diaphoretick.
Diaphoretick, viz.. Aurum vitae gr. 8. or Mithridat.. 1. Elect. de Ovo, 1.
Confect. Alcherm. ss. Ol. Vitriol. gut. 4. in Aq. Borag. Lujulae Acetes. vel
Buglos. viz. of any one of these, 4. with Sir. Limon. Citri. Lujulae. The order
of the applying of it.
Violar. or some of them, Misce, fiat haustus, give it the Patient being laid
warm in bed, and cover him warm, and provoke him to sweat gently; and as you
find his strength, continue his sweating for an hour, two hours or more: which
done, keep him in a moisture one other hour at the least; which ended, let him
cool and dry paulatim, and warily, and having so done and refreshed himself,
till four or five hours ended, then you may, if you see cause, give him the
like Cordial again, and proceed again as before, to sweat him the second time,
and give him 8. grains of Aurum vitae ^or a Diaphoretick: which done, you may
then admit him rest and respite again for a fitting time, wherein you may
advise what further is requ^site to be done, in which time, not omitting in any
case, both before his laying down to sweat and after, as also betwixt his
sweating, ever to apply all fitting topical helps, viz. by scarifications and
hot fomentations of some good lixivium, such as aftrr the taking off members in
the mortified place, hereafter are described. Thus much in brief of the
Gangrena.

A Definition of Sphacelus, and the cure thereof from some ancient Writers, to
show the Reader their opinions and judgments thereof, for that some Artists
have grounded their judgments, that their relations are according to good
practice; and therefore are to be imitated.
A Sphacelus, says Falopius, and likewise Fabritius, is an affect of a part
already utterly mortified, and therefore not to be cured but by amputation,
that the whole body come not to corruption thereby, Extremum genus morbi
requirit extrema remedia.
and this abscission is not done without great danger of death: for often, even
in the instant act of amputation, the Patient dies by the profusion of blood
and spirits, wherefore the strength of the sick is to be considered: and
Cornelius Celsus alleges, Cap. 25. The opinion of Celsus concerning Sphacelus.
lib. 5. that in his time they used to take off the Sphacelated member, by
cutting the flesh round about unto the bone, in the whole part, near the rotten
or sphacelated part, and cutting ever in the live flesh, not leaving any of the
mortified flesh untaken away; further Celsus (say Another way of amputation.
they) does admonish us in this work, that the skin and also the flesh, be
brought and drawn upwards, that the bone may be the better covered by some of
the said part, in the healing of the stump; but the same Author confesses
also, that by such abscission causing exceeding pain, with over-large effusion
of blood and spirits, death usually follows: therefore to avoid hemorrage,
they must presently use actual Cauteries to burn the parts adjacent, in which
may be conjectured, how cruel that course is to the Patient, and uncomfortable;
and prepare the upper part thick enough, to be a firm cover to the vessels.

But after himself not approving that course, he says, that he took another
way of curing, which as he said, happily succeeded; by which work no profusion
of blood happened, because no blood flows from a mortified part, neither is
grief moved therein; but lest the corruption should spread it self further,
(says the said Author) I burned the putrefied part, remaining every where
with red-hot Irons, that were heavy and well burnt, until the Patient did feel
the heat of the fire, and that he suffered some small pain; and the rather they
did it, they write, because the same operation is very profitable, and
therefore burned ever some of the sound flesh also, because the putrefaction is
best to be drawn out by a red-hot Iron, as I suppose, says he, which is
apparent to the eye, for the humors are apparently seen to boil about the
Iron; and likewise the weakness of the parts considered by burning, it is
fortified, the adjacent parts being freed from many noxious humors thereby, so
that the weak part receives strength, and within a few days begins to
separate the living from the dead part, and so afterward the dead part falls
off, and the living part is conserved. And this manner in my judgment, says
Fabritius, is best; but this Author conceives Fabritius to be but a relater,
not a true practiser of the aforesaid course in amputation, for that that work
is so terrible and cruel nevertheless.

In this recited Chapter you have the opinions of some of the ancient The way
of amputation made better by experien^^.
and learned Writers touching Sphacelated members, and the manner of the
amputation of those times, since which the Art has been (by Gods favor) very
much illustrated, so that where the complaint formerly was, that by reason of
great hemorrage, namely, the large effusion of blood and spirits in the work of
their amputations, many of their Patients perished under the Surgeons hands in
the very act of amputation: I may to Gods glory, and so justly do I affirm for
a truth, that for the space of near 24 years I have been a Surgeon in the
Hospital of Saint Bartholomews, where I have taken off, and helped to take off
many more then one hundred of legs and arms, besides very many hands, and
fingers; amongst all which, not one of them all has dyed in the time of their
dismembering, nor afterward, through the exceeding effusion of blood, in the
operation, that ever I could gather or conceive: and furthermore, I affirm,
that not above four of each twenty dismembered, but lived to have been healed,
and have been delivered whole out of the Hospital, notwithstanding whatsoever
their diseases have been, and for that horrid cruel course mentioned by the
aforesaid recited Ancients, of burning the ends of the stumps in the the
tender, living, and most sensible parts, since I have known the Art of Surgery,
which has been by the space of 50 years, that I have used it, I never saw it
used by any in England, nor elsewhere; and yet I will not deny but the best
Artist that is, in the first work of amputation, or in the second dressing of
the Patient after amputation, may be so put to it, that if he provide not
himself of a cauterizing button, he may heartily wish he had had a small button
ready, for fear of the loss of his Patient, upon an unexpected flux; and
howsoever, it is a good Art, and safe to my knowledge, both for the Patient and
Surgeon, and but fitting for him, so to be provided for fear of need: only I
advise it to be privately absconded for the reputation sake. Thus much of the
manner of amputation from the Ancients. This precedent D^finition I have takes
out of some of the ancient Authors, from their own words verbatim, that the
Reader may consider how far it differs from the scope hereafter to be handled.

An Introduction to amputation, but chiefly for the mortified place.
LOving Reader, the general opinion of the most ancient, as also of the modern
Writers, yea, and of the best Artists with us, at this present living, as far
as I can gather or conceive, is, that the fafest and best way for the cure of
sphacelated or putrid dead members, is to amputate them in the sound part, and
not in the putrid; and their general reasons are, to prevent that none of the
putrid, venomous or gangrenated blood, or spirits should remain untaken away,
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
for fear it should infect the sound, and so consequently confound the whole
mass of the blood and spirits, and to conclude, kill the whole body; but the
horrid pain the patient thereby susteineth, with also the great uncertainty of
his life, after his extreme sufferings, caused me ever to mislike my own works
therein, yea, although the success, for the most part, was answerable to my
desire.

And I further confess, tradition took place with me in the Hospital of S.
Bartholomews, in part, where I was, as is said, a Surgeon, for many years, yea,
and that in my whole practice there, as also with the rest of the Surgeons, my
partners, until after, reading some Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest
per pauciora.
ancient Authors, I conceived; that I might in some cases save a man's life, by
amputating in the sphacelated part: notwith standing the general vate and
tenent aforesaid, to the contrary; whereupon by accident, about the year 1617.
having a fit Patient, which had a mortified leg, and was as feeble and weak, as
possible a living creature might, be insomuch I was of opinion, upon the first
view of him, that Natures third was at hand spun out in him, so that it was
even sin and pity for me to hinder natures course, or to shorten her course,
in hasting it with violent Art, and namely by dismembring him in the whole
part, who had not blood and spirits in such a case, according to the word, to
keep life and soul together, but by consequent, he must dye in the very act;
and therefore I confess, I intended the Patient should dye by Nature, rather
then to be killed by Art, ever esteeming it a great sin to take away a limb
from any creature, but with some good hope thereby to preserve his life: But
again considering Christian duty, and that I was tied to do my best, to
preserve life, to the utmost in my power, I conceived there might be
peradventure yet some small hope of life, if I could without pain to the weak
Patient, or loss of blood, rid away his rotten member; so I in short
concluded to take it off in the dead place, which as all men may conceive, I
without pain quickly effected, and by Gods mercy, the next day, I found that my
poor Patient, after the loathsome stinck of his putrid limb was removed from
him, he began to cheer up, and so after, from day to day was refreshed more and
more, and nature as it were rejoiced, even as a tree refreshes after the dead
boughs are pruned off, so my poor Patient grew more and more lusty and
cheerful; and to conclude, in the space of 10. weeks, he was perfectly healed,
and being then sound and lusty, gave thanks to the Governor of the Hospital,
in full payment of his cure, and so departed from the Hospital upon a leg of
wood, he then being fair and fat, and very formal; the which blessing of health
to the poor man, and light of knowledge, by that experience to me, did put me
in mind of my duty in just thankfulness to God, and also it animated me
further to proceed in the like practice upon many others, which since that
time, I have with good success, to Gods glory, in the same manner well healed;
I then also began with my self to consider, and as it were to question the
reason, why this latter Age of ours, consisting of more pregnant wits then
former Ages, and that by good reason their judgments should in Art far exceed
the former, as having had the experience, light, knowledge, and examples from
all the precedent Ages; I say, I wondered they should so clean have lost, or
omitted and passed by so worthy a work of practice as the aforesaid was, it
being of such good consequence in a Commonwealth, and to let dye in oblivion,
yea, and not only so, but also to brand it with pitiful inhibitions, and
conjectured slanders, and unfeasablenesse, for I cannot see how any man can
justly aver a rule, to be so punctual, or so generally absolute, that it may
admit no exception, for even this so ancient and great a rule, I hope the
Reader will acknowledge is confuted, or anon will fully be by apparent
practice, and common experience, (as namely) one way, if the Reader do but call
to mind the works of Gale, a late worthy Writer, he may find that he affirms,
and by sound arguments well maintains, that wounds made by Gunshot were not
venomous, as diverse ancient Writers formerly had affirmed; and if so, how
stands it then, that the amputation of sphacelated members, proceeding by
Wounds made with Gunshot, not venomous, that the amputation of such performed
in the wounded or mortified parts, should of themselves be so poisonous or
venomous, that the whole body should suffer thereby? but I suppose one should
affirm it were so, yet the contrary by true, and yet visible practice, is
apparent, and to be proved, yea, and further by good practice, amputation in
the mortified part, is experienced to be good practice in more venomous cases,
then in For example.
Gunshot: for my self dismembered a young man of a leg, in the putrid part, the
mortification proceeding by a violent pestilential Feavour, which many justly
deemed to be venomous, far beyond a wound made by Gunshot, yea, even venomous
in the highest degree, and yet that leg being so taken off, the venomous
disposition thereof did cease, and did not offend at all, but the Patient was
quickly healed, and if the case be cleared by experience, that the venom from
a mortified member, in the Plague; returns not to hurt the Body, though such
a member be abscissed in the mortified part, in case of the Plague, how then
can it well stand, that the aforesaid general rule holds true, Ense recidendum
est, ne pars sincera trahatur?

And yet further I desire to instance to the Reader, a case that will, as I
conceive, satisfy him fully; but if not all men, yet at the least, every
understanding Artist, that mortified flesh left on upon amputation, or
otherwise let remain, without amputating, until nature being strong of her
self, have cast it off, does no way endanger the life of Mortified flesh not
presently h^z^ding the life of the Patient.
the Patient, no not in the least, and this is very familiarly known, and daily
almost observed, or may be observed to be, and that it does not at all
prejudice that which is sound, the which may be often seen in poor people, men,
women and children, but most commonly in poor children, who by Gangrenes upon
their toes, whole feet, fingers, and hands, yea, and on their legs, and arms,
proceeding of cold, or by weakness of nature, where sustenance, diet, and
natural warmth is wanting, does no way overthrow the body, for that the said
parties of indigent and poor being, brought into an Hospital in London or
elsewhere, where that there is no need of competent food, and warmth, nature of
her self being helped by the only administration of food and warmth, with
small, or sometimes no help of Art at all, Nature does of her self exfoliate*
and cast off the part putrid, from the whole part, by a separation in Nature,
without offending or indangering the parts thereunto adjacent at all.

And I my self may truly say, have from more then a hundred persons, cut off
from some a leg, yea, both the legs, a hand, a foot, a toe or toes, an arm,
a finger, etc. of such rotten members, being all dismembered in the rotten part,
of which not one has dyed in the cure, neither has the mortification spread
it self any further at all, many of which, if occasion were, I could produce,
at this time of penning this relation, I dare affirm twenty for living
witnesses, and also I have had sometimes old folks, and young children, which
only by weakness, and for want of food competent, deficiency in nature, as
aforesaid, their limbs have gangrenated, and some of these, if no help had bin
at hand, would have fallen off, yea, and of some my self have pinched off
fingers, and sawed asunder the greater bones, when all the flesh was by nature
separated, rotted, and fallen away of it self, and yet that rotten, stinking,
or cadaverous part, did no way infect the sound, otherwise then by the stinck,
and the truth hereof each Artist in practice may not deny, and can fairly
witness; then if granted, away with the conjectural supposition, that the
sphacelated part has any property active, or faculty in it self, to corrupt
otherwise then each other cadaverous thing has, namely, by his Fetour, in want
of being removed, it may noysomly be offensive, but not to the height, as to
kill the Patient: And yet I will believe per contra, that neither the one nor
the other way of amputation, no not with all the art of man can save from the
grave, by any amputation in some cases, which, although by all men must be
granted, yet the practice of amputating in the putrid part must be held good:
as for example, which I trouble your patience with, about 14. years past,
there was a Minister, named M. Poston, a Reader in the Chapel of For example.
Suttons Hospital, in London, who had a corn upon one of his little toes, that
troubled him, he being otherwise at that time in perfect health, and himself at
evening going to bed, pared the said corn with his penknife, that it bled a
little, as he himself said, but within a few hours after, his toe pained him
very much, and grew to be inflamed; in the morning his foot was wholly
discolored, and gangrenated, and the Patient, with the violent fiercencsse of
a sudden Fever, by the pain then upon him, was wholly distracted, and in a
delirium, which continued till the next day at night, and then he dyed: and
this man was immediately before that accident, a man in perfect health, and of
an extraordinary great strength of body, yea, and wanted not the learned advice
of the Physician; only he had a full corpulent body, and was a very large
feeder; so that to such a patient, so fiercely visited, I cannot conceive how
any amputation, of what sort soever, could have succored to have saved his
life, for that in my opinion, the whole mass of the blood and spirits, were
tainted and subjugated by an exceeding fear, before help could take place: many
other reasons I have elsewhere instanced of impossibilities, or unfitness in
my judgment to enjoin any Artist to observe any one particular way, course or
order of amputation, for that the occasions of the Gangrenes, so much do
differ, only as elsewhere is recited for the facility thereof, and for the
saving of blood and spirits, I have thought fit to commend to your
consideration this new method, as to the discretion of the Artist shall be
esteemed fit.

Also I have observed, that in surfeited delicate bodies of great personages,
such as are over-pomper'd with pleasure, ease, and fullness, if by any way or
accidents such happen to have a Gangrene, seldom one of them escapes death,
especially if they be ancient, and have the dropsy, or Scorbute, and on the
contrary, amongst those which are weak, poor, indigent and miserable people,
which have bin by long continued ulcers, fistulaes, or other grievous maladies
spent to extreme weakness, although seeming half dead before the work begin,
scarce two of ten dye amongst them, upon amputation, if the work be
judiciously, and in a fit way and time performed; for I by practice have often
observed, that where an infirmity has pulled down a Patient low, and almost
past hope of recovery, especially if the disease proceeded by any outward
violence, that such bodies have bin by my experience found to be generally most
hopeful of recovery, either by amputation in the one or the other kind, as the
occasion will most fittest bear; and on the contrary, persons that are to be
dismembered in full strength, if it be to be acted in the sound part, bear a far
greater venture of their lives, then the miserable dejected wretches do, as
aforesaid, except it can be effected in the putrid part.

And one observation more, to be by all men had in regard; namely, that our God
in Naturehath created in man's body such a strong antipathie betwixt the living
and the dead parts thereof, that when by any violence in Nature, either by
distemperature from within, testified by Feavours Pestilential, or others, or
by the outward violence of Engines of War, or other incident mischances, as
by Fractures, Contusions, etc. whereby one part or limb of man's body becomes
sphacelated and dead before the other* it is manifest, that the living parts do
as it were, either in fear or disdain of the dead parts, or for some other
secret cause in Nature, (though not without great pain and grief) notably
withdraw themselves each from the other, as in disdain, leaving neither warmth,
not at all any comfort, motion, nor sense, either by blood or spirits, or ought
else moving in the dead Veins, Nerves, nor Arteries, neither any sense in the
Periostcon, that sensible Panicle that covers the bones; but as by a
comparison of a Snail may in part be explained, they wholly withdraw
themselves: for the Snail having, by the virtue of natural warmth, stretched
her self out of her shell, either for her necessity, nourishment, or delight,
in a moment apprehending cold, or danger, retyres into her shell, and with all
her force, by her own slime, shuts her self close up again, and so rests her
self in a supposed safety, with her no doubt content; even so all the living
instruments, faculties, or vessels of Nature, as in a nauseous disdain,
contempt, or fear of the dead parts, forsake the sphacelated parts, and leave
them utterly desperate and impotent, and by virtue of the Radical Balsam of
Nature contracts and shrowds her relict living parts, as Artists may judge by
the mortified toes of children; but much the better, where Art is at hand to
aid Nature, so that thereby the dead parts become as a noisome and heavy
burden to the living parts: so as if you wound the sphacelated part, it is not
only senseless, but also it is without blood or spirits at all, neither does
blood or humors run any more, nor so much as move in the sphacelated or putrid
Veins at all; and whilst lively Nature is (as aforesaid) shutting her dead
enemy out of her living doors, by stopping up all the breaches, that she may
hold the relict of her own, if animal Art have not the charity to take her dead
enemy from her: yet vital agility, assisted by natural motion and will, in his
due time does efficiate what fairly can be expected, for the assisting of
Nature, and supplying all defects proceeding ex intemperie; all which excellent
offices in Nature, no question, proceed de praesciencia Dei.

Here follows a brief relation of amputation, or of dismembring in general;
but more particularly, being for the taking off of members in the rotten or
mortified places; which ha^h in many cases been approved by the Author
thereof, by his own long experience.
FOr brevity sake, in this place, I will not spend time to write of the general
diseases, causes, or reasons, that might urge the amputation of any member,
having elsewhere written somewhat thereof; only my intent, for the present, is
to aquaint the younger sort with my long experienced practice, for the manner
of dismembring in a mortified part, where just cause is offered: having
undertakeen it merely for the public good, by informing the younger sort of
Surgeons, as well for their encouragements in the safe and warrantable putting
in practice my pactical Method therein, as also to show and fore warn them from
being overmuch misled, in the insisting upon old errors and traditions of
their Masters, Patrons, and Predecessors, too punctually; As for example:

A Chirurgical ^ase put betwixt two Surgeons.
Suppose the younger Surgeon in consultation with his Friend or Brother
Surgeon, by way of asking advice, should put the case and say; I have a Patient
that has the toes of his feet putrefied, fistulated, and many ways perforated
with foul bones therein, so that it is unsound even almost to the joints of the
ankle, or the like, and I have endeavored by Art, and with advice the best I
can, to heal him, and cannot prevail in the Cure: Wherefore, since the toes of
the foot cannot be cured, the rest of the foot, as unprofitable, were, as I
suppose, best to be taken away, and no less of the leg also; for it will be
but a hinderance to the Patient, considering that he cannot stand thereon, and
is full of grievous pain; I will therefore conclude, according to custom, to
take all off a little below the Gartering place, leaving a fit room for the
stilt, to rest the body upon: The which his said friend admits of, as good
practice; and so he proceeds to the work, as being a rational and fair
course, and warrantable. If the rest of his suggestion or indications be
answerable The Chirurgical case answered and admitted.
unto the aforesaid allegation, the work is doubtless good; and so I my self
would heretofore have done, until my practice taught me better things: but
now, by my own practice, which I much rather would ground on, then upon (ipse
dixit) I take a shorter course: For, if the bones of the toes of the feet only
were foul, fistulated, etc. as is suggested, yea, and therefore incurable, for
so stands the suggestion, as being so by reason of some great contusion, wound,
or ulcer, or otherwise, as aforesaid, with diverse fragments of foul bones in
them, or the like; I would not proceed as afor^said, if the Patient were mine,
and he or she otherwise of a good habit of body, the joints of the ankle it
self not being fistulated, nor plainly corrupted: but rather I would take off
the foot, I mean the toes only, before the A note of practice put.
joints of the ankle, and spare the joint of the ankle, and that with a fitting
Instrument made for the purpose, with good hope to effect the cure, and to save
the joint, to the great joy and good service of the Patient: for I would save
him a part of the foot to stand upon; yea, and if to stand on, I dare say, to
go on in a reasonable manner: the which I have more then once put in practice,
and effected with good success: but on the other side, if that the joint of
the ankle be diseased, so that this my way will not take good effect, then I
will yield the foot is not to be saved, by reason of the aforesaid defects
thereof; A yielding to the first proposition.
and then in such a case I will give way, and say, that the whole leg is best
to be taken away, as aforesaid, and it is an artificial course and good
practice: Yet (under favor) let me put the Reader in mind of another rational
good Method, which were a far better course then to take away a guiltless
sound leg, if any other means were found, and the practice of our times had
experienced and approved thereof; and it is a modern practice frequently
practiced in the East Indies, as it has An East India practice.
been credibly reported to me by sundry credible Surgeons, who having spent
some time in travel there, have related it to me, namely, that they have seen
diverse persons, who having formerly had their feet chopped off at the ankles,
by censure of their Country Laws, for trespasses committed, and the said men
have been cured by their own Country Surgeons, and after have pue their
stumpes into large Canes or rcedes, which they term Bamboes, being stuffed
with Cotton Wool, or the like, and they all their lives after have been
employed to run of Etrands, and get their livings as before, notwithstanding
the want of feet, though, as I conceive, not with former like speed: which has
put a longing desire in me, I confess, having had opportunity above some
others, to have tried the experience in the Hospital, but a fit subject has
not presented it self to me for a trial: for I have, I confess, ever been
tender in that point, and loath to put any one Patient against his own
free will, upon new inventions, by beginning new practice upon him, making an
unwilling person the first example; every Patient in such a case having just
freedom to choose his way: although, on the other side, a Patient fit for such
a trial of Art ought to be one, who by a violent contusion, as of a wound made
by Gunshot, or some other violence, as a violent bruise by an intolerable
weight had spoiled the foot and ankle, and not any one whose disease proceeded
from any evil habit in the blood, as in a body having Struma, or scrupulous
tumors, for there is small hope in such, for their stumps will not heal sound
to bear their bodies.

It is unjust in nature, that any member being sound, should suffer for an
unsound one.
For I confess, I esteem it very unjust in Nature, rhat any one part of a
sound member should suffer and be taken off for the fault or defect of another,
being sound and blameless, especially when any better or other comfort can
possibly be found. As for example, for the offense or disease of the toes, let
only the toes suffer, and no more of the members of the body be lost, if it
may so be: and for the offense of the foot and joint thereof, if it be
intolerable by exceeding pain, and therefore not to be sustained, it is just,
that so much be amputated as deserves expulsion, and not, as is said, to take
away a sound and blameless leg, when it is innocent and free from fault,
error, or disease: for the nobleness of each member of man's Of the
excellen^ies of the uses of part of a member.
body, and namely of the leg, is highly even in humanity to be tendered and
regarded, being a great honor and comfort to the man, when, if withont a foot,
by the help of Art, namely, of a hollow Case, or the like, with an artificial
foot adjoined, a man may decently and comely walk, and ride, go over a style,
yea, and run, and sit straight, and behave himself man like in a Bed, and at
board, and do good service for the defense of his Country, or of himself: in
regard whereof, I should esteem that Artist a very unworthy, nnwise, and
wilsull person, who by any good means could keep a profitable part of any
member untaken off, and would presume to take it away for any reason or
pretense whatsoever; and besides, it is no small dishonor to the Art of
Surgeryr Wherefore I will conclude this point, in persuasive manner admonishing
young Surgeons, as I have recited elsewhere, well to be advised by counsel of
the most ancient and best experienced Artists, before they undertake any
amputation whatsoever; and not to think themselves to be disparaged, by craving
counsel, but rather graced thereby; following the precepts of that sweet Lily,
in the Preface of his Grammar: Qui dubitat, qui sape rogat, mea dicta tenebit:
Is qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni.
Which may bear this English construction.

Who doubts and asks, he expert proves,
and Lilies Rule makes good:
Whilst he that is wise in his own conceit,
puts on the Idiots bood.
A Caveat against rash incision, and chiefly abscission.
And as for my Brethren of the younger sort, let me lovingly advise you,
neither for vain ostentation sake, nor popular applause, by rashness, to be
guilty of the effusion of blood, by unadvised amputation, though you may
pretend you have Art for a sufficient warrant, or for a Buckler lest God touch
your hearts for it in secret,, who sees not as men see; for the artificial
shedding of blood has no warrant nor encouragement written in Gods book;
wherefore in matters of weightbe not too rash, but be advised by counsel; this
my second declaration of amputation was, as elsewhere is recited, chiefly
published to encourage the taking off of a member in the putrid or dead part;
where a circular putrid part is, notwithstanding the practice I well know, is
Old, now new practice in amputating mentioned.
by many ancient and modern Writers inhibited, as also it has by reason of old
tradition, been generally shunhed, and not so much as been attempted in our
times, and yet nevertheless, some of the ancient Writers, as Fal^pius,
Fabritius, de aqua pendente, Johannes de Vigo, and some others, as they
themselves affirm, have used it with good success, although by reading their
works I observe by their method, that they were rather narrators one from
anothe, then truly actors; but be it as it will, this one comfort the Surgeon
shall be Comfort to the patient in ubscissing in the mortified part.
sure to find thereby, he shall no way endanger his patient in that course,
either by loss of blood or spirits, nor shall the Patient endure any pain at
all in the act of amputation after that way, and the practice is good and
warrantable in diverse, yea, in most cases, as hereafter I shall explain, and as
my self of many years experience may boldly affirm; and it is likewise
beneficial for the Commonwealth, and for a true instance of the truth thereof,
I have many of my Patients so dismembered at the writing hereof, living and in
perfect health, (I mean) which were dismembered in the putrid part, and that
upon some Patients on both the legs at one instant performed, amongst which
trials I made of one leg, was in Anno Domini 1617. Secondly, I had one Thomas
Brown, about Anno 1619. a Sayler, who had received a great wound by Gunshot at
Sea upon the right leg, the greater Fossels A bislory for an example.
thereof being broken in sunder, so that the shot had carried away two inches
of the said bone in length, together with the lacerating the muscles, nerves,
Artcries, Veins, etc. whereby it was so contused, lacerated and torn asunder,
with also so much loss of substance, that nature could not bear to heat that
member to be any way serviceable for ought; besides, there had followed upon
the wound so great and intolerable hemorrage or expense of blood and spirits,
that the member mort fied by reason of the former great evacuations and
contusions, neither could nature in that Patient possibly have born a
dismembring Loss of blood causes Gangrena.
in a whole part, without eminent danger of present death, and so was the
estate and case of this Patient before he came by me to be cured in Saint
Bartholomews Hospital; wherefore considering well his most desperate estate, I
resolved to make a second experience of him, and did take off the wounded leg
in the lacerated dead part, wherein I conceive (as aforesaid) all men of
judgment will easily be of opinion, that the Patient by that work was without
danger of death or pain, and without loss of any drop of blood, and I healed
this patient by Gods mercy in five months, and he had been by the half sooner
whole, had not he lost so exceeding much blood and spirits by his wounds, as
aforesaid; and this Patient was living at the writing hereof, being many
years after the amputation, the method of which cure, with the manner of
amputating thereof, shall (God assisting me) hereafter be set down.

Another example.
The next I took off in the mortified place, was one Thomas Hog, a
shippe-Carpenter, a Scotchman, who also was living at the writing hereof; this
man at his labor aboard the ship, standing stoutly at his work, at the
straining of a Cable as it was running out of the bits of the ship (as the
Seamen term it) the Cable took hold of his leg, close by the ankle, and
forceably bruised in pieces, not only the veins, arteries, and nerves, with
the softer parts, but brake also the bones in sunder with extreme violence,
insomuch, as by reason of the want of a Surgeon present to dress him, by great
effusion of blood and spirits, the leg mortified the next day, and he after
that fell unto my part in the Hospital to be cured, the which being emboldened
by the good success of the two former, I took off his leg also in the
mortified part, as I did the other, and made a perfect cure thereof in three
months, and he followed the trade of a ship-Carpenter at the writing hereof.

Another example.
Also two years after, I cured an Apprentice of one Master Goddard an
Upholster at the sign of the Crown in the Poultry in London, named John
Harding, in his Masters house, who after a fierce pestilential Feavour, had his
right leg mortified in bed as he lay, and I took it off in the mortified
part, at, or near the gartering place, which by the ancient use of Art of our
times, must have been taken off in a sound place, notwithstanding the great
feebleness of the Patient at that time, and his eminent danger of death, he
being extreme feeble, and at the point of death, in which case to have taken it
off in the sound part, he doubtless would have dyed under my hand, but by Gods
mercy he lived diverse years after, and went most neatly on an Artificial leg
not easily discovered.

Another history Remarkable.
A history or a relation of a remarkable example of an amputation by me
performed upon a woman in Saint Bartholomews Hospital, of both her legs, and
part of seven of her fingers in one morning together all taken off in the
mortified part, without pain The amputation of both the legs and part of seven
fingers, of a woman in one morning.
or loss of blood or spirits at all, and the woman was living at the writing
hereof, and the Patient was a certain poor maid or woman servant in London,
named Ellin French, of whom there were made Books and Ballads, that were sung
about the streets of her, namely, that whereas the said maid or servant, was
given to pilfering, and being accused thereof by her M^ster and Mistress, used
to curse and swear, and with words of execration to wish, that if she had
committed the crime she stood accused of, that then her legs and hands might
rot off, the which thing accordingly, no doubt by the providence of God, came
to pass, as a judgment upon her, namely, that both her legs almost to the
gartering place, with parts of seven of her fingers did rot off, the which
wretched woman nevertheless, being referred to me in Saint Bartholomews
Hospital to be cured, by Gods mercy and permission, I healed her perfectly, by
cutting off both the Sphacelated legs in the mortified parts, with also part
of her seven fingers, as is said, all in one morning without pain, terror or
of any loss of blood unto her, in the taking them off, and made her perfectly
whole in a very short time, namely, within three months, so merciful is our
God unto us vile creatures, when we are most unworthy of such his mercies: she
is at the instant writing hereof also living.

Now with your friendly patience, only one example more, I will trouble you
with, namely, of the cure of a mortification proceeding of a Carbuncle in a
Feavour Pestilential by me performed, and I A his^^ry.
will therein conclude my showing of instances, although I could declare many
more of living persons, and I will haste to show forth the manner of my acting
of such amputations.

The work was of a certain Stationer, then dwelling in Paul's Churchyard (whose
name I conceal,) for that at the writing hereof he lived, and it was performed
upon his Testicles, who in the Plague-time, that was Auno 1612. as I remember,
or about that time, by a Carbuncle, that by Gods hand seized upon one of his
Testicles, and namely upon the left Testicle, that it became wholly mortified
with the half of the Scroton, or the purse of the Cod, in brief, I took and
cut away the said left Testicle, or stone, which An amputation of a Testicle
with the half of the Scrotum.
was wholly mortified with the half of the Scroton, or the purse of the same
stone in the mortified place, and healed him perfectly whole in five weeks and
less, and after the loss of that his one stone, or Testicle, he married and
had diverse children, and I verily believe they were my Patient his own, and by
him begotten on his wife.

Let these instances suffice; and now having presumed of the friendly Reader,
by my former digressions, I have resolved with my self, though I confess in a
mean style, to put forth these instructions, being as is said, for the benefit
of posterities, as I conceive, and namely, that when my bones are at rest, upon
fair and reasonable grounds, any discreet Artist may boldly attempt, and
doubtless perform the like practice, for that I am confidently persuaded, it
will be a means for the saving and preserving the lives of many worthy and
valiant Soldiers, and other brave hardy Seamen, especially in time of Wars,
from which God of his mercy protect our Country.

Certain Rules to be had in regard before dismembring be taken in hand, either
insound or mortified parts.
Caveats before abscission.
FIrst, amputation or dismembring of any man whatsoever, is never The first
rule.
to be undertaken by any Artist without judicious preconsideration, nor without
the advice of other expert Surgeons, first had and obtained, as I have said,
yea, and of those of the best judgments in practice, where such may be had.

The second rule.
Secondly, dismembring or amputation is not to be put off nor delayed where
necessity requires not to stay for the best advice; yet let me thus far
explain my self, that the most mortifications, yea, and few extempted, may stay
for advice, if the Artist do take his just time for it.

The third rule.
Thirdly I advise that no Artist attempt to undertake the work of taking away
any member from any person, but by the desire and with the good will and full
consent of the said person first had, If the said patient have his perfect
senses, and be of years and judgment, but if want be thereof, let the patients
friends and kindred be advised with concerning it, and give consent thereto,
yea, and desire it, for I counsel all young Surgeons to be exceeding modest and
sparing, in putting A Caveat in amputation, not to do it but by consent and
entreaty of the patient.
forwards themselves, and their Patients to the dangerous work of amputation,
or moving them at all thereunto, especially where it is to be acted upon the
whole skin, lest peradventure it be afterward said, it might have been saved
on, had not the Surgeon been overforward for his gain: for no little, though
for the most part unjust reproach and scandal falls upon the Surgeon, by such
his improvident forwardness.

Fourthly, the work of dismembring ought not to be done nor attempted The
fourth rule.
by any, who have not first, either done the like, or at the le^st been a
helper to dismember some, yea, and more then one, and has A caveat necessary.
often seen and well observed the manner of the work, to have been done by
other Artist, before he presume to attempt it himself, for the dismembring of
the Image of God in man ought never to be performed but with a due reverend,
and religious regard.

The fifth rule of preparation to amputation.
Fifthly, before any begin to make the incision, he ought to have all the
materials fit for such a work ready and at hand (as elsewhere I have advised)
and namely, both Instruments, Ligatures, Medicines, and all other additaments,
which are assistant in the work.

The sixth rule.
Sixthly, the amputation once resolved upon, and all things being ready for the
work, let the Surgeon with all his assistants and friends, not forget before
the beginning of the work, heartily to call upon God for a blessing upon their
endeavors, and let the Patient the day before, have notice given him, that he
also may take time to prepare himself with true resolution of soul and body, to
undergo the work, as being never performed without danger of death, but more
especially, if it be to be done in sound parts, which done, then let the
Surgeon prepare himself as aforesaid, with also his helpers, namely at the
least five persons besides himself, as for example, Five persons to assist the
Surgeon in amputation.
one to sit behind the Patient to hold him, a second for a holder, who by the
Surgeon must be instructed fast to stand before him, and to bestride the limb
to be amputated; and to amplect the member; and a third to hold and stay the
lower end of the diseased member to be taken off; a fourth to bring and receive
back the sharp instruments, a fifth to attend to deliver the Artist his
Needles, and Buttons, restrictive rollers, boulsters, bladder, with other
additaments and services, and so soon as possible may be, to stay with the
palm of his hand the Medicines applied to the end of the abscissed stump, that
being the duty of the fifth helper, and the sixth is the Artist himself that
dismembreth* for six and not fewer, are a fit number, and that with the least
to the The manner of amputating expressed.
work of taking off a leg or an arm, if it be to be done in the whole or
sound part, or for the taking off of a member proceeding by a wound by
Gunshot, done in the lacerated, not totally mortified part; but for the taking
off of a member in the mortified part, three persons as assistants may serve,
or two for a need, namely one to hold the upper part, the other the lower end,
and the third to abscisse, namely the Surgeon. It follows now, that I proceed
to explain according to my opinion, in what cases a member may be taken off in
a mortified part, with as good hope, and more to preserve the life of the
Patient, then if it were taken off in the sound part.

Amputati^^ (...) members mortified by cold.
First, in frozen members, and all that come of extreme cold, it may be done
very safelyalso, in all mortifications of members by Feavours whatsoever, the
Feavour being first cured, yea, although they were pestilential, I speak this
of long and true experience, and therefore I conceive, I may without
disparagement omit the producing or repetition of the ancient Writers, for
witnesses, or warrants in ought for me in any such works, as I have manifestly
and often performed in the parts mortified.

Also amputation may be done safely in all such mortifications as proceed by
contusions, as also in all mortified members proce ding by wounds made with
Gunshot, where a mortified place is circular, or more then seem circular, and
that with comfort and good hope of the saving of life, to the languishing
Patient, as by any other way. And as touching the poor Soldier and Seaman,
after that he has suffered terrible and unspakeable pain, as also great loss
of blood and spirits by his wounds, it were then pity of all pities, if any
other remedy could be had or thought of, to wound him a new in the whole part,
and thereby to endanger him, yea, and ten to one to kill him by Art, namely, by
artificial amputation, to deprive him of that national relict, poor blood and
feeble spirits yet reserved within him, merely to hold life and soul together,
whereof by consequent the said small portion of relict blood and spirits, being
taken away, he must needs perish, yea, even as may be feared in the very act of
amputation, the contrary being a wonder, Quasi unum e multis.

Amputation in mortified places by hemorrge, s^f^.
Also amputation in the mortified parts may be done in mortifications that
proceed by hemorrage in any wounds whatsoever that can be named, if the patient
be otherwise curable by any art of amputation, he is then safer and more easier
cured by this way. Also in all mortifications that proceed by over-hard
ligatures, or by the violence of scaldings and burnings, or by the extremity of
corrosive medicines immoderately, or unskilfully applied.

Also in all mortified limbs by Dropsies, Scorbutes, the small Pox, In places
mortified by Dropsy, or other diseases, etc.
or like obstructions that can be said to be curable by amputating in the whole
part, and that with as much and more hope and far more facility and ease to
Surgeon and patient, that work may be performed in a mortified place, if there
be a fit mortified place to do the work in.

Also mortifications happening by fractures or dislocations of legs, or
arms, fingers, or toes, as also in all cases happening, and proceeding by
starving, namely, for want of food, weakness and debility of nature, either of
children or of old folks, the patient having no present Feavour at the time of
the dismembring, neither being in a Delirium, besides many other mortifications
for btevity omitted.

It follows fitly also here, that I set forth in what cases abscission
Abscission in some cases not to be used.
cannot be well effected in the sphacelated or dead part, wherein I do but open
again to posterity in the parctick, what the ancient Authors have declared in
the theorick, in general terms of amputation in the mortified part, assuring
the Artist, that whenever there is a circulat mortification with any hope of
life in the Patient, it may receive cure by this old new, renovated practice of
A renovated old practice ^n amputation.
mine, even as well and better in the mortified part, then in the living. And
although generally this knowledge and practice serves well in times of peace,
yet it serves most fitly in times of war, yea, and at all times, for such
Surgeons as are employed in military affairs, by Sea or Land, that they might
take notice thereof, and also enable themselves to make use of this manner of
practice where occasion is offered, for the comfort, and more hopeful
preserving the lives of the valiant Soldiers, and brave hardy Seamen, as I
have said, who for the honor and defense of our King and Country, very often
are put to encounter with their, and our enemies, to their no small perils and
grievous sufferings by fearful wounds made with Gunshot, and other fierce
engines of war, and by the accidental harms, succouring them, whereby they
suffer great effusion of blood and spirits by their wounds, so that thereby
together with the want of good lodging and comfortable nourishment, which to
such good fellows, is for the most part, but very mean and scant, especially
in ships and Camps, their wounds, after their most pitiful endurings and
languishings, as aforesaid, commonly end in a Gangrena, which granted, all men
may easily then judge, how heavenly a thing, and above all measure comfortable
it is to the despairing patient, if his life may be preserved and prolonged,
and he safely healed without the loss of any blood or spirits at all, or any
pain in the act of amputation; and here as by the way I desire to put to the
Chirurgica^ Readers, a case or two to be considered of, concerning the curing
of wounds made with Gunshot, A supposition.
and namely, I will suppose or suggest a valiant well-deserving Soldier, for
the honor of his King and Country, pressing forward in fight, should receive
a wound by a shot upon his leg, having broken both the fossils, and so
contused and lacerated the parts adjacent, as in any other place was suggested,
that it was manifest to the Surgeon, that the leg, for the surer saving of
the Patients life, were not convenient to be left on, but rather to be taken
off, according The supposition answered.
to Art, the aforesaid suggestion admitted, what were to be done, the Surgeon I
suppose might fairly answer as follows, although the bones be broken, the
Muscles with their Nerves, Veins, Ateries, etc. lacerated, contused, and the
like, yet I will endeavor to reduce all what is fitt^ng to be reduced to their
due and natural places, forms, and true posture, or as much as may be, and I
will speedily haste to stay the flux, the which done, I will for the present,
and so for twenty four hours at the least, repose it to rest, except a
furtive flux convulsion, or the like fearful accident constrain me to look upon
it sooner; and though the work be desperate, yet, I will not dismember it at
the first, but try further, except any eminent occasion, as namely,
mortification urge, and beget new thoughts, and then I will take it off in the
sound part (and Art warrants me so to do) left any of the Gangrenated part
being left untaken away, as the common opinion is, it should infect the whole,
and so I should lose my Patient, and be blamed, as for Malapraxis
unwarrantable. The second might allege, that the A second supposition answered.
former supposition granted, namely, that if the wounded member would be a
burden, I therefore before the abiding of the time, either of digestion or
putrefaction of the aforesaid wounded parts, would whilst my Patient were yet
in strength, for preventing Fevers, furtive fluxes, and other fearful
accidents incident to such great wounds as Gangrene, since I see the member is
like though saved in part, yet will be unserviceable and an eyesore, and
burden, I will immediately take it off in the wounded and lacerated part,
before that woeful Crisis of Gangrene seize upon my patient, which commonly is
accompanied with a Feavour, and expense of vital spirits, and death waits at
the door.

The third pleads in this manner following, and says the former The third
supposition answered.
supposition granted, yet for my patient, although his wounds received be
desperate, as formerly is suggested, it would be held great rashness and
unadvised cruelty in me, if I should but offer to take off this member,
especially in the wounded part, ye^, or elsewhere, at the least before it be
brought to digestion; wherefore I hold it my safest way to follow a rational
method, by joining the parts fitting to be joined, as aforesaid, and to proceed
in the cure, the which, if by Art I could effect, I should rejoice, though my
patient were left with an unprofitable limb; but if the hope of healing came
short, then I should hold it fit, if it must be taken off, to do it in a sound
part, and not in a putrid, according to the now general practice in that kind
which is warrantable. But yet let the The resolution.
young Artist take this note from me, that when he apparently sees that a limb
cannot be saved without amputation, that whilst his patient is yet in
strength, as before is expressed, that he do his duty: first to show the patient
his opinion, grounded upon Art and good reason, and if his patient give way to
it, then in the Name of God, the sooner he takes it off, he better; but if the
patient do not approve of the motion, good reasons tbeing given him, the error
rests in him but if he consent to the work, let him take it off in the wounded
part, although it be not wholly gangrenated circular, regarding that memorable
old verse: Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Quum mata per longas invaluere moras


And further, let the understanding Artist consider, as follows, that if the
bullet have taken away one full third part of a leg, or arm, in the
circumference thereof, with the breach of both the bones, the great contusion
and laceration considered with, also the loss of blood and spirits thereby
happening, it may be feared justly that the limb although the party live, will
hardly or never be saved; but howsoever, it will be no way serviceable, being
done by a contused wound lacerated, so that if ever it be healed, the wound
must come to suppuration, and thereby to digestion, so that by that reason some
part more* will be spent and lost by quitture, and by consequent, if by the
part taken away, the part contused so fall out that the half limb, with the
office and vigor thereof be lost, or come away by the just course of Art in
the healing, scarce one often escape with life, by reason of the pain and great
expense of blood and spirits incident, as is said, and by reason of the long
continuance of the grief, so that it falls out, that for the most part,
Nature is tired out, and the Patient dies in Marasmus or hecticke, and such an
end is more to be feared at Sea, where want of fitting nourishment is, then at
Land. So much I held fit to express of my experience and opinion, for young
Artists to ruminate on.

And now forward again, to my yet unfinished scope of dismembring in the
mortified part: in the prosecution whereof, let me as by the way yet again put
the Reader in mind once more of the old document or phrase, viz. That there is
no general rule, but may admit an exception: even so in this case, there are
diverse times, places, and causes, Amputation in a mort^fied part in some cas^s
forbidden.
wherein amputation in a mortified part is utterly forbidden; as namely, the
Patient being in a violent Feavour, or in a Delirium, for one case; and yet
even then neither is it wholly desperate, and so to be utterly inhibited, but
only during that paroxisme: for, if by Gods mercy, through the help of the
expert Surgeon or Physician, the prefent fit, I mean the Delirium be but
removed, and the Feavour taken away, if there be any way to save the life of
the Patient, such amputation I mean in the mortified part, is in my opinion the
most safe, easy, and rational way, being of all other the most likely way to
preserve the life of the Patient; for by that, the Artist without pain or
effusion of the blood may (ipso facto) remove (impurum a puro) the putrid from
the sound, and utterly alter the so much imagine^ or suggested corrosion or
venomous quality thereof: so as justly it may be said, then it is in this
effected; Causa ablata est, ergo tollitur*effectus, the cause is taken away,
and therefore the effect cease.

A second inhibition.
Another inhibition is, when an amputation is to be done, and there is no
mortified place to do it in, which in the most happens; and then, in such a
case, the Reader will grant the expert Surgeon is freely admitted to choose his
place, so that he choose it secundum Artem, according to Art, and so proceed;
and such occasions are very frequent, as namely for one, when the occasions of
dismembring proceed from corrosive, putrid, or fistulous Ulcers in Joints, or
by foul bones, or by fractured bones, or by dislocated bones, or members
distorted, or otherwise, by diseases incurable and unsufferable, when and
whereas no mortified place can fitting be found, the Surgeon then must be left
to take the convenientest whole place.

A third inhibition.
Another inhibition generally is, when an occasion happens in a putrid body,
where Gangrenous and livid spots, or otherwise discolored spots happen here
and there, to and fro, upon the body, presaging a hidden and venomous humor,
or violence, or otherwise deficiency in Nature from within him. Gangrenes do
proceed (de abdita causa Naturae) by occult causes in Nature, or when a
dissolution in the harmony of Nature manifestly appears to be at hand, or
when Pestilential or Carbunculous spots happen upon a Patient, which many times
mortify even to the bone; and yet such Pestilential Gangrenous spots after
separate of themselves, and the Patient lives and is healed, for that often in
such cases the patients receive an ordinary Cure, which my eyes have seen more
then one so escape, and cured in the Plague time; and many other occasions may
hinder such amputations, which are not now in the apprehension of my memory to
unfold.

Only I desire, that younger Artists would observe to hold the general rule in
wounds made with Gunshot, formerly touched; namely, that they foresee where
they cannot save a Limb to be serviceable, that they, with the approbation of
the Patient, and likewise by Advice for younger Artists in the cure of
Gunshot, by amputation.
good advice, they take it away in time, whilst Nature is in her strength: and
if they have a fit mortified place, then to do it there if possibly they can;
and the rather, because there the work is in part done to their hand; not
regarding, though the stump fall out somewhat too long, for that the Patient
has the Artist ready ever when he please, in such cases as need shall require.
But grant the amputation be to be acted in the one way or the other, yet the
Artist may not be wanting of cauterizing Buttons, at the least of one, at any
amputation, lest having need on the sudden, and unexpected, there be occasion
of the use of one of them, and by their want he lose the Patient by
improvidence, called had-I-wist.

But even now, me thinks, I hear one of the hotter sort of my younger Brethren
say, Will this old nan never have done, and show us his Riddle? I have almost
tired my self out with his circumlocutions: Why does he not conclude, and come
to the matter, after his long process? Wherefore, lest he should grow too much
impatient, I will endeavor in some weak measure to pacify him, and fall upon
the business promised. In which I conceive, and hope the friendly Reader may
gather, and charitably think, that the scope of my precedent narrations to
amputation at this time, is not altogether unprofitable, and impertinent to the
matter in hand, although perhaps adjudged tedious; and namely, were it but
only for to introduct the younger Artist, and embolden him to the practice:
that when I come to the point of the operation it self, he may be the readier
for the acting thereof; for, in truth, the method will be short: so that a few
words will suffice to express it, and a few instruments or medicaments for the
efficiating thereof.

Directions for the amputating Surgeon.
Wherefore, for the first work of amputating in the putrid part, let the
Surgeon have at hand at the least two or three ministers or servants besides
himself, to assist him in the work, as is heretofore said: and as for Medicines
for the first dressing, let him have ready a good fomentation, being an
artificial, strong, well fitted Lixivium, that may have faculty abstersive,
desiccative, and almost caustic, but not so sharp, that it corrode the hands
of the fomentor; let him also be provided with fit ligature, and with large
woollen stupes, also with fitting boulstring and convenient bandage: then let
him further have ready for instruments, a fit amputating Serra, a Catling and a
good small incision Knife, a good pair of strong Scizars, and three or four
cauterizing instruments, such as in their places shall be described: and when
he proceeds to the effecting of the incision, let one of the assistants take
the upper part of the member, holding it in both his hands reasonable fast and
steady, I mean the whole part thereof, somewhat near unto the unsound part, and
let the other helper hold the part, I mean the putrid part to be abscissed in
his hand, each party holding reasonable hard and steady to the work, whilst
the Surgeon himself first by circumcising divide the putrid flesh from the
bone, doing it somewhat near the quick part, but not too near it, about one
inch-full from the quick part, as may be imagined, will do well, that with the
Serra he may come without fear to divide the bone or bones asunder, where he is
sure they are sphacelated, and that carefully first, having regard to make his
incision wisely and securely in the insensible part, as is said, not touching
any quick part at all with his sharp instruments, neither with the one nor the
other; which he may the certainer observe to do, if with a Needle he enquire
cautiously. Let him also divide betwixt the bones the putrid members or parts
there being, lest by lacerating or tearing with the teeth of the Serra he
offend; which done, let the Artist amputate the bones.

And as for the rest of the work, the putrid flesh being (as is said) divided,
and bones being abscissed and so removed, there will be admitted deliberation
sufficient, with full time to consider what is next to be done; the which will
be, as in order, for diminution of the remaining excremental part, by
abscission or ustion, one or both, to remove, for the first, as much more
thereof as safely you may from the stump, with not being over-solicitous in
taking all at one time: for in truth it matters not much* neither does it any
thing hasten the work of healing, that all be at the first removed; but rather,
it may bring terror and danger to the Patient, to be too busy or too forward;
which by all means should be avoided, for fear of inducing of a Feavour: only
it will not be amiss, at the first dressing, by cautery superficially to run
over the putrid flesh, and also therewith to heat the end of the bone or bones
abscissed; and also after that, with a good Lixivium satis calidum with stupes
well to foment not only the sphacelated wounded parts, but also the parts
adjacent, with sufferable full warmth, for the space of half an hour; not at
all using any scarification in this whole work, for that it will bring terror
and needless pain, and be fruitless: which done, leave very warm woollen
stupes upon the part; and so well bound up, finish that dressing.

Then the next work, namely, at the second dressing, will be only the
reiterating of the Artificial former actions and application, ever (as
aforesaid) very warm fomenting, being somewhat hot, and the Medicine ever still
ready on the fire, and for the mortified part, only to be applied with a
scalding hot small Map, of purpose made, or a Sponge, and that with several and
often shiftings and reiteratings for half an hour, or longer; provided, you
discourage not the Patient, by scalding or excoriating the whole parts next
adjacent at all: in which time, it will also be very necessary, that you have
ready one or more of the cauterizing Buttons hot, to apply betwixt the
fomentings; as also not omitting, if occasion serve, with Scizers or otherwise,
to be clearing any insensible sloughs from the wounded part: and forget not, at
each dressing, with a Button to heat the end of the bone, until the Patient be
sensible of the heat, and no longer; the Buttons being of such forms, as
hereafter in their places shall be described; whereby the rest of the putrid
flesh may by degrees be consumed, eroded, abscissed, and fret away, as is said.

But in this work, let not the younger Artist presume, in a work of A Caution.
super erogation, or over-excellency, to be too busy to scorch, scarifie, or
excoriate the sensible part, in pressing to take away all what is putrid from
the quick flesh, nor to cut or divide betwixt the quick and the dead flesh, for
fear of awakening of a sleeping dog; neither to provoke pain to the Patient
at all, as near as he can, further then what of necessity shall accede in
fomenting, whereby to minister a full and sufficient warmth to the whole parts,
and no more; neither by extreme hot stupes, in fomenting the living part too
too hot, as is said, nor by cauterizing so long, until overmuch pain be
provoked: only let all the operations and applications for the dressings, from
time to time, be very gentle, mild, and pleasing, as may be possible, to the
Patient, but especially for the first dressing, that without any great sensible
pain the Surgeon may come somewhat near the sensible and living parts, ever
mildly eroding, clipping, and abscinding only the corrupt flesh, and giving a
lively warmth to Nature; and in this manner proceed thrice, if you see fitting,
or at the least twice for every twenty four hours, or as in descretion the
discreet Artist please, and so for three days and nights together in this
work, or as long or short a time as cause shall offer: And you shall not need
to use any cauterizing Buttons at all, after the first putrid flesh is eroded,
only one, and that at each dressing you may use somewhat hot unto the
remaining dead end of the bone, therewith to cause the said end of the
remaining abscissed bone to scale the sooner: but after the second or third
dressing, it will be fit to consider to apply some Unguent foveant and
digestive very warm.

And as for further documents touching artificial proceeding in this Cure, I
may as a superfluous thing, and frivolous, forbear any further narration to the
discreet young Artist or Scholar in Surgery, for that the rest of the Cure will
no way differ from the ordiuary way of the Cure of other ordinary Ulcers, but
will be healed with much celerity and comfort, through Gods Favor, both to the
Surgeon and Patient. And for the bone, fear it not; for by the only heating
the mortified end thereof, it will scale off by that time the Ulcer be healed,
and that with flesh incarnated upon the living part of it admirably, and will
in fitting time siccatrize, and be perfectly whole, if the Surgeon will have
patience with poor Nature in her weakness to forbear, and not be too busy,
especially with Mineral Medicines; all which I leave to the discretion of each
understanding Artist: only once more with this Caveat, as by reiteration, that
for the end of the stump, after that it has scaled, that the Surgeon be sure
to use no Mineral Medicine at all, as precipitate Vitriol, nor any other,
neither mixed with Basilicon, nor otherwise, but with gentle and ordinary
Digestives, Mundificatives, Incarnatives, and the like gentle Desiccatives, or
at the utmost, Parum Aluminis Usti, if need be: for that by experience I know,
that Mineral Medicines, as they help to scale a bone, so they will surely help
to defile even the same bone again and again, and so make long work upon work;
the which is foul and hateful for any Artist to be guilty of, that professes
to fear God; yea, and it is abominable to be wittingly tainted with that
Devilish crime: for, let reproach and many evil Curses ever attend upon that
Surgeon, which willingly prolongeth healing; for which many an innocent Artist
daily stands accused unjustly thereof: which guilt I advise all the Sons and
successo^s of Aesculapius may avoid, even as they fear God, and desire a
blessing from him upon their Labors.

The conclusion.
And now to conclude, concerning amputation aforesaid, see it be done in
requisite time: For the omitting thereof, until the blood and spirits be too
much spent, makes often the success of the work doubtful and desperate,
especially where it is to be acted upon the whole part: for in truth, when the
languishing Patient shall truly say, Deficit animus; it will be too late for
the Artist to answer, Jam venio And so I will take my leave at this present,
concerning the manual part of the work, in amputating in a mortified place: and
for the doing of it in the whole part, I refer the Reader to what I have
formerly, in my first Edition, in the Surgeons Mate explained, which, together
with this Postscript, I conceive may satisfy any indifferent Reader.

Only one observation more, as in charity to the Patient and the young
Surgeon, I thought fit to aquaint the young Surgeon with what my experience
showed me, and that is; That after any amputation either in the sound or
mortified part, the first eskers or cadaverous sloughesbeing removed, and the
Ulcers reasonably digested, mondified, and somewhat incarnate, the Patient
uses ever to be exceeding sensible, and grievously tender, and also flesh is
subject on the sudden to grow over-fast, and the stump is subject to turn
cancrous, or at the least very dolorous: For remedy whereof, I use for one
dressing, to have Pledgents of fine towe made ready beforehand, so much as will
cover the whole Ulcer; and having ordinary good strong Unguent. Aegyptiacum,
without sublimate, seething hot in a small flat Pewter or Stone dish, dip the
pledgents therein, being very exceeding hot, and suddenly applied so hot to the
Ulcer, and bound with another thick pledgent to keep it warm, bind it up, and
dress it no more in 48* hours; and for the next dressing, cover the Ulcer
only with soft Lint; and likewise in all other dressings, provide by thick
pledgents of towe ever to keep the stump very warm: and that one only
dressing, as aforesaid, of Aegyptiacum, will wholly take away the tenderness,
and very much conduce to true healing; which a fourtnight after, if need be,
may be reiterated.

And as touching amputation to be performed in the mortified place, for that
the curing differs nothing from that in common use for the healing of Ulcers in
general (as is said) therefore if the discreet Artist have a strong and fit
Lixivium, a good Aegyptiacum, a Digestive, a Mundificative, an Incarnative, and
a Desiccative or Sigillative Unguent, and according to Art, and in their
seasons, make use of each of them; he is then fitted for the work. And for the
first, he may prepare his Lixivium as follows, if he please, and have not one
of his own experience.

A fitting Lixivium, for the amputating of any member in the moritified part.
Lixivlum.
REc. Com. Lix. de Cineribus Lign. Fract. Gallanos quatuor, herbae Centaur.
Scord. Card. Benedict. Hyper. Absinth. Rosemar. ana. p. 3. Flor. Camom.
Melilot. ana. p. 4. fiat decoctio ad tertiae partis consumpt. colentur, ac
colat. add Sal. Com. M. 2. Vitriol. Viria. se. lib. Spirit us Vini, 2. lib.
Misce simul S. A.

Ung. Aegyptiac.
Rec. Aeruginis. 5. Alum. Rochia. 4. Vitriol. Roman.. 2. Sal. Commun.. 1. se.
Mellis 2. se. Aceti fortis. 3. Misce and coquantur ad spissitudinem Unguenti.

Ung. Digestiv.
Rec. Cerae Alba, Resinae Pini, five Vaccini, picis Gracae, Terebin. Olibani,
Mirrhae, ana.. 1. Olei Oliv. lib. 1. aut quantitatem sufficientem. Misce and
fiat Unguentum. S. A. In cujus loco Liniment. Digestivum Arcei sufficient.

Ung. Mundificat.
Rec. Terebinth. Resinae, Cerae Albae, Amoniac. ana.. 14. Aristoloch. Long.
Thuris Masculi, ana.. 6. B^ellii, Myrrhae Galban. ana.. 4. Opopanacis, For.
Aeris, ana.. 2. Lytharg.. 9. Olei Oliv. lib. 2 se. Aceti, quant. S. ad
Ammoniac. Galban. and Opopanac. dissolvendum. Misce secund. artem.

Ung. Incarnat.
Rec. Cerae Citrini,. 6. Olei Oliv. 2. lib. se. Terebinth.. 2. Resinae,
Colophoniae, ana.. 1. se. Thur is, Mastichis, ana.. 1. Croci,. 1. Confice
secund. Artem.

Ung. Dosiccat.
Rec. Olei Oliv. 1. slib. ss. Lytharg.. 2. Minii. 3. Cerus.. 1. se. Tutiae,
Camphor. ana.. 3. Cerae Citrini,. 2. Misce S. A. and fiat unguentum.

Moreover, there are to be prepared ready: 1. Cauterizing Buttons, such as are
following hereafter described, for the eroding and fretting away of the putrid,
Cadaverous, or sphacelated remainer after abscission of the first part, and
these cauterizing Buttons ought to be thicker then others, namely, more
ponderous then those, which usually Surgeons use to cauterize the end of one or
two veins or arteries, which being otherwise not so serviceable for this kind
of amputation or operation, of which it were requisite, that two or three were
laid into the fire privately, to be hot, to do such needful services, as that
work of dismembring requires, namely, they being hot, are to cauterize or crode
(as is said) the putrid flesh.

Also it is as fitting to have in readiness the other instruments common in
all amputation, viz. A well fitted saw, a dismembring knife, and incision
knife, or a sharp instrument, fit to divide and cleanse betwixt the bones, etc.
Not forgetting likewise the other fit materials, amongst the rest, as stupes,
and rollers, all which it ought to be the Surgeons own care, to be sure to see
ready, that no one thing be wanting at the instant, and not to trust to his
assistants, lest to his grief and reproach, he be wanting of some one or more
of them in his necessity.

LOving Brethren, if the meannesse of my style, the weakness of my aged
memory, capacity, or what else soever herein, is not answerable to thy
expectation, from me, yet take it in good part, I pray thee, as proceeding from
a Friend, who, if his Talent could have afforded better, would willingly have
imparted it to thee. The former was the fruits of my Youth; This, such as the
weakness of Old Age can afford. The public good acceptance of the former,
has purchased the latter.

Vale in Christo.
Concerning the Instruments for Amputation in the sphacelated part.
BEnevolent Spectator, here ensuing to thy view, are deciphered the Instruments
most useful for the Manual operations of several Amputations in the
sphacelated parts of members, which being for memory sake, only described to
the expert Artist, he will easily conjecture and resolve in Art, according to
each present occasion, which of them to make use of, and which to omit: all of
them tending to the scope of a resolved abscission, by ablating impurum a puro,
the unpure from the pure, for the better perfecting the warrantable scope of
the studious Artist, in efficiating the same, that he may make a cure thereof,
although detractors and depravers of that excellent mystery of healing,
maliciously make a byword, or word of reproach against Surgeons, of making a
cure; yet I will hope, if it be for the saving of the precious life of his
miserable Patient, the making of a perfect cure, will have a fair construction
from good men: yea, although it be to be performed as indeed it must be, part
by abscission, adustion, cauterization, by erosion, or Serra, or how else
soever the work may be safest, and surest, and more artificially efficiated.
All and every of which apparent particulars, in their due turns, times and
orders, are to be made use of, which to describe in each particular, or more
thereof then is heretofore related, would be but tedious for me, and frivolous
for the Artist, who joining his reason and experience with the reading my
precedent Relation, will doubtless, by Gods favorable permission, make a sound
cure of his Patient: maugre the scandal of detractors, in the abuse of that
honest phrase, to the reproach and unjust vilifying of many an honest well
deserving Surgeon. I end with an old Phrase,

Ars non habit inimicos praeter ignorantes. FINIS.


THE TABLE.
A
ABlution. 268 Absinthium herba. 81 Acetum Commune Distillatum
249 Rosatum 44 Vini 44. 249
Acr, 249. to be corrected in infection, 335 Aes Commun. 77 Viride. 251
Aestas. 251 Agaricum. 64 Albation. 268 Album Graecum. 83 Alumen Combustum. 249
Commune. 67. 249 Plumbosum. 249
Albumen Ovorum. 249 Alcolismus. 268 Aloes. 65. 348 Amalgama. 249 Amalgamatio
quid sit. 268 Amigdalae amarae dulces
69, 70 Amputation, when and how to be used on all occasions, 146. 156. 158. in
Gunshot, 304. in putrid parts, 387. Amputation in the mortified place 389. a
leg taken off in the putrid part, 390. Mortified flesh does not presently
hazard the life of the Patient, 391. Amputati^ng in the putrid part is good,
392. Amputation in general, 394. six rules necessary in Amputating a member,
400, 401. six persons necessary in the amputating a member, 401. Amputation in
members mortified by cold, 401. Amputation in a member mortified by Hemmorage,
420. Amputation in mortified places by the Dropsy, 402. Abscission in some
cases not to be used, 402. Amputation in a mortified part in some cases
forbidden, 405. Advice for young Artists in care of Gunshot by Amputation, 406.
Directions for the Amputating Surgeon, 406. a Caution in Amputation, 408.
the Conclusion of the Treatise of Ampu^a^^on, 409. Lixivium for the amputating
any member in the mortified part, 410 Amylum. 70 Ammoniacum. 71 Annus. 150
Angena mendosa cured. 362 Antimoni vulgar. 73 Vitri Regulus.
250 Anthrax. 331 Apostumes in the mouth opened, 1. cured by Causticks,
Incision, etc. 141, 144 Aqua 250 Aqua Cardui Benedicti. 40 Caelestis. 38
Cinnamoni. 39 Doct. Stephani. 38 Falapii. 42 Fortis. 43. 250 Amisi. 40
Absinthii. 40 Angelicae. 40 Balsami. 40 Limonum. 39 Menthae. 40 Oder^fera. 42
Plantaginis. 42 Regis. 250 Rosaru^ Damasenarum, Rubrarum.
41 Rorismarini. 39 Sassafras. 39 Viridis. 42 Vitae. 250
Argentum vivum. 77 Aromatization. 268 Arsenicum. 77, 250 Attrition. 268 Aurea
Alexandrina. 60 Auriculum. 250 Auri-pigmentum. 250 Auram Potabile. 250
Autumnus. 250 Axungiae Cervi. Porci.
36
B
Baccae Iuniperi. Lauri.
79 Bags. 24 Balm water. 40 Balneum Mariae. 251 Balsamum Artificiale. 49
Natural. 51
Basin of brass 22 Bdellium. 71 Bedpan. 24 Benzoin. 73 Benedicta Laxativa. 63
Blaines. 232 Bleeding at nose. 171 Blood-letting. 19, 20 Board to spread
plasters upon, 24 Bladder to search, vide Cathetor. Bolus Armenus. 251
Communis. 75, 251
Borax Veneti. 251 Broths. 352 Bricks. 25 Bubo, sign of the Plague, cures,
330, 365 Burnings. 98 Burras pipe. 20 Buccellatio. 268
C
CAlcanthum, vide Coperas or Vitriol. Calcinare. 268 Calcinatio. 268 Callenture
what it is, signs and cures, 23, 205 Calfactio. 268 Calidus. 251 Calor. 251
Calx Commun. 251 Ovorum. 251 Viva. 83, 251
Caustic white, its composition. 46. 210 Candle, vocat. searching candle. 15
Cambodgia. 66 Camphora. 75 Cantharides. 74 Calcother, or Deadhead. 216, 25^
Carduus Benedictus. 81 Cariophili. 70 Carunckle in the bladder. 15 Cassia
Fistula. 66 Cathetor. 15 Catlings. 1, 2 Carbuncles, signs of the Plague,
nature and cure. 331 Commentare. 252 Cementum Cementatio
268 Cera citrina. 74, 252 Ceratio. 268 Cerussa Venetarum. 76, 252 Chasing-dish.
24 Chalibs. 251 Characters usual with Chemists, from 248, to 260 China. 66,
253 Cinefactio. 268 Cineres ligni. 252 Cinnabrium. 78, 252 Cinnamonum. 70
Circulatio. 268 Clarificatio. 270 Clouts. 24 Close-stoole. 25 Coadunatio. 270
Coagmentatio. 270 Coagulatio. 270 Coctio. 270 Cohobatio. 270 Colatio. 270
Colliquatio. 270 Coloratio. 270 Coll^ca passio, nature of it, signs, cures.
197, 198, 199, 200 Combustio. 270 Comminutio. 270 Complexio. 270 Compositio.
270 Confectio Alkermes. 58 Hamech. 56
Confrictio. 270 Confusio. 270 Congelatio. 270 Conglutinatio. 270 Conservae
Anthos. Cidoniorum. Lujulae. Prunellorum. Rosar. rubr.
55 Contusio. 270 Convulsion. 88 Copperas, vide Vitriol. Copper, vide Venus.
Corallus albus rubr.
252 Cornu cervi. 65 Corrosio. 270 Cortex Granatorum Guaci
67 Costivenesse. 9, 200, 201 Cribratio. 270 Crocus Commun. Martis. Veneris.
66 252 Crows Bills. 7 Cupping-glasses. 22 Cupping. ibid. Cups for Physical
potions. 24
D.
Decoctio. 253 Deliquatio. 270 Deliquium. 270 Descensio. 270 Despumatio.. 270
Dentes Elephantini. 59 Diacodion 60 Diamoron. 54 Diaprunum simplex. 56
Diarrhaea, or flux of the belly, the cure. 177, to 183 Diascordium. 60
Diaphoreticks to procure sweat, 318 Diatessaron. 53, 346, 347 Diatrion
piperion. 57 Dies and nox. 253 Diet pot. 23 Difflatio. 270 Digestio. 253, 270
Dislocations. 153, 154, 155 Dismembring. 146, 156, 158 in Gunshot, 304. in
putrid parts, 387 Dissolutio. 270 Distractio. 270 Distillatio. 270 Divaporatio.
270 Drink for the Calenture. 23, 205 Drink for the Lask. 23 Dysenteria, and
cure, 182, 183, 184, 185
E
Ear-pickers. 12 Elaboration. 271 Election. 271 Electuarium Diacatholicon, 56
Diaphaenicon, 56 de Ovo, 58, 344, 345 de sncco Rosarum, 56
Elementa. 253 Elevation. 271 Elixation. 271 Elution. 271 Emplastrum Calidum.
29 De Lapide Caluminari vel grifium. 29 Diacalsithres. 28 Diach. cum gummis. 27
parvum. 28
Melilot simplex, and pro spleen. 28 de Minio. 29 Oxicroceum. 28 Stipticum
Paracelsi. 27
Esker when to be pricked in Apostumes, 47. lying long, a good sign. 47 Eskers
fall must not be hastened, where Nature has breathing. 47 Esker cannot by Art
be kept in Apostumes. 47 Evaporation. 271 Euphorbium. 65 Exaltation 271
Exhalation 271 Expression 271 Exitus Any, the causes and cures by fomentation
and otherwise. 212 213 Expressio 271 Extinctio 271 Extractio 271 Extract.
Cathol. purg. 56 Eyes ill affected to cure, 215
F
Farina Fabarum Hordei Tritici Volatilis
88 Fermentatio 271 Ferruminatio 271 Fever, what it is, with cure in general.
88 Files with their uses. 10, 11 Filtrum. 253 Filteratio. 271 Fimus Equinus.
253 Fish living draw Carbuncles. 365 Fission. 271 Fistula's and Ulcers with
cures. 147 Fixatio. 253, 271 Fluxes, the diverse kinds, cures, 177, 178, 179,
180. an approved remedy for the flux. 25, 26 Flos Aeris. 253 Flores Anthes. 78
Balaustiarum. 78 Centauriae. 79 Chamomeli. 78 Hyperici. 79 Melilot. 79
Sambucin. 79
Folia Sennae. 64 Forcers. 16 Forceps. 17 Fractio. 271 Fractures, with the
parts and diverse cures. 149, 150 Falling of the Fundament, vide Exitus Any.
112, 113 A Funnell necessary. 24 Frixion. 271 Fulmination. 271 Fumigation. 271
Fumes for infected air, and houses, apparel. 337, 338 Fullness of stomach by
nauseous humors. 348 Furfur Tritici. 80
G
GAngreen, the definition and cause, 381. cure. 384, 385, 386 Gangreene caused
by loss of blood, 397 Examples of Gangre^^^ amputated by the Author. 397, 398
Galbanum, 72 Gallae. 75 Gallens unguent in Amputation. 159 Galens rule in
Dysenteria, 188 Ginger, vide Zinziber, Glasses. 24 Glister pot. 12 Glister
Siringe, vide Siringe. Glister, how to prepare with rules in the administration
of it. 12, 13 Glister vocat. Enema Fumosum, with the draught or description of
the Instrument or Pipe, whereby we deliver it, 49 Gold, vide Sol. Goose Bills.
7 Gradation. 272 Gradus. 254 Granatorum Cortex. 67 Granulation. 272 Gravers.
10, 11 Gray paper. 24 Guaci Cortex 67 Lignum 67 Gummi. 71
Gummi. 254 Gummi Ammoniacum. 71 Galbanum. 72 Guacum. 71 Opopanac. ibid.
Sagapaenum. 72 Tragacanth. 73 Bdellium. 71 Myrrha. 72 Mastick. 72 Styrax. 72
Benzoin. 73 Ladanum. 72 Pix Burgundiae. 73 Communis. 73 Resina. 73
Gums overgrown with filthy skin, and rotten, with their cures. 213
Guttigamba, vel Cambogia. 66
H
HAmules. 11 Hemorrhaea. 87, 171 Head Saw, with rules in Sawing. 5
Hermodactyli. 65 Hooks. 11 Hernia humoralis, with Cure. 308 Horsleeches draw
Carbuncles. 365 Hordeum Commune Gallicum.
67 Humectation. 272 Hyems. 254
I
IGnis. 254 Ignition. 272 Iliaca passio what it is, the signs, cures by
Cataplasmes, Fomentations, Glisters, Potions, etc. 194, 195, 196 Illiquation.
272 Imbibition. 272 Imbution. 272 Incarnative medicines. 89 Inceration. 272
Incineration. 272 Incision, 1, 2 Incision by Caustic. 1 Incision by the
Caustic stone* 47 Ink. 24 Incorporation. 272 Infusion. 272 Inhumation. 272
Injections into the yard, with the manner how to insert. 14 Injections of
Mercury, bad for the yard. 14 Insolation. 272 Intemperature in general, what it
is, and what intemperature of the Liver is, 87 Irons to cauterize. 7
Irrigation. 272 Iron, vide Mars. 248 Jupiter or Tin. ibid.
K
KNives for Amputation or dismembring, with their use. 2 Knives for Incision.
1, 2
L
LAc Virginis. 240 Ladanum. 72, 306 Lanxthorn. 24 Lapis Calaminaris. 254
Granatus. 254 Hematites. 254 Magnetis. 254 Prunellae. 254 Sabulosus. 254
Lateres Cribrat. Integr.
255 Ladanum Opiat, Paracelsi. 59, 189, to 194 Lancet, with the use. 18 Lead,
vide Saturn. 239 Lenticular. 316 A Levatory. 4 Levigatio. 273 Limatio. 273
Limatura Martis. 255 Limon juice. 165 Limon water. 39 Linimentum Arcei. 35
Liquatio. 273 Liquefactio. 273 Liquiritia. 67 Lixivium. 210 Lixivium Commune
Forte.
44 Lixivium lucinium. 255 Lotio commun. 43, 273 Lues Venerea. 254 Luna. 239.
Crescens decrescens.
254 Lupines. 74 Lutation. 273 Lutum Commune. Sapientia.
255 Lienteria. 177 Lythargicum. 77 Argenti. 256 Auri. 256 Ptumbi. 256

M
MAcis. 70 Maceration. 273 Mallet and Chissel for Amputation. 5 Marchasita. 256
Mars or Iron. 236 Mastick. 70 Maturation. 273 Mel simplex. 37, 257 Mel.
Rosarum. 54 Saponis. 33
Measures for Chirurgions. 310 Melissa 81 Mellilotum. 81 Mensis. 256 Mentha. 80
Mercurius. 238, 248 Mercurius Jovis. 256 Lunae. 256 Martis. 256 Praecipitat.
256 Saturni. 256 Sublimat. 256 Solis. 256 Veneris. 256
Mercury praised in general, and also dispraised, 239, 256 Methridatum. 58
Metals s^ven in number, their virtues, names, and Characters, 239, 248 Minium.
77 Minii Emplastrum. 29 Mint-water. 40 Minutum. 257 Mirabolans. 65 Mistion. 273
Mollition. ibid. Mortar and Pestel. 24 Mullets. 11 Multiplication. 273
Mundification. 273 Mummia. 74 Myrrh. 70
N
NEck of a glister Siringe may be crooked. 12 Nippers for Amputation. 5 Needles
and stitching quills. 18 Niter salt. 47, 217 Nutrition. 273 Nux Muscata. 71
O.
Oleum. 257 Oleum Absinthii Commun. 50 Chimic. 53
Oleum Amigdalarum Amararum. dulcium.
50 Oleum Anethinum, 48 Agarici. 49 Anisi. 52 Antimonii. 52 Chamomelinum. 48
Cariophillorum. 51 Hypericon composit. simplex.
48 Juniperinum. 52 La^inum. 49 Liliorum. 48 Lini. 49 Lumbricorum. 48 Macis. 51
Origani. 53 Ovorum. 49 Papavorum. 50 Petreoli. 50 Philosophorum. 52 Rosarum. 48
Sambucinum. 49 Scorpionum. 50 Spicae. 52 Succini Chimice. 53 Sulphuris per
Campanam. 51 Terebinthinae. 52 Vitrioli. 51
Opium. 66 Opopanax. 71 Orpiment. vide Auripigmentum. Oximel simplex. 54
Ointments fit for the Chirurgions Chest. 31
P
PLaces. 10 Payl of Brass. 24, ^5 Philonium Persicum. Romanum. Tarsense.
60 Phlebotomie with instructions concerning blood-letting. 19, 20 Phlegma
Vitrioli. 212, 257 Phlegmes. 11 Piger Henricus. 257 Pillulae Aggregativae. 61
Aureae. 62 Cambogiae. 62 Cochiae. 62 de Euphorbio. 62 Ruffi. 62
Pills how to be hardened and dried up. 166 Piper nigrum. 70 Pipkins. 24 Pix
Burgundiae. Graeca. Navalis.
73 Plaister-box with appurtenances. 16 Plasters for the Chirurgions Chest* 27
Plantane water. 42, 184 Plague what it is, 323. what parts are most subject to
the plague, 324. natural causes, 326. precedent signs, 327. signs presaging
death, 328. Gods tokens, with the manner of them, 333. Directions for
preservation from Infection, 334. Fumes to purge air in houses, 337, 338.
Cordials, 340, 364. looseness unsafe, Burges receipt, 343. Electuar. de Ovo
good in the Plague, 344. Diatessaron good in the plague, 346. Cordials for
women with child, 347. Pillulae Ruffi. their virtue and dose in the plague,
348. Plague not cured by solutives, 351. danger of Laxatives, 352, 359. Julips
for the diseased of the plague, 354. against sw^uning, 355 Blood-letting good
in the plague, and sweating to be used, 357. Venice Treacle good in the plague,
360. Diet for the sick of the plague, 361. Angena mendosa incident to people in
contagious times, with the cure, 362. cure of pains in the head of those who
are infected, 363. Emplasters and Cataplasmes to draw and heal Buboes, Blaines,
Carbuncles, 364. 365, 366. Aurum vitae, a rare Experiment to cure the Plague by
sweating, the manner of using it, 367. Lastly, Certificates from S. Margarets
Westminster, to the Lords of the Council, concerning the effects of this; and
another Certificate from the Major and Justices of North-hampton, touching the
cures done by the Aurum vitae. Plumbum album. 76 Philosophorum. 257 ustum. 77
Polypodium. 65 Porringers for blood-letting. 23 Gally-Pots. 24 Praecipitate,
vide Mercury. Precipitation. 273 Probation. ibid. Probes with use of them. 8
Procidentia Any, vide Exitus Any. Projectio. 273 Prolectatio. 273 Pullicans.
10, 11 Pulpa Tamarindorum. 61 Pulvis. 257 Pulvis Arthreticus. 63 Punchies. 10,
11 Purgatio. 273 Purificare. 257 Putrefactio. 257, 273
Q
QUartation. 273 Quicksilver. Vide Mercury. Quils for stitching. 18 Quinta
Essentia. 258, 273 Quinta Essentia Vini. 258, 273
R
Radices Altheae. 82 Angelica. ibid. Chinae. 66 Consolidae, major. 82 Pyrethri.
ibid. Raphani silvestris. ibid.
Rasion. 274 Rasour. 2 Ravens Bills. 7 Realgar. 258 Reductio. 274 Repurgation.
ibid. Resina. 73 Resolution. 274 Restinction. ibid. Restrictive necessary in a
fracture. 150 Retorta. 258 Reverberation. 258, 274 Rhabarbarum. 64 Rob.
Berberum. Cidoniorum.
55 Rosa solis. 38 Rosae rubrae. 78 Rose-vineger. 44 Rose Water Damask. Red.
41 Rosemary. 80 Rosemary-water. 39
S
SAbina. 82 Saccharum. 69 Says. Saturni. 179, 240 Sal. Absinth^i. 216 Askoli.
259 Anomoniac. ibid. Colkotharis. ibid. Communis. 258 Gemmae. ibid. Nitri. 47,
317 Petrae. 258 Tartari. 259
Salts, the antiquity and kinds. 206 what uses it serves to, and the
necessity ofit, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, etc. Salvia. 81 Salvatory with
appurtenances. 16 Sapo. 259 Sarsaperilla. 66 Saffron. 66 Of Copper. 252 Of
Iron. 252
Sassafras. 67 Sassafras water. 39 Sagapaenum. 72 Sanguis Draconis. 74 Saw for
Amputating. 5, 158 Saw for the head. 5 Scammonium, 64 Scorbutum, or Scurvie,
what it is the nature, and names of it, the causes, 161. signs of it, 162,
163. the cure by Lotions, 169. by baths, oils, and Unguent, 170, 171, 172 the
cure for the ulcers of the Scurvie, ibid. Searces. 24 Section. 274 Segregation.
274 Semen Anethi. 69 Anisi. 68 Carui. 68 Cardui. 68 Faeniculi. 68 Faenugraeci.
68 Lini. 68 Papaveris. 69 Petroselini. 69 Plautaginis. 69 Quatuor frigida
majora frigica minora
69
Serginge Large Small
12, 13. Separation. 274 Sheeres for Incision. 8 Siccation. 274 Sigillum
Hermetis. 259 Sikes. 11 Silk for the stitching needles. 18 Silver, vide Luna.
Sizers. 17 Skillet. 24 Sol, or Gold 239 Solution. 259, 274 Soap. 259 Sorrel.
171 Spatulae's Great Small
9, 17 Spatula Mundani. 9 Speculum Any. 6 Linguae. 6 Oris. 5
Speculum Oris with a screw. 6 Sperma Ceti. 74 Sphacelus what it is, the way of
Amputating of the Sphacelated part, 387. Amputation made better by experience,
388 Spiritus Terebinthinae. 46 Vini. 45, 259 Vitrioli. 212
Splints. 24 Spleen and the diseases of it cured. 28 Spodium. 75 Spunges. 24
Stercus Caninum, vide Album Graecum. Stibium. 75 Stiching. 18 Stone in the
bladder, to search it by Cathetor, and searching candle. 15 Storks bills. 7
Strainers. 24 Stratification. 274 Statum super stratum. 259 Styrax Calamita.
Liquid
72 Stephens water, and its virtues, 38 Subduction. 274 Sublimare. 258
Sublimation 274 Subtiliation 274 Succinum. 73 Album. 259 Citinum. 259
Succus Absinthii. A^aciae. Glicerhizae. Limonum.
61 Sulphur in general what it is, and its virtues, 76, 221, 222, 223, 224.
Sulphur Commun. Philosophorum.
258 Sumach. 75 Syncope, what it is, with the cure. 88 Syrupus. Absinthii. 53
Cinamoni. 53 Limonum. 53 Papaveris. 53 Prunellorum. 55 Raphani silvestris. 54
Rosarum simplex. solutivu^.
54 Violarum. 54

T
TAlcum. 260 Tamarinds. 165 Tapes. 24 Tartar. 260 Teeth how to be drawn out. 10
Tenasmus what it is, cure. 9, 201, 202 Terebellum. 7 Terra. 260 Theriaca
Andromach. 59, 360 Diatessaron. 53, 146 Londinensis. 57
Thread and needles. 24 Thimum. 81 Tigillum. 260 Tinderbox. 24 Tin, or Jupiter.
248 Torrefactio. 274 Tow. 12, 24 Transmutatio. 274 Transudatio. 274 Trafine a
new invented instrument which works far better, and more safe then the
Trapan, 313, to 318 Tragacanth. 73 Trapan with the use. 3 Trochisoi de
Absinthio. 63 Alkandal. 63 Minio. 63 Spodio. 64
Tumors not to be incised. 1 Tumor defined in its kind. 87 Tumores. 260
Turbith. 260 Turpethum Cathapsaris. 65 Tutia. 77, 260
V.
Veins must be opened. 19, 20 Vein how to be opened. 20 Venus, or Copper. 239
Veriuice. 43 Vitriolum. 76, 212 Vitriolum album. 215 Vitriolum ustum. 215
Vitriol* mel. 216 Vitrioll called Colkother, vide Colkother. Vitrification. 274
Vitrum. 260 Ulcers cured. 147, 148, etc. Vlcus. 260 Vnguentum Album
Camphoratum. 32 Aegyptiacum. 31 Apostolorum. 31 Aragon. 36 Aureum. 31
Basilicon. 31 Dialthaea composit. simplex.
34 Diapompholigos. 32 contra Ignem. 33 Martiatum. 36 de Mercurio. 34 Nutritum.
32 Pectorale. 32 Populeon. 33 Potabile. 34 Rosatum. 32 contra Scorbutum. 34
Saponis Mel. 33 Triapharmacon. 32
Vrina. 260 Vstion. 274 Vvapassa. 70 Uvula spoone. 21
W.
Waters for a Surgeons Chest, vide Aqua. Waters vocat: Hot Waters in what
quantity to be taken, when good, sometimes put in Glisters. 41 Wax lights. 15
Weights and scales. 24, 310 Wormwood water. 40 Wormew od salt. 216 Worms a
cause of Disenteria. 183 Wine vinegar. 44 White Paper. 24 Wounds in general,
with cures. 85 Wounds in the Arteries 86. Nerves and ligaments 86. Head, Face,
Nose, Ears, eyes, hands, in Thorax, etc. 88 Wounds by Gunshot. 93, 94
Z
ZInziber. 71
FINIS.

