THE ROMAN-CHVRCH'S DEVOTIONS VINDICATED From Doctor Stillingfleet's
mis-representation. By O. N. a Catholic.

Io. 3.8. Spiritus vbi vult spirat: and vocem ejus audis: Sed nescis vnde
veniat, aut quo vadat: Sic and omnis, qui natus est de Spiritu.

1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Spiritum nolite extinguere, Prophetias nolite spernere, omnia
autem probate.

M.DC.LXXII.

THere is nothing (Pious Reader) wherein a Christian can receive a greater
damage in order to Salvation,. I*
then to be any way misinformed, or prejudiced concerning Prayer: and too much
pains cannot be taken in endeavoring to satisfy all doubts and scruples raised
on this subject. I have therefore thought fit to enlarge myself in this ensuing
discourse, not only in discussing punctually page by page that part of Doctor
Stilling fleets late Book that handles this matter, but also in premising (for
the Readers benefit) a more General Account of the Church's Doctrine and
Practice herein; as being the most fundamental part of a Christians Duty, and
wherein Man, whilst here on earth, entertains a nearer conversation with
Heaven; as also the instrument, by which he derives from thence all other
Graces and Blessings, Spiritual or Temporal.

And here I may first say this,. II.
in my entrance upon this task; that there is no part of Religion, wherein the
Roman Catholic Church might think herself more secure from blame and censure;
and wherein her extraordinary care and prudence for the right Guidance of her
children in this Holy exercise (as appears by the great store of writings upon
this subject) does more deserve praise even from her Adversaries; all Sects
borrowing from Her, Rules and Patterns for Prayer and Meditation; as the
Catholic Books on this subject translated and rendered common among them do
abundantly witness. For, from whom can they learn these so well, as from those,
who most practice Prayer? and who are they, but those who also use solitude and
Retirement, and a sequestration of themselves from all unnecessary secular
affairs, to attend altogether on this Holy exercice, who renounce all worldly
wealth, and prevent the trouble of a conjugal life, of children, family, and
the like, and so both the cares of this world, and the necessary causes
thereof, that so they may calmely and quietly entertain a closer communication
with God, and have their conversation in Heaven, whilst here on Earth: Or to
use the Apostles language, 1. Cor. 7. that so they may give themselves to
Fasting, and Prayer. ver. 5. may be without solicitude ver. 32. may take care
only for the things of the Lord, how they may please the Lord. Ib. and that
they may attend upon him without distraction ver. 35. Which they doing, I hope
it may seem no wonder, if God also use a greater familiarity toward them,
delight to be with them; he and those of his Court; and show them greater
Kindness, who love him more (or nothing but him:) and whom also he loves more:
who is no man's debtor in love; and who also loves first, otherwise they could
not love him at all; and magit amat, and ante.

. III.
To begin then first (by the assistance and inspiration of the Holy Spirit,
without which we can do nothing) with a more general explication of this
matter, to render the following Animaduersions on the Doctors book more
intelligible.

1. HEre those supernatural, and extraordinary Graces and Favors that are vrgd
against this Church as mere Fanaticism: Namely Visions, Revelations,
Predictions of things to come, Knowledge of things done in Absence, Knowledge
of other men's thoughts, science infused, Hearing interior Words spoken in the
Soul, See S. Austin. De Civit. Dei. l. 16. c. 6. S. Gregor. in Ezech. Hom. 2.
interior apparitions of Saints, and Angels, and our Lord, (Such as happened
Act. 22.16.8.9.7.23.9.10.3.26.10.3.
to S. Paul, in the Temple; At Corinth; when he suffered shipwrak; to Ananias,
to Philip, to Cornelius, and others) Ecstasies, Rapts, an extraordinary sense of
the Divine presence in the most interior part of the Soul, or Spirit,
suspension of the senses, and of the Discursive operations of the interior
Faculties, called by the Fathers Contemplatio; Transformatio; unio, Dei sensus,
gustus, tactus; Amplexus; Osculum; ingressus in Divinam Caliginem; introductio
in Dei cellaria, in cubiculum; raptus, mentis excessus; and the like: These, I
say, and much more that might be named, and much more then can be very
intelligibly expressed to the unexperienced, are willingly confessed not
unfrequently to have happened to Men of a more holy and innocent life, and
Persons especially much addicted to Solitude, and Prayer, within the Communion
of the Catholic Church in all Ages. The Ecclesiastical Histories are full of
them, not only the Modern, but those of the more ancient and Primitive times.

. IV.
Whereof he who doubts may read the relation S Dionysius Areopage Epist. ad.
Demophilu^.
makes of S. Carpus: The life of S. Antony, written by S. Athanasius, the
reading of which was partly a cause of the conversion of S. Austin: Confess. l.
8. c. 6.
the life of S. Paul the Hermit, Hilarion, Malchus, and others, written by S
Hierom; to which may be added the strange relation he makes of what happened to
himself, in his Epistle to Eustochium: Epist. 22.
The lives of the Syrian and Egyptian Monks, and Hermites living in perpetual
retired solitude, and Prayer, related by Theodoret, Historia Religiosa.
Cassian ^ollationes
and Palladius: Historia Lausiaca.
The life of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, (and in it the famous vision he had of
the Blessed Virgin, and S. John the Evangelist,) The life of S. Theodorus, and
S. Ephrem, written by S. Gregory Nyssen: The life of S. Ambrose by Paulinus;
and what S. Austin, says of him, in his Confessions l. 9. c. 7. and De Cura
pro mortuis cap. 17. as also of John the Egyptian Monk Ibid. and de Civit. Dei.
l. 5. c. 26. The life of S. Martin by Severus Sulpitius, who lived with him,
and of a noble Roman become a Monastic: Of several Sts. and Martyrs by S.
Gregory Turonensis: of S. Benedict by S. Gregory: of our English Saints by S.
Bid; not long after the general conversion of England, nor before his own
times: Of S. Malachias by S Bernard, his intimate acquaintance: and again of S.
Bernard, by some Abbots, his familiar Friends: of S. Francis by S. Bonaventure,
who lived immediately after his time. I descend no further to later times,
because, possibly, they may have with Protestants less credit.

These are the lives of such as were universally reputed Saints in the Church
of God till the late Reformation;. V.
Written also by Saints, or Persons of an unblemished credit; many of them
Contemporary, or also acquaintance: and, so, who might better know the truth of
what they writ. Now in these lives may be found frequent mention of Visions,
Revelations, Rapts, and the other forenamed extraordinary Divine Graces and
Favors: and all these stories very consonant one to another: Such as the
latter times relate, and such as are now still pretended, Such do the former:
and all much agreeing with those mentioned in the Holy Scripture; and this
uniforme Experience of the operations of the Holy Spirit grounding an uniform
Doctrine of the Mystical Divines. And the same matter of Sport or derision,
this Author finds in S. Gregory's story of S. Benedict, or in S Bonaventure's
of S. Francis, the same he may in all the rest, if he will take the pains to
bring them also upon the stage, and dares continue his play with such Holy
things, exposed to the Atheistical, and Profane. He that will say, all these
Relations are feigned by the Historians (I say All; for if some of them only be
true, it serves our purpose, by these to justify the like) against the Faith of
Church History, and Tradition, and the eminent Sanctity also of the Relaters,
may proceed, for any thing I know, a little further; and say, that Christianity
(depending also on Tradition) is so; and he, who, granting them not forged, yet
calls them Enthusiasmes, or frauds, and delusions of the evil Spirit, must make
the Holiest lives that have appeared in Gods Church to have bin the greatest
impostures; and these deceits also to have bin seconded with the Gift of
Prophecy, and Miracles; which, in like manner, occurr in the same stories; and
these latter serve to justify the former.

. VI.
Meanwhile, because Deus non facit taliter omni nationi, and mirabilia sua non
manifestat illis, these are become a wonder to other Sects, who, from
altogether wanting them, first disbelieve them; and, from this, proceed to
despising them; and now at last, it seems, to reproaching them, (according to
those Jude 10. Quaecunque quidem ignorant, blasphemant) and reducing them to
Fanaticisme; as if, after themselves have bin so much molested with it, it were
some consolation to them, that their Neighbors had a share, or, that, being
deeply overrun with this yellow jaundise, they can now see, abroad, no other
color. But, the application they have made of this name, here, to the
Catholics is somewhat like an ill sort of Argument, that, by proving too much
(that is, all Antiquity Fanatic too) proves nothing; Nay renders the imputer
of it a Fanatic; if a Private Spirit, opposing the Public one of the Church
of all Ages since the Apostles, may be called so. But with whatever terms of
reproach these Divine Favors are blasphemed by Strangers to them, it has
pleased his Divine Majesty in all times to honor his Church with them; and to
convert many to the Christian Faith by them; and she must with all gratitude
profess them; and particularly, that not without these Divine Inspirations,
though also more principally upon the Evangelicall Counsels delivered by our
Lord, and his Apostles, as also the precedent Examples of Scripture-Saints, all
the Orders of Religion in any Age, that are erected in, and allowed by, the
Church, have bin founded.

A special Means also for obtaining such spiritual and extraordinary Favors
from God (the effects of which are admirable as to advancing a soul in all
Christian Perfection and virtues,. VII.
whether respecting Gods service, our own, or our neighbors, good) is affi^med
to be (besides a watchful guard for keeping the Conscience clean, as much as
may be, not only from Mortal, but also venial sin) much frequent and continued
Vocal, or Mental Prayer, much Solitude and Mortifications of our flesh, and
Abstraction of our thoughts and affections from any creature, much Recollection
and withdrawing from abroad into our selves, Psalm. 63.8.
accedentes ad cor altum, and quaerentes regnum Dei intra nos; Luke 17.21
much Meditation on such selected subjects, as may rather inflame our
affections, then increase our Science; and when once we find these enkindled,
the endeavoring a Quiescence, as much as we can from former Discourse (these
actions of the Brain, and Intellect, now hindering the Heart and Will,) and the
bringing ourselves rather to a simple Contemplation, to exercise acts of Love,
adhere to, sigh after, and entertain the Divine Object thereof. And here, if
his Divine Majesty please to advance us any higher, to such Unions, with him,
as are not in our power, and wherein we receive rather, then act, and he
operates in us rather, then we our-selves, we embrace them with all humility,
and gratitude; if otherwise we acquiesce in our best endeavors, and longing
after him with patience; though enabled also to these only by his Grace. This
our Spiritual and Mystical Masters teach us; and this, after this way, which
these men style Fanaticisme, and Enthusiasme, We endeavor to procure a more
strict acquaintance, and converse with God, and herein to follow the example of
our Forefathers.

. VIII.
IT is also freely confessed that many of those Supernatural Communications of
his Divine Majesty to some of his choicest servants in Prayer are so sublime
and high, as that they are described by them, not without great difficulty, and
un usual expressions (some of which this Author has gleaned up, and put
somewhat untowardly together, but so, as they best made for his purpose;)
expressions not so well understood but only by Such as have experienced such
favors; which also happen to be very few. Qui spiritualis est (says S.
Bernard in relating his own experience herein, of which more anon) In Cantica
Sermon. 73.
non me despiciet: qui minus, non me intelliget. And, to Pope Eugenius: De
Consid. l. 5. c. 2.
Queris, Quomodo? si Sanctus es, nosti; si non es, esto; and tuo experimento
Scies. And in scala Claustrali. C. 4.
Inexpertitalia non intellgunt, nisi ea expressius legant in libro
Experientiae, quos ipsa docet unctio. -- Quod nec abs^ndi potest, nec
sermonibus aperiri, says S. Gregory De Moral. 24. l. 5. c.
of the same Grace. And S. Austin. De Moribus Eccles. c. 31.
Pulchritudinis ejus contemplatione beatissimi, quae, nisi Sanctorum
intellectu, percipi non potest. Yet notwithstanding this, the persons who have
received such heavenly Caresses have bin induced, as Well as they could, to
declare them to others, (though with much reluctance of their humility) upon a
triple account. 1. Either induced to discover them in Confession, out of fear
of some delusion in such extraordinary elevations (as is well known in the long
trial of that great Saint of God, Teresa, whose praises are spread through the
whole Church Catholic) so to be assisted with the Direction of their
Superiors. Or. 2. (after they were confirmed, that these were from God by many
most unquestionable notes thereof) declaring these, and the noble effects of
them for the great advancement in us of all Christian virtues, out of their
great ardour of Charity, to excite many others to the like assiduity of Prayer,
Solitude, Recollection, etc. by which means themselves attained them; yet so,
as not, for this, to omit any duty to others, to which either Obedience or
Charity obliges them. Or. 3. publishing them also for the instruction of their
Scholars, how they are to behave themselves with most profit and advantage,
when they should happen to arrive to the receiving of the like; wherein at the
first Novices are wont to be troubled with many fears, scruples, and
jealousies. Such extraordinary and Supernatural Illuminations, Inspirations
etc. we then must acknowledge not unfrequent in the Catholic Church. They
occurr every where in the Ecclesiastical Records of latter and former times;
and it is too late now generally to cry them down. And these we find also
ordinarily not conferred, save on such persons, as are also registered there to
have bin very eminent for the Sanctity of their lives; and among other virtues
much addicted to Prayer Solitude, and Contemplation; and lastly a many of them
Such, as we see, before Protestancy was borne, set down in the Churches
Calendar, for Saints; So that if these things must be styled Fanaticisme, we
find, that the holier the Persons, the greater Fanatics.

. IX.
3. WE earnestly contend, therefore, that all pretense whatsoever of such high,
and Supernatural elevations cannot be justly charged as Enthusiasme, or
Fanaticisme; that is, as proceeding either from the suggestions of the evil,
or of our own, Spirit, or also as feigned only, when indeed we have none such:
Such a general charge I say cannot be made without much temerity, and I am
afraid, without blaspheming the Holy Ghost, (a crime, we know, of what weight;)
especially when such a Censure proceeds point blank against the judgment of the
Church, to whom the public discerning of Spirits is committed.

For, thus, for example, S Paul, if his Apostle-ship did not privilege him,
must have bin declared clearly a Fanatic, when he says, that the Gospel, Gal.
1.12.
which others learnt from the instruction of the Apostles, he received from our
Lord merely by Revelation; and again Gal. 2.2. that he went up to Jerusalem, at
such a time, by Revelation, and when, in his speech to the Jews Act. 22. he
pretended a vision he had as he was praying in the Temple, and elsewhere
frequent and long Colloquies with our Lord (see Act. 22.17. etc. 26.15.16.17.
-- 2. Cor. 12.19.) and, when we are told so often of the Holy Spirit speaking
to him, and others. Act. 10.19.20. Act. 16.6.7 9.20.22.23. Act. 8.19.21. Tim.
1.18. 4.14.
(doubtless by some interior voice, or other signification clearly discerned
by them to be from God:) when again he relates his Rapt, his alienation from
his Senses; and, uncertain whether, from his Body; and his hearing ineffable
words. And the strange joy and transport of mind he received from these things
was so great and extraordinary, as that it seems it was necessary to be
allayed and qualified with some counter griefs, I say how could he escape the
imputation of a Fanatic, on these terms, but that he was an Apostle?

. X.
In the old Testament also the sons of the Prophets, and other Saints must have
incurred the same censure, in whom may be observed many Supernatural and
wonderful operations of the same Holy Spirit, whereby they were put at certain
times into sudden Ecstasies, and Raptures, into strange, and unusvall actions,
and agitations of their Bodies (for which to avoid tediousness, I desire the
curious Reader to view. 2. Sam. 6.14. Ps. 26.6. -- 2. King. 4.35.- 2.16.
compared with. Act. 8.39. and 1. Kings. 18.12.- Ezech. 3.12.14. 2. King. 9.11.
-- 1. Kings. 20.35.) so violent, that Saul (when in their society possessed
with the same) is said to have stripped of his clothes (that is, his upper
garments) and to have lien down all night unclothed, being wearied with those
strange motions. They in these Raptures not only foretelling things to come.
(2. King. 2.3.5.) but conceiving, and on a sudden (after an unusvall manner)
dictating Psalms, Songs, Praises of God, or explication of some Mystery, or
former Prophesy, like those under the Gospel. 1. Cor. 14.6. See. 1. Sam.
18.10.- 1. King. 18.29.- 1. Chron. 25.3. compared with. 1. Cor. 11.5. And this
Spirit then, as now, did more ordinarily thus inspire persons prepared by
Studies, and exercises of Devotion in Schools, and Solitudes for this purpose.
Amongst which means one was calming or charming, and abstracting the Mind by
Music 1. Sam. 10.5. -- 16.16. -- Psalm. 43.4. -- 2. King. 3.15. and we know,
what use, herein, the Holy Prophet David made of his Harp. And, in these
strange accidents, there wanted not those then, who esteemed, and called them
no better then Madmen. 2. King. 9.11. But these Scoffers, then, were no
Divines. And it is well, that these Saints are, now, secured from Such derision
by being Scripture Saints. But then S. Austin, for example, having no such
privilege, I see not, but that he must be one of the Society of these new
Fanatics if it were but for his Toll lege, Confess. 8. l. 12. c.
that he heard in the Garden, as if some boys were singing it, upon which
Fancy he left of the thoughts of a wife, and betook himself to a Retired, and
Monastic life. Neither can his holy Mother Monica escape the censure of one of
this Authors Hystoricall Gossips: of whom this her son testifies; See S. Austin
Confess. l. 3. c. 11. l. 6. c. 1. l. 6. c. 13.
That she had frequent Visions and Revelations, one of them concerning his own
becoming at length a Catholic: so that he observed, that, when God was
pleased to effect it, she was not much moved with the news thereof, because
before assured of it: Insomuch as that, when S. Austin had a purpose of
marrying he requested her Prayers to God concerning it Vt ei per visum
ostenderet aliquid de futuro matrimonio. And, she having only some imaginary
ones, he tells how she slighted them. Dicebat enim (says he) discernere se,
nescio quo sapore, quem verbis explicare non poterat, quid interesset inter
revelantem Te, and animam suam somniantem.

To bear this Saint company I vvil beg. XI.
leave to add, both for the Antiquity and particularity of it, what Tertullian
relates, of another pious woman Well known to him, in his book De Anima. Est
hodie (says he) Soror apud nos Revelationum Charismata sortita, quas in
Ecclesia inter Dominica Solennia per Extasim in spiritu patitur, conversatur
cum Angelis, aliquando etiam cum Domino; and videt, and audit Sacramenta, and
quorundam corda dignoscit, and medicinas desiderantibus submittit. Iam vero
prout Scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi canuntur, aut adlocutiones proferuntur,
aut petitiones deleguntur, ita inde, Materiae Visionibus administrantur. Forte
nescio quid de Anima diserueramus, cum ea soror in Spiritu esset. Post
transacta Solennia dimissa plebe, quo usu solet nobis renunciare quae viderit,
(nam and diligentissime disseruntur, ut etiam probentur) inter caetera, inquit,
ostensa est mihi anima corporaliter, and Spiritus videbatur, sed non inanis and
vacuae qualitatis imo quae etiam teneri repromitteret, tenera, and lucida, and
aetherei coloris, and forma per omnia humana. (Where note that the Revelation
of the Holy woman might be most true, and yet Tertullians collection from it
very erroneous; that is, that souls were aeriall Bodies, because that of some
person deceased appeared to this sister like one.) This is a subject has no
end. And methinks Catholics are not so ingenuously treated, in being forced,
after the experience of so many ages, to produce such instances as these, to
free in general the extraordinary favors done to reputed Saints from plain
Fanaticisme.

Again we contend also,. XII.
that all obscure language in Divine matters, and such things as are mysterious
and difficult to be understood, ought not therefore to be exposed to sport and
Scorn, as savouring of Enthusiasm, or madness; or, as affronting and taking away
the use of Reason (a thing these men much talk of, but never reasonably do
this, against Church Authority.) For, such things they may be, as are above the
ordinary comprehension of Reason, or most men's Experience; and the
vnintelligibleness of them may lie in the sublimity of the matter, not in the
expression. And it has bin a long observation, that the plea of Reason has
bin the common practice of Sects, and is now of the Socinians: as Faith is the
thing especially called for by the Church. If then the language of our
Mystical Divines savours of Fanaticism, I see not how several passages in the
Scripture do not run the same risk; and may not be also questioned for it, if
arraigned at the Bar of some men's Reason, had they not had special
protection from the sacred Persons that penned them.

Such are (to name some of them) S. Paul's not living,. XIII.
but Christ living in him; Not his acting, Gal. 2.20.4.19. 1. Cor. 15.10. 2.
Cor. 4.16. Col. 3.3. Romans 13.2.
but grace With him. His being in travel with the Galatians, till Christ was
formed in them: our inward, and outward: our old, and our new Man, -- We dead,
and our life hid in Christ; Our being transformed in the renewing of our mind.
The new Man renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him.- Our
being borne of God.- Being borne of the Spirit; Col. 3.10. 2. Cor. 3.18. Gal.
5.16.18.
walking in, being led, by the Spirit; Our being changed into the same image
with Christ. Our being made partakers of the Divine Nature.- A peace of God in
the mind that passes all understanding. 2. Pet. 1.4. Phil 4.7. Ephesians.
3.17.18.19.20.
- Attaining a knowledge of the love of Christ that passes knowledge, by our
being rooted in charity, so as to be able to comprehend the breadth, length,
depth, and height thereof; Filled with all the fullness of God according to the
power that works in us, above all that we, can desire or understand: He that
is joined to the Lord is one Spirit: 2. Cor. 4.18. 1. Cor. 6.16.17.
- The Kingdom of God not coming with observation from abroad, but within us.
If any man love me, my Father, and I will come unto him, and make our habitation
with him. Jo. 14.23. Jo. 17.23.
The Father in Christ, and Christ in us, that we may be consummate in one. 1.
Jo. 4.16.
- That God is love: and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him (and this more, as the love is greater) -- In the last days God's pouring
out his Spirit upon all flesh; so that their sons, and daughters too shall
Prophesy: their young men see visions, Act. 2.17*
and their old men dream dreams. -- The Apostles ordering. 1. Cor. 14.30. That
when a Prophet is speaking in the public congregation, if any thing happen to
be revealed to another who stands by, that the first should hold his peace:
and ^biding them ver. 26. for not ordering their Revelations discreetly -- His
praying for the Ephesians c. 1.17.18.
That God Would give them the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, for
enlightening the eyes of their understanding -- 5. Phil. 13.15. presuming, that
God in good time would reveal also things to the imperfect, (surely by an
illumination of their understandings as before,) which the perfect already
believed. -- David's Audiam quid in me loquatur Deus, -- Praying with the
Spirit, whilst the understanding is unfruitful, (or vnedified*) so, We not
knowing what to pray for as we ought, 1. Cor. 14.14.
(that is according to Gods will) the Spirit that is Within us helping our
infirmities and requesting for us with unspeakable (or inexplicable* Romans 8.26.
) groans: Romans 8.26
-- The gift of the Holy Ghost inexplicable 2. Cor. 9.15. Col. 2.5. Heb. 4.12.
2. Cor. 5.13. Psalm. 67.
Saint Paul reckoning Three parts of a Man; Body, Soul, and Spirit. His being
present in Spirit, when absent in Body. The Word of Gods Word dividing Soul and
spirit. -- Sive mente excedimus, Deo; sive sobrij sumus, vobis. Benjamin
adolescentulus in mentis excessu. what language is found here as well as in the
Mystic Divines for one of those men's humor to have made sport with, had it
not bin Scripture? Mean while I do not deny but many of the expressions may be
in some lower degree verified of every person, that is regenerate, and in the
state of Grace, all such having an Union with God less or more by his Spirit
and his extraordinary Grace, importing only an higher degree thereof; yet much
more properly and in their full sense, they seem only applicable to those: who
have attained to some Measure of Christian Perfection: and therefore Divines are
not to be censured, that understand these chiefly described in them, in whom
they are most eminently fulfilled. To conclude, Enthusiasme or Fanaticisme, is
not the speaking things hard to be understood (S. Peter says, S. Paul did so;)
nor yet the pretending high and mysterious effects, visions, Revelations, etc.
for all these we believe may be, and are, often wrought in Gods Saints by the
Holy Spirit, and his special presence in their Souls; and that, we say, in a
much higher and more admirable way, then any of Satan's infatuations can
imitate, or ascend to. But Fanaticisme is a false pretense of these, or the
like, when having no just ground to be credited.

. XIV.
4. FOr the discerning of such Illusions, proceeding from Satan, from the true
inspirations of Gods Holy Spirit, we affirm, that many notes and observations
there be, whereby they may be known, if not certainly whether Divine as to
their original, (where no spirit of Prophecy or miracles:) yet whether
containing truth, and advancing virtue, as to the matter; and, whether any way
noxious, and hurtful, either to the person that receives them, or others. And
this is abundantly sufficient. Now for these notes of discerning them, I need
referr the Reader to no other Book then to the Doctors Martyr Sancta Sophia,
(though he was pleased, to take no notice of them See. Rom Idol. pa. 337.338.
there) in the Preface from. 29. to. 35. again, in the third Treatise, p. 268.
from. 9. to.. 22. Where, after directing a strict observation to be made
concerning the Person, Preface. 29.2. d. vol. p. 269.. 11.
Whether 1. viciously inclined, 2. arrogant and proud; or, 3. curious; 4. or
much addicted to melancholy, there are particularly cast off, and marked out
for Satanicall Illusions, among others, these: All such pretended inspirations,
or revelations, as do inuit the person to say, or do, any thing contrary to
the Catholic Faith, Obedience, Humility, peace, and Unity, Honesty, Purity,
and any other Divine virtue: but especially contrary to the Catholic Faith, or
Obedience; for insta^ce as the attempting to make any new, and seditious
reformations; as likewise, Ibid. p. 272.
When the persons obstinately believe these revelations to be of God after they
have bin condemned by experienced Superiors, and Directors. All such, I say,
are condemned for Satanicall Illusions; which cuts all the nerves, of all such
pretended Revelations, as can any Way disturb the Church'es Faith or Peace;
and most of all, of those Enthusiasmes, and Fanatic frenzies, which have bin
so common among Protestants; the chief use that these persons make of
pretending new divine inspirations being to take away the yoke of those former
delivered in Scripture, which being so point blank opposite to that party, no
less then new divine inspirations can serve their turn, to confront and fight
against, them on an equal ground.

Lastly,. XV.
in all these pretensions, where there is any greater difficulty of discerning
the Good and Divine from the bad and Satanicall, Spirit, We have a Judge to
repair to, the Governors of the Church, The Spirits of the Prophets says S.
Paul, are subject to the Prophets: And Quench not the Spirit. Despise not
prophesying: (But) Prove all things. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.20.21. 1. Jo. 4* 1.
and try the Spirits, says S. John, whether they be of God. Now the last Tryer
of them, in any controversy arising, must be the Church according to our Lords
stating of this matter Math. 18.17. Dic Ecclesiae. And so the Catholic Church
has tried them in all ages (for we do not deny, but that, as Fanatics and
Enthusiasts have more abounded among Sects, perhaps because they find more
liberty, so, such do appear sometimes within the body of the Catholic Church*
the Devil being Gods Ape, and every where ambitiously and perversely imitating
his Works;) and the Church does still try them from time to time, as occasions
offer themselves: and by her Sentence some are justified as Saints, and
singular Favorites of God; others censured, condemned, and suppressed as
Impostors, and Deceivers.

. XVI.
Now if any sober Protestant, upon this late writers bringing this subject on
the stage, has the curiosity to inform himself both what Supernatural favors
and extraordinary celestial communications are received by some persons of
great devotion in the Catholic Church; and what strictnes and caution the
Church uses in examining them, I much recommend to him, for both these, the
perusal of the life of S Teresa; where he may 1. observe the great diligence
that Was used for several years in the Trial of the Spirit of that most Holy
Virgin; and as to this is desired to view in particular the 33. Observations
made by a Confessor of her* in Approbation thereof. Last Engl. Edit. p. 323.
and 2. where he may see (if Ecclesiastical Authority have any Weight with
him) those sublime favors she received in prayer, confirmed to be from God as
it were by a general attestation of them throughout the Christian World: even
those who suspected and questioned them at first, afterward magnifying them:
her works being approved by the most eminent persons for learning and Sanctity
that were in her Age, and translated into all modern languages, for a more
universal Benefit: And, if in this contest about the truth of Visions, and
Revelations, etc. still continued in the Catholic Church, This Author will be
concluded by the Common Reason of Christians, which he often appeals to, how
can he condemn all those as Fanatics whom the Common Reason of the Church,
trying their Spirits by the general grounds and Principles of Christiany, has
for so many Ages approved, and received for Saints* or again, how condemn those
Divines (who, long before the birth of Protestancy have Written on Mystical
Theology) as maintaining Enthusiasme, Whose works the Common Reason of the
Church has approved and esteemed most useful for the advancing of Christian
Perfection.

The Church then is the Judge for discerning of Spirits,. XVII.
to which we do, and these persons in Common Reason ought to, submitt: but yet
on such new Illuminations, or Revelations, can be grounded no Article of Faith,
because that, by which she judges these, is her former Rule of Faith; and thus
far she can only allow them, as they appear to contain nothing contrary to it;
which certainly, they would, if they should pretend any new Addition of Faith
to it: Neither is the Church secured, that any, though reputed Saints, are
infallible in all that which they say; nor, that all is Divine, that they
pretend to: Nor is there now, not only any contradictory, but any additionall
new Revelation of any part of the Catholic Faith to be expected, Ephesians. 2.20. S.
Thom. q. 1. 1. Act. 8. ad 2.
or admitted; after God the Fathers speaking, and declaring all his will, to
the Church by his only son our Lord, and by his Apostles; Nor can we believe,
since Miracles are the only thing that can confirm such Revelations, (I mean,
of some Common Article to be added to the Christian's former Creed) for Divine,
that these shall ever be wrought to such a purpose.

. XVIII.
us also in actions in their own nature indifferent, or of counsel, and on
either side lawful, and free from sin; some of which inspirations cannot be
tried, or distinguished from Enthusiasme by any such way as the former; Which,
because they are much spoken of by the Mysticks, and are very necessary for
advancing Christians in the way of Perfection, it seems requisite, for the
freeing these also from mistakes, to give the Reader here some account of them.

1.. XIX.
We must know then (as Sancta Sophia 1. vol. p. 57. etc.
and others have discoursed more at large,) that there are two Spirits within
us; (that is all the Regenerate) the Holy Spirit, and that of Corrupt nature
assisted with the Suggestions of the Devil, who took a kind of possession of
us, upon Adams Fall: Ephesians. 2.2.
That this last Spirit is never totally expelled, or silenced in us during this
life: Gal. 5.17.
but tempts us still; and, That it is suggestions may appear many times like the
motions of Gods Spirit; pretending good ends, the performing some duty to
ourselves or our neighbor, our advancement in virtue, and the like: That the
effect of the first of these Spirits, Sanctifying Grace, received in our
Regeneration or justification, is, in it is infusion, ordinarily but as a small
seed, or spark, 1. Jo. 3.9.
capable of a daily growth, and increase; and which, 1. Pet. 1.23.
with the cooperation of our free will, and further aids, that are from time to
time received from God, Matt. 13.31.33.
works in us at length a total Reformation, and Christian Perfection; which so
many among the regenerate as do attain, are said in a more special manner to
be Spiritual Persons, and to have the Spirit of God: And in this sense the
Apostle writes to the Corinthians -- I Brethren could not speak unto you as to
Spiritual, but as to Carnal, and as to Babes in Christ. 1. Cor. 3.1. and so,
ver. 3. For ye are yet Carnal, and Walk according to Man: that is, ye are Babes
only in Christ, and so in some degree carnal, and walking according to the
natural Man still, and not as yet entirely Spiritual. And frequent mention we
find in the Scriptures of these several degrees and growths in a regenerate
condition (It being Gods pleasure, that the new Man, as the old, should grow by
degrees, and not be made complete in us all at once:) Mention, I say, of some
Babes and little ones, and to be fed as yet only with Milk: Of strong Meat, and
Wisdom, and higher Mysteries, only to be delivered to, and Spoken amongst, the
Perfect. See Heb. 5.12.13. 2. Pet 3.18 Col. 2.19. 2. Cor. 4.16. Ephesians. 4.13. Col.
1.28. -- 4.12.
-- 1. Pet. 2.2. -- 1. Cor. 3.1.2. -- 2.6. Of Growing in grace and receiving
increase from God; Of the new Man being renewed day by day; Of arriving to a
perfect Man unto the measure of the stature (or age) of the fullness of Christ;
Of the Apostles laboring to present every one perfect in Christ Jesus, and
that they might stand perfect, and full in all the will of God; and of this
Perfection still containing in it higher and higher degrees; Not as if I had
already attained, says the Apostle Phil. 3.12.

Though therefore by this Principle of a New life, and the infusion of the
habitual Grace of Charity, We are already translated from the former being of
corrupt Nature to a Divine being of Supernatural Grace; freed, at the first,
from the former state of Mortal Sin, and from the Slavery, and Captivity, we
suffered under it is dominion, yet has not this Spirit as yet attained such a
sovereign Empire and Mastery over the importunate solicitations of
Concupiscence, and the natural inclinations of our Will and Affections, as
that we do not still fall frequently into many lesser, and those called Venial,
Sins; Or at least, as to actions, that are not sinful, but in their nature
indifferent, or lawful, that we do not, for the most part, still prosecute
those, that are more grateful, or advantageous to our present carnal desires,
and our sensual, or secular designs; Though such actions are no way expedient
for us, nor acceptable to the Holy Spirit, in which now we live; nor do conduce
to our growth in Grace, but are great hindrances thereof; and though these
acts, contained indeed within the compass of lawful, yet often expose us to
occasions of Sin. Now, so long as we stay here and advance no further, we
appear but as infants, and Babes in Grace: It having not as yet obtained it is
perfect Reign in us, either over our Concupiscence which carries us still into
frequent venial Sins: or, over our nature and will which carries us, in other
matters lawful, to those satisfying our natural condition. But, when we are
come to have potestatem voluntatis nostrae, as S. Paul expresses it, 1. Cor.
7.37. come once to act seldom according to (...), Concupiscence, to fall
seldom into Venial sin) especially with advertency, and vnsurprised; and, the
Holy Spirit to have a more absolute power over Sense, Reason, our own will,
Propriety, and Self-love, as to these things lawful, but not expedient; when
come to S. Paul's omnia mihi licent, sed ego sub nullius redigar potestate, and
to his corpus in servitem redigo, 1. Cor. 9.27. 1. Cor. 6.12.
and to act more constantly according to the Spirit, moving now more
perceptibly in us, and giving the laW to us; when Grace is, as to these non
expedients also predominant, and sole Mistress; ordering all things (without
our reluctance, or also with our zeal,) to the greater love, praise, honor of
God and the doing of all things in order to his will, so far as it is made known
to us by this his Spirit, then are We arrived to a full growth to a complete
Man in Christ, to a state of Perfection, such as this life attains: but few
Regenerate there are that do not, by their own disorders, dye in their
Spiritual youth, before they come to such a mature age. As therefore, in our
Regeneration, a Man is removed from the state of Sin into the state of Grace;
so the Church desires, in that Which is called, from some high mysteries it
speaks of, as to the supreme effects of this Grace, Mystical Theology, to
advance those, already in the state of Grace, to that of Perfection; and from
the Spirit dwelling, to it more absolutely Reigning, in us. which finds so many
great rewards not only in the next, but this present life.

2. We must know therefore,. XX.
That to such end this Holy Spirit, received in our Regeneration, assisteth and
works in us, not only as to affording generally to all good Christians that
seriously endeavor to save their Souls, such internal illuminations, and
motions, as are sufficient to direct them for the resisting of any sinful
temptation, or to perform any necessary act of virtue, in circumstances wherein
they are obliged to it; but also, in affording us light and ability in all
indifferent actions, and occurrences (With which may be also joined all the
Acts of Christian virtues, When no necessity obliges us to do any of them, and
so When it is lawful for us, Without Sin, to do, or omit, them) whereby we are
guided to make such a choice, as is more conformable to Gods Will; and,
particular circumstances considered, may much more advance us in the love of
God, and Christian Perfection; and whereby we may avoid such other of them, as
may be suggested, either by corrupt Nature, or the evil Spirit, under pretense
also of some good end, but to defeat a better. For the Holy Spirit excites us,
and assists us, not only in doing duties of necessary obligation; or, in the
avoiding what is prohibited, and performing What is commanded by God under
penalty of sin; but in all these acts also, that may any way tend more to Gods
glory, or to our greater perfection; Though these be such, as we may without
sinning, choose, or refuse.

For, in this, I may say, that the Holy Spirit in us is like to Concupiscence
in us; the one continually exciting us unto that which is better, as the other
to that which is worse. See the Apostles description of these two inmates Romans
8.1. etc. and Gal. 5.16.17.18. where he says. v. 17. that Spiritus concupiscit
adversus carnem, and caro adversus Spiritum - and that Sibi invicem
adversantur. And Ibid. v. 18. as also. Romans 8.14. That those who are Gods
children, or Regenerate, aguntur Spiritu, are acted by the Spirit: Jo. 16.13.-
14.26. Act. 6.9.10 1. Cor. 12.8.9.28. Romans 12.6.7. Act. 4.29.31. Lu. 24.45.
Act. 16.14. Ephesians. 1.18.
It guides us into truth- Brings things forgotten to our remembrance: Gives
knowledge and arguments to one -- utterance and Eloquence, and the power to
persuade, to another -- To another Wisdom, or a good Judgment -- Prudence in
Governing: in executing another comands -- To another courage, and boldness --
It opens men's understandings and hearts, and renders them docile, and apt to
believe. What is there, that is not done in us by this Holy Spirit, when we are
employed about any thing, that tends to the glorifying of God, the Father, or
the Son. So is our regenerate life wholly managed by this Spirit, as the natural
is by the Soul; and, if not obstructed, works in us a continual growth in
Grace, till we come to a perfect man in Christ 2. Pet. 3.18. Ephesians. 4.13.
Therefore the Apostle exhorts his converts; that Gal. 5.25.
as they live (their new life) in, or by, the Spirit, so they would walk in it
(according to its directions:) And that they would mind or affect the things of
the Spirit, (or the things, it minds them of:) Because (...) within them is
death in the end; Romans 8.5.6.
but the (...) within them is life and peace to them* Exhorts them also -- Ephesians.
4.30. with no corrupt and fruitles communication to contristate or grieve this
Spirit. -- Tim. 4.14. not to neglect it -- 1. Cor. 15.10. That it should not be
void (or idle) in them -- 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. not to quench it Ephesians. 5.18. To
replenish themselves with it. And 2. Tim. 1.6. continually to revive it -- Romans
12.11. to be fervent in it. Without which the Apostle says, we cannot think a
good thought, 2. Cor. 3.5.
and our Lord, Jo. 15.5.
that We can do nothing.

3. These actions of the latter kind, we are now speaking of,. XXI.
that may be lawfully done, or omitted; the one, or the other performed,
without any guilt of sin; are either such, as, by the Evangelical Councels, and
the dictate of rectified Reason, are clearly discerned by us, the one to be
better, and more to lead to Christian Perfection, then the other; or such,
Where we have some doubt, of these two actions, good or lawful, which is the
better, or more expedient? In the former of these we may safely conclude; that,
that which is manifest to us to be the better as to our perfection is the
motion in us of the Holy Spirit; and that the doing it is the doing the will of
God in this matter; and that, so often as we reject, or neglect, this, so often
we contristate the Spirit (that would thus conduct us to perfection;) and
refuse to do Gods will, when this is known to us; Whose will it ought always to
be presumed to be, that we should do that, which is clear to us, all things
considered, to be best, for his glory, and our good, to be done; though such
omission or neglect, amounts not to a sin, but to a failing so much in
Perfection. And indeed the not vigilantly observing these Motions of the Spirit
within us, and the not harkening to and obeying them when evident to be such,
or also, the not preconsulting by prayer what it advises, but rather
precipitating our action to prevent it, is the Reason of so many their no
greater improvement in the Spirit, and that they are such strangers to it, and
It to them; is a check to the further, and stronger operations of it in the
Soul; (for who would offer Counsel, seldom, or never accepted, or asked?)
abates the fervor, and solace, that there would be in prosecuting it is
suggestions and leave us guilty of much unkindness, and ingratitude. For, as S.
Bernard. In Cant. Sermon. 17.
Cum hae Sancti Spiritus circa nos dispensatoriae quidem vicissitudines
vigilantissime non observantur, fi^, vt nec absentem desideres, nec presentem
glorifices.

But in the latter Actions, wherein we have some cause of doubt, which is best,
and yet wherein the making a good choice may be exceedingly beneficial to us,
(according to the variety of our temper and condition) to the better, ordering
of our life and service of God, such illumination and Direction of the Holy
Spirit, or also a clear discerning thereof, is obtained especially by much
Purity of conversation, and Abstraction from worldly things by frequent
Recollection, and introversion, and attendance on God, in the perfectest
practice of Prayer, we can attain to. For God has graciously declared to us in
the Scriptures: Jac. 5.17.
That the effectual prayer of a righteous man (as that of Elias) avails much-
that he hears not sinners, Jo. 9.31.
but if any one be a worshiper of him, and does his will, Matt. 21.22.
him he hears: - That all things whatsoever we shall ask in prayer (that is,
Mar. 11.23
Such persons) not doubting, but believing, we shall receive them -- that if we
abide in Christ, and he in us, Jo. 15.7.
ask what we will, and it shall be done unto us (because indeed such ask by the
Spirit of Christ, 1. Jo. 3 22.
who lives in them, and so ask according to Gods will.) -- That if we keep his
comandements, 1. Jo. 5.14.
and do what is pleasing in Gods sight, Romans 8.26.27.
whatever we ask we receive of him* That if we ask any thing according to his
will he hears us (and grants our requests) that though we know not what we
should desire, or pray for as we ought: (that is, as to temporal prosperity, or
afflictions, or such like things of which S. Paul there speaks, what therein is
best for Gods glory, or our own proficiency) yet the Holy Spirit within us with
unutterable groans and great ardour intercedeth for us according to Gods will;
1. Cor. 2.10. etc.
and that God knows its mind (though not expressed in Words; and grants
it is requests) - that the same Spirit searches the profound things of God (and
what is his will) and reveals them to us; that natural Reason is not able to
understand them, but they many times seem foolishness to it: But that the
things of the Spirit are discerned only by the Spirit: most of Which Texts seem
to be spoken not only of our petitioning God concerning the necessary means of
our or others Salvation; but more universally of all sorts of requests
concerning the things of this life and any things that are in their nature
indifferent, and lawful, and of his Spirit directing us to ask and do in them
what is his will; and of his granting those to us Which may be best for us;
wherein God hears, and grants the petitions of his Saints much sooner then
of others.

. XXII.
I say then, since God in the Scriptures has declared these things, and made
these promises, that he will not deny what we ask according to his will, we may
rationally presume and be piously confident, that he will grant our request,
when this is, only to know his will, that we may do that which is according to
it; and we may safely take that for his will, to Which, after such addresses,
and other due preparations made, we shall find our selves more strongly
inclined; and also take such inclination to proceed from the operation of Gods
Spirit, either illuminating sometimes our understanding in discovering to it
some Reasons, not so well discerned; or else disesteemed, and thought
considerable, before; Or sometimes more confirming to us the judgment, our own
Reason made of the thing before: Or some times effecting a strong and suddenly
iniected inclination in the will, so swayed without any preceding Reasons, or
discourse of the Intellect presented it: Or sometimes causing an extraordinary
tranquillity, consolation, and satisfaction to accompany such our Election;
(According to the Rule of Abbot Isaac in Cassian Collat. 9. c. 32.
- Cum orantes nos nulla interpellaverit hesitatio, si obtinuisse nos in ipsa
orationis effusione, quod poscimus, senserimus, non ambigamus preces nostras ad
Deum efficaci^er penetrasse. where note; that the Devil, or any Creature,
cannot work so immediately and intimatly on our understanding and will as Gods
Spirit does; but by the use, of phantasms or Images; of the Spirits, humors,
etc.) Or, where no such preponderation to any side is perceived in the Soul,
then We may presume this to be his will, that, making use of our best Reason,
or others Advice, without any solicitude, we take either side.

Now in the discerning of these Divine Illuminations and inspirations from
Enthusiasmes, XXIII.
or the motions of the Good, from those of our own, or a Bad, Spirit in these
matters, As any one has attained to a greater perfection in Prayer, and
Mortification and Purity of life, they attain hereby a greater measure of Gods
Spirit, and hence it is Illuminations and inspirings in them are also much
greater, and stronger; and more intimately effective on the Soul, then any
other motions, from whence soever they come, can be; and so also these become
more evident to such, and many times are so clearly discerned by them, from the
Supernatural impression, they make upon the Soul as that it cannot resist,
disbelieve, or any way doubt of them, that they are Supernatural and Divine.
So, S. Austin Confess. l. 6. c. 13.
relates of his Mother Monica, that she clearly knew such Supernatural actings
in her from her own imaginations. -- Dicebat enim, discernere se nescio quo
sapore, quem verbis explicare non poterat, quid interesset inter revelantem Te,
and animam suam somniantem. And indeed, if such interior Divine operations
Were not sometimes certainly discernable, how could S. Paul be assured, when he
intended to preach the Word in Asia, and again in Bithynia, (a most charitable
design!) that the Spirit forbad it; and not rather the Enemy of the publishing
of the Gospel? Act. 16.6.7. -- or, That it was by Revelation, and not a fancy
of his, that he ascended to Jerusalem? Gal. 2.2. Or, That it Was the Holy
Spirit that testified, and not men's fears, that much affliction should happen
to him there? Act. 20.23. How the Corinthians knew, when they had a Revelation,
Cor. 14.
that it was not a work of their own imagination? since all these things were
transacted only interiourly in the Soul, and it was the Holy Spirit only, that
in all these gave the evidence to itself. A certain Assurance then, it cannot
be denied, that some at sometimes may have of Divine operations in them. But yet
it is not affirmed here, that all persons, less advanced in Prayer, and Purity
of life, or also the greatest Saints at all times, discern the operations of
the Holy Spirit within them so clearly in this sort of actions, as not to be
sometimes mistaken; and it is sufficient, that persons piously disposed, and
frequent in Prayer, may have a rational presumption of it as has been said:
Neither is any more communicated unto them, perhaps, for the better preserving
of their Humility. And, that no absolute certitude is herein to be expected is
a thing often confessed by Sancta Sophia. See 1. vol. p. 139. and p. 137.

4. But 4. in case such Divine inspirations be sometimes mistaken, yet can no
damage come thereby, I mean as to committing any Sin; 1. the subject of them
we speak of here being matters in themselves indifferent, and on any side
lawful. See Sancta Sophia. 1. vol. p. 143.-2. No command of Superiors in
these any way neglected. 3. no neglect, besides using Prayer, in practicing any
other means of making a secure choice, either in weighing reasons on all sides,
or taking advice from others: Only the devout Soul, in using these endeavors,
yet relies not on them, but on the directions of Gods Holy Spirit, working
continually in the Regenerate both by prevenient and subsequent Grace: makes no
sudden resolutions, nor rushes hastily upon any action; but diligently hearkens
first to this internal Guide, what it may tell her is best; desiring
faithfully, all natural Passions and self-love laid aside, to correspond with
all it is motions; the careful observers of which with a pure intention of mind
may be justly presumed seldom to Want them, though they do not so certainly
know them; and mean while such persons, if not free always from mistakes, yet
are secure, in this sort of actions we speak of, from entertaining any sinful
Enthusiasme; or such, as any other person (except by Divine Inspiration) can
either censure,. XXV.
or discover.

Churches Directions concerning Prayer and Devotion, the chief means of
procuring all these Divine Graces; which Directions this our Author Roman Idol.
c. 4. p. 325.
censures to be such as if they were designed only to amuse and confound the
minds of devout persons and to prepare them for the most gross Enthusiasme, and
extravagant illusions of fancy; whereas indeed there is no part of a
Christian's duty, in which the Church, by those many Doctors of hers, Mysticks,
and others, who have chiefly employed their talent, and communicated their
experience, on this Subject, has taken more profitable pains, and descended
lower, even to the meanest capacities; nor where this displeased Author can
find less ground for a quarrel. Infinite are the Books written on this Divine
Art of Prayer; Wherein like a careful Mother, she trains up her children, by
certain degrees, from the lowest step thereof, which touches the ground, to the
highest, which reaches to heaven; knowing it to be the Foundation of all
Goodness; and the Attractive of all the Divine Benedictions, and Benefits.

She then, first here, in preparation for Prayer, advises her Children to a
serious endeavor to keep their conscience clear from Mortal sin (or also
Venial, as much as humane frailty permits;) and to a care of avoiding the
occasions thereof, without which endeavor our devotions cannot be acceptable
to God; I mean, as to the receiving from him any great plenty of his Grace:
And, again, requires, at such times of Prayer, a dismission of, and abstraction
from all secular business; Solitude, and a recollection of the mind and
thoughts, and oblivion, so much as we can, of all creatures; and a removing
also of all hindrances, that may come from the objects of the exterior senses,
etc. These presupposed; She first begins to feed her little ones with milk, and
as it were to chew their meat for them; giving them infinite prescriptions, for
all occasions, of several Forms of Vocal Prayer, where Novices begin; and
Which the most perfect, also return to.

From these Vocal,. XXVI.
she next leads them on to Mental, Prayer; where their devotions may enjoy more
liberty, whatever way they are bent, without their former confinement to set
Words, or Forms; and where the cessation from external action renders the
inward more attent, and affective (as experience shows;) and more freed from
the distraction of the senses, and also from the wandering of the Thoughts; to
which vocal Prayer gives more relaxation: Nor is it so easy to think, as to
speak, one thing and mind another; but, for how long time the attention
cease, so long does Mental Prayer; and we are either not distracted, or not
praying. Here likewise she delivers them many useful Subjects of Meditation,
chiefly these either touching our own misery; or the Mysteries of our
Salvation; or the Divine Perfections. The Negative benefit also of which
Meditations, confined to some certain Subject, at the first is very
considerable* in preventing distraction of thoughts, and taking of the mind
from it is usual amusements, and wings about external, worldly, vain, and
superfluous things: The Books written in this kind are almost infinite, not
vnfrequent in Protestants hands, and on each subject some brief Heads
perscribed, whereon the Meditants may enlarge their thoughts; Where also she
directs the reading of some Pious Book, when there is much distraction of
Thoughts, or sterility of Invention. And, in these Meditations, She trains them
first more in those, of the knowledge of their natural condition, of the
Hainousness of Sin; of the Divine Justice; of the bitter Passion of our Lord in
making Satisfaction for sin; of the Terrors of the Tria Novissima, 1. Death.
2. Judgment, 3. Hell; and the like: to plant in them a due Fear of God, and
advance all sorts of Mortification and a cleansing of themselves from the
former habits of Sins. After this she practices them much in the Meditation of
the Life of our Lord, and the Lives of his Saints, as constant Patterns for
their Imitation, as to growth in virtue; lastly, of the Divine, Perfections,
and also many Benefits to us; those already received, and those promised; of
the Graces and operations of the Holy Ghost within us, and the abilities for
doing good, and pleasing God, restored to Man by it, if attentively observed,
and obeyed; by these to advance them in all Spiritual Grace, and Christian
Perfection; and to enkindle in them an ardent Love of God. The acquisition of
which Love, and not of knowledge is the Churcheschief design in all these
Meditations. See in Sancta Sophia (this Authors great Rock of offense) both the
recommending this course of Meditation, especially for Beginners; and directing
the practice thereof. 3.. 2. c. 2. -- and 4. c. 1.. 6.

By the practice of these Meditations,. XXVII.
and, amongst them, especially that of the Life and Passion of our Lord (whilst
other Sects dare hardly look upon a Crucifixe) she endeavors by little and
little to kindle and inflame the affections of the devout Soul toward so dear a
Lord, whom so many offenses, and affronts of hers, which now cut her to the
heart, could not alienate from her; and The Passions thus learned, by much
practice, to be more easily excited, begins to train up such Proficients more
in the School of Love; directing them, by laying more aside, When thus well
prepared, their former arguings, and discoursings of the Brain (with the
frequent strokes of which they have already kindled this fire in the heart) how
to exercise these affections now, in that Lesson of Loving God with all the
heart, Luc. 10.27
and all the Soul, and all the mind, and all the strength; In a more simple and
quiet intuition, and contemplation, advertency and admiration of the Divine
Beauty, and Perfections; and in more fervent and amourous Colloquies with God;
In praising, thanking, solacing her self with, him, whilst she, casts her eye
upon his infinite mercies past and promised; In many resolutions for the future
to serve him better, and no more so to grieve and offend him; in offering all
she has, she can do, or suffer, to his service, and in putting herself in a
posture of silence and attention, to hear what he may be pleased to speak to,
and in her: speak to her, not only in guiding and admonishing in all necessary
duty, but also in things indifferent, or also good, but not necessary, when
several of them fall under deliberation; In which she also desires to be
instructed by him, that she may still choose and do, that which may better
please him, and wherein his holy will may be more perfectly accomplished.

. XXVIII
Which Acts of Love, when once, to a competent degree, facilitated in us, as
they fill the Soul with great consolations, so they exceedingly help to advance
it in all Christian duties, and virtues. For Love will not be idle, and works
in now with much more fidelity and alacrity; as doing all things not out of
fear, but affection; and not to obey, but please, her Beloved, and gain from
him also a reciprocal love. And when a soul is arrived so far, through the
constant exercise and custom of Prayer, and other Mortifications necessary to
it, that these acts of Love, and of the will, (of which there are many several
degrees surpassing one another) are rendered easy and frequent, and upon every
occasion speedily resumed, without any or much precedent meditation, Which acts
before were difficult and rare: And when the Soul by reason of the greater
sweetness she finds in this latter affective meditation, as I may call it,
returns not to the former intentive meditation Without some reluctance, this
is the first entrance into that which is styled a state of Perfection, such as
humane industry attains; namely wherein the will assisted with Grace excites
itself to these Acts of Love and simple contemplation. Of which practice thus
S. Bernard De interiori Domo c. 14.
-- I am fortasse ascendisti, jam ad cortuum rediisti, and ibi stare didicisti:
nec hoc sufficiat tibi; Disce habitare, and mansionem facere; and, qualicunque
mentis vagatione abstractus fueris, illuc semper redire festina. Absque dubio
per multum usum quandoque tibi vertetur in oblectamentum in tantum vt absque
vlla laboris difficultate possis ihi assiduus esse; quin imo pena potius tibi
sit alibi quam ibi moram aliquam facere. Thus He; yet is the Soul not directed
here to remain idle, stupid, or vnactive, but to return to its wonted
Meditations, and, if neither fitly disposed for these, to Vocal and set Forms
of Prayer: or also to Reading, when the sweetness of such contemplation cease.

. XXIX.
Devout Souls advanced hitherto, the Church forbeareth not to show, and to
exhort, and provoke them to, yet much higher flights; and by their continued
devotions to prosecute a further fruition of that object which has no bounds.
To this purpose she proceeds to declare to her children, for their
encouragement, from persons experienced therein, the many rich rewards of
Prayer; the Supernatural Elevations that God is pleased to advance some Souls
to, who have bin much practiced in this holy Exercise, and the more free and
familiar manifestations of himself that he makes to them in several manners
mentioned before; See. 3.
Wherein the Soul does not now act so much, as, in a great quietness, silence,
and rest of its former natural operations, is more immediately moved and acted
by a more special Presence of God in it, Who sometimes with the touches and
influences of an extraordinary Grace does illuminate, inflame, and ravish the
Soul, and causes in it an ineffable and transporting delight in contemplating
what is showed to it of the Divine Beauty, and Perfections; perceiving in
itself a most ardent Love, and this supernaturally infused; When also are
communicated to it many times celestial Secrets, and Divine Mysteries, and
Future events, by internal words, and Revelation. All which things are received
by it with a great tranquillity, and attention, and cessation of the natural
use of its Faculties Sensitive or intellectual: nor seems it in its own
disposal whilst it has these touches, but both does and must see, and think,
only what his Divine Majesty will have it; and this only so long as he
pleases. Nor can any of these things by any art or industry of the Soul be
attained or procured when she will, but all is Supernatural, and as well above
the operations of common Grace in us, as of Reason. In which supernatural and
extraordinary Divine Impressions upon the Soul the experienced also observe two
sorts of motions in it: either a very intimate Retreat and Recollection of the
Soul from exterior objects as it were into some interior part of itself,
removed from the thoughts or remembrance of Creatures or worldly things, (which
is often joined with a retiring also of the vital Spirits more or less from
the outward parts of the Body, lest sometimes in such Recollection without
sense, motion, or heat:) Alienatio mentis a sensibus Corporis S. Austin In
Psalm. 67.
calls it, vt Spiritui quod demonstrandum est demonstretur. Such perhaps was
that Ecstasy of S. John. when he is said to be in the Spirit Apoca. 1.10. or, 2.
An Elevation, Rapt, or Flight of the Soul as it were above it self; and as if
it were to depart presently out of the Body, and the person to suffer a present
dissolution Ablatio mentis, as S. Bernard expresses it: Such seems that of S.
Paul. 2. Cor. 12.

. XXX.
And in the expression of these supernatural Graces and influences it is, that
the experienced, and the Mystic Divines labor so much. Touching these it is,
that they use such terms of a Supernatural life, a Deiformity or Deification;
of a sense, or fruition of Gods Presence, in the Fund, depth, or center, or
innermost part of the Soul, or, also in the Apex or supreme point of it; of
Passive Unions; Where is to be understood not an exclusion of all acts whatever
(for the souls knowing, receiving, assenting to such things cannot be withour
some action of it; and that not only of the Will, but intellect. -- Quod sentit
affectus, intelligit Intellectus,) but an exclusion of any discursive and
laborious acts, and any primacy moving of it self to action.

Which terms if hard to be understood, so are the matters, they would express;
which have something of S. Paul's (...) in them and to be thoroughly apprehended
only by the experienced. And for him that says he understands them not, me
thinks S. Austins advice writing of a very difficult matter, the Trinity, 1. l.
3. c.
is very seasonable -- Ille, qui se ista non intelligere conqueritur, secum
agat votis and studiis, ut proficiat; non cum Ecclesia agat querelis, and
convitiis, ut taceat. Especially considering, that these things are not handled
by Catholic Divines as a part of the Churches Rules of Devotion, but as a
reward of it; and as things only in Gods, not our, power.

. XXXI.
Yet these rich Gifts of God, and pregustations of the state in the world to
come, the Church neglects not to recommend unto her Children; and to signify
the many noble effects, and powerful influences, that such favors have upon
those that receive them, as to the completing them in all Christian
Perfection; that is, in the perfect Love of God; all these Divine Inactions (if
the Reader will pardon the word) tending still to a clearer manifestation of
God to the Soul, and so to the wounding it more deeply with the love and
longing after him; and after the suffering, and doing any thing, with all
alacrity, for him: and the Graces that are received disposing us still to
others higher, if the Soul correspond to them so as she ought- Si perseveravero
(says S. Bernard speaking of these favors) In Cant. Sermon. 69.
huic Dignattoni dignis (quod in me est) Affectibus and actibus respondere; and
gratia Dei apud me vacua non fuerit, etiam mansionem apud me faciet Pater and
Filim. She neglects not to tell them also; that, though upon no preparations,
and predispositions in us whatever such favors do necessarily follow; yet that
without these, God does not usually do them; that Active contemplation is the
ready way to Passive: and that, though in the higher degrees of them, they are
but rare, and given to few, yet in some inferior degree, they are communicated
to many. And, how ever, that an Active Contemplation, and Fruition of God by
love (spoken of before) and the great advancement in all Christian virtue we
gain thereby (if we be admitted to no higher things, of which true Humility
always esteems it self unworthy) is a sufficient recompense in this world, of
any pains of ours in purging of our life, and close attendance on God in
Solitude, and Prayer, that is undertaken for it.

Lastly, since such Christian Perfection chiefly consists in, and depends upon,
the exercise of the Affective part of the Soul; and not on high knowledge, or
Speculation, therefore the Church recommends it as attainable by all Sexes, and
conditions: and equally encourages all in the prosecution of it -- Non enim
(as S. Gregory observes) In Ezech Hom. 17.
Contemplationis Gratia Summis datur and minimis non datur; sed saepe hanc
summi, saepe minimi: saepius remoti (id est, a curis mandanis,) aliquando eam
conjugati percipiunt.

. XXXII.
Of these Supernatural and extraordinary Graces, and Caresses received from
God, before I conclude this general Discourse, I have thought fit here to set
down some passages I have met with in the Fathers, because some Reader perhaps
may receive from their experiences benefit and encouragement for a more
diligent practice of Prayer. And he who has no further curiosity to inform
himself herein, may, omitting them, pass on to.. 40. Of these then thus speaks
S. Austin. Confess. l. 10. c. 40. Lux es tu permanens, quam de omnibus
consulebam, -- and audiebam docentem, ac jubentem. Et sepe istud facio: Hoc me
delectat, and ab onnibus actionibus necessitatis, quantum relaxari possum, ad
istam voluptatem refugio. Et aliquando intromittis me in affectum mul^um
invsitatum introrsus; ad nescio qu^m dulcedinem, quae, si perficiatur in me,
nescio quid erit, quod vita ista non eri^. Sed recido in haec aerumnosis
ponderibus, and resorbe or solitis; and teneor, and multum fleo; sed multum
teneor; Tantum consuetudinis sarcina degravat. Hic esse valeo, nec volo: illic
volo, nec valeo; vtrobique miser. And this sweetness it is that he seems so much
to thirst and sigh after having had some former tastes of it, when he breaks out
into this Ejaculation. Confess. l. 8. c. 4. -- Age Domine and Fac: excita and
revoca nos: Accende and rape: flagra, dulce ce. jam amemus and curramus.

See also his extraordinary Illumination, or Revelation concerning Gods
Incorruptibility, and immutability (whereupon he says he forsook the Manichean
Sect, and became a Catholic (which he mentions in his Disputation with
Fortunatus a Manichean: There S. Austin says thus. -- Illud ergo respondere
possum, quod me Dominus nosse voluit, Deum necessitatem nullam pati posse,
neque ex aliqua part violari, atque corrumpi. Where his Adversary catching at
it, and replying- Tu dixisti, quiae huc vsque tibi Deus revelavit, quod
Incorruptibilis sit, the Father only in the close of the Disputation thus
reflects on it- Ego novi non te habere quid dicas; and me, cum vos audissem in
hac questione, nunquam invenisse quid dicerem; and inde fuisse admonitum
divinitus, vt illum errorem derelinquerem, and ad fidem Catholicam me
converterem. And to this seems to relate what he says: Confession: Lib. 7.
cap. ^ -- nesciens vnde, and quomodo -- and -- hoc uno ictu etc.

See also the frequent Recollections he mentions* Confess. l. 7. c. 10.
entering as he says (though not into the Fund, or Depth, of his Soul, yet) in
intima sua; and his, there, seeing, qualicumque oculo animae suae, supra eundem
oculum animae suae; supra mentem suam, lucem Dei incommutabilem: and herein God
speaking to him, Sicut (says he) auditur in cord. After which Interior
speech to him, he says his former doubting was removed -- Et non erat prorsus,
vnde dubitarem. And see that devout Conference with his Dying Mother. Confess.
l. 9. c. 10. where he says- Dum loquimur, and inhiamus illi (vitae aeternae,)
attingimus eam modice cum toto ictu cordis, and suspiravimus, and reliquimus
ibi religatas primitias Spiritus. And so, says he (this sudden transport of
mind passed over) remeavimus ad strepitum oris nostri. And afterward he
descants upon the same Rapture, or transport thus,- Dicebamus ergo: Sicut
sileat tumultus carnis, sileant phantasiae terrae etc. and ipsa sibi anima
sileat, and transeat se, non se cogitando, etc -- Si loquatur ipse solus (Deus)
non per ea, sed per seipsum, vt audiamus verbum ejus (non per linquam carnis
etc,- Ipsum sine his audiamus, sicut nunc extendimus nos, and rapida
cogitatione (speaking of the former ictus cordis) attingimus aeternam
saptentiam super omnia manentem; si continuetur hoc, and subtrahantur aliae
visiones long imparis generis, and haec una rapiat and absorbeat, and recondat
in interiora gaudia spectatorem suum; vt talis sit sempiterna vita quale fuit
hoc momentum Intelligentiae cui suspirauimus; nonne hoc est, Intra in gaudium
Domini tui? and istud Quando! (Does not this, much resemble the derided Conting
language of the Mystical Divines?

Of the same contemplation the same Father speaks in this manner in his book de
Quantitate animae,. XXXIII
c. 33.
written at Rome not long after his conversion: where he makes of the 7.
degrees of the Souls ascent toward the discovery of Truth, or God,
contemplation the highest -- Spiritus rectus (says he,) quo fit, ut anima in
veritate quaerenda deviare atque errare non possit, in ea non restauratur, nisi
prius cor mundum fuerit; Hoc est, nisi prius ipsa cogitatio ab omni cupiditate
ac fece rerum mortalium sese cohibuerit and eliquaverit. Psalm. 50.10
Iam vere in ipsa visione atque Contemplatione veritatis (id est Dei) (qui
septimus atque vltimus animae gradus est, neque Iam gradus, sed quaedam mansio,
quo illis gradibus pervenitur) quae sunt gaudia, quae perfruitio very and summi
Boni! cujus serenitatis atque aeternitatis afflatus! Quid ergo dicam? Dixerunt
haec, quantum dicenda judicaverunt, magnae quaedam and incomparabiles animae,
quas etiam vidisse, ac videre, ista credimus. Thus also he writes about the
same time of the Egiptian Hermites spending their life in contemplation De
moribu^s Eccl. c. 31.
-- Secretissimi penitus ab omni hominum conspectu, pane solo, qui eis per
certa intervalla temporum affertur, and aqua contenti, desertissimas terras in
colunt; perfruentes colloquio Dei, cui puris mentibus inhaeserunt: and ejus
pulchritudinis contemplatione beatissimi, quae, nisi Sanctorum intellectu,
percipi non potest; (not easily aprehended by others.) Then thus apologizeth
for such a life -- Nihil, inquam, de his loquar. Videntur enim nonnullis res
humanas, plusquam oportet, deseruisse; non intelligentibus, quantum nobis eorum
animus in orationibus prosit, and vita ad exemplum, quorum corpora videre non
sinimur. Thus he. And, in this exercise of Contemplacion by those Hermites, we
find also their Experience of Ecstasies, and Rapts. Abbot John in Cassian,
Collat. 19. c. 4.
describing this contemplation, modestly relates of himself. -- Pio Domini
nostri munere (says he) memini me in hujusmodi raptum esse frequenter
excessum, ut obliviscerer me sarcina corporeae fragilitatis indutum; mentemque
meam ita omnes exteriores sensus subito respuisse and a c^nctis materialibus
rebus omni modis exulasse, ut neque oculi neque aures meae proprio fungerentur
officio; and ita divinis meditationibus ac spiritalibus theoriis animus
replebatur, vt saepe ad vesperam cibum me percepisse nescirem, etc. -- And
ibid. c. 5 -- Majoribus remoti secretis, frequentissime ad ^elestes illos
rapiebamur excessus And elsewhere Collat. 9. c. 31.
Abbot Isaac reports of S. Antony the Hermit - Illum in excessu mentis
frequenter orasse. And there recites this sentence of his, -- Non esse
perf^ctam orationem, in qua se monachus, vel hoc ipsum, quod orat, intelligi^.

. XXXIV.
Of the same Grace of Contemplation thus S. Gregory Moral. l. 23. c. 13 on that
text Psalm. 29.^^*
Ego dixi in excessu mentis meae sublevatus quippe ( David says the) vidit,
quod se hic videre non posse, ad se relapsus ingemuit. Perfectam scilicet
animam ista compunctio afficere familiarius solet, qua omnes imaginationes
corporeas insolenter sibi obviantes discutit, and cordis oculum figere in ipso
radio incircumscriptae lucis intendit; vnde aliquando ad quandam inusitatam
dulcedinem interni saporis admittitur, ac raptim aliquo modo ardenti spiritu
afflata renovatur; tantoque magis inhiat, quanto magis, quod amet, aegustat;
atque hoc intra se appetit, quod sibi dulce sapere intrinsecus sentit. -- Cui
inherere conatur. Sed ab ejus fortitudine sua adhuc infirmitate repellitur: and
quia ejus munditiae contemperari non valet, flere dulce habet, sibique, ad se
cadenti, infirmitatis suae lachrimas sternere. Neque enim mentis oculum potest
in id, quod intra se raptim conspexerit, figere: quia ipso vetustatis suae usu
deorsum ire compellitur. Inter haec anhelat, aestuat, super se ire conatur; sed
ad familiares tenebras suas victa fatigatione relabitur.

Of the same Grace he speaks also Ibid. l. 24. c. 5. c. 33.26.
on those words of Job -- and videbit faciem ejus in jubilo-Iubilum dicitur,
quando ineffabile gaudium mente concipitur; quod nec abscondi possit, nec
sermonibus aperiri: and tamen quibusdam motibus proditur, quamvis nullis
proprietatibus exprimatur. Vnde David Propheta intuens electorum animas tantum
gaudium mente concipere, quantum sermon non valent aperire, ait: Beatus
populus qui scit jubilationem. Non enim ait qui loquitur, sed qui scit: quia
sciri quidem jubilatio intellectu potest, sed dicto exprimi non potest. -- And,
Tunc resplendente raptim corruscatione incircumscripti luminis illustratur. Quo
utrumque conspectu in gaudio cujusdam severitatis absorbetur; and quasi post
defectum vitae praesentis, vltra se rapta, in quadam novitate aliquo modo
recreatur: Ibi men's, ex immenso font, infusione superniroris aspergitur; ibi
non se sufficere ad id, quo rapta est, contemplatur; and veritatem sentiendo,
vide^, quia, quanta est ipsa veritas, non videt, (the language of S. Dionisius
Areopagita) Cut veritati, tanto magis se long existimat, quanto magis
appropinquat, quia nisi illam vtcunque conspiceret, nequaquam eam conspicere se
non posse, sentiret. Adnisus ergo animi dum in illam intenditur, immensitatis
ejus coruscante circumstantia reverberatur. Vnde and ad semetipsam citius
labitur; and, prospectis quasi quibusdam veritatis vestigiis, ad sua ima
revocatur. Haec ipsa tamen, per contemplationem facta, non solid, and
permanens visio, sed, vt, ita dixerim, quasi quaedam visionis imitatio Dei
facies dicitur. Quia ergo, post laborum certamina, post tentationum fluctus,
saepe in excessu anima suspenditur, vt cognitionem Divinae Presentiae
contempletur, quam tamen presentiam and sentire possit, and explere non possit,
recte, post tot labores, de hoc tentato homine dicitur; videbit faciem ejus in
Iubilo.

. XXXV.
On the same thus S. Bernard. De Consid. l. 5. c. 2. after mentioning some lower
degrees of Devotion -- At omnium (says he) maximus (ille,) qui, spreto ipso
usu rerum and sensuum, quantum quidem humanae fragilitati fas est, non
ascensoriis gradibus sed inopinatis excessibus, avolare interdum contemplando
ad illa sublimia consuevit.- Ad hoc vltimum genus illos pertinere reor excessus
Pauli: Excessus, non ascensus; nam raptum potius fuisse, quam ascendisse^, ipse
se perhibet; 2. Cor. 5.13. Ephesians. 3.18.
Inde est quod dicebut; Sive mente excedimus, Deo. And. Ib. c. 14. On that of
the Apostle -- vt comprehendamus cum omnibus Sanctis -- Sancti igitur (says he
to Pope Eugenius) comprehendunt. Quaeris Quomodo? Si sanctus es,
comprehendisti, and nosti. Si non es, esto; and tuo experimento scies. Then
explaining the Longitude, Latitude, altitude, and profundity of this Divine
love; of the several degrees of Contemplation (says he) Prima and maxima
contemplatio est admiratio Majestatis (Dei*) Haec requirit cor purgatum; vt a
vitijs liberum, neque ^neratum penatis, facile ad superna levet, interdum
quoque, vel per aliquas mo^ulas, stupore and extasi suspensum teneat,
admirantem. Cant. 2.3.
So in his 49. Sermon in Cantic. on that text, Introduxit me Rex in cellam
vinariam -- Sed and Tu quoque (says he) si collecto tuo Spiritu, mente sobria
and vacua curis, orationis domum solus introeas, etc. confido in Deo, qui dixit
Petite and accipietis, quia perseveraveris pulsans, non exibis vacuus. Verum,
cum te nobis reddideris plenum gratia and charitate, nec poteris, Spiritu
fervens, dissimulare munus acceptum etc. poteris and ipse veraciter protestari:
Introduxit me Rex in cellam vinariam -- nec omne donum, quamvis Spirituale,
prodire dixerim de cella vinaria -- Sed si quis orando obtineat mente excedere
in id Divini arcani; vnde mox redeat divino amore vehementissime flagrans, and
estuans justitiae Zelo. nec non and in cunctis spiritualibus studijs and
offictis pernimium fervens, ita vt possit dicere: concaluit cor meum intra me,
and in meditationibus meis exardescit ignis -- Is plane in cellam non in rito
perhibebitur vinariam introisse. Cum enim duo sint beatae contemplationis
excessus: in intellectu unus, and alter in assectu^, unus in lumine, alter in
fervore -- pius sane assectus, and pectus amore calens and sancta devotionis
infusio, etiam and vehementi Spiritus repletus Zelo, non plane alivnd^ quam e
cellae vina^^a reportatur.

. XXXVI.
The same Father elsewhere In Cant. Sermon. 23. Cant. 1.4.
in discoursing of Contemplation upon the words Introduxit me Rex in cellaria
sua speaks thus of himself after his Apology Iact^^tiae deputandum non esse
quod in illorum pandebat profectus. -- Est locus (says he) vbi vere quiescens
and quietus cernitur Deus; Sermon. 67.
locus sponsi; and qui mihi quidem (nam de aliis nesc^o) plane cubiculum sit,
si quando in illum contigerit introduci: sed heu, rara hora, and paruae mora.
-- (and elsewhere, Fortasse me hora quidem sed horae dimidium)* Dixi Beatos
quorum remissae sunt iniquitates. and quorum tecta sunt peccata, cum subito
tanta mihi quoque de me suborta fiducia and infusa laetitia est, quantus certe
-- in loco secundae visionis non processerat timor, ita vt mihi visus sum vnus
ex illis beatus e^^e. O si durasset! iterum, iterumque visita me Domine in
salutari tuo etc. In hoc arcanum and in hoc Sanctuarium Dei. Si quem forte
vestrum aliqua hora sic rapi contigerit, vt minime avocet aut perturbet vel
sensus egens, vel cura pungens, vel culpae mordens, vel ea certe, quae
difficilius amoventur, irruentia imaginum corporearum phantasmata, poterit qui
dein hic, cum ad nos redierit, gloriar^ and dicere. Introduxit me Rex in
cubiculum suum.. XXXVII.


Again Sermon. 74.
^reating of the vicissitudes of the coming and departing of the Spouse on
those words Cant. 2* -- Revertere dilecte mi, similis esto capreis etc. he
modestly declares his own experience in these matters; and how in such heavenly
visitations he was affected, after he had thus in his former Sermon Sermon. 73.
engaged his promise concerning it -- Ego, quicquid illud est quod in me de
hujusmodi experiri donatum est, coram eloqui non verebor. Nam etsi vile
forsitan, cum fuerit auditum, and despicabile videatur, non mea refert; quia
qui spiritualis est non me despicter, qui minus, non me intelliget. Attamen si
in alium istud Sermonem servavero, forte non deerunt, qui edificentur in ijs,
quae exoraetus interim, Dominus inspirabit, Sponsus Ecclesiae, Jesus Christus:
In S^rm. 74. then, he proceeds thus. Audite me tamen hominem, qui loqui
trepidat, and tacere non potest. which it seems by the words following he spoke
not without Tears -- Nunc sustinete modicum quid insipientiae meae. Volo dice e
(nam and hoc pactus sum) quomodo mecuin agitur in ejusmodi. Non expedit quidem,
sed prodat sane, vt prosim. -- Fateor and mihi adventasse verbum* in
insipientia dico, and pluries. Cumque saepius intraverit ad me, non sensi
aliquoties cum intravit. Adesse sensi, affuisse recorder, interdum and
praesentire potui introitum ejus sentire nunquam; sed, ne exitum quidem. Nam
vnde in animam meam venerit, quove abierit denuo eam dimittens: sed and qua vel
introterit, vel exterit, etiam nunc ignorare me fateor: secundum illud* nescis,
Joan. 3.8.
vnde veniat aut quo vadat. -- Quaeris igitur, cum ita sin^ omnino
investigabiles viae ejus, vnde adesse norim? (then going on he declares the
admirable effects of these visits.) Viuum and efficax est, moxque vt intus
venit, expergefecit dormitantem animam meam; movit and mollivit; vulneravit cor
meum. -- Cepit quoque evellere, and destruere, edificare and plantare, rigare
arida, tenebrosa illuminare etc. ita vt benediceret anima mea Domino, and omnia
quae intra me sunt, nomini sancto ejus; Ita igitur intrans ad me aliquoties
verbum Sponsus, nullis vnquam introitum suum indicijs innotescere fecit, non
voce, non specie, non incessu. Nullis denique suis motibus compertum est mihi,
nullis meis sensibus illapsum penetralibus meis: tantum ex motu cordis, sicut
prefatus sum, intellixi presentiam ejus, etc. -- Haec omnia, ubi abscesserit
verbum, perinde ac si illae bullienti substraxerit ignem, quodam illico
languore torpentia and frigida jacere incipiunt: atque hoc mihi signum
abscessionis ejus; tristis si^ necesse est anima mea donec iterum revertatur,
solito recallescat cor meum intra me, idque sit reversionis indicium. Tale sane
experimentum de Verbo habens, quid mirum si and ego vsurpo vocem Sponsae, in
revocando illud, cum se absentaverit. -- Et hoc oro, vt non vacuum veniat; sed
plenum gratiae and veritatis, more utique suo, sicut heri and nudius tertius.

See the effects of this visit of the Spouse described much what in the same
manner Sermon. 69. -- Si sensero aperiri mihi sensum vt intelligam Scripturas,
aut sermonem sapientiae quasi ebullire ex intimis, aut infuso lumine desuper
revelari mysteria, aut certe expandi mihi quasi quoddam largissimum caeli
gremium, and vberiores de sursum influere anim^ meditationum imbres, non ambigo
Sponsum adesse. Again; see such sign of his coming Sermon. 31. -- Ignis ante
ipsum praecedet. Psalm. 96.3. -- Oportet namque ut Sancti Desiderii ardor
praeveniat faciem ejus ad omnem animam, ad quam est ipse venturus. -- Et tunc
scit anima, quoniam juxta est Dominus, cum se senserit illo igne succensam, and
dixerit cum Propheta; De excelso misit ignem in ossibus meis and erudivit me.
Et illud, Concaluit cor meum intra me, and in meditatione mea exardescit ignis.
And see the attendance that ought to be given to it Sermon. 17. -- Quando veniat,
vel quando vadat, id plane periculosissime ignoratur. Cum enim hae Sancti
Spiritus circa nos dispensatoriae quidem vicissitudines vigilantissime non
observantur, fit, vt nec absentem desideres, nec presentem glorifices. --
Vigilandum proinde, and vigilandum omni hora, quia nescimus qua hora Spiritus
venturus sit, seu iterum abiturus: It, and redit Spiritus. -- Et has alternare
vices non cessat in his qui Spirituales sunt, vel quos potius spirituales
proinde ipse creare intendit, visitans diliculo, and subito probans. And indeed
it may be observed of the Apostles themselves, that they had extraordinary
accesses, and excitations of the Holy Ghost at certain times more, then at
others: (As likewise the Prophets before them were also extraordinarily moved
by the Spirit only at certain times;) As appears Act. 4.8. and 31. (much what
like that Act. 2.2. the place shaken with the same Spirit.) 7.55. -- 13.9. --
17.16. -- 18.5.25. -- Lu. 1.41.67. -- 2.27.

See this Grace also copiously described in Scala Claustrali; And de vita
solitaria ad Fra^res de Monte Dei, by S. Bernard, or who ever was the Author of
them In Scala c. 4.5. His incantationibus (says he) anima advocat sponsum;
Dominus autem medium orationis cursum interrumpens festinus ingerit se, and
animae desideranti festinus occurrit, celestis rore dulcedinis circumfusus,
etc. Et sicut in quibusdam carnalibus officiis anima adeo vincitur carnaeli
concupiscentia quod omnem vsum rationis amittit, and fit homo quasi totus
carnalis; ita merito in hat superna contemplatione ita consumuntur and
absorbentur carnales motus ab anima, vt in nullo caro Spiritui contradicat, and
fiat homo quasi totus spiritualis. -- Then speaking of the Sighs, and Tears,
dulciores super mel and favum, which in the great alterations, dilatings, and
impulses of the Heart plentifully flow in such supernatural visits and the
difficulty to express how in these the Soul is affected.- Sed quid (says he)
hujusmodi secreta colloquia proferimus in publicum? Cur ineffabiles and
inerrabiles affectus verbis communibus conamur exprimere? inexperti talia non
intelligunt, nisi ea expressius legant in libro experientiae, quos ipsa docet
vnctio. And then again, laments the shortness of their stay. -- Quomodo remanet
anima Spiritus sancti fervore discedente.- Bonum erat nobis hic esse.- Sed jam
dicit sponsus, dimitte me etc. Venit (O sponsa) ad consolationem; recedit ad
cautelam, ne magnitudo consolationis extollat te. -- Hanc autem gratiam cui
vult, and quando vult sponsus tribuit. As he says elsewhere c. 18.
O quam jucundum sentitur, si non esset tam modicum, Raptum.

Again of the same things in his Tract.. XXXVIII
De Vita Solitaria ad Fratres de Monte Dei p. 1045.
he speaks in this manner -- Dilecto Dei aliquando vicissim lumen quoddam
vultus Dei ostenditur sicut lumen, clausum in manibus pa^et, and latet, ad
arbitrium tenentis: vt per hoc quod quasi in transcursu, vel in puncto
permittitur videre, inardescat animus ad plenam possessionem luminis aeterni,
and hereditatem plenae visionis Dei: cui vt innotescat aliqua tenus id, quod ei
deest, nonnunquam quasi pertra^siens gratia perstringit sensum amantis and
eripit ipsum sibi, and rapit in diem, qui est; a tumultu rerum ad gaudia
silentia: and pro modulo suo ad momentum, ad punctum, id ipsum ostendens ei
videndum sicuti est, interim etiam and ipsum efficit in idipsum, vt sit suo
modo sicut illud est (Here we find the Mystical language.) Vbi cum didicerit,
quid intersit inter mundum and immundum, redditur sibi, and remittitur ad
mundandum cor, ad visionem etc. -- And before Col. 1043
-- Intellectus vero cogitantis efficitur contemplatio amantis; and, formans
illud in quasdam spiritualis vel divinae Suavitatis experientias, afficit ex
eis aciem cogitantis, illud vero efficitur gaudium fruentis, and tunc de Deo
been cogitatur secundum humanum modum; si tamen cogitatio dicenda est, vbi nil
cogat, nec cogitur, sed tantum modo in memoriam abundantiae suavitatis Dei
exultatur, jubilatur etc. -- Sed modus hic cogitandi de Deo non est in arbitrio
cogitantis, sed in gratia donantis; scilicet, cum Spiritus Sanctus, qui ubi
violt spirat, quando vult and quomodo vult, and quibus vult, in hoc aspirat.
Sed hominis est jugiter praeparare cor, voluntatem expediendo ab affectionibus
alienis. Thus that Holy Man highly experienced in Spiritual matters.

. XXXIX
Mean while, as to our selves, and our highest endeavors, and ambitions in
Prayer, I may say with Sancta Sophia Tract. 3.. 4. c. 6.. 3.
- All our perfection consists in a state of love, and an entire conformity to
the Divine Will. There are therefore in a Spiritual life no strange novelties,
or Wonders pretended to (on our side*) Divine love is all. As for the manner of
exercising this in those nearer approaches that are made to this fountain of
Beauty and light in Passive unions, (that is, where God in us seems the chief
or only Agent.) We must (as it goes on there) content ourselves to hear those
speak of it that have had some experience in it: and, if what they say be
incomprehensible to us, we ought not to wonder at it: For (as it follows. 6.)
the internal actuations in the Souls of the Perfect. (that is, in these
supernatural divine communications) are so inexplicably subtle and pure, that
experience it self does not sufficiently enable them to give an intelligible
account of them. These things therefore Sancta Sophia confesses hard to be
understood by the experienced, as well as its Adversary. Neither could he
justly pitch upon these, as the chief, or only, Devotion taught in the Church
of Rome, whenas it is there taught, that these are not at all in the power of
our Devotions; but bestowed when, and to what persons, and for what duration
God pleases. And, in them, as there is much that proclaims the honor of Gods
Church, and of such Saints, So what is there that opposes the Reasonablenes of
Christian Religion? For, this, I hope, is not Reasonable, that nothing in
Religion may be above Reason; and somthings therein, that are less easy to be
understood, are therefore to be received with admiration rather, then scorn, If
the Church speaks wisdom among the Perfect, may the imperfect blame her for
this? And may they presently charge her with madness, as Festus did S. Paul,
for speaking things they understood not? If the immense Goodness of God is
pleased to communicate such supernatural favors and caresses, and
consolations to those who have weaned themselves from all other Creatures for
his love, the over joyed Soul cannot but speak of the things she sees of him,
and hears from him, and declare his wondrous works, and endeavor also as much
as she can to render her neighbors partakers of the same; And, if the Wise
men, and Philosophers of this world shall call this Fanaticisme, and Canting,
Frenzy, and fits of Melancholy etc. yet the Church will still proclaim these
Honors done her by his Divine Majesty; and Wisdom will be justified of her
Children.

THis said in General, I address now my self more particularly to this Authors
Discourse,. XL.
on this Subject in his 4. chater,. 15. and 16 from Page 325. to p. 343. To
which I have confined my self, because so much only treats of this Argument.
And on this part I shall only make some short Remarks, where it seems
necessary; leaving the Reader, (for avoiding tediousness) to apply them to the
Doctors words.

Reply to page 3.5.

This page contains an unjust charge (as appears, before. 26. etc.) without
proofs.

So mystical and unintelligible a way etc.

. XLI.
The Churches directions for Prayer are so plain, and intelligible as the
practice of them has advanced infinite Souls even of the weaker and less
learned Sex to very great Perfection and Sanctity: The obscure expressions,
which are culled here out of Catholic Books are in the context joined with
others, that, according to the quality of the matter, sufficiently explain
them. And the Reader is here dealt withal, as if in a Dictionary one should
cancel or hide the language understood; and then persuade us, we can make no
use of such an vn-intelligible Book: To know the truth of which I wish any
piously disposed Protestant, (upon occasion of this contest,) would but read
some of the Churches books of Devotion. I doubt not such would be so far from
complaining of their obscurity, as to be rather much excited to practice their
excellent lessons.

. XLII.
Leaving the Scriptures etc. The Holy Scriptures do warrant* and secure the
Churches common Doctrines and Rules of Devotion; Neither can any of these be
showed dissonant from, or contrary to them: provided, both be rightly
understood. Only I hope the Church may be excused, for not showing all the
words perhaps she uses in her writings of Devotion to be in Scripture; as well
as the Nicene Fathers, for not showing (...) there.

Reply to page. 326.

That bitter enemy of theirs called Reason etc.

This Author is a great Common Reason Man;. XLIII.
and often appeals, and summons us to the Bar of Reason; and would persuade,
that the Religion of Catholics is no Reasonable Religion. But it is noted
(which is some prejudice to him and his party) that all Heretics have always
done the like. Nay it is also Clear, that they cannot do otherwise. For, since
a cause must be defended either by Authority or Reason, (for who will at once
affront both these?) whilst these men do oppose the one, they are driven to
pretend the other. To clear this matter, I suppose by Reason is not meant here
merely arguing, or reasoning: for this is, and must be* used equally on all
sides, on all Subjects, either when we dispute for, or against Reason. Here
then must be meant, the Natural Principles of Reason that Catholics are
enemies to. And, contrarily, Catholics affirm, that neither they, nor their
Religion maintains (though indeed many things above, yet) any thing contrary
to, true Reason; or any true Principle thereof. For, omne verum omni vero
consonat? But notwithstanding first they contend, that many things in Religion
may seem contrary to the best Arguments which we have from seeming Reason, or
from the seeming Principles thereof; and so, that seeming Reason (for, true,
all things considered, never can do so) dictates one thing to us, and Religion,
or Divine Revelation, another: and, that here all seeming contrary Reason, I
add, or also sense whatever, is to yield to an undoubted Revelation: and the
certainty of Such Revelation, only, is abundantly sufficient to prove the
contrary to be no true Principle of Reason, nor true information of Sense. And
nothing is more Reasonable then this; because Gods Revelation carries also the
Divine Reason (if I may so say) or knowledge along with it; which is above
man's. 2. Catholics affirm, that, as many things in Religion are contrary to
seeming Reason; so many go above or beyond the latitude, or capacity of Reason.
In which though our Reason apprehends that these things are so, they are
proposed to it; and apprehended also some Motives, why, in prudence, it may
believe them to be so; yet from its own Principles it cannot comprehend, why,
or how, they are so: Nor can discover any such things by its own light.
Animalis homo non percipit, quae sunt Spiritus Dei; stultitia enim illi, and
non potest intelligere, quia Spiritualiter examinantur. 1. Cor. 2.1^. -- 1.26.-
^or. 5, 7.10 6.
- Non multi sapientes etc. -- Per fidem ambulamus, and non per speciem; -- In
Captivitatem redigentes intellectum, in obsequium Christi. And S. Austin's-
Christianus sum; Credo, quod nescio, De Trinitate. Sermon. 1.
are passages here worthy this Authors better consideration.

More liable to fall into the dotages etc. ^sec;. LXIV*
Persons of a temper naturally more disposed to Religion are also, in a
special manner disposed to Fear, Humility, and Obedience, and such as they are
most inclined to, so if remaining in the Catholic Church, they are
sufficiently secured in, following the conduct of their Spiritual Guides, from
all miscarriages in Religion; from Superstion, Enthusiasme, etc. Mean while, to
tell men that the devoutly inclined are apt to fall into Superstition, or
Enthusiasme, what is it, but to deter them from Devotion; 1 Thessalonians ^.19.
and to quench the Spirit?

Is in the use of the greatest Reason etc. The conduct of Gods Spirit, is
another thing then the use of natural Reason and Prudence. It consists well
with it indeed; but not in it. And many times also our seemingly greatest
Reason and Prudence guide us in a way quite contrary to the Spirit. Therefore
said the Apostle- Fides nostra non est in sapientia hominum* sed in virtute. 1.
Cor. 2 9. 1. Cor. ^.^5
(or if you will Spiritu) Dei And- Quod stultum est Dei sapientius est
hominibus.

The design of that Church, etc. Sectas non metuunt introducere,. XLV.
blasphemantes. I fear a severe account, 2. Pet. 2 ^^
(without a Retraction of this) will one day be required for making here the
Church Catholic, for so many ages before Luther, not only to have practiced
erroneously, but to have designed so wickedly, as to conspire against the true
practice of Christianity, as a thing found contrary to her interest* Of which
Church those, who lived then said in their creed.- Credo vnam, Sanctam,
Catholicam, Ecclesiam.

Reply to page 327.

Keeping the Bible out of the hands, etc. The Holy Scriptures are not kept out
of the hands of any such persons of what condition soever, To. p. 327.
as their Spiritual Superiors and Confessors, who are acquainted with their
Consciences, do conceive, may receive more benefit, then hurt by reading them.
But these, mean while, (as sad experience shows,) are better withheld from all
such, who seem self-wise, disobedient, not well-contented and resigned, in all
matters difficult, and controverted there, to submit to the Church's judgment.

Tedious and ceremonious way of external Devotion,. XLVI.
etc. Here we hear, on the one side, that the Churches long and ceremonious
external Devotions are as dull, and cold, as the earth it self: on the other,
that her Mental Prayer, Abstraction, Introversion etc. ends either in
Enthusiasme, Luke 7.31.
or Madness. -- Cantavit allis, and non saltant; lamentavit and non plorant;
Because they are like froward children, out of love with Devotion; and never to
be pleased. By this tedious and ceremonious way of external Devotion as dull
and cold as the earth it self, I conceive, is either meant the Churches
Liturgy; for which we know, since the great complaints of it in Cromwels time,
that there are many among Protestants that are no hearty Friends, and which the
Reformation indeed, to her great loss, has much abridged; or he means the
Forms of vocal Prayer that are often iterated, so to continue the Devotions of
such persons, as cannot read: Both of these most Prudently, and piously
ordered. And, what humble person, would not extol and reverence the Judgment
and Authority of the Church of so many Ages?

They commend Abstractednes of life; mental Prayer;. XLVII.
Passive union etc. Terms of Art, invented for expressing something
compendiously and in one word, which before was expressed by Circumlocutions,
and in many, and freely indulged in all other Arts and Sciences, I see no
Reason, why they may not also be current in Mystical Theology, or in this
Divine Art of Prayer. To collect here together (that I may not in every page be
troubled with them) all the hard or unintelligible Terms here Complained of in
the Roman Devotion, and which are said p. 372.
must, either end in Enthusiasme, or Madness; and again* p. 335. that they must
be left to be understood by mad men, and practiced, by fools) they are either
Terms describing the Divine Favors received in Prayer; or describing the
exercise it self of Prayer, and Devotion. Of the first kind are these. Passive
Unions; Divine inactions; a Super essential Life of the Soul; Deiformity;
Deification; the Fund, or Depth; the Apex, or Supreme point, of the Soul, or
Spirit; Aspirations, and Elevations of the Superior Will; the Nothingness of
the Creature; God himself, nothing that, or no such thing as, any Creature is;
Divine inspirations, new Revelations.

Of the latter these: Mental Prayer, Abstraction of life; a state of
introversion; Self Annihilation; unknowing our selves, unknowing God; Removing
Images of God, Images of the Creatures; an Active and a contemplative state of
Prayer. These are the unintelligible words that I could find in these pages;
perhaps, if I have missed some, I may meet with them in passing along. Now it
is strange, that this Author, who in the Book where he found these words must
find also the explications of them, would not give the Reader, the one with the
other. I shall run over them in the order they lie, and supply this defect of
his; but very briefly, to any Ingenuous Reader, for most of them, it seems
labor lost.

. XLVIII.
Passive Unions are sufficiently explained before. 30.31. called Passive, See
Sancta Sophia 3. Treat. p. 243.266.
not that, when herein a Soul contemplates God, she may not be said in some
sort Active; but, Because, when God is pleased so graciously to communicate
himself to the Soul, the Soul is taken out of her own disposal, and does and
must see and think only what God will have her, and this no longer then his
good pleasure is such. Neither can any dispositions or preparations that the
Soul can use, assuredly procure it. Thus Sancta Sophia explains this word; And
the Expression is secured by such like Scripture language -- Qui Spiritu Dei
aguntur -- Not I live, Romans 8.14 Gal. 2.20. Cor. 15.10. Matt. 10.20.
but Christ in me, -- Not I work, but the Grace of God which is with me, -- Not
ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father, that speaks in you. Romans 8.26
So the Spirit, that is in us, said to intercede for us with groans
unutterable. So the Natural actions of S. Paul's Soul seem wholly suspended,
when it knew not so much, as whether it was in, or out of the Body. Hierotheus
(says S. Dionysius Areopag. De Divin. nomm. c. 2.
) was not only (...) but (...). All the Divine influences admit degrees: and
the Soul is said to be more Passive as the Holy Spirit is more operative: and
so, in it is strongest and most extraordinary workings, the Soul is hindered at
least from reflecting on it is own action, and seems to it self not to act at
all: as in a great intention of the Mind, the actions of our senses, what we
then see or hear, are not at all observed. Divine Inaction is, in plain
English, the acting of God, or his Spirit in us, which, in the perfect is more
extraordinary, sensible, and manifest.

A Superessentiall life of the Soul; Superessentiall is a composit (as also
many other words with (...) added to them) used much by Dionysius Areopag: or
the Ancient Author of those works; signifying no more then Superlative; a life
of the Soul much advanced by Gods Spirit above it is natural operations and
apprehensions. Deiformity and Deification are words not of late only but
Anciently used; signifying an union with God not in Essence, but by Grace; and
this union still more intimate, as the Grace more extraordinary: secured by
like Scripture language. For Deiforme -- Renewed to the Image of our Creator-
Changed into the Image of our Lord -- Transformed by the renewing of our Mind.
Col. 3.10. -- 2. Cor 3.18. Romans 12.2. Heb. 6.4.5. - 2. Pet. 1.4. - 1. Cor.
6.17. Ephesians. 3.19.
For Deification, Partakers of the Divine Nature and of the Powers of the
future World. -- The Lord and we made one Spirit -- Filled with all the fullness
of God etc. And, if any of these may be communicated to the lowest rank of
Gods Saints, the less may the Mysticks be blamed for applying them to the
highest, and most perfect. The reason of the Mysticks using sometimes the
expression of the Depth, Fund (that is in plain English, the Bottom;) or Apex;
the Supreme Point (or top,) of the Soul, or Spirit, (that is the innermost; or
the highest, part of the Soul,) is mentioned before,. 30.
viz. a double motion, observed by the experienced, in the Soul, in Gods
communicating his more special Presence, and more extraordinary Graces to it,
(as it is in Ecstasies, and Rapts, or inferior Transports somewhat partaking
thereof;) either one Inward, or one Upward. We find in Scripture Ps. 64.7. --
67.28. Ephesians. 3.18.
Cor altum -- and Excessus mentis -- and Heights, and Depths, of Love,
answering those* and this Author may find in the Common Prayer Book: A sinner
repenting from the bottom of his heart; and that is, of his Soul: and what more
usual, then to say; a Man in passion (and this Holy Love is such) is
transported above, beyond beside, himself? yet some Mystick's there are, who
use Fund, to express the lower and affective part of the Soul, and Apex
Spiritus, to express the Superior, and Intellective. However the impropriety of
a term may be excused, where the explication of it prevents mistakes. Superior
Intellect and Will are School-terms called so from the Supernaturalness, and
sublimity of the object, to which some actions of these Faculties are directed.

Nothingness of the Creature is an expression of it is extreme litlenes compared
with God;. XLIX.
And, if he be all in all; and I am, be a name that none but himself can claim;
this will carry it, that, in some sense they are nothing and that they are not;
It is no hard matter, to show the Apostle saying, that Man is nothing. If a man
think himself something, when he is nothing. Gal. 6.3.- The planter and the
waterer both nothing 1. Cor. 3.7. And, Things that are not- 1. Cor. 1.18. But
the Mystick's nothing chiefly is; when we think them as nothing; and so, think
nothing of them; as the greater Saints still do less. Again there is a
nothingness that may be affirmed of God also, in respect of his being nothing
that the Creature, or any thing that we know, is; and whose Being, as yet, is
better apprehended by us negatively, and by what he is not, removing all the
natures and imperfections of Creatures from him; then positively, and by
affirming what he is, of whom, nothing that man does, or can, apprehend* has
the least Similitude. S. Dionysius is much in this; and so since him the
Mysticks. And the sum is. 1. to instruct us; That, for obtaining such an union
with God, in a more special presence thereof to devout Souls in Prayer, we need
not frame to our selves any curious Ideas of him who is incomprehensible; and
that the less we labor with the Intellect to do this, the better; and the less
hindrance to Devotion; but rather we are to contemplate him by Faith, as the
most beatifying object of our Love, and containing in him all Perfection; and
to be contented with such a general confused, obscure notion of him, as this
life affoords. 2. and also to signify, that the nearer any one, in such high
contemplation, is admitted to a fuller sight of his Perfections and Beauty, the
more still they are dazzled, and darkened, with his light; and are less able to
express, what they see: The more also a Creature becoms vile unto them: and as
his greatness more appears to any one, the more their Smalness or Nothingness:
As at the farther distance, we are removed from any thing, the less still it
shows to us, and at last quite vanishes.

. L.
Divine Inspirations; or Illuminations and Infusions of the Holy Spirit,
enlightening the understanding with a right apprehension and judgment of
things, and inspiring into the will holy desires, and such as are acceptable to
God, and conformable unto his will, surely this Author will not deny. These are
frequently petitioned for in the public Prayers of the Church, Catholic, and
Protestant; I dare not spend long time in proving them, least I should incurr
the censure below p. 338. Only I wonder how they came to be put here amongst
non-intelligibles. Must nothing be ackowledged, and allowed, that Fanatics
pretend to? For new Revelations see what has bin said before. 4. and let the
Scriptures be considered, that are cited. 24.- If any thing be revealed to
another, let the first hold his peace. And Every one of you has a Revelation:
1. Cor. 1^.30. and ^^. Ephesians. 1.17. etc. c. 3.16. etc.
And the Apostle's praying for the Ephesians- That God would give unto them the
Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, for opening the eyes of their understanding,
and to comprehend the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of
Christ etc. -- To which Scriptures may be added the place of Saint Austin, when
going to write of the Trinity, De Trinit. c. ^.
-- Si quid autem aliter sapio; id quoque mihi ipsa revelabit, sive per
occultas inspirationes, atque admonitiones, sive per manifesta eloquia sua,
etc. -- And so, Confess. lib. 11. c. 22. About the measuring of time -- Exarsit
(says he) animus meus nosse istud implicatissimum enigma. Noli claudere Domine
Deus, noli claudere desiderio meo ista. If it be asked, what are, or may be,
the Subjects of such new Revelations? I answer. All matters concerning either
an Orthodox Faith, or an holy life; All the Precepts, and Counsels of
Perfection, already delivered in the Gospel; but these extended and applied,
to several particulars, wherein we cannot otherwise without such new light be
so certainly guided, such new illustrations, and influences of the Holy Spirit
often producing in us a firmer assent, and a greater affection to them; Showing
Divine Mysteries more clearly and profoundly; Pressing Christian Duties more
efficaciously; Instructing us in particular cases and circumstances, and with
considering our present disposition, or condition; Directing us, of things
indifferent, or also good, proposed, which is to be performed as the more
perfect, more acceptable to God, beneficial to us; Often acquainting and
admonishing us of our infirmities and temptations; Discovering also Secrets;
Events, and matters of Fact past, present, future; as they may happen to
concern the benefit of ourselves, or others; lastly new Revelations of former
Revelations, as some circumstantial application of them is necessary.

. LI.
Mental Prayer, is praying with, or in the mind, with a liberty from set
forms; Abstraction of life, is only sequestring ourselves, as much as we can
from wordly cares and business, especially at the time of our Devotions.
Introversion is nothing more then a Recollection of the mind, from all external
objects, and acts, which distract it, into it self, there to spend all it is
thoughts, and affections on God and pious Meditations. Convertimini ad cor
Accedet homo ad cor altum, Psalm. 85.9.*64.7. Luke 17.21
is Scripture Language; and Regnum Dei intra vos, says our Lord. And -- Ipse
nomen contemplationis suscipit, qui cor intus habet, Says S. Gregory In Ezech.
Hom. 17. A state of introversion, is a strong and well-confirmed habit of it,
when we have gotten a power over ourselves to do it without difficulty. Self
annihilation is self denial, self mortification; such was the Apostle's, when
he said- I am nothing 2. Cor. 12.11. I wish there were not more, deficient in
the practice, than ignorant in the meaning, of these. Unknowing ourselves,
unknowing God; Removing the Images of the Creatures, and of God; 1. as much as
we can, forgetting our selves, and other Creatures; and defacing the hurtful
phantasme, or Images we have of them in our minds (though I would not be here
understood to include amongst them, the Humanity of our ever Blessed Lord,
which is the Chief nourishment, and support of all true Devotion) Defacing
them, I say, first, and chiefly, as they relate to our Affections; in retaining
no inordinate inclinations or adherence to them, or any of them: in neither
solicitously seeking, nor willingly admitting when offered, consolations from
them; (a sure way, but after some patience, to find consolations much greater
in and from God.) Happiest he who ever thus most vnknows both them, and
himself; and thus he becomes the better prepared for a more immediate, and
intimate union, by Love, to his Creator; This our being wholly Mortified to the
world and weaned from the Creature (and so from ourselves) as if it were not,
is one of the chief Lessons that is taught in the Catholic School of
Devotion. And as God manifests to any Souls his Greatness, so there more appears
to them, the litleness or nothingness of the Creature. 2. Removing them, As
they relate to our Meditations; in laying aside, as much as we can these
workings of the Brain, after the Soul perceiues herself sufficiently excited
by them to Acts of Love: for now, Such Meditations become hindrances, and
distractions to Contemplation, and then, when our Will is fixed on that
supremely amiable object, the enioyment of which we seek by them: Which the
Affective part of the Soul more quietly possesses, as our imagination works
and disturbeth it less; and when the Soul in respect of these Images, is at it
were in the dark and sees least of them, I mean such Images, as the act of
love, and contemplation, or affective meditation (rather infused then acquired)
do not necessarily include. Indeed the greatest disturbance we find in our
prayers (and therefore it needs to be no wonder if the Mysticks speak so much of
them) is from these Images of wordly things; so lively drawn and imprinted in
our Fancy by our much trafficking with them, that the Soul at her devotions is
frequently casting her eye aside, upon them: And the greatest art of a
christian is to deface these Images there, as much as he can, that he may keep
his mind fixed on something much nobler, and better: and the way to obliterate
them again is, to sequester ourselves, as much as necessity and duty permits,
from negotiating with these wordly affairs, and cares, that necessarily stay
them there.

. LII.
Of removing these Images S. Dionysius speaks much: See the much noted place De
Mystic, Theolog. c. 1. Tu vero Timothee Charissime, intentissima contuendis
Spectaculis Mysticis exercitatione, and sensus linguae, and intellectuales
operationes; and sensibilia, and intelligibilia omnia, etc. v^ illi jungaris,
qui super omnem substantiam omnem quae scientiam est. Libero enim solutoque a
Te, and ab omnibus discessu, ad divinarum tenebrarum radium super-essentialem
contendes. And thus S. Gregory In Ezech. Hom. 1^.
- Qui adhuc exteriora immoderatius cogitant; quae sint de aeterno lumine rimae
contemplationis, ignorant. Neque enim cum corporearum rerum imaginibus illa se
infusio incorporea lucis capit: quia dum sola visibilia cogitantur, lumen
invisibile ad mentem non admittitur. And elsewhere Moral. l. 24. c. 13.
Quia per illas imaginationes corporeas infra se lapsa est anima, sine illis
supra se ire conatur (id est, in contemplatione:) and postquam per multa
indecenter sparsa est, in vnum se colligere nititur; and si magna vi amoris
prevalet, esse vnum atque incorporeum contempletur. To the same purpose S.
Austin, of contemplation- Si cui sileat tumultus carnis, sileant phantasiae
terrae, Et ipsa sibi anima sileat, and transeat se, non se cogitando, etc. See
before. 33. And S. Bernard In Cant. Sermon. 73.
on Revertere dilecte mi: sponsa revocat; oblita totum quod non ille est se
quoque ipsam.)

The same that is said here of the Images of Creatures may be also of such
gross and unrefined Images or Imaginations, borrowed from the creature, as are
had of God; which the experienced find very different from, and diminutiue of,
those discoveries and participations of him, to which he is pleased sometimes to
admit them. An Active and a Contemplative state of Prayer is nothing else but
the way of Meditation, the state of Beginners, and of Contemplation, the state
of greater Proficients: the one more using the understanding, other more the
will and Affections: The one, the way to the other.

. LIII.
And lastly, what comes all this Arabic and canting (as some Discouragers of
Devotion would make us believe it) I say what comes it to? but that which is
given account of before. 26. etc. That by much purity of Conscience, and
Solitude, so much as business permits, and frequent Mental Prayer, and
Abstracting of ourselves from earthly things, and by retiring into ourselves
(where, and not abroad, is that Regnum Dei) from things without us, by self
mortification, unknowing, and forgetting our selves, and all other creatures,
and their delights, we may attain, to a perfecter love of God, and a greater
fruition of him in this world to be united to, and made like, him; and to have
his Image, defaced by the Fall to a very eminent degree, renewed in us; and to
become one Spirit with him; and hence also enabled to perform all Christian
virtues that our state of life calls us to, in a much more amorous, and
Heroical way. Thus as this Author leaves such terms and way of Devotion to be
understood by madmen, and practiced by Fools, so I hope I have showed them
easy to be understood by the Sober, and necessary to be practiced by the
Devout. And so I proceed to attend the remainder of his discourse with my
Remarks.. LIVE.


Came first into request in the Monastic Orders etc. Poverty or freedom from
wordly wealth and cares; Celibacy, Solitude, obedience, silence, which are the
vows and Practices of a Monastic life (much frequented in the Church ever
since Constantines times, and the first secular liberty of Christianity.) are
excellent dispositions and preparations for Prayer and Contemplation, and our
ascending to the highest degree of a Spiritual life.

The men who solemnly divulged it,. LV.
were Rusbrochius etc. Both the Fathers See. 33. etc.
and Schoolmen were frequent on this Subject of perfect Contemplation, before
Rusbrochius. And among others these: S. Dionysius Areopage, Cassian, S.
Gregory, S. Bernard, Hugo, and Richardus de Sancto Victore, S. Thomas, S.
Bonaventure, etc. Some of them also writing Tracts under the name of Mystical
Theology, So that the writers on this subject are both more numerous, and more
ancient, then he would make the world believe. Rusbrochius and Suso were
persons eminent in Sanctity, and Spiritual life, and writ their own
Experiences. Ludovicus Blosius's works are deservedly much commended; and were
highly esteemed, and much read by the pious Emperor Charles the Fifth; (though
their Author modestly refused his preferments.) On whom also they seem in part
to have wrought this good effect, that, laying down his Empire, and Honors, he
ended his days in Retirement and Devotion.

Reply to p. 328.

Who after his many turnings etc. To. p. 328.. LVI.
There being so many Sects, and but one Church Catholic, makes a change of
Religion in many persons a thing not to be reproached, but highly commended.
And what Illaudable Constancy in Religion were this, that one born, must
therefore dye, among Sectaryes? M. Cressy, educated in a Religion, and a Church
that challenges no infallible Guidance of Souls and (as this writer says)
permits also, to all, liberty of opinion, made use of his privilege to change
the one, and the other, as he thought fit: (as many others daily do, some
running one way, some another:) till, after that Gods mercy had discovered to
him the Canonical Church Authority, which God has established for ever for the
Guidance of his Church, He, by an humble resignation of his judgment wholly
into it is sacred conduct, became fixed, and at rest. Nor does he take it for any
dishonor to him to be listed together with S. Benedict, S. Francis etc. in the
Roll of this Authors Fanatics.

Reply to p. 329.

To. p. 329.. LVII.
That concerns others (though it be their Salvation,) etc. This writer seems
no very charitable Glosser. After the words ( a sequestration from all business
that concerns others) in stead of, ( though it be their Salvation:) he should
have interposed ( that is, such business as is in things indifferent: and to
which, by obedience or charity, they are no way obliged) for so M. Cressy and
Sancta Sophia, often declare their meaning, in this very Section, and
frequently elsewhere.

What this pure Fund of the Spirit means, etc. For the hard terms which this
Author picks up here, and there in Sancta Sophia, and M. Cressy, and others,
stripped of from the context that would make them more intelligible and current,
I referr to the former explications. Blosius, by his Deiforme, Fund, which so
few know by experience, means nothing else but the Image or Presence of God
more perfectly imprinted in the intimat essence of the Soul, (what if I had
said, in the very center, or Bottom, of it?) by the extraordinary Graces of
his Holy Spirit, which he calls there Regnum Dei intra nos; and he goes on thus
in a sublime Description of it* Instit. Spiritualis. c. 12.
Ibi anima, quicquid est humanum exuens, and quod est divinum induens,
transformatur mutaturque in ^eum, sicut ferrum in igne positum formam ignis
accipit, and transmutatur in ignem. Manet tamen essentia animae sic Deificatae,
quemadmodum ferrum ignitum non desinit esse ferrum. Igitur ipsa anima, que
prius erat frigida, jam ardet; quae prius erat tenebrosa, jam lucet; quae prius
erat dura, jam mollis est. But these mirabilia super nos are not to be found in
the Rules of the Churches Devotions but in the gracious Effects thereof.

A way of knowing without thoughts etc.. LVIII.
These seeming contradictions which may be parellell'd with the like in Holy
Scripture, and several of them are borrowed from S. Dionysius, seem not
incapable of a good sense (though I do not find them thus put together in
Blosius; and this Author is very good at making Anagrams of such discourses by
displacing the parts of them as best fits his purpose.) For in such
supernatural communications, The Soul knows, or contemplates without any
thoughts, discursive; Sees in darkness; or in the obscurity of Faith, not
clearly. The Apostle expresses it 1. Cor. 12.12. Videmus per speculum, in
aenigmate, and says Heb. 11.1.- that Faith is an Evidence of things not seen.
Understands without Reason, that is, reasoning; Vnknows God, as to the notions
had of him formerly, by her perceiving him now another thing; Is melted and
brought to nothing; first mortified as to self love, interest etc. The Apostle
was so, when he said, I am nothing, and the old man perishes. 2. Cor. 12.11.
2. Cor. 4.16.
And then lost, and Swallowed up in God; He all in all 1. Cor. 15.28. and our
life hid in him Col. 3.3. or It, his life, rather then ours, Gal 2.20. By which
means all created being is put of, and that which is only Divine put on. Or, if
you will, in the Apostl'es phrase, the old man and all his lusts and affections
to the Creature put of, and the new put on: And the Soul is changed into God;
the word in Blosius is Deificata, a word anciently in use; that is in
Scripture, changed into his Image, or, filled with his fullness, or, made one
Spirit with him: As Iron heated into the nature of fire. But cetera desunt;
what follows is cut of; not serving this Authors turn: It follows in Blosius,
after mutatur in ignem (which is here translated, into the nature of fire) as
if he knew not into whose hands he might fall: manet tamen Essentia animae sic
Deificatae, quemadmodum ferrum ignitum non desinit esse ferrum etc. as I have
set down before? He only declaring it to be a change of Quality.

Reply to page 330.

Consider the Directions in order to it, To. p. 330.. LIX.
etc. The sum of that, which is cited here out of Sancta Sophia's directions,
for our attaining such Union with God, is this. That there is a seeking of Such
Union with God etc. either more with the acts of Meditation performed by the
Understanding; which is called an Active state of Prayer; or more by exercising
the Acts of Love by the Will, It being only assisted and furnished with some
common notions of the intellect, Of a general knowledge of God his being the
most perfect amiable and beatifying object, the most worthy of all praise,
honor, adoration, love etc. Without the trouble of those many phantasmes, and
images borrowed from the Creatures abroad, which the Intellect must make use of
in its subtle discourses, and which many times steal its thoughts away from
the Meditation designed. Of these Acts of Love you may see great variety for
patterns set down at the end of Sancta Sophia p. 26. etc. (Not that these two
Meditations and Aspirations, or that the Acts of the Intellect, and will are
perfectly severed from one another; but only secundum magis and minus; the one
used much more, then the other.) And this latter, is called a Contemplative
state of Prayer. And the latter of these, the Contemplative way, or Affective
Prayer, so much as it can be procured, in which the will resolutely pur^sues to
do what it can; (and almost always it can do something,) as to adoring,
praising, giving thanks, humiliation, resignation etc. upon some Mystery of our
Salvation simply presented unto it. I say this affective way of prayer is
recommended as the better and more advantageous, 1. As enjoying a greater
internal Solitude and quiet from these various imaginations, then such acute
speculations, or discursive Prayer do admit. (Of which thus S. Bernard De
interiori Domo. c. 70.
Ad huius scientiae pleni^udinem opus est potius intima compunctione, quam
profunda investigatione; suspirijs* quam argumentatione; lachrimis, quam
sententijs; Oratione quam lectione). As better searching into, and discovering
to us, our defects, by intentions, self love, and other inordinate affections,
in doing our duty, which duty our Love to God now more exactly purifies from
them. 3 As more simple and plain, and less liable to, illusions, curious
speculations, not un often running into errors, and mistakes, and occasioning
also pride and self conceit. 4. As the practice of it is more easy to all sorts
of People.

Of this Affective way of Devotion thus speaks one much experienced in
Spiritual matters Barbaso^ Amor, Divin. occult. Semitae part. 1. c. 16.
Si scire cupias, quid tibi faciendum, vt tam prestans bonum [fruitionem divini
amoris) consequaris, tribus verbis tibi declarabo. Exercita teipsum serio and
sedulo in Desiderio Divini amoris per ferventissimas aspirationes* and alios
actus voluntatis, assumens tibi, subjectum primi ac principalis tui Exercitii
interioris, hunc ipsum Amorem In id saltem vnice connitendo, vt, ex veritate
and toto cord tuo, Deo complaceas, cumque spiritum ad eum assidue habeas
intentum and elevatum; A quibusque aliis sive affectionibus sive
occupationibus, non necessariis expeditus: Animumque tuum interea accomodans,
ad tot diversos casus and eventus vitae humanae familiares, tam intra cum Deo*
quam extra Te, fortiter excipiendos. Ecce tibi totum quod pettisti pau^is
verbis comprehensum. And e^swhere Anatom. de l'Ame. part. 1. c. 16.
It is not by force of Speculations that one ascends to God but by good
affections; not by sublime Contemplations upon the Divine perfections but
rather by an humble, Simple, and well resigned will, seeking, aspiring, and
persevering, assisted with a pure and naked faith or simple consideration of
the Divine Majesty, worthy of all love, praise, honor, reverence. But if Gods
Grace work not so effectually with a soul, at the first, in this affective
way, nor any proficiency be observed therein, then ought the soul to repair to
a more vigorous excitation of it self by meditation and by administering to it
self all those motives aed Reasons possible, conducing to the end it aims at,
a greater love of God.

Reply to page 331.

Men given to sublime speculation are not so capable, To. p. 331.. LX.
etc. From the Precedents an observation is made as by S Sophia so by many
others; and decided, but not disproved, by this Author; That simple people, who
are less nimble and subtle in their notions, and women, who are commonly
stronger, and more tender in their Passions, by this way, which they can
chiefly take, arrive many times to a greater degree of the Love of, and Union
with, God, then persons of greater learning or wit, because, these are more
apt to take the former way of speculation, and to use their brain more, then
the heart. Abscondit saepientibus; Revelat parvulis. And here it seems the
Churches purging pills, that is her directions, for Prayer, are not so harsh or
ill to be taken, but that this Author says p. 332.
that women also easily swallow them without perceiving any bitterness in them.

To. p. 332.. LXI.
Reply to page. 332.

A most admirable way of contemplation with the will, etc. The applying of this
word Contemplation to such an act of the Will, is because, this its act is not
single, but accompanied with a simple intelligence, or apprehension, and sight
of the Object, performed by the Intellect, though, without any, or at least
much, discourse thereof: Both which Acts therefore Contemplation includes:
though of these two, the action of the will is much more considerable. And
hence is the question in the Schools: An contemplatio possit consistere in solo
actu voluntatis? With all Divine influxes into the Soul, both the intellect and
will seem affected, though not equally: and the soul sees and tastes such
celestial delights both at once. Neither are the Acts of the understanding in
Meditation to be conceived abstractively from all operation of the will
accompanying them: nor those of the will in Contemplation, or fruition,
abstractively from any operation of the understanding. The common use, and not
an Etymology, gives law to the sense, of words: Else what word almost may not
one make sport with? - Videte, quoniam suavis est Dominus: therefore as well
gustate, quoniam pulcher: This said, besides what is explained before, I think
I may securely pass on to the next Paragraph. p. 333. without a just charge of
having left any Roman Fanaticisme behind me.

Reply to page 333. To. p. 333*. LXII. N. 1.


The steps he sets down etc. Of the steps, in Order to the highest State of
Perfection, which this life arrives to, (mentioned in Sancta Sophia p. 32.) 1.
the first is the way of External, and Imaginary Exercises of Prayer; that is,
using the Discourse of the understanding* and Meditations, as also Vocal
Prayer; then which step Sancta Sophia observes many go no further, but end
their days in it; that is, In such Meditations is taken up the most part of
their Devotions.

2. The second step is the Exercise of the will and Affections, which, after
long practice, breaks forth into continual Aspirations and Elevations thereof.

3. The Third is Divine inaction, or the extraordinary, and supernatural, and
more sensible operations of Gods Spirit in the Soul wherein God acts more then
she, and which are not in her power at all to procure sooner, or retain longer,
then God pleases: of which much has bin said before.

4. After which usually,. LXII^* N. 2*
in the intervals of these celestial visits, do follow great Desolations of
Spirit, as the Experienced have described them; partly arising from a sense of
her loss, and an impatient longing after these favors, once tasted: and
partly, out of a great nauseating, and disrelish that she has now of those
entertainments of the Creature, from which she formerly received some content.
Such we may imagine was that of the Prophet David, when he said- Heu mihi, quia
incolatus meus prolongatus est, And- Concupiscit and deficit anima mea, in
atria Domini, -- And after a Non movebor in aeternum (Psalm. 29.) an Avertisti
faciem tuam, and factus sum conturbatus.

. LXIV. N. 3.
But not only this; but God also sometimes withdrawes even from his greatest
Saints, and that for some long duration of time, any sensible assistance at all
of his Grace, leaving the Soul as it were in its pure naturalls and as if he
were quite departed from it, in great Aridity, obscurity, solitude, pressure
and heavines, disgusted with all things she knows not why; performing still her
Devotions and accustomed duties of Piety and the service of God as formerly,
but without any sensible comfort in such performance; Meditation, Aspiration,
Reading, very difficult, sterile, insipid, and seeming without fruit; only
forbearing her consent to any sin, vanity, or sensuality, and not seeking any
secular consolations. Much discouraged also at such times many are, in
imagining, that God has so deserted them, for failings in their duty, or for
something wherein they have offended his Divine Majesty, which doubles this
anguish. Or, if not this, at least they imagine it to be caused by some great
indisposition of Body (as it is granted sometimes partly it may) so as some
begin therefore to dispense for a time with the former exercises of their
Devotion, and other pious employments. But notwithstanding many times in these,
the poor Soul is mistaken; and this strange deiection of Spirit, comes, without
any such respects, merely from the sole will of God, and is the ordinary course
of his proceeding with those also, who are by his former Graces well grounded,
and arrived to some degree of Perfection, and is sent only for their much
greater advancement therein, and the rendering them more capable of higher
favors; and therefore ought, as such, to be entertained with all equanimity,
patience, resignation, and conformity to his Will.

These Consolations, and Desolations, take as it were their certain turns in
them; as they do, in a lesser degree, in all the Regenerate; they have by
course a Day, and a Night, an Ascent toward God, and a Descent, and decadence
into themselves; a vivification by and in him, and a Mortification in
themselves; a Summer, wherein the branches shoot forth, and fruit comes to
maturity, and a Winter when the root spreads more, and the Tree becomes more
surely fixed. To all Gods Children do these vicissitudes happen, but these in a
higher degree to the further advanced in Perfection; and the greatest Favors
are preceded with greater Desolations: and these ordinarily proportioned one to
the other. And alwais necessary less or more are such purgations and refinings
of the Soul by these interior Crosses, because alwais something in them is
amiss, and as yet imperfect. Our natural corruption is still producing something
in us to be amended; and some self will, and self love to be pared away by this
sharp remedy, whilst we are in this life. And the benefit of these Desolations,
if rightly complied with, as well as of Divine Consolations is very great in
many respects.

. LXV. N. 4.
For herein it is, that the Soul comes most perfectly to know it self, and all
other Creatures; to see its own nothingness; and to be most perfectly purged,
and cleansed from all self-love, and propriety: and herein it is most
especially taught - non quiesceree in donis Dei, sed in Deo; - and Adorare Deum
in Spiritu and Veritate; not, in Devotione: and Exercere se ad Deum in
adversis, sicut in prosperis; the seeking gust, and suavity, and consolations
even in spiritual things being one of its imperfections since these are not God
himself. Herein it is, that the Soul is preserved amidst such Divine Favors,
which are apt to inflate it, in a due and necessary Humility ( Angelus Satanae
colaphisans, ne magnitudo Revelationum extollat me. Says the Apostle after his
Rapt.) Herein its true love and adherence to God ( Qui veniendo adjuvat; and
then, derelinquendo probat: Donis firmat, and then Tribulationibus tentat;
Says S. Gregory Moral. l. 20. c. 19.
) its perseverance and loyalty, are especially discerned, in keeping constant
in the service of him, when deprived of all consolation in it; avoiding any
application to the comforts of the Creature, when God has thus as it were
dismissed, and cast it of: But resigning it self and loving its misery for his
sake, and because it is his will that it should be so. An exercise wherein our
Lord himself was pleased to be tried (that he might become a merciful High
Priest before God-and (experimentally,) that he might compassionate our
infirmities in the great Desolation he underwent in the garden, Heb. 4.15-2.17.
the night before his passion. Where caepit pavere and caedere, says the
Evangelist, Matt. 26.37.38.- Mark. 14.33.
and that sad expression came from him Tristis est anima mea vsqu^ ad mortem
Tarry here, and watch with me Yet these Desolations also, in a Soul thus far
advanced in Grace, are not void of a mixture of joy and satisfaction, that it
has alwais in Gods will being performed in them; which will of God now in
whatever happens is a constant consolation to it, and the Apostles precept of
Semper gaudete is thus accomplished in such a Soul as well as his orate sine
intermissione; 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.17.
and go together. For there cannot want content, where the Mind has its
desire; nor does such a Mind want this, that is unanimous with the Divine Will:
the want of which conformity, is only from the loving of Something that is
against his Will. Wordly sorrows says S. Gregory affligentes, cruciant; but
these Spiritual reficiunt, dum affligunt. In the one is, In afflictione maeror,
but in the other, In merore letitia Moral. l. 23. c. 13.
: Nay more true Sweetness in these sorrows; then in the other's joys: And the
abstaining in such a sharp trial from all sin against God, or seeking comfort
from any thing besides him, or giving over her accustomed exercises of piety,
argues also then a close union of the Soul with God, though not so sensible;
and that when it thinks it self farthest from him, it is in some sort the
nearest to him. Lastly, by and upon these Spiritual Desolations ordinarily it
is, that the Soul afterward receives higher sensible visits, and caresses from
God, then any former were; for which the Soul seems best prepared by this her
extreme poverty, and lowness; and then it is, if ever, the Soul receives them
with more gratitude; and both highlier values them, and vilifies it self. And
it is Gods ordinary way to exalt us in proportion to our humility, Psalm. 9.10.
and to be Adjutor in tribulationibus, as in opportunitatibus, when also the
Soul is more endeared unto him by her sufferings. All this I have said, to show
that these Spiritual Desolations (of which this Author p. 333.
Ironically says, Then, when one would least expect them, follow etc.) are a
necessary part of the way to Perfection; and that the resistance of such
pressures when they come, or a noncompliance with them in showing much
irresignation and impatience, in seeking to relieve such spiritual desertions
with some secular contents in relaxing former holy practices and the like,
disappoints the Soul of those following consolations, which are the proper
reward of these sufferings, and disturbs Gods work in her, and good intentions
toward her; and hinders her growth in virtue, by her retaining still those
imperfections, and that self-love, which these, rightly received, would have
purged, and mortified. This of the fowrth step to Perfection, Desolation.

5. The fifth is a state more settled, constant, and tranquil, where neither
these Desolations are so frequent or necessary; nor those Celestial Visits so
violent, or so short.

A sad case etc.. LXVI.
Now whereas, upon the first of these steps, this Author descants thus- A sad
case to end our days as Christ and his Apostles did; who used this low
dispensation of praying to the last. But alas they never understood these
unions with God in the Fund of the Spirit; they taught men a plain and
intelligible way of serving God, and bid them look for Perfection in an other
world. Thus he; I ask, did our Lord and his Apostles end their days only, or
chiefly, in the first Step here; that of Meditation, and Discursive, or Vocal,
Prayer; and never ascend to the second Step, exercising more, therein, the
Will, and Affections, in Aspirations, and Elevations of the Soul to Gods. What
think we of the most exalted Disciple S. John every where discoursing so much
of Love? and of our dwelling, by Love, in God* and God in us? 1. Jo. 4.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Luke 21.36. Ephesians. 6.18.
What of those Precepts- Pray without ceasing* watch and pray alwais And with
all perseverance therein? Are these to be understood only of vocal and
discursive prayer, the first step; or not rather of affective prayer, the
second* (according to that- Qui semper desiderat semper orat:) which latter is
also much easier to be continued. Again What think we of our Lords spending so
long time in Prayer, often mentioned in the Gospells? - Rising up a great while
before day. for this purpose; Mar. 1.^5. Again, retiring into the wilderness,
for a greater vacancy to it, Luke 5.^6. Before the day of the Election of his
twelve Apostles, (the twelve Foundations of his Church,) ascending into a
solitary mountain, and there spending the whole night in prayer; His ascending
again into another mountain, before he took his last journey to Jerusalem, for
the accomplishing of his Passion, taking three of his Disciples with him; where
all the night again was spent in Prayer: for it is said, he descended not from
the hill till the next day: and that, there, the three Disciples were surprised
with sleep: Luke 9.37.32.
In which Prayer they saw his countenance changed, and an anticipated
appearance of his glory, such as he shall have when he comes to judgment, 2.
Pet. 1.16. Matt. 16.28.
and an apparition also of Moses and Elias; they by a supernatural
illumination, knowing also who the persons were; and his disciple Peter in such
an Extatick joy, as that he cried out -- Bonum est esse hic etc. Luke 9.33.
not knowing, says the Evangelist, what he said. So, In our Lords being in
Prayer presently after John's baptizing him, happened the Vision of the Heavens
opened, the Holy Ghost descending upon him in a bodily shape like a Dove, seen
by the Baptist: Luke 3.21.22. Luke 9.35.
and a voice from heaven speaking to him, as here- Thou art my beloved son: And
then a Rapt of the same Spirit, that carried him into the desert: Where also we
may rationally imagine his time to have bin wholly spent in Prayer and Devotion;
and this in such a degree, as to suspend and supersede the ordinary functions
of nature as to eating and drinking; and in these his Prayers the Tempter to
have assaulted him- What think we, Jo. 11.33.38.
again, of our Lords Infremuit Spiritu once, and again, in his Prayer to his
Father for the resurrection of Lazarus? of the ravishing expressions of his
love, and tender affection, and aspirations after a perfect union of all his
with Him, and his Father, in his prayer after his last supper, delivered Io.
17. c. from the 20. ver. to the end. Luke 22.44
And lastly of his (...) in the garden; with few words, but much passion; being
in an Agony, and sweating blood and making frequent acts of Resignation, and
conformity to the will of his Father. What think we again of S. Peter's
Extaticall prayer and his vision on Simon the Tanners house top Act. 10.9. and
again S. Paul's in the Temple Act. 22.17. Whilst I prayed, I was in an ecstasy
etc. Did our Lord and his Apostles, in the Devotions here mentioned, not ascend
at all to that which the Mysticks make the second step to perfection, the
aspirations and Elevations of the will and affections; but only stay on the
first step? and did they understand nothing of that the Mysticks call passive
Unions with God? Their Ecstasies and Raptures and their being in the Spirit,
their (...) 2. Cor. 12.4* and (...) Romans 8.6. argue other wise. But then are
Passive Unions the obscure and unintelligible way of serving God, p. 14.
that the Church teaches in her Rules of Devotion; or, the end rather, which
her plain and intelligible way sometimes attains to? Lastly, is there not, in
some sort a state of Perfection also in this world? 1. Cor. 2.6. We speak
wisdom among the perfect. And Phil. 3.15. let us, as many as be perfect, be
thus minded. And Luke 6.40. Every one that is perfect, shall be as his Master
(that is in sufferings like him.) The Author may do well to review this passage.

. LXVII.
He describes the progress toward this state, etc. These expressions of a
graduall Recollection of the Faculties, the External, Internal, Inferior,
Superior, in a suspension and cessation of them from working on the Creature
and its Images, and their being fixed on God in perfect Contemplation, are only
mentioned (out of Harphius p. 575.509
and others) by Sancta Sophia, 2. vol. p. 244.
not justified: after which he concludes only this: It is certain that by a
frequent and constant exercise of Internal Prayer of the will joined with
Mortification, the Soul comes to operate more, and more abstracted from sense,
and more elevated above the corporeal organs and Faculties.

To. p. 334.
Reply to page 334.

. LXVIII.
The state of nothingness, etc. How the Creature and all its Glory, and among
the rest the Soul also itself appears a mere Vacuity, and emptines, and Nothing
to a Soul filled with the love, and with a more special and perceptible sense
of God within it: and How God himself also then more clearly appears No such
thing as we do, or can, conceive of him by sensible imaginations; and is
truelier known negatively by us, what he is not, then positively what he is,
enough has bin said already;. 51. and 53.
and more needs not; unless I should observe here this Author's diligence in
raking up several little heterogeneous patches out of several pages and
chapters, and weaving them together as one piece, either cutting of the
explications, or not giving them entire, to render all obscure, and so
pertinent to his subject, Fanaticism.

A feeling of her not being etc.. LXIX.
Sancta Sophia 2. vol. p. 304.
says this: that the Soul so advanced in contemplation comes to a feeling
indeed of her not being; and by consequence, of the not being of Creatures; and
that this is a real truth. But then goes on Not as if the Soul, or other
creatures either did cease according to their Natural being; or as if a
natural Being were indeed no, real Being: but that the Soul truly apprehends
now, that they have no such Being of themselves, but all of God. Whenas
formerly in her sinfully adhering to them and staying in them with love, she
carried her self toward them as if she thought them to have a being and
subsistence of, and in, themselves, and not of God, and that they might be
loved in themselves, etc. And thus I suppose the mist that was cast before the
Readers eyes is dispelled. But the Author having recited Sancta Sophia's words
as far as ( which is a real truth,) here gives over and draws the curtain
before his Reader, that he may see no further: and then goes on: A real truth
or else intolerable nonsense; and so, as after a great victory, displays his
colors till we come to his. 15. concluding, that he leaves such stuf to be
understood by mad men, and practiced by fools. So Festus said S. Paul was mad,
when he spoke forth the words of truth, and soberness.

To p. 335.. LXX.
Reply to p. 335.

As this Author Says Friar Bernard, etc. If what is said of Friar Bernard, and
Masseus be true, which I am not obliged to justify, of their making some
vn-articulate groans or noise, or strange gestures and motions, in the fervor
of their Devotions, so we read also of the Spirits groans Romans 8 ^6. And
David's dancing; 2. Sam. 6.14. 1 Samuel 19.24. Jer. 1.6. vulg.
and Saul's stripping of his clothes at Ramach, and lying naked for a day and a
night; And Masseus his V. V V seems no more then the Prophet Ieremys. A.AA.
Grief and Fear have their inarticulate notes, and extravagant Gesture, why not
Joy and Love? Habent suas voces affectus, per quas, se etiam cum nolunt,
produnt. Says S. Bernard in Cant. Sermon. 67.
speaking of Contemplation.

Proposed the not doing etc. Sancta Sophias words 1. vol. p. 63. To. p. 336.
. 1^. are -- Generally and ordinarily speaking, when there is proposed the
doing, or not doing, of any external work, and that both of them are in
themselves lawful (that is the doing or not doing them, Sancta Soph. 1. vol.
p. 246.
when we have no obligation to either by virtue of any external law) the Divine
inspiration in Contemplative Souls moves to the not doing; because this is more
suitable to their present state; and to that abstraction of life which they
profess: except when the doing may prove a more beneficial mortification to
self-love. This Author gives it us here thus- Generally, when there is
proposed, the not doing or doing of an external work, and both of them are
lawful, the Divine Inspiration moves to the not doing: changing here Generally
speaking, or most commonly; into Generally, when, or alwais when. Again
omitting the limitation ( in Contemplative Souls) and the (except) that
follows, and Sancta Sophias Reason as for these Contemplatives, Having thus
prepared this passage, and rendered it easy for a Confutation, he falls to
battering down his own work; and goes on. A most excellent and Apostolical
Doctrine etc.

The doing things merely for Edification,. LXXI.
etc. It is not strange, That one good work may be an impediment to another, as
to some present circumstances better or more necessary. As for example: A woork
done merely for Edification, may be an impediment to our Prayers, at a time
when this latter duty is more necessary. As the Apostles had inspirations for
external works, preaching etc. and for giving good example thereby, so doubtless
at other times, Act. 10.9.
they had, of forbearing these, and retiring rather to Prayer; and it is not to
be believed, that they, who exhorted others to pray continually, omitted this
duty themselves. Again; As they had holy Inspirations to external works, to
preaching etc. so may another have them to forbear preaching; and rather to be
take himself to Solitude, Reading, Meditation, as this is more necessary and
beneficial to himself, then his doing the former would be to others. Nor I
hope was S. John Baptist's business in the desert, whose chief practice there
must needs be Prayer; nor Anna's in the Temple, who is said not to have
departed thence, Luke 2.37.
but served God there with prayers night and day, unlawful emploiments. And so
it is, that an undiscreet zeal of doing good to others hinders many imperfect
Souls from that charity, and robbs them of that time, which they owe much
rather to themselves.

Reply to p. 337.

To. p. 337.. LXXII.
What becomes of all the precepts they have left us, etc. The precepts the
Apostles have left us of doing good, of mutual edification, of constant business
besides the Commands for the outward duties of worship, are affirmed by none to
be hindrances in the way to Perfection. Nay further; so much, in any of these,
as the Apostles have commanded, is necessary to Perfection. But will this
Author say, that the Contemplatives, or Sancta Sophia in their Rules oppose any
of these, or other external duty whatever, in such time, and place, and other
circumstances, as the Apostles have commanded it? For, so often, the omission
of it is not lawful (they always suppose) but a sin. Or, 2. will he say
because external good works, outward duties of worship etc. are Apostolical
Precepts, therefore private prayer is none? Or 3. will he argue: when ever we
can do any of these, therefore we may not at any such time better omit them, and
do something else? All these consequences are faulty. Affirmative Precepts
oblige not all persons, not at all, times; and the Acts of them are in
consilio, not Praecepto, except in some case of necessity; and then toties
quoties, the Contemplative's Devotions, as they profess are to be laid aside.

Internal liver to pretend etc.. LXXIII.
Sancta Sophia grants Spiritual Persons sometimes to have such Supernatural
Favors; 1. vol. p. 65.
yet would it not have such persons* easily to pretend them (least perhaps they
may be mistaken, when indeed they have them not;) Nor so much as desire them,
nay rather pray against them, least considering their own weakness, they should
abuse them to vanity and pride: lastly nor to esteem, or execute any thing
according to them, unless approved by Superiors.

Obliged to resign their Judgments,. LXXIV. a. vol. p. 280.. 37.
etc. S. Sophia's words are -- In such cases all Souls are not so absolutely
obliged etc. Which Proposition is brought in here by this Author, but the Cases
left out: After which manner Catholic Casuists, and Schoolmen are very
ordinarily used by Ptotestant Writers, and particularly by Doctor Tailor, whom
this Author much follows. Now, the Cases are: 1. If the Souls be such as are
eminently perfect, and not little experienced, and such as have not as yet their
senses well exercised in discerning Good and Evil; Heb. 5.16.
2. that there be great certainty, that the Internal Direction is from God. 3.
and that it be in actions good or indifferent, and where is no question or
Scrupule in such person of the lawfulness of either doing or omiting it: 4.
that if a Superior shoud Command any thing contrary thereto, he is to be obeyed,
and no such interior Illumination, or call obliges in such case: S. Sophia.
1. vol. p. 135.138.
5. that where no such contrary command, yet, if the matter be of considerable
moment, the express approbation, or permission, of their Superior is to be
observed. 1. vol. p. 147.
Let this Author fit these Cases to the Fanatics: And then let the Fanatics,
in Gods name, take their Liberty. For it is not necessary, where no reasonable
cause of doubt, or fear of Sin, to consult; or, when consulting, to resign our
judgment to others concerning any thing that happens to us; provided, such
allow it a thing good or indifferent. But we may not argue here; If somein some
things have no cause, therefore none in anything can have any cause, of
Scrupule, and of consulting and following another counsel.

M. Cressy in his preface, etc. M Cressy in his Preface,. LXXV.
as also Sancta Sophia do at large show the difference between the Inspirations
or Revelations allowed in the Church of Rome, and those of Fanatics, in the
places, and words cited before. 15. Those of the Fanatics being easily
discernable to be false, and suggestions of the Evil Spirit, not by Prayer
only, but by the Divine laws, these inspirings being pretended by them in
things not indifferent, but directly contrary to these Laws: But the passages
which this Author here selects, (and omits the other that were to the purpose,)
are concerning the motions of Gods Spirit in matters, or actions, and
omissions, agreed on to be in themselves indifferent, and lawful, or also
good. Within which bounds had the Fanatic Inspirations contained themselves,
some mistakes perhaps there might have bin, but hurt none, either to the
Church, State, their neighbors, or themselves, as to sinning.

Nothing but the assistance of Divine Grace,. LXXVI. To. p. 338.
Nothing more is here meant by Divine Inspirations, then the assistance or
efficiency of the Divine Grace, illuminating the understanding with a right
judgment, and infusing into the Will right inclinations, and desires, (that is
the most conformable to Gods will) as to our doing, or omitting such particular
actions, as are daily suggested to us, we know not by what Spirit, and do fall
under our Deliberation. Which Divine Inspirations was it foolishness
heretofore; or is it now, to justify, and confirm, against those who seem
professed enemies of them, and style them Fanaticism?

The only means imaginable that can be proper, etc. The repairing to Prayer;
in the best manner, we can make it, is a proper natural, and most efficacious
way to obtain a supernatural light (from Gods Spirit) to discern his will in
all our actions; speaking of such as are indifferent, and such wherein neither
we, nor any others, have any external certain, Rule, all circumstances
considered, whereby we may be guided; as we have in all such other actions the
lawfulness which is doubted of; Which yet is not said, as if Prayer were the
only means of our direction in these, so as to exclude the making use of,
either our own Reason, or other men's Advice; as is said before.

. LXXVII.
To make Enthusiasm necessary to distinguish, etc. Now this is not making
Enthusiasme, but Prayer a means to obtain the illuminations of Gods Spirit, to
show us, in two things suggested to us, which of them comes from It, or which
is more conformable to Gods will, that so we may follow, and obey it; And what
a Christian is he, that being doubtful, especially in two affairs of much
concernment, which to make choice of, does not retire to his Prayers, desiring
God to direct him in such a particular, and promising to do that which he shall
be pleased, by any way, to signify to him to be more conformable to his Will,
and more conducing to Christian Perfection (as certainly the one may be much
more then the other, although both contained within the general bounds of
Good, or indifferent?) And then what Illumination he prays for, why may not he
also expect? Again who is there, much frequenting Prayer, that does not
perceive in them some illustrations, and influences entering, and iniected as it
were, into his mind without his own procurement, touching a more perfect
knowledge of himself; or the immense Love of God to Mankind, or some acceptable
service he may do to God or his neighbor; or secret reprehensions for some
Faults; or admonitions for the better ordering of his life; Spiritu (as our
Lord Says Io. 3.8.) Spirante ubi vult, and he not knowing whence such things
come, or how they pass away; yet these things we are assured must be from Gods
Spirit, because no good thought is from ourselves. And why may not we imagine
the same, (a due preparation being supposed) of the thoughts iniected in our
doubtings, and requests, concerning actions left free, and undetermined by the
Divine declared will, what way in these we may rather take, the better to serve
and please him. God forbid, that the name of Enthusiasme should deterr
Christians from such a practice, or harkening to this internal Language; Or
(as M. Cressy expresses it in his Preface p. 19.
) should render Prayer and by Prayer, the obtaining of Divine Grace, a
suspicious exercise And I wish the Author would a little better weigh his
words, and the malign influence they may have on others. We say then; Divine
Inspirations are necessary (for Grace, as well furthers, as prevents, us) to
distinguish the motions of the Good and Bad Spirit in our minds in matters
purely indifferent (which may be proposed to us, by either of these Spirits for
a different end,) where we have no other extenal Rule to judge these motions
by, as we have in all internal suggestions concerning such other matters, as
are either directly commanded or prohibited, by Gods Law. And it is by this
latter way of discovery, and not the former, that M. Cressy shows the
suggestions of Fanatics to be Satanicall.

To try Illuminations by Inspirations, and so Inspirations by Illuminations,.
XXVIII.
etc. This Author since Lauds Labyrinth dreams much of Circles. To me there
appears no more of a Circle, or Identicall proof here, than in the proving of
the Scripture by the Church, and the Church by the Motives of credibility. Or,
than in the Protestants proving their Church Authority from the Scriptures; and
Scriptures from Universal Tradition. The discerning of the motions of the
Spirit, by other second motions of the same Spirit more manifest to us, See
before. 15. To. p. 339.
is no circular proof, or evidence, no more then this; when a friend unknown,
does me a favor, and afterward tells me, he did it, The things of the Spirit,
says the Apostle, are discerned Spiritually (that is, Surely, by the Spirit)
and, 1. Co. 2.14.
verse. 12. we have received the Spirit of God, that we might know the things
that are given to us of God; (that is, by his Spirit) And the Gift of
Discerning of Spirits (1. Cor. 12.10.) is a gift, or operation of the Spirit;
and the Spirit, in bearing witness to our Spirits that we are the children of
God, Romans 8.16.
or born again of the Spirit, bears witness of it self.

New Revelations, and as great etc. New Divine Revelations are pretended by
Fanatics; As great, or greater, or frequenter, are pretended by the Church; By
the one truly; by the other falsely; the Divine laws being Judge. But no new or
strange Revelations are pretended by, or in the Church: that is such as deliver
any new thing contrary to or dissonant from the Old: of which M Cressy there
speaks; and the latter following words sufficiently explain the precedent;
which this Author, after 2. pages discourse upon new, is pleased to take notice
of, p. 242. where he goes on -- Yet M. Cressy says, they are not seditious etc.

Reply to p. 340. To. p. 340.


To hearken to the Immediate impulses the Spirit of God, etc.. LXXIX.
Catholics, as well as Fanatics affirm; that men ought to hearken to the
immediate Impulses (I suppose he means inspirations) of the Spirit of God within
them. And will not this Author say so too? But no Catholic pretends, that God
acquaints him with his mind and will, in a way peculiar to himself; and not
such, as is, or may be, common to all others, that are in the state of Grace.

Who did not boast of so many Raptures etc. Rapts, and Visions in the Catholic
Church are not to be distinguished from Fanaticism by the degree, or the
number, of them, but the quality.

As though the case were the very same,. LXXX.
etc. The Prophets and Apostles received truth by Revelation (says Blosius)
therefore others may. But he says there also Denique Sacrae Scripturae Diuinis
Revelationibus sunt plenae; Revelationibus made to others, I hope, besides
Apostles, and Prophets, witness. 1. Cor. 14.26.30. and so he concludes* Dominus
semper po^uie, semperque poterie, operari quod vult in mundis animabus: that he
may bestow such Revelations on others still.

New and strange Revelations made to four. LXXXI.
Women Saints, etc. New Revelations and Visions taken in any sense, save as
these oppose the Old ones, I mean the Scriptures, Blosius had no reason to
disbelieue, since it is a promise under the Gospel Act. 2.17.
* your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your yongmen shall see visions;
and your old men shall dream dreams; and that this Spirit should be powered out
not only on our Lords men servants, but also on his hand maidens; ver. 18. as,
on the four daughters of Phillip the Deacon Act. 21.9. And we find Anna having
Revelations, as well as Simeon. And what means this Author in these words-
Melancholic women; Luke 2.
Hystericall vapors etc? Are women more remote from the Graces of the Holy
Spirit, then Men or, are not these to be equally honored when they appear in
that Sex? As for the four women Saints, the particular Persons here named, the
Sanctity of their Lives is recorded in Church History; their Festivals were
celebrated in the Public Liturgy through all the Western world before the
appearance of Luther: their Revelations are pious and consonant to Scripture.

. LXXXII.
We have before showed how much they were approved, etc. The more ample this
Author has shown such testimonies to be, the more, methinks he condemns his
own censure, in his going against the Common Reason of the Church; and so, if
this may argue any faulty presumption in him, he has no cause to be angry with
Blosius for praying for this Pardon.

Reply to p. 341. To. p. 341.. LXXXIII.


What means that saying in the Spiritual exercises, etc. I have an Edition of
the Spiritual Exercises printed at vienna 1563* that is after S. Ignatius his
death (and therefore nothing added to them since;) and before 1574. wherein I
can find no such passage. Nor is it (as this Author confesses) to be found in
the later Impressions. Is he not then hard put to it, to find fuel enough for
enflaming the popular hate against Catholics, that runs to such old Editions
for it (and this only out of a report, not knowledge, that it is there) when
the newer do not supply it; Nor yet will forgive nor forget their fault
(Suppose one) when he finds, they have amended it? But now to consider the
words, so happily discovered. The words are these -- It is the great perfection
of a Christian to keep himself indifferent to do what God shall reveal to him,
and not to determine himself indifferent to do what he has already revealed,
and taught in the Gospel. Their sense must either be this; that S. Ignatius
directs his Sons not to determine themselves to do what God has already
revealed, and taught in the Gospel, but to keep themselves indifferent to do
the contrary, if revealed to them. Or else That they are not to determine
themselves to do only what God has already revealed, and taught in the Gospel.
(that is as to the things commanded, and prohibited there;) but also to keep
themselves indifferent (as to the things on either side lawful to be done) to
do that, which God shall reveal to them. that is, shall reveal to them,
recommending it to him in Prayer, by the internal illuminations and
inspirations of his Holy Spirit to be, ad majorem Dei Gloriam, and more
conformable to his will. Of which much has bin said before. 21. etc. Of these
two senses the former is too gross and impious in conscience for S. Ignatius to
prescribe to his whole Order in a book pretending Devotion, and so public in
the face of the whole Church; let this Glorious Saint be supposed as great an
Hypocrire or Fanatic as this Author would make him. For what Fanatic will say
so much? In the latter sense I see no harm unless the word ( reveal)
displease; but then change it into God shall inspire them, and the Protestants
common Prayer Book will justify the language.

. LXXXIV.
That is for new and strange Revelations too, etc. If Mother Iuliana's
Revelations have many things new and strange, yet, if therein be nothing
contrary to Faith or Good manners, nor words taken in a modern-improper sense
will amount to Heresy, I hope this Author will not put her in the List of his
Fanatics, unless he can make good the same of them; or, that he can prove her
old English to be Fanaticism, but then let Chaucer also look to himself.

Reply to page 342.

To. p. 342.. LXXXV.
As though the persons were ever the less madd etc. I suppose this Author would
have spoken with more reverence of Confessors (that is, Ecclesiastical
Superiors) than to make their Office the keeping of Madmen, had he remembered
that the Church of England in her Liturgy recommends Confession; but, this, so
little practiced, he might the easier forget it. Men chained can do no harm; as
Fanatics are in the Roman Church, thanks to their Holy keepers; and for the
persons under such custody, their being sober, or mad, (for, either they may
be) it is fit the Church should rather judge of it then this Author; who here
pronounces that Madness, which these Confessors, and the Church take for
Perfection. And so it is, that All persons being diligently watched by these
keepers, those judged Fanatics by the Church, all, sooner, or later, even all
those with much pains collected in this Book by this Author, that were truly
Such, have bin crushed by her hitherto; and have no present being: I wish it
were so with the English Fanatics. But whilst they do impose no such keepers
over them, nor can justly deny that liberty of judgment to others, which they
have taken to themselves, what hope is there of their suppression, or, what
just Laws, I mean Ecclesiastical, can there be made for it?

We are not to think that the Principles,. LXXXVI.
etc. For the seditious or rebellious facts of any Fanatics in the Catholic
Church disobeying, or breaking loose from their keepers, if any such can be
proved by this Author, they are not justified by the Church, or its Principles,
and so he loses his labor in thinking to prejudice the Church by them, any
more, than by proving some Adulterers, Homicides, Blasphemers to have bin in
it. And within the memory of man the Church of England was not free from having
such facts committed by some of her Body and Communion; yet, I suppose this
Author will maintain, without her guilt.

And here I take of my Pen wearied with following a person whose sense much
fails his rage against the Catholic Church; and who has much more of
Raillery, then Reason: Hoping these, short Animadversions may conduce some
what, if not to the vndeceiving of himself (for I fear his defect lies not
there) yet of others, in a matter of the greatest consequence, Devotion.

FINIS.

