December. 24. 1685.
This may be printed.

R. M.

LOYALTY, The Ornament of Christianity: OR, Scripture Proofs FOR MONARCHY.

With Comments in Verse on each Proof; and Applications relating to the
unparalled Rebellion in the West: wherein the Arch-Traitor Ferguson is in
some measure anatomized, and his Disciples uncharacterized.

Written by a Soldier, Geo. Wood.

And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to
Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. Ezra 7. 26.

London, Printed by John Darby, for the Author. 1686.

To the Right Honorable, Heroic and Valiant, JOHN Lord Churchil of Aymouth,
Baron of Sandridge; one of the most Honorable Lords of his Majesty's
Bedchamber; Major General of all his Majesty's Forces, and Colonel of his
Majesty's third Troop of Horse-Guards, etc.
MY LORD,
WE read in Holy Writ, a Catalogue of King David's Worthies, who ventured their
Lives to settle their Sovereign in the peaceable possession of his Kingdom: But
should I go about to give an account of those truly Loyal Heroes, who lately so
freely ventured their Lives and Fortunes for their King and Country, my Book
would swell to so prodigious a bulk, that it would be tiresome and troublesome
to read.

None were more singularly eminent in this blessed Work, than your Illustrious
Lordship; and therefore the Dedication of this Loyal Book most properly belongs
to you. The consideration of which matchless Loyalty in your Lordship, has
emboldened me to lay these my dull Labors at your Lordship's feet: If you
vouchsafe to patronize them, let the Whigs spit out their Venom, as fast as
Whales spout out Water, I value't not a Rush; I know they are the Seed of the
old Serpent, and they will nibble at my Heels, if they cannot bite me by the
Throat. But having a glimps of your Lordship's Favor, where is the Ferguson I
need to fear? What hurt can another Absalom, or Achitophel, do me? I humbly
therefore beg, that this my poor (but Loyal) Labors, may find Protection under
your Lordship's most loyal and indulgent Wing; not for any worth or ingenuity
that can be found in them, but purely because this Fruit springs from a Loyal
Tree.

My Lord! this is not a Piece for Phanaticks to countenance; I believe they
will be so far from favoring of it, that they will burn it, and stab me if it
lies in their power, unless God fastens some of those Texts of Scripture upon
their hearts, to convince or convert them: but I dread them no more, than the
Sun dreads the Dunghill; nor love them, no more than they love the King. If any
thing can convert them, these Scriptures will; but if they wilfully sin against
knowledge, and thereby bring upon themselves certain Damnation, there is no Art
nor Power that can prevent it.

However, (God be praised for it) if this Loyal Book will not convince these
Rebels, His Royal Majesty has a many Noble, Loyal, and Valorous Heroes, (of
whom your Lordship deservedly ought to be reckoned one of the chief) that are
able to suppress thousands of them, and force them to their Obedience; your
Lordship having already, by your Valor, and prudent Conduct, been a main
Instrument, under his Majesty, to reduce those Traitors and Rebels, who lately,
with the height of Impudence, did rise in Rebellion against his Sacred Majesty;
which glorious Action of yours, is not only delightful to all his Majesty's
Loyal and Loving Subjects, (for which they have your Noble and Heroic Person
in veneration) but the memory thereof will be (to your Lordship's never dying
Honor) sweet and fresh in the mouths of all Loyal Subjects to succeeding Ages.

Now to conclude; My humble Request to your Lordship is, That you will be
pleased to accept of the good Will for the good Deed: I having ventured to
compose and write this Book in Defense of Monarchy, who am one of the meanest
and weakest of his Majesty's Subjects, having had the honor to serve his
Majesty, in Military Employments, by Sea and Land, from my Youth to this
present day; and therefore I hope Your Lordship will consider me, as a
Soldier, that has lived more by the Sword than by the Word; and that will
sufficiently excuse the want of those smooth Lines which otherwise you might
justly have expected from me; wishing Your Lordship, and all Your Noble Family,
all the happiness that Heaven can shower down upon You in this Life, and
Eternal Happiness in the World to come: I presume to subscribe my self,

My Lord, The humblest of Your Lordship's Servants, GEO. WOOD.

Courteous Reader;
LET it not appear strange to thee, that I who never was an Academian, nor bred
at the feet of Gamaliel, but a Soldier from my Youth, unto this present day,
in his Majesty's Service, both by Land and Sea, should adventure to write on so
Sacred a Subject. If you take a serious view of the State of this present
World, you will find I am not the only Man that is found out of my proper
Station Some are doing that which, like Sampson's Foxes, with Firebrarnds in
their Tails, consume our Plenty. Some Rebels are writing, preaching, and
fighting, to disturb our Peace: Others are studying, plotting, and contriving
the downfall of the peacefullest King that ever reigned.

Now, whilst these Men are so forward and hasty to destroy our Peace, who can
blame me, if I strive, with my small Might, to preserve it? Though many will
say I am out of my Element, and act out of my Sphere; Yet none can say that I
do not act as I am bound in duty. This Subject indeed requires a far better
Pen, much more understanding than I am master of. But when I consider the
Widows Mites were accepted, it encourages me to think, that all Loyal Persons
will prize the Will as much as the Deed: May I but give any satisfaction to
such, I value not the displeasure of others. If the smoothest Orators, and the
sweetest Poets, should write upon this Subject, they cannot want for too great
a number of Phanatical Critics, to render their Labors unprofitable and
contemptible. These Caterpillars will bite off my Blossoms; these Toads will
spit out their Venom; but my comfort is, Cursed Cows have short Horns. Indeed, I
would seek to convince and convert them, but I would never study to please
them: If these my poor Labors meet with any welcome from those who are lovers
of their King and their Countries Peace, my Toil is sufficiently requited. How
can I expect less than abuse from those, who have murdered such as I go about
to preserve? What I seek to save, they have sought to destroy. What agreement
can there be between God and Belial?

Yet out of pity to such who, it may be, would pluck out my Throat, I have
printed this Book, in hopes they may meet with some powerful Text that may
prevail with them, to FEAR GOD, AND HONOR THE KING; (being confident, that no
one in this kind has been presented to public view). I leave the Courteous
Reader to judge how necessary and convenient this Book may be for the Press in
these sad times, especially when a good King becomes the Mark of so many bad
Men, who know not what Obedience to MONARCHY means; but by their Actions and
Behavior, by their Lives and Doctrines, seem to deny the express Words of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, and to treasure up Wrath
against the Day of Wrath, and bring irrecoverable Damnation upon their own
Souls.

I have (to make this Book a little more pleasant and delightful to the Reader)
made some Poetical Comments upon the several Texts of Scripture: If either may
be serviceable for the Public Good, it will be matter of great satisfaction to
me. I have (the Phanaticks will think) been a little too severe upon the
Arch-Traitor Ferguson; and yet I know not what Pen or Tongue can revile him too
much, who has been so eminently instrumental to shed so much innocent Blood,
and so impudently villainous, as to attempt a change in the Government; and
which is yet more than all, to contrive the downfall of the best of Kings: There
are but too many who bave just cause to style him a Comrade for the Devil,
rather than a Companion for Christians, because they have been led to ruin, as
Sheep to the Slaughter, by his rebellious, canting, and deceitful Stories;
Murder and Sacriledg having been at the bottom of all his Designs, even when he
has seemingly preached and practiced the contrary. But it were happy if I had
no more Fergusons to reprove; I doubt, that little piece of sower Leven, has
leven'd a considerable Lump; and we have too many lurking Traitors, who are,
and have been Abettors of his wicked Designs: I hope this Book may meet with
them; but if it does not, God will find them out, and all such as wilfully,
disloyally, and traitorously, draw away the Hearts of the Subjects from our
dread Sovereign. I would fain persuade such Reprobates, to read what the
Prophet Samuel tells them, 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23. That to obey, is better than
Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the Fat of Rams. For Rebellion is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. And what St. Paul
speaks, Heb. 10. 26, 27. For if we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries. Possibly it may prevail with them to live a peaceable and a quiet
life, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Which we shall never be able
effectually to attain, till we have all learned that excellent Precept given us
from the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 17. to FEAR GOD, AND HONOR THE KING.

Now to conclude;

I heartily wish that the Seduced, and the Seducers of his Majesty's Subjects,
may read and consider the many weighty Texts in this small Book, that it may
speedily put them upon the Duty of Repentance; that God may speak pardon to
their perishing Souls; and the King grant Mercy to their dying Bodies; that we
may live together in Unity, and in the Ponds of Peace.

That God would smite their Hearts, and work this happy change, shall be the
earnest Prayer of,

The KING's most loyal Subject, and their Friend and Servant in the LORD JESUS,
GEO. WOOD.

STRONG Scripture Proofs In Defense of MONARCHY.

Beginning with the Old Testament, Written by the Author. Anno 1685.

Strong Scripture Proofs in Defense of MONARCHY, etc.
THE Islraelites were brought from Egypt's Land,
Unto Mount Sinai, at the Lord's Command.
There Moses did the Law of God display;
Cursed them that from's Commands should go astray.
Above the rest, this was the chiefest thing,
To fear the Lord, and to obey the King.
But at this time no King they have, we find;
Yet Kingly aw was then in Moses mind:
He did foresee, a King should Rule and Reign,
Read his own words, for they are full and plain.
DEUTERONOMY, Chap. 17. Verse. 14, 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over
thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose, etc. And,

EXODUS, Chap. 22. Verse. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the
Ruler of thy People. As Moses prophesied, so now we find
The Israelites, according to their mind,
Procure a King; to Samuel they pray,
That they may have a Sacred King to obey.
The Prophet prayed, that they may have a King.
God granted one; with one consent they sing.
Here God himself ordained, that King Saul
Should be the King and Ruler of them all.
I SAMUEL, Chap. 10. Verse. 1. Then Samuel took a Vial of Oil, and poured it
upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD has
anointed thee to be Captain over his Inheritance? Verse. 24. And Samuel said to
all the People, See ye him whom the LORD has chosen, that there is none like
him among all the People? and all the People shouted, and said, GOD SAVE the
KING. God gave King Saul, a wise and godly heart,
Fitted him for to act his Kingly part.
Now general Acclamations fill the Sky,
God save King Saul, and may he never die.
These were his Subjects Prayers, they all seemed glad,
That such a pious prudent King they had.
But wicked Men their King did soon despise,
And impiously did murmur in this wise;
Can this Man save us from our Enemies?
Shall Saul Reign over us? Shall he be King?
Shall we be sheltered underneath his Wing?
But they were soon convinced of this great Evil,
And known to be but Servants of the Devil?
And had not Saul been merciful, they would died,
For in some measure they their King defied.
I. SAMUEL, Chap. 2. Verse. 12. And the People said unto Samuel, Who is he that
said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the Men that we may put them to death.
Here the King's Mercy wrought a happy change;
From their Obedience they no longer range.
Whilst the King lived, they always lived in awe,
And studied due Allegiance to his Law.
They were not like the Rebels in the West;
Who when they were with gracious Pardons blessed;
Turned tail to their Obedience, and became
The just Promoters of their lasting Shame.
WHEN Saul was settled on his Glorious Throne,
And was, for Pomp, inferior unto none;
He did neglect to serve the God of Heaven,
By whom his Honor and his Power was given.
Beneath his Feet the Lord's Commands he trod,
Did not obey Jehovah as his God:
Therefore another King the Lord did choose;
And Saul, for his transgression, did refuse.
When Saul perceived that David should succeed,
He used all means to obstruct what God decreed.
He made him fly, we find, from place to place;
And David durst not look King Saul in the Face.
He feared his Wrath, yet would not throw him down,
Tho he were sure thereby to gain a Crown.
He often could have killed him, but forbore
To dye the Earth with Royal Purple Gore.
His Servants often tempted him to slay him;
And yet he rather studied to obey him.
Said he (when he had power to kill the King)
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing.
I. SAMUEL, Chap. 24. Verse. 4. Then David arose, and cut off the Skirt of Saul
's Robe privily. Verse. 5. And it came to pass afterward, that David 's heart
smote him, because he had cut off Saul 's Skirt. Verse. 6. And he said unto his
Men, The LORD forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, the LORD's
Anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of
the LORD. CHAP. 26. Verse. 9, 11. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not;
for who can stretch forth his hand against the LORD's Anointed, and be
guiltless? -- But I pray thee, take now the Spear that is at his Bolster, and
the Cruse of Water, and let us go. Verse. 13. Then David went over to the other
side: Verse. 14. And David cried to the People, and to Abner the Son of Ner,
saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou
that criest to the KING? Verse. 15. And David said to Abner, Art not thou a
valiant Man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then have thou not
kept thy Lord the King? for there came one of the People to destroy the KING
thy LORD. Verse. 16. This thing is not good that thou have done: as the LORD
lives, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master the LORD's
Anointed. Would every Subject were a David now;
Would every Subjects heart and knee would bow
To our most gracious King, whom God has sent
To give three Kingdoms Plenty and Content.
Those who have traitorous Hearts, rebellious Minds,
Who to act Mischief are as swift as Hinds.
Such who disturb our happy peaceful King,
May they on any Country Gallows swing.
David durst do no ill unto King Saul;
Yet David's rise must not be till his Fall.
David's Heart smote him when his Skirt was cut:
He soon drew back, he soon withdrew his foot
From doing further mischief, and he cried,
That Readiness great General should by right have died,
Because he did no better guard his King.
Curs't Ferguson would scarce have done this thing:
This wicked Viper scarce slept Night or Day,
He was so greedy of a Royal Prey:
He had no time to read this Text, I fear,
Some other Texts rung oftener in his ear.
He was for binding our blessed King in Chains,
Hoping Rebellion would requite his pains.
But God, I hope, our King will long preserve,
And give such Rebels what they do deserve.
Rebellion, Treason, Murder, these great Crimes,
Being too often repeated in our Times.
God will not let them go unpunished here,
Even in this Life, they pay for them full dear.
They pierce the Heavens, and for Vengeance cry.
On such vile Wretches God has still an eye;
A watchful eye, to give them their desert,
Scaffold and Ax, or else a Rope and Cart.
Those who go yet unpunished now, I hope,
Will fear their God and King, for fear a Rope
Make them repent too late: Let God arise,
And through his Mercy give them flowing eyes;
Make them repent, before it be too late,
Lest they fall under their deserved Fate.
AFTER King Saul, King David's Life had sought,
He and his Men with the Philistines fought.
But Israel fled, and three of's Sons were slain,
And he lay wounded, very full of pain.
Upon the Mountains of Gilboa, then
In great distress, he called to one of's Men
To fall upon him: he had only breath
To beg a Wound, and strength to crave a death.
The young Man saw him, then to David went,
Told him the News (thinking to give content).
But David rent his Clothes; and mourned for Saul,
And grieved extremely for his hasty fall.
The Man that brought the News, was forthwith slain,
David esteemed him but a Second Cain.
How, wast thou not afraid, said he, to slay
Him that in Israel bare so great a sway?
II. SAMUEL, Chap. 1. Verse. 14, 15, 16. And David said unto him, -- Thy Blood
be upon thy Head; for thy Mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have
slain the LORD's Anointed. You that disturb our Peace, our King and State,
Want you a Pattern now to imitate,
That leads to Loyalty? Then read this Text,
And, without doubt, your hearts will be perplexed.
Tho Saul was David's Foe, kept him from's Crown;
Tho he had just pretense to cast him down,
He durst not entertain a thought to slay him,
But rather sought to please, and to obey him.
Much more ought we our peaceful King to love,
Who is established by the God above.
He that sweet England's golden Scepter sways,
Should be the subject of our constant praise;
We should his Fame, high as Gilboa, raise.
Yet like, accursed Men, we'in ambush lie,
To spill his Blood, and bring that Sacred Dye
Upon our Souls, a stain that still will last,
When all the Glory of the World is past:
Much Soap and Niter cannot make us clean,
If once this stain upon our Souls is seen.
WHEN News was brought to David, Saul was dead;
David was then in Ziklag, where he fled
From Readiness pursuit. The Men of Judah came,
And did King David in the Streets proclaim.
II. SAMUEL, Chap. 2. Verse. 4. And the Men of Judah came, and there they
anointed David KING over the House of Judah, etc. Thus David being settled in
his Throne,
Prized by all, and envied now by none.
When he perceived that he was fully blessed,
With peaceful Subjects, and with quiet rest;
He studied thankfulness to God above;
Advised with Nathan to express his Love.
II. SAMUEL, Chap. 7. Verse. 1. And it came to pass when the KING sat in his
House, and the LORD had given him rest round abo^t from all his Enemies, Verse*
^* the KING said unto Nathan the Prophet* See now, I dwell in an House of
Cedar, but the Ark of GOD dwells within Curtains, etc. Now, good King David,
makes it his chief care,
To build the Lord a glorious House of Prayer;
That he, his God, may for his Mercy's praise,
And magnify him for his wondrous Ways.
God was well pleased, sent Nathan to the King,
Who did this joyful Message to him bring.
II. SAMUEL, Chap. 7. Verse. 11. Also the LORD tells thee, that he will make
thee an House. Verse. 12. And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep
with thy Fathers, I will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thy Bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom, etc. Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. And
thine House, and thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee; thy
Throne shall be established for ever. Here David's thankfulness is well repaid;
New blessings on his Royal Head is laid.
The Crown's secured to David and his Heirs;
This was the fruit of David's Zeal and Prayers.
God was a Father to him, and his Race,
He gave them Honor, Wisdom, Wealth, and Grace.
If God so highly prizes Kings, then we
Should all, with great submission, bend the knee.
If Heaven does put such value upon Kings,
That it does mount their Fame on Cherubs Wings.
Then how much more ought we to love and fear'm!
With what a sacred aw should we come near'm!
This may reprove every rebellious Creature,
Who harbors Treason in his cursed Nature.
And this should lay the Western Rebels low,
Who did the Coals of a Rebellion blow.
PEACE crowns King David now on every side;
Tho his Dominions were both large and wide.
His God was pleased highly with his Duty,
In Holiness he saw the greatest beauty.
His Subjects underneath their Vines do sing,
Lord, long preserve our Sovereign Lord the King;
The hand of God guides him in every thing.
But as the Water damm'd up in a place;
And long debarred from running on its Race,
At last with greater violence breaks out:
Even so his Peace for War begins to shout.
The Viper which he long had warmed in's Breast,
Crawls out, and now begins to break his Rest.
Absalom sneaks about from place to place,
And try's to bring the King into disgrace.
He fawns and cringes now to all he meets,
Kisses the meanest Rascals in the Streets;
And all to bring his wicked Ends about,
To gain the Crown, and turn his Father out.
But this unnatural Youth must have some help;
Achitophel, that old and wicked Whelp,
Helps him with counsel: now the Plot goes on,
Which good King David little thinks upon.
They get the Herd together, and prepare
Things ready for this most unnatural War.
David thinks more upon his dying Day,
Than that his Son's in a rebellious way.
They find him unprovided, hugging Peace,
He thinks it is time that he from Wars should cease.
His Armor now grows rusty; but behold,
His Crown and Kingdom now is bought and sold.
Absalom's mounted, dos in's Armor rattle;
But David's unprovided for the Battle.
Now all his Friends about him loudly cry,
Prepare your Horses; for unless you fly,
The best of Kings by th'worst of Rogues must die.
David, and's trusty Friends, forsake the City,
Finding them void of Grace, and void of pity.
He passes Kidron's Brook, and flys by guess,
Still aiming to come at the Wilderness.
Those that are with him, weep to see his State,
And only wish they could subdue his Fate.
They grieve for this Rebellion, but, alas!
With pensive Hearts the King and they must pass,
'Till God finds out a way to bring relief,
And ease they are heavy sighs, and matchless grief.
And now the time is come, God sees, and hears
The Prayers of David, ushered in with Tears.
God smote the Rebels Hearts, away they fly
From those who drew them to th'Conspiracy.
And his good Subjects followed their good King,
Resolved to live and die beneath his Wing;
So that his Loyal Army did increase:
Now have at those who did disturb his Peace.
The Battl's pitched; it is by the King appointed,
And who shall lead them but the Lord's Anointed.
He itches to be foremost, I will go.
But his good Subjects kindly answer, No;
It matters not for us, if thousands die,
You Are better than ten thousand, is the cry.
II. SAMUEL, Chap. 18. Verse. 3. But the People answered, Thou shall not go
forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us
die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us;
therefore now it is better that thou succor us out of the City. This is the
Language of good Subjects still,
They Are always ready their own Blood to spill:
Provided Royal Blood may not be shed,
They do not care how many Men lie dead.
The King's entreated, and he stays behind,
The rest go on the Trayt'rous Rogues to find.
Mark now, what comes of the rebellious Crew,
How every Traitor has his proper due.
Absalom is pursued (when forced to fly);
He Is taken up between the Earth and Sky;
A Tree secures him, holds him by the Hair,
Till Joab did to Absalom repair;
Who carried in his hand a fatal Dart,
By which he stabbed the Traitor to the Heart.
Bad was this Death, Achitophel's was worse,
He hanged himself, and without doubt the Curse
Of the Almighty followed to his Grave;
Such Deaths as these may all such Traitors have.
These Rebels were like ours, who rose in the West;
Nay, ours were worse, and truly bad's the best.
For David's Son, we find, was lawful Heir:
But what Pretense had our late Young Man there?
He could not lay a Claim to any Crown,
Unless that he had dropped five Shillings down.
Well, but the Wapping Lads, they made a noise.
And he was puffed up by some Western Boys,
To a Conceit, that he was Prince of Wales.
And fooled by Shipton's, and such old Wives Tales.
Ferguson acts Achitophel's ill Part,
In the same way, with the same Mind and Heart.
But God defeated all these bloody Knaves;
Sent some, with shame, unto their dusty Graves.
It Is true, Achitophel escapes a while,
And has not smarted for his matchless Guile.
But he, with sorrovv, will go to his Grave;
Till then, a troubled Conscience let him have.
May he be marked, like Cain, when he is found,
For Ferguson's a greater Vagabond.
But, God be praised, his Counsel's brought to naught,
And some their Enterprise have dearly bought.
Whilst our good King, rides on the Wings of Fame,
He sees his Enemies are clothed with shame.
May his Crown flourish on his Royal Head,
When every traitorous Enemy is dead.
WHEN all King David's Rebels were suppressed,
He waxed old, and did prepare for rest.
Then Adonijah did usurp the Crown,
But David found a way to cast him down.
He caused young Solomon to be proclaimed;
And when they heard that he their King was named:
Then Adonijah's Heart was filled with fear,
Ran to the Altar; and the King did swear,
If he would but be Loyal, he would forgive
His Brother's Crime, and suffer him to live.
I KINGS, Chap. 1. Verse. 28. Then King David answered, and said, Call me
Bath-sheba: and she came into the King's Presence, and stood before the King.
Verse. 29. And the King swear, and said, As the LORD lives, that has redeemed
my Soul out of all distress, Verse. 30. Even as I swear unto thee by the Lord
God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy Son shall reign after me, and he
shall sit upon my Throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day,
etc. Verse. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. Verse. 39. And Zadock the Priest took
an Horn of Oil out of the Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon; and they blew the
Trumpet, and all the People said, God save King Solomon, etc. Verse. 40, 47. and
so to the end of this Chapter. Solomon being seated on his Throne,
And David's Crown and Scepter now his own.
David instructed him, and he obeyed;
He was a glorious King by's Counsel made.
II SAMUEL, Chap. 23. Verse. 1. Now these be the last words of David: David the
Son of Jesse said; and the Man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of the
God of Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel, said, etc. Verse. 2, 3, 4, 5.
And, I CHRON. Chap. 28. Verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9. And thou, Solomon my Son, know
thou the GOD of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind: for the LORD searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but
if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

Solomon's ways were pleasing unto God,
For he the Paths of his good Father trod.
His Zeal was great, his Wisdom did excel;
No King before was this King's parallel.
I KINGS, Chap. 3. Verse. 5. In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream
by night: and GOD said, Ask what I shall give thee, etc. Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Solomon prayed: it was but ask, and have;
For whatsoever he asked, Jehovah gave.
He begged a wise and understanding Heart:
God his great Wisdom to him did impart.
He gave him Wealth, and Honor too, we find;
To any King, God never was more kind:
And promised him, if he would sound his praise,
That he would likewise give him length of days.
All Nations were at peace with him; thus blessed,
With Wisdom, Honor, Wealth, and Peace, and rest.
I KINGS, Chap. 3. Verse. 10. And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had
asked this thing. Verse. 11. And GOD said unto him, etc. Verse. 12, 13, 14.
Solomon's Fame now reaches every Ear,
And he fills every Heart with Love and Fear.
The Queen of Sheba hears the great Report;
She, in an instant, quits her Pomp at Court;
Hastens to see him: When she saw his State,
And that he lived at such a glorious Rate.
Her Spirits failed her, she had naught to say,
But for a certain time she speechless lay.
At last her silence broke, and then she said,
She Is happy that may be the King's Handmaid.
Blessed are they who in thy presence wait,
That may behold thy Wisdom, and thy State.
I KINGS, Chap. 10. Verse. 6, 7, 8. Happy are thy Men, happy are these thy
Servants which stand continually before thee: and that hear thy Wisdom. Verse.
9. Blessed be the LORD thy GOD which delighted in thee, etc. Thus happy are the
Kings whom God does love,
He sends them Guardian Angels from Above.
He makes their Riches swell, their Wars to cease;
He makes their Enemies to be at Peace.
He keeps them as the Apple of his Eye,
When wicked Traitors do in ambush lie.
He makes them famous unto after Story,
When he has brought them to himself in Glory.
BY God's appointment, we have plainly found,
That Kings by him have all along been crowned:
And finding good King David so Divine,
Settled the Succession in his Royal Line,
Whilst Judah was a Kingdom so't remained,
And still the Son after the Father Reigned.
The Kingly Prophet David did foresee,
That this Succession would hereafter be.
Therefore his Royal Voice he often raises,
And gives the Great Jehovah his due Praises.
In Psalm the twenty first, read, how the King
Has tuned his Instruments, God's praise to sing.
The hundred and fifth Psalm, may us convince,
How we are obliged to due obedience.
The Psalms, indeed, are very full of Beauty,
In chalking forth the ways to Kingly Duty.
PSALMS.
PSALM. 21. Verse. 1. The King shall joy in thy strength, O LORD: and in thy
Salvation how greatly shall he rejoice? Ver. 2, 3, 4. Verse. 5. His Glory is
great in thy Salvation: Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him. Ver. 6.
Verse. 7. For the King trusts in the LORD: and through the Mercy of the most
High, he shall not be moved. Psalm. 18. Verse. 47, 50. Psalm. 61. Verse. 6, 7.
Psalm. 89. Verse. 3, 4, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37. Psalm.
105. Verse. 15. Touch not mine Anointed: and do my Prophets no harm. Psalm. 132.
Verse. 17, 18. Why should not every Subject imitate
King David's Precepts, tho of former date?
His Ways were Sacred, Counsel always pure,
By his Examples, let him then allure
Us, in these days, to reverence our King,
That Peace and Wealth may make the Subjects sing.
Would you but read, how disobedient Slaves,
Have been, with shame, soon hurried to their Graves.
Would you but mind whither their Paths do lead;
What Inconveniences this Crime does breed.
Would you the sad Examples often read;
Certainly it would make your hearts to bleed.
But some seem hardened in their Impudence,
For lack of Wisdom, Piety, and Sense.
Let those bad Men, that don't deserve to live,
Have Patience whilst [ This Discourse which passed between the Earl and the
Presbyterian Minister, I had the honor to have the Relation of it from the
Earl's own mouth, several years ago, when I little intended the writing of this
Book.
I this Example give].
The Earls of Airly always loved their King,
And due Obedience showed in every thing.
In Prison, out of Prison, they were true
And faithful to their Kings, (give them their due;)
They speak, and acted, suffered for them too.
He that now is, was sometime in the Tower,
Nol's Friends often aimed his Honor to devour.
He had prepared for Death, and did not doubt,
But they would quickly come to fetch him out,
To lose his Head. Phanatick Preachers came,
Who did the Earl of Airly highly blame,
For being Loyal. He was not afraid
Of them, nor Death, but soon this Answer made;
Read, said the Earl, K. David 's Psalms with care,
And you will find your Arguments are bare,
Senseless, and sinful, and they spring from Hell,
Where now too many such cursed Zealots dwell.
The wicked Presbyter replied with speed,
To what you offer, must not be agreed.
David did Preach Obedience to his Law,
And strove to keep his Subjects all in aw;
With Doctrines like to these: The reason see,
'Cause he upon his Throne in Peace should be.
This was his Policy, as he was King;
It Is not our Duty to preach such a Thing.
Surely this Villain was a second Cain,
He never preached for God, but still for Gain.
When David was a Subject unto Saul,
How loath was he to see his Master's fall.
Tho by his Death he was to gain the Crown,
Yet he never hast'nd forward his Renown;
But out of fear to God, and love to's King,
Lived in Obedience underneath his Wing.
See these false Prophets, how they wrest God's Writ,
For their own profit: Want of Grace and Wit,
Emboldens them for to expound God's Word,
To please their cursed Designs. And Cromwell's Sword
Must side with them: And thus the Lord's Anointed,
For useless things, by this vile Brood's appointed.
But hold, can this cursed Presbyter prevail,
To sham the Earl with this his wicked Tale?
He left his Slime behind him like a Snail.
The Earl remains unshaken by his Wind;
It Is Loyalty alone contents his Mind.
A Goal, and Loyalty, does him content,
He does not loss of Liberty repent.
He values not his Life, nor his Estate,
His Heart shall still upon his Sovereign wait;
As (God be praised) at this day it does;
And still he lives in Peace and Honor both.
He made's escape from the Tower, whenas his Fate
Was gaping to devour him at the Gate.
Long may such truly loyal Lords as he,
The Corner Stones of these three Kingdoms be.
May all disloyal Men, who hate a King,
Be judged by Airly, early for to swing.
SOLOMON, as you read, by God was blessed;
On him the Mercies of the Lord did rest.
In token of his Thankfulness, the King,
To God's great Glory, improved every thing.
His Wisdom he so highly did improve,
That he gained God's, and every Mortal's love.
Three thousand witty Proverbs he expressed,
A thousand and five Songs he made at least.
In all these things, much Loyalty is found;
He was the wisest King that e're was crowned.
Read but his Works, and you will quickly find,
That God himself to Kings was always kind.
They give account to none but God alone;
Man's greatest Power can never reach the Throne.
PROVERBS.
Chap. 14. Verse. 28, 35. Chap. 16. Verse. 10. A Divine Sentence is in the Lips
of the King; his Mouth transgresses not in Judgment, etc. Verse. 12, 13, 14,
15. Chap. 19. Verse. 12. Chap. 20. Verse. 2. The fear of a King, is as the
roaring of a Lion: whosoever provokes him to Anger, sins against his own Soul,
etc. Verse. 8, 26, 28. Chap. 21. Verse. 1. Chap. 22. Verse. 29. Chap. 24. Verse.
21. My Son, fear thou the LORD, and the King: and meddle not with them that are
given to change. Chap. 25. Verse. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Chap. 28. Verse. 2. Chap. 29.
Verse. 4. SONG of SOLOMON.
Chap. 3. Verse. 9, 10, 11. Yet to our grief, the cursed Phanaticks tried;
The best of Kings by those Usurpers died.
They made a Law, contrary to all Reason,
To paint, or color, their most hellish Treason.
Now, at this day, God seeks revenge on those,
Who side with such as were King Charles his Foes.
The Western Blades, I mean, for what are they,
But such as did pursue the self-same way?
They were for killing Kings, as well as the rest;
Sure they were Birds of prey of the same Nest.
But now their Wings are clipped, they cannot fly:
In some dark Cages may they always lie:
And may the God of Heaven bless the King in's Royal Line,
That they, like th'Sun, may always on their Loyal Subjects shine.
Where they one Mercy now enjoy, may there be added ten:
Let every Loyal Subject say, AMEN, Even so, AMEN.
E'RE I have done with good King Solomon's Reign,
Reader, I think, it may not be in vain,
To give a hint, to show he was more wise,
Than has been yet apparent to your eyes.
Besides, the Proverbs, and the Songs he teaches,
We find that Solomon himself here preaches.
Ecclesiastes shows you his great Parts,
By which the King takes captive most Men's Hearts.
You do not find the King does preach alone,
Unto his Subjects, from his splendid Throne;
But to succeeding Ages, his Truths reach,
Even unto us this day that King does preach;
And nothing more than Loyalty's expressed,
For only this will make a Kingdom blessed.
ECCLESIASTES.
Chap. 8. Verse. 2. I counsel thee to keep the King's Commandment, and that in
regard of the Oath of GOD. Verse. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand
not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. Verse. 4. Where the
Word of a King is, there is Power: and who may say unto him, What do thou?
Chap. 10. Verse. 16, 17, 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; and,
etc. Solomon had God's Spirit, and foresaw,
Some Fergusons would make a breach in's Law,
He knew that Herd would not be kept in aw.
For ought I know, this moved him thus to teach,
That made him this most Sacred Doctrine preach.
You that have been misled, read over his Works;
If you have Hearts as hard as Jews, or Turks,
Yet you will see something will find an Art,
To touch your Conscience, and to prick your Heart:
Something will meet with you, to make you leave
The ways of Ferguson, amd make you grieve
That he, or Satan, has so long deluded
Your Understandings, and so long intruded
His hatred Doctrine on you. Do but read
This good King's Works, and you no Preacher need.
His Texts are plain and powerful, you will find;
Then to your selves, and to your Souls be kind.
Up, and be doing, e're it be too late,
Before you are thrust within the Traitor's Gate;
Before Jack Ketch does catch you, and before
Your God shall say, that you shall be no more.
The fatal Day draws near; let not that Sect,
Make you your Duty, and your Time neglect.
Read, and consider, and you will find much beauty,
In the performance of your Sacred Duty.
The King is God's Vicegerent, fear to offend:
Who dare, with God, or with his King contend?
You Would better wake a drouzy Lion far,
Than he that is made bright by God's own Star.
If you run on in disobedient Ways,
You gain but Hell, whilst others gain much Praise,
And by their Loyalty their Fortunes raise.
FORTY full Years King Solomon had Reigned;
The praise of all his Subjects he had gained.
Then with his Fathers this good King did sleep,
Now Rehoboam does his Scepter keep.
So the Succession lasted many Years,
As by the Texts of Holy Writ appears.
The Son succeeds the Father, and one Brother,
By the same Method, does succeed another.
A Sacred aw for Kings was then required;
And now, what is there more or less desired?
We have a Gracious King, by God appointed,
Let Us love, and fear, and serve the Lord's Anointed.
Solomon's Wisdom, Hezekiah's Zeal,
Are both in James the Second. I appeal,
Even to Phanatick Foes, if Truth they will speak,
They Will say, he is wise, he is zealous, just and meek.
Since we are so happy in our Sacred King,
Vive le Roy with one consent we'll sing.
THE Jews sinning; to Babylon were sent,
There Slaves to be until they did repent.
Now God takes pity of the Jews again,
In the beginning of King Cyrus's Reign,
He gave command to Cyrus, to restore
The large Dominions which were theirs before.
He, tho a Heathen King, did not deny
The great Commands of him that sits on High.
EZRA,
Chap. 1. Verse. 1, 2. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, The LORD God of Heaven
has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, etc. Verse. 3. Chap. 6. Verse. 8,
10, 11. Chap. 7. Verse. 26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and
the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be
unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment.
God turns the Hearts of Kings as pleases him;
And as the Brooks of Water, so they swim
Round this vast Orb. Who is it that can resist
Him that contains the Winds within his Fist?
If Heathens did obey the God of Heaven;
How shall then our Phanaticks be forgiven?
Who do pretend to greater Light than they,
Yet have not learned the Voice of God to obey.
And if that Cyrus was by all obeyed,
When he his great and mighty Scepter swayed:
Then how much more should our Angelick Prince,
Expect that we should show Obedience?
He that defends our Faith, supports our Peace,
That makes our Wars and Controversies cease.
He who preserves the Church of England pure!
How can we fancy that he should endure
To see his Subjects act such horrid Treason,
Against his Sacred Person, without reason?
Solomon's Wisdom he has shown of late,
In the subduing of his bloody Fate.
And David's valor on the Seas we have seen,
Before he married this our Royal Queen.
King Hezekiah's Zeal to him belongs,
If we on all his Virtues make our Songs.
Then Moses meekness in him, let us proclaim,
And let some Angel's Pen his Virtues name.
He is, it is hard for me to tell you what,
Sum all Perfections up, and He is that!
If so, then they must be of hellish Breed,
The worst of the despised Serpent's Seed,
Who think him ill; much worse are they who Act
That thing which may his peaceful Reign protract.
Yet he was hardly settled on his Throne,
When cursed Treason in the Land was known.
Rebels of blackest hue crept to the West,
Each sharping Swords and Syths to pierce his Breast.
Can God behold this Wickedness? Can he,
With his pure Eyes, this horrid Treason see,
And not reveal it? No, a Trumpet's sounded,
And they are no sooner met than they are confounded.
The Great Jehovah has a watchful eye,
For some small time, Traitors securely lie,
And hatch their Treason, but at last they die;
Before they bring it up unto perfection,
God finds them out, and gives them due correction.
They often die, like Birds upon a Tree,
It Is seldom they from God's great Wrath can flee.
The Vulture Ferguson escapes a while;
I fancy he can hardly go a mile
In any Land, but Conscience bids him Hark,
To hear the cry of Bloodhounds, how they bark,
And howl for Justice; every noise he hears,
He does imagine that some ravenous Bears
Dog him at's Heels, his filthy Flesh to tear.
And, oh! Who can a wounded Conscience bear?
He does but linger out his hateful Life,
Which Justice will cut off with his keen Knife.
POWERFUL Scripture Proofs FOR MONARCHY.

Diligently collected out of the New Testament OF OUR Lord and Savior JESUS
CHRIST.

Written by the Author. Anno 1685.

Powerful Scripture Proofs in Defense of Monarchy, etc.
THAT wicked Men may be convinced by Reason,
And hindered from Rebellion, and from Treason.
No one, I think, can want for Argument,
Who reads the Texts in the Old Testament;
There Is Proof on Proof, and Texts so plain and full.
They cannot choose but pierce the thickest Skull.
Yet some may think, all they have read too few,
Therefore unto the Old, I add the New.
Here are such awful Texts sent down from Heaven,
That sure they cannot think to be forgiven
Who disobey them; read, and you will find,
Enough to satisfy a Critick's Mind.
St. MATTHEW, Chap. 17. Verse. 24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they
that received Tribute-mony, came to Peter, and said, Does not your Master pay
Tribute? Verse. 25. He says, Yes. etc. Verse. 26. Verse. 27. Notwithstanding,
lest we should offend them, go thou to the Sea, and cast an Hook, and take up
the first Fish that comes up: and when thou have opened his Mouth, thou shall
find a piece of Money; that take, and give unto them for me and thee. A Miracle
our Blessed Savior wrought.
Was this his great Obedience shown for naught?
Did he unto Authority submit?
Then 'twas to teach us awfulness and wit.
He showed Obedience even to heathenish Kings,
And these Examples he upon us brings,
For our Instruction: Christian Kings much more,
It is our Duty daily to adore.
Next to the Deity, an awful fear,
Should pierce each Subject's Heart, and every Ear.
READ further yet in Luke, and you will find,
That which unfolds the Eyes even of the Blind.
The blindest Whig, if he but reads this Text,
Must have his Conscience very much perplexed.
If ever he has disobedient been,
What stronger Argument was ever seen,
Than this which now I do declare to you,
Give unto Caesar, what is Caesar's due?
St. LVKE. Chap. 20. Verse. 20. And they watched him, etc. Verse. 21, 22, 23, 24,
25. And Jesus said unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be
Cesar's, and unto God the things which be God's. The tempting Pharisees have
naught to say,
Their Mouths are stopped as if it were with Clay.
They were convinced, by this his Sacred Word,
Which pierced far deeper than a two-edged Sword.
And shall not our Phanaticks see the evil
Of Disobedience, which comes from the Devil?
What Doctrine did they preach in the Rebels Camp?
Their Coin, I fear, had Beelzebub for stamp,
There was not one had Oil within his Lamp.
If Christ had called them to his Judgment Seat,
Rebellion's such a Sin, there is none more great.
I wish it were repented of, by those
Who hitherto have been King James his Foes.
Without repentance, when they hence must fly,
They in the hottest place of Hell shall lie.
The Rebels did intend to cut off Kings;
On their own Necks the Whigs this mischief brings.
It proved a happy thing unto this Nation;
Their wickedness did give all Men occasion
To show their Loyalty. The King has found,
Most of his Subjects hearts, loyal and found.
Most of the Clergymen, who preached the Word,
And all the Soldiers too, who wore a Sword,
They were all ready, both to Preach and Fight,
For to maintain our Royal Sov'raign's Right.
Princes and Lords made ready for the Battle,
When they perceived the Whigish Canon rattle.
And his Great Council, our good Parliament,
Hastily strove to give the King content.
This tried his Friends, and this found out his Foes,
Who will, in time, receive deserved blows.
This Skirmish made the Crown more fast to's Head,
For most of's Foes are now in Goals, or dead,
Except a few poor Wretches that are fled.
And now he sits in peace, and shines much more
With Glory, than he ever did before.
God strikes a greater aw in's Subjects Hearts,
To the confounding all the Rebels Arts.
No King e're did so gloriously appear;
Now every Heart he fills with Love or Fear.
BUT now some more Examples let us call:
Let us but listen to the Apostle Paul.
And when we find him brought before the Jews,
To answer Festus, when they him accuse,
St. Paul, we see, does readily refuse.
Paul knew that they were under Cesar's power,
And did believe that him they would devour.
Therefore, to Caesar, he makes his complaint;
This was the policy of that good Saint.
The Jews, like Whigs, would soon a Law have found,
That good St. Paul should have been hanged or drowned.
Paul reasons thus; Shall I by these be tried?
No, I Will to Caesar, he for Caesar cried,
If he had not, doubtless the Saint had died:
ACTS, Chap. 25. Verse. 10. Then said Paul, I stand at Cesar's Judgment Seat,
where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, etc. Verse. 11. No
Man may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Caesar, etc. V. 12. If Caesar had
such Power in those days;
If they his Crown to such a height did raise.
Then how much more should our King be obeyed,
Upon whose Head 3 Kingdoms weight is laid?
We no oppression find from our good King;
No, Heavens be praised, he suffers no such thing.
He gives us wholesome Laws, he grants us rest,
By his protection we continue blessed.
He breaks his sleep to give his Subjects Peace;
All our Calamities and Sorrows cease.
Lord, long command that our blessed King may Reign,
Then no good Subject ever will complain.
THE Bishop of the Ephesians next let us view,
He was for giving crowned Heads their due.
Pious Instructions he leaves for our use,
Which no good Christian surely dare refuse.
I TIMOTHY, Chap. 2. Verse. 1. I exhort therefore, that first of all,
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all
Men: Verse. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Verse. 3. For this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Here he not only bids us
pray for Kings,
But a much sweeter Lesson to us sings.
He bids us pray for all that are in Power,
Whether they are good, or bad, or rich, or poor.
Chalking out this way to a quiet Life,
Which is sufficient to prevent all Strife.
This is the way to please the God of Heaven,
By whom our wicked sins must be forgiven.
Now he that has a grain of sense in's Pate,
How dare he offer to disturb the State?
But God and Christ, Prophets and Bishops too,
Command al Men that they should humbly bow,
and be obedient unto Kings: Yet we,
A cursed Tribe of Hell Hounds daily see,
Who use their Art and Power still to destroy'em,
So far are they from wishing to enjoy'em.
Their Rye-house Plots, their Wapping Treats, we find,
Do fully, and most fairly, paint their Mind.
Their King of Lime, and their Cabals elsewhere,
Do show how far they from Obedience were.
But God, in time, will pluck those bitter Weeds,
And cause Jack Ketch to cut off all their Heads.
No Peace in Israel there is like to be,
Whilst we such wicked Vermin in it see.
Each goes to Bed with Treason in his Heart,
And when he rises, then he does impart
His wiched thoughts unto his bosom Friend,
Who, Monster-like, quickly his Aid does lend.
And thus it is hatched, and brought to Bed, but, Lord,
Reward the Authors with a Hempen Cord.
HE that has Ears to hear, or Eyes to see,
I pray that he would read these Texts with me.
I. St. PETER, Chap. 2. Verse. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme, etc. Verse. 14, 15.
Verse. 17. Honor all Men, love the Brotherhood, FEAR GOD, HONOR THE KING. And,
ROMANS, Chap. 13. Verse. 1. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers.
For there is no Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God.
Verse. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, etc. Verse. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.

Now, Reader, tell me, if thou art not seared,
Whether this Light before to thee appeared?
Or since this Light is come, it is want of Wit,
And Grace, if longer thou in Darkness sit.
If God should send his Angels now to preach,
I Am sure no other Doctrine they would teach.
This is the Language of the God of Love,
He preaches thus from's glorious Throne above.
This is the Will of God, dare you resist?
Can you stand up against his angry Fist?
Who dare provoke to Wrath the God of Sion?
Or who dare go to wake the drowsy Lion?
Phanaticks now indeed grow wondrous bold,
Since they their Faith and Loyalty have sold.
But there is a day draws near of Recompense,
For such as had no Grace, nor Fear, nor Sense,
Nor no Obedience; Oh, a dreadful day,
For such as run in this rebellious way,
When they are summoned, What is it they can say?
Is it enough to say, This Canting Fool
Has bred me in his Irreligious School?
This Ferguson, that Jenkins, or his Brother,
Drew me to hate a King, and drew my Mother,
My Father too, into this fatal snare,
Where now we are come beyond the reach of Prayer?
We sucked his poisonous Doctrines in our mouth,
And took his Treason for the Word of Truth.
Thus will these Hellhounds say when it is too late,
When Troops of Devils at their Elbows wait.
You that are yet alive, Oh! turn to God,
That you may never feel the weight of's Rod.
Turn to the King likewise with humble aw,
Obey his Sacred Person, and his Law.
Fear to offend him, he is the Lord's Anointed;
To rule us, and protect us, he is appointed.
He Is God's Vicegerent, hearken to his Word;
For, woe be to you, if he whets his Sword.
The Frowns of Kings are not to be endured,
These by Rebellion chiefly are procured.
May the blessed Powers Above keep us in peace;
Then Sorrows, and our Sufferings both will cease.
And, O, thou glorious God of Heaven Above,
Send down thy choicest Blessings, with thy Love,
To our dread Sovereign; give him such a Heart,
As he may from thy Footsteps never depart.
Lengthen his Comforts, and prolong his days.
Then give us Hearts to spread abroad thy praise.
Guide thou his Council; Let his Soldiers fight
For Royal James, under the God of Might.
Be with his Clergy, bless their Ways and Words,
And let their Doctrine pierce like two-edged Swords.
And, Lord, we pray thee give us all content,
In our blessed King, and happy Parliament.
Let every one, within his proper Station,
Act for the Peace and Profit of the Nation:
That we may all have cause, thy praise to sing;
And with one Voice cry out, God save the King.
AMEN.

