THE PROTESTANT's Crumbs of Comfort: CONTAINING

I. Prayers and Meditations, with Ejaculations for every day in the Week, and
other occasions.

II. Thanksgivings for Deliverances from Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power.

III. The Rebellion in Ireland, and Massacre of Paris.

IV. The Learned Bishop Usher's Prophecy, concerning Ireland and the Downfall
of Rome.

V. Advice to the late Besieged in Londonderry, under that Reverend Divine and
valiant Commander

Coll. George Walker.

Ilustrated with Pictures suitable to each particular Occasion.

London; Printed by W. W. for Nicholas Bodington at the Golden Ball in
Duck-lane 1690.

Defenders of ye Protestant Religion
Q. Elizabeth.
K. William.
K. James
Q. Mary


II. of Sam. XXIII v. 3. He that rules ore men must be just ruling in ye fear
of God.

Licensed,

December 16th. 1689.
To the Honorable The Lady P. T.
Madam,
WHere true Piety inhabites, Charity always ^ims a Privilege in ^owning
Religious Actions* ^d, like the good Samaritan, ^ords the Oil of relief to the
^ounds of the distressed.

Such tender Compassion al^^ys attends the Great and ^st, of whom, Madam, you ^
a perfect Pattern; your ^nty has been unlimited to (...) distressed and
afflicted, to (...) Fatherless and the Widow, ^t even Commiseration it self has
been your daily delight and practice.

Divine Souls, like yours can never be free from humbl^ Addressers, which
creates ^ Pr^sumption in me to lay the Tract at your La^^ships Door where I
humbly conceive yo^ will honor it so far, as (...) take it into your Closet.

That Heaven may prosp^ you with length of days here and reward you with a Cro^
of Glory hereafter, is t^ hearty Prayer of,

Madam, Your most obedient Servan^ G. W.

THE Protestant's Manual, OF PRAYERS AND MEDITATIONS*
When we first awake.
O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

I will sing of thy power, ^d will praise thy Mercy becomes in the Morning; for
^ou have been, and wilt be (...) defense and refuge in the ^y of my Trouble.

A Prayer for the Morning
O Eternal God, whose Providence has protected m^ the night past, and brought
me t^ the beginning of this day; defend me, O Lord, in the same by thy Almighty
power, an^ grant that this day I fall into n^ Sin, neither run into any kin^ of
danger, but that all m^ doings may be ordered by the Governance, to do alway^
that which is righteous in the sight, through Jesus Christ.

II.
I praise thy Name, th^^ thou have still continued to (...) the opportunity of
servin^ thee, and advancing my hop^ of a blessed Eternity; preser^^^^ me this
day from all violence and snares of my Enemies, visible and invisible; keep me
from all pride, self-love, and vainglory; all obstinacy and disobedience; all
fraudulency and dissimulation, and let the graces of thy holy Spirit take an
absolute possession of my Soul, and all its faculties, that I may finally tread
down Satan under my Feet; all this I beg for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake,

Amen.
A Prayer for the Evening.
ALmighty God, I praise and magnify thy holy Name, for thy preservation of me
this day, and all the days of my Life; for unless thy Mercy had withheld me, I
had committed* more and more grievous Sins, and had been overwhelmed by thy
just wrath, and severest judgments: Pardon, O Lord, I beseech thee, the Sins
and Offenses of my Youth, and the irregularity of all my Actions, either in
thought, word, or deed.

II.
Let thy Heavenly Grace be present with me, that though my Body sleep, yet let
my Soul be vigilant, lest I sleep in Sin, and be forgetful of my Duty toward
thee; let thy goodness and loving kindness never slip out of my remembrance,
but so unite my heart unto thee with fervent Charity, that whatever I do, may
redound to thy glory.

III.
Grant that whether I sleep or wake, live or dye, I may never lose the light of
thy Countenance, but evermore live in thy favor; that escaping from the
Darkness of this World, I may at last arrive at the Land of everlasting Peace
and happiness, to behold thy power and glory,

Amen.
Meditations for Sunday Morning.
LEt God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him,
flee before him.

Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away; and like as wax
melts at the Fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God.

But let the Righteous be glad and rejoice before God; let them also be merry
and joyful.

II.
O Sing unto God, and sing Praises unto his Name; magnify him that rides upon
the Heavens as it were upon an Horse; praise him in his Name, yea, and rejoice
before him.

He is a Father of the Fatherless, and defends the Cause of the Widows; even
God in his holy Habitation.

He is the God that makes Men to be of one Mind in an House, and brings the
Prisoners out of Captivity, but lets the Runnagates continue in scarceness.

III.
O God, when thou wentest forth before the People, when thou wentest through
the Wilderness:

The Earth shook, and the Heavens dropped at the presence of God, even as Sina^
also was moved at the presence of God, which is the God of Israel.

Thou, O God, sentest a gracious Rain upon thine in heritance, and refreshed'st
i^ when it was weary.

Thy Congregation shall dwell therein; for thou, O God, have of thy Goodness
prepared for the Poor.

IV.
The Lord gave the Word: Great was the Company of the Preachers.

Kings with their Armies did flee, and were discomfited, and they of the
Household divided the spoil.

Though ye have li^n among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the Wings of a Dove,
that is covered with silver Wings, and her Feathers like Gold.

V.
When the Almighty scattered Kings for their sake, then were they as white as
snow in Salmon.

As the Hill of Basan, so is God's Hill; even an high Hill, as the Hill of
Basan.

Why hop ye so, ye high Hills? this is God's Hill, in which it pleases him to
dwell; yea, the Lord will abide in it for ever.

VI.
The Chariots of God are Twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, and the
Lord is among them, as in the holy Place of Sin^i.

Thou art gone up on high, ^hou have led Captivity Captive, and received Gifts
for Men; yea, even for thine Enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

VII.
Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helps us, and pours his
benefits upon us.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes ^alvation: God is the Lord by whom
we escape Death.

God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such a one as
goes on s^ill in his wickedness.

VIII.
The Lord has said, I will bring my people again, as I did from Basan: Mine
own will I bring again, as I did sometime from the deep of the Sea.

That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine Enemies; and that the Tongue
of thy Dogs may be red through the same.

IX.
It is well seen, O God, how thou go; how thou, my God, and my King, go
in the Sanctuary.

The Singers go before, the Minstrels follow after; in the midst are the
Damsels playing with the Timbrels.

Give Thanks, O Israel, unto God the Lord in the Congregations, from the ground
of the Heart.

There is little Benjamin their Ruler, and the Princes of Juda^, their Counsel;
the Princes of Zabul^n, and the Princes of Napthali.

X.
Thy God has sent forth strength for thee: Stablish the thing, O God, that
thou have wrought in us.

For thy Temples sake at Jerusalem; so shall Kings bring Presents unto thee.

When the Company of the Spear-men and multitude of the Mighty are scattered
abroad among the Beasts of the People, (so that they humbly bring pieces of
Silver,) and when he has scattered the People that delight in War.

Then shall the Princes come out of Egypt; the Morians Land shall soon stretch
out her hands unto God.

The Prayer.
MOst gracious God, who art ^ Father of the Fatherless, and pleadest the Cause
of the Wido^, have Mercy upon thy holy Catholic Church, and since her Lord is
^scended up on high, even to his heavenly Mansions, leave us not alone
comfortless, but send thy holy Spirit into our hearts, that by his assistance
we may escape spiritual, and the bitterness of the temporal.

II.
Send a gracious shower, even the Dew of thy divine Favors, to refresh our
weariness in this Calamity; make thy People as Doves, innocent and chaste, and
adorn them with the Beauty of inward Sanctity: Let all Kings, Princes, and
Rulers of the Earth, confess thy Name, and thy honor; that thy Gospel
extending forth into all Lands, Peace, and all thy Blessings may follow it, and
thy praise be increased from Generation to Generation, through Christ our Lord
and Savior,

Amen.
Sunday Noons Meditations.
SIng unto God, O ye Kingdoms of the Earth: O sing Praises unto the Lord,

Who sits in the Heavens over all from the beginning: Lo, he does send forth
his Voice, yea, and that a mighty Voice.

Ascribe ye the Power to God over Israel; his Worship and strength is in the
Clouds.

O God, wonderful art thou in thy holy Places! even the God of Israel; he will
give strength unto his People, blessed be God.

II.
O clap your hands together, all ye People; O sing unto God with the voice of
melody.

For the Lord is high, and to be feared; he is the great King upon all the
Earth.

He shall subdue the People under us, and the Nations under our Feet.

He shall choose out an Heritage for us; even the Worship of Jacob whom he loved.

III.
God is gone up with a merry noise, and the Lord with the sound of the Trump.

O sing Praises, sing Praises unto our God: O sing Praises, sing Praises unto
our King.

For God is the King of all the Earth: Sing ye Praises with understanding.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, Celestial King, who reign^st Potentate in all the World, thou art
exalted above all Creatures, and art to be feared in all the Dominions of the
Earth; let the Seed of thy glorious Gospel be planted in all parts of the
habitable World, that thy saving Health may be known unto all Nations.

II.
Let thy Grace pull down all the strong Holds of Sin and Satan, that any ways
oppose thy Holy Name and Word; subdue all thy People unto thee, and the Nations
under thy Feet, so that we that are thy People, and Sheep of thy hands, may
become one Sheepfold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and
Savior.

Meditations for Sunday Night.
I will magnify thee, O God, my King; and I will praise thy Name for ever and
ever.

Every day will I give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Name for ever and ever.

Great is the Lord, and mavelous worthy to be praised; there is no end of his
Greatness.

II.
One Generation shall praise thy Works unto another, and declare thy power.

As for me I will be talking of thy Worship, thy Glory, thy praise, and
wondrous Works.

So that Men shall speak of the might of thy mavelous Acts; and I will also
tell of thy greatness.

The Memorial of thine abundant Kindness shall be showed, and Men shall sing of
thy Righteousness.

III.
The Lord is gracious and merciful, long-suffering, and of great Goodness.

The Lord is loving unto every one, and his Mercy is over all his Works.

All thy Works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give thanks unto thee.

They show the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power.

That thy power, thy glory, and mightiness of thy Kingdom might be known unto
Men.

Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; and thy Dominion endures throughout
all Ages.

The Prayer.
MOst mighty God, mavelous worthy art thou to be praised, and of thy
greatness there is no end; give us sanctified Hearts, and Lips, that we may
express thy Righteousness, and magnify thy glory, Worship, and wondrous Works.

II.
All the Earth praises thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give Thanks unto thee: Make
us religious and sincere before thee, and to lay aside all Hypocrisy. Protect
us, O Lord, by thy hand of Providence, that we fall not, and raise us up when
we are down.

III.
Give us spiritual and temporal Meat in thy o^n due time for our Souls and
Bodies; that we being filled abundantly with thy Mercies here, we may have our
hearts desire fulfilled, and satisfied hereafter, among such as fear thee, and
praise thy holy Name for evermore.

Amen.
Monday Mornings Meditations.
THE Lord upholdeth all such as fall, and lifts up all those that be down.

For he shall deliver the Poor when he cries; the Needy also, and him that
has no helper.

He shall be favorable to the Simple and Needy, and shall preserve the Souls
of the Poor.

He shall deliver their Souls from wrong, and falsehood, and dear shall their
blood be in his sight.

II.
There shall be a heap of Corn in the Earth, high upon the Hills: His Fruit
shall shake like Li^anus, and he shall be green in the City, like Grass upon
the Earth.

His Name shall endure for ever; his Name shall remain under the Sun among the
Posterities, which shall be blessed through him, and all the Heathen shall
praise him.

III.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, and all the Earth shall be
filled with his Majesty,

Amen.
The Prayer.
O Eternal God, thou that defendest the Children and Poor, but pu^ishest the
wrong doer, have mercy upon thy People under affliction; extend thy Mercy and
compassion from ^ne Sea to another, even unto the Worlds end.

II.
Make thy People, who love thy Name, flourish; and subdue their Enemies under
them, that neither ^alshood nor wrong may any ways ^p^ress them. Bless them
with Peace and Tranquillity, and satisfy them with thy Righteousness and
Salvation, through thy Mercy, O blessed ^esu,

Amen.
Mo^nday Noon's Meditations.
NOT unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the Praise, for thy
loving Mercy, and for thy Truths sake.

Wherefore shall the Heathen say, Where is now their God?

As for our God, he is in Heaven; he has done whatsoever pleases him.

II.
Their Idols are Silver and Gold, even the Work of Men's hands.

They have Mouths and speak not; eyes have they, and see not.

They have Ears and hear not; Noses have they and smell not.

They have hands, and handle not: Feet have they, and walk not; neither speak
they through their Throat.

They that make them are like unto them; and so are all such as put their Trust
in them.

III.
But thou House of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: He is ^^eir succor and
defender.

Ye House of Aaron, put your Trust in the Lord: He is their helper and defender.

The Lord has been mind^ull of us, and he shall bless ^s: Even he shall bless
the ^ouse of Israel, he shall bless ^^e House of Aaron.

He shall bless them that ^ar the Lord, both small and ^reat.

The Prayer.
ALmighty God, whose Dwelling is in the highest Heavens, and ^st whatsoever
pleases thee both in heaven and on Earth; give Grace, (...) beavenly Father,
that in all our ^ubles and calamities, we may put (...) whole Trust in thee,
who art our ^y succor, defender, and deliver.

II.
Let us evermore praise thy holy Name, and never ascribe to our selves any
Honor, and Glory, or Thank^ of any good Action, or prosper o^ Success; but to
thee alone who a^^ the Author and Giver of all good things. Keep us from
Idolatry from worshipping vain Imagination^ and any thing which is contrary to
t^^ Gospel. Bless us in all our way^ that when we go from hence, we (...)
inherit thy Kingdom.

Amen.
Meditations for Monday Night.
I Will lift up mine Eyes un^ the Hills, from when comes my Help.

My Help comes even from the Lord, which has man Heaven and Earth.

II.
He will not suffer thy For to be moved: and he the keeps thee will not sleep.

Behold he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor ^^eep.

III.
The Lord himself is thy Keeper: The Lord is thy Defense upon the right hand.

So that the Sun shall not ^urn thee by day, nor the Moon by night.

IV.
The Lord shall preserve thee ^^om Evil: Yea, it is even he that shall keep thy
Soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy ^oing out, and thy coming in, ^^om this time forth
for evermore.

The Prayer.
O GOD, from whence comes all our Help and Succor, pre^ve us by thy Power and
Providence, ^at nothing either by day or night ^ay molest our Peace, or disturh
our ^afety; suffer not the Vanities of ^e one to allure us, nor the Terrors
(...) the other to amaze and affright us.

II.
Let our Feet be immovable, an^ fixed upon the Rock and Foundation Christ
Jesus; and so dispose of o^ going out, and coming in, that ^ may not swerve
from thy Commandments: but walk according to t^ Holy Rule in all things, who
art o^ Lord and Savior.

Meditations for Tuesday Morning.
THey that put their Tr^ in the Lord shall be ev^ as the Mount Sion, which m^
not be removed, but stande^ fast for ever.

The Hills stand about Jerusalem: even so stands t^ Lord round about his
Peop^ from this time forth for ev^ more.

II.
For the Rod of the Ungo^ comes not into the lot of t^ Righteous; lest the
Righteous out their hands unto Wickedness.

Do well, O Lord, unto those that be good and true of Heart.

As for such as turn back un^o their own wickedness, the lord shall lead them
forth with the Evildoers: but ^eace shall be upon Israel.

The Prayer.
MErciful God, our* only Trust and Confidence, and whosoever ^usteth in thee
shall not be removed, ^^t stand fast for ever; let thy Pow^^ and Glory stand
round about us, and all thy Holy People, like Hills ^r our Protection and
Safety, that ^e may be sheltered from our Enemies.

II.
Permit us not to put our hands to Wickedness, neither let us partake (...) the
Lot of the Ungodly, whom thou or dainest for Destruction: B^ let us receive
that Blessing which o^ Lord and Savior has left (...) Church, even the Peace
of God t^ Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: (...) whom be all Honor and Glory, Wor^
without end.

Amen.
Meditations for Tuesday Noon.
WHen the Lord turned again the Captivity (...) Sion, then were we like unt^
them that dream.

Then was our Mouth fil^ed with Laughter, and o^ Tongue with Joy.

II.
Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has do^ great things for them.

Yea, the Lord has do^ great things for us already whereof we rejoice.

III.
Turn thou our Captivity, O Lord, as the Rivers in the South.

They that sow in Tears shall ^eap in Joy.

He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears ^orth good Seed, shall
doubt^ess come again with Joy, and ^ring his Sheaves with him.

The Prayer.
GRacious God, who have promised Life and Salvation to thy cho^en Servants, and
have wrought ^ighty things for them already, ^hereof they rejoice. Deliver us
we ^eseech thee, from the Slavery and ^etters of Sin and Misery; dissipate and
scatter all our Enemies which ^ay close Siege to us, seeking to destroy us.

II.
Fill our Hearts with Con^t^ition, ^or having trespassed against thee; teach us
that Divine Art of Self denial, to mo^tifie our Affection (...) our Lust, and
extinguish a^ ^^^shly Temptations; that when the great Harvest shall come, ^e
may (...) admitted as Fellow Laborers (...) work in thy Spiritual Kingdom
through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Meditations for Tuesday Night.
OUT of the Deep have called unto thee, O Lord Lord hear my Voice.

Oh let thine Ears conside^ well the Voice of my Complaint.

II.
If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done a^ miss, O Lord, who may
a^ bide it?

For there is Mercy with thee: therefore snalt thou b^ feared.

I look for the Lord, my Soul does wait for him; in his Word is my Trust.

III.
My Soul flies unto the Lord before the Morning Watch: I say before the
Morning Watch.

O Israel trust in the Lord: for with the Lord there is Mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his Sins.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Lord, who with thy most precious Blood, did pay ^ur Ransom, to
purchase for us Freedom, and Salvation. With thee, ^here is Mercy and plenteous
Redemption; O let the height of that Mercy ^ake us out of the bottomless Pit of
^in and Misery.

II.
Be not extreme, O Lord, in marking out what we have done amiss in our Life
time, but rather blot out the Handwriting which is against us* And as thy
boundless Mercy pardon^ what is past, so let the sweetness of i^ create thy
Fear in our Hearts, that we may never more dare to offend s^ gracious and
merciful a Savior a^ thou art to us. Grant this, O Lord, I beseech thee, for
thy alone sake.

Amen.
Meditations for Wednesday Morning.
DEliver me, O Lord, from the Evil Man, and preserve me from the Wicked Man.

Which imagine mischief i^ their Hearts, and stir up stris^ all the day long.

They have sharpened their Tongues like a Serpent: Adders Poison is under their
Lips.

II.
Keep me, O Lord, from the Hands of the Ungodly, preserve me from the wicked
Men, which are purposed to overthrow my going.

The Proud have laid a s^are for me, and spread a Net abroad with Cords; yea,
and set Traps in my way.

III.
I said unto the Lord, thou art my God: hear the Voice of my Prayers, O Lord.

O Lord God, thou strength of my Health, thou have covered my Head in the day
of Battle.

IV.
Let not the Ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous
Imagination prosper, lest they be too Proud.

Let the mischief of their own Lips fall upon the head of them that compass me
about.

A man full of Words shall not prosper upon the Earth: Evil shall hunt the
wicked Person to overthrow him.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, the Strength of all those that depend upon thee; deliver us from
evil and wicked Men: that neither their Examples may corrupt us, nor their
Counsels misguide us, or their Mischief disturb our Safety.

II.
But do thou, O Lord, cover our Heads in the day of Battle and Strife against
all our Bodily and Ghostly Enemies; that though they pursue us to overthrow us,
yet we may be safe on Earth under thy Favor and Almighty Protection, and at
the last being removed from all Fears and Dangers, we may appear in thy sight
amongst the Righteous for evermore.

Meditations for Wednesday Noon.
HEar my Prayer, O Lord, and consider my Desire: Hearken unto me for thy Truth
and Righteousness sake.

And enter not into Judgment with thy Servant: for in thy sight shall no one
living be justified.

II.
For the Enemy has persecuted my Soul, he has smitten my Life down to the
ground, he has laid me in the Darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

Therefore is my Spirit vexed within me, and my Heart within me is desolate.

III.
Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: Yea, I exercise my
self in the works of thy Hands. I stretch forth my Hands unto thee: my Soul
gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty Land.

The Prayer.
MOst Righteous Judge and dear Redeemer, hear us for thy Truth and Mercies
sake; free us from the heinous Guilt of all our Sins, and renounce those
Punishments due to us for the same.

II.
Enter not at any time into Judgment with us, for in thy sight no Flesh can be
justified by its own worthiness. Fortify our Souls with the Holiness of a
lively Faith, which works by Charity, that at last we enter into thy Holy of
Holies, even Life Everlasting.

Amen.
Meditations for Wednesday Night.
HEar me, O Lord, and that soon, for my Spirit waxes faint: Hide not thy Face
from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the Pit.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the Morning, for in thee is my
Trust: Show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my Soul unto
thee.

II.
Deliver me, O Lord, from mine Enemies: for I fly unto thee to hide me.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: Let thy
loving Spirit lead me forth into the Land of Righteousness.

III.
Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: and for thy Righteousness sake bring
my Soul out of trouble.

And of thy goodness slay mine Enemies, and destroy all them that vex my Soul;
for I am thy Servant.

The Prayer.
BOW down thine Ear, O Lord, and hear my Complaint, support my weak Spirit with
thy Heavenly Grace, which is sufficient for me. Hide not the light of thy
Countenance from me, but replenish me with the Beams of thy Mercy and Goodness.

II.
Direct me in the way that I should walk in; instruct me to do whatsoever
pleases thee, quicken my Soul in thy Paths which lead to Life Eternal; and so
continue the Conduct of thy Blessed Spirit to me, that it may never depart from
me, till I am brought out of this temporal World, and am safely arrived at thy
Spiritual Kingdom.

Amen.
Meditations for Thursday Morning.
PRaise the Lord, O my Soul; while I live will I praise the Lord; yea, as long
as I have any Being, will I sing praises unto my God.

O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any Child of Man: ^or there is no help
in them.

For when the Breath of Man goes out, he shall turn again to his Earth: and
then all his Thoughts perish.

II.
Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

Which made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is; which keeps
his promise for ever. Which helps them to right that suffer wrong; which
feeds the Hungry.

III.
The Lord loses Men out of Prison: the Lord gives Sight to the Blind.

The Lord helps them that are fallen: the Lord cares for the Righteous.

The Lord cares for the Strangers; he defends the Fatherless and Widow: as
for the way of the Ungodly, he turns it upside down.

The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be King for evermore, and throughout all
generations.

The Prayer.
GReat God, who art King for everlasting, world without end, vouchsafe us thy
Grace, and assist us with thy ready help, that we may fix all our hopes in
thee; for thou alone art able to grant Deliverance.

II.
Lord, feed our Souls, and satisfy us with thy Salvation, when we hunger and
thirst after thee; revenge our Cause, when we suffer wrong; and heal our
backslidings. Enlighten our Darkness, that we walk not in the shadow of Death,
and let thy hand of Providence take care of us in all our necessities, that
when our life is expired, and we return to that Earth from whence we were
taken, we may reign with thee for evermore.

Meditations for Thursday Noon.
I Cried unto the Lord with my Voice, yea, even unto the Lord did I make my
supplication.

I poured out my Complaints before him, and showed him of my trouble.

When my Spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my path: in the way wherein I
walked have they privily laid a snare for me.

II.
I looked also upon my right hand, and saw there was no Man that would know me.

I had no place to fly unto: and no man cared for my Soul.

I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said, thou art my Hope, and my Portion in the
Land of the Living.

III.
Consider my Complaint: for I am brought very low.

O deliver me from my Persecutors, for they are too strong for me.

Bring my Soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name; which thing
if thou will grant me, then shall the Righteous resort unto my Company.

The Prayer.
THou art our Place, O Lord to flee unto, and the only Sanctuary wherein is
safety: O hide us under the Shadow of thy Wings, keep us from all those Dangers
which increase upon us when our Spirits are in heaviness, and our Bodies bowed
down with infirmities.

II.
Stand thou evermore at our right hand, and aid us so with the power of thy
Grace, that our Temptations and Enemies may at no time molest and disturb us:
Grant that our Souls in thy good time may depart out of the Prison of the Body
with joy and not with grief, and enter into thine eternal Joy to reign with
thee for evermore,

Amen.
Meditations for Thursday Night.
O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me; thou know my down-sitting
and mine up-rising; thou understandest my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my Bed, and about my path, and spiest out all my ways.

For lo, there is not a Word in my Tongue, but thou, O Lord, know it
altogether.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.

II.
Such Knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me, I cannot attain unto it.

Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit? or whither shall I go then from thy
presence?

If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there: If I go down to Hell, thou art
there also.

If I take the Wings of the Morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the
Sea.

III.
Even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say, peradventure the Darkness shall cover me; then shall my Night be
turned into day.

Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the
day; the darkness and light to thee are both alike.

For my Reins are thine; thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb.

The Prayer.
INfinite art thou, O Lord, in Wisdom, and omnipresent in all places; thou
fillest Heaven and Earth with Majesty, and the effects of thy Glory: Hell feels
thy Mighty power, but thou communicatest to us thy poor Creatures thy boundless
Mercy.

II.
And, O Lord, as thou art present with us, so we humbly beseech thee be
President amongst us; teach us thy Holy Laws, and so guide us by thy Golden
Rule, and Divine Precepts, that we wander not in the darkness of our own
Errors, but in thy Light whom no Clouds can overcast, nor Darkness eclipse:
Preserve us, O Lord, from falling into utter darkness, where there is weeping,
and wailing and gnashing of Teeth.

Meditations for Friday Morning.
I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
mavelous are thy Works, and that my Soul knows right well.

My Bones are not hid from thee, though I am made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the Earth.

Thine Eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy Book were all
my Members written.

Which day by day were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.

II.
How dear are thy Counsels unto me, O God! O how great is the Sum of them!

If I tell them, they are more ^n number than the Sand: When I awake up, I am
pre^ent with thee.

Will thou not slay the Wick^d, O God? Depart from me ^e bloodthirsty Men.

For they speak unrighte^usly against thee, and thine Enemies take thy Name in
^ain.

III.
Do not I hate them, O Lord that hate thee? And am not grieved with those that
ri^^ up against thee?

Yea, I hate them right sor^ even as though they we^^ mine Enemies.

Try me, O God, and se^^ the ground of my heart Prove me, and examine m^
thoughts.

Look well if there be a^ way of Wickedness in m^ and lead me in the way ev^^
lasting.

The Prayer.
O Lord, thy Works are marvell^ for thou have done great thi^ for my Soul; it
is thou that have (...) med me in the Womb, and thy (...) der care has
preserved me to (...) moment: Teach me to hate and hor all iniquity, und to
love Counsels as my dearest Treasure, we may be as fearful of committing Sins
in Secret, with that circumspection, as in the Eye of the World.

II.
Lead me in thy Truth, and guide me in the Paths of a Holy Life, that I may
examine my self strictly of what Sins I stand guilty off, and earnestly repent
of those offenses: Make me to shun all wicked ways, and conduct me into the way
everlasting, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Friday Noon's Meditations.
O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready, I will sing, and give praise with
the best Member I have.

Awake thou Lute and Harp, I my self will awake right early.

I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the People: I will sing praises
unto thee among the Nations.

II.
For thy Mercy is greater than the Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.

Set up thy self, O God, above the Heavens; and thy glory above all the Earth.

That thy beloved may be delivered, let thy right hand save them, and hear thou
me.

III.
God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice therefore and divide Sic^em,
and meet out the Valley of Succoth.

Gilead is mine, and Mana^se^ is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head.

Juda is my Lawgiver; Moab is my Wash-pot; over Edom will I ^ast out my Shoe;
upon the Philistines will I triumph.

III.
Who will lead me into the strong City? and who will bring me into Edom?

Have not thou forsaken us, O God? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our
Hosts?

O help us against the Enemy; for vain is the help of Man.

Through God we shall do great Acts; and it is he that shall tread down our
Enemies.

The Prayer.
EArly, O my God, to thee will I make my Prayer and Supplication! for thy Mercy
in extent is greater than the Heavens, and thy glory above all the Earth; for
ever be thou exalted in thine own strength, and magnify thy power, and thy
never-failing Mercy in defending us and all thy holy Church against all our
Enemies temporal and spiritual.

II.
Leave us not, nor forsake us, O God, who art our strong Tower and Defense, for
in vain is Man's help, unless thou strengthen us; fortify us, and go forth
with our Hosts to Battle, that we being defended and armed by thee, may perform
Acts great and good, fighting thy Battles, and place our Confidence in thy
Righteousness only, and thy Salvation,

Amen.
Meditations for Friday Evening.
IN Jury is God known; his Name is great in Israel; at Salem is his Tabernacle,
and his Dwelling in Sion.

There he brake the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, the Sword, and the Battle.

Thou art of more honor and might than the hills of the Robbers.

II.
The proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep; and all the Men, whose
hands were mighty, have found nothing.

At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the Chariot and Horse are fallen.

Thou even thou, art to be ^cared, and who may stand ^n thy sight when thou art
angry?

Thou did cause thy Judgments to be heard from Heaven: the Earth trembled and
was still.

III.
When God arose to Judgment, and to help all the meek upon Earth.

The fierceness of Man shall turn to thy praise, and the fierceness of them
shall thou refrain.

Promise unto the Lord your God, and keep it, all ye that be round about him:
bring Presents unto him that ought to be feared.

He shall refrain the spirit of Princes; and is wonderful among the Kings of
the Earth.

The Prayer.
GReat is thy Name, O Lord, and thy dwelling in the highest Heavens; give a
deep impression of a dread and reverence of thee and thy power in our Hearts:
Let thy threatenings and judgments which descend from Heaven, and are executed
upon stubborn and disobedient People; make us loath Sin, or the thoughts of it,
and shun all the occasions and alluring baits of it.

II.
O let thy continued mercies, and loving kindnesses be ever in our remembrance;
and make our Hearts still, full of smoothness and tranquillity, that we may not
fear the rigor of man, or the cruel wrath of those whose spirits thou can
refrain, lest we be hindered in our duty toward thee; but let us so fear to
offend thee, that we may press forwards from fear to love, from apprehensions
of thy wrath, to the sense and comfort of thy mercies.

Meditations for Saturday Morning.
UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks; yea, unto thee do we give thanks.

Thy Name also is so nigh; and that do thy wondrous works declare.

When I receive the Congregation, I shall judge according unto right.

The Earth is weak, and all the Inhabitants thereof: I bear up the Pillars of
it.

II.
I said unto the Fools, Deal not so madly: and to the Ungodly, set not up your
Horn.

Set not up your Horn on high, and speak not with a stiff Neck.

For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from
the South.

And why? God is the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.

III.
For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is red: it is full
mixed, and he pours out of the same.

As for the dregs thereof, all the ungodly of the Earth shall drink them, and
suck them out.

But I will talk of the God of Jacob, and praise him for ever.

All the Horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the Horns of the Righteous
shall be exalted.

The Prayer.
GReat Judge of the whole Universe, from whom proceeds all promotion and
punishment, extend thy Mercy now upon us, at the hour of Death, and in the day
of Judgment, when thou shall judge all the Society of Men and Angels according
to Right.

II.
O Give us thy powerful Grace, that we may expect thy coming in Humility and
perfect Charity, and not be puffed up and exalted in our Fancies and
Imaginations, but may submit to thy Will with Meekness and Holy Obedience; that
when thou shall pour forth thy Wrath upon the Ungodly, we may not be numbered
amongst them, but partake of those Mercies thou have provided for those that
love and fear thee.

Amen.
Meditations for Saturday Noon.
Have thee, O God, to deliver me: make have to help me, O Lord.

Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my Soul: Let them be turned
back-ward, and put to confusion that wish me Evil.

Let them, for their reward, be soon brought to shame that cry over me, There,
There.

II.
But let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all such
as delight in thy Salvation, say always, The Lord be praised.

As for me, I am poor and in misery: Have thee unto me, O God.

Thou art my Helper and my Redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying.

The Prayer.
THou, O God, art our Deliverer, Helper, and Redeemer, have mercy upon us, and
all those which serve thee, in Sincerity and Truth; help us, O God, against
those that seek to destroy our Souls: Let our delight be, to wait for thy
Salvation, and to trust in thy never-failing Mercies, that our Feet being
guided by thy direction, we may remain safe under thy Providence.

II.
Suffer us not, O thou, who art a God of Power and great Glory, to be a Prey to
our Enemies; but dissipate and scatter them, as offensive Clouds to the light
of thy Gospel. Strengthen our Weakness by thy Power, pardon our Sins by thy
Mercies, and justify our Souls by thy free Grace, that we may now, and
evermore with the humble Addresses of Devotion, give thee Praise, not only with
our Lips, but in our Lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Meditations for Saturday Night.
GOD be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of his
Countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon Earth, thy saving Health among all Nations.

Let the People praise thee, O God; yea, let all the people praise thee.

II.
O let the Nations rejoice and be glad; for thou shall judge the Folk
righteously, and govern the Nations upon Earth.

Let the People praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the Earth bring forth her Increase, and God, even our own God,
shall give us his Blessing.

God shall bless us, and all the ends of the World shall fear him.

The Prayer.
O God, thou great Governor of all Mankind, and judge of the whole Earth, have
mercy upon us, and bless us. Thou make the resplendent Beams of thy unwearied
Sun to shine, and cast his Luster upon all corners of the habitable World,
bestowing his Light both on the Good and Bad.

II.
Let the blessed Light of thy bright Countenance, spread it self to all
Nations, and to all People: Lighten all our Darknesses with the radiant Beams
of thy Divine Favor, teach thy ways to all People, and give thy saving Health
to all Nations; that all may join with one consent to fear thee, and praise thy
Name for evermore.

Amen.
EJACULATIONS UPON Several Occasions Out of the Holy Scriptures*
In the Morning
MY Voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: Early in the Morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee, and will look up, Psalm. 5. 3.

My days are like the days of an Hireling. Until the day break, and the
shadows fly away, Job 7. 1. Cant. 4. 6.

At going forth.
The Lord preserve my going out, and my coming in: from this time forth, and
for evermore, Psalm. 121. 8.

O hold thou up my goings in thy Paths; that my Footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17. 5.

Beginning a good Work.
In the volume of the Book it is written of me: I delight to do thy Will, O my
God; yea, thy Law is within my Heart, Psalm. 40. 7, 8.

In good Inspirations.
The Lord God has opened my Ear, and I was not rebellious against him, Isa.
50. 5.

At Church.
O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, Psalm. 84. 1.

Before Reading.
Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. 9.

Speaking.
My Heart is inditing a good Matter; I speak of the things which I have made
touching the King, Psalm. 45. 1.

When you go about worldly Affairs.
O let not my heart be inclined to any evil thing: Let me not be occupied in
ungodly Works, with the Men that work wickedness, lest I eat of such things as
please them. Psalm 141. 4.

Deliver me, O Lord, from every evil Work: and establish me in every good word
and work. 2. Tim. 4. 18.

God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing; whether it
be good, or whether it be evil.

Before Eating.
Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
Psalm. 145. ^6.

After Eating.
The Lord is to be praised, who satisfies thy Mouth with good things; making
thee young and lusty as an Eagle* Psalm. 103. 4.

In prosperity.
If I do not remember thee let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I
prefer not thee above my chie^ Joy. Psalm. 137. 6.

Adversity.
The Lord kills and makes alive, 1. Sam. 2. 6.

Shall we receive good at the hand of God? and shall we no^ receive evil? Job
2. 10.

Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his Glory?
Luk^ 24. 26.

Troubles.
Surely Man walks in ^ vain Show; surely they are disquieted in vain. Psalm.
39. 6.

Calumnies.
If I pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

Praises.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, Psalm. 115. 1.

Against vain Hope.
As a Dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall de^pise
their Image, Psalm. 73. ^0.

Pride.
Whosoever exalts himself, shall be abased, Luke 14. 11.

Covetousness.
It is more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20. 35.

Luxury.
Know ye not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15.

Envy.
He that loves not his Brother, abides in Sin, 1 John ^ 14.

Gluttony.
The Kingdom of God is n^ Meat and Drink, Romans 14. 1^

Anger.
Learn of me, for I am me^ and lowly in Heart, Mat. 1^ 29.

Sloth.
Cursed be he that does t^ work of the Lord negligentl^ Jer. 48. 10.

Rules of Faith.
Remove not the anci^ Bounds which thy Fath^ have set, Prove. 22. 28.

Acts of Faith.
Lord, I believe, help the my Unbelief, Mark 9. 24.

I know that my Redeem^ lives, etc. Job 19. 25.

Hope.
Though I walk through t^ valley of the shadow of Death I will fear no Evil;
for thou art with me, Psalm. 24. 4.

I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him, Psalm. 90.
15.

Charity.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire in
comparison of thee.

My Flesh and my Heart fails; but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25, 26.

Against Worshipping of Idols.
To whom will you liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Isa.
40. 18.

Woe unto him that says to the Wood, Awake; to the dumb Stone, Arise, it shall
teach; behold it is laid over with Gold and Silver, and there is no breath at
all in the midst of it, Hab. 2. 19.

If ye do return unto the Lord with all your Hearts; then put away the strange
Gods, and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your Hearts unto the Lord, and
serve him only.

Then the Children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the
Lord only* 1 Samuel 7. 3, 4.

Against Popish Tradition.
For as much as this people draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lip^
do honor me, but have removed their Heart far from me, Isa. 29. 13.

In vain they do worship me teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men,
Man* 7. 7.

Take heed and beware o^ the Leaven of the Pharisees an^ of the Sadduces.

Against Praying to Saints.
Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Romans 10. 13.

When you pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Luke 11. 2.

Against Antichrist.
Little Children, it is the last time, and as you have heard that Antichrist
shall come; even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the last
time, I John 2. 18.

Let no Man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there
come ^ falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of
Perdition:

Who opposes and exal^eth himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he, as God, ^itteth in the Temple of God, ^he wing himself
that he is God.

And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a Lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2. These. 2, 3, 4, 11, 12.

Divine Breathings of the Soul, toward the Evening.
AS the Heart pants after the VVater-brooks, so longs my Soul after thee, O
God.

My Soul is athirst for God, even for the living God* when shall I* come to
appear before the presence of God* ^salm. 42. 1. 2.

Thy loving kindness is better than life it self; therefore my Lips shall
praise thee. Psalm 63. 4.

A Prayer for a Family, that may serve for Morning or Evening.
O Eternal, Lord God, we thy poor and unworthy Servants, prostrate our selves
before thee, in all Humility; to ask pardon for all our Sins and Offenses: Thou
art a God of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity, yet so infinitely Gracious,
that none ever trusted in thee, and was confounded: Thou had an Eye upon us,
in the Womb, and notwithstanding our unworthiness, thou still relievest us,
giving us our daily Food, and hourly Breath.

II.
What can we render unto thee, O Lord, for all thy Mercies which thou
continually bestowest upon us: O let the Ocean of this thy Mercy be a partition
betwixt us and our Sins, and betwixt thee and thy Judgments; Remove from us
whatsoever displeases thee; and we beseech thee be not extreme in marking our
Imperfections; thou have gone along with us, and have kept us and preserved us
this Night past, from Fire, In the Morning.
Water, Robbery, sudden Death, and Desolation: Day past from wilful Snining,
Frights, In the Evening.
and Fears, Maiming, Drowning, and Fire, from bad Company, and false Witnesses,
which might lay to our Charge, things that we know not, and from all other sad
Accidents which might have be^aln us.

III.
Bless our gracious Deliverers, and Sovereign Lord and Lady, K William and Q.
Mary, defend their Persons, uphold their Crown, and maintain their State, give
them continual Peace, length of Days, and much happiness: Bless Catherine the
Queen Dowager, Her Royal Highness, the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the rest
of the Royal Family: Let thy Blessing be upon this Family, guide us in our
ways, and lead us in thy Truth: Bless all our Relations and Friends, guide and
govern us by thy good Spirit of Grace; and whatsoever thou know to be
needful and convenient for us, we beseech thee grant it.

IV.
Lastly, We come unto thee for a blessing, for all that are distressed either
in Body, Mind, or Estate, especially those who suffer Persecution, for enjoying
the Light of thy Gospel, and fly into this Land for Succor: Hear us, O Lord,
for them, and thy whole Church, and hear Christ for us all, in whose Name, and
Word, we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer before the Communion.
O Merciful Jesu, who diedst an ignominious Death upon the Cross for my Sins,
and did bequeath in thy last Will and Testament, this holy Sacrament for my
Souls Nourishment: My Sins, O Lord, are great, but I lament my Uncleanness, and
renounce my Unworthiness.

II.
I come not to thy Holy Table, because Worthy, but Necessitous; I come to be
made clean and purged from my Dross and Filthiness; thy Body and Blood can make
me Clean, thy Merits can make me a worthy Receiver; and here is a Conveyance of
thy blessed Body and Blood in this Holy Sacrament: Give my Sins thy Pardon, my
Soul thy Heavenly Grace, and what thou do convey, seal unto me, for thy alone
sake, my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
At receiving the Bread.
Blessed Jesu, as thou have given thy Flesh to be the Bread of Life and
Salvation; so vouchsafe to work in me by a lively Faith, that I receiving the
same, may evermore continue in thee, and thou in me,

Amen.
At receiving the Cup.
Lord, grant, that as thy Blood was shed to wash me a poor Sinner; so grant,
that it may through a lively Faith take effect in me, that I may become a fit
Member of thee, and live, and die in thee for ever.

A Prayer after the Communion.
GLory, Honor, and Praise be given unto thee, O Lord, most Holy, for all thy
Mercies bestowed upon me: I have now been partaker of Bread and Wine: Lord make
me partaker of thy Body and Blood: The one turns to the Nourishment of my Body;
but the other, with thy Grace, is the Nourishment of my Soul.

II.
O let not thy precious Blood be shed in vain for my Sins, but let my hearty
Repentance, with thy Grace, fully purge me from all Uncleanness: I have this
day been put in mind of the benefit by Christ's Death; let me every day learn
to die unto Sin, and live the Life of the Righteous; that at last I may become
a new Creature: Unto thee, O Father, my Creator and Preserver; unto thee, O
Christ, my Redeemer and Justifier; unto thee, O Holy Ghost, my Sanctifier and
Instructor, be ascribed, all Honor, Power, and Glory, now and for evermore.

Amen.
For the Church.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, graciously to accept the Prayers of thy Church; that
she being delivered from all Adversity and Error, may serve thee in safety and
freedom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For the King and Queen.
O Lord, we beseech thee* Bless our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William* and
Queen Mary, by thy Gracious Appointment our supreme Governors; enrich them
with all increase of Virtues, whereby they may be able to eschew Evil, and to
follow thee, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For the Royal Family.
We beseech thee, O Lord, to Bless Catherine the Queen Dowager, Her Royal
Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the rest of the Royal Family: Grant
that they may walk in the ways of thy Holy Commandments, all the days of their
Lives, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For the High Court of Parliament.
O Lord, Bless the great Council of the Nation, direct The joyful Coronation
of King William and Queen Mary at Westminster Abbey, April the 11th 1689.


April ^he 11th. 1689. Their Majesty's went from (...) c-hall to Westminster,
(...) Heralds being ready, (...) Peers in the Lords House, and the P^eresses in
the Painted Chamber, so that (...) even in the Morning The^ Majesty's, and the
wh^ Proceeding were conducted to Westminster Hall, where a Throne being
erected, (...) Majesty's took Their Sea^ and after the Ceremon^ was ended, the
Proceeding began from Westminster Hall to the Abbey, where bein^d in Order, the
Lord ^ishop of London began ^th the Recognition, which ended with an universal
Acclam^tion of Joy; then the (...) of St. Asaph and Ban^r sung the L^^t^ny*
(...) ended, the Communion Service began, the Epistle taken out of the 1. Pet.
2. (...). 17. read by the Bishop o^ Carlisle; the Gospel, (...). 22. 16. 22.
read by the Bishop of St. Asaph; then followed the Sermon by the (...) of
Salisbury, whose Tex^ was 2. Sam. 23. 3. 4. (...) God of Israel said, the Roc^
of Israel spoke, etc. S^^mon being ended, T^ Majesty's took the Oath, and were
solnmnly anoi^nd (...) Crowns placed on their Heads by the Lord Bishop of
London, assisted by (...) Lord Bishop of Rochest^ upon which the Dr^t, the
Trumpets sounded, the great Guns were fired, yet were drowned, in a man^y the
loud Shouts and ^lamations of the People Many other Royal Ceremonies ^as used,
too tedious to insert in this narrow (...) About Eight in the Eve^ing Their
Majesty's r^d to White Hall.

and prosper all their Consultations, grant that what they do, may be to the
advancement of thy Glory, the good of thy Church, the safety, honor, and
welfare of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, and their Kingdoms; that all things may
be so well ordered, and firmly settled by their good endeavors upon the best
and surest Foundations, that Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion
and Piety may be established among us, for all Generations. These and all other
Necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg for thy Son's
sake, our Savior.

Amen.
For the Clergy.
Almighty and everlasting God, who by thy Spirit do sanctify and govern the
whole Body of thy Church, Graciously hear our Prayers, for all those whom thou
have Ordained, and called to the public Service of thy Sanctuary; that by the
help of thy Grace, they may faithfully serve thee in their several degrees,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For Friends.
I beseech thee, O Lord, for all those to whom I am indebted, for my Birth,
Education, Instruction, Promotion; their Necessities are known unto thee; thou
art rich in all things; reward them for these Benefits, with Blessings both
Temporal and Eternal.

For a Family.
Almighty and Everlasting God, send down thy Holy Angel from Heaven, to visit,
protect, and defend all that dwell in this House, through Christ our Lord.

For a Friend.
Almighty and Everlasting Lord God, have Mercy upon thy. Servant N. and direct
him by thy Goodness into the way of Eternal Salvation; that through thy Grace,
he may desire those things which please thee, and with his whole Endeavor
perform the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For Peace.
O God, from whom all Holy Desires, all good Counsels, and all just works do
proceed, give unto us thy Servants that Peace which the World cannot give, that
both our Hearts may be set to obey thy Commandments, and also that by thee we
being defended from the Fear of our Enemies, may pass our time, in rest and
quietness, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior.

In the time of Plague.
Let thy Anger cease, O Lord, and be appeased for the inquity of thy People, as
thou have sworn by thy self. O Holy God, Holy and Strong, Holy and Immortal,
have Mercy upon us.

For a City.
Compass this City, O Lord, with thy Protection, and let thy Holy Angels guard
the Walls thereof: O Lord, mercifully hear thy People.

For Grace.
Lord from whom all good things do come, grant unto us thy humble Servants,
that by thy Holy Inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy
merciful guiding may perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

For Enemies.
O God the lover and preserver of Peace and Charity, give unto all our Enemies
thy true Peace and Love, and Remission of Sins; and mightily deliver us from
their Snares, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For the Afflicted.
O Almighty God, the Afflicted Soul, the troubled Spirit cries unto thee:
Hear, O Lord, and have Mercy, for thou art a merciful God.

For Travelers.
Assist us mercifully, O Lord, in our Supplications and Prayers; and dispose
the way of thy Servants toward the Attainment of Everlasting Salvation, that
among all the Changes and Chances of this mortal Life, they may ever be
defended by thy most Gracious and ready Help, through Christ our Lord.

For the Fruits of the Earth.
O God, in whom we live, move, and have our Being, open thy Treasure, in the
due Season, and give a Blessing to the works of thy Hands, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Against Temptation.
Almighty God, which does see that we have no Power of our selves, to help our
selves, keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls, that
we may be defended from all Adversities, which may happen to the Body, and from
all Evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ.

For Misbelievers and Sinners.
Almighty and Everlasting God who desire not the Death of a Sinner,
mercifully look upon all that are deceived by the subtilty of Satan, that all
evil Prejudice laid aside, they may return to the Unity of thy Truth and Love.

For Temporal Necessities.
Replenish those, O Lord, we beseech thee with Temporal Nourishment, whom thou
have refreshed with thy Blessed* Sacraments.

Against Tempests.
Drive spiritual Wickedness from thy House, O Lord, and preserve it from the
malignity of tempestuous Weather.

For Women in Travel.
O Lord, of thy abundant Goodness, and Mercy, help thy Servants who are in
great pains and perils of Childbirth; that being delivered out of their
present Danger, they may glorify thy holy Name, who art blessed for evermore.

For the Sick.
O God, the only refuge of our infirmities, by thy mighty power relieve thy
sick Servants, that they, with thy gracious Assistance, may be able to give
Thanks unto thee, in thy Holy Church, through Jesus Christ.

For Prisoners.
O God, who deliveredst thy Apostle Peter from his Chains, and restoredst him
to Liberty, have pity upon thy Servants in Captivity, release their Bonds, and
grant them Freedom and Safety: Accept of the hearty Repentance of those that
are appointed to dye, and save their Souls for his Merits who lives and
reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, World without end.

For the Dying.
Father of all Flesh, and God of all Spirits, receive the Souls which thou have
redeemed with thy blood, returning to thee.

A Prayer before Study.
O unspeakable Creator, who, out of the Treasure of thy Wisdom, have ordained
Hierarchies of Angels, and have placed them above the highest Heaven in a
wonderful order, and disposed them sweetly for all parts of the World; thou,
the true Fountain and incomprehensible Principle of Light and Wisdom,
vouchsafe to illuminate the Darkness of my Understanding with a Beam of thy
Light; remove the Darkness wherein I was born*, Sin and Ignorance; thou, who
make the Tongues of Infants Eloquent, loosen my Tongue, and pour forth the
Grace of thy Spirit upon my Lips, give me acuteness to apprehend, capacity to
retain, subtilty to interpret, aptness to learn, readiness to speak; direct my
beginning, farther my progression, and perfect my conclusion.

When the Bell tolls for a Dying Person.
O gracious God, be with this Person in the holy operations of thy Grace, and
in the yearnings of thy tenderest Mercies; in the dreadful Moment when the
Soul shall depart from the Body, and conduct this thy dying Creature through
the Valley of the Shadow of Death unto the Land of everlasting Life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A concluding Prayer.
Almighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Son's Name; we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine Ears to us, who have
now made our Supplications and Prayers unto thee; and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked according to thy Will, may be effectually
obtained to the relief of our Necessities, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and minds in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord; and the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be with us now, at
the hour of Death, and at the Day of Judgment.

King Edward the Sixth's Prayer against Popery.
LOrd God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life, and take me
among thy chosen: Howbeit not my Will, but thy Will be done: Lord I commit my
Spirit to thee: O Lord, thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee;
yet for thy chosen's sake; send me Life and Health, that I may truly serve thee.

II.
O my Lord God, Bless thy People, and save thine inheritance: O Lord God, Save
thy chosen People of England: O my Lord God defend this Realm from Papistry;
and maintain thy True Religion, that I and my People may praise thy Holy Name,

Amen.
For God's Mercies upon Their Majesty's Forces, under the Command and Conduct
of his Grace the Duke of Schomberg.
O Most powerful and great God, mighty in Battle, fearful in praises, doing
wonders; thou have done mighty things already for us, whereof we rejoice: O be
pleased still to continue thy undeserved Mercies toward us, and accomplish
what thou have already begun for us: Go forth we humbly beseech thee, with our
Armies against those who would make a Prey of thy People.

II.
Protect and guide our great Governor and Commander, whose Commission is to
fight thy Battle; Guide him, and Counsel him in all his Undertakings, and cover
his head in the day of Battle; cause those that hate thy Name and People, to
flee before him, and scatter them as the dust before the Wind; Crown him with
Victory and great Success, that at the last he may return home in Peace and
Safety, to thy Glory, their Majesty's Comfort, his own Satisfaction, and all
the Nation's happiness; this we beg for the Merits of Jesus Christ,

Amen.
For Mercy to the whole Nation.
O Lord God, who art full of Mercy and Compassion to all thy people, bless us,
we beseech thee, from all domestic and foreign Enemies, that would endeavor
to ruin our Souls, and betray our Lives: Let thy goodness and loving kindness
evermore watch over us to defend, protect, and keep us from all assaults and
temptations of the Enemy, and grant that we may live sober, godly, quiet Lives,
to the glory of thy Holy Name,

Amen.
A Short Account OF THE MASSACRE IN Ireland and Paris.
THE Popish Party in Ireland pretending the English unjustly detained their
Lands from 'em, which were justly forfeited to the Laws, by their continual
Rebellions and Treasons; they did at last resolve to stir up all the cursed
Romish Faction, to show their utmost Zeal, for the Protestant's Destruction.

When their business was well laid, in their public Prayers, they recommended
the good Success of a great Design, to advance their Catholic Cause; and to
stir up the People to act this Villainy, with the greater Cruelty, they
publicly discoursed, that the English Protestants were Heretics, and not to
be suffered to live any longer amongst them; that it was no more Sin to kill
one of them, than to kill a Dog: and a mortal Sin to protect, or relieve any
one of them.

When their Plot was ripe for Execution, they proceeded against the English in
diverse methods; some of the Papists only stripping the Protestants, and turned
them out of doors naked; others murdering Men, Women, and Children, without
Mercy; they all agreed ^o root out all the Protestants The most Reverend Bishop
Usher.
The Irish Rebellion, and French Massacre.
The Downfall of Rome.


The Massacre in Ireland happened in the year 1641, which by the learned Bishop
Usher was predicted in 1601. at which time the Irish and English Papists, by
all manner of cursed Cruelties, murdered near Three hundred thousand innocent
English Protestants, without the least cause or provocation given them* whose
blood yet cries for Vengeance from Heaven against them, and which we doubt not
but the God of Vengeance will judge in his due time.

The Massacre of Paris was in the time of bloody King Charles the Ninth, the
Papists used diverse means to draw the Chief of the Protestants to Paris, under
pretense of a Marriage between the king of Navarre, a Protestant, and the Lady
Margaret, Sister to the French King. Admral Coligni, a Protestant Gentleman,
(...) invited to the Wedding, and in the Evening the Duke of Guise sent for the
Captain of the Switzers, and showed him the King's Commission, for murdering
the Admiral, and at midnight the Provosts, Sheriffs, and Captains of every Ward
had the same Commission showed them; the Watchword for the general Massacre
was, The tolling of the Bell in the King's Palace a break of day, and that the
Executioners should be known by white Handkerchiefs tied on their Arms, and a
white Cross in their Hats; no s^oner was the Watch Wo^^^ given, but they felt
to their Barbarity, and murdered the Admiral, and in two days there was slain
in Paris above Ten thousand men, women, and children.

Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power being vanquished, Rome's Idolatry must
expect its downfall; the Multitude being got together begun to root out their
damnable Religion here in England, by falling down, burning, and demolishing
most of Their Chapels and Houses; but the utter ruin of Rome will be when she
thinks her self most secure, as the learned Bishop Usher mentions in his
Prophecy.

in that Kingdom; and so great was their violence, that they would not permit
the English Language to be spoke, but punished all that used it; they likewise
changed the Names of all English Places, killing, or maiming all sorts of
Cattle, which belonged to the English Protestants.

The Popish Priests gave their Sacrament to several Irish, on condition they
should spare none of the Protestants, but wash their hands in their blood. They
also Excommunicated those that afforded any Relief, so that many were ^^^^ved
and perished; their Friars and Monks exhorted them with Tears not to spare any
of the English, and boasted when they had destroyed them (...) Ireland, they
would go into England, and do the like; for they ^^ld it as lawsull to kill an
English Man, as to kill a Sheep or a Dog; and that it was no more Conscience to
deprive them of their Lives and ^s^ates, than to take a bone from ^ Dog's Mouth.

The day before this bloody Massacre; the Priests gave them admission after
Mass, telling them, they had now fre^ Liberty to go and take possession of
their Lands, and (...) strip, rob, and despoil all the English, of whatever
they had that killing them was a mentorious Act, and would preserve them from
the pains (...) Purgatory; which cause some of these murtherous V^lains, after
they had ^lain multitude of the English, pu^ lickly to boast, That if the
should die immediately, th^^ were sure of Heaven, and escape Purgatory.

They then proceeded commit all manner of Cru^ties and Villainies imaginabl^
stripping naked Man, Woman, and Child, driving Eight hundred and odd into a
River, where they were drowned, and put one Hundred and Fifty into a Castle,
and burned them altogether.

An Abstract of their Popish Tortures, and Cruelties against the Protestants in
Ireland and Paris.
A Protestant Woman being delivered in the Fields, they gave the new born
Infant to the Dogs to be devoured. The Irish Women followed the Camp, and
stirred up the Men to Cruelty, crying, Kill them all; spare neither Man, Woman,
or Child; yea, such was their detestable Malice, that they taught their
Children to kill English Children.

An Irish Woman was very angry with a Soldier, that he did not bring the Grease
of a ^at English Gentlewoman, who was murdered, to make Candles with; which
they barbarously did in many places.

By all manner of cursed Cruelties, the Irish and English Papists, in a short
time, murdered near three hundred thousand Protestants, without the least cause
or provocation, whose blood yet cries loud for Vengeance from Heaven against
them, and doubt not but God will avenge it in his due time.

Children have been cast to Dogs and Swine to be devoured by them.

Women great with Child have been hanged up, and their Bellies ripped open,
that the Infant has dropped out, and been thrown into a Ditch.

Youths have had their brains dashedout against Trees, and some have been
trampled to death.

Some Infants have been found sucking the Breasts of their dead Mother.

A great Commander took delight to ^lea off the skins of Men, and to Head his
Drums with them.

Some have been driven to a River where the Bridge has been broken down, and
there drowned; if any of them could swim, they either shot at them with
Muskets, or knocked them on the head, as they came near the Land.

Some were put into Dungeons full of mire and dirt, and having Bolts put on
their Legs there perished with hunger.

Some had their eyes plucked out, and their hands cut off, and so let go, to
pine away in Misery.

Many have been stoned to death, and some have been stripped stark naked, and
driven into the Woods and Mountains in the extremity of Frost and Snow, and
there starved.

Some have been compelled to carry their own Parents to Execution, others to
give fire to the Wood that burnt them. Mothers have been forced to throw their
own Children into the Water; Wives to hang their own Husbands; Children to hang
up their own Parents; and when they have done all this, in hope, and upon
promise of Life, they themselves were barbarously Murdered.

Some have been boiled alive in Cauldrons; some have been put into a hole in
the ground, all but the head, and there forced to continue till they died.

Some have been driven through the streets naked; and if, through weakness,
they kept not their pace, they were pricked forward with Spears and Swords.

Some have been so racked and tormented, that Worms have bred in their
putrified Sores; Infants have been closed again in their Mothers Bellies, which
the Villains had ripped up, and there strangled, some have been wounded deadly,
and then hung upon Tenter-hooks, and others have been hung by the Arms, that
the Soldiers might try their valor, and the strength of their Swords upon
them.

Some have been ripped up, and their Guts let out to trail about their heels,
others have been dragged with Wythes and Ropes about their Necks, through the
Waters, Bogs, Woods, and Streets, to force them to confess their Treasure,
which when they had gotten, they were basely murdered. One hundred and four
sheltred themselves in Caves, and by smoke, made with wet straw, at the mouth
thereof, have been smothered.

The same Cruelties we must have expected again to have ^aln upon all
Protestants, if God in his great Mercy had not prevented them.

Strange and remarkable PREDICTIONS OF THAT Holy, Learned, and excellent
Bishop, James Usher, LATE Lord Primate of Ireland.
THE Author of the Life of this worthy Archbishop relates, That amongst other
extraordinary Gifts and Graces, the Almighty had bestowed upon him, he was
wonderfully endued with a Prophetic Spirit, whereby he predicted several
things sometime long before they came to pass, whereof some we have seen
fulfilled, and others remain yet to be accomplished: and though he was one that
abhorred Enthusiastic Noti^^s, being too Learned, Rational, and Knowing, to
admit such idle Freaks and Whimsies: Yet he professed, That several times in his
Life he had many things impressed upon his Mind, concerning future Events, with
so much warmness and importunity, that he was not able to keep them secret, but
lay under an un^voidable necessity to make them known.

From which Spirit he foretold the Irish Rebellion Forty years before it came,
with the time when it should break forth, in a Sermon at Dublin, in 1601; where
from Ezekiel. 4. 6. discoursing concerning the Prophets bearing the iniquity of
Judah forty days, the Lord therein appointed a day for a year: He made this
direct Application in relation to the connivance of Popery at that time. From
this year, says he, will I ^eckon the Sin of Ireland, that those whom you now
embrace, shall be your ruin, and you shall bear this Iniquity.

Which Prediction proved exactly true; for from that time 1601, to the year
1641, was Forty years, in which it is notoriously known, that the Rebellion and
Destruction of Ireland happened, which was acted by those Popish Emissaries,
which were then connived at.

And of this Sermon the Bishop reserved the Notes, and made a Remark of it in
the Margent of his Bible; and for 20 years before, he lived in the expectation
of the fulfilling of it, and the nearer the time was, the more he was confident
it was near accomplishment; though as yet, there was no visible appearance.

The year before the Rebellion brokeforth, (says Dr. Bernard) The Bishop taking
his leave of me, being going from Ireland to England, he advised me to a
serious Preparation; for I should see heavy Sorrows and Miseries before I saw
him again; which he delivered with as great Confidence, as if he had seen it*
which seems to verify that of the Prophet, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord will do
nothing, but he will reveal it to his Servants, the Prophets.

From this prophetic Spirit he foresaw the Changes and Miseries of England in
Church and State; for having in one of his Books, ( De Prim. Eccl. Brit.) given
a large Account of the Destruction of the Britains, by the Saxons, about 550
years after Christ, he gives this among other Reasons, why he insisted so
largely upon it; That he foresaw that a like Judgment was yet behind, if timely
Repentance and Reformation did not prevent it; and he would often mourn upon
the foresight of this, long before it came.

From this Spirit he gave mournful intimations of the Death of King Charles
the I* of whom he would be often speaking with fear and trembling, even when
the King had the greatest Success; and would therefore constantly pray, and
gave all Advice possible, to prevent any such thing.

From this Spirit he foresaw his own Poverty in Worldly things; and this he
would often speak of, with admiration to the Hearers, when he was in his
greatest Prosperity, which the event did most certainly verify.

From this Spirit he predicted the Divisions and Confusions in England, about
Religion, and the sad Consequences of it; some of which we have seen fulfilled,
and I pray God the rest, which he feared, may not also be accomplished.

Lastly, from this Spirit he foretold, That the greatest stroke upon the
Reformed Churches was yet to come; and the time of the utter ruin of Rome
should be when she thought her self most secure; and to this last, I shall add
a brief Account from the Person's own hand who was concerned.

The year before the Primate's Death, I went to him, and earnestly desired him
to grant me in Writing his Apprehensions of Justification, and Sanctification
by Christ, because I had formerly heard him Preach upon those Points, wherein
he seemed to make those great Mysteries more intelligible to my mean Capacity,
than any Discourse I had heard from others; but by reason I had an imperfect
Memory of the particulars, I took the boldness to importune him, That he would
please to give me a brief Account of them in writing, whereby I might the
better imprint them in my memory; o^ which he would willingly have excused
himself, by declaring, his Intentions of not writing any more; adding, That if
he did write any thing, it should not exceed a sheet or two: but upon my
continued importunity, I at last obtained his promise.

He coming to Town some time after, was pleased to give me a Visit; where I
failed not to challenge the benefit of his promise made to me; to which he
replied, That he had not writ, and yet could not charge himself with any breach
of promise; for (said he) I did begin to write, but when I came to write of
Sanctification, that is, of the new Creature, which God forms by his Spirit
in every Soul, which he does truly regenerate, I found so little of it wrought
in my self, that I could speak of it only as Parrots by rote, and without the
knowledge and understanding of what I might have expressed; and therefore I durst
not presume to proceed any farther upon it.

When I seemed to stand amazed to hear such an humble Confession, from so great
and experienced a Christian. He added:

I must tell you, we do not well understand what Sanctification, and the New
Creature are; it is no less, than for a Man to be brought to an entire
resignation of his Will to the Will of God, and to live in the offering up of
his Soul, continually in the flames of love, as a whole Burnt-offering to
Christ, and how little (says he) are many of those who profess Christianity
experimentally acquainted with this Work on their Souls.

By this Discourse, I conceived he had very excellently and clearly discovered
to me that part of Sanctification, which he was unwilling to write.

I then presumed to enquire of him, what his present apprehensions were,
concerning a great Persecution which should fall upon the Church of God in
these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, of which this reverend Primate
had spoken many years before, when we were in Peace and Settlement.

I asked him whether he did believe those sad times were past, or to come, he
told me, They were to come, and that he did as fully expect it, as ever he had
done: adding, That this sad Persecution would fall upon all the Protestant
Churches in Europe.

I replied, I hoped it might be past, as to these Nations of ours, since I
thought, that though we have been punished much less than our Sins have
deserved, and that our late Wars have made far less devastations, than War
commonly brings where it pleases God in Judgment to suffer it; yet we must
needs acknowledge, that many great Houses have been burnt, ruined, and left
without Inhabitants; many great Families impoverithed and undone, and many
thousand lives also had been lost in that bloody War, and that Ireland, and
Scotland, as well as England, had drunk very deep of the Cup of God's Anger,
even to the overthrow of the Government, and the utter Desolation almost of a
very great part of those Countries.

But this holy Man turning to me, and fixing his eyes upon me with that serious
and irefull look which he usually had, when he spoke God's Word, and not his
own; and when the Power of God seemed to be upon him, and to constrain him to
speak, which I could easily discern much to differ from the Countenance
wherewith he usually spoke to me. He said thus: Fool not your self with such
hopes; for I tell you, all you have yet seen, has been but the beginning of
Sorrows, to what is yet to come upon the Protestant Churches of Christ, who
will ever long fall under a sharper Persecution than ever yet has upon them;
and therefore ( said he to me) look you be not found in the outward Court, but
a worshipper in the Temple before the Altar, for Christ will measure all those
that profess his Name, and call themselves his People; and the outward
Worshippers he will leave out, to be trodden down by the Gentiles.

The outward Court ( says he) is the formal Christian, whose Religion lies in
performing the outside Duties of Christianity, without having an inward life
and power of Faith, and Love, uniting them to Christ, and these God will leave
to be trodden down and swept away by the Gentiles; but the Worshippers within
the Temple, and before the Altar, are those who do indeed Worship God in Spirit
and in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is honored and adored
in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and
vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him; and these God will hide in
the hollow of his hand, and under the shadow of his Wings.

And this shall be one great difference between this last, and all the other
preceding Persecutions; for in the former, the most eminent and spiritual
Ministers, and Christians did generally suffer most, and were most violently
fallen upon; but in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God, as
^ Seed to partake of that Glory, which shall immediately follow, and come upon
the Church, as soon as ever this Storm shall be over; for as it shall be the
sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Persecution of them all, and shall only
take away the gross Hypocrites, and formal Professors, but the true spiritual
Believers shall be preserved till the Calamity be over-past.

I then asked him by what means or instruments this great Trial should be
brough^ on. He answered, By the Papists. I replied, Th^^ it seemed to me very
improbable they should be able t^ do it, since they were no^^ little
countenanced, and b^^ few in these Nations, and that ^he Hearts of the People
were ^ore set against them, than ever since the Reformation. He answered again,
That it would be, by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden Massacre;
and that the then Pope should be the chief Instrument of it.

All this he spoke with so great assurance, and with the same serious and
concerned Countenance, which I have before observed him to have, when I have
heard him foretell some things which in all humane appearance were very unlikely
to come to pass, which yet I my self have lived to see happen according to his
Prediction: and this made me give the more earnest attention to what he then
uttered.

He then added, That the Papists were in his opinion the Gentiles spoken of in
the Eleventh of the Revelations; to whom the outward Court should be left, that
they might tread it under foot; they having received the Gentiles Worship, in
their adoring Images, and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many
Mediators: and this ( said he) the Papists are now designing among themselves,
and therefore be sure you be ready.

This was the substance, and I think (for the greatest part) the very same
words which this holy Man spoke to me, not long before his death, and which I
writ down, that so great and notable a Prediction might not be lost by my self
or others.

This gracious Man repeated the same things in substance to his only Daughter
the Lady Tyrrel, and that with many Tears, and much about the same time that he
had expressed the aforesaid to me, and which ^e Lady Tyrrel assured me of ^ith
her own mouth to this ^rpose:

That opening the door of ^s Chamber, she found him ^ith his eyes lift up to
Heaven, ^d the Tears running apace ^own his Cheeks, and that ^e seemed to be in
an Ecstasie, ^herein he continued for a^out half an hour, not taking ^e least
notice of her, though ^e came into the Room; but (...) last turning to her, he
told ^er, That his thoughts had ^en taken up about the Mi^ries and Persecutions
that ^ere coming upon the Chur^es of Christ, which would ^e so sharp and
bitter, that ^e contemplation of them ^d fetched those Tears from ^s Eyes, and
that he hoped ^e should not live to see it, ^ut possibly she might, for it ^as
even at the door; Therefore take heed (says he) that y^ be not found sleeping.

The same things he also r^peated to the Lady Bysse (...) Wife to the Lord
Chief. B^ron of Ireland; but addin^ this Circumstance, That (...) they brought
back the King, (...) might be delayed a little longer, but (said he) it will
s^r^ come; therefore be sure to look the you be not found unprepared for it.

To conclude in the Wor^ of Dr. Bernard, speaking (...) this excellent Person:
No^ howsoever I am far from heeding of Prophecies, ye^ with me it is not
improbabl^ that so great a Prophet, s^ sanctified from his Youth (...) so
knowing, and emine^ throughout the univers^ Church, might have, at some special
times, more than o^dinary Motions and Impu^ses in doing the Watchman (...)
part, of giving warning o^ Judgments approaching.

The Spanish Inv^ion, 1558.
Gun powder Treason, Nov 5. 1605.
The Arrival of the Prince of Orange Nov. 5. 1688.


The Thanksgiving for the Deliverance from the Spanish Ar^ada, was August 7.
1558. their Fleet was 150 Ships, and 65 Galleons, which were to join the Duke
of Parma, who had 32 Ships of War, 70 Flat-bottoms, and 2^0 Boats which lay in
Newport Haven, with 2000 empty Cas^s to cho^k Havens, and make Bridges: To this
Design the Pope contribute^ a Million of Gold.

November the 5 1605. was our great Deliverance from the Hellish Powder Plot,
and ^e miraculous finding of it out, was by a Letter sent to the Lord
Mounteagle, to advise him to take care of himself, for the Parliame^^ should
receive such a Blow, and not see who hurt them: The Con^ir^^ors were Everard
Digby Knight, Robert Catesby Esquire Ambrose Rockwood Esquire Francis Tresham Esquire
Robert VVinter Esquire Tho. Piercy Gent. Tho. VVinter Gent. John Wright Gent.
Christ. Wright Gent. John Grant Gent. Robert Keys Gent. G^y Fa^x, and Bates,
Catesby's Man: Provisions for this horrid Design was 36 Barrels of Powder, 500
Faggots, and 1900 Billets.

November the 5. 1688, was our happy Deliverance from Popery, Slavery, and
Arbitrary Power, by the Arrival of the Prince of Orange, who landed with a
considerable Army at Brixam Key in Devonshire, where the whole Country
congratulated him, and brought Plenty of Provisions and Necessaries for the
S^diers.

Thanksgivings for God's wonderful Deliverances.
From the Spanish Invasion.
WE laud and magnify thy holy Name for this wonderful Deliverance wrought for
our Ancestors, which were surrounded with fear of Roman Slavery, and Popish
Usurpation, which would have destroyed both Queen and Kingdom, when their
Galleys and Ships came to assault us, with murdering Pieces, and Instruments
of Cruelty, which none but Satan and themselves could invent; as Whips to
scourge us, Seals to mark us, and Fetters to manacle us.

II.
They were full of Pride calling themselves Invincible and had hemmed us in on
every side, trusting in their own Arm of Flesh, and pursuing our ruin and
destruction; then, O Lord, thou did awake as one out of sleep, and, as a
Giant, refreshed with Wine, and smotest our Enemies in the hinder parts,
putting them all to confusion: Blessed be thy Name for this, and all other
Mercies bestowed upon us, and grant that we may never want thankful* Hearts to
praise thee.

From the Gunpowder Treason, November 5th. 1605.
Blessed Lord, whose Eye of Providence watched over us, and did discover to
us those hellish Contrivances which were laid in the dark, but not hid from
thine All-seeing eye; Rome's Factors were then busy in contriving to blow up
the Bodies of our King and Nobles with a most barbarous and unnatural invention.

II.
What had they done to them to be adjudged to so strange a Death? and what had
they done for thee, to be so graciously preserved? as we consider their
inhumanity in laying their cruel project, so we must acknowledge thy Goodness
in revealing the same, to whom be glory, now, and for ever,

Amen.
For our Deliverance from Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power.
O Eternal God, who have wrought so great a Deliverance to all thy People, by
raising up happy Instruments for thy Glory, and our Peace and Safety, even thy
Servants, our dear and dread Sovereign Lord and Lady K. William and Q. Mary,
who, like Moses, stood in the Gap, between us and Pharaoh's Cruelties.

II.
Thou have delivered us, O Lord, thou God of Mercy, when we were even ready for
destruction, Tyranny, and what else their Roman Malice could invent, or slavish
yoke have imposed upon us; but blessed be thy holy Name, that thou have
snatched us as a Brand out of the Burning, and have restored those good Laws
and Liberties, which our Forefathers l^ave enjoyed; teach us to prize and value
this great Mercy, that all Nations may say, happy are the people, that are in
such a Case, yea happy is the People whose God is their Lord.

For the Relief of Londonderry. in Ireland.
O Lord of Heaven and Earth, who did in thy great Mercy remember thy poor
Servants when they were in trouble, and besieged round about, being in great
necessity s ^race the Duke of Sc^^mberg.
The Valiant Governor Walker.
The Siege of Londonderry, 1688.


The Irish and French Forces being leaded by the late King James, laid close
Siege to Londonderry, at which time Colonel Lundy, and others, (...) driven
away by fear, they were destitute of a Governor, the Town then consisting of
about Nine thousand Fighting men, they (...) chose Col. Walker their
Governor, and preserved the Place courageously, enduring great extremity; but
at last they were supplie^ with Provisions by way of the River, and the
Besiegers, after great loss sustained, drew off and left them, August the 13th.
His Grace (...) Duke of Schombergh l^nded his Forces in Ireland, near
Carrickfergus, and reduced diverse Places to obedience, causing the French and
Irish Army to retrea^.

Not long after, Governor Walker safely arrived in England, and waited upon
their Majesty's at Hampton Court, with an humble Address from the Governors,
Officers, Clergy, and Gentlemen in the City and Garrison of Londonderry, at
which time His Majesty was pleased, as a Mark of his Royal ^ounty, to order him
Five thousand Pounds, with this Assurance, That it should not at all lessen his
Kindness to him and his Family.

for want of Food, and other Necessaries, thou did in thy due time send them
Relief and Succor, else they had perished in their Affliction.

II.
And what can we render, O Lord, sufficient for these things; our best thanks
we can pay, O God, are less than the least of all thy Mercies; yet in the mean
time we desire to acknowledge thine abundant Goodness, and loving Kindness to
us, and to praise thy Name for evermore.

For the Gifts of God.
I yield thee all humble and hearty Thanks, O merciful God, that by the Death
of thine only Son have redeemed us from death to life, and have continually a
care of us, preserving us as the Apple of thine Eye from the dangerous Assaults
of Satan, and providest for us all things necessary, that more Thanks and
Praise is due unto thee, than the Tongue of Men or Angels can declare.

II.
Accept these my Praises and Thanksgivings, O Lord, Ibeseech thee, and increase
in me a daily desire to praise thy Goodness, acknowledging every good and
perfect Gift to come from thee; to whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, now and for evermore,

Amen.
To God for all his Benefits.
Most merciful God, we yield thee humble thanks for thy continual favor and
kindness toward us thy poor and unworthy Creatures, for whose Salvation, when
we were lost, thou were pleased, even of thy mere Love, to send thine only
beloved Son, Christ Jesus, into the World, taking humane Nature upon him, and
suffering most bitter pangs of Death upon the Cross, to redeem us again to thy
favor.

II.
Such, O Lord, was thine unspeakable Love, for which we are never able to pay
the least recompense; but give us, O Lord, thankful and obedient hearts, that
we may yield thee praises not only with our Lips, but in our lives; not only in
giving thy Son for us, but in leaving unto us a continual remembrance of the
same thine unspeakable Love, thy Holy Gospel, wherein consists the rule whereby
we are directed; and though Heaven and Earth pass away, yet not one tittle of
that shall decay or diminish; for without which we should have been in our
accustomed Ignorance: accept us, we beseech thee, in thy Son, our blessed Lord
and Savior.

Amen.
Christian Courage IN AFFLICTION.
A Prayer before the following Advice to the besieged Soldiers in
Londonderry, under the Command of that worthy Divine and most Loyal and
Valiant Commander Col. Walker.

O Most Eternal Lord God, whose Providence never fails those who trust in thy
Name and Word, mercifully we beseech thee to cast down thy Eyes of Pity and
Compassion upon us miserable Sinners which are here met together; we do in all
humility prostrate our selves before thy Divine Majesty, beseeching thee to
pardon all our Sins, and help our Infirmities; O Lord, we are not able of our
selves to do any thing, but offend thee, committing daily and hourly Sins
without number: but, O Lord, hear thy Son Christ Jesus for us, and nail them to
his Cross, that they may never rise up in Judgment against us, either to shame
us in this World, or condemn us in the World to come; bury them in the
bottomless Sea of thy Mercy and Forgetfulness, that they may never appear
before thee, to hinder thy Favors unto us; seal the remission of them to our
Souls and Consciences, that they may not disturb or distract us in our
Devotions and Duty; pour thy Grace and holy Spirit into us, that may enable us
to walk before thee in Holiness, Righteousness, and in Sobriety, all the days
of our lives.

Bless we beseech thee, our dear and dread Sovereign Lord and Lady, King
William and Queen Mary, Katherine the Queen Dowager, the Princess Anne of
Denmark, and the rest of the Royal Family: Bless the Archbishops, and Bishops,
with the rest of the Dispencers of thy holy Sacraments, and grant that the
light of thy Gospel may never depart from us. And Lastly, we come unto thee for
a Blessing upon our Governors, Commanders, and fellow Soldiers; guide and
conduct them in this Calamity, fortify them with Courage and Strength against
our Romish Adversaries, that thy Name may be glorified, our Lives preserved,
and our Souls Eternally saved, in the great day of the Lord Jesus, when all
flesh shall appear. Grant that our Meeting at this time may be for the better,
and not for the worse; to praise and glorify thy holy Name, in whose holy Name
and Word we put up these our imperfect Prayers, in that most absolute and
perfect form of Prayer which Christ himself bath taught us. Our Father, etc.

Christian Courage IN AFFLICTION. A Discourse by way of Advice to the besieged
in Londonderry.
2 Chronicles. 20. Chap. Verse 9. latter part of it. Be not afraid nor dismayed by*
reason of this great multitude; for the Battle is not yours, but God's.
THE Context runs thus, And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and thou King Jehoshaphat: Thus says the Lord unto you, Be not
afraid, nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the Battle is not
yours, but God's.

These are the words of God, which he commanded Jahaziel the Prophet to deliver
to Jehoshaphat King of Judah. When the Moabites and Ammonites came to make War
against him, to dispossess him of his Kingdom, verse the 8th of this Chapter,
and may be a seasonable Text for this Auditory.

Our Sins indeed are many, which have justly provoked God's heavy Wrath against
us: and our Enemies are very numerous which surround us, therefore now let us
cry mightily unto God, earnestly beseeching him, that he would pardon all our
Sins, blot out all our Iniquities, and receive us graciously; let us sincerely
repent and be heartily sorry for our manifold Transgressions committed against
him, so shall we by his Divine Assistance be in a readiness to encounter with
Roman Malice, these Moabites and Ammonites, who are Enemies to our Lives,
Religion, Laws, and Liberties; and be animated with Courage to go out
cheerfully against Rome's Force and Cruelties, fighting manfully the Lord's
Battle, every one of us, laying his hand upon his Heart, with this comfortable
Expression in our Mouths, Be not afraid, nor dismayed by reason of this great
multitude, for the Battle is not ours, but God's.

Servile Fear is the harbinger of the Guilty, and a slavish timorousness
belongs not to the Strong and Courageous, but a God like Fear attends upon the
Virtuous, and produces Success in their Undertakings. Holy Job that great
Proficient in God's School, and great Example of Christian Patience tells you,
Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil is
Understanding. This is the only supreme Good and Fear, which secures us from
committing, shameful Acts, and creates a circumspection in our Lives; for as
the shadow of the Body is followed by the Sun, so does Glory attend Virtue in
our progress to Christ. Let us then put our whole trust in God, in this time of
danger, and take the Royal Prophets resolution, Psalm. 118. 6. Not to fear what
man can do unto us; but rather fear the Lord, who pitieth those that fear him,
Psalm. 103. 13.

It is the Duty of every one of us to be circumspect in our Lives, but more
especially at this season and time of Affliction, when the hand of God is
stretched out against us; when the Enemy waits even at our doors ready to
devour us, when they stand gaping ready to swallow us up quick, and none of us
can prognosticate how soon his Life may be lost, or be in danger; therefore it
behooves us to lay hold on that Advice which St. Paul gave the Ephesians, Ephesians.
6. 10, 11. Be ye strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Put on the
whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand. So shall we be fortified
with that Courage which is mentioned here in my Text, of being not afraid, or
dismayed by reason of this great multitude, for the Battle is not ours, but
God's.

Be not afraid, or dismayed by reason of this great multitude, is the Command
of God, and therefore in obedience to his Command let us humbly obey his Divine
Order, and valiantly fight under his Protection. A multitude there is, and very
great; what then, the Battle is God's, and David tells us, 1 Chronicles. 16. 5.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; he is also to be feared above all
Gods. The multitude here in my Text were Moabites, and Ammonites; but the
multitude which lays close Siege to us, are Jesuits and bloody Papists, whose
damnable Principles, and hellish Doctrines are to quench the light of the
Gospel, to root and destroy all Christianity, who blasphemously think to gain
Heaven by Massacring God' People, and triumph in the effussion of shedding
innocent Blood: it is their Glory to lay Kingdoms wast, and Countries desolate,
reduce Cities to Ashes, and ruin Families those which will not fall down to
worship their Idols, false Gods of Wood and Stone, are fit objects of their
Fury; their Cruelty is beyond what Malice can invent, or Hell imagine, and
Solomon gives a true Character of them, Prove. 27. 4. Wrath is cruel, and Anger
is outrageous; but who is able to stand before Envy?

But God will pour out his Wrath upon them, and shoot at them with his Arrows,
that they shall be wounded, his Vengeance will speedily overtake, and drown
them, like hardened Pharaob in the red Sea of Perdition; let him who has
provoked God to Anger, lay his hand on his Heart, and now say with Nehemiah,
Shall such an one as I fly? Shall I whom God has honored so much, dishonor
him by Oaths so greatly? who am placed in an higher Sphere than others, be
either a dim or a wandering Star? Shall I who am most obliged to God by the
Bonds of Wealth and Power, exceed the bounds of Truth and Justice? whom he has
made a Ruler of the People, not rule my self and my own Kingdoms according to
his Golden Rule? God forbid. God will not permit their Romish policy to
overthrow our Christian Piety, he will not suffer them to break the bruised
Reed of the Distressed, nor quench the smoking Flax of their Necessities, he
will be a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto our Path in this Extremity;
therefore be not afraid, or dismayed by reason of this great multitude, etc.

We must every one of us look upon this great Affliction as sent from God, for
he knows what is better for us, than we do for our selves; and that which seems
most evil at present, may turn at last to our greatest benefit. None of us
ought to despair of God's Mercy, for when our weak Apprehensions of God are
such as drive us from him, we overthrow the main end of Religion, which is to
bring God, and our selves nearer together. None ought to exclude themselves
from God's Mercy, whom he excludes not from it; and God excludes none, whom he
invites to repent, with a promise of forgiveness, if they do it: and the
goodness and long suffering, and forbearance of us Sinners, is on purpose
designed to lead us to Repentance; so that after all this, to despair, and fail
in our Courage, is only to reject the Mercy which God offers, but to question
his truth and sincerity, to slight his Patience, to disparage his Goodness, and
to look upon him as a most revengeful and implacable Being, is to admit and
entertain most dishonorable and unworthy Thoughts of the Best, the Wisest, the
most merciful and compassionate Being in the World, who has proclaimed
himself, Exodus 34. 6, 7. To be a God merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, for giving
Iniquity, Transgresson, and Sin; that is, to all that truly repent: So that
when we consider, we have no reason to despair of his Mercy to us, but readily
and willingly to obey his Command, and not shrink from those principles which
prompt us to his Honor and Glory, in whose Service is perfect freedom; but to
rouse up our selves like Men, stand upon our Guard, fortify our selves and be
vigilant, not being afraid, or dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for
it is God's cause which we fight for, and our Lives cannot be better employed
than in his Service, from whom we received all we have, or can pretend to;
therefore let us press forwards in obedience to his Command, for the Battle is
not yours, but God's.

When the Lord's Battle is to be fought, we must endeavor to follow his holy
Order and Discipline, and not our own sinful Lusts and Appetires, like brute
Beasts, which have no understanding: Let us seriously consider, I beseech you,
what it is we fight for? it is to defend our Religion, and oppose Idolatry? to
maintain Truth, and beat down Falsehood? to exalt Glory, and decry Shame? and to
enjoy our Freedom, and not espouse Slavery? Let happy England now be our
pattern for Loyalty Magnanimity and Courage; then shall we arrive at that
serene State, which holy David expresses, Psalm. 85. 10. where Mercy and Truth
are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other; if on the
contrary we revolt, nothing can be expected but Parisian Slavery to ^^thrall
us, and Romish Idolatry to attend us: Have we not felt the smarting Rod of
Popery for many years? yea, within a few years, when Legality was changed into
Arbitrary Government; Orthodox Religion grossly invaded and innovated; Popish
Doctrines publicly preached; Crucifixes erected; Adoration to Saints and
Altars practiced, and Ten Ave Maria's said for one Pater Nesler? The same may
be said of Ireland, as once a Reverend Divine wittily said of England: Though
it was but a little Place, yet there was a great deal of ROME in it. And shall
not I visit for these things? says the Lord, shall not my Soul be a^enged on
such a Nation as this? Jer. 5. 9. yes surely, God will avenge himself, and
defeat all their Policies; he will laugh a^ their Galamity, and meek when the
^^^^ comes, when their fear come as desolation, and destruction as Whirlwind.
Prove. 1. 25, 26, 27. he is able, and will deliver us, if we trust in him; he
has promised us, who will not break his Word: Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the
time of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Therefore let
us be all of one mind, and not halt between Two Opinions, but stand fast, Fear
not, nor be dismayed, for the Battle is not ours, but God's.

Is it God's Battle we are to fight? let not sloth then seize upon us, or a
supine Carelessness take hold of us; but let us quit our selves like Men, and
fight, 1 Samuel 4. 9. securing to our selves that Religion, the Light of that
glorious Gospel God has given us, not forgetting to take the Prophet
Jeremiah's Counsel, in the 6. w^ap. of his Prophecy, ver. 16. pe^nd ye in the
way, and see and ask (...) the good old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and you shall find rest unto your Souls. The well compacted Hedge of
our Laws was trodden down: let us therefore be diligent, and repair those
breaches our Sins have made, by our earnest Supplications to the Throne of
Grace; so true is that Maxim, Inter Arma, silent Leges, The Voice of Law
cannot be heard for the noise of Drums, and the threatening Cannon. O let Policy
now amongst us ever give place to Piety; and now let me exhort the chiefest
amongst us, beseeching you to let your private Affections be swallowed up in
the common Cause, as small Rivers lose their Name in the Ocean. That practice
of Pompey deserves well your observation and imitation, who when his Soldiers
would needs leave the Camp, threw himself down at the narrow Passage, and bid
them go, but they should tread first upon their General. So let your pious
Resolutions, and valiant Examples stir up the Courage of our weak Brethren;
expose your selves to the worst of dangers, and endure the bru^^t, that they
may not desert you; may it be your Glory in after Ages, to be loudly
proclaimed, that you were the Champions of the Lord to fight his Battle; that
you stood in defense of your Religion against gross Idolatry; that you promoted
Peace against bloody Persecution; and rather choose to endure Affliction with
the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. In our Duty
in Matters of Religion, we are no farther to walk after Ruler's Commands, than
they walk after God's; Fatherly power is the rise of all Authority; and yet our
Savior tells us, He that loves Father or Mother more than him, is not worthy
of him, Mat. 10. 37. Parents must be honored, but God preferred; it is as true
in regard of Regal as Paternal Authority; the Instances of the Hebrew Midwives,
Exodus 1. 17. the three Worthies, and Daniel, are obvious to all, Dan. 3. 18. 6.
10. That Epithete that was given to B^c^n of Doctor Resolutus, in this Case
well becomes every Christian. It was a just Resolve of Luther in divine
Matters, Cedo nulli; and a remarkable Speech of the Apostles. Acts 4. 19. 5.
29. That we ought to obey God rather than Men; it is true, when the supreme
Authority enjoins what God inhibits, we must patiently undergo the punishment
inflicted, but not willingly walk after the Commandment prescribed. It was a
pious Speech of King Henry the Eighth to Sir Thomas More, when he made him
Chancellor, Look first at God, then at me. St. Augustine's Rule is excellent,
The Supreme Power has a Superior in Heaven; for fear of one, we must contemn
the other; the one may threaten the Prison, but the other has ordained Hell. In
a word, neither must Princes leave the People to their own Will, nor the People
conform themselves to the Prince's Will, but both to God's Will in Matters of
Religion, lest otherways both Prince and People be consumed.

But, O Lord, we have sinned against thee, and as the Prophet David says Psalm.
76. 7. Who can stand in thy sight, when thou art angry? no Bounds could keep us
from Sinning, and therefore God's Wrath knows no Bounds in punishin^ our
Transgression was above Measure, so God's Judgment is without Measure. It is
St. Chrysostom's Note, concerning that fiery shower which God rained upon
Sodom, That as the Sodomites inverted the course of Nature, to seek Woman in
Man; so God changed the Order, by showring down Fire instead of Water. Thus
does the Almighty's Justice ever proportion the Smart to the Fault; so that
here we may at once behold the greatness of our Sin in the punishment, and the
fitness of the punishment to the Sin; Invasion, and being Besieged by Romish
Adversaries, for our neglecting God's Commands, which ought to be our Rule, and
despising of his Goodness, which should lead us Sinners to Repentance.

But as the Water that is poured on the Earth, can never be gathered up again;
so let us pour out all our Sins, and God will not pour out all his Wrath: let
us speedily cast away the filth of our Transgressions, and he will soon stop
the current of his Indignation; let us cheerfully reform, and he will willingly
assist us, let us repent of our provocations, and he will bring us out of this
Calamity; may this our great work, be wisely and speedily accomplished, and by
the Divine Assistance, and our weak endeavors faithfully performed, that the
power of Religion may be advanced, the Name of God honored, the fury of our
Enemies suppressed, the Hearts of Gospel-Friends comforted, and which is above
all, and beyond all, Christ over Antichrist, in the purity of his Gospel among
us and our Posterity for ever. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant us, to
whom be ascribed, as most due, all Honor, Power, and Glory, Adoration and
Subjection, now, and for evermore.

The Prayer afterward.
BLessed, Lord, who a^t our Strength, Hope, and Fortress, our Castle, and
Deliverer, our Defender in whom we trust; how the Heavens, O Lord, come down
and save us, send down thine Hand from above, deliver us, and take us from the
great Waters, from those Miseries and Afflictions which come upon us, by reason
of our Sins, and from the Condition of Mortality, and from the hand of strange
Children, whose right hand is a right hand of Wickedness.

Give us, O Lord, Victory and Peace, and all the Blessings belonging to it,
with which thou usest to adorn and bea^tifie the Dwellings of the Righteous,
that we may be happy in the continual descent of thy Favors; but above all,
that our happiness may consist in being thy People, and thou being our God,
that we may be blessed for ever in so happy a Union, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for the preservation of our most gracious Sovereign Lord King
William, in his Royal Undertaking to Subdue Ireland, and for his safe Return to
England,

O Most mighty God, the great Creator of the World, and the Preserver of all
Mankind; preserve, we beseech thee, our most gracious Sovereign Lord, King
William, whom thou have made the happy Instrument of our mighty Deliverance:
Let thy Blessing accompany him in his Journey, and Voyage; protect him from all
Dangers; visit him as thou did Moses in the Bush, Joshua in the Battle,
Gid^on in the Field, and Samuel in the Temple: Let the Dew of thy never failing
Mercies fall upon his Head, and give him the blessing of David and Solomon.

II.
Be unto him an Helmet of Salvation, and cover him with thy Grace, as with a
Buckler against the Face of his Enemies; dissipate, and scatter all those which
shall oppose him, as the Dust before the Wind, and as the Clay in the Streets,
direct him in all his Counsels, to the end, that being blessed with Success in
this great Design, he may employ all that great Power which thy Omnipotence
shall ^ntrust him with, to the Honor of thy Holy Name, the establishment and
Advancement of the True Religion, and to the Peace, and Happiness of thine, and
his People, and the perfect Deliverance of our poor Distressed Brethren in
Ireland, that they may rejoice together with us, and triumph in thy Praise.

III.
Grant him in this Enterprise a good Event, that he may Return home with Joy
and Victory: Let his Reign be prosperous, and his days many; let Peace, and
Love, and Holiness, let Justice, and Truth, and all Christian Virtues, flourish
in his Time: Let his People serve him with Honor and Obedience; and let him so
duly serve thee here on Earth, that he may hereafter everlastingly Reign with
thee in Heaven, through Jesus Christ, our Lord,

Amen.
THE CONTENTS.
WHen we first awake Page 1. A Prayer for the Morning, 2. A Prayer for the
Evening 3 Sunday Mornings Meditations 5 The Prayer 10 Sunday Noons Meditations
12 The Prayer 13 Sunday Nights Meditations 14 The Prayer 16 Monday Mornings
Meditations 17 The Prayer 19 Monday Noons Meditations ibid. The Prayer 21
Monday Nights Meditations 22 The Prayer 23 Tuesday Mornings Meditations 24 The
Prayer 25 Tuesday Noons Meditations 26 The Prayer 27 Tuesday Nights Meditations
28 The Prayer 29 Wednesday Mornings Meditations 30 The Prayer. 32 Wednesday
Noons Meditations 33 The Prayer 34 Wednesday Nights Meditations 35 The Prayer
36 Thursday Mornings Meditations 37 The Prayer 38 Thursday Noons Meditations 39
The Prayer 41 Thursday Nights Meditations 42 The Prayer 43 Friday Mornings
Meditations 44 The Prayer 46 Friday Noons Meditations 47 The Prayer 49 Friday
Nights Meditations 50 The Prayer 52 Saturday Mornings Meditations 53 The Prayer
55 Saturday Noons Meditations 56 The Prayer. 57 Saturday Nights Meditations 58
The Prayer 59
Ejaculations upon several Occasions out of the Holy Scriptures*
IN the Morning 61 At going forth 62 Beginning a good Work ibid. In good
Inspirations ibid. At Church ibid. Before Reading ibid. Speaking 63 When you go
about worldly Affairs ibid. Before Eating ibid. After Eating 64 In Prosperity
ibid. Adversity ibid. Troubles ibid. Galumnies 65 Praises ibid. Against vain
hope ibid. Pride ibid. Covetousness ibid. Luxury ibid. Envy 66 Gluttony ibid.
Anger ibid. Sloth ibid.
Rules of Faith ibid. Acts of Faith ibid. Hope ibid. Charity 67 Against
Worshipping of Idols ibid. Popish Tradition 68 Praying to Saints 69 Antichrist
ibid.
Divine Breathings of the Soul toward the Evening. 70 A Prayer for a Family,
that may serve for Morning or Evening 71 A Prayer before the Communion 74 At
Receiving the Bread 75 At Receiving the Cup ibid. A Prayer after the Communion
76 for the Church 77 for the King and Queen 78 for the Royal Family ibid. for
the High Court of Parliament ibid. for the Clergy 79 for Friends 80 for a
Family ibid. for a Friend 81 for Peace ibid. in time of the Plague 82 for a
City ibid. for Grace ibid. for Enemies ibid. for the Afflicted 8^ for
Travelers ibid. for the Fruits of the Earth ibid.
A Prayer against Temptations 84 For Misbelievers and Sinners ibid. For
Temporal Necessities ibid. Against Tempests 85 For Women in Travel ibid. For
the Sick ibid. For Prisoners 86 For the Dying ibid. A Prayer before Study ibid.
When the Bell Tolls for a dying Person 87
A concluding Prayer. 88 King Edward the Sixth's Prayer against Popery. 89 A
Prayer for God's Mercies upon their Majesty's Forces under the Command and
Conduct of his Grace the Duke of Schomberg 90 A Prayer for Mercy to the whole
Nation 92 A short account of the Massacre in Ireland 93 An abstract of their
Popish Tortures and Cruelties 97 Bishop Usher's Prophecy concerning Rome's
Downfall 103
Thanksgivings for God's wonderful Deliverances.
A Thanksgiving for our Deliverances from the Spanish Invasion 121 From the
Powder Treason* November the 5th 1605. 122 For our Deliverance from Popery,
Slavery, and Arbitrary Power 123 For the relief of Londonderry in Ireland 124
For the Gifts of God 125 To God for all his Benefits 126 A Prayer before the
following Discourse. 128 Christian Courage in Affliction, a Discourse by way of
Advice to the Besieged in Londonderry, under the Command of that worthy
Divine, and valiant Commander, Col. Walker 131 The Prayer afterward 150 A
Prayer for the preservation of our most gracious Saveraign Lord King William,
in his Royal Undertaking to Subdue Ireland, and for his safe Return to England.
151
FINIS.

