TWO TREATISES

The FIRST, Proving both by HISTORY and RECORD THAT THE BISHOPS ARE A
Fundamental and Essential Part OF OUR English Parliament: The SECOND, That they
may be JUDGES IN Capital Cases.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

THAT THE BISHOPS MAKE A FUNDAMENTAL and ESSENTIAL PART OF THE English
Parliament.
THough the Demerits of this Sacred Order of men is sufficiently known and
acknowledged, though their Sufferings in the late ill times are notorious to
the whole world, and no less a Scandal to this Nation, I speak of those who
then traitorously usurped the Name and Title of the Supreme Authority of
England; yet there are not still wanting those of the old Leaven, who endeavor
to embroil us again, who still raise and maintain the old Scruples and
Jealousies, and endeavor as much as in them lies, to put us again into the old
and preternatural Ferments of 42: it is strange you will say, that a Nation
should be twice undone by the same ways and method; that the evil success we
all of us felt (save those of the Independent Faction) should not deter us from
endeavoring the like unsetlements for the future; I wish our Fears and
Jealousies were groundless; but so long as the old and baffled Arguments are
rallied by such men, so long as they proceed to make ill use of the Indulgence
of their Prince and his Government under whom they live in peace, and endeavor
to unravel the Constitutions of our Parliaments, hereby to bring us into the
Disorders under which we so lately groaned, and out of which, by the goodness
of God, we are now in safety escaped, it will not (I hope) be thought
unseasonable to any person who is a Friend to his Prince or Country, or to
himself in his own quiet and settlement which he now enjoyes, to mind and to
advise him (I hope it is no ill counsel) stare super vias antiquas, to tread in
and keep to the old paths. Regia via est tuta via; the Kings way is the safest
and best of ways. Let us then in the Name of God see what were the ancient
usages, the old Constitutions under which we and our Forefathers were happy,
our ancient Kingdom so famous throughout the whole Civilized World, has
flourished, and become so renowned as erst it has been: And seeing a great
Question has of late, and is now again raised concerning the Sacred Order of
Bishops, as to their Right of being and voting in our Parliaments, we shall
endeavor to evince and prove this great Point, which it is hoped may in a good
measure contribute to the allaying the heats of this sort of men amongst us,
and who seem to be the most busy and forward in these Embroylments. And that
we may the more orderly and methodically proceed to evince what we have
undertaken, and in regard this Question is about the very Constitution of our
Government, we can, I think, do no better than to make use herein of the good
old Maxim and Rule de Legibus and longa consuetudine. Si de interpretatione
Legis quaeritur, inprimis inspiciendum est, quo jure Civitas retro in hujusmodi
casibus usa fuerit: Consuetudo enim optima interpretatio Legis est. If you
would know the true sense and interpretation of any Law, you must especially
look to the practice and usage of the Law; for that Custom is the best
interpretation of the Law. We now seem (at least some party amongst us) to
question whether our Bishops are an Essential part of the Parliament; which,
together with His Majesty, as to the Enacting of Laws, and giving of Aids and
Subsidies, is the old Government under which England has heretofore to the
envy of our Neighbors, flourished and been happy. -- Foelices nimium bona si
sua norant Angli.

That we may then (I say) put this Question out of question, we shall endeavor
to prove by two sorts of Arguments; of which one shall be De Jure, and the
other De Facto: the one derived from that Original Right which is vested in
them; the other from the constant Exercise and continual practice by which that
Right has been enjoyed in all times foregoing.

And first we shall begin with the proofs de jure, and therein first with that
which does occur in the Laws of King Athelston, one of the first Monarchs of
the English Saxons. Among which there is a Chapter (it is chap. 11.) entitled
De officio Episcopi and quid pertinet ad officium ejus; that is to say,
Touching the office of a Bishop, and that which does of right belong unto it.
In which Chapter it is thus declared, viz. Episcopo jure pertinet omnem
rectitudinem promovere, Dei scilicet and seculi etc. Spelm. Couns p. 402.
and convenit ut per consilium and testimonium ejus omne Legis scitum, and
Burgi mensura, and omne pondus sit secundum dictionem ejus institutum; that is
to say, it belongs of right unto the Bishop, to promote Justice in matters
which concern both the Church and State, and unto him it appertains, that by
his Counsel and Award, all Laws, and Weights, and Measures, be ordained
throughout the Kingdom.

2. Next we will have recourse to the old Record entitled, Modus tenendi
Parliamentum; In which it is affirmed, Ad Parliamentum Summoniri and venire
debere Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, and alios majores Cleri,
qui tenent per Comitatum aut Baroniam ratione hujus modi tenurae; Modus tenendi
Parliamentum.
That all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates of the
Church, who hold their Lands either by an Earls Fee, or a Barons Fee, were to
be summoned, and come to Parliament in regard of their Tenure.

3. Next, look we on the Chartularies of King Henry the first, recognized in
full Parliament at Clarendon, under Henry the second, where they are called
Avitas consuetudines, which declare it thus, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and
universae Personae qui de Rege tenent in capite, habeant possessiones suas de
Rege sic ut Baroniam, etc. Et sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse judiciis
Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, quousque pervenerit ad diminutionem membrorum vel
ad mortem Math. Paris in H. 2.
The meaning is in brief, that Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
Ecclesiastical Persons which hold in Capite of the King, are to have and hold
their Lands in Barony, and that they ought as Barons to be present in all
Judgments with the other Barons in the Court of Parl. until the very Sentence
of Death or Mutilation (which was very common in those times) was to be
pronounced. And then they commonly did use to withdraw themselves, not out of
any incapacity supposed to be in them by the Law of Engl. but out of a
restraint imposed upon them by the Can. of the Church of Rome.

4. In the Great Charter made by King John, in the last of his Reign, we have
the form of summoning a Parliament, and calling those together who have Votes
therein, thus expressed at large. Ad habendum commune concilium Regni de
auxilio assidendo, etc. Et de scutagiis assidendis, faciemus summoneri
Archiepisc. Abbates, Comites, and majores Barons Regni sigillatim per literas
nostras, and praeterea summoneri faciemus in generali per Vice-Com. and
Ballivos nostros omnes alios qui in Capite tenent ad certum diem, scil. ad
terminum 40 dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum, etc. Id. in Job.
In which we have not only a most evident Proof, that the Bishops are of right
to be called to Parliament, for granting Subsidies and Escuage, and treating of
the great Affairs which concern the Kingdom, but that they are to be summoned
by particular Letters, as well as the Earls and Barons, or either of them; A
form or copy of which Summons issued in the time of the said King John, is
extant on Record, and put in Print not many (*) P. 1. 20. 5.
years since in the Titles of Honor.

5. We have it thus in the Magna Charta of King Henry the 3 d. the Birthright
of the English Subject, according as it stands translated in the Book of
Statutes. First we have granted to God, and by this our present Charters have
confirmed for us, and our Heirs for ever, That the Church of England shall be
free, and shall enjoy all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable, Magna
Charta c. 1.
But it is a known Right and Liberty of the Church of England, that all the
Bishops, and many of the greater Clergy (and peradventure also the Inferior
Clergy in the said Kings time) had their Votes in Parliament; and therefore is
to be preserved inviolable by the Kings of England, their Heirs and Successors
for ever. Which Charter, as it was confirmed by a Curse denounced on all the
Infringers of it, by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Math. Par. in H. 3.
and ratified, in no fewer than 80. suceedings Parliaments: So was it Enacted
in the Reign of Hdward the first, That it should be sent under the great Seal
of England, to all the Cathedral Churches of the Kingdom, to be read twice a
year before the People; () That they should be ready four times a year in a
full County Court, 28 E. 1. c. 1.
and finally that all Judgments given against it should be void and null; 28 E.
1. c. 2.
the Application of which last Clause I refer to those, to whom the rectifiing
of the Error (which to the contrary thereof has been committed) does of right
belong. (*) 28 E. 1. c. 3.


6. We have the Protestation of John Stratford Arch Bishop of Canterbury, in
the time of King Edward the 3 d. who being in disfavour with the King, and
denied entrance into the House of Peers, challenged his Place, and Suffrage
there, as the first Peer of the Realm, and One that ought to have the first
voice in Parliament in right of his See.

But hear him speak his own words, which are these that follow, Amici (for he
spoke to those that took witness of it) Rex me ad hoc Parliamentum scripto suo
vocavit, and ego tanquam major par Regni post Regem, and primam voce habere
debens in Parliamento, jura Ecclesiae meae Cantuariensis vendico and ideo
ingressum in Parliamento peto Antiqui. Brit. in Gati. Stratford.
which makes it plain enough, that the Archbishop did not challenge a place in
Parliament, as the first Peer of the Realm, either by way of favor, or custom
only, but as a power and privilege as he ought to have (habere debent are the
words) in the Right of his See.

7. And lastly, there is the protestation on Record, of all the Bishops in the
Reign of King Richard the 2 d. at what time William Courtney was Archbishop of
Canterbury: who being to withdraw themselves from the House of Peers, at the
pronouncing of the Sentence of Death on some guilty Lords, first made their
Procurators to supply their rooms, and then put up their Protestations to
preserve their Rights; the sum whereof, for as much as does concern this
business in their own words thus; De jure, and consuetudine Regni Angliae ad
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, qui pro tempore fuerit, nec non caeteros
Suffraganos, confratres, and compatres, Abbates and Priores, aliosque
Prelalatos quoscunque per Baroniam de Domino Rege tenentes, Pertinet, in
Parliamentis Regis quibuscunque, ut Pares Regni praedicti personaliter
interesse ibidemque de Regni negotiis, ac aliis tractari consuetis cum caeteris
dicti Regni paribus, and aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus Consulere,
and Tractare, Ordinare, Statuere, and Definire, ac caetera facere quae
Parliamento ibidem imminent facienda. In vita Gu. Courtney
It appertains say they, both by Right and Custom to the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the time being, as also unto all the rest of his Compeers, as
well as the Suffragan Bishops, as to the Abbots, Priors and other Prelates
whatsoever, which hold their Land by Barony of our Lord the King, to be
personally present at all Parliaments as Peers of the Realm, and there together
with the rest of the Peers, and all other, which have Right to be therein
present to Consult, treat of, and Ordain, and finally to determine and
establish all such things, and matters, as are accustomably handled, and
ordained in Parliaments. Which sets the matter as I take it beyond all dispute,
as to the first of these two heads, or sorts of Arguments, whereby I was to
prove this point, which were those de jure.

Let us next see whether this Right of theirs be confirmed and countenanced by
continual practice, and that they have not lost it by Discontinuance; which is
my second kind of Argument, those I mean de facto. And in this way of proof, we
can go as high, as the first preaching of the Gospel to the English Saxons, and
so descend unto those last times without interruption. By which it will appear,
that Christianity in this Nation, and the Bishops Votes in Parliaments, and
Common Councils, are of like Antiquity.

For first, no sooner had King Ethelbert received the Gospel, but presently we
read, that as well the Clergy, as the Laity, were summoned to the Common
Council: which the Saxons sometimes called Mycell Synoth, the great Assembly,
and sometimes Witennegemote, the Council or Assembly of the Wise men of the
Realm, Anno 605. Ethelbertus Rex in fide corroboratus Catholica, etc.
Cantuariae convocavit Commune Consilium tam Cleri, quam Populi; King H. Spelman
in Conc. p. 116.
Ethelbert, as my Author has it, being confirmed in the Faith in the year 605.
(which was but nine years after his Conversion) together with Berha his Queen,
their Son Thalbald, the Reverend Archbishop Augustine, and all the rest of the
Nobility, did solemnize the Feast of Christ's Nativity in the City of
Canterbury; and did there cause to be assembled on the 9th. of January, the
Common Council of his Kingdom, as well the Clergy, as the Lay-Subject; by whose
Consent and Approbation he caused the Monastery by him built, to be dedicated
to the honor of God Almighty, by the hand of Augustine.

And though no question other Examples of this kind may be found amongst the
Saxon Heptarchies, yet being the West Saxon Kingdom did in fine prevail, and
united all the rest into one Monarchy, we shall apply our selves unto that more
punctually and with greater care.

I. And first we read of Egbert, who first united the seven Kingdoms of the
Saxons under the common name of England, that he caused to be convened at
London his Bishops, and the Peers of the highest Rank, pro consilio capiendo
adversus Danicos Pyratas, Charta Whitlagii Mercyorum Regis ap. Ingulph.
to advise upon some course against the Danish Pirates, who infested the
Seacoast of England.

II. Another Parliament or Council (call it which you will) called at Kingbury,
Anno 855, in the time of Ethelwolph, the Son of Egbert, pro negotiis Regni,
Charta Bertult mer. Regis ap. Ingulf.
to treat of the Affairs of the Kingdom; the Acts whereof are ratified and
subscribed by the Bishops, Abbots, and other great men of the Realm.

III. We find that the same King Ethelwolph in a Parliament, or Assembly of his
States at Winchester, Anno 855. Cum consilio Episcoporum and Principum, Ingulf.
Croyland. hist
by the Advice and Counsel of the Bishops and Nobility, confirmed unto the
Clergy the tenth part of all men's Goods, and ordered that the Tithe so
confirmed unto them should be free ab omnibus secularibus Servitutibus, from
all secular Services and Impositions.

IV. The two Charters were issued out by Athelstone abovementioned, Consilio
Wifelmi Archiepiscopi mei, and aliorum Episcoporum meorum, Ap. eund. p. 402,
403.
by the advice of Wiselme his Archbishop, and his other Bishops.

And V. That Ina in the year 902. caused the great Council of his Realm to be
Assembled, consisting ex Episcopis, Principibus, Proceribus, etc. of Bishops,
Princes, Nobles, Earls, and of all the wise men, Elders, and people of the
whole Kingdom, and there Enacted diverse Laws for the weal of this Realm. Ap.
eund. p, 219.
We also read this in the Reign of Edrid, Anno 948. viz. in festo igitur
Nativitatis Beatae Mariae cum universi Magnates Regni per Regium Edictum
summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, ac Abbates, quam caeteri totius
Regni Proceres and Optimates Londini convenissent ad tractandum de negotiis
publicis totius Regni; Id. ibid. p. 497. edit. Land.
That in the Feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, the great men of the
Realm, that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Nobles, Peers, were
summoned by the Kings Writ to appear at London, to handle and conclude about
the public Affairs of the Kingdom. Mention of which Assembly is made again at
the Foundation and Endowment of the Abbey of Crowland; Mad p. 500.
and afterward a Confirmation of the same by Edgar, Anno 966. Praesentibus
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, and Optimatibus Regni; Id. p. 5. p. 1. 50.
In the presence of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Peers of the Realm. The
like Convention of Estates we find to have been called by Canutus the Dane,
after the death of Edm. Ironside, for the settling of the Crown on his own head,
of which thus the Author, Rog. Hoved. Annal page prior p. 250.
Cujus post mortem Rex Canutus omnes Episcopos, and Duces, nec non and
Principes, cunctosque Optimates gentis Angliae, Londini congregari jussit.
Where we still find the Bishops to be called to Parliament, as well as the
Dukes, Princes, and the rest of the Nobility; and to be ranked and marshalled
first (which clearly shows that they were always reckoned for the first Estate)
before the greatest and most eminent of the Secular Peers. And so we find it
also in a Charter of King Edward the Confessor, the last King of the Saxon
Race) by which he granted certain Lands and Privileges to the Church of
Westminster, An. 1066. Cum Concilio and Decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, aliorumque Optimatum; ap. H. Spel. in Council. p. 630.
with the Counsel and Decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and others of
his Nobles. And all this while the Bishops and other Prelates of the Church did
hold by no other Tenure than in pura and perpetua Eleemosyna; Camden in Brit.
or frank Almoygne, as our Lawyers call it; and therefore sat in Parliament in
no other capacity than as Spiritual persons merely; who by their extraorinary
knowledge in the Word of God, and in such other parts of Learning as the world
then knew, were thought best able to direct and advise their Princes in all
points of difficulty. But when the Norman Conqueror had possessed the State, then
the case was altered. The Prelates of the Church were no longer suffered to
hold their Land in Frank Almoigne, as before they did, or to be free from
Secular Services and Commands, as before they were. Although they kept their
Lands, yet they changed their Tenure, and by the Conqueror were ordained to
hold their Lands sub militari servitute, Mat. Paris in Will. 1. An. 1070.
either in Capite, or by Baronage, or some such military hold, and thereby were
compellable to aid the King in all times of War, with Men, Arms, and Horses, as
the Lay-Subjects of the same Tenures were required to do.

Which though it were conceived to be a great Disfranchisement at first, and an
heavy burden to the Prelacy, yet it conduced at last to their greater honor,
in giving them a further Title to their Place in Parliament, than that which
formerly they could pretend to. Before, they claimed a place therein ratione
Officii, only by reason of their Offices, or Spiritual Dignities; but after
this, by reason also of those Baronies, which were erected, and annexed to
their several Dignities; En respect de leur possessions l'antient Baronies
annexes a leur Dignities Stratford Pleas. l. 3.
as our Lawyers have it. From this time forwards we must look upon them in the
House of Parliament, not as Bishops only, but as Peers and Barons of the Realm
also; and so themselves affirmed to the Temporal Lords in the Parliament holden
at Northampton, under Henry the Second. Non sedemus hic Episcopi, sed Barons,
Pares hic sumus: Seldom titles of hon. p 2. 18.
We sit not here, say they, as Bishops only, but as Barons; we are Barons, and
you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. Which last is also verified in terminis,
by the words of a Statute, or Act of Parliament, wherein the Bishops are
acknowledged to be Peers of the Land.

But to proceed more particularly to our proofs de facto, after the alteration
of their Tenures by the Norman Conqueror; we find a Parliament assembled in the
fifth year of that King, wherein are present Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, and
Primates totius Angliae, () the (*) Math. Paris in Willi elmo 1.
Bishops, Abbots Earls, and the rest of the Baronage of England.

And 3ly. In the ninth year of William Rufus, an old Author tells us, de
Regni statu acturus, Episcopos, Abbates, and quoscunque Regni Proceres in unum
praecepti sui sanctione egit, that being to consult of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, he called together by his Writ the Bishops, Abbots and all the Peers
of the Realm, Edmor hist. Mov. l. 2.


And 2ly. During the Reign of King Henry the first, for we will take but one
example out of each Kings Reign, though each Kings Reign would yield us more) a
Parliament was called at London. wherein were many things dispatched, aa well
of Ecclesiastical, as Secular nature, the Bishops, and Abbots being present
with the other Lords; Coacto apud Londinium Magno Episcoporum and Procerum,
Abbatumque concilio, multa Ecclesiasticarum, and Secularium rerum ordinata
negotia, decisa Litigia, says the Monk of Malmsbury Malmbs. Hist. Reg. Ang. l.
5.
and of this Parliament it is, I take it, that Edmor speaks Hist. Novel. l.
4. p. 91.

Proceed we 4ly. to King Henry the second (for King Stephens Reign was so full
of Wars and Tumults, that there is very little to be found of Parliaments) and
there we find the Bishops with the other Peers, convened in Parliament for the
determination of the points in controversy between Alphonso King of Castile and
Sancho King of Navarre, referred by com-promise to the King of England, and
here determined by King Henry amongst other things. Habito cum Episcopis,
Comitibus and Baronibus cum deliberatione Consilio, as in Roger Hoveden
Hoveden. Annal. pac. Rose in H. 2.


5ly. Next time comes Richard the first, his Son; during whose Imprisonment by
the D. of Austria, his Brother John then Earl of Moriton, endeavored by force
and cunning in Normandy to set the Crown on his own head; which caused Hubert
the Archbishop of Canterbury, to call a Parliament (Convocatis coram eo
Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus Regni, Id. in Ioh.
wherein the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, did with one consent agree to seize on
his Estate, and suppress his power, the better to preserve the Kingdom in
Wealth, Peace, and Safety.

6ly. After succeeded John, and he calls a Parliament, wherein were certain
Laws made for the defense of this Kingdom, Communi assensu Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum and omnium fidelium suorum Angliae, by the Common
Counsel and Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and the rest of
his Lieges. (Remember what was said before touching the Writ of Summons in the
said Kings time) from this time till the last Parliament of King Charles, there
is no Kings Reign of which we have not many, (though not all) the Acts of
Parliament still it Print amongst us. Nor is there any Act of Parliament in the
Printed Books, to the Enacting of which the Bishops Approbation and Consent is
not plainly specified, either in the general Proem set before the Acts, or in
the Body of the Acts themselves, as by the Books themselves does at large
appear.

7ly. And to this kind of proof may be further added the Form and manner of the
Writ, by which the Prelates in all times have been called to Parliament, being
the very Law Verbatim, with that which is directed to the Temporal Barons, save
that the Spiritual Lords are commanded to attend the Service, in fide and
dilectione, the Temporal in fide and Homagio, and of late times in fide and
Ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini. A Form or Copy of which Summons as ancient as
King John's time, is still reserved upon Record, directed Nominatim to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; Titles of Hon. part 2. cap. 1.
and then a Scriptum est similiter to the residue of the Bishops, Abbots, Earls
and Barons. Then add the Privilege of Parliament for themselves and their
Servants, during the time of the Sessions, the Liberty to kill and take one or
two of the Kings Deer, as they pass by any of his Forests in coming to
Parliament upon his Commandment, Charta de forest. cap.
their enjoying of the same Immunities, which are and have been heretofore
enjoyed by the Temporal Barons; Camden in Briiania.
and tell me if the Bishops did not sit in Parliament by as good a Title as the
Temporal Lords, and therefore Essential, Fundamental parts of the Court of
Parliament.

By this Discourse it may appear, that the Bishops Sit and Vote in Parliament
by a double capacity; as Bishops, first in reference to their several Sees; and
secondly, as Peers, in regard of their Baronies. In both respects accounted one
of the Three Estates, and the first also of the Three, as from the Premises may
be gathered without any great trouble. But in so nice a point as this, we shall
not only build upon general Inferences, but particular Evidences.

And first it is affirmed by Titus Livius, in his Relation of the Life and
Reign of King Henry the 5th, That when his Funerals were ended, the three
Estates of the Realm of England did assemble together, and declare his Son King
Henry the 6th. being an Infant of 8 Months old, to be their Sovereign Lord, ()
as his Heir and Successor. And three Estates there (*) Tit. Live. M. S. in Bib.
Bodl.
could not be to perform that Service, unless the Bishops were acknowledged to
be one of the number.

2ly, In the Parliament Rolls of King Richard the third, there is mention of a
Bill or Parchment presented to that Prince, being then Duke of Gloucester, on
the behalf, and in the Name of the Three Estates of the Realm of England, that
is to wit, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons by name; which
forasmuch as neither the said Three Estates, nor the persons which delivered it
on their behalf, were then assembled in form of Parliament, was afterward in
the first Parliament of that King, by the same Three Estates Assembled in this
present Parliament (I speak the very words of the Act it self) and by Authority
of the same Enrolled, Recorded, and Approved; An. Speed in K. R. 3*
and at the request and by the assent of the Three Estates of this Realm, that
is to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of this Land Assembled
in this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same it be pronounced,
decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign Lord the King was and is the
very and undoubted Heir of this Realm of England, etc.

And 3ly, So it is acknowledged in a () Statute of 1 El. c. 3. where 1 Eliz. c.
3
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament
assembled, being said expressly and in terminis to represent the three Estates
of the Realm of England, did recognize the Queens Majesty to be their True,
Lawful, and undoubted Sovereign Lieg'd Lady and Queen. And in a Statute of the
8th. year of the said Queens Reign, the Bishops and Clergy are declared to be
the greatest Estates of the Realm, and called the High Estate of Prelacy, in
another place.

It may perhaps be thought unnecessary or impertinent, to add the Testimony and
Authority of a private person to that which has been said by our Laws and
Statutes. But being it is such a Person as was accounted for the Oracle of the
Law when he served in Parliament, his Judgment may be taken for a creditable
and sufficient Evidence in the present Case. It is the Testimony and Authority
of Sir Edward Coke, successively Chief Justice of either Bench; who in his Book
Concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts, speaks thus of Parliaments, Coke of
Parl. fol. 1.
This Court (says he) consists of the Kings Majesty sitting there as in his
Royal Politic Capacity, and of the Three Estates of the Realm, viz. of the
Lords Spiritual, Archbishops and Bishops, who sit there by Succession in
respect of their Counties, Baronies, parcel of their Bishoprics which they
hold also in their Politic Capacity; and every one of these when any
Parliament is to be holden, ought ex debito Justitiae to have a Writ of
Summons. Secondly, The Lords Temporal, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and
Barons, who sit there by reason of their Dignities, which they hold by Descent
or Creation, and likewise every one of these being of full age, ought to have a
Writ of Summons ex debito Justitiae. The Third Estate is the Commons of the
Realm, whereof there be Knights of Shires or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and
Burgesses of Burghs. All which are respectively Elected by the Shires or
Counties, Cities and Buroughs, by force of the Kings Writ ex debito Justitiae,
and none of them ought to be omitted: And these represent all the Commons of
the whole Realm, and are trusted for them. So He: and this is plain enough
beyond exception.

Add hereunto ex abundanti, that in all Christian Kingdoms of the Gothic
Model, there are no more nor fewer than three Estates, convented at the Will
and Pleasure of the Supreme Prince, for their assistance and advice in Affairs
of consequence; that is to say, the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons,
who are always one, the Nobles for themselves, and the Commissioners for the
Commons of their several Provinces; for so we find it in the Constitutions of
the Roman Empire, and the Realms of Spain, the Kingdoms of France, Poland,
Hungary, together with those of Denmark, Sweden, and the Realm of Scotland. And
it were strange if in the Constitution of the English Parliaments, or Conventus
Ordinum, the Bishops should have been left out, and none at all elected to
present the Clergy. But being admitted with the rest in those public Meetings,
and being looked on as the First Estate in the Style of that Court, it must
needs be, that their Exclusion shakes the very Fundamentals of the said
Assemblies, and makes the whole Body to be maimed and mutilated for want of
such a principal Member, so necessary to the making up of the whole Compositum.

But against all this it is objected, first, that some Acts have passed in
Parliament, to which the Prelates did not Vote, nor could be present in the
House when the Bill was passed; as in the sentencing to death or mutilation of
a guilty Person: as does appear by the Laws and Constitutions recognized at
Clarendon, and the following practice. This has been touched on before, and we
told you then, that this restraint was laid upon them, not by the common Law of
England, or any Act or Ordinance of the House of Peers, by which they were
disabled to attend that service. It was their own voluntary Act, none compelled
them to it, but only out of a conformity to some former Canons, ad Sanctorum
Canonum instituta, Antiqui. Brit. in Gul. Courtney.
(as their own words are) by which it was not lawful for the Clergy Men, to be
either Judges or Assessors in causa sanguinis Constitut. Othob. Fol. 45.
. And yet they took such care to preserve their Interest, that they did not
only give their Proxies for there presenting of their Persons, but did put up
their protestations, with a salvo jure, for the preserving of their Rights for
the time to come: Jure Paritatis and interessendi in dicto Parliamento Antiqu.
Brit. in Gul. Courtney.
quoad omnia and singula ibi exercendi in omnibus semper salvo, as the manner
was; Examples of which are as full and frequent, as their withdrawing
themselves on the said occasions.

But then the main Objection is, that as some Acts have passed in Parliament,
absentibus Prelatis, when the Bishops did absent themselves of their own
accord; so many things have been transacted in the Parliament Excluso Clero,
when the Clergy had been excluded or put out of the House by some Act or
Ordinance. A President for this has been found and published by such as envied
that poor remnant of the Churches honor: though possibly they will find
themselves deceived in their greatest hopes, and yet the evidence will not
serve to evince the cause. The Author of the Pamphlet entitled, the
Prerogative and practice of Parliaments, first lays this Tenet for his ground,
That many good Acts of Parliament may be made, though the Archbishops, and
Bishops should not consent unto them () (which is a point (*) Printed at Land,
1628 p. 31.
that no man doubts of, considering how easily their Negative may be overruled
by the far greater number of the Secular Peers.) Then he adds that in a
Parliament held at St. Edmundsbury, 1196. in the Reign of Edward the first, a
Statute was made by the King, the Barons, and the Commons, excluso Clero, and
for the proof hereof refers us unto Bishop Jewel.

Now Bishop Jewill says indeed, That in a Parliament held at St. Edmundsbury
by King Edward the first, Anno 1296. the Archbishops and Bishops were quite
shut forth, and yet the Parliament held, and good and wholesome Laws were there
Enacted, the departing or absence of the Lords Spiritual notwithstanding.
Defense of the Apol. part 6. c. 2. S. 1.
In the Records whereof it is written thus, Habito Rex cum Baronibus suis
Parliamento, and Clero excluso, statutum est, etc. The King keeping the
Parliament with his Barons, the Clergy, (that is to say, the Archbishops, and
Bishops,) being shut forth, it was enacted, etc. Wherein who does not see, if
he has any eyes, that by this reason, (if the proof be good) many good Acts of
Parliament may be made, though the Commons either out of absence or opposition
should not consent unto the same; of whose consent unto that Statute (whosoever
it was) there is as little to be found in that Record, as the concurrence of
the Bishops, But for answer unto so much of this Record so often spoke of, and
applauded, as concerns the Bishops, we say, that this (if it be truly senced,
as I think it is not) was the particular Act of an Angry and Offended King
against his Clergy, not to be drawn into example as a proof or Argument against
a most clear, known and undoubted Right.

The Cause stood thus, A Constitution had been made by Boniface the 8th, Ne
aliqua collecta ex ecclesiasticis proventibus Regi, aut cuivis alii Principi
concedatur; Math. West. in E. 1.
that Clergymen should not pay any Tax or Tallage unto Kings or Princes out of
their Spiritual Preferments without the leave of the Pope. Under pretense
whereof, the Clergy at this Parliament at St. Edmonsbury, refused to be
contributary to the Kings occasions, when the Lay-Members of the House had been
forwards in it. The King being herewith much offended, gives them a further Day
to consider of it, Adjourning the Parliament to London, there to begin on the
morrow after St. Hilaries Day; and in the mean time commanded all their Barns
to be fast sealed up. The day being come, and the Clergy still persisting in
their former obstinacy, Excluso e Parliamento Clero Consilium Rex cum solis
Baronibus and populo habuit, totumque statim Clerum protectione sua privavit;
Antiqu. Brit. in R. Winchelsey.
The King (says the Historian) excluding the Clergy out of the Parliament,
advised with his Barons, and his People only, what was best to be done; by
whose Advice he put the Clergy out of his protection, and thereby forced them
to conform to his Will and Pleasure.

This is the Summa totalis of the Business, and comes unto no more but this,
that a particular course was advised in Parliament on a particular Displeasure
taken by the King against the Body of his Clergy then convened together, for
their particular refusal to contribute to his Wants and Wars, the better to
reduce them to their natural Duty. Which makes not any thing at all against the
Right of Bishops in the House of Peers, or for excluding them that House, or
for the validity of such Acts as are made in Parliament during the time of such
exclusion; especially considering that the King shortly after called his States
together, and did excuse himself for many extravagant Acts which he had
committed Wolsingh. in E. 1. An. 1297.
against the Liberties of the Subject, (whereof this was one) laying the blame
thereof on his great occasions, and the necessity which the Wars which he had
abroad did impose upon him.

And so much as in Answer unto that Record, supposing that the words thereof be
rightly senced, as I think they are not, and that by Clerus there, we are to
understand Archbishops and Bishops, as I think we be not, there being no Record
(I dare boldly say it) either of History or Law, in which the word Clerus
serves to signify the Archbishops and Bishops, exclusive of the other Clergy,
or any Writing whatsoever, wherein it does either notsignifie the whole Clergy
generally, or the inferior Clergy only exclusive of the Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Prelates. Therefore in answer unto that so much applauded Cavil of
Excluso Clero, from what Record soever it either has been hitherto, or shall
hereafter be produced, I shall propose it to the consideration of the sober
Reader, whether by Clerus in that place, or in any other of that kind and time,
we must not understand the Inferior Clergy, as they stand distinguished in the
Laws from my Lords the Bishops.

For howsoever it be true that Clerus in the Ecclesiastical Notion of the Word
does signify the whole Clergy generally, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons; yet in the Legal notion of it, it stands distinguished from the
Prelates, and signifies only the inferior Clergy. Thus do we find the
Ecclesiastics of this Realm divided into Prelates, men of Religion, and other
Clerks, 3 E. 1. c. 1. the Seculars either into Prelates and Clerks, 9 E. 2. c.
3. 1 R. 2. c, 3. or Prelates and Clerks Beneficed, 18 E. 3. c. 2. or generally
into the Prelates and the Clergy, 9 E. 2. c. 15. 14 E. c. 1. and 3. 18 E. 3. 2,
7. and 25 E. 3. 2, 4. and 8 Hen. 6. c. 1. And in all Acts and Grants of
Subsidies made by the Clergy to the Kings or Queens of England since the 32 d.
of H. 8, (when the Clergy-Subsidies first began to be confirmed by Act of
Parliament.

So also in the Latin Idiom, which comes nearest home, Nos Praelati and Clerus,
in the submission of the Clergy to King H. 8. Regist. Watham.
and in the Sentence of Divorce against Anne of Cleve Regist. Cranmer.
and in the Instrument of the Grant of the Clergy-Subsidies presented to the
Kings of England ever since the 27th. of Queen Eliz. and in the form of the
Certificates (per Stat. 8 Eliz. c. 17. and ever since.
Praelatos and Clerum) returned by every Bishop to the Lord High Treasurer, and
finally, Nos Episcopi and Clerus Cantuariensis Provinciae in hac Synodo more
nostro solito, dum Regni Parliamentum celebratur, Congregati. Stat. 1. Phil.
and Mary, c. 8.
In the Petition to K. Philip and Mary, about the Confirmation of the
Abbey-Lands to the Patentees; so that though many Statutes have been made in
these latter times, Excluso Clero, the Clergy, that is to say, the inferior
Clergy (who anciently had their place in Parliaments) being quite shut out, and
utterly excluded from those public Councils; yet this proves nothing to the
Point, that any Act of Parliament has been counted good, to which the Bishops
were not called, or at the making of which Act they either were shut out by
Force, or excluded by Cunning.

But then, besides the so much celebrated Argument of excluso Clero, the Author
of the Pamphlet before remembered, has told us somewhat on the credit of
Kilbancies book; In which the Justices are made to say 7 Hen. 8. That our
Sovereign Lord the King, may well hold his Parliament by him, and his Temporal
Lords, and by the Commons also, without the Spiritual Lords, for that the
Spiritual Lords have not any place in the Parliament Chamber, by reason of
their Spiritualities, but by reason of their Temporal Possessions. But first
this is but the Opinion of a private man, of no Authority or Esteem for ought
we can can find) in the Realm of England, and therefore not concluding in so
great a business. And 2dly. admitting him to be a man of more note and credit
than perhaps he was, yet he must needs fall short in all respects, both for
Abilities and Reputation of Chief Justice Coke, whose Judgment to the contrary
we have seen before. But 3ly, it runs cross to the ancient practice of the
Saxon Times, in which the Bishops sat in Parliament as Spiritual Persons,
without relation to their Temporal Possessions, or their Barons Fees, as
afterward in the Reign of the Norman Kings. And finally, admitting that
Kilbancies Plea were of weight enough to keep the Bishops down from rising to
their place in Parliament, it must be strong enough to exclude all the Temporal
Lords; The Temporal Lords being called to Parliament on no other ground, than
for the Temporal possessions which they hold by Barony. Adeo argumenta ab
absurdo petita, ineptos habent exitus, said Lactantius truly, It is the Fate
(said he) of ill chosen Premises, that they produce ridiculous and absurd
Conclusions.

There remains one Objection more, and indeed the greatest, not extant in the
Pamphlet before remembered, though possibly promoted and occasioned by it; that
is to say, that the Bishops are excluded from their Place and Vote by Act of
Prrliament, deliberately made and passed by the Kings consent. For answer
whereunto, it will be necessary first to state this Question, viz: Whether that
any two of the the three Estates, concurring or agreeing together, may conclude
any thing which tends to the Subversion of the third. Bodinus that renwoned
Statesman, has resolved it negatively, and determined thus; Nihil a duobus
ordinibus discerni posse, quo uni ex tribus incommodum inferatur, etc. Bodin de
Rep. l. 3. c. 7.
That nothing can be done by two of the three Estates, to the disprofit of the
third, in case the point proposed be such as concerns them severally; and he
resolved thus in favor of the Commons of the Realm of France, who were upon
the point of being excluded from the Parliament, or Convention of the three
Estates, if he had not notably bestirred himself in their behalf (he being then
a Delegate or Commissioner for one of the Provinces) and by his diligence and
care preserved their Interests; and to preseve their Interest, he insisted
chiefly on the ancient custom of the Realm of France, as also on the Realm of
Spain and England, and the Roman Empire; in each of which it was received for a
ruled Case, Nihil a duobus ordinibus statui posse, quo uni ex tribus
prejudicium crearetur, That nothing could be done by any of the two Estates,
unto the prejudice of the third.

And if it were a ruled Case; then in the English Parliaments, there is no
reason why it should be otherwise in the present times, the Equity and Justice
of it being still the same, and the same reasons for it now as forcible as they
could be then. Had it been otherwise resolved of in the former ages, wherein
the Clergy were so prevalent in all public Counsels, how easy a matter had it
been for them, either by joining with all the Nobility to exclude the Commons,
or by joining with the Commonalty to exclude the Nobles? Or having too much
Conscience to venture in so great a change, and alteration, so incompatible,
Inconsistent with the Constitution of a Parliament; how easily might they have
suppressed the Potency, and impair the Privileges of either of the other two,
by by working on the humors or affections of the one to keep down the other?

Nor does it help the matter in the least degree to say that the Exclusion of
the Bishops from the House of Peers, was not done merely by the procurement of
some of the other two Estates, but by the Assent of the King, of whom the Laws
say He can do no wrong, and by an Act of Parliament whereof our Lawyers say,
que null doit imaginer chose dishonorable, that no man is to think Plowden in
Commen.
dishonorable. For we know well in what condition the King was when he passed
that Act, to what extremities he was reduced, on what terms he stood, how he
was forced to withdraw from his City of London, to part with his dear Wife and
Children, and in a word, so over-powred by the prevailing Party in the two
Houses of Parliament, that it was not safe for him (as his Case then was) to
deny them any thing. And for the Act of Parliament, thus insisted on, besides
that the Bill had been rejected when it was first brought unto the Lords, and
that the greater part of the Lords were frighted out of the House, when
contrary unto the course of Parliament it was brought again; it is a point
resolved both in Law and Reason, that the Parliament can do nothing to the
destruction of it self, and that such Acts as are under a constraint, are not
good and valid, whereof we have a fair example in the book of Statutes. 15 Ed.
3.


For whereas the King had granted certain Articles pretended to be granted in
the Form of a Statute, expressly contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and his own
Prerogative and Rights Royal (mark it, for this is just the case) which he had
yielded to eschew the dangers, which by denying of the same were like to follow
in the same Parliament, it was repealed in these following words; It seemed
good to the said Earls, Barons, and other wise men, that since the Statute did
not proceed of our Free Will, the same be void, and ought not to have the name
nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their Counsel and Assent we have
decreed the said Statute to be void, etc. Or if it should not be repealed in a
Formal Manner; yet is this Act however gotten, void in effect already by a
former Statute, in which it was enacted in full Parliament, and at the self
same place where this Act was gained, That the Great Charter by which and many
other Titles, the Bishops held their place in Parliament) should be kept in all
points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be held for none.
42 Ed. 3. c. 6. 1.


More Arguments than these against the Bishops Place and Vote in Parliament I
have no where found. And these being answered and refelled, I hope the point in
question has been fairly proved, viz. That the Bishops make a Fundamental and
Essential part of our English Parliaments.

AN ANSWER TO THE GENTLEMAN'S Letter to his Friend: SHOWING THAT BISHOPS MAY BE
JUDGES IN Causes Capital.

PSALM. 82. 1. Deus stat in Congregatione Dei: in medio Deorum judicat.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

AN ANSWER TO THE GENTLEMAN's Letter to his Firend: SHOWING THAT BISHOPS MAY BE
JUDGES IN CAUSES CAPITAL.
SIR,
I Thank you for the Gentleman's Letter you sent me, touching the Right of
Bishops sitting as Judges in Cases Capital. This Order of Men is not Sacred
enough, it seems, in the Constitution, to secure it against (the Iniquity of
these last Times) Attempts of Rage and Extirpation.

Not to mention Martin Mar-Prelates, nor others of former Times; within our own
Memory, Mr. Prynn led up the Van against them (1640.) in a Book of this Title,
viz. [Lord-Bishops, none of the Lords Bishops.] After their Divine or
Apostolical Constitution, they began to question their Right to Sit in
Parliament. This occasioned that Quodlibetical Question, [Whether the Bishops
make a Fundamental and Essential part of the English Parliament. The Rational
and Solid Answer to which Question was Printed in 1661; and now Reprinted (as
then put forth at first) for the Information of some, the Confirmation of
others, and the satisfaction of all.

The Gentleman who wrote this Letter, seems to grant the Bishops a large share
of Power within this Kingdom; yet as to Secular Matters, he does insinuate some
kind of Prohibition they are supposed to lie under, though his Arguments are
very inconsequent to prove it. The Rescript of Honorius (he says) and
Theodosius, and the Decree of Justinian forbid them to have to do in Secular
Matters? Therefore the Kings of England (who are of another Mind, upon good
experience of their judgment and fidelity) may not admit them to have any
Communion with Public Functions: Nor is the Argument less inconsequent, which
the Gentleman insinuates from the Apostles Declaration and Practice. The
Argument must be this, A few men are appointed by our Lord to propagate the
Gospel, and plant the Christian Church all the world over; and they think it
unreasonable they should neglect this generous Employment (imposed upon them
immediately from Heaven, to serve Tables, that is, to relieve the Temporal
Needs of indigent Disciples) therefore when the Church is generally
established, Bishops settled in every Diocese, and Ministers in every Parish, it
is equally unreasonable that the King should entrust any of the Clergy with any
Secular Employments.

But after these By-blows, this Gentleman tells us, This is none of his
business (which he had therefore done better to have let alone;) It Is the
Critical point he stands upon, which he calls Vexata Quaestio, what is to be
done in Parliament, that is, in their Judicial way upon Trials, not in their
Legislative Capacity, passing Acts of Attainder, in which the Gentleman is
pleased to confess [I know that Bishops have born a part; but (says he) that
is not now the Question, but only this, Whether the Lords Spiritual have a
Right to stay and sit in Court, till the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty,
or Not Guilty.] This Gentleman concludes, They ought not. But the Question
truly and precisely stated, is only this; Whether of Right they may or may not?
And having diligently examined what has been said on both sides (as the
Gentleman has advised me) I profess to differ from him, finding no sufficient
Reason to change my Opinion, which is for the Affirmative.

But the better to carry on his Negative, this Gentleman falls upon Two
Questions more, which may be thought preliminary to this other. The First is,
touching the Peerage of the Lords Spiritual: The Second, Whether they make a
Third Estate in Parliament? These two fall in collaterally, and must be
considered before we fall upon his main Battalia, mustered up for the Defense
of the Opinion we oppugn.

1. That the Bishops make a Third Estate in Parliament, there is very much
alleged in the Treatise forementioned (from the Examples of all Christian
Kingdoms of the Gothic Model, from Titus Livius, Sir Edward Cook, the
Parliament-Rolls of King Richard the Third, and the Recognition of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal with the Commons, 1 Eliz. 3. and 8. and what is argued
from thence, p. 16, 17. of the Rebels Plea, Printed 1660.) to which I shall add
that Mr. Sheppard in his Grand Abridgment, and the Word Parliament tells us,
That the Parliament in England is the Assembly of the King and the Three
Estates of the Realm, viz. the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the
Commons. And this Gentleman does acknowledge (p. 86) that the Subjects of
England are divided into Three Estates, The Nobility the Clergy, and the
Commonalty. These, he says, are the several Estates of the Kingdom. But if the
Bishops be not One of these Estates, then one of the Three Estates of the
Kingdom is not Represented at all in Parliament (for he says, (p. 88.) that
the Convocation where all the Clergy are present in their Persons, or their
Representatives, is no part of the Parliament,) which is absurd. The Authority
of Mr. Seldom to the contraay, is most consonant to Reason; and the Practice at
the Ratification of the Peace with the French King, 9 H. 5. and 11 H. 7. are
further Confirmations of it.

But this Gentleman says (p. 88.) The Three Estates of Parliament are clean
another thing; each must have a Negative Voice to all that passes there: I
might take notice by the By of his Mistake herein; for there is nothing passes
where use is made of the Negative Voice: but I must observe, that this is a
cleanly begging of the Question. As for the Bishops being intermingled with the
Earls and Barons, and so if they be an Estate, it is an Estate within an
Estate, like a Nest of Boxes, one within another, there is no absurdity at all
in it: for when Christianity had prevailed (not to recur to the time when all
the Members of Parliament sat in one House together) the Piety and Prudence of
those times thought the State of the Church (with all its Rights and Interest)
safe enough among the Nobility, without any peculiar Negative voice to secure
it; and yet the Bishops Right of Protesting (upon just occasion) serves very
well instead of such a Negative.

But this Gentleman thinks it would be a great Disparagement to the Peerage of
England, that Two Estates must be put together, to keep the Balance even with
the House of Commons, who are but One Estate; and that their Two should
signify no more than that One: (taking no notice how much more they signify,
though they do very much,) To this I answer in the general, That Numbers of
persons add no Right or Privilege to a Politic Estate: The Peerage of England
had the same Power and Dignity when they were not half so Numerous.

But to be more particular, Experience tells us (and we have an Instance too
fresh in memory) That neither the Bishops Protestation, nor the Temporal Lords
Negative Voice, nor the Kings Le Roy S'avisera, are sufficient to hold the
Balance even when the Commons depart from the Principles of Honor, Justice,
and Loyalty. And as they never pretended to be infallible, so have they not
always been observed to be so calm and steady in their Proceedings, as becomes
the Wisdom and Honor of so Grave and Solemn a Convention. In 50 E. 3. they
desired, that the Lord Latimer, the King's Chamberlain, (for pretended
Oppression) might lose all his Offices, and be no longer of the King's Council;
which the King granted; yet afterward 51 E. 3. at the Request of the Commons
themselves, he was restored to all, and declared innocent. This Gentleman was
so sensible of this their Prejudice and Rashness (attended with so much Levity)
that he could not pass it by, without setting some Remark upon it, p. 12.

But when Justice, Loyalty and Honor governs their Debates and Resolutions, we
may put the King, and (to use his own Illustration) all the Three Estates of
Parliament into the same Nest of Boxes, and yet their respective Interests
(which is the Interest of the whole Kingdom interwoven) will be secure, and
preserved inviolate.

But the Gentleman tells us further, That if the Bishops be one of the Three
Estates, nothing can pass in Parliament without them. This may be generally
true among States coordinate, without a Sovereign Head over them; and when a
Rival is set up, to give Check-mate to the Sovereign Authority, as it was in
the time of Hen. 8. mentioned by this Gentleman (at p. 92. when the Question
was [To whom the Supreme Jurisdiction did belong, to the King, or to the Pope?]
(In the time of such a Competition, the Crown is obliged to secure it self
against such an Usurpation, and does most justly abandon the Clergy that sides
with it.

But 2. If Acts have passed without the Bishops, they have likewise done so (as
by him is said) sometimes without the Commons. Egbert, who first united the
Seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, under the common Name of England, he caused to be
convened at London His Bishops and Peers of the highest Rank, to advise upon
some course against the Danish Pirates, (this was a Military Business, and
Bloodshed might have ensued upon the Stubbornness of those Pirates) who
infested the Seacoast of England. And King Ethelwolph in Parliament or
Assembly of his States, at Winchester, Anno 855. by the Advice These Great
Councils were the Parliaments of those Times, Let. p. 72.
and Counsel of the Bishops and Nobility, confirmed unto the Clergy the Tenth
Part of all men's Goods; and Ordered that the Tithe so confirmed unto them,
should be free from all Secular Services and Impositions. And Wingate in his
Abridgment, and the Word Parliament, tells us, out of the Mirror of Justices,
of an Act in Aelfred's Time, That Parliaments should be held twice a year, and
oftener if need required. But (note, says he) This was by the King and Lords
only. And I believe we may observe the like practice among some of this
Gentleman's Precedents.

But it is much more satisfactory, when the Laws are Enacted by the Sovereign
Authority, at the Request of the Commons, with the consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal; that is, by the King, with the joint Assent of the
Three Estates of Parliament; let us not therefore dissolve or drive them away
when we have them.

That which is alleged out of Bishop Jewel and Crompton, I refer you to the
Answer of the Quodlibetical Question for your p. 93. to 98.
satisfaction.

That King James was of this Judgment, is evident from the very Words and
Speech produced by this Gentleman to the contrary. The Parliament (says he) is
composed of a Head and a Body; The Head is the King, the Body are the Members
of the Parliament: This Body again is subdivided into two parts; the Upper and
the Lower House; the Upper House compounded partly of Nobility, Temporal men,
who are Hereditable Counselors to the High Court of Parliament, by the Honor
of their Creation and Lands; and partly of Bishops, Spiritual men, who are
likewise by virtue of their Place and Dignity, Counselors ad vitam,
Life-Renters of this Court. The other House is composed of Knights for the
Shires, and Gentry and Burgesses for the Towns.] Here we see, though the King
makes but Two Houses, yet he does clearly distinguish them into Three Estates,
though he does not call them so.

To what is said by Stephen Gardener and Finch, I oppose the Testimonies of
Livy, Seldom, Cook and Sheppard: To the Expressions of the Late King of B.
Memory, in his Answer to the 19 Propos. (when he was fluctuating in the midst
of a Storm gathering round about him,) and to the Declaration of the Commons, 2
H. 4. n. 32. I might Answer, That the Upper House, in a large sense (consisting
of Lords Spiritual and Temporal sitting and voting together) may be taken for
One Estate: But taken precisely, and in a strict sense, as their Concerns and
Interests are distinct, so they are clearly Two. But to those Authorities, I
shall rather oppose the Act of Recognition, 1 Eliz. 3. Where the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament Assembled, do
Recognize the Queens Majesty to be their true, lawful, and undoubted Sovereign
Lieged Lady and Queen in these words, [We Your most Faithful, Loving, and
Obedient Subjects, representing the Three Estates of this Realm] which
evidently shows the Queen was not (there) esteemed one. So when the Funerals
of Hen. 5. were ended, the Three Estates did Assemble and Acknowledge his Son
King. To think to elude such Evidence, by saying (as this Gentleman does in the
like case) that such Expressions are delivered obiter, upon the By, is to make,
what we fancy not, in any Statute, utterly void, and of none effect.

The next Question concerns the Bishops Peerage; For the Affirmative, we have
these things to say,

1. That the Prelates are called by the same Writ (for Form and Manner) with
that directed to the Temporal Barons: so the Answer to the Quodlibetical
Question: That they Sit and Vote there by a double capacity; as Bishops first,
in reference to their several Sees; and secondly, as Peers, in respect of their
Baronies. Hereupon they affirm to the Lords Temporal in Parliament holden at
Northampton Hen. 2. as Seldom reports, We sit not here as Bishops only, but as
Barons; we are Barons, and you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. And some
Statutes call them Peers of the Land in terminis.

2. It Is his Grace of Canterbury's Title, Primus Par Angliae. That the first
Peer should be no Peer, is an unheard of Solecism. If he be a Peer, the rest of
the Bishops are his Com-peers, what ever they are to the Lords Temporal. John
Stratford Archbishop of that place, in the time of Ed. 3, claimed this
Privilege in the Right of his See. And the Protestat. of W. Courtney,
elsewhere mentioned, with the rest of the Bishops, is another pregnant Evidence
to this purpose. And 25 Edw. 3. The Prelates put up this Petition to the King
(as the Gentleman himself relates it, p. 83.) Seeing Archbishops and Bishops
hold their Temporalties of the King in capite, and therefore are Peers of the
Land as other Earls and Barons are, that you will be pleased to grant unto
them, that no Judge may henceforward, for mere contempts, cause their
Temporalties to be seized. Here we have a Prayer, that their Temporalties may
not be seized, and the Reason of it; because they are Peers, as Earls and
Barons are. The King grants their Petition, and allows the Reason. The King
cannot err in Titles; his Allowance therefore is a sufficient confirmation of
their Peerage. And this Gentleman, p. 93, etc. when he argues against their
being a third Estate, he tells us, William the first erected the temporalties
of Bishops into Baronies, to hold in capite; and upon account of those
Baronies, both the Temporal Lords and Spiritual had of right place in
Parliament, and were bound to serve him there. They were all Foedal Barons, all
holding by one tenure, and by that tenure sitting in Parliament. And a little
after he says, They are still qualified to be Members of Parliament, as
before, a Baron sat as a Baron, an Earl as an Earl. Being made by Patent, or
by Writ, or by holding such a proportion of Land, alters not the Case as to
their sitting in Parliament; for it is being of such a degree which makes them
Peers of Parliament.] One would think this is clear enough for the Bishops
Peerage. But besides, either the Bishops sit in Parliament as Peers, or as
Commoners: if as Commoners, then his own Argument, p. 90. will be returned upon
him; Would it be for the Honor of the House of Lord, that Commoners must be
put to them, to keep the Balance even with the House of Commons? And most
clearly it would be a Disparagement to the Peerage of the Kingdom, the Temporal
Lords, and would make them to be a poor Estate, that a number of Commoners must
be joined to them, to make up their Negative Voice, and set them upon even
ground with the House of Commons. But the truth is, the Bishops Sit and Vote in
Parliament (as we said before) by a double capacity; as Bishops, first, in
reference to their several Sees; and secondly, as Peers, in regard of their
Baronies. All the Lords are equal in respect of their Peerage, and so they make
up but one House; but they are distinguished by their Nobility and Spirituality
respectively, and so they make up two Estates distinct and different.

But to prove that they are no Peers, this Gentleman fetches Page 85. Cap. 14,
and 29.
an Argument from Magna Charta it self, I know it says, Every man that is
tried at the King's Suit, must be tried by his Peers, whether he be Amerced, or
Imprisoned, or Disseised, or Outlawed, etc. it must be by his Peers. But this
Argument makes clear against him; for he himself informs us, p. 11, 12. that
the Lord Latimer, who was the King's Chamberlain, for Oppression in several
places in Britain, and in England, was by the Bishops and Lords adjudged to be
imprisoned, and put to Fine and Ransom; and the Lord John Nevil, a Privy
Counselor, for buying some Debts due by the King, at easy Rates, to make
advantage to himself: He mentions some others, and concludes, At all these
Trials the Bishops were present, and no body says but they might: which makes
it evident (if the Law of Magna Charta were observed) that the Bishops sat as
Peers in giving Judgment upon those Culprit-Lords.

But for all this, the Gentleman has a very strong Objection out of Magna
Charta against the Bishops Peerage; and it is this, If any Bishop be tried for
any Capital Offense, he is tried by Ibid. 85.
the Commoners, and that is the Common Law and Practice of the Land; then
(says he) must Commoners be his Peers, and he and Commoners must be Pares. A
Temporal Lord, Duke, Earl p. 86.
or Baron cannot be Judge in the case of a Bishop, (out of Parliament) nor can
any Bishop be their Judge, how then can they be said to be Pares, Fellow-Peers?
For my part (says he) I see not. But I will undertake to read the Riddle to
him: the King may restrain his Favors, and limit his Grants as himself
pleases: the Dignities and Privileges of the Lords Spiritual are not
Hereditary like those of the Lords Temporal, but only Personal, and conferred
upon them in regard of their Holy Function. Hereupon, when they are impeached
for any heinous Crime, which is supposed to desecrate their persons, they are
interpretatively (though not formally) degraded Privilegium personale
amittitur, extincta persona cui id concessum est. And such persons are reputed
dead in Law.
, and by a Fiction of Law (not unusual) dead in that capacity, divested of
their Peerage with their Spiritualities, and so (being in the sense of the Law
reduced to that condition) they come to be tried as Commoners. And thus much
for the Bishops Peerage.

3. For their Right to Sit as Judges in Cases Capital, as this Gentleman says,
p. 3. It deserves a strict enquiry, and we should do well to consider upon what
ground the Prelates were prohibited having Votes in Cases of Blood. Such a
Prohibition indeed is extant; but it is Authentical only in the Canon Law, as
we shall evince anon: but this Law is Popish, grounded upon Principles of
Superstition, Usurpation, and Papal Tyranny; and is very irrational and
uncharitable, according to the usual practice of it. This I doubt not to make
appear to the unprejudiced and impartial Reader.

In the Interim, I think to remove a great mistake of this Gentleman, who tells
us, that Mat. Paris a Monk, one that would not be partial for the Lords
Temporal in relating matters, to give them Let. p. 73.
more power in Judicature, and less to the Lords Spiritual, than of right
belonged to each, and looking upon this exclusion of the Prelates from the
power of Judging in such cases, to be some diminution of their Omnipotency,
which they were so ambitious of, he therefore ranks it amongst the
Consuetudines iniquas, the wicked Customs of the former times. I say, herein
the Gentleman has committed a great mistake. It Is true, their presence in
Parliaments, at such Debates was debarred, and the restraint was put upon them
by this Law, and none else: but so far were the Clergy of those times from
ranking this Canon-Laws amongst those wicked Customs, that indeed they had it
in too high a veneration; and this the Gentleman himself observes in diverse
places of his Letters, averring it to be that Law, to which only the Clergy of
those times would be subject, conceiving themselves above, and not bound by any
other. p. 68. And some Laws before that, p. 22. He confesses, The Canon Law
was to them above all Laws, and what was forbidden by that Law, they could not
have a thought that it could in any sort be Lawful for them to challenge, as
their right upon any account. This Gentleman knew, they did look upon it as
sacred: They appeal to it, and plead it for their exemption; and this he sets
down with his own Hand (at p. 20.) in these words: Quia in praesenti
Parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis alicui eorum
juxta sacrorum Canonum instituta, quomodo libet personaliter interesse: Because
in this present Parliament some things are to be transacted, at which it is not
lawful for us, by the Decrees of the Holy Canons to be personally present: This
is the ground and reason of their protestation. The wicked Customs therefore
which that Monk inveighs against, and which cost Becket so severe a Penance,
must be sought for elsewhere, amongst the rest of those Sixteen Constitutions
of Clarendon.

But whatever Opinion the Clergy of those times had of this Canon, I doubt not
to make it evident that it is grounded upon Principles of Superstition, for as
the Reverend Davenant has Determ. 11.
it, Quid impium, quid illicitum? What is in it that is impious, What that is
unlawful, What that is contrary to the Office or Sacredness of a Priest where
there is a just authority for it, to bridle and restrain such as are
notoriously wicked, and disturbers of the Christian Commonwealth, by civil
penalties, and corporal inflictions? The Angels of Heaven think it no way
disagreeable, at Gods command, to inflict corporal punishments upon the wicked.
And why should the Angels of the Church at the appointment of the King, who is
Gods Image upon Earth, think it unlawful to adjudge the same wicked persons to
deserve punishment? The Act and Exercise of civil Jurisdiction of its own
nature is not disagreeable to the most holy person, nor any way opposite to the
Sacerdotal Function. We have the Authority of God himself in the practice of
his most Ancient Church, to justify this Jurisdiction. Under the Law God
himself joined it to the Sacerdotal Office; it is not strange therefore, nor
forbidden by Divine Law, that the Priest should obtain a Civil Jurisdiction. We
find it exemplified in Eli and Samuel, and See Numb. 25. 7, 13.
the Maccabees, and all that were invested with the Office of High Priest. This
could not be expected amongst the Apostles, because then the Civil Magistrates
were not Christians; yet S. Peter had once a supply of Civil Authority by a
Miracle; and to show that it was not unlawful for an Apostle to give Sentence
in Cases Capital, He pronounced Saphira's Doom for Sacrilege and Lying, Acts
5. 9. Behold the feet of them which buried thy Husband, are at the Door, and
shall carry thee out. But these New Masters of Israel were afraid a Sentence of
Justice should defile them with the Blood of a Malefactor; like the Priests and
Elders among the Jews, John 18. 28. when they had bought and sold the Life of
our Blessed Lord, and used all the Tricks that Craft and Malice could suborn to
destroy him; so precise they were for all that, they would not go into Pilates
Judgment Hall, least they should be defiled and unfit to eat the Passover.
'Twas the Superstition of those Men, to think they could render the Priests
Office more Sacred, and put more veneration upon his person, then Gods own
Institution had done. They would not have him interess or concern himself in a
Case of Blood; least it should desecrate and unhallow his Person, and stain his
Function. But we know that all Virtue is Ornamental; and it is as well an Act of
Justice, to condemn the Guilty, as to acquit the Innocent.

2. Here is Usurpation in this Canon, and it is flatly against the King's
Supremacy. By this means a Foreign Power restrains the Sovereign Authority of
the Kingdom from commanding the Service, or making use of the Duty of his
Subjects in such Cases. The Force of this Canon divided the Prelates of those
times between the Prince and the Pope; either they did not understand, or they
did wilfully neglect their Duty; and some Instances of the mischievous effects
hereof this Gentleman gives us in his Letter. He tells us, p. 7, 8. 5 E. 3. The
Parliament was declared to be called for the redress of the Breach of the Laws,
and of the Peace of the Kingdom. And because the Prelates were of opinion, that
it belonged not properly to them to give counsel about keeping the Peace, nor
punishing such Evils, they went away by themselves, and they returned no more.
Nor did their Disobedience stop here; but the Gentleman tells us further, at p.
96. That 20 R. 2. the Bishops upon occasion of the Statute of Provisors, enter
a Protestation against whatsoever should be done in derogation or restriction
of the Power of their Holy Father the Pope, saying, they were sworn to his
Holiness, and to the Court of Rome. These, and the like Insolences were the
Fruits of those Immunities which the Prelates of those times received by the
Decrees of those Holy Canons.

And as this Canon was grounded upon Superstition, and did confront the Kings
Supremacy, so the Practice of it (in those times) was irrational and
uncharitable.

First Irrational; for, 1. Why were the Prelates debarred the liberty of
sitting Judges in such Cases? Was it because they wanted Knowledge, Reason, or
Discretion? I suppose not: If it were not because they had too little, but too
much of these Qualifications: That was Irrational.

2. That the Prelates have been, and may be Judges of Misdemeanors, this
Gentleman does grant, at p. 18. But there may be an Impeachment for sundry
Offenses under the name of Treason, which really, according to the Rule of Law,
are no more than Misdemeanors. Why may not the Bishops sit as Judges in such
Cases? Must the Culprit be delivered up to Justice upon such Impeachments,
without any further Trial or Examination, what will it amount unto? This would
be a kind of Hallifax-Law; and that is Irrational.

3. In the Case of Sir John Oldcastle, this Gentleman tells us, Page 38, 39.
The Popish Bishops did excommunicate and condemn him for an Heretic, and so
turned him over to the Secular Judgment (for execution) yet certainly (says
this Gentlem. p. 39.) those good men, I mean those Popish Bishops would have no
more to do with him, as to his further Execution, that the World might see they
were not men of Blood. So that it is pretended at least, that this Holy Canon
(as they call it) was designed for Caution, that the Prelates might have no
hand in Blood; and yet the practice is so irrational, it does not sufficiently
prevent it. For in their Legislative capacity, this Gentleman grants, p. 3.
that they may Sit, and Vote, and pass Bills of Attainder He says p. 51 the E.
of Straffords Trial was completed that way.
. And, p. 104. Acts of Attainder are Laws, and every Freeman is supposed to
give his consent to every Law, either by his Representative, or in person, if a
Member of Parliament; and Bishops being Members, may, I think (says he) claim
to do it personally. And though there be a great stir about such things as are
preliminary, and preparatory to Condemnation, yet the Constitutions of
Clarendon enjoined them Let. p. 71.
to attend the Court quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum, vel ad
Mortem; till it comes to loss of Life or Member (which the Lawyers understand
to be the Sentence of Guilty or Not Guilty.) Now I would fain be resolved,
whether these proceedings be not in agitatione causae sanguims? whether
accoording p. 1.
to this practice a Case of Blood be not all the while in agitation? And then
reflecting upon the Gentleman's Rule in Logic, Causa causae est causa causati,
and upon the Story of Chaucer's Friar, let the Reader please to peruse p. 64,
65, 66, of the Letter, and then judge whether the practice be not, (as I said)
Irrational. And then,

Secondly, This practice of those Popish times was uncharitable; for if the
Bishops were debarred sitting as Judges in such Cases Capital, out of a
suspicion of their Integrity, it was uncharitable to the Bishops; if out of a
jealousy they might be too soft and yielding in their clemency, it were
uncharitable to the Delinquent; if out of fear they might be too severe in
point of Justice, it is uncharitable to the Commonwealth; for Discretion ought
to take her Rules from Charity, when Pity, and when Severity are to be used for
the advantage of the Public. Sometimes Justice may be provoked into Severity,
and when Impeachments are preferred with rigor, it is possible the Prudence and
Piety of such grave and holy persons intervening, a rash and unadvisable
Sentence may be stopped and prevent a Deluge of Mischiefs, which might otherwise
ensue. See the Case, p. 26, 27, 28. of the Letter.
Had the Bishops been present at Haxeye's Trial, they might as well have
prevented his Condemnation, as obtained his Pardon.

The Canon Law then gave the first rise and beginning to this Usage (as this
Gentleman seems to acknowledge, p. 68.) But the Ground of that Canon was
Superstition, and it did confront the Kings Supremacy, and was irrational and
uncharitable in the practice of it: Let us therefore examine what Force it had,
and by what Authority. That this was in use while the Pope had a concurrent
Jurisdiction here, cannot be denied; but whether ever it received a Civil
Sanction, and an express Ratification, and had the stamp of
Parliament-Authority set upon it, is the matter now in question. And this I do
steadfastly deny, and the Gentleman as earnestly affirm and contend for.

To prove this, he does allege a double confirmation, and to give it the more
Credit, he carries it up as high as the days of Edward the Confessor. But I
desire the Reader to observe, that in the management of his Evidence, he turns
an Indulgence into a Prohibition; a Privilege into a complete Act of
Parliament; and a Protestation into a Statute.

He does allege the Year-Book of 10 E. 4. Term. Pasch. n. 35. Let. p. 78.
Where we have set down the manner of their Trials in Parliament; [When a Lord
is indicted, etc. he shall plead Not Guilty, and this shall be tried by his
Peers; and then the Lords Spiritual, who may not consent to the Death of any
man, shall make their Proctor, etc. This (says he) I allege, to show that
even by the Law of the Land, the Bishops cannot be Judges in a Case Capital.]
Here the Gentleman says, Their making a Proctor, was Error Temporis; the Error
of those Times. Why? Because that practice was not for his purpose. But, if, by
the Law of the Land, he means the Statute Law (as he seems to do) I must have a
Writ of Error, to reverse his Judgment. For the Pope having then a concurrent
Jurisdiction here in England, the Canon Law was in force amongst them; and in
declaring that the Lords Spiritual might not consent to the Death of any man,
they have respect to the Prohibition of the Canon Law, but this is not any the
least confirmation of it.

But this Gentleman will needs have it confirmed by a Civil Sanction, and so
become the Law of the Kingdom.

The first Confirmation, he says, was about the time of 10 H. p. 69, etc.
2. amongst the sixteen Constitutions of Clarendon, which (besides the
Authority of Parliament (to make the Observation of them the more inviolable)
were established by the Solemnity p. 72.
of an Oath, which is the greatest Obligation that Mankind is capable of,
making even God a Party to it, to see it obeyed, and punish the Transgressors.
Here is a fair Plea for a solemn Confirmation, if the Gentleman were not
partial or mistaken in the Business. But the Case was this, upon the account of
their Immunities, the Prelates especially grew very remiss and careless of
their Duties (as was noted formerly.) Hereupon, in that Great Council (which
was then their Parliament) amongst the rest, the King made this, (the 11th. of
those Constitutions,) The Archbishops, Bishops, and universae personae Regni,
p. 71.
(not all the Dignified Clergy of the Land, as this Gentleman renders it, but)
all persons whatsoever, who have a Tenure in capite, shall hold their
possessions from the King as a Barony, and shall answer for their Estates unto
the Kings Justices and Ministers, and shall observe and obey all the Kings
Laws; and together with other Barons they are to be present in all Judgments in
the Kings Courts. [This is the Duty they are obliged and solemnly sworn to; and
then follows an Indulgence or Priviledge] till the Sentence comes to the loss
of Life or Member; and here they are left to their Liberty to observe the
Decree of the Holy Canon. Hereupon we may p. 73.
build our Faith, that there was really such an Usage (as this Gentleman
infers) in ancient times, and that a liberty was left to continue it (according
to the Canon, and in veneration of it) but that 'twas ratified and confirmed,
we have not one Syllable to prove it.

The Second Confirmation this Gentleman finds, was in 11 R. p. 18, etc. 71, etc.
2. upon the Protestation of the Archbishop, for himself and the other Bishops.
And here (after some fluctuation and unsteadiness,) p. 75. to make it a Law, he
tells us, The subject matter enacted did consist of two Particulars; the one,
That the Prelates had a Right to sit and vote in all other Businesses; the
other, That they had no Right, nor was it lawful for them to be present in
Parliament, when such Businesses were in question: But the Tenor of their
Protestation is, That they intend to be present, to consult, to treat of, and
to determine, in omnibus, in all things, saving their Rights, their State and
Dignity. But because some things were to be transacted in that Parliament, at
which, by the Decrees of the Sacred Canons, it was not lawful for them to be
personally present, therefore they protested, that while such things were in
agitation, they would absent themselves. Which Protestation, being read in Full
Parliament, at the instance and prayer of the Archbishop and other Prelates,
was entered upon the Parliament-Roll, by the Kings Command, with the Assent of
the Lords Temporal and Commons. This, the Gentleman will needs contend to be a
Law of Parliament, (or a Law of the Land.) Why? Because it was entered in the
Roll or Journal Book, that such a thing was agreed upon by the King and Two
Houses; Which (says he) was all the Formality of passing Laws in Parliament,
in p. 23.
those times. But what was it that the Bishops petitioned might be entered upon
the Parliament-Roll? Was it the Decree of the Sacred Canons, which debarred
their presence in the House at such Debates? That indeed had been somewhat to
the purpose: but here was no such matter desired; it was their Protestation:
and if every thing that is entered upon the Parliament-Roll by the Agreement of
the King and the Two Houses, becomes an Act of Parliament forthwith, then let
this Protestation, for the present, pass for an Act of Parliament; and we shall
see anon what it will amount to.

In the Interim let us return to the Constitutions of Clarendon, where there
seems to be most color for such a Confirmation. There we may observe Two
things in that 11th. Constitution, a Duty enjoined, the Prelates attendance at
the Kings Courts; and then a Liberty or Privilege indulged; That they may
withdraw and forbear that attendance, when it comes to sentence for loss of
Life or Member. That this is a Privilege or a Liberty, cannot be denied. Mat.
Paris reckons it inter Libertates, amongst the Ancient Liberties Let. p. 71.
; and this Gentleman could not choose but observe it, (though it was not for his
purpose to distinguish this Privilege from the Injunction) One would think
(says he) they (the Bishops) might look upon (it) as a Right and Privilege,
to be exempt from being obliged to attend in such Cases, Cases of Blood. If a
Privilege, then I may use or I may forbear it. To say, I may do such a thing,
therefore I shall do it, is irrational; ill Logic, and worse Polity.
Privileges, say the Lawyers, are Franchises and Liberties, or Immunities
granted to a Person, an Office, or a Corporation. Such as have them, may either
enjoy or refuse them. It is the Privilege of Attorneys and Clerks in they
Kings Bench, they cannot be pressed for Soldiers, they cannot be compelled to
bear Offices in their Parishes; yet Volunteers they may be in both Cases. No
man should be compelled to use his Privilege; for then his Franchise would be
no Liberty, but the more inthrall him. We may observe accordingly, that the
Prelates very well understood this their Liberty; for sometimes they would use
their Privilege, absent themselves, when Cases Capital were upon Trial, and
withdraw, when Matters of Blood were in agitation; and this is obvious to every
eye in the perusal of the Gentleman's Letters. But many times (which is very
considerable in the Case) when they did withdraw, they either made a Proxy to
represent them, or entered their Protestation to preserve their Rights. It Is
true, the Gentleman does except against their way of Proxy's, as
Unparliamentary; and three or four Exceptions he has, which are sufficient to
elude any Testimony: For either it is Error Temporis, an Error of those times;
or spoken obiter, upon the By, and of no importance; or it is unparliamentary
and extravagant, or else Repealed: Such a provision of Evasions as may serve to
help a man out of the Noose of any Argument that can be produced in Matters of
this Nature.

For the Protestation, he would elude the force of that, by saying, Their
Salvo, that which they would ensure to themselves, p. 21.
is their Right of sitting to consult, treat of, and determine in that, and all
other Parliaments, when Capital Cases are not in question: but there was no
need of a Protestation to this effect: This was their Duty, to which the
Clarendon Constitution, and a Solemn Oath obliged them. When men protest a
Right, it is not to be understood of that Right which no man doubts of, and
therefore is not liable to question; but of that Right which they give some
color to be questioned, because they decline and forbear the use and practice
of it: This was a Right to debate, vote and sit as Judges in Cases Capital, if
possibly the Decree of that Canon should come to be null (as now it is) or
altered.

I must not forget to tell you of two Rules observable about such Privileges
as are granted to Subjects by the King, as this of the Clarendon Constitution
was to the Prelates. The first is, That they are not to be understood to debar
the Kings Commands, nor ought to be a Supersedeas to his Sovereign Authority,
for this were a derogation to his Royal Office, a diminution to his Crown and
Dignity; not to be granted by him upon any pretense whatsoever. By the
Constitutions of Clarendon, the King did exempt the Bishops from attending his
Court of Parliament at such Trials in Capital Cases in general; but he did not
absolve them from their Duty and Obedience to his own special commands, upon
any just occasion. Hereupon in the 11th. Hen. 2. Archbishop Becket, in a Solemn
Council at Northampton, being accused of Treason, and other Misdemeanors, where
Bishops were his Judges, as well as Temporal Lords; when those Lords and
Bishops could not agree about pronouncing the Judgment, they putting it off
from one to the other; at last the King commanded the Bishop of Winchester to
do it. This happened soon after the Ratification of the Clarendon Constitutions,
which all the Lords and Bishops had taken their corporal Oath to observe for
ever: And it is not to be imagined they could forget what had been so lately
done amongst them; wherefore we must conclude that they did not take themselves
to be obliged either by that Oath or Constitution, to absent themselves always
from such Trials; for though the Constitution says, Debent interesse judiciis
curiae Regis, sicut caeteri Barons; That they ought, as well as other Barons,
to attend all the Judgments of the Kings Court; quousque perveniatur ad
diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem; till the Matter comes to Sentence, for
the loss of Life or Member.

Yet (whatsoever William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the
Bishops had said in their Protestation, 11 R. 2.) The Constitution of Clarendon
does not say, Debent se absentare, that the Bishops ought to withdraw and
absent themselves from such Sentence. This Gentleman endeavors to invalidate
this so pregnant p. 60, 61.
an Evidence, because it is taken out of a Manuscript made by the Monk
Stephanides; and none of the Ancient Historians of those times say any thing of
Becket's being accused for Treason. But I must tell you, it is not the Print
that adds Truth or Authority to any Writing; and I shall trust Mr. Selden's
Judgment, rather than this Gentleman's Conjectures: Besides, A Negative Argument
from Authority is of no force; for why do we read variety of Historians upon
the same Subject; but because we suppose what one fails in for want of Memory
or Information, another may supply by a better Diligence and Enquiry.

The Second Rule observable in matters of Privilege, is this, Privilegia omnia
sine prejudicio Tertii concedenda and concessa intelligenda sunt; We must
understand all privileges that are granted, to be granted without any
prejudice to any third person. Now this Gentleman quotes Brompton's Chronicle,
reciting among p. 108.
the Laws of King Athelstan, this concerning Bishops; Debent Episcopi cum
seculi Judicibus interesse Judiciis, ne permittant, si possint, ut aliqua
pravitatum germina pullulaverint; The Bishops ought to be present in Judgments
with the Secular Judges, not to suffer any Buds of wickedness to sprout up if
they can hinder it. And does not the Law of God oblige such as are in
Authority, to use their Power as well to rescue the oppressed, as to punish
evil doers? Let us consult the wise man, Prove. 24. 11, 12. If thou forbear to
deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain;
if thou say, Behold we knew it not; does not he that pondereth the Heart
consider it? and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he know it? and shall not
he render to every man according to his works? This, says the Author of the
Synopsis, concerns especially such as are in Authority: And (as Dr. Tho.
Cartwright comments upon the place) Quamvis periculum certum non sit, si tamen
suspitio aliqua mortis imminentis justa subsit, non est cunctandum, donec morti
quis adjudicatus fuerit; facilior enim est Liberatio, dum exitus adhuc dubious
est, quam cum lata est Mortis sententia: And I must not omit what the same
Author says a little after; Quemadmodum autem insontes, si possis, non
liberare; sic maleficorum, quantum in te est supplicium non promovere, atrox
flagitium est: and for this, the said Cartwright quotes the same Solomon, Prove.
17. 15. This is a matter of so great importance, every man who has a Right and
Power of Judicature, ought especially to consider it. And if this Gentleman be
as sincere in his Profession toward the Bishops (which I have no reason to
question) as he is just and modest in saying, that he does not envy them their
Honor. I hope he will be so ingenuous also, as not to deny the King their
faithful counsel, nor the Country their pious Aid and Service.

For the Body of his Epistle, it consists of Record and Precedents, which most
men want means and opportunity to examine This Task therefore is fallen into a
more able hand.
, and very many skill to construe and comment on: This is the Evidence which
this Gentleman does produce, and that it may be the better understood, I shall
lay down some undoubted Principles, Rules and Observations, that the Reader may
the better judge of it. And I shall observe,

1. The Lords Spiritual, being Barons, Peers, and Great men, they are many
times comprehended under these Titles, when they are not styled by their proper
and distinctive Names of Bishops or Prelates. I shall need to instance in no
more than that of Magnates, Great men. In the Reign of Edrid (948) we read
thus, In Festo Nativitatis B. Mariae, cum universi Magnates Here Archbishops
and Bishops are Magnates as well as others.
Regni per Regium edictum summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi, and Episcopi, quam
caeteri totius Regni Proceres, and Optimates Londini, etc.

2. A Negative Argument from Authority is of no validity, v. g. Such a Writer
does not report such a thing; therefore there was no such Matter: this does not
follow.

3. The practice of Ancient times, in the case before us, was very variable:
For they were under the Popes Jurisdiction, who kept the Canon Law in force;
and among the rest, this Canon touching the Bishops Recess from all Trials in
Cases capital.

In obedience to which Canon they did, for the most part, absent themselves.
But when H. 2. by the Constitution of Clarendon enjoined all Prelates, as well
as other Barons, to attend his Courts, he granted them withal a Liberty or
Privilege to absent themselves (if they should think good) from Trials of that
nature: Hereupon they did sometimes use their Privilege, and absented
themselves; sometimes they did refuse their Privilege, and sat as Judges.

4. We may observe how the Matter was carried, running through all the Trials
upon Record, as this Gentleman gives account of them With what care and
fidelity is left to others to examine and make report.
, and in his Method.

1. The first is 4 E. 3. in Mortimers Case; where we have Earls, Barons, the
Peers; afterward, Earls, Barons and Peers: the Bishops may be comprehended
under either Title of Barons or Peers; for they were both.

5 E. 3. The Bishops would not understand their Duty at all: they would neither
keep the peace, nor punish a Battery. This was a stupid Neglect; but signifies
nothing to the deciding of the Controversy.

3. 25 E. 3. The Bishops may be comprehended under the Name of Grantz,
Magnates, the Great men.

4. 42 E. 3. Here the Bishops were present by their title of Prelates.

5. 50 E. 3. The Bishops were present at these Trials, yet two of the De
linquents were Lords.

6. 1 R. 2. They were, and they were not present; the Case is doubtful.

7. 3 R. 2. If the Bishops were not present, it is confessed they might have been;
for what was done, was done by the Legislative Power, and in that capacity to
pass Bills of Attainder, the Gentleman grants they have a Right.

8. 4 R. 2. If the Bishops be Peers of the Realm, and Lords of Parliament, they
might be comprehended there. To say they are always expressed by the Name of
Prelates, is to beg the Question.

9. 7 R. 3. It seems the Lords Spiritual were absent.

10. 10 R. 2. Here the Bishops were present, and judged of Misdemeanors, which
(for ought we know) upon Trial, might have amounted to Merit of Death.

11, 11 R. 2. The Bishops were virtually present by their Protestation.

12. 20 R. 2. Thomas Haxey Clerk (whether he was a Member of the House may be a
question) but his fault (however aggravated) seems to be but a Misdemeanor, at
the Trial whereof, the Bishops had right undoubtedly to be present; whether
they were present, seems doubtful: but it is most certain it had been more safe
and charitable to prevent the Condemnation, than to run the hazard of an
After-Game, when he was condemned, to seek his Pardon.

13. 21 R. 2. In this Parliament, the Bishops were present by their
Representative, by Proxy, and that three several times, upon three several
Occasions.

14. 1 H. 4. Here they were present, but gave no Judgment.

15. 2 H. 4. It does not appear that the Bishops were present.

16. 5 H. 4. The Bishops may be comprehended under the title of Peers, and the
Matter being found but a Trespass, their right of Sitting, the Gentleman cannot
deny them.

17. 7 H. 4. Here the King commanded the Advice only of the Lords Temporal,
which was a special Case.

18. 5 H. 5. Here the Bishops had declared Sr. John Oldcastle Heretic, and
delivered the Prisoner over to the Secular Power; and yet in the Sentence, they
may be comprised under the Title of The most wise Lords of this present
Parliament.

19. 2 H. 6. It is not certain the Bishops did Vote.

20. 28 H. 6. The two Archibishops and 13 Bishops were present, did Debate and
Vote in the Case.

21. 31 H. 6. The Bishops doubtless (as well as in the 28) were present, being
Peers of the Realm, as I have proved.

22. 38 H. 6. The Commons did accuse; the King answered, He would be advised;
and so the Matter ended.

Here we have 22 Precedents cited by this Gentleman, from the time of Clarendon
Constitutions to the Trial of the E. of Strafford; whereof one is a special
Case; three are insignificant and null, in regard there was either nothing at
all done, or a stupid neglect of their Right, or a careless throwing off of all
Duty. Four are doubtful; Ten are for their presence at such Trials, either in
person under the Names and Titles of Bishops, Prelates, Peers, Great men, or
Lords of Parliament; or present virtually, by their Proxies, or their
Protestations; so that there are but four of all the 22, for their not
appearing, or not voting at such Trials.

5. For a Supersedeas to all further enquiry or dispute about this matter, we
must take notice that the Canon which required the Bishops to withdraw at all
Trials in Cases Capital, is abolished, and the Lords Spiritual are under no
obligation to observe it. To say the Civil Sanction does still enforce it, is
absurd; for what is that Civil Sanction but an Act of Parliament? and if an Act
of Parliament has abolisht it, it has likewise abolisht all other Acts, which
might seem to ratify and confirm it; otherwise it should be abolisht, and not
abolisht, taken away, and yet in force still; which are Contradictions, and
absurd.

The Gentleman takes notice of this to be the Bishops Plea, (p. 67, 68.) That
it is only by the Canon Law that this restraint is upon them, and that the
forbearance of their Predecessors being Papists, and so subject to that Law,
was only in that respect; which Law being of no force at present, and taken
away by Act of Parliament, they are now at liberty, though in Modesty they
think fit sometimes to withdraw, but have a Right to continue sitting if they
please.

What does the Gentleman answer to this? He says, I do not deny but the Canon
Law might give the first rise to such an Usage; but it came afterward to
receive a civil Sanction, the stamp of Parliament-Authority, and several
confirmations, ibid. But I have evinced already that his Allegations do not
prove what he pretends to undertake; and the practice of the Bishops
withdrawing at such Trials, having no other bottom to rely on than the Canon
Law, That being absolutely dissolved and broken by Act of Parliament, cannot
now support it.

6. And lastly, Seeing there is no other Authority to continue and inure this
practice but that Popish Canon, I should think it a very dangerous thing (if
the King should be severe) for any person to attempt it; for upon the Clergies
submission to the King 25 H. 8. 19. the Statute says thus, [Be it therefore
now enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, according to the said
submission and petition of the said Clergy, that they nor any of them, from
henceforth shall presume to attempt, allege, claim or put in ure any
Constitutions or Ordinances, Provincials or Synodals, or any other Canons,
unless the same Clergy may have the Kings most Royal Assent and License -- upon
pain of every one of the same Clergy, doing contrary to this Act, and being
thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment, and make fine at the Kings Will.

After those Precedents abovementioned, the next the Gentleman meets with, was
the Earl of Straffords, whose Trial in Parliament was completed in a Judicial
way; but he was attainted and condemned by the Legislative Power, where this
Gentleman does acknowledge a Right in the Bishops to be present. Why they did
then withdraw themselves, such as were not Eyewitnesses or Observers of those
times, may best learn from Mr. Hobbes his History of them.

To conclude, the Author does protest, that he has the very same Design, Aim,
and Wishes with that Gentleman; for that Right may prevail is the natural wish
of every good man. And the prevention of those Mischiefs which the Enemies to
our Religion and Government have plotted, and do atchieve to put in execution,
has incited me to this task to satisfy my self and others, where the Right is.
My Sentiments herein I humbly submit to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament; and if I have written any thing that gives a just cause of offense
to my Superiors, I do here solemnly retract it.

This Gentleman is Ingenuous, and leaves his Reader to his Liberty, to weigh
the Arguments on both Sides, and judge for himself. I have taken the freedom he
allows me, and delivered my Opinion: I pray take you the same course without
Partiality, and then judge for your self.

FINIS.

