THE SECOND and THIRD TREATISES Of the First Part of Ancient CHURCH GOVERNMENT.

THE SECOND TREATISE Containing a Discourse of the SUCCESSION OF CLERGY.



OXFORD, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE READER.
IN the First Treatise of the First Part of Church Government, Printed A. D.
1662, and Reprinted 1685, is contained the Succession of the Apostles to our
Lord in his Pastoral Office, and the Primacy of St. Peter; then the Succession
of Bishops to the Apostles; their Authority; and the Subordination to them of
Presbyters,

In this Second Treatise is discoursed, the Indeficiency of the Clergy, and of
the Evangelical Doctrine delivered to them by our Lord.

In the Third is contained the Subordination of Bishops; their several
Jurisdictions; and tho Primacy and Supreme Authority of the Bishop of Rome.

CORRIGENDA.
Page 6. l. 7. ought not to do; the page should be 14.

P. 24. l. 28. Mat. 23.2, 3.

P. 42. l. 30. Bishop Andrews in answer.

SUCCESSION OF CLERGY.
Ancient Church Government already published, First, Our Lord's deriving his
Authority and Pastoral Office here on Earth upon his Apostles; and this not
with an equal parity. Secondly, And again, the Apostles transferring the same
Office to others: And this also, for preventing Schisms, and preserving Order
and Peace in the Church, done, as before, not with an exact equality amongst
all the Clergy, but with a certain preeminence and superiority of some above
the rest, the Bishops above the Presbyters; and this a superiority too not only
of precedence or honor (which would not have cured Schisms), but of Office and
Authority.

I now proceed to show more at large:

That Christ has left the same his Ministers, 1. The infallible Preservers of
all necessary Faith, and the supreme Judges to be submitted-to in all spiritual
doubts and controversies.

2. These in this their Government independent-on, and not dissolvable by any
external secular power.

3. Firmly united among themselves in one external Profession, and Communion
not ruinable by any intestine Division.



1. That considering men's ordinary frailties and passions, there is a clear
necessity of such a Judge to decide Controversies, resolve Doubts, suppress
false Doctrines, etc. And

2. That there has always been appointed in the Church of God, besides the
Rule, such a Judge, both under the Law and under the Gospel; and men never left
to their own Conduct in Religion.



2. Could such a Law be, yet that the Canon of Scripture is far from being such
as to every part thereof, is evident from the many Controversies of Religion,
that are on foot amongst those who all acknowledge the same Canon, and who must
be said, at least some of them on all sides, to be both of quick capacity and
sober judgmemt, and sufficient integrity: seeing that almost whole Nations have
thus opposed one another, all whose capacities or integrities it were too much
uncharitableness and pride to question. Here therefore whereas frequently both
the contrary parties use to say the Scripture is plain on their own side, they
both show that it is difficult; and whereas both also could wish an Arbiter of
Controversies at least to silence their Adversary, they mutually confess One
necessary for them both. And so long as sober Judgments contradict in their
expositions of Scripture, tho both should say, that the Scripture is clear, yet
neither can say that in respect of all men it is so. And so long there is
necessary another Judge besides Scripture, especially when none in Religious
matters will confess that they contest about a Controtroversie which is not
necessary to be decided. Indeed this happens ordinarily, that some sentences of
Scripture seem plain on one side, and other sentences thereof plain on another;
but since all parts of Divine truth must cohere and accord, the more plainness
in this manner makes it the more difficult. And therefore, we commonly see,
that in their not well-comparing of several Scriptures, but fastening their
thoughts only on some parcel thereof, to which their fancy or interest
specially guides them, the more ignorant are the more confident, and lest
doubting, and they who have least compared things, soonest decide them. And
thus those who have the Scriptures the more common, and open to each man's
comment (without dependence on any other Judge than themselves) run into great
varieties of Opinions and Sects. 2 St. Pet. 3.16. takes notice concerning a
chief part of the Scriptures, and that written purposely for instruction, St.
Paul's Epistles; [but not only concerning these, but the other Scriptures too,
see the end of v. 16.] that in them there were some things hard to be
understood, which they that were unlearned and unstable did wrest to their own
destruction. These things then of consequence, the mistaking of which tended to
the Mistaker's destruction; which yet men, even in his days, mistook by being
unlearned, i. e. not well taught in Christianity, which teaching they must have
from their Pastors; and unstable, which must be by departing from the Doctrines
received from their Pastors, as the words following v. 17. also imply. Now I
see not why the same accident concerning the same Scriptures should not happen
still to the illiterate and unstable, disclaiming any other Judge save these
Scriptures, and conceiting that God's Written Word has rendered his Ministers
useless. This is said for the necessity of a Judge in matters of Religion, where
Scriptures indeed (as St. Peter says of them) have some difficulty. But

3. Since Controversies may be raised and maintained by the peevishness, and
perverseness, and passion of a Party, even where Scriptures are clear enough,
here also no less necessary is a Judge juridically to suppress and silence those
who irrationally, and many times with autocatacrisie, thus offend. But

4. It is possible also, that some very material Controversies there may be in
Religion, wherein the Scriptures have either been silent, or have not spoken to
them so expressly and openly, but that they must be drawn out from thence by
several deductions. Here then also some other Judge is necessary.

Judge therefore is necessary to be. And therefore such a Judge there always has
been appointed by God to be consulted and submitted-to by his people; both
before the Law Written, and under the Law Written, and under the Gospel.

First, In the times before the Law Written, even from the very infancy of-the
World, God ever had a Church, contradistinct after Adam's Fall (of whose Sons,
as some were, good, so others were impious) to the rest of the world, serving
God in a public external Communion, and under several other Laws besides that
of Nature written in every man's Conscience, Romans 2. 14, 15. Laws and Rules of
Worship revealed and delivered by God to Adam himself at first, or to other
Holy men even of the first times, and many of these Laws the same with those
after ward recorded by Moses. So for the Church, we find righteous Abel serving
God in a way well pleasing to him, and offering acceptable. Sacrifice, and (an
early type of our Savior.) slain and martyred by the Nead of the Race of the
Church's Persecutors, out of envy to his sanctity, Heb. 11.4. -- 1 John 3.12.
-- Upon his death Seth raised in his stead a Father of the Holy Race, Genesis 5.1,
2, 3. -- His Son Enos the first more eminent public Preacher of Righteousness,
see 2 Pet. 2.5. -- In whose time it is said, that people now began more
publicly to call on the name of the Lord, -- Genesis 4.26. -- Enoch, the fifth
from him, a Prophet, Jude 14. -- and in a most singular manner pious, Genesis
5.24. -- Heb. 11.5, 6. -- the eighth from Enos, Noah again a famous Preacher of
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 3.19. -- 2 Pet. 2.5. In whose times the Members of the
Church are by a special name called the Sons of God, Genesis 5.2. -- From him
again we find the Church continued to Abraham a Prophet, Genesis 20.7. Psalm.
105.15. -- In whose time also was Melchisedech the Priest of the most high God,
Genesis 14.18. And to Abraham we find a Promise made by God of the never-failing
of his Seed, i. e. of the Children of his Faith and Holy Religion; i. e. of the
Church. So soon as this Spiritual. Seed began to cease among the Jews, then it
being continued to him still among the Gentiles. See Romans 4.12. -- 16.17. Gal.
3.7, etc. Gal. 4. Joh. 8. 39.44. -- Luke 19.9.

Moses his committing them to record. Of Holy Persons, Priests; Prophets,
Intercessors, Genesis 14.18.-20.7, 17. Exodus 19.22. -- 24.5. Of Holy Times Genesis
2.3. Exodus 16.23. Of Holy Places, Genesis 4.12, 14, 16.-28.17-35.1. --
12.6.-26.25. Ex. 3.5. Of Altars, Genesis 8.20. which the Patriarchs built in such
places where God appeared to them, -- Genesis 12.6.-26.25. Or where they made a
longer abode, Genesis 12.8.-13.4, 18. Of Sacrifice; Sacrifice of the firstlings;
and of the far, Genesis 4.3, 4. Burnt Offerings and Peace Offerings, Genesis 8.20. --
Exodus 5.1.-10.25. -- The Birds in Sacrifice not divided, Genesis 15.10. as it was
afterward commanded in Lev. 1.17. -- Of clean and unclean Beasts, Genesis 7.2. --
and of not eating the Blood, Genesis 9.4. -- Of Purifyings, Cleansings, changing
their Garments, etc. Genesis 2. -- Of Tithes paid to the Priest, -- Genesis 14.20. --
Of making Vows, Genesis 28.20. -- Of not matching with Unbelievers, Genesis 6.2 comp.
1. -- Of the Brother's raising of Seed to his Brother, Genesis 38.8.comp. Deuteronomy.
25.5. Thus then from the beginning God had a Church, had Preachers and Priests,
and certain Rules of his due Worship.

2. In these times it seems, that the People for matter of Religion and God's
Worship, were cast wholly upon the Instructions and Doctrines, Traditions and
Dictates, of their Guides for knowing their duty, without any Written Records
or Law of Natural Reason (which these things transcended) to examine these by:
and supposing that there should have happened to have been, concerning any
particular, two contrary Traditions amongst these Teachers, in all reason they
ought to have followed the former and more universal. Here also we may presume,
that these Fathers of the Church were then sufficiently assisted by God to
deliver always to the People all truths necessary to their Salvation, since
they had no other Director to repair to.

Which Office at first we find Moses, who also had continual recourse to God in
his Doubts, to have executed for some time both for Religious and for Civil
causes, alone; To whom (says the Text Exodus 18.16.) the people, when they had
a matter, came, and he made them know the Statutes of God and his Laws. --
Afterward to ease him of this great burden, especially as to ordinary Civil
matters, we find by Jethro's advice (but also God's approbation) other able men
chosen out of the people, and set over Tens, Fifties, Hundreds, and Thousands,
to decide the easier matters, but to bring the harder still to Moses, Exodus
18.13, etc. And he still alone to be for the People to God ward, to bring the
causes unto God, teach them Ordinances, and show them the Work that they must
do, Exodus 18.19, 20. -- Afterward yet more to ease him in these more difficult
matters, we find, by God's appointment, Seventy Elders chosen out of the former
Officers and Judges, more immediately to assist him; which Seventy Elders, to
enable them for this higher employment, had part of Moses his Spirit taken and
put upon them; which Spirit at the first showed wonderful effects in them, and
magnified them before the People; as Christ (the Prophet whom Moses resembled,
Deuteronomy. 18.15.) his Spirit also did at first, when it was derived on the chief
Evangelical Judges and Magistrates. ( Act. 2.) See Numb. 11.14, 16, etc.

Deuteronomy. 16.18.) by God's command, a standing Court established in that City,
where God settled his Sanctuary and Presence (that they also might there consult
him in their difficulties; established, I say, for the Exposition of the Law in
all matters too hard for the other, and we find all persons obliged under pain
of Death to stand to their Decisions. See for this, Deuteronomy. 17, 8, etc. -- If
there arise a matter too hard for thee [ i. e. the inferior Country-Judges,
Deuter. 16.18.] in judgment between Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea, or
between stroke and stroke [or Leper and Leper: what in these was permitted or
prohibited, excusable or punishable, or in what manner punishable according to
the Letter of the Law] being matters of Controversy within thy Gates [or as
the Vulgar, and Judicum intra portas tuas videris verba variari] thou shall
then arise, and get thee up unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose;
And thou shall come unto the Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge [that
chief Secular Magistrate or his Substitute, because the matters brought before
this Court were sometimes relating to God's, sometimes to the King's Laws;
Causes, some Ecclesiastical, some Civi] that shall be in those days, and they
shall show thee the sentence of Judgment. And thou shall do according to the
sentence which they of that place shall show thee, -- according to all that
they inform thee. According to the sentence of the Law which they shall teach
thee, thou shall do, [or as the Vulgar, Quodcunque docuerint te juxta legem
ejus facies], Thou shall not decline, from the sentence which they shall show
thee, to the right hand, or to the lest. And the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest that stands to Minister
there before the Lord, or to the Judge [as his Cause is Ecclesiastical or Civi]
even that man shall die. And all the people shall hear and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. Thus Deuteronomy. Again in 2 Chronicles 19.5, 8, 10, 11. where
Jehoshaphat in his Reformation, amongst many other, reduced this Law into
practice; the same thing is cxpress'd in these terms, First, v. 5. And he set
Judges in the Land through-out all the fenced Cities of Judah, etc. answerable
to Deuteronomy. 16.18. and then v. 8. Moreover in Jerusalem [the place the Lord had
chosen] did Jehoshaphat set the Levites [for under Officers, and of the
Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, v. 11.] for the judgment of
the Lord, and for controversies. And he charged them saying, what cause soever
shall come unto you of your Brethren that dwell in their Cities between Blood
and Blood, between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments: ye shall even
warn them, that they trespass not against the Lord, etc. And behold, Amasiah
the chief Priest is over you in all matters of the Lord, [concerning his Law
and Religion], and Zebadiah the Ruler of the House of Judah, for all the Kings
matters [concerning the King's Law and Civil Subjection]. Also the Levites
shall be Officers before you, etc. See 1 Chronicles. 23.4. -- 26.29, 30.

matter of fact, as some would have it, that when doubt arose at the Country
Sessions, they were to repair to this Court at Jerusalem, which fact was most
easy and most fit to be judged upon the place; But concerning matter of Law or
Statute, when question arose about that, between Plea and Plea, Law and
Commandment, statutes and judgments, says the Text, (see Diodate's Comment in
Deuteronomy. 17. 8.) -- and according to the sentence of the Law which they shall
teach thee, etc. -- Again, it is not for matter of Law in such a sense as some
would have it; namely, that the Litigant was to be put to death, if he obeyed
not the sentence of the Judge, whenever he judged right, and according to the
Law of God. But that he judging otherwise, he was not tied to obey him, nor
might be put to death for disobedience in such case For so Bishop Andrews
(Tort. Torti) answers Bellarmin, urging this place; Quali Sacerdotis imperio
obediendum? Ita praecedentia verba babent, imperio Sacerdotis juxta legem Dei
docentis. Tum sequeris sententiam ejus; turn si superbierit etc. But who is it
that shall judge when this Supreme Court, appealed to, judges juxta legem Dei,
when not? Surely it must be the litigant, or no body, unless there can be a
Super-supreme Court. But then how absurd this? for so, whenever the Litigant
judges the Judge to have judged not according to this law, he is free from
obeying his sentence, and consequently from punishment for any disobedience
thereof, unless the Judge can by God's law punish him, for doing only what
God's law permits him. Therefore, Quodcunque docuerint te juxta legem Dei, in
the Vulgar, which the Bishop here is pleated to make use of, means only this;
Quodcunque doenerint te esse juxta legem Dei these being the supreme expositors
of the Law to the people, as is clear from the Hebrew rendered thus; Super os
legis quam docebunt te, and super judicium quod dicent tibi, facies; and from
the Septuagint, -- Secundum legem and secundum judicium quodcunque dixerint
tibi; and the Syriack, Secundum praescriptionem legis quam tibi indicabunt; and
the other famous Translations; and also from the English, according to the
sentence of the Law, which [sentence] they shall teach thee: -- and clear also
from the context, requiring also most strict and absolute obedience. Thou shall
not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee to the right hand, nor
to the left. He that will not hearken to the Priest, that man shall die.

Chilingworth c. 5. 109, 110.) but also of doing what it shall direct. For the
words are plain, Deuteronomy. 17.9. Thou shall observe to do all that they shall
inform thee, not turning to any hand: and 2 Chronicles. 19.10. it is said to the
Judges, Ye shall warn them that they trespass not against the Lord, which
cannot be meant of punishments, but in breaking his laws. Again, it is nor
meant of doing neither what this Court shall direct, that is in such things,
wherein meanwhile we are not bound to think also their determination lawful,
and their sentence just. As one may lawfully pay a mulct of an 100 l. wherein
he is condemned by the Court, without thinking their sentence lawful; because
any one, when wrong is done him, may cedere suo jure, without sinning therein.
Thus Mr. Chilling worth would avoid this place urged by Mr. Knot; and in his
instance indeed no more is required than he affirms; but it seems also an
obligation to think such determination and sentence just and lawful: as in all
those instances may be made appear, where the party is enjoined by this Court
to perform some neglected duty to God, or his Neighbor, and not only sentenced
to undergo some punishiment; as certainly all the decrees and determinations of
that Court were not only about passive obedience, satisfactions, and
punishments, but active too, duties, and service. Now this is certain, that
none may do any thing which he does not first think is lawful to be done, or at
least which, he does not go so far, as to think that it is unlawful to be done:
for, Conscientia erronea obligat. And next, he cannot think such thing lawful
to be done, so long as he thinks that God has forbidden it, or commanded the
contrary of it to be done. Therefore as long as he thinks that he may
lawfully do it, so long he thinks, or at least is not certain, but that it is
agreeable to God's command and so long he thinks, or is not certain of, the
contrary, but that the determination of this court is right, and just. But here
if any one would say; That one may think a thing lawful to be done by him,
because it is commanded him by those Superiors, whom God has charged him in
all things to obey, whilst meanwhile he believes God to have commanded the
contrary, and that hence only he thinks it lawful for him to do it; not
because God has commanded it, or has not commanded the contrary, but because
God has commanded him to obey his Superiors, tho erring and decreeing a thing
sometimes contrary to God's command. Let it be so: This suffices our purpose,
so that constant obedience be allowed to these Judges, and that what they
command we ought to do, not only in matters of Penalty, but of Duty. Thus
Schism is excluded, thus Peace is preserved perpetually in God's Church.

Exodus 20, 10. [in it thou shall do no manner of work,] that this is by God
prohibited. The matter upon this is brought before these Judges, and decided
for the master: here the servant is bound to water the cattle of his master,
and therefore bound to think it not unlawful to do, since none may do what they
think must law: and if he think it not unlawful to do so, he must either now
change his former opinion, and think God's law not to have prohibited it; or at
least God to have bound him by another law to do some thing sometimes, he
thinks, but is not certain, that God's law prohibits, namely, so often as these
Judges, who are appointed God's substitutes to expound his law, do mis-intepret
it. For in the judgment also of Protestants, God has upon some suppositions,
obliged us to believe, and give assent to the determinations and injunctions of
an erring Guide; namely, of our Spiritual Governors, in matters Theological,
where ever we our selves doubt of the truth, and have no certain evidence of
the contrary to what they enjoin us: yet in which injunctions they do grant
these Governors both may, and do sometimes err. So likewise an erroneous
conscience is granted, to oblige us, and that from the Divine command, who has
made it sin to do otherwise, which conscience also sometimes errs faultlesty,
i. e. out of an invincible ignorance. Take therefore of the two former ways
which you will, the duty of the servant rectifying his opinion, or of obeying
the Judge, and acting contrary to his-opinion, (where note, that in such
obeying he still follows his conscience, for he obeys here, because he first
thinks that he ought to obey,) Obedience is the product; but Obedience in the
former notion is an act of more humility and charity.

Hooker has commented upon it., (in his Preface sect. 6.) writing against
Puritans, and so speaking much of subordination of private opinion to the
determination of Ecclesiastical authority. God (says he) was not ignorant that
the Priests and Judges, (whose sentence in matters of controversy he ordained
should stand) both might, and oftentimes would be deceived in their judgments;
howbeit better it was in the eye of his understanding that sometimes an
erroneous sentence definitive, should: prevail, till the same authority
perceiving such oversight, might afterward correct or reverse it, than that
strifes should have respit to grow, and not come speedily unto some end. [Then
answering the Objection of doing nothing against Conscience] 'Neither wish we
(says he) that men should do any thing which in their hearts they are
persuaded they ought not not to do; but we say, this persuasion ought to be
fully settled in their hearts, that in litigious and controverted causes of such
quality [here what exceptions Mr. Hooker makes matters not, for the Text makes
none] 'the Will of God is to have them to do whatsoever the sentence of
Judicial and Final Decisions shall determine: yea tho it seems in their private
Opinion to swerve utterly from that which is right, as no doubt many times the
sentence among the Jews did unto one or other party contending: and yet in this
case God did then allow them to do that which in their private judgment it
seemed, yea and perhaps truly seemed, that the Law did disallow. Thus Mr.
Hooker. Whose last words seem to me to say, either that we are to submit our
private opinion or judgment, ( i. e. those reasons that we have from the thing
to think the contrary) to the judgment of this Court, i. e. to another reason
which we have drawn from Authority. Of which is spoken largely elsewhere, in
Obligation of Judgment, 2, etc. -- Or else, that retaining still our private
Opinion, yet we ought to practice contrary to what it dictates, by reason of
God's commanding us absolute Obedience to this Court. Which, tho it does err
sometimes, perhaps in matters less necessary, yet much oft'ner should we err,
if not thus restrained and subjected to it. -- And of two evils, or human
infirmities, the lesser is to be chosen. Therefore also in Secular affairs the
Soldier is punished when he does that which is better, if he does this against
his General's Command; because indeed by such a liberty indulged, how much
oft'ner would he do that which is worse?

Deuteronomy (upon which you will excuse my long stay, for the freeing it from
several faulty restrictions) may be added many more Texts of the Old Testament
to the same purpose. See Ezech. 44.24. where the Prophet in the end of his
Prophecy describing (typically under the ancient Ceremonies) the restoration
and flourishing condition of God's Church, at last amongst other recites this
Law, Deuteronomy. 17. In controversy they [the Priests] shall stand in judgment; and
they shall judge it according to my judgments. See Hag. 2.11. -- Thus says the
Lord of Hosts: Ask now the Priests, saying; If one bear etc. According to which
command the Prophet consulted them, and received an answer from them, ver. 12,
13. See Mal. 2.7. where chiding the Priests, causing many to fall in the Law,
the Lord faith, -- The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they [the People]
shall seek the Law at his mouth. For he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts; [If
he therefore err, no remedy but the People must fall.] See Deuteronomy. 33.9, 10.
comp. Eccl. 45.17. And see Hos. 4.4. where when God would express the extreme
perverseness and obstinacy of his people, he compares them to those that
contend with [and show disobedience to] their Priest. Likewise the Priest's
putting difference between holy and unholy, clean and unclean, and accordingly
admitting men to, or separating them from the Congregation; and in the
readmission of these, exercising the Ceremonies of their Cleansings, (for which
see Lev. 10.10, 11: Ezech. 44.23. -- Lev. chapter 13. and 14.) are only Metaphors
of the Church's Authority in Judging what is, and what is not, sin and trespass
against God's Law; in Excommunicating those whose continue in sin; and in
Reconciling those who are penitent. And the Observation of the Evangelist, Joh.
11.49, etc. (upon Caiaphas his saying, It was expedient, etc.) that he spoke
not this of himself, but being High Priest that year, prophesied; argues some
special assistance of God attending this chief Judge of the People.

Scribes and Pharisees, because those, who for the present sat in Moses his
Chair, which Chair was yet to stand a little while longer (till himself had
accomplished his Sufferings, till the Consummatum est, on the Cross, and the
Nailing of the Old Law thereto, Joh. 19.30. Col. 2.14. After which, at the next
Pentecost was set up a new Ministry of the Gospel ( Act. 2.) and a new
Sanedrim, or supreme Court for deciding of Ecclesiastical Controversies, Act.
15.) Therefore our Savior both enjoined to others, Mat. 8.4. and most
punctually observed himself the Mosaical Law, all his days keeping the
Ceremonies New and Old, Luke 2.21. Mat. 3.15. Gal. 4.4. Going at the solemn
Feasts to Jerusalem, frequenting the Synagogues in the Country; neither could
any justly accuse him of the breach of the least tittle thereof, Joh. 8.46. And
in this Chair yet standing, the Pharisees are said to sit, because several of
the Priests or Levites, and Members of the Sanedrim, or chief Ecclesiastical
Court of the Jews, see Joh. 12, 42, 43. and also of the Doctors and Expositors
of the Law to the People in their Synagogues, were of this Sect; and their
Doctrines, it seems by Mat. 23.4. were very strict and rigorous, and much
otherwise than their Lives; strict, not only for I know not what Traditions of
the Elders, which they themselves very scrupulously observed; but for some, at
least of the more solid points of the Law, which they themselves hypocritally
neglected. For our Savior signifies there, that out of this Chair they said
much that they did not, and that they laid heavy burdens on other men's
shoulders, which themselves would not move with one of their fingers. In the
very front of that Sermon therefore (see Mat. 23.) wherein our Lord most
vehemently reprehendeth their impious lives, as if he were afraid, that from
his taxing their evil Conversation men should reject their Authority and
Injunctions, he premiseth these words, agreeable to those formerly mentioned
Deuteronomy. 17.8, etc. -- Mat. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses
seat. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but
do not ye after their Works. For they say, and do not. Which place to interpret
so as some do, All whatsoever that is conformable, or not contrary to the Law
of Moses, i. e. All that he who hears them thinks conformable, or not contrary,
etc. seems unreasonable, as has been showed before, p. 8. on Deuteronomy. 17. -- To
which I will only here add what Bellarmin ( De Verbo Dei, l. 3. c. 4.) says on
that place, as applicable to this, -- Non voluit [Moses] dicere; sta judicio
Sacerdotis, si docuerit te secundum legem. Tunc enim fuissent homines magis
dubii and perplexi, quam antea. Nec opus fuisset ire ad Sacerdotem, si ipsi
potuissent ex lege Domini per se judicare causam suam. Immo tunc non Sacerdos
fuisset Judex, sed ipsi; quippe qui de sententia Sacerdotis judicaturi erant.

Messiah, a Law-giving Prophet like Moses, of whom he gave a special charge in
his Law, Deuteronomy. 18.15. that whenever he came all should hear him; was now come
into the world; come with such evident testimonies, as that all not wilfully
blind must needs know him; come with such Miracles, with the Testimony of the
Baptist, who was generally acknowledged a Divine Prophet; with the Testimony of
God himself from Heaven, reiterating Moses his words, hear ye him, Mat. 3.7. --
17.5. All which our Savior frequently urges, to beget in the people faith and
adherence to him, as their supreme Doctor and Guide. See especially Joh. 5.
from ver. 31, to the end. Something I must confess, is here altered from the
case in Deuteronomy. Neither is the Obedience and Submission to the Doctrines
of those in Moses his Chair here to be so far extended, as if this Messiah
advanced the Sanedrim's Authority above, or equaled it to his Own; or, as if
he enjoined Obedience to these Chair-men in any thing wherein they contradicted
or opposed him; or so restrained men now to their sentence, that in their
doubts they might not repair from this formerly Supreme Court, now to Him, who
was the Light of the World, and Truth it self. But only is to be extended thus
far (which serves our turn) that he would tie the People's Duty and Obedience
always to their Spiritual Guides and Superiors: In the first place to Himself,
the perpetually Supreme Head of the Church, see Joh. 18.37. -- Mat. 7.24. and
those whom he sent; as likewise to the Baptist, the Messenger before the
Messiah, as evidently sent by God. [For we must know, that all extraordinary
Missions manifestly from God, as those of the Prophets, obliged both Priest and
People to Obedience in what they said. As Abraham stood obliged by such a
Message from God to Sacrifice his Son. And the People were reprehended by God
for not heark'ning to his Prophets, whatever the Priests said to them to the
contrary; the Mission always being supposed manifest.] In the next place to the
Successors of Moses, so long as they were to continue in their Office, i. e.
till the Consummatum est on the Cross, or descent of the Holy Ghost on our
Lords new Missioner's, the Apostles) in all things, wherein he taught them not
the contrary: All this in contradistinction to following their own Guidance and
private Judgment against the Dictates of their Superiors and Doctors,
especially when they saw their Lives scandalous. And for the better preserving
of which Duty to these Superiors, it is observed, that our Savior never said
any thing against the Priests eo nomine, lest he should so have seemed to
vilify the Priesthood. Dominus (said St. Cyprian long ago, Epist. 69. on Joh.
18.22.) custodiens and docens Sacerdotalem honorem servari oportere, contra
Pontisicem nihil dixit. To this place of St. Matthew commanding Obedience to
those in Moses his Seat, may be added our Savior's Vindication of the Jewish
Church against the Samaritan, Joh. 4.22. saying, That the Samaritans worshipped
they knew not what; and that salvation was of the Jews; the meaning of which
must at least extend thus far, That the true way of Salvation was taught by the
Jewish Doctors. And that saying of his, Mat. 11.13. and Luke 16.16. that the
Law and the Prophets prophesied until John. And that answer in the Parable,
Luke 16.29. they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. See likewise
Romans 9.4. Which places, if they intimate thus much, that the Doctors and
public Expositors of this Law taught to the people so much truth as was
necessary to their Salvation till the coming of the Baptist, and of our
Savior; I press them not so far, as that these taught no Errors. And if they
taught not the former Truths, judge what a case the People were in, who had no
Copy of the Law themselves, and also had such an Injunction in Deuteronomy. 17.18.
upon pain of death for their presumption, v. 12,13. to obey these
Law-expounders.

Matt. 16.6. compared with 12. b declaring, that they transgressed the
commandments of God by their Tradition, and that in vain they worshipped God,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Matt. 15.3.9. g Again, that
they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; or, as S. Luke has it, ( c.
11. v. 52.) that they had taken away the key of knowledge, neither going in
themselves, nor suffering those that were entering, to go in. Matt. 23.13. d
That those whom they made Proselites, they made them twofold more the chlldren
of hell than themselves. Matt. 23.15. e And that they were blind leaders of the
blind, and that if the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch.
Matt 15.14. z And what dangerous blind leaders they were, we see, when as they
taught the people that Jesus was not the Messiah, and excommunicated his
followers, (Jo. 9.34,) and at last this highest Spiritual Court, or
Ecclesiastical Synod, condemned this Savior of the world to death, for a
Seducer, a Blasphemer, a destroyer of the Law, and so also his Apostles after
him. e To which may be added Esai. 8.20. where the Prophet directs the people
immediately to the Law and Testimony. -- To the Law, and to the Testimony: If
they speak not according to this word, it is, because there is no light in
them. All which seems inconsistible with Mat. 23.2. as it is interpreted.

Jo. 5.39, 45. etc.) that Jesus was not the Messiah,) yet our Savior, and the
Baptist, and the twelve Disciples sent abroad, in these taught the people
contrary to them, whom (as we have said before) the people were bound to
believe, and not them; because now the Messiah, not the Sanedrim was the
Supreme Judge, (upon which the Cardinal, no enemy to the High Priests
Supremacy, is facile to grant, that; Non fuit necessarium ut Pontifices
Judaeorum non possent errare, quando Christus summus totius Ecclesiae Pontifex
praesens aderat, and Ecclesiam per se administrabat,) which High Priest, to
guard the people from this pernicious Pharisee-doctrine, sent forth not only
twelve at one time, but seventy Disciples at another, and both with miracles,
to publish in all the coasts of Israel the coming and the Kingdom of the
Messiah, that none might plead ignorance of his coming, or be misled in these
things by their former Masters, denouncing the greatest woes to them who should
reject Him or His.

Matt. 10.14, 15. -- 11.21.

etc. blinded their judgment; yet these errors of theirs were not damnable,
i.e. such as would bring damnation to all those others who submitted to them,
because that inculpable ignorance in people that neither had, nor were able to
study the law themselves, and their obedience yielded in these things to none
but their appointed Guides and Superiors, excused so many of them at least, as
never had the opportunity from our Savior, or his Missions to learn the
contrary.

Some of those particular Doctrines of the Pharisees in this kind, which we
find our Savior to have taxed, are these. Their tenet, Mark c. 7. v. 3. that
eating with unwashen hands, or in an unwashen dish, or on an nuwashed Table,
etc. which perhaps some unclean person or thing had used or touched, defiles a
man, and their more scrupulously observing this (and by their example inducing
others to it) than the much weightier matters of God's law: see Matt. 23.23.
Mark 7.21. -- That no work (tho an act of mercy) among the rest, (some say) no
medicinal cure (except some things that seemed more necessary, perhaps because
of their profit, the watering or the saving the life of their Beast, Luke
13.15. -- 14.15.) might be done on the Sabbath day. -- That one who had vowed
his goods or supernecessaries to God, or to the Treasures of the Temple, (tho
perhaps doing this on set purpose,) was upon this free from relieving his
indigent parents therewith, (the Pharisees, many of whom were Priests, perhaps
eying also herein their own profit;) or, as others, one who had made a folemn
oath, upon some offense taken, never to relieve his Parents, was obliged to
keep such oath: (see Matt. 15.5.) -- That in an assertory Oath the voluntary
swearing of some Truth by some things more remotely sacred, as by the Temple,
or Altar, was not faulty, or in promissory Oaths, was not obligatory, but the
swearing by things of a higher sanctity, and more nearly consecrated to Him, as
they conceived the Golden-inside of the Temple, and the Sacrifice offered to
God on the Altar to be, this rendeed men accountable. See Matt. 23.16. etc.
compared with Matt. 5.33. etc. -- Such as these, I say, were the Pharisees
erroneous Doctrines. But provided, that a subject of the Church was taught by
the same Doctors all other necessary points of God's law, and walked in them
with sincerity, tho in these he were deceived, or also in his actions preferred
some of these before greater duties, yet not so far as (by the Pharisees wicked
example) to omit those greater duties; I doubt not but that such a disciple of
theirs, upon a general repentance for all unknown sins, might attain Salvation.

Moses. In which chair some sat who were not Pharisees, and some Pharisees
also were good men and believers in Christ: Jo. 12.42. amongst whom were
Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea, (see Jo. 3.1. Mark 15 43. who, with some
others, how far in several matters they might moderate and rectify the public
Decisions and Doctrines, we know not. This replied in general; now to answer
the texts in particular.

etc some doctrines destroying salvation, others some way vitiating their
practice. But this wariness to be exercised, not by following their own
judgments, and deserting that of their Churchmen, but by leaving the
subordinate, where they discovered any contradiction, and adhering to their
supreme Judge, I mean the Messiah. After the Mission of whom, and not before,
God's Providence permitted this formerly chief Ecclesiastical Court to err so
criminally as to the fundamental point of the Messiah. However, then they were
still to obey these Doctors of Moses his Chair, in all their other Doctrines
whatever, yet in any such wherein this new Lawgiver, or Expositor, who came
with Miracles, controlled them, and taught the contrary, they were now to
beware of them, and follow him.

Pharisees condition, who were in these things faultily blind, and misguided
the others, might be very deplorable, and their wickedness herein render their
other service of God vain, and unacceptable.

To g. In that damning Doctrine of their's, opposing Christ and his Kingdom,
the Followers of these Doctors are granted to miss of Heaven, as well as the
Leaders. For they had another superior Leader, whom they ought to have followed.

To d. They made them such by their wicked example, the following of which is
excepted by our Savior, Mat. 2.2, 3. Or by their forementioned Doctrine,
contradicted by their supreme Teacher.

To e. Some things there are, wherein if they err, both the Leaders and
Followers are wilfully blind; here both fall into the Ditch, not only of error,
but of perdition. Such were the followers of the Pharisees in their opposing of
the Messiah; or also those who brutishly imagined (if any did so) the Pharisees
Doings as well as their Doctrines safe; and that so much Righteousness only was
necessary or required, not as the Pharisees taught, but as they performed. Of
such error or blindness the People had sufficient Remedy provided in the
Instructions received from our Lord. Again, some things there are wherein, the
Followers may be unculpably, and yet the Leaders are wilfully blind; here both
may be said to fall into the same Ditch, i. e. of error, but not of perdition;
but for this later the Followers are safe; (of which inculpable blindness our
Savior seems to speak to the Pharisees, Joh. 9.41. If ye were blind ye should
have no sin, etc.) such I conceive to be some of those errors above mentioned,
p. 21.

i. e. seem to the People to expound) it not aright. But it is only said here,
that recourse ought to be made to the Law, etc. in opposition to the People's
repairing to the Heathenishwizards, Pythonists, and Ventri-loquists, etc. Isa.
8.20. that also worshipped other Gods, as appears by the verse precedent, [
When they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar Spirits and
Wizards [or Conjurers that peep and that mutter] should not a people seek
[rather] unto their God [consult his Oracle (which some think is meant by
Testimony here) and his Prophets then] for the living [to go] to the dead
[Negromancers, or Idols, or the Spirits of the Dead]. Thus v. 19. and then it
follows, to the Law and to the Testimony; If they speak not according to this
Wordy, etc. They, that is, the Diviners, the Pythonists, etc. mentioned before
(who professed another Law, and other God than the God of Israel, see ver. 21.)
not the Priests of the Lord; at whose mouth the people were to seek the Law,
Mal. 2.7. and stand to their Expositions of it, Deuteronomy. 17.8. Thus much in answer
to this main Objection touching the errors of the Pharisees, and of the
Sanedrim; where you see we are neither reduced to this extremity, which some
fall into, to say, That God having appointed to the People Teachers for
Exposition of the Law, whose directions they should follow (as is showed before
upon Deuteronomy. 17.8.) had left also power to the People to Judge of these their
Teachers, when it was that they taught them according to the true sense of the
Law, when contrary; which seems very absurd. Nor on the other, into this
extremity, to say, that God commanding the people to obey their Guides, had
provided them, at least in some times, none but blind ones, whom therefore they
obeying must with them fall into the Ditch and perish; not obeying, must
transgress Gods command, which seems very impious.



2. For the erring also, and falling away of the Jewish Clergy, before the
coming of the Messiah, (so that the Judgment and Sentence, at least of the
major part of them, could not be safely submitted to by the people) there are
urged both many expressions out of the Prophets, and several instances in the
Old Testament story.

1. a. Many places in the Prophets are quoted to this purpose. As Isa. 56.10.
that the Watchmen were blinded, that they were all ignorant, etc. Jer. 6.13.
that from the Prophet even to the Priest every one dealt falsely, and healed the
wound of the people slightly. Jer. 2.26, 27. -- 23.11, etc. Ezech. 22.26. Mal.
2.8. Zeph. 3.4. That the Priest had done violence to the Law; had caused many
to stumble at the Law, and had corrupted the Covenant of Levi. Likewise Ezekiel.
7.22, 26. it is foretold, that in the approaching Captivity the Law should
perish from the Priest, and Counsel from the Ancients; that God would turn away
his face, and strangers should pollute his secret place. And 2 Chronicles. 15.3.

b. It is affirmed, that for a long season Isreal was without the true God, and
without a teaching Priest, and without Law. And a 2 Chronicles. 36.14. that all the
chief of the Priests and of the people transgressed very much after all the
abominations of the Heathen. See likewise the Prediction Hos. 3.4. See also
Jer. 26.11. The Priests and Prophets especially persecuting Jeremiah (in this a
great Type of our Savior), and in this persecution urging (but mistaken in
it), that the Law should not perish from the Priest, etc. Add to these, Ezech.
44.10, 12, 13. where it is ordered, when God's true Worship should be restored,
that the Priests that ministered before the Idols, should not afterward come
near the holy things; and 2 King. 23.9. that the Priests who had offered in the
high Places should not approach God's Altar at Jerusalem; several instances
likewise are produced out of the story. -- g. Aaron's making the Golden Calf,
and the people's worshipping it. -- d. Vriah the Priest's building an Altar
like to that at Damascus at the King's command, and Offering upon it, 2 Kin.
16.11, 16. -- ^. Ahab's four hundred false Prophets to one true, 2 Kin. 22.6.
and Elijah's complaint, 1 Kin. 19.10. -- z. The Priest's Offering Sacrifice in
the High Places, where was neither the Tabernacle of Moses, nor the Ark, nor
the Temple, contrary to God's express command in the Law, and that upon pain of
death, (see Lev. 17.4, 9. Deuteronomy, 12, 13.) and this custom used for many hundreds
of years, till at last Hezechiah reformed it. The shutting up the doors of Gods
House, putting out the Lamps, and hindering the burning of Incense, and of
offering Sacrifice in the time of Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28.24. -- 29.7. Again, the
ceassing of God's public worship under the Babilonish Captivity. Again, the
taking away the daily Sacrifice, and the setting up the abomination of
desolation upon the Altar, in the time of the Maccabees by Antiochus. 1
Macchab. 1.54, 59. To all which, in the last place, may be added -- the
Reformations of this Church made by the Kings, and not by the Priests, after
the defection of Solomon, Rehoboam, and Abijab, by Asa, and his Son Jehosaphat.
After that again, of Ahaz by Hezechiah, after that, of Manasses and Amon by
Josiah.

Jo. 4.22. Luke 16.16. Genesis 49.10, See Romans 11.2, 5. -- 9.6, 7, 29. -- 3.3.
Psalm. 89.33. etc. See Benef. of our Savior. H. ult.

Creed, consisted wholly of Laics, destitute of a Minister of Holy things, of
public Liturgy, power of the Keys, administration of Sacraments, teaching
God's law, ordination of Successors, in these Holy functions, etc. except
perhaps these such as were vain, false, pernicious. But however else it be, yet
under the times of the Law (which only are to our purpose at present) can be
showed no such thing. For in the two greatest Apostacies that were in these
times, that of Ahaz before Hezechias Reformation, and that of Manasses before
Josiah's, -- for whose enormous sins chiefly Judah was doomed by God to the
Babilonish Captivity, irreversible either by his own or by his righteous Son
Josiah's repentance and reformation; (see 2 Kings 23.26. compared with 25. --
24.3, 4. -- 21.10, 11. Jer. 15, 4. 2 Chronicles. 35.15. etc.) yet I say in these
two, the greatest Apostacies, we find that there was some Clergy still
remaining orthodox. For the one see 2 Chronicles. 29.4, 13. where Hezechias
Reformation in the very beginning of his Reign is assisted by the Priests, and
these reintroduced into the Service of the Temple, out of which they had been
not long before excluded by Ahaz in the latter end of his Reign. 2 Chr. 28.24.
But yet for the most part of Ahaz his reign also, we find the daily Morning and
Evening Sacrifice in the Temple not intermitted: see 2 Kings 16.15. In whose
time also Hezethiah his Son was rightly educated and instructed in the true
Religion, reforming all as soon as he came to the Crown; in whose time also
were many Prophets, Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, Micah, and others, who both instructed
the people, and animated and confirmed the Priests in God's true worship: and
the dishonorable burial of Ahaz 2 Chronicles. 28.17. shows neither the Nobility,
nor Clergy, nor people, generally addicted to his Apostasy; whose Progenitors
also Vzziah and Jotham being orthodox Princes, it is not well imaginable how so
short a Reign as his, which lasted only sixteen years, could produce any
general defection. But if this in others, yet especially not in the Levites and
in Aaron's posterity; because these, who were selected for the sacred Ministry
in the worship of the God of Israel, yet had no such privilege in the service
of other Gods. For, for the worship of their Idols, the Kings as of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. -- 13.9. so of Judah, made others Priests, who were not descended
from Aaron, consecrated after the manner of the Levitical Priests, only with
more Sacrifices; 2 Chr. 13.9. compared with Exodus 29.1. who are called
Chemarim, 2 King. 23.5. [ And Josiah put down the Chemarim, i.e. the idolatrous
Priests, whom the Kings of Judah had ordained etc.] see concerning these
likewise in Zeph. 1.4. and Hos. 10.5. tho I deny not but that sometimes some of
the Levitical Priests might fall away to idolatry, and officiate amongst these.
[Yet see their constancy in the defection of Jeroboam and his sons, who, it is
said (2 Chr. 11.13, 14.) the Priests and the Levites, that were in all Israel,
left their suburbs and their possessions, and came to Judah and Jerusalem,
because Jeroboam and his Sons would not permit them to execute their office
unto the Lord.] But then when any of these Priests so Apostatized, they were
never afterward permitted, tho penitent, to approach to God's Altar, or
officiate in Holy things before the Lord, as I shall show you presently.

Ahaz. Next, for the Apostasy of Manasses, which was far much greater yet, (see
2 Chronicles. 33.16.) where in the latter end of his days the true worship of God
was restored, and the Priests of the Lord officiated in the Temple. See
likewise 2 Chro. 34. and 35. chapter where Josiah in his Reformation, begun before
by Manasses his Grandfather, had the assistance of the Priests and Levites, and
amongst the rest, of the High Priest Hilkiah, who also found in the Temple the
book of the Law, (probably the Original, which it was commanded that it should
be put in a place made for it in the side of the Ark, Deuteronomy. 31.26. and now it
was found in the cleansing of the Temple,) and communicated it to the Prince,
who therefore long before this had learnt God's true Service, not from the
Scriptures, but from the Priests. Now none of these Priests and Levites, who
assisted Josiah, did apostatize at all in the days of Manasses. For touching
idolatrous Priests, King Josiah, who performed, as the last, so the exactest
Reformation of any Prince of Judah, proceeded so severely against them, as to
sacrifice them upon their Idol-Altars, (see 2 Kings 23.20. according to the
Prophecy of him. 1 Kings 13.2.) And even touching those other Levitical
Priests, who had formerly offered sacrifices in the High places, tho these to
the God of Israel; he would not permit them afterward to officiate at the
Lord's Altar in Jerusalem, but only indulged them their diet, with the rest of
the Priests. See 2 Kings 23.7, 9. Agreeable to which is that charge in Ezekiel.
44.10. that those Priests, who had ministered formerly to Israel, before their
idols, should not come near to do the Office of a Priest unto the Lord, nor
come near to any of his Holy things, in the most Holy place, but only be
Under-Ministers in the Sanctuary. Those Priests therefore that officiated in
Josiah's days, had not formerly revolted in the days of Manasses. Add to this
that Manasses his times were not also destitute of Prophets, sent from God to
him, and his people: 2 Kings 21.10. By whom also Esaias is said (by the Jewish
Tradition) to have suffered a most cruel death, sawn asunder.

Josiah, before the destruction of Jeruvalem, they were not very long, not
above twelve years to the first Captivity. Again, these times, tho very
corrupt, yet after Josiah's purging of the Land, not equalling the former
Apostasy of Manasses, therefore the Captivity chiefly charged on his Guilt. In
these times some of the Princes and Great men good, as Ahikam, Jer. 26.24. a
powerful man under Josiah, 2 Kin. 22.12. and Ebedmelech ( Jer. 30.39.) by whom
Jeremy was several times befriended, Jer. chapter 26 and 36. and Seraiah and
Baruch, Jer. 51.59. -- 43.6. and Daniel with his three Companions, Dan. 1.1, 6.
and Mordecai, Esth. 2.6. In these times too were many Prophets, Vriah Jer.
26.21. Zephaniah, and the Priests, Jeremias and Ezechiel. And in the same times
where the Idolatrous Priests are rejected by the Lord, so it is testified in
chapter 44. of Ezech. who began to prophecy some few years before the last
Captivity, Ezekiel. 1.2. of some others of the Priests, that they persevered
upright, see chapter 44.15. But the Priests the Levites, the Sons of Zadock (either
of Zadock mentioned 1 Kin. 2.35. and 1 Chronicles. 6.8. or of Sadock mentioned 1 Chronicles. 6.12. Grandfather to Hilkiah the High Priest in Josiah's time,) that
kept the charge of my Sanctuary when the Children of Israel went astray from
me, they shall come near to me, to minister unto me, etc. Some Priests
therefore there were through all those evil times, whom God accepted and owned.
And for those others after Josiah's days, who are so often complained on, tho
some of them perhaps fallen away to Idolatry, yet are they chiefly accused (as
also the Kings) for the wickedness of their Lives, and neglect of their duty,
and for Covetousness, and particularly for undertaking to foretell good things
to a wicked people, instead of exhorting them to repentance; and lastly, for
persecuting the true Prophets, who foretold bad things, Jer. 23.26, 27, 28, 29.
Chapters. This that the Church of God, if always it had a being, had not this
being, especially after the Mosaical Economy, without some Orthodox Clergy
concurring to the Constitution thereof, and administering holy things therein,
and was never a Flock without some Pastors.

Pharisees and Sadducees, and some others,) both professing the Observance of
Moses his Law, and the Worship of the God of Israel; but only into two parts,
one falling away from, and deserting Moses's Law, and the God of Israel. So
that here the people could not be put to any doubt (how numerous soever any
part happened to be at some time in comparison of the other) whom they were to
obey and follow as their true Guides and Governors, where one part openly
renounced the God of Israel and his Laws. But if any Division should have been
amongst that Clergy, which all adhered to the God of Israel, neither here could
the people mistake their Guides; for they were always to be guided by the major
part of these, especially if the High Priest also himself concurred and joined
with it. And if you ask, What if that, which is now a Minor part amongst these
Ecclesiastical Judges, and is condemned by the rest, in time happens to
over-number the rest? I answer, That these two Parties shall always stand
opposite to one another, and Truth divide it self from error, and the
Innovators still either be cast out, or also go out from the others; who, as
Innovators also when they first are either cast out, or do go out, are easily
discerned by their paucity; tho after wards such a defection may be, that they
may outnumber the Catholics themselves. These two bodies then standing thus
distinct, Id est verum (as Tertullian says concerning discerning Heresies)
quodcunque primum; id adulterum quod posterius. That which is the former, and
was formerly also the more numerous, is the lighter; and it only, or, in any
dissent, the major part thereof, is to be adhered to, and obeyed. Of which
matter see more below, and Trial of Doctrines, 32. Sectaries are either always
the fewer number, or at lest the fewer at their going out; and the former body
of the Orthodox and Catholic Clergy never afterward joining with them, how
numerous soever. As for the Sadduces, their Sect was as gross for their
Tenants, ( Mar. 12.24, 27.) so inconsiderable for number, and none, or no
considerable party of the Sanedrim. Thus then, as in the Apostasy of some pant,
yet there never wanted a true and Catholic Clergy to guide the people; so the
people never wanted also a sufficient evidence to know what Clergy were their
true Guides; which Guides once found and known, they were now to lay aside
their own judgment, and follow theirs.

Kin. 17.13, 14. 2 Chronicles. 24.19 -- 36.15, 16. Jer. 25.4. -- 35.14, 15. Mat.
23.34. Their chief Judges, and their Priests also, being sometimes Prophets, as
Deborah, Samuel, David, Jeremiah, Ezechiel, Zachariah (2 Chronicles. 24.20.) and
others. Whose Misson from God was sufficiently testified to the people, by
God's giving the power of Miracles to some by fulfilling the. Predictions of
others in matters of a speedy accomplishment, that so in other things they,
might be credited, God suffering none of their words to fall to the ground,
Deuteronomy. 18.22. Jer. 28.9. 1. Sam. 3.19.20. [God let none of his words fall to the
ground, and all Israel knew that Samuel was established to be a Prophet] see 1
Kin. 17. Elijah's drought. Jer. 28.16, 16, 17. Hananiah's dying the same year.
Such instances might be many. And these extraordinary Directors and Instructers
of the people, were sent commonly in the most peccant times, and to the more
guilty Princes both of Judah and Israel. So in Judah, Shemaiah the Prophet was
sent to Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 12.5 To Jehoram, by reason of his matching with
Ahab's Daughter, (much more wicked than any of his Forefathers). Eliah's Letter
2 Chronicles. 21.12. -- besides that in those wicked times of him and his Son was
Jehojada the High Priest an extraordinary person, 2 Chronicles. 24.15. who
aftersward reformed the Church, 2 Chronicles. 23. To Joash, revolting after
Jehoiadah's death, was sent the Prophet Zechariah, Jehoiadah's Son, 2 Chronicles.
24.20. To Amaziah also, when he in his later days turned aside, was, another
Prophet sent, 2 Chronicles. 25.15. Afterward God sent Zechariah, a Prophet, for the
guide of Vzziah his Son; who after Zechariah's death presuming to meddle with
Holy things, was sharply rebuked, and thrust out of the Temple by the zealous
Priests, 2 Chronicles. 26.5, 17, 20. In wicked Ahaz's time, were many Prophets sent
in a time of much iniquity, Hosea, Amos, Micha, Isaiah, and others of the Minor
Prophets, then or sooner. To Manasses also, and the people of his days, were
Prophets sent, see 2 King. 21.10. and 2 Chronicles. 33.10. who spoke unto them, but
they would not hearken. Lastly, in the times after Josiah, were the Prophets
Jeremiah, Ezechiel, Zephaniah, and others; rising betimes, and sending his
Messengers, because he had compassion on his people, and on his dewlling place,
as it is said 2 Chronicles. 36.15. And to these extraordinary Prophets, being
forerunners and types of our Savior, the great Prophet that was promised,
Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. where those who well-inclin'd went with great reverence to
resort to hear the words of the Lord from them, denouncing God's judgments upon
sin, preaching repentance, and upon it eternal redemption by the future
Messiah. See Ezech. 8.1. -- 33.31. Jer. 36. 2 King. 4.23.

Deuteronomy. 31.25. Out of which the Priests had a Transcript; and out of this
another Copied for the King, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. But that such Copies were not
very common, see 2 Chronicles. 17. 9. where the Priests and Levites, that were sent
by Jehoshaphat from Jerusalem to teach in the Country, are said to have taken
the Book of the Law with them; and 2 King. 22.8, 10, 11. where the Book of the
Law, perhaps the Original, after Manasses his persecution, is said to have been
found by chance, as it were, in the Temple, in repairing the House. Which I do
not urge, as if there had been no Book of the Law at all, preserved in any
hand, if this had not been found, but only to show, that it was then very
scarce; for that pious King, tho now in the Eighteenth year of his Reign, had
not seen it before; and ill times, between Hezechiah and Josiah, could not have
rendered it so rare, if the former times had abounded with Copies thereof. As
for the practice enjoined Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9. it was not for the entire body of
the law, but only for some choice and select pieces thereof, of more general
concernment, as may be perceived by the narrowness of the Tables, wherein these
were to be written.

Cor. 7.12. etc. Now under the Gospel I shall show you by and by, that God has
left Guides unerrable for all necessary knowledge in all matters of salvation.
These things therefore being first recommended to your consideration; as also
this, That the Donatists long since urged some of these Objections, for the
failing of the Church under the law, and that S. Austin has answered them in
defense of its not failing, see S. Austin. Epist. 48. De Vnitate Ecclesiae,
cap. 12,13. -- Contra Donat. post Collationem. 20. c.

Jer. 23.27, 28. etc. Again, some Prophetical only of the falling away of that
Church, after the coming of the Messiah, and substitution of the Church of the
Gentiles. Again, That some indeed speak of the falling away, in some times, of
a great part of the Priests, if not into Heresy, yet unto Open idolatry. But
yet this we say hinders not, but that the people in all times might have some
orthodox Clergy to adhere to, and this a body distinct, and easily discernable,
from the party falling away, as has bin showed before in Consid. 3. p. 33. and
amongst them had the High Priest for their chief Guide, who cannot be showed in
any of those times to have A postatized to idolatry. And this body of Clergy
that persevered orthodox, we may well imagine to nave behaved themselves, for
their Courts or Sanedrim, for their Assemblies and such Divine Services, as
might be performed without the Temple, in some such manner, under the
persecuting Kings of Judah, as the Apostles, and their Successors did under the
persecuting Emperors Lastly, that when the Prophets in some places name all the
Clergy or Priests to be ignorant, blinded etc. they mean (for the reasons given
above in Consid. 2. p. 28.) only many of them; All of such a place, of such a
relation or sect, there; in a manner all, as is not unusual elsewhere: see Ps,
14.3. Phil. 2.21. which answer is not mine, but was given along ago by S.
Austin to the Donatists urging such texts. ( De unitate Ecclesiae c. 1.) --
Plerumque Sermo Divinus impias turbas Ecclesiae sie redarguit tanquam omnes
tales sint, and nullus bonus omnino remanserit. Inde quippe admonemur in suo
quodam numero eos dici omnes etc. and contra Donat. post collat. 20. -- More
suo Scripturalloquitur, quae sic arguit malos, tanquam omnes in eo populo mali
sint, and sic consolatur bonos, tanquam omnes ibi tales sint. -- In populo
Corinthiorum, quod dicimus, demonstramus, ne forte arbitrentur Prophetarum
tantum moris fuisse, sic arguere reprehensihiles quasiomnes in eo populo
arguantur etc.

Israel, for all this time. God's true worship was preserved in Shiloh, at
least where the Ark, Tabernacle, and Altar was settled, and which the
piously-affected yearly frequented. See Josh. 8.1 -- Jud. 18.31. 1 Samuel 1.3. By
others, of the times of Jeroboam. But here Israel falling away, God had still
his true Church in Judah.

Aaron was before his being installed High Priest. In this, his and the peoples
defection, both Moses, then the supreme Governor in Ecclesiastical affairs,
and all the Tribe of Levi, remained not only constant, but valiant and zealous
Professors of the true Religion, for which God afterward chose his Tribe for
the sacred, Ministry. See Exodus 32.27. Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9. Malach. 2.5, 6. Lastly,
Aaron's Guilt (tho great) was rather in his being for fear (instead of a
corrector) a complier with, than a Founder of the peoples Idolatry.

Vrijah was but of one person, uncertain whether one of the chief Priests, or
of some meaner rank, but such an one as was the King's favorite; at least none
such is found named in the roll of the High Priests. 1 Chronicles. 6.4. His act not
consented to that we find, by any other of the Clergy. Besides, the fault
seems not great; the King's command having some show of piety, who pretended
the former Altar not large enough for the Sacrifices, and to reserve it for
more special occasions: mean while continuing the daily Oblations of the usual
morning and evening Sacrifice upon this new Altar, as was formerly, on the
other: see 2 Kings 16.15. Add to this, that the Prophet Esaiah selecting him
for a witness to his Prophecy, ( Esa. 8. 2.) together with Zechariah one of the
Reformers in Hezechiah's time, (2 Chronicles 29.13) argues him to have bin no person
unfound in his Religion.

Judah still, after the revolt of Israel; when also the Priests and Levites
revolted not with the people, but leaving their Cities and possessions, went
over to Judah, and so did all the more devout among the people; (see 2 Chro.
11.13, 14. -- 15.9.) which indeed rendered Judah and Benjamin much what equal to
all the other Tribes. Again, in Israel, in Jezebel's persecution, were Elijah,
and Michaih, and probably many more Prophets of the Lord, tho concealed, and
unknown to Elijah. In the 1 King. 18.3, 13. there is mention made of an hundred
of these Prophets; who, and many more, might be included in the 7000 mentioned
by the Lord. 1 Kin. 19.18. And these Prophets had their Colleges, and had
their followers among the people, who resorted to them on new Moons and
Sabbaths, to hear the law of God. For they were not called Prophets only for
predidiction of things future, (see 1 Chro. 15. and 25. chapter and 1 Cor. 14. chapter
but for their sequestring themselves for the studying of Divinity, and
celebrating the praises of God many times with raptures and sudden
inspirations, and with Music at the times of sacrificing, and other solemn
meetings, (and therefore their Colleges were commonly at some High place, and
for this teaching and instructing the people in the ways of God. Now we find
such Schools or Colleges of these Prophets in Israel, as in Samuel's time: one
at Na oath in Ramah, governed, and perhaps also first erected by Samuel, to
which College David retired when he first fled from Saul, see 1 Samuel 19.18,
19, 20. another in the Hill of God, probably Gibeon, where was the great High
Place, see 1 Samuel 10.5. comp. with -- 13.3. So also in the days of Jezebel (tho
probably in her great persecution these were dispersed) one at Bethel, and
another at Jericho, and another at Gilgal; governed by Elisha, see 2 King. 2.3,
5. -- 6. 1. -- 4.38. One of which Sons of the Prophets see sent with a Message
to Ahab himself, 1 King. 20.31. and another with a Message to Jehn, who
afterward slew Jezebel, 2 King. 9.1. both of them discernable who they were by
their Habits, see 1 King. 20.41. -- 2 King. 9.11. Pardon this digression, to
show you, That God's Worship in Israel was not utterly extinct in the Reigns of
those wicked Kings.

Moses was removed from place to place, and these also severed from one
another; from the time that the Ark was taken by the Philistines, and the
Temple not yet built, it seems not so unexcusable a fault as some would make
it, being a thing done in those days, most-what (especally for Peace Offerings)
by the Holiest of men, as Samuel and David, accepted by God, and sometimes
commanded by him. See Judge. 6.26. -- 13. 19. -- 1 Samuel 7.9. -- 9.12. -- 1 Samuel
16.2. -- 20.6. and in some manner excused, 1 King. 3.3. and 2 Chronicles. 33.17.
Indeed after the Temple erected, a far more heinous fault it was in the Priests
of Judah; but the better sort of this Clergy was not guilty of it, as may be
seen (in the forecited Text, 2 King. 23.7, 9.) by the punishment that Josiah
inflicted on such former Offenders. Yet in those times we find it done in
Israel in cases extraordinary, by the Prophet Elijah 1 King. 18.33. and
accepted by God ver. 38. and some such thing seems to be conceded to Naaman the
Syrian, 2 King. 5.17, 19.

etc. in that place where only he appointed it (which Worship might not be
performed elsewhere) was under the Law several times by wicked Kings
prohibited, and so several times intermitted by the Priests. But
notwithstanding this, the Legal Clergy still subsisted under those oppressing
Kings, as the Evangelical did under the persecuting Emperors, and continued all
those parts of God's Worship in more secret Assemblies, which might lawfully be
exercised elsewhere as well as in the Temple.

Judah, 1. Are no where said to have reformed all the Priests, or the High
Priest, or not to have found him as Orthodox as themselves. 2. Are not said to
have reformed the People against the Priests. 3. Are not said to have reformed
the People without the Priests. 4. Are every where said to have been assisted
in their Reformation by the Priest. See more of this hereafter, and before, 24,
etc. The most that Bishop Andrews says, in answer to Bellarmin ( Tort. Tort.
p. 365.) says, in behalf of these Kings, is this; That these Kings reformed
citra or ante doclarationem Ecclesiae: but he says, not contra declarationem;
and to make good his citra or ante, has only the strength of a Negative
Argument, -- Tortus loca aliquot apponere debuit, ubi Ecclesiae declaratio
praecessit. Which argument is this: There is set down no such Declaration,
therefore there was no such. An Argument of little strength always, less here,
where so succinct a relation is made of so many hundred years, and chiefly of
the actions of the Kings, not of the Church or Clergy. But yet of whom may we
think did Hezekiah and Josiah, the Sons of such wicked Parents, learn the
Religion to which they reformed the people, but from some of the Clergy? And is
not this, enough (suppose it) for a declaratio praecessit? The King's power is
more effective for a Reformation than the Priests, because his Civil Sword awes
men more than the Spiritual; and therefore there King's part in it is more
spoken of (especially in a story written chiefly of the Kings), except Jehoiada
the Priest's Reformation, when the King was a Child, 2 Chronicles. 23. But the
Kings, without Priests, in Church Matters may reform nothing, because he is to
learn from the Priests God's Law, and what concerning it he is to reform. The
King may command also the Priest to do his duty according to this Law; but then
he must first learn from the Priest what is the Priest's duty according to that
Law, i. e. he may constrain in Spiritual matters any Priest to do what the Body
of the Clergy, and the Councils of the Church inform him that the Priest ought
to do. And he may not constrain in Spiritual matters any Priest to do, what the
said Clergy and Councils declare against. The King may reestablish the Priests
in their Office, and exhort them to a faithful Administration thereof, and yet
it follows not, that these formerly deserted or neglected this Office; but only
that they were formerly ejected from it, and might for the future possibly
neglect it; and much less does it follow, that the King gave them any right to
it, or could justly deprive them of it.

Romans 2.14, 15. comp. 12.2. Neither do I say, that where God has not appointed
any one to seek the meaning of his Laws from another mouth, there he may not (
caeteris paribus, that is, where he thinks his own abilities as great as other
men's) judge for himself; and we ought to presume, that where God has set no
such Directors over us, there his Laws are delivered with clearness enough to
be understood by our selves. But 3ly, This only I say, That those to whom God
in his overflowing goodness has besides his Laws left also Guides, and
commanded them to obey these, such cannot innocently withdraw their obedience
from these Guides; ought not to use their private judgment against these; are
safe, if these Guides err, in following them, tho not the Guides safe, in no
better conducting them; and that, tho in some times, these Guides, to whom God
refers us, for knowing his will, may be much more corrupt than in others;
yet that these, by God's care over his people, can never so grossly err, as
that their followers shall not receive from their doctrines all necessary
knowledge for salvation; and that this is sufficient to tie us always to their
obedence. 1. Because we cannot promise our selves this security in following
our own private judgments, which we have in following theirs, for private men
are not secure upon their own judgment from falling into fundamental errors, as
perhaps the Sadduces did in relinquishing the Moses-chair-men of their times.
2ly. Because if any mortal error should be supposed to have seized upon these
Supreme Governors, on whom by his appointment all others depend, it is to be
hoped that God will never suffer it long, but either change their opinions, or
the persons. For in all extremities God sends speedy relief.

p. 4. of unfailing Guides and Judges for Spiritual matters in the times of the
Law; now we come to the times of the Gospel.

Where 1. Observe, that if in these we prove an unfailing Church Authority, to
whose judgment and sentence we ought always to submit, tho under the Law it
were much otherwise, and tho all that is said hitherto be cancelled; yet this
sufficiently serves the intent of our Discourse, namely, to procure due
obedience to the present Church Governors. And indeed there want not many
motives to persuade us, that tho the law never had any such highly-priviledged
Guides, yet the Gospel has, and therefore that no arguments taken from the one
can conclude any thing concerning the other. Because the Gospel advances to a
much higher perfection than the Law, nay to the highest; and is to have no
further Testaments or Manifestations of God's will to succeed it, as the Law
and Old Testament was: ( Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, 19. Heb. 9.8, 9, 10.) Because the
Minister of this is not a Servant, but the Master of the House himself; the
last Legislator, the last Reformer, and Consummator of all the my steries of
Religion, who came out of his Fathers bosom to reveal to men all his will, and
after him to come none other: Heb. 1.2.9, 10. 1 Jo. 17, 18. Jo. 4.25 Because
the Church under the Gospel has a much nobler Priesthood founded in a
Succession to this Son of God, has a far nobler Sacrifice, a far nobler
Unction of the Holy Ghost in the much more copious effusions thereof, called
Spiritus veritatis, Jo. 14.17. and promised to lead them into all truth, as
well as holiness. Jo. 16.13. -- A far more extended and stronger Tradition in
the Gospel spread over all Nations, and a far more numerous Sanedrim, if I may
so call the Churches Councils, than the Law had; and higher and clearer
promises made to these, of the Son of God, the Truth's perpetual presence with
and assistance of them; as I shall now show you.

Moses his chair to guide the people in matters of the law, that there are
others placed in Christ's Chair to guide God's people in all matters of the
Gospel, whose judgment and sentence in all their decisions the subjects of the
Church ought to follow and obey, appears 1. from many texts of Scripture.

See first that text in the Gospel Matt. 18.15. etc. answering to that other
formerly urged in the law, Deuteronomy. c. 17. v. 8. etc. -- If thy brother shall
trespass against thee, [ i.e. either by way of personal offense, or by way of
scandal, of which our Savior had bin speaking before v. 6, 7. whereby any
great offense of our brother, against God, against his neighbor, or himself
becomes matter of our cognizance, as fellow members of the same Body, and who
should be always so charitably affected to him, as not to suffer sin upon him,
Lev. 19.17.] go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, etc. If he
will not hear thee, then take with thee two or three more, etc, [convent, and
arraign him, as it were, before some neighbors.] If he shall neglect to hear
them, tell it [his fault and neglect] unto the Church; but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen, and a Publican, [as a
person excommunicated, and not to be a companied with. Luke 15.2.] Verily I say
unto you, whatsoever ye [before whom such matters are brought] shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall [upon such offenders
penitence] loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Again. I say unto you,
that if two of you [any small assembly] shall agree [together] on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall [resolve on and] ask [to have it ratified,]
it shall be done for them of my Father. For where [any such assembly tho but]
two or three are gathered together in my Name, [and by my authority delegated
to them, (see 1 Cor. 5.4. 2 Cor. 2.10)] there am I [whom the Father hears
always] in the midst of them.

Church [Tell it unto the Church] v. 17. is to be understood Clergy, is clear
from what follows v. 18. whatsoever ye shall bind etc. comp. with Mat. 16.19.
Jo. 20.23. and from what follows v. 20 comp. with Mat. 28.19, 20. And 2. That
here is meant the Clergy, not only that were then in being, the Apostles; but
that should succeed them through all following Ages, is clear both from the
same occasions of repairing to the Churches Tribunal, v. 15. occurring in all
ages, and from the power of binding and loosing, as necessary in one age as
another, and unquestionably exercised by the Apostles Successors; concerning
which matter I refer you to what is said before. 36. n. 1, 2. and below and
Church Government part. 2.. 27. etc. 3ly, That the Order for telling, and the
Precept of hearing this Clergy, the Church of all Ages is to be understood, not
only concerning some injuries, or wrongs done to us by our brother, but
concerning other faults and evil manners, whereby our brother offends God and
the Christian Society, whereof he is a member, appears from that expression v.
15. If he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; not gained thy loss in
receiving satisfaction, but gained thy Brother in procuring his reformation.
Again, that is to be understood not only concerning trespass of Manners
neither, but also of Doctrines and Opinions much more, as it seems deduceable
from the context, v. 6, 7. mentioning scandals, of which, false doctrines and
opinions are the chiefest, and as it seems clear a minori ad majus; if others,
our Brothers trespasses be matter of complaint, and of the Churches cognizance,
much more these; any corruption in a matter of faith being generally far more
dangerous and pernicious, than a corruption in manners. See Jo. ^.11. Gal.
5.20. evil deeds, heresies, etc. and Romans 2.8. the contentious not obeying the
truth. -- 2 Pet. 3.16. Wresting Scriptures to their own destruction. -- Tit.
1.11. Romans 16.17. Act. 15.. Subverting men's souls, and deceiving the hearts of
the simple. -- Jud. 1. perishing in gainsaying. And our zeal to God's truth and
honor being much to be preferred before that to our own wealth, honor, or
security. So is it evident and put out of doubt by many other Scriptures, which
may be brought in illustration of this; 1. In which Scriptures, both the
members of the Church are warned to mark and avoid such false teachers and
doctrines. And 2ly, The Church Governors are authorized to judge
controversies, and proceed in their censures against such teachers, and such
tenants as are contrary to the Doctrines formerly delivered by our Lord and his
Apostles. And 3ly. in which Scriptures also are contained several instances of
such judgments and proceedings.

Romans 16.17. 2 These. 3.14: 2 Jo. 10. where we are bidden to mark, to note those
that obey not, those that cause divisions, contrary to the Doctrines received
from the Apostles, to avoid, not to have company with, not to salute them, i.
e. to carry our selves toward them as Heathens and Publicans here; Matt. 18.18.
and to avoid such in like manner, as the Corinthians the incestuous person, (1
Cor. 5.11. compared with 7.13.) that is, by Excommunication and
Church Censures. Whence also was the custom in the Primitive Church of
Christians that traveled, to carry with them Letters commendatory from the
Bishop of the place, that so they might be admitted to the prayers and
communion in those Churches whither they went, scrupulous of joining with any
Heretics,

See for the 2d. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 11 etc. There is one Body, and one Spirit, -- One
Lord, one Faith: -- When he ascended up on high he gave gifts unto men. -- And
he gave some Apostles etc. some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith unto a perfect man. -- That we
henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro; and carried about with every
wind of doctrine by the slight of men etc. This then is one office of the
Churchmen, to edify the Church in the unity of the faith, and to keep them
steady in its Doctrines, that they be not carried about, now one way, now
another; and that they be not thus carried about, not only before the Gospel,
or other Books of the N. Testament were written, but also after; nay also, that
they be not carried about with several false glosses and misintepretations of
these Writings, of which very Writings S. Peter says, (2 Pet. 3.16.) that some
wrested them to their own destruction; therefore the members of the Church to
submit to their Doctrines, and to conform to their Faith, that there may be a
unity therein, One Lord, one Faith, one Body, one Spirit, an unity of the
Spirit kept in the bond of peace. v. 3. see Heb. 13.7, 9, 17. The like
obedience commanded to be given to these Church-rulers in respect of Doctrine,
and Faith. -- Remember them who have the rule! over you, and who have spoken
unto you the Word of God, whose faith follow. -- Jesus Christ the same for
ever. -- Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines. -- Obey them
etc. for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account. Account,
for the Precepts they give you, and for the Doctrines they teach you. Add to
these those Texts of the Apostle, charging Christians to be all of one
judgment, to speak the same thing, -- not to be wise in their own conceits. 1
Cor. 1.10. Romans 12.16. -- 15.5, 6. Phil. 1.27. -- 3.16. where the Apostle
seems not to mean their condescendence for opinion one to another; for which
rather who shall so yield, will still be in debate; but their union in the
doctrine of their Spiritual Superiors, in which he would have them all to
acquiesce. See 1 Cor. 4.16, 17. -- 11.1, 2. Phil. 3.17. Romans 16.17. 2 These.
3.14. the succeeding Ecclesiastical Superiors being commanded still to retain
and continue the doctrine of their Predecessors. 1 Timothy 1.3. 2 Timothy 1.13. --
2.2. After the forenamed mission Ephesians. 4.11. see 1 Cor. 14.29.32. where the
Apostle amongst other things submits also the doctrines of the Prophets to the
judgment of the Prophets, [let the other judge,] and 1 Timothy 4.11. -- 6.3.5. and
Titus 1.11. and 3.10, 11. where he gives order to the Church Governors, ( Tim.
and Titus,) that touching error and heresy in matter of faith, such persons (if
any discovered) after due admonishment, should be withdrawn from, should be
excommunicated and silenced by him; their persons rejected, c. 3. their mouths
stopped. c. 1.

Act. 15.2. etc. where a controversy riseing in the Church of Antioch, by
reason of some teaching there, that the Gentiles were to be circumcised, and to
keep the Mosaical Law, without any such commandment from their Superiors; Act.
15.44. who were opposed by Paul and Barnabas; the Antiochians, tho many amongst
them having eminent gifts of the Spirit, do repair for a final decision thereof
to the judgment of the Apostles at Jerusalem; where after an Assembly called,
v. 6. we find a consulting and disputing on this matter (from the believing
Pharisees, still zealous of their law,) and then a giving of their several
votes, and a deciding of it, not from pretense of immediate inspiration, or
revelation, but from arguments. 1. Of Gods converting the Gentiles (showed in
several instances,) and giving them the Holy Ghost (as to the Jews,) without
any previous using such Jewish ceremonies: And 2ly, from the Predictions of the
Prophets, concerning the calling of the Gentiles in the latter days, as a
distinct people, not to be translated by circumcision etc into the Jewish
Religion, but to be transplanted and counited together with the sews into the
Christian. v. 7, 12, 13, 19. After this, the sending of their Constitutions to
the particular Churches under this style: It seemed good unto the Holy Ghost,
and to us, to lay upon you etc. v. 28. See again (1 Timothy 1.20. compared with 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. and 4.14, 15.) the Apostle excommunicating Hymeneas, Alexander,
and others, for their false doctrines: -- and see Rev. 2: 2, 14, 15, 20. the
Lord Jesus commending the Angel, i.e. Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, for
trying, and not tolerating or bearing with the false Apostles: and reprehending
the Angels of the Churches of Thyatira and Pergamas, for the contrary; for
their suffering the false Prophetess Jezabel to teach and seduce his servants,
and for their tolerating the Nicolaitans, who indulged the Christians more
liberty; 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. in complying with Heathen Religions, and held it
lawful to eat of their sacrifices, and to commit fornications like them, some
unnatural ones also which usually accompanied Idolatry. See 1 Kings 14.24. --
15.12. 2 K. 23.7.

Mat. 18.17. which is to be complained and repaired to, in matters of
trespasses unreform'd, and to be heard and obeyed, upon pain of being reckoned
as an Heathen and Publican, of Excommunication, and being bound both in Earth
and Heaven, Mat. 18.18. that by this Church, I say, is meant the Clergy. 2. The
Clergy of one Age as well as another. 3. This Clergy to be heard and obeyed, as
well in matters of Theological Controversies, and of Doctrines, as in any other
matters; as well in these, if not more.

Now 4ly. That this Hearing and Obedience due to them, is not only an
obligation of non-contradicting, but of assenting to such their Doctrines, and
Decisions of Controversies, so far as they require assent; appears likewise
from the aforenam'd Texts, as likewise those following. Because these
Church Officers are called Teachers and Guides, which have reference to Truth,
as well as Judges and Rulers, which have reference to Peace; and we charged to
hear them, as Christ; who also have received from Christ a Spirit leading them
into all Truth, and a promise that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against them, etc. Of which more anon. Again; Because they are said to be set
over the Church, that there may be in it an unity of faith, Ephesians. 4.13. and one
faith, ver. 5. and not only a bond of peace, but an unity of the spirit, and of
judgment, and speaking the same thing, etc. Ephesians. 4.13, 3. 1 Cor. 1.10. That
their Subjects may not be carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
sleight of men; not carried about with them, i.e. not believe them. Now he who
by these Superiors may be restrained from believing them, is hereby enjoined to
believe the contradictories of them, namely,, the Positions of the Church; and
if the people are enjoined to believe this, then also their Seducers. But were
the people obliged only to the obedience of non-contradiction, and not of
assent toward such Superiors; then whereas some Tenants are exclusive of
Salvation, and many more having dangerous effects upon the lives and manners of
Christians, see Act. 15.24. -- 2 Pet. 3.16. (and wherefore are the Teachers
prohibited, if the Doctrines were not pernicious, and to be renounced?) Yet is
there no Church Authority which can afford any remedy to this great evil. It
can indeed provide for its own peace, but not its subjects safety, whilst it
must tolerate the liberty of all (tho destructive) opinions; and may exact no
more than a non-gainsaying. Again; Because it is clear, that these
Church-Guides may not only reject and excommunicate false Teachers and
Seducers, but the Heretical also, when any way they come to be discovered
guilty thereof; consider Tit. 3.10, 11. where observe ver. 11. that their
autocatacrisie, or being condemned by their own Conscience, (tho there be no
endeavor, by divulging their Heresy, of infecting other men's Consciences
therewith) is rendered a sufficient ground of their rejection; nor may such
Heretical person be restored again to the Church's Communion upon his engaging
to conceal his Heresy, but upon his quitting and renouncing it. Since then
these Church-Guides have power to excommunicate Heretics, i. e. men for
holding false Opinions in matters of Faith; i. e. men for their dissent, at
least after some previous admonitions, and reasons sufficient to convince; or
men for their obstinacy in dissent; which obstinacy is not delible but by
yiedling assent. This I say infers, that there is due to these Church-Guides an
Obedience of Assent; or else these Guides may excommunicate one for
not-performing an Obedience which is not due. (See this more largely prosecuted
in Oblig. of Judgm. 4.) And again, consider 1 Timothy 4.11. -- 6.3, 5. where the
Apostle writes thus to Timothy; These things command and teach, -- and if any
man do teach otherwise, and consents not to wholesome words, etc. from such
withdraw thy self. Lastly, Because at least in Agendis, in all those things
which by these Ecclesiastical Judges are required to be done, we must either
yield the obedience of Assent, or we can yield none at all (save that called
Passive Obedience, which is a submitting to the punishment appointed for
disobedience); for who can oblige to do a thing, does oblige us also to think
it lawful to be done, else we may never do it. If then this Church Authority
may so far, in Agendis, determine to us what is lawful or unlawful; as, herein,
to exact assent from us to her Judgment; why may it not in the like manner, in
Credendis, determine to us what is true and false? Or, what reason can there
be, that this should be more unerring, or more creditable, in truths practical
than speculative, where both equally necessary.

Mat. 28.19, 20. -- 18.20. compared with 17.18. Rev. 1.13, 16. [the perpetual
assistance of our Saviour]. Joh. 14. 16, 26. -- 16. 13. 1 John 2.20, 27. 1 Cor.
12.7, 8. [the perpetual assistance of the Holy Ghost.] Mat. 16.18, 19. Luke
1.16. 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Timothy 2.19. compared with 16, 17, 20 Ephesians. 4.13. compared
with 11. [their indefectibility]. The particular contents of which Scriptures
set down in the former Treatise, 31. I forbear here to repeat; you may be
pleased there to review them.

Upon the expressions of which Scriptures it is there noted:

1. That these promises of not failing in Truth, are made to the Church, or to
Christians, not hypothetically only (as some would have it) if they shall not
fail to do their duty; but absolutely, that there shall always continue a
Church, or a Christianity in being, that shall not fail to hold the Truth, and
do their duty.

2. That these promises are made absolutely, not only to Christians taken in
general, some or other of them; Sheep, or Shepherds; Laity, or Clergy; as some
would have it: but particularly to the Clergy, the Pastors of these Sheep, and
the Guides of this Church.

3. To these, not of some of one Age, those of the First, or Third, or Fourth,
or Second, as some would limit; but those of all Ages, usque ad consummationem
saculi.

i. e. not to some or other of them, still whom we please to adhere to; to some
small number of inferior Clergy in some part or other of the world, either
dispersed through several, or united in one particular Church, either departing
from, or ejected by all the rest of the Clergy of the same, or of other
Churches (in which a few straglers would fain verify our Savior's promises,
when they pronounce all the rest erroneous,) but to that Clergy, which the
Church ought to take for her Guide. Which Guide, when as this Spiritual Court
consists not of one, but many persons, when ever there is any disagreement
therein, must be the major part; and, when as there is also an established
subordination of these persons and courts; must be the superior rather than the
inferior persons, and the more universal and comprehensive Synods, rather than
those Synods which are of a less circuit, and smaller company; otherwise any
Heretic, if a Clergyman, may be entertained for a guide: and whenas our
Savior has enjoined the people to obey their guides, yet has this people no
means to know who these are, unless when all the Clergy of the Universe are of
one opinion. Now he that appoints us to follow a Guide in what he shall enjoin
us, and then leaves us no way (when our Guide consists not of one but many
persons, and two parties of them contradict one another) to know which of them
is to be our Guide; it is all one, as if he left us no Guide: And he that ties
us, beside the use of our own judgment, to obey and follow some Ecclesiastical
person or other only, not obliging to the most or major part, to a superior
more than inferior person or Court, revolves our obedience only to our own
judgment; i.e. to choose that side which we judge the rightest, as we follow the
counsel of that friend, who we do think speaks most reason, without
acknowledging any obedience to his authority, and then left to this choice;
what opinion can we take up so absurd, in which we cannot find some Clergyman
or other for a Leader? Of these four Observations see what is more largely
discoursed in Church Government, Par. 2. from. 26. to 29.

5ly. From the same texts another thing is clear,

6ly, These Church-guides, to avoid such ill consequences, being made the
unfailing Repository of all Truth absolutely necessary to Salvation, will it
not also after this be reasonably deduced, that they are so too for all other
truths that are so far necessary, as that the error contrary to them some way
hazards salvation, or by some consequence overthrows any absolutely necessary
truth? I say, may not this also reasonably be concluded for these Reasons? 1.
Because we find no restriction of our Savior's promise of assistance, only for
these absolutely necessary fundamentals; and there must be granted need of this
his assistance further, so long as there is granted further danger. 2. Because
if we confine the non-failing guidance of these Church-guides only to absolute
necessaries, this will not extend so far as the points of the three Creeds, a
very few Articles of which are by the Learned thought Truths absolutely
necessary. 3. Because those of the Church-Doctors will not consent to an
universal inerrability of these Church-guides, but restrain it only to some
truths; whereas the Scriptures make no limitation, but do it on such pretenses
as these. 1. Because those wherein they say these may err, are by-and
unnecessary truths, to which the Churches curiosity or weakness may carry her
beyond her Rule. See Bishop Laud, 21. n. 5. 2ly. Because they are unprofitable
curiosities and unnecessary subtilities, for which the Promise was not made;
because Deus non abundat in superfluis. Because they are such points as may be
variously held and disputed, without hurt or prejudice to faith. See Dr. Potter
5. p. 150. etc. 3ly. So then in all dangerous points, as well as in absolutely
necessary, the Divine assistance and the Church-guides infallibility I hope
will be still allowed. 2ly. They say, the Church errs not in absolutely
Fundamentals, because the Word of God in all such points is so plainly and
manifestly delivered unto Her, that it is not possible that she should
universally fall from it, or teach against it. See Bishop Laud, 21. n. 5: But
then there seems also to be good reason, why other points dangerous to
salvation, or undermining fundamentals, should be delivered clearly in the same
Word of God; or if not clearly, there is the more reason still, that the
Churches-guides should be infallibly assisted in these, which both are
dangerous, and the Churches Rule (the Scriptures) in them obscure. See more of
this in Chapter Government, 2. part 32.

7. If these Church-guides have at least a Promise to be infallible in
Necessaries, namely those made in Necessaries; for who can deny assent to a
granted infallible Proponent? And if assent must be granted to them in
necessaries, then, as Mr. Chillingworth most acutely observed, to all that they
shall judge a Necessary. [If ( says he, p. 150.) the Church be an infallible
Director in Fundamentals, then must we not only learn fundamentals of Her, but
also learn of Her what is fundamental, and take for fundamental which she
believes to be such: In performance whereof (says he) if I knew any one Church
to be infallible, I would quickly be of that Church.] This will hold at least
for so many of Christians, as will not pretend the skill themselves of
separating necessaries, and not-necessaries. And these Church-guides judging
what is necessary, especially if they take it in such a larger sense as we have
showed but now, that they have reason to presume of our Savior's assistance
therein, then perhaps so many of their decisions will receive from them the
denomination of Necessary, as that we shall not think meet, whilst assenting to
all these, to dissent from them in the rest. But however, if we yield assent to
all these, good reason there is why we should also in all the rest,
(abstracting from matters of fact, and matters not Spiritual) only putting in
this exception, unless any happen to be infallibly certain of the contrary to
what they decide, (for whosoever is so, I grant cannot yield assent;) but how
any one should be so, (debarring new revelations, and his having any Divine
evidence which the Church-guides have not as well as He,) I do not see;
especially when also having proposed to these Church-guides all the reasons and
grounds of his infallible certainty, yet he has not made them so.



1. Seeing that (if I may transfer the Apostle's argument, 1 Cor. 6. 3. from
persons to things) these being set over us to regulate our Judgment in the
greatest matters, how can they be conceived unfit to do it in the lesser?

2. Seeing that by our not-yeilding assent to all their Decisions, even those
also in non-necessaries, so long as they have made no distinct partition of
these two, we may incur a peril of withdrawing our assent in some thing
necessary; but by assenting to all, we are sure to have a right persuasion in
all necessaries, wherein these Guides have a Warrant not to fail; but not so,
private men undertaking to Guide themselves.

3. Seeing that in our erring together with our Guides (who are thus also to
give an account for our errors, Heb. 13.17.) so long as it is in
non-necessaries, our condition is not dangerous; but on the other side there
may be a great fault in us, in denying due obedience, tho in small matters.

4. Seeing that those who most vindicate the liberty of their own judgments,
do, to make these Guides the more liable to fallibility in non-necessaries,
plead the Scriptures to be in such points less perspicuous; but on the
contrary, this imperspicuity of them in the Scriptures argues the more need in
them of Guides.

5. Seeing that private men have reason to presume, that the Judment of so
many, so learned so ancient, as these Ecclesiastical Courts use to consist of,
is, where not absolutely infallible, yet much to be preferred before their own,
i.e. that of one single person, or of a few not so learned, not so experienced.
So Children wisely follow their Parents, and Scholars their Masters, tho
fallible, Judgments. Or putting our selves equal every-way, in parts, in
learning, etc. to all these; yet what help or means have we, or what diligence
do we use to discern Truth which these do not? Consult we former Church and
Tradition? so do they: And since the Writings of the Fathers, as well as the
Divine, are liable to diverse constructions and misunderstandings, doubtless
their exposition of these, as well as of the Scriptures, is to be preferred to
private men's. Again, these present Church-Guides, in any opposition or
difference from the former Church-Guides, having as high an authority as they,
if we pretend to yield obedience to the one, so we must to the other. Consult
we the Holy Scriptures? and what Scriptures have we, which they have not, and
which we have not first from them? And what can be clear therein to us, which
is not so to them? Or since no place of Scripture, tho never so plain in its
terms, may be so understood, as will render it contradictory to any other
place, how can such a man be secure enough of his diligence and wit in making
such a due collation of Scriptures, and collecting a right sense, where he
finds such a Body to oppose him?

But perhaps these Guides, tho more knowing then he, yet have not like
integrity. And what misguiding passions are these subject to in judging, to
which our selves are not much more? Or what self-interest do we find in them,
but only when we have a contrary our selves? Every one imagines himself to
stand in an indifferency to Opinions, when as indeed scarce any, by reason of
their education, fortunes, particular dependances, and relations, is so; and
meanwhile, like Icterical persons, he thinks that color to be in those he
looks upon abroad, which is only in himself. I know no greater sign of a
dis-interested, and an unpassionate temper of mind, than to be apt readily to
submit to another's judgment; and seldom it is, but much self-conceit and
spiritual pride do accompany singularity of Opinion. This have I said, to show
what reasons there are for our assent to the Doctrines and Determinations of
our Spiritual Guides, drawn from that measure of assistance and infallibility
which our Lord has promised them; tho other Scriptures had laid on us such
injunction. Of which subject see what is more largely discoursed in Obligation
of Judgment, from 5, to 9. and Infallibility, Church Government, Par. 2. 35.
Par. 3. 27. n. 1, etc.

That there is a Judge of Controversies appointed and left under the Gospel; to
all whose Decisions the Subjects of the Church ought to be obedient, and
acquiesce, as there was formerly under the Law. 2. Next, The same thing is
proved from the constant Practice of the Church, which we must not say to have
been mistaken in the just extent of her Authority.

1. The Church from time to time in her General Councils has judged and
decided Controversies as they arose, both in matters Practical and Speculative.
In Practicals, enjoining her Subjects, upon Ecclesiastical penalties, not only
not to gainsay, but also to do, them; and consequently enjoining them to
assent, that such things are lawful to be done. And in Speculatives also
enjoining her Subjects, not only not to gainsay her Decisions, but to profess
them; and consequently enjoining them to assent, that such her Positions are
true. For none may profess with his mouth, what he believes not with his heart.
Nay, further enjoining her Subjects to believe them; her Language for several
of her Determinations and Canons in those her Councils, which all sides allow,
being such as this: In her Canons, Siquis non confitetur, -- non profitetur, --
non credit, (putting several of her Determinations in the Creeds). And in her
Decisions, -- constanter tenendum, -- firma fide credendum. -- Nemo salva fide
dubitare debet, -- and the like. If it be said, that such ^ssent is required by
the Church, or her Councils, only to some, not all their Decisions: I answer,
that I contend not, that you are to yield your assent by virtue of Obedience
(whatever you ought to do in prudence) where they do not require it. Only let
it be granted, that it belongs to them, not you, to judge what, or how many
points it is meet for them to require, and for you to give your assent. And let
no such limitation as this be annexed to their Authority. That they require
assent to what is true, or to what is agreeable to God's word (not in theirs,
but) in his Opinion whose assent is required. For thus their Authority is
annihilated to this. That they may only require me to assent to that,
whatsoever I do assent to. Do what I will, or they make me.

non-confitentes, and the non-credentes in such main points as she thought
necessary to be believed. Which infers, either sin in dissenting from her
Judgment, and the Doctrines she defines; or that she faultily excommunicates
any on this account; or that she may lawfully punish another for that which the
other lawfully does. But if there be any Church that teaches; That every one
may examine her Doctrines, and where he judges or thinks these contrary to
Scriptures, that there he is not obliged to yield his assent; the same Church
cannot justly excommunicate such person for dissenting; i. e. for doing that
which she teaches him he may do. And then, since all that dissent from the
Church will pretend, that the Church-Doctrines seem to them to be contrary to
the Scriptures, it follows, such Church can justly excommunicate none at all
for any Heretical or false Tenent whatever. See more of this subject in
Church Government, Par ^. 34. and Par. 3. 29. -- Obligation of Judgment, 3, etc.

England, as will easily appear to you, if you please to view the 139, 140, 4,
5, 73, 12, 36, of the Synod held under King James 1603, and the 3, 4, 5, and
the Oath in the 6th Canon of the Synod under King Charles I. and what is argued
from them in Church Government, Par. 3. 29, etc. and after all these, to view
the Act of Parliament 13 Eliz. cap. 12. requiring Assent to the XXXIX Articles;
and the Title also prefixed to them, which says, That these Articles were
drawn up for the avoiding of diversities of Opinions, and the establishing of
Consent touching true Religion. It Subscription then to them does not extend to
Consent to the truth of them, the end is frustrated for which they were
composed. Lastly, If you please to view the Complaint for this cause, of the
Presbyterians in their Reasons showing necessity of Reformation, printed 1660.
See Church Government, Par. 3. 29. against the Canons and Articles of the
Church of England, as the Church of England does for the same cause against the
Canons and Articles of the Church of Rome.

in omnibus licitis and honestis, or the like; licitis, I mean lege divina. But
if we have any doubt concerning this, we are to repair from him, not to our own
judgment, but to the Spiritual Magistrates; and according as they shall declare
the lawfulness or unlawfulness hereof, we are to yield, or withdraw, our active
obedience to the Civil, neither can this Civil Magistrate justly punish us for
not observing his Laws, when pronounced by the Ecclesiastical Magistrate
opposite to the Divine. And in such case we may answer to them as the Apostles
(who were then the chief Ecclesiastical Judges) twice answered to the Sanedrim,
which was then exauthorized, that we ought to obey God rather than men. But to
the Ecclesiastcal Magistrate, we owe an obedience advanced beyond the former
limitation; being not only to do what they command, if it be lawful; or
subscribe or swear to what they require, if it be true; but to believe that to
be lawful or unlawful, that to be truth or error, I say in these Divine
matters, what they tell us is so, without repairing, concerning these, to any
other Judge. We are to yield the same obedience to these Delegates of Christ our
Lord touching Divine Laws, as to a Temporal Supreme Legislator concerning his
own Laws, that are made in things left purely indifferent by the Divine Laws;
(The Commands of which Temporal Legislators in the foresaid matters we are to
obey not only when we our selves judge that they do accord with his Laws, but
also, when we doubt of the meaning of his Laws, we are to learn their true
sense from him: to obey him in all his Laws, and to know from him what are his
Laws.) For as he or his Delegates have authority to determine Controversies
concerning the Secular Laws, to put an end to contentions; so have I showed the
Church Magistrates to have, to determine Controversies concerning the Divine
Laws.



For this are urged, first, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life, and they testifi^ of me. 2ly. Act. 5.17.1^. These
[the Bereans] were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received
the word [that Paul preached to them] with all readiness of mind, and searched
the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. 3ly. 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak
as to wise men, Judge ye what I say. 4ly. 1 John 4.1. Try the Spirits, whether
they be of God. 5ly. 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is
good. 6ly. Gal. 1.8, 9. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Gospel to you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.
To which Texts is added, the utter uselesness, as to Spiritual matters, of
private Judgment in such an universal submission required to a Judge.

i.e. in her General Councils, or in the most unanimous consent of those whom
our Savior, departing, left to be the Guides, of the Church, and Expositors of
the Scriptures. And if thus searching, we find the Doctrines of our Teachers
contrary to the Scriptures so expounded, we may and ought to withdraw our
belief from them. Or this trial, 3ly, by Scriptures, is of the doctrines of the
Church, i.e. of those doctrines which are delivered, not by a private Teacher,
but by a general consent of the Church-guides (at least the fullest that we can
discover). Or by General, or other Superior, Councils; or by the Apostles; or
by our Savior himself.

1. Now the allowance of such a trial may be understood in two senses: 1.
Either in this sense; Search or try my, or our, Doctrine by the Scriptures, for
you will surely find my Doctrine agreeing thereunto, if you do search right,
and as you ought; and in this sense, the trial, by the Scriptures, of the
Doctrines of the Church, nay of the Apostles, (S. Paul's by the Bereans,) nay
of Christ himself, Whether the Old Testament, as he urged, testified of him, is
both allowed, and recommended; for since there is no difference of the teaching
of Christ, or of S. Paul, or of the Church, from the teaching of the Scripture,
the one will never fear, but freely appeal to a trial by the other, if it be
rightly made.

2ly, it may be understood in this sense: Search and try my Doctrine by the
Scriptures; and if you in the search do not perceive it agreeable unto them, I
declare that you have no reason to believe, or that you are excusable in
rejecting my Doctrine. Now in this sense our Savior, or St. Paul, or the other
Scriptures, never recommended private men's searching, or gave any such
privilege to it, unless you put this clause, that they have searched aright.
But if you put in this clause; then is the searcher, after his searching, not
yet at liberty to disbelieve the Apostles or the Churches doctrine, till he is
sure first that he has searched aright. I say our Savior or the Scriptures
cannot recommend Searching in such a sense, or upon such conditions.

Paul, of the abrogating of Circumcision under the Gospel; neither can any body
be secure of his dis-engagement from all such letts of using a right judgment
in searching.

m diums, by which is proved to men the truth of such doctrines, and by which
not bearing witness to a falsity, one may discover himself to have made his
search of Scripture amiss, so often as he thinks it to contradict them. Such
mediums are, Miracles, and other mighty operations done by the power of the
Holy Ghost; upon which our Savior ( Jo. 5.36. and elsewhere,) and S. Paul, (
Romans ^5.19. 2 Cor. 12.12. 1 Cor. 2.4. Mark 6.20.) required belief and
submission to their doctrine, and universal Tradition; upon which the Church
also requires belief to the Scriptures; the same Tradition that delivered the
Scriptures, delivering also such doctrines and expositions of Scriptures as are
found in the Church So that a Pharisee searching and not finding in Scriptures
(by reason indeed that he searched them not aright) such testimony of Jesus
being the Messiah as was pretended, yet ought to have bin convinced, and to
have believed his doctrines from seeing his miracles; and from hence also to
have blamed his faulty search. So a Berean, searching and not finding in
Scripture such evidence of S. Panl's doctrine, suppose of the abrogation of the
Judaical Law by Christ, as was pretended; yet ought to have believed it from
the mighty works he saw done by S. Paul, or from the authority he, or the
Council at Jer salem ( Act. 15.) received from Jesus, working Miracles, and
raised from the Dead, as universal Tradition testified. And the same may be
said for the Churches Doctrines.

And therefore as there are some Scriptures, that bid us search the Scriptures,
because if we do this aright we shall never find them to disagree from the
Doctrines of the Church; and beause some doctrines of the Church are also in
the Scripture very evident: so there are other Scriptures (if those who are so
ready to search them on other, would search them also on this point,) that bids
us hear the Church; because our searching of Scriptures is liable sometimes to
be mistaken, and because in some things the Scriptures may seem difficult; In
which case God having referred us to the judgment of those whom he has
appointed to be the expounders thereof, ( Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10. Matt. 18.17. Luke
10.16.) cannot remit us again to the same Scriptures, to try whether their
expositions be right. Therefore that Text Gal. 1.8, 9. is far from any such
meaning; If the Church or Churchmen shall teach you any thing contrary to the
Scriptures, as you understand them, let these he Anathema to you; but rather it
says this; If an Angel, or I Apostatizing, (as some shall, Act. 20.30) shall
teach any thing contrary to the doctrines ye have received, that is, from the
Church, let him etc. which makes not against, but for the Churches Authority
very much.

search of Scriptures concerning our Lord's or his Apostles doctrines, is both
allowed, and recommended, because the Scriptures, rightly understood, and these
doctrines, perfectly agree. But a dissent from these doctrines, if upon a
search thought to be disagreeing, which the Objectors would infer, is not
allowed from the reasons formerly given. In the fourth Text, the Apostle speaks
of private Spirits to be tried, whether of God, by their conformity to the
common doctrines of the Scripture, and of the Church. See 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. The
5th includes a general trial, as well by the directions and expositions of the
Spiritual Guides, as dictates of the Scriptures the Rule. The 6th is expounded
before, If an Angel shall teach you any thing contrary to the doctrine you have
received from Christ's Ministers, or from the Church confirmed with Miracles,
let him be Anathema.

Matt. 24.11, 12. -- 24.38. Luke 18.8. compared with 7. Luke 17, 25, 26, 27,
etc. -- 21.35. and of the Apostles; 2 These. 2.3. 1 Jo. 2.18. 2 Timothy 3.1. 1 Cor.
11.19. 2 Pet. 2.1. etc. Rev. 20. c. 13.20.8, 9. and other places, speaking of
the power of Antichrist, and of his sitting in the Church of God; and in the
Church-story, the prevalency of Arrianism. In answer to the former, the
Scriptures: It is granted, that it seems in these latter times of the world
there shall be a great falling away from the faith; but that it is from
Christianity it self, and from the Church; as indeed we have already seen all
those flourishing Churches of Asia, and other Eastern and Southern parts, once
Christian, now overrun by the Doctrine of the Great Prophet of God, as he
styled himself, Mahomet; who sits and triumphs in those same places which were
once the chiefest Churches of God; and the love of many to Christ waxen cold by
the abounding of iniquity, and the terrible persections of the Turkish Empire,
the Image of the former Persecutor, the Heathen Roman Empire, to which Imago
Mahomet's doctrine has given life and vigor; and this decession we have seen,
and what more shall be seen hereafter, God knows. But this argues not that
Truth shall fail in all or the major part of the Doctors who remain still in
the Church, and profession of Christianity, but that the Church it self shall
sail of having so great an extent in the world, or her Guides of being so many
at some times as at others, yet at all times sufficiently apparent.

Arrianism; it seems that in these later times there shall be a falling away
too (within the profession of Christianity) from the faith, i.e. from that
faith which is orthodox, by many dangerous Heresies and Schisms from time to
time arising in the Church, whilst many formerly members of it shall separate
from it, 1 Jo. 2.19. but shall always apparently be known by their departure
from it; but it follows not, that any of these Sects within shall ever have so
great, or so long a growth, as to be able to outnumber the Body of the Church,
or the true Teachers. Concerning which, many are of opinion, that the Orthodox
Communion in all times shall exceed not Infidels; but yet any other Sect
(especially of one Communion as it is) professing Christianity, both for the
multitude of people, and extent of several Nations. See Trial of doctrines. 30,
31, etc. and particularly concerning Arrianism in 2. Disc. conc. the Guide in
Controversy, 26. [As for Antichrist, (the story of whom has given occasion of
a contrary fancy, especially amongst the Reformed,) I shall elsewhere, I think,
sufficiently clear to you, that he shall profess an Antichristianity, and
oppose the Gospel in general], or if, at some time, such Sect shall out-number
the Church it self, yet, as was said before, it shall stand in an external
Communion separate from the Church, and also formerly expelled by the Church,
when these did not outnumber it; and tho afterward these shall grow never so
numerous, yet the remnant of Orthodox Believers, how small soever, continuing
in the same body, will not cease to be truly and only Catholic without them:
neither have these any right, or will be permitted, to vote in her Councils;
which Councils to be truly General need to be no larger than the Church
Catholic is; of which declared Heretics are no part. And thus the Church
shall still be to the end of the world a City upon a Hill, and united within it
self, even in its greatest persecutions conspicuous to those who sincerely bend
their course to it. Again, it seems, that near the time of the worlds
dissolution, from this total Apostasy (through great persecutions) from the
faith in some, and from the sound doctrines of the Orthodox faith in others,
(because both false Religions, and such Heretical doctrines, as the Apostles
speak, do all tend some way or other to vitiousness of life,, to libertinism,
and inducements of the flesh. See 2 Pet. 2.3, 10, 18, 19. Phil. 3.18, 19. 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Timothy 3.2, 7. etc. see Trial of Doctrines. 32.) there shall abound
very great wickedness, and much security amongst the then heavy oppressors of
God's Church, much what like to the days of Noah and of Lot, when God shall
come upon them unexpectedly to judgment. But this is no failing of the Church,
which shall then remain an Holy City, at unity in it self: see Rev. 20.9. And
if also within the Church it self the vicious shall out-number the pious,
neither is this any prejudice to the truth of the Churches doctrines, since the
same thing happens less or more in all ages that the wicked here-in are more
than the good; as St. Austin has taken notice and much pains to prove to the
Donatists, urging some of the former texts. De unitate Ecclesiae 12. and 13. c.

viz. The Clergies being delegated (by our Lord departing hence) the infallible
preservers of all Truth and Necessary faith, and supreme Judges in all
controversies arising therein. Now to proceed to the 2d.

Next, this Authority (to secure it for ever from any decay or interruption
thereof) is given them to the end of the world, without dependence on any save
the Lord Jesus; they being Ambassadors of salvation from the King of Kings to
all Nations, and so to be every where free from all violation. For which there
is the greatest reason; since their constitutions are such as cannot do the
least wrong, or hurt to any secular dominion, nay brings great security to it,
and since this their Ministry (because without a Sword can be no Government,
or Discipline) comes armed only with a Spiritual sword, and not a Temporal; and
lastly, since Christianity (the Doctrine they plant) gives no man any
privilege, interest, or advantage by it, in this world, or for Secular
matters: but maintains every Kingdom and State in the same condition wherein it
finds it; and only obliges men to pray always for such State, (1 Timothy 2.2.)
and to yield all strict obedience to it, ( Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.); and, upon
no pretense of maintaining Religion, to use, or to advise to use the material
Sword, or any otherwise to defend the truth, than 1. by confessing it, [1. in
practicing its Precepts at all times; (among which, yet, one necessary-one is
public assembling together to worship God etc. -- Ecclesiacticos coetus
humanis legibus interdictos ob divinum praeceptum Christiani intermittere non
possunt. Grot. sum. Imp. circa sacra.)] and 2ly, by suffering for it. The
Christian profession therefore never troubles the Civil peace, (which cannot be
broken but by Arms); and therefore whatsoever disturbs the civil peace may be
lawfully punished on any person whatsoever by the temporal Sovereign power, for
it is not the Christian profession; [I say lawfully purished, unless in respect
of some persons, such temporal Magistrate make over this power to another;
which thing doubtless may be lawfully done, if, for example, the Prince shall
not think it so decent, etc, that he should sit in Judgment, and inflict
corporal punishment upon a Bishop, his Spiritual Father, by whom he is to be
guided, and corrected, and (if need be) censured, and Spiritually punished,
concerning greater matters see 1 Cor. 6.3. Or, That the Priest one day should
summon the Civil Magistrate to his Tribunal; the next, the Magistrate Him; or
upon other reasons. And perhaps, This remitting of the Trial of Clergymen,
even in Civil matters, to their Spiritual Superiors; so that the Secular power
only uses the Temporal sword upon them, when the other deliver them up to it,
as it may preserve more reverence, in the people toward the Ministry, so may it
conduce to a more severe animadversion (from such Judges, supposing the Fathers
of the Church to be of that sanctity and integrity which they do profess) upon
such Malefactors, than any other way could. And (whether it was upon these, or
some other motives) it is plain, that such Concessions by several Emperors, and
Princes, have bin made to the Church.]

Solomon confined Ahiathar the High Priest, (1 Kin. 2.26, 27, compared with chapter
4, v. 4.). whom, had he pleased, he might also have put to death, (see 1 King.
2.26, 27.) not for Error, but for Rebellion; not, that the King may meddle, or
has any power or Jurisdiction, in Ecclesiastical affairs, over, or in
opposition to, the Priest, (to do any thing, save the assisting the Spiritual
Sword with his Temporal; and the using his Civil power for the service of the
Church.) See Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 11. s. 15. (For the Priest having lawful
power to excommunicate the Civil Magistrate for Heretical Opinions, How can
again the Civil Magistrate have a lawful power, for the same cause, to depose
the Priest?) But, over Ecclesiastical persons, meddling, without his leave, and
beyond their Lord's Commission, in affairs Temporal. But then, if the Secular
power, in his taking care of the Commonwealth's safety, is pleased to Decree
the Church's Religious Assemblies (either for worshipping God, or composing
Laws for the Church) to be Conspiracy; or make their Preaching, or coming
within his Territories, Treason; only because they possibly may, (for how can
any be sent by Christ, to whom this may not be objected?) not because it is
proved, that they do any hurt to it; or provoked by some particular persons,
who transgressing their Commission from Christ, do some acts, or hold some
opinions, prejudicial to the safety thereof, should therefore condemn and
execute all others of the same Order, against whom the same fault cannot be
proved, and who abjure such horrid Tenants; should he interpret any their
meddling with his Subjects, (whom our Savior sends unarmed, like Lambs among
Wolves), to be subverting of his State; and their Spiritual Sword inconsistent
with, or frustrating his Temporal, he now usurps upon our Savior's Authority.
and they must go on, through all his Torments, by way of the Cross (which shall
certainly conquer at last), not of the Sword, (with which those Ministers shall
perish that take it up, Mat. 26.52. against those powers to which only it is
committed, Rom* 13.14.) to do their Office; with that answer to him, Act. 4.19.
And he must give account to the same King of Kings for killing his Subjects, in
their obeying their Lords commands; who sent them to all Nations, without
asking any man's leave; as they could not (in doing their duty) possibly wrong
any man's right.

Fidelity; That which makes good men, making good Subjects. 4ly, And again,
because, That where any takes away another's right, both Divine Justice
sentences him to loose his own, and his Example teaches others to invade it].

Herod's jurisdiction, yet was hindered by no threats for exercising the
commission of his Father in his Dominions, Luke 13.31, 32.) did exercise their
Authority as much as ever, and that for some hundreds of years, even when all
the temporal Magistrates and their Sovereigns opposed it, (for then they were
sustained unarmed, against all force by the power of the King of Kings, JESUS,
and so shall be, till his second coming,) in which time we find they had their
Public Assemblies for God's Worship; revenged by Excommunications and Penance
all disobedience; called Councils, for enacting Ecclesiastical Canons and Laws;
[which therefore it is not absolutely necessary (very convenient, I grant) that
the Secular power should either call, or assist; neither may he annull them, or
any part thereof, if purely concerning Ecclesiastical affairs; but as a member
also himself of the Church, ought to become subject unto them, and, as a
Prince, to maintain them. And hence it seems to follow, That no Prince can
lawfully abrogate the Authority of Patriarchs (supposing it only founded on
Ecclesiastical Constitutions) over those, who are the Churches, as well as His,
Subjects, no more then he can any other Ecclesiastical Decrees.] Again, in
which times we also find, that as fast as any suffered by persecutions, in
their places they ordained others, multiplied by their slaughters; and ordained
them, without any order or nomination from the civil power; who for ever,
neither can himself, neither can cause them to lay hands on any, but whom they
approve, nor to be partakers by this of other men's sins or errors. 1 Timothy 5.22.

temporal sword, I say; which tho the Clergy may not use in the behalf of
Religion, yet (He that has it committed to him Romans 13.4.) the Civil
Magistrate, as a Son of the Church, and the Servant of Christ, upon his own
subjects may, and ought, to use that weapon, in maintaining of Christ's Laws,
which he may in defense of his own; as who also may make Christ's Laws his own.
Hence Calvin, ( Instit. 4 l. 11. c. 16. sect.) speaking of the Primitive
Governors of the Church; -- Non improbabant (says he) si quando suam
authoritatem interponerent Principes in rebus Ecclesiasticis; modo conservando
Ecclesiae ordini, non turbando; disciplinae stabiliendae, non dissolvendae, [of
which, I suppose, the Spiritual Governors, not the Princes, were to judge,] hoc
fieret. Nam cum Ecclesia cogendi non habet potestatem etc, Principum parts
sunt legibus, edictis, judiciis, religionem sustinere. But these Princes may do
only according to the Priests directions.

Therefore all the establishing and restoring of Religion by the Kings of
Judah, (from whose having power in advancing Religion it is strange to see, how
some argue their having the sole power,) were only by, and in assistance of,
the Priest, never against him, and they commanded often the Priests to perform,
what the Priests together with them consented to be their duty. See 2 Chr.
29.4, 11. etc. -- 17.6, 8. -- 24.6. -- 26.17. -- 19.8, 10. -- 13.9. -- 34.5, 9,
14. -- Ezra 1.5. -- 3.2. 1 Chr. 25.1. compared with 24.31. (see Deodat.) 2
King. 23.5. -- 2 Chr. 35.10, 18. And see Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. the end of the Kings
having a copy of the Law allowed him, but another end of the Priests having the
custody of it, Deuteronomy. 17.9. and 2 Chr. 19.8. But no where can we find that they
decided controversies against the Priests; or, that the succession of Priests
maintaining a false Religion, the King against them vindicated the true; or in
their stead, because erroneous, appointed, and made new Priests; because indeed
the Succession of Priests never apostatized from the whole body of true
Religion, nor ever shall; but should they, yet why not the Prince rather? and
whom then finally is it fit to rely on for Religion? But for those parts of
true Religion, wherein the Clergy was defective, (as it happened under the
later Kings of Judah, and in the times of our Savior, they were reformeable
only by extraordinary Prophets sent from God; whom in all times the people
lawfully consulted, and repaired to, for judgment, as they did to the Priests,
(fee before) but neither people nor Princes reformed Priests upon this
pretense; and therefore those Texts, wherein the Prophets blame the errors of
the Priests, do no way warrant the Laities reforming them, lest so the errors
of the second be worse than that of the first. See this spoken of more at large
before. But for a false Religion, we find this done in wicked Jeroboam; and
consequently, we read of his making for his new Religion also new Priests.

Vzziah, (generally a good Prince, 2 Chronicles. 26.18.) and that of Athanasius, and
Alexander, Bishops of Alexandria and Constantinople, to Constantine, requiring
the restoring of Arius Excommunicated; and that of Ambrose to Theodosius.
Neither can the Bishops at any time excuse their not governing, and defending,
and patronizing the flock of Christ, under pretense either of the care that
Christian Princes their Sovereigns have of it, or enmity they have to it: For
either these Princes second their authority, and then they have all
encouragement to exercise it: or else they oppose and persecute it, and then
they are to do no less than their Predecessors did in the Primitive bloody
times, (taking up their Cross and following Christ and their Leaders,) which
had they not done, Christianity had not descended so far as us; and if these do
not the same, it cannot be propagated to posterity. See more of this subject in
Church Government, part. 1.

Obj. But what if all, or the much greater part of the Clergy run into error,
may not the Temporal Magistrate then Reform it? I answer 1. That concerning
points or truths necessary to salvation, the Supposition is impossible, until
our Savior shall cancel his promise of their indefectibility in such
necessaries. 2ly. That for any other Spiritual matters (wherein perhaps they
may err,) yet the Temporal Magistrate may not reform: because, he that in
Spiritual things is to learn of them what is truth, and what error, can never
judge when they err, unless they first tell him so. What, you will say, cannot
judge? when as he has the Holy Scriptures left to demonstrate to him truth and
error? I ask, were they left to him alone? or has he any evidence therefrom,
which the Clergy has not? Or does the Secular man study them more than they,
who make this their employment and trade? Yes: but their eyes are blinded in
many things with self-interest, namely in those, which some way concern their
own privileges etc. 1. Then in all Doctrines no way advancing the privileges
of the Church, the Prince may not swerve from its judgment. Well it were, if
but so much were observed. But 2ly. For these matters of interest, it were
something that were said, if where the Ecclesiastical power were interested on
the one side of the controversy, the Secular power (which claims right to
judge) were not as much on the other; and whatever privileges were taken from
the one, were not devolved upon the other. For example: If Henry 8th. and his
Lords had took the Supremacy in Church Affairs from the Pope, and not
transferred on themselves, it were something (tho not sufficient) that were
said: but in such concernments men being equal, judge in which we have reason
to expect the more integrity, that they will not claim more than their due. But
3ly. Suppose that our Savior had granted his Church some great privileges,
(as such a thing is possible); either these privileges by them must not be
maintained, or such a cavil cannot be prevented. But methinks this is enough to
preserve truth in their sentence, (who are most accounted men of conscience,)
tho in matters concerning themselves, That by a false judgment a greater
interest hereafter is lost, than is for the present gained.

contrary to the Divine Laws; and for other things, which they think contrary,
not to resist any punishment inflicted on them for not obeying actively, i. e.
in believing and practicing as that Magistrate appoints. Thus G. Vossius, H.
Grotius (Jus Imp. circa Sacra), and ordinarily Protestants. Vossius represents
the matter briefly thus, in an Epistle inserted in Praestantium Virorum, Ep. p.
167. Synodi falli possunt, Magistratus non debet iis credere propter se; sed
quia consentiunt cum Scripturis and Canonibus antiquis. Et haec [Synodus] et
ille errori est obnoxious, sed hoc non impedit, quo minus and Synodi Officium
sit dirigere intellectum in cognitionem very, tum magistratus, imperare, quod
rectum est and salutare. -- Quodsi illa dirigit male, non ideo hic imperabit
male; and si hic imperet malum, non ideo subditi parere debent in malo. Sed and
Magistraetus and subditus unusquisque aget, quod sui esse officii Scriptura,
and Ecclesiae Catholicae consensus, and recta ratio, persuaserit [ i. e. what
Scripture, Church, or Reason, seems to him to perswade]. But may the Magistrate
then punish here those that disobey his commands? Yes, says he, -- Rex and
illud imperare debet, quod in verbo jussit Deus, and paenarum comminatione
obstringere ad illud subditor potest, nec in his imperium detrectare cuiquam
licet. In his, if he means which both Prince and Subject are agreed to be God's
Word, this is certain. But meanwhile, if the, Subject apprehends that contrary
to God's Word, which the Magistrate says is not, and commands as his Word,
here the Subject may and ought to disobey him. And upon this the question still
proceeds: How the Magistrate may justly punish the Subject for not doing a
thing, where the Subject also may lawfully disobey, and not do it? One would
think, either the Magistrate ought to be certain that what he commands is right
before he may punish any for disobeying his command; or the Subject ought to be
certain that what he commands is not right, before he may disobey it. But yet
neither is the one, or the other, held any certain Judge in these matters we
speak of Nor yet do these men leave any third person, that being so, may guide
and regulate them. But the one lawfully commands and punishes him for that,
which the other lawfully disobeys. Where in effect every one in things
Spiritual is finally committed to his own Judgment; whilst they leave none at
all above others, that may so decide what is contrary to God's Law, what not,
as to constrain submission thereto, further than their private judgment
concurs. And the only absolute obligation we have to any of their commands, is
to non-resistance of the punishment. But then suppose one thinks this also;
namely, that we should be bound in all cases (even where we are innocent, or
also truly religious) to nonresistance, etc. to be a thing contrary to
Scripture, (as there want not many of late who have been so persuaded,) then
their commands will oblige such an one in no sense at all, and so indeed will
be no commands as to such a person; for effectus imperii est obligatio: Lastly,
the authority, these men do give to the Church, is (except that which she
derives from the Civil power) only regimen suasorium, or declarativum, and so
sine obligandi jure. But this is making our obedience to her (if it may be so
called at all) no more than that we give to any other private man,
administering, as we think, good Counsel to us; which is sufficiently confuted
before. Only in all this you may observe; That whilst these wary Factors for
Truth are afraid to acknowledge such an obedience enjoined to the Church, as, to
believe that to be the meaning of the Divine Law, or not; to be truth, or
error, that she tells them to be so, (and then much less can allow such an
obedience to Secular power,) they in avoiding these two, yield this judgment of
what is truth, what is not in these matters of highest concernment, to be left
by God to every one; which exposes the Christian world to far more, and
grosser errors, (as daily experience thereof shows), than would in
probability either of the other: But yet this pleases, because thus the
staters of the question make themselves also Judges. See more of this subject
in Ancient Church Government, etc.

Ambrose his words, ( l. 2. ep. 13. quoted by Dr. Field, l. 5. c. 53.) when he
was cited to be judged in a matter of Faith by Valentinian the Emperor; which
conclude it cannot be without usurpation of that, which no way pertains to
them, that Princes should at all meddle with the judging of matters of Faith,
neither had it been heard of: but on the contrary, that Bishops might, and had
judged Emperors in matters of Faith; Quando (says he, speaking to Valentinian)
audisti (clementissime Imperator) in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopo judicasse?
Ita ergo quadam adulatione curvamur, ut sacerdotalis juris simus immemores; and
quod Deus donavit mihi, hoc ipse aliis putem esse credendum? Si docendus est
Episcopus a Laicis, quid sequetur? Laicus ergo disputet, and Episcopus audiat;
Episcopus discat a Laico. At certe si vel Scripturarum seriem divinarum, vel
vetera tempora a tractemus, Quis est qui abnuat in causa sidei, in causa inquam
fidei Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus Christianis, non Imperatores de
Episcopis judicare? Pater tuus [Valen. sen. Imp.] vir maturioris aevi dicebat:
non est meum judicare inter Episcopos, and See the like in Athanasius (Epist.
ad solitariam vitam agentes) Quando unquam judicium Ecclesiae ab Imperatore
authoritatem habuit? See many more like testimonies collected by Champney De
Vocatione Minist. c 15. And see the Concessions of Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad
Apol. p. 29, and 332. And of Calvin, no zealous Vindicator of the Church's
Authority, Inst. l. 4. c. 11. 15. And of many others cited in
Church Government, Par. 5. And see more of this matter in Church Government,
Par. 1. And if the Church (to use some of Mr. Thorndikes words) subsisted
before any secular power was Christian; extended beyond the bounds of any one's
Dominion, in one visible Society, with equal interest in the parts of it,
through several Dominions; endowed with such power in Spiritual matters, as is
set down before, what Title, but Force, can any State have, whilst this Body
continues to exercise its power, not only without, but against it? Dr. Field in
Answer says, That such power belongs to the Clergy regularly; but may be
devolved to Princes in cases of necessity. [In what case?] i.e. If the Clergy
through malice or ignorance fail, etc. That the Prince having charge over Gods
people, etc. may condemn them, falling into gross errors, contrary to the
common sense of Christians; or into Heresy formerly condemned ( l. 5. c. 53.)
formerly condemned; For, says he, we do not attribute power to a Prince, or
Civil state, to judge of things already resolved on in a general Council, [no?
not if they err manifestly and intolerably?] but only to judge in those matters
of faith that are resolved on, and that according to former resolutions. From
which I gather, That Princes can define nothing against the Clergy, ( i. e. the
more considerable part thereof, else there was never any thing so absurd a
Prince can propose, but that he may find, or make some of the Clergy to join
with him,) but protect what is already first defined by the Clergy in a former
General Council. But if so, then his power with hardly extend to the points of
Reformation: since how few are those Heresies (amongst the many points of the
Roman Church,) from which the Reformed have departed, which are solemnly
condemned (some of them they say are defined) by General Councils? I suppose
therefore we must found the Princes Ecclesiastical authority on the other
member, [if the Clergy err against the common sense of Christians,] or, as Mr.
Thorndike expresses it; when the Ecclesiastical power abolisheth any of
matters already determined by our Lord, and his Apostles, (for all such are law
given to the Church etc.) But, alas, who must judge, when the Ecclesiastical
power abolisheth any of matters etc? for the Pastors of the Church at the same
time affirm, and will die for it, that neither against the Scriptures, neither
against Traditions of former Church, have the transgressed; nor do abolish, but
establish, them: and as for the people, whom should they rather follow in
matters of Divinity? their Pastors, or their Prince? God has given charge to
the Clergy over the flock, but where has he committed the charge of the Clergy
to the Prince? Perhaps the common sense of Christians shall judge. But are the
Guides of the Church then only void of it, and that in their own faculty?
Common sense of the Christian Laity, what if they differ then in their common
sense, are we not then to follow the major part of them? But so also the
Reformed are cast, the major part of Lay-Christians entertaining the Roman
Tenants.

Again, we have given up this right of the Church to the Prince, where now
shall we stay? If one Prince may do the office of a Council, and if need be
decide matters of Faith for the Clergy; why may not the next, if need be,
Ordain for the Bishop, or depose that Order obstinate in error? Is this a
dream? are there not also those who claim this? But then again, if where the
Clergy fails the Prince may take our Savior's Chair, and judge, then supposing
the Prince also through malice or ignorance etc may fail too; (Is there not
some Commonwealth, that has been lately under God's judgments in this
condition?) I would gladly know, whether an Ecclesiastical power may not review
his Acts, and reform his Errors? and then, why not both reform; both, at the
same time according to their differing judgments? But God is the God of order,
not of such confusion. Thus much of the 2d. thing proposed before 1. the
independency of the Ministers of Christ on any Secular power. Now I shall
consider the Third.

it, ( Ephesians. 4.5, 13.) against all intestine divisions amongst the Clergy; which
divisions often shall happen in it, but shall never remain of it. For it is as
true, that no Heresy or Schism within, as that no Secular power without, (being
only several Gates of Hell,) shall ever prevail against it.

unity of her faith; nor will there be any such crime as Schism from it.
Therefore the Church may and ought, for the preservation of her purity, and
unity, to excommunicate, exauthorize, and separate her self and her children
from such as are false Teachers, and walk disorderly, that she might not be
partaker of, nor countenance them in, nor encourage more to follow, their sin;
according to the frequent commands of Scriptures, forequoted, see 2 Jo. 10, 11.
Matt. 18.17, 1 Timothy 6.5. Tit. 3.10. 1 Cor. 5.13. 2 Timothy 2.19, 21. compared with
18. -- Iniquity, i.e. errors, Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 2.6, 15, 16. (texts abused by
some to justify a separation from the Church it self,) therefore also none can
lawfully communicate both with the true and with an Heretical or Schismatical
Church: who tho they hold sufficient truth, yet are to be refused and avoided
for the breach of unity, and that without respect to the numbers of the
revolted, or to the liability of the Church, they desert, to some
(nondestructive) errors. And this practice the Church has always observed, and
the persons so disauthorized by it, if afterward using their functions, were in
the Primitive times esteemed guilty of sin, and sacrilege; and so those also,
by them ordained. And when returning to the Catholic faith (as many Arian
Bishops did) they might not officiate, till by a Declaration and reabilitation
of the Church they were restored to the exercise of that authority, of which
they were by her formerly deprived. For we must know, that tho according to the
common Tenent of die Church (see Conc. Nice 8. Can.) none that is ordained
(according to the right form of Ordination) by a Heretic, or Schismatic, may
be reordained, no more than one baptized by such may be rebaptized, or the
Eucharist consecrated by such reconsecrated; but when he recants his Heresy, or
Schism, he being only relicensed by the Church, discharges his function by
virtue of his formerly received Orders. Yet who so by Heresy or Schism is once
deprived of the right of exercising his function, (as any one may be,) cannot
confer this right on others, but that all these afterward stand as much
suspended from any execution of their offices, as himself does. Tho I cannot
say, but that the Effects of the Sacraments, and other offices of their
function, as well in other things as in Baptism, (as in Marriages, in Penance,
and Absolution, the Eucharist, etc.) are still valid to the simple Receiver,
who is guiltless of their faults, the wickedness of the Minister (if truly
ordained) not hindering the benefits to mankind, which Christ has annexed to
that Office, and which always himself (as the principal Agent) by their hands
confers.

power of ordaining others. See Canon Apost. 67.63. Cons. Nice. can. 19.8. And
the same case, I suppose, it is of those who are condemned, tho not guilty, and
who are excommunicated and thrust out of the Church never so unjustly; for they
yet desiring the communion denied them, show their approbation so far of it, as
that they may not ordain others against that, wherein they grant is preserved
the unity of the Faith; tho I think, that simply an unjust Excommunication
never made such a manner of division in the Church; but that those, who have
set up new communions, have still disallowed some Tenants or practices of the
former, for which they would not, if permitted, return to communicate with her;
tho they seem to justify their new communion, chiefly upon the pretense of
being cast out of the former. Now Schism (as the former times understood it) is
any relinquishing, and departing, upon what pretense soever, from the former
external communion of the Church, (when we cannot show that it has departed
from the former external communion of its Predecessors), where we must grant
was before the unity of the faith, (because there was no Christian communion at
all besides it,) and in that faith, salvation (undeniably) to be had, and its
judgment in all controversies of faith, and interpretations of Scriptures, to
be obeyed. Now who depart thus, are also easily discerned: 1. By the paucity of
their number, if we look not at the Succession, but at the beginning of the
Breach; tho afterward (in some places at least) it may outnumber the Orthodox.
So Arianism was easily discerned for Faction at the Council of Nice; when it
was but new planted, tho not at that of Syrmium or Seleucia afterward. And 2ly,
By their plea, one alleging Truth only, the other also Tradition.

Thorndikes concession, Right of the Church p. 148. 250. 147. The Reason:
because Ordinations were to have bin made only by the Provincial Councils,
which were to be held frequently, (twice a year); in defect of these, the
execution of it was committed to three, or in a case of necessity to one; but
presupposing the consent, and that by letters of the rest, or the major part of
them. See Conc. Nic. 4. Can. Conc. Nicen. can. 6. Apost. can. 1.36, 38. Ap.
Constable. l. 8. c. 27. Else the unity of the Church can no way be preserved:
Therefore Novatianus ordained for Bishop of Rome by Three, was forced to yield
to Cornelius Ordained by Sixteen. Again, it was cautioned, That all the Bishops
of a Province might do nothing in these Ordinations without the Metropolitan's
consent, Conc. Nic. Can. 4, 6. And again, these Metropolitans were subjected to
a Council. And what is said here of Bishops in respect of a Provincial Council,
the same may be said of all those of a Province, or also Patriarchy in respect
of a General. For as in a Province disagreeing, those are only to be accounted
Successions lawful, i. e. such as all are only to submit to, which the
Provincial Council allows; so in greater rents of the Church, only those, which
the General Council allows which disauthorizing of some if it be not allowed,
there can be no Unity in the Church, nor suppression of Heresies, Schisms, etc.
If it be allowed, there can never be two Successions opposing one another, both
lawfully by such Clergy exercised, and submitted to by the people, after this
exauthorizing one of them by a Council.

And this is the reason, why we find the Canons of the ancient Councils, not so
much busied in debating Opinions, as about settling Peace, and Unity, and
perfect Subordination amongst Ecclesiastical persons; knowing, that upon this,
more than evidence of Argument and Reason (which in most men is so weak and
mis-leadable) depended the preservation of the Unity of the Church's Doctrines,
and requiring, in any division of these Governors, Obedience still to the major
and more dignified Body of them. Christ's promises of indefectability belonging
to a City set on an Hill, and to a Light set on a Candlestick; that we should
not leave this City so eminent, to repair to some petty Village; nor this Light
that shines over the whole House, to follow a Spark, glistering for a while in
some corner thereof.

Arians; and afterward the Division of the Eastern Churches from the Latin, or
Roman.

Now for the first of these, which seemed for a time to eclipse the
Church-Catholick, and to be set higher on an Hill than it; very small it was at
first, when censured and condemned in a General and unanimous Council; and tho
afterward it grew much bigger, by being promoted by the Secular power, yet it
never grew to a major part, as is showed in the Discourse Of the Guide in
Controversies, Disc. 2. 26. and the violence of it vanished in fifty years; i.
e. when the Secular power failed it; and the former Church Communion has
outlived it. And for the time also in which it most flourished, the Catholics
valiantly kept both their Bishops and Communion distinct; there being two
Bishops at Rome, at Constantinople, etc. one Catholich, and the other Arrian;
and two external Communions; one containing that of the former times, and
adhering to the General Council of Nice; the other deserting, and deserted by,
the former Communion, nor admitted to any Fellowship with it, till at last many
of the penitent members thereof, returned to the Catholic Communion; and the
new Sect expired. See before 62.

Greek Churches from the Western; it is granted, that two Churches coordinate
may, upon several pretenses moving them thereto, if such as are not determined
by the Superior to them both, abstain from one another's external Communion,
without incurring any such Schism, as to cease to be still, both of them, true
Members of the Church-Catholick. But if one of these Churches, either desert,
or be deserted by, and excluded from the Communion of, the other, for a matter
once determined by an Ecclesiastical Authority, Superior to both; and such
Superior Authority be embraced and adhered to by the other, rejected by it:
Here the Church, that disobeys its Superior, and departs from such other
Churches as are united to them, is Schismatic, and cease to be any longer
Catholic. If then the former, or present differences between the Roman and
Greek Churches are such, as have been by former Church Authority, superior to
both, Canonically decided and determined; as suppose by the Lateran Council
under Innocent III. or of that of Lions under Gregory X. or that of Florence
under Eugenius IV. and the Eastern Churches disobeying these Acts, have
separated from, or thereupon been rejected by, the Roman Communion, observing
them: Or again, If the Greek Church have made a discession and rent from the
Prime Patriarch of the Church, and the Chair of St. Peter, in denying any of
those Privileges, and that Authority which rightly belongs to him over the
whole Church of Christ, in order to the preserving the perpetual Peace and
Unity thereof, (things which it concerns me not here to determine), the Greek
Churches by this Separation from the Roman, must stand guilty of a Schism from
the Catholic Church, and cease to be any true Members thereof. Neither indeed
have these Churches, since this Division, like withered branches, retained any
Dignity, Authority, Growth, or Extent, equal to the Roman, or such as they had
formerly; this indeed hap'ning to them from the opression of an open enemy to
Christianity, but yet perhaps the same also an Instrument of God's displeasure
against them.

Arian. It is known, when that single person stood alone, who began it; and it
spread afterward by the support of the Secular power against Church Authority;
and when in its greatest growth, but an inconsiderable part in comparison of
the Whole. Which also has cast it off from her Communion, condemned it by her
Councils, and permits not any of her Members to have any external Communion
with it. And, tho at first, by reason both of foreign Invasions from the Turk,
and many Civil Wars in Christian States, it made, especially in climates more
remote from the residence and superintendency of the chief Hierarchy of the
Church, a very great and speedy increase; yet the vigor of its age may be
thought already past, and it is a long time, that it seems to be in its Wane
and decadency, expecting still, and prophesying to it self the fall of
Antichrist, till it self by little and little be sunk down into its grave.

So many parts therefore, as fall off once from their union with the main Body,
can be accounted no longer any members of the Church-Catholick, nor yet
lawfully continue a Church Communion, or Succession of Clergy, among
themselves; Because there can be but unum Corpus, as unus Dominus Christus,
Ephesians. 4.5. from which Body any part separated strait withers, and separated
from the Body, is so also from the Head Christ.

Tho all among these are not really cut off from the Head or Body, that the
Church externally separates from it by her Censures. Which proceed upon these
according to the outward profession, which only the Church sees, but cannot
discern the inward affection and disposition, which secretly may still continue
some of those to the Body whom her Censures removes from it. Such are the
invincibly ignorant, or those that without malice, are involved in such Schism,
especially where the fundamental Faith is not diminished by any Heresy added
to Schism.

But tho this plea of Ignorance invincible do seem good and credible for many
in the present Greek Churches (if these Churches may be concluded Schismatical)
kept in so much slavery, illiterature, and darkness; yet it is to be feared, it
will fail many in the Reformed Churches, where too much presumption of Knowledge
seems to be the chief thing that has destroyed their Obedience and Conformity
to the whole.

FINIS.
THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE FIRST PART OF ANCIENT Church Government.

REFLECTING On the late writings of several Learned Protestants, Bishop
Bramhall, Dr. Field, Dr. Fern, Dr. Hammond, and others on this Subject.

OXFORD, Printed in the year M.DC.LXXXVIII.

CONTENTS.
SVbordination of Glergy. 1. Three Patriarchs only at the first. 2. The first
of these the Bishop of Rome. 3. The extent of his Patriarchate.
The 2d. the Bishop of Alexandria. 4. The 3d. the Bishop of Antioch. 5. From
whence their Superiority over other Bishops. 6. The Sea of Constantinople
advanced to a Patriarchate in the next place to Rome. 7. The great extent of
this Patriarchate in latter times.
The Sea of Jerusalem raised to a Patriarchate in the 5th place. 8. The
authority of Patriarchs, and other Ecclesiastical Governors, for the
ordinations or confirmations, and for judging the causes (upon appeal) of their
inferiors. 9. Where concerning the authority of the Council of Sardica. 11. A
Digression concerning the controversy between the Bishops of Africa and Rome
about Appeals. 12. Whether transmarine Appeals in some cases very necessary.
14. Those not subjected to any Patriarch for Ordination, yet subjected for
decision of controversies. 18. The Patriarchs also subjected to the judgment of
a superior Patriarch. 20. The power of Jurisdiction (not only Primacy of
Dignity) of the Bishop of Rome above the rest of the Patriarchs and Bishops.
ib. This power exemplified in the Primitive time to the end of the 6th age, the
days of Gregory the Great. 21 to 31. A Digression concerning the meaning of
that ancient Canon, Sine Romano Pontifice nihil finiendum. 22. A Digression
concerning the Title of Universalis Epipiscopus assumed by the
Constantinopolitan, and declined by the Roman, Bishops. 26. A Digression
concerning the Patriarchship of Ravenna and Justiniana prima, urged by Dr.
Hammond. 30.
The authority of this See of Rome by Protestants allowed to be the more
orthodox in all other divisions that have bin made from it, save only their
own. 31. n. 2. By the former clear allegations some other (controverted)
sayings of the Fathers expounded. 32. etc. The Protestants ordinary replies to
the authorities above cited, to me seeming not satisfactory. 36. That such
power (which was anciently exercised by the Bishop of Rome) was not exercised
by him jointly only with a Patriarchal Council, which is by some pretended. 37.
That it is schism to deny obedience to any Ecclesiastical power, established by
the Ecclesiastical Canons; and that no such power can be lawfully dissolved by
any power secular. 38. The concessions of Bishop Bramhal and Dr. Hammond in
this matter. 39. Several pretenses to weaken such Canons to me seeming invalid.
41.
That obedience due may not be withdrawn upon Governors undue claims. 47. That
Ecclesiastical Councils may change their former Ecclesiastical Laws, tho
Lay-Magistrates may not change them. 48. That Prelates, and others, stand
obliged to those Church-Canons, which in a superior Council are made with the
consent of their Predecessors, till such Council shall reverse them. 49.
Reflections upon what has him said. -- That the Church of England seems
obliged in as much observance to the Rome See, as the former instances have
showed the Orientals to have yielded to it. 51. That the Church of England
seems obliged to yield the same observance to the Roman See, as other Western
Provinces, upon the 6th Nicene Canon. 52. That this Nation owes its Conversion
chiefly, if not only, to the Roman See. 53. And has in ancient Councils,
together with other Churches, subjected it self to that See before the Saxon
conversion. 55. The Britains observation of Easter different from Rome, not
agreeing with the Orientals; and no argument, that they received Christianity
from thence. 57. That the English Nation is sufficiently tied to such
subjection by the Decrees of latter Councils, wherein her Prelates have yielded
their consents. 59. Thus the Principle, upon which some set the English Clergy
and Nation free from such former obligations, has bin showed to be unsound.
60. That some Rights once resigned and parted with, cannot afterward be justly
resumed. 61.

Dr. Field, of the Church. Ep. Dedicat:
Seeing the controversies of Religion in our times are grown in number so many,
and in matters so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding, to examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out, which amongst all
the Societies in the world is that blessed company of Holy ones, that Household
of faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the Living God, which is this
pillar and ground of Truth, that so he may embrace her Communion, follow her
Directions, and rest in her Judgment.

Grot. Animadv. cont. Rivet. ad Art. 7.

Rogo eos, qui. verum amant, ut cum legent Dav. Blondelli viri diligentissimi
Librum de Primatu, non inpsius (...), sed ipsas historias, quarum veritatem
Blondellus agnoscit, animo a factionibus remoto expendant; spondeo, si id
faciant, inventuros, in quo acquieescant.

S. Austin de util. credendi, 16. c.

Authoritate decipi miserum est, miserius non moveri; si Dei providentia non
praesidet rebus humanis, nihil est de religione satagendum. -- Non est
desperandum ab eodem iposo Deo authoritatem aliquam constitutam, qua velut,
gradu incerto, innitentes attollamur in Deum. Haec autem authoritas seposita
ratione (qua sincerum intelligere, ut diximus, difficillimum stultis est)
dupliciter nos movet, partim miraculis, partim sequentium multitudine. and 10.
c. Sed inquis, Nonne erat melius rationem mihi reddere, ut quacunque ea me
duceret, sine ulla sequerer temeritate? Erat fortasse: sed cum res tanta sit,
ut Deus tibi ratione cognoseendus sit, omnesque putas idon^os esse percipiendis
rationibus, quibus ad divinam intelligentiam men's ducitur humana? an plures? an
paucos? paucos ais, existimo. Quid caeteris ergo hominibus, qui ingenio tam
sereno praediti non sunt. negandam religionem putas? [who therefore must
receive this, not from Reason, but Authority.] -- 12. c. -- Quis mediocriter
intelligens non plane viderit, stultis utilius ac salubrius esse praeceptis
obtemperare sapientum, quam suo judicio vitam degere? -- 13. c. -- Recte igitur
Catholicae disciplinae majestate institutum est, ut accedentibus ad religionem
fides [ i.e. adhibenda authoritati Ecclesiae] persuadeatur ante omnia. 8. c.
andSi jam satis jactatus videris, sequere viam Catholicae disciplinae, quae ab
ipso Christo per Apostolos ad nos usque manavit, and abhinc ad posteros
manaturaest. -- 12. -- Quum de religione, id est, quum de colendo atque
intelligendo Deo agitur, ii minus sequendi sunt, qui nos credere vetant,
rationem promptissime pollicentes.

Rivet Apol. Discussio. p. 255.

Nunc plane ita sentit Grotius, and multi cum ipso, non posse Protestants
inter se jungi, nisi simul jungantur cum iis qui Sedi Romanae cohaerent, sine
qua nullum sperari potest in Ecclesia commune regimen. Ideo optat, ut ea
divulsio quae evenit, and cause divulsionis, tollantur. Inter eas causas non
est Primatus Episcopi Romani secundum Canones, fatente Melancthone, qui eum
primatum etiam necessarium put at ad retinendam unitatem. Neque enim hoc est
Ecclesiam subjicere Pontificis libidini, sed reponere ordinem sapienter
insticutum.

Bishop Bilson in perpet governm. of Christ's Church. 16. c.

Not Antichrist, but ancient Councils, and Christian Emperors, perceiving the
mighty trouble and intolerable charges, that the Bishops of every Province were
put-to, by staying at Synods for the hearing and determining of all private
matters and quarrels; and seeing no cause to employ the Bishops of the whole
world twice every year to sit in judgment about petit and particular strifes
and brabbles: as well the Prince as the Bishops, not to increase the pride of
Arcbishops, but to settle an indifferent course, both for the parties and the
Judges, referred (not the making of Laws and Canons, but) the execution of them
already made, to the credit and conscience of the Archbishop. -- To the Fathers
leave an Appeal either to the Councils, or the Primate of every Nation.

Mr. Thorndike, Epilogue 3. l. 20. c. p. 179.

Of the Councils [he means those first Councils held in the East] how many
can be counted General by number of present votes? The authority of them, then,
must arise from the admitting of them by the Western Churches: and this
admission of them what can it be ascribed to, but the authority of the Church
of Rome, eminently involved, above all the Churches of the West, in the
summoning and holding of them, and by consequence in their Decrees? And indeed,
in the troubles that passed between the East and the West, from the Council of
Nice, tho the Western Churches have acted by their Representatives, upon
eminent occasions, in great Councils; yet in other occasions they may justly
seem to refer themselves to that Church, as resolving to regulate themselves by
the Acts of it, [and then he produces several instances.] -- Whereby (says
he) it may appear, how the Western Churches went always along with that of
Rome. -- Which necessarily argues a singular preeminence in it; in regard
whereof He [the Roman Bishop] is styled the Patriarch of the West, during the
regular government of the Church; and being so acknowledged by K. James of
Excellent memory to the Card. Perron, may justly charge them to be the cause of
dividing the Church, who had rather stand divided than own him in that quality.
[ Afterward he says, p. 180.] That it is unquestionable, that all causes that
concern the whole Church, are to resort to the Church of Rome. -- [ And p. 181.
asks) what pretense there could be to settle Appeals from other parts to Rome,
[ as such Appeals were settled in the Council of Sardica, which Council he there
allows, and calls General,] rather than from Rome to other parts, had not a
preeminency of Power, and not only a precedence of Rank, bin acknowledged
originally in the Church of Rome.

CORRIGENDA.
Page 29. l. 7. else he would.

Page 55. l. 80. through five or six.

Page 115. l. 3. except that of one or two of his Predecessors.

CONCERNING ANCIENT CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
PART I. Of the Authority and Subordinations of Ecclesiastical Governors.
Subordination of Clergy.
and for the easier suppressing of all Errors, and Divisions; and for rendering
all the Church of God, tho dispersed through several Dominions, but one visible
compacted Society; we find anciently these Subordinations of superior Clergy:
1. Presbyters. 2. Bishops. 3. Metropolitans; and (amongst Metropolitans)
Primates. 4. Patriarchs; and (amongst these Patriarchs) a Primate.

Nice, held A. D. 325. there were only Three [call'd, Three Patriarchs only at
the first.
at the first, by the common name of Metropolitants; tho with a distinct
authority from the rest: Then, by the name of Primates, (2. Genesis Con. Constable.
can 2.5.) -- (this name also being common to some others): Afterward by the
name of Patriarchs, ( Conc. Chalc. Act. 3. -- 8 Genesis Conc. can. 10). Neither
was this name (tho most frequently) always applied only to the Patriarchs of
the first Sees. But we find in the East (the Primates of Asia minor, Pontus,
Thrace, and many others, to the number of nine or ten, called by Socrates, who
writ in the fifth Age, Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 8.) Patriarchs; (called so, as well
as by the name of Primates, in respect of some other Bishops, or also
Metropolitans, subject to them); yet which Patriarchs had also a subordination
and subjection to some of these prime, or major, Patriarchs, of whom we here
speak; as appears in the Church History; and especially in Conc. Chalced. Act.
and Act. 16. And we find also in the West (after A. D. 500.) several Primates
in France, Italy, Spain, called Patriarchs; as the Primate of Aquileia, Gradus,
Lions, (see Conc. Matiscon. 2. in praefat. Priscus Episcopus Patriarcha dixit,
etc. See Greg. Turon. 5. hist. 10. Paul Diacon. l. 2. c. 12. Greg. Epist. l.
11. ep. 54.) yet over whom the Roman Bishop, the major Patriarch of the West,
exercised a superiority and Patriarchal jurisdiction, both before and after
that we read this name given to them; as will appear hereafter in this
discourse, and more particularly in the matter of the Letters of Leo, and
Gregory, and other Popes, written upon several occasions to diverse of them.
This I note to you, that the commonness of the name may not seem to infer an
equality of the authority. Now to go forward.]

3. n. 1. The first of these the Bishop of Rome.
The first and chief of these was the Bishop of Rome; whose Patriarchship the
Bishop of Derry ( Vind. Chapter Eng. c. 5. p. 62.) and Dr. Hammond (of schism, c.
3. p. 51, 52.) following Ruffinus Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 6. (one less to be
credited in this matter, because by the Bishop of Rome formerly excommunicated;
see Anstasius 1. ad Johan. Hierosol.) make very narrow, and much inferior to
that of the two other Patriarchs (whereof one had subjected unto him all Egypt,
Lybia and Pentapolis; and the other, all Syria, and the Oriental Churches,)
allowing to the Bishop of Rome only regiones suburbicarias in the Eastern parts
of Italy, and the Islands of Sicily, Sardinia, The extent of his Patriarchate.
and Corsica, near adjoining to it. But over these Churches that Bishop might
have some more immediate superintendency, and Metropolitan- or Primat-ship,
contradistinct to other Metropolitans, as to that of Millan, etc. (So the
Primat of all England has yet a particular superintendency over one Diocese
more than over the rest; of which more particular superintendency over the
regiones suburbicariae, as he was their Primate or Metropolitan, Ruffinus seems
to speak; and perhaps the 6th canon of Nice [Mos antiquus perduret, in Aegypto
vel Lybia and Pentapoli, ut Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habet
potestatem; quoniam quidem and Episcopo Romano parilis mos est. Similiter autem
and apud Antiochiam, caeterasque Provincias, honor suus unicuique servetur
Ecclesiae.] may be thought partly to intend it, for which consider those words
in that 6th Canon [ caeterasque Provincias and] compared with Concilium
Constantinopolitan. 2. Can. -- and Conc. Ephesians. 8. can. Yet do not these Canons
therefore abrogate and superior rights of any Bishop, quae prius atque ab
initio sub illius seu antecessorum suorum fuerit potestate (to use the phrase
of the forementioned 8th Canon of Ephesus,) but confirm them, not only the
Metropolitan, but also whatever Patriarchal Rights they held formerly: as
appears in those first words of the 6th Nicene Canon, (...) * of which see more
below 19. from which the Roman Primacy was both urged by Paschasius, a Legate of
the Sea Apostolic in the 4th General Council, and also acknowledged by the
Council in their Epistle to Leo. (See below 25 n. 2.) And again on the other
side, (as Bellarmin de Romans Pontif. 2. l. 18. c. observes), the Pope's being
Caput Ecclesiae universae (supposing him to be so) in some general way of
superintendency, or for some particular acts and offices, (as suppose for
receiving appeals, deciding controversies, between the chief Governors of the
Churches admitting them to, and deposing them from, their places, obliging them
pro tempore with his decrees,) hinders not, but that he may be also a
Patriarch, a Metropolitan, a Bishop, in respect of some other more immediate
super-intendencies and offices diverse from the former; which he does actually
exercise over some particular Church or Churches, but does not so over others;
or which also he cannot exercise over the whole as he does over those
particular Churches, (as, suppose, for ordaining the inferior Bishops and
Presbyters, and hearing their causes, personally officiating in the Word and
Sacraments, receiving and distributing the Ecclesiastical revenue thereof etc.)
Nor again, e converso, (as Cardinal Perron, in answer to K. James, observes,)
does his governing only the Roman Province, as their Metropolitan; or only
Italy, as their Primate, hinder, that he should govern the West also as their
Patriarch. Nor again, does his governing the West as their Patriarch) because
he was Bishop of Rome, the chiefest city of the West) hinder, that he may not
also, as S. Peter and S. Paul's Successor there, (to one of whom the Jew, and
to the other, the Gentiles, were committed, ( Gal. 2.7, 9.) have some special
superintendency over all the Church, Jew, and Gentile.

I know, 3. n. 2.
it is earnestly pleaded by Bishop Bramhal Vind. 8. c. p. 251. and Rep. to S.W.
10. s. p. 69. -- That, to have an universal Headship over the Church, and to
have a Patriarchal authority or headship over only some part of the Church; to
have a limited, jurisdiction over a certain Province, and to have an unlimited
jurisdiction over the whole world. -- To challenge the same thing from divine,
and from humane, institution; as Patriarch, to be subject to the Canons, as
Universal Head of the Church, to be above them, are contradictions. And in
Schis. guarded, 4. sect. p. 304. it is again urged by him, that Sovereign
government, and Subordinate government of the same person in the same Society,
is inconsistent; where he has also these words. When I did first apply my
thoughts to a sad meditation on this subject, I confess ingeniously, that which
gave me the most trouble, was to satisfy my self fully about the Pope's
Patriarchate; but in conclusion, that which had bin a cause of my trouble,
proved a means of my final satisfaction. For seeing it is generally confessed,
that the Bishop of Rome was a Patriarch, I concluded, that he could not be a
Spiritual Monarch. It Is urged likewise by Dr. Hammond, in Schis. 6. c. 2. s. --
That he that supposed in (gross) to have by Succession to S. Peter that
original title to all power, over all Churches, cannot be imagined to acquire
it afterward (by way of retail) [i.e. by any other ways and means] over any
particular Church. He that claims a reward as of his own labor and travel,
must be supposed to disclaim donation, which is antecedent to, and exclusive
of, the other; as the title of descent is, to that of conquest. Thus Dr.
Hammond. But to these it is easily answered.

1. To Bishop Bramhal:. 3. n. 3.
That nothing consists better together than contradictories, if they be not
understood secundum idem. To have a headship Universal over the whole Church,
given him by God, or by the Church, (if God has left to it the disposal
thereof) for some things, and to have a headship Patriarchal only over some
part of the Church given by the same authority; or the first given by God, the
second by the Church, i. e. the first by divine, the second by humane,
institution, for some other things, contradict not. To have an unlimited power
(if he means for place) for some things, and limited (for place) for other
things, contradict not: To hold the same power or authority both by divine and
humane institution, or title, or laws, (which are all one,) contradicts not;
unless this term [only] be added. One may hold the same thing both from the
donation of our Savior, and from the donation of the Church too, and from the
donation of the Prince too, quantum in illis est, which is only a consenting to
Christ's donation, if they acknowledge it. Neither will these latter donations
be needless, or useless, ad homines, tho the former donation be good; if the
former be at any time questioned, as many good titles have bin. Again, it does
not contradict, that one as Patriarch be subject to some thing, to which, in
another consideration, i.e. as head of the Church, he is not subject; for the
respect is changed. Christ the same person as Man was subject to laws, to which
as God he was not. So Sovereign government and Subordinate government of the
same person in the same Society are consistent. The government of a city is
subordinate to the office of a Prince in the same civil society; yet may the
Prince, that rules over all the Kingdom, be governor also of some particular
city thereof, (if so he pleases for his more security,) and may execute in
that city all those under-offices himself which his Substitutes do in the rest,
or also formerly did there, by his authority. A Rectorship of a Parish is
subordinate to that of a Bishop in the same Ecclesiastical society, and yet the
Bishop may also be the Parson of some Parish within his Diocese, and officiate
therein, as is usual in some poorer Bishoprics. One may be made by the King
governor of a whole Province, in respect of some command which he has over it
all; and may be made by the same King, or by any other, to whom the King has
given the bestowing of such a dignity, governor also only of one city in that
Province; in respect of some other offices, diverse from the former, which he
may exercise over that town, and not likewise over the Province. Thus much to
Bishop Bramhal. Only I must tell you, that he may put his propositions in such
a sense, as they shall point blank contradict: but then he will not be able to
show, that, in such a sense, the Roman Church affirms them.

2. To Dr. Hammond, I answer, That no man can acquire the possession of a thing
anew, which he already possesses, but he may acquire a new title or right to
what he already rightly possesses, i. e. he may do something upon which
another law, which now does not, shall give him right to the same thing,
supposing that his present right fails, or is questioned. Neither needs he,
when such titles are questioned, adhere to one, and renounce the other, but may
successively plead both; one after another. Indeed when these two titles are in
several persons, one voids the other, the former the latter; because the same
thing cannot, at the same time, be possessed by several persons, (as Dr.
Hammond rightly argues in Rep. to Cath. Gent. 6. cap. 1. s.) but seems to me to
apply it amiss to two titles remaining in the same person, that the one of
these will spoil the plea of the other. So one may receive a possession from a
Prince by free donation; and afterward, fearing some cavil at this title, may
acquire another right to the same thing by purchase; either from the same
Prince, or from any other person of his Subjects, who pretends to have the just
disposal thereof. And this person may afterward plead, as he sees cause,
either of these titles, the donation from the Prince, or purchase from the
Subject; which Subject whether he had a right power to dispose of such a thing,
or no, yet the purchaser's plea is good against him, and against all those who
are bound by his act, so that they cannot resume such possession from him. So,
to come nearer our business; Suppose a donation by our Savior of such a
Supremacy for ever over the whole Church, and so over Britain, to S. Peter's
Successor; and suppose a donation ( quo jure I need no here enquire) by the
Church, of the same Supremacy to the Patriarch of the West over all the West,
and so over Britain: and suppose 3ly, a donation or consent by the inhabitants
of Great Britain of the same Supremacy over them to the first author of their
conversion: I say here, the same person being S. Peter's Successor, and
Patriarch of the West, and converter of England, may challenge such Supremacy
over it, by which of these titles he pleases; they being obliged to all; to
our Savior's Act, of whom they are subjects, to the Act of the Church,
(whereof the are a part,) and to their own. But when these three titles are
pretended by three several persons, but one of them can stand in force; Or, if
any one will say, that possession can never relate save only to one single
title; yet if this be granted, that there may be several titles inherent in the
same person, of which the one failing the possession may still justly relate to
another; And will come to one, namely this; That no other can dispossess this
person, unless he first prove (not only one, but) all his titles faulty. Thus
much that a Primatship, a Patriarchiship, and an Universal Headship may be well
consistent in one person. This rub being removed, now to go on.

But tho the fore-nam'd Writers much straiten the Bishop of Rome's
jurisdiction, 3. n. 4.
and make his Primateship, and Patriarchship both one; yet Balsamon (in his
Explication of the Nicene Canons), and Nilus (in his Book against the Primacy),
no great Friends to the Greatness of Rome, looking upon that authority which he
always exercised over the other Metropolitans of the West (of which more
hereafter), besides that which he had over his own more particular Suburbican
Diocese, do enlarge this his Patriarchship to all the West; Quoniam and Romanus
Episcopus praeest Occidentalibus Provinciis, (says Balsamon.) Balsamon and
Nilus interpret the words of the Nicene Decree (says Dr. Field, l. 5. c. 31.)
that the Bishop of Alexandria shall have the charge of Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis, and the Confirming of the Metropolitans in those parts; because the
Bishop of Rome, who has care of the West, Confirms the Metropolitans of the
West. And, before these, Zomaras a Greek Writer likewise, (on Conc. Sard. can.
5.) grants the more Westernly of the Eastern Provinces at that time to have
belonged to the Roman Church. To the Roman Church (says he) were the subject
all the Western Churches, namely, those of Macedonia, Thessalia, Illyricum,
Epirus, which were afterward subjected to the Church of Constantinople. And
likewise Dr. Field, being pressed with many instances (not denyable) concerning
the Bishop of Rome's authority most anciently exercised over the Bishops, not
only, of Spain, France, Africa, etc. in the West; but also, of some parts of
Greece, Thebes, Thessalonica, Corinth, etc. in the East; whereby they
endeavored to prove his Universal [Vicaria] Headship over all the Church; is
glad to plead; That the Roman Bishop used such authority, not as Head of all
the Church, but as Patriarch of the West; embracing Balsamon's opinion; and
proving, out of Cusanus, that such places, as are urged by the Romanists, do
belong to the Roman Patriarchship. (Which Patriarchship the other Doctors
laboring to straiten, how they will avoid another Universal
Super-intendentship of the same Bishop, urged by the Roman party, I see not).
See Field l. 5. c. 37. p. 551. -- c. 38. p. 560. -- c. 39. p. 570. and p. 568.
where he has these words: Appeals, of ancient time wont to be made out of
France to Rome, no way prove the Bishop of Rome to be Universal Bishop; unless
we will acknowledge every one of the Patriarchs to have been so too: it being
lawful to appeal unto them out of any, the remotest, Provinces subject to them.
And c. 38. p. 560. where Dr. Field confesses, that Leo (who lived in the time
of the fourth General Council) constituted Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica
his Vicegerent for the parts thereabouts, as others his Predecessors had done
former Bishops of that Church; which, (says he) causing great resort thither
upon diverse occasions, may be thought to have been the reason, why the Council
of Sardica ( Can 20.) provideth, that the Clergymen of other Churches shall
not make too long stay at Thessalonica [this Council of Sardica was about
twenty years after that of Nice.] So the same Leo made Potentius the Bishop his
Vicegerent, in the parts of Africa; Hormisda Bishop of Rome about ann. 500.
Salustius Bishop of Hispalis, in Baetica and Lusitania; and Gregory, Virgilius
Bishop of Arles, in the Regions of France: all these places being within the
compass of the Patriarchship of Rome. And the same may be said of the Bishop of
Justiniana prima; who was appointed the Bishop of Rome's Vicegerent in those
parts, upon signification of the Emperor's will and desire that it should be
so. Thus he. To this I will add, the testimony of Innocent I. Bishop of Rome in
St. Austin's time, who ( Epist. 1. Decentio Episcopo Eugubino) prescribing some
Roman Orders to be observed in the Western Churches, there gives a more
particular reason of their obedience, to observe the Rules and Customs of the
Roman See; namely, their conversion to Christianity by it; Quis enim nesciat
(says he) aut non advertat id, quod a Principe Apostolorum Petro Romanae
ecclesiae traditum est, ac nunc usque custoditur, ab omnibus debere servari,
etc. -- praesertim, cum sit manifestum, in omnem Italiam, Gallias, Hispanias,
Aphricam, atque Siciliam, insulasque interiacentes, nullum instituisse
Ecclesias, nisi eos, quos venerabilis Apostolus Petrus, aut ejus successores
constituerunt sacerdotes, etc. And afterward he says, Quibus [ i.e. Decentius
his proposals] idcirco respondimus, non quod te aliqua ignorare credamus, sed
ut majori authoritate vel tuos instituas, vel, si qui a Romanae ecclesiae
institutionibus errant, aut commoneas, aut indicare [ i. e. to the Bishop of
Rome] non differas, ut scire valeamus, qui sint, qui aut novitates inducunt,
aut alterius ecclesiae, quam Romanae, existimant consuetudinem esse servandam.
The sufficiency of the reason given here I will not now dispute; but this
appears, that over all those Churches he then exercised some authority. And see
below ( 23. and elsewhere) many instances of the Roman Bishops authority
exercised over the Bishops of France, of Spain, and other Western Provinces,
before the sitting of the first Council of Nice; to all which therefore, and
not only to the regiones suburbicariae, must the 6th Nicene Canon [Mos antiquus
perduret] be extended.

Alexandria; The second, the Bishop of Alexandria.
containing under his Patriarchship, all the Archbishops and Bishops of Egypt
and Lybia.

Antioch; containing under him all the Archbishops and Bishops of the East; The
third, the Bishop of Antioch.
and amongst the rest, the Bishop of Jerusalem, whose Metropolitan, as also of
all Palestine, was the Bishop of Caesarea: But he subject to the Antiochian
Patriarch. See Hierom's Epistle to Pammachius against John Bishop of Jerusalem,
-- Ni fallor hoc ibi [i. e. in Concilio Niceno] ut Palestinae Metropolis
Caesarea sit; and totius Orientis Antiochia. Aut igitur ad Caesariensem
Archiepiscopum refer debueras, cui, spreta communione tua, communicare nos
noveras; aut si procul expetendum judicium erat, Antiochiam potius literae
dirigendae.

From whence their superiority over other Bishops.
which was rather confirmed, than given, to them in the Nicene Council, as
appears by those words in the 6th Canon thereof, [Mos antiquus perduret;] and
by those in the 7th (concerning some Honor also allowed to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, yet [manente Metropolitanae civitatis dignitate] -- Quoniam mos
antiquus obtinuit and vetusta traditio. Such expressions we find also in Conc.
Antioch. can. 9. [secundum antiquam a patribus nostris regulam constitutam;]
and in Conc. Ephesians. can. 8. [singulis Provinciis pura and inviolata, quae jam
inde ab initio habent, jura serventur]; wherein the Councils show themselves
very zealous for preserving all ancient customs and privileges. So St. Ignatius
the Martyr, living presently after the Apostles times, in his Epistle to the
Romans, styles himself the Pastor of the Church in Syria; because that whole
Region belonged also in those times to the Metropolis of Antioch, as Dr.
Hammond observes out of him ( Sch. p. 50.) And this superiority over the rest
these three Metropolitans had, as was anciently conjectured, from St. Peter
(who was first, or Primate of the Apostles) his being Bishop of Rome; and
formerly of Antioch; and his having also (by his Disciple Mark, sent thither) a
more particular relation to the Church of Alexandria. These therefore were
called Apostolicae seeds which title was also sometimes anciently communicated
to some other Churches besides these, where any of the Apostles had for any
long time made their residence, as to Ephesus, to Jerusalem, etc.): but, (...),
the Roman See, the last and most eminent Seat of the two greatest Apostles,
Vid. Bell. de Roman. Pont. l. 3. c. 2. l. 2. c. 27.
St. Peter and St. Paul (not disputing here what subordination there was
between these two, whose Government the Divine Wisdom thought meet to conclude
in one and the same Succession) is so styled. Which place, from this rather,
than from the secular eminency and power of that City, or from any other cause
whatever, (if we may judge by the suffrages of Antiquity), had the Honor and
Primacy above all other Churches. The secular eminency of that City was the
reason indeed mentioned by the Bishops in Conc. Chalc. ( Act. 16. propter
imperium civitatis illius]) because they endeavored the advancement of the
Constantinopolitan Bishop (the Patriarch of Alexandria, Dioscorus, being
condemned by that Council as a Defender of Eutyches) to the same privileges
with the Roman (in the second place) upon the like grounds: But a reason
disclaimed by Leo, the then Bishop of Rome, and by his Legates; and a reason
also omitted and left out by themselves, when they writ to Leo for his
confirmation of their Canons; who there give another reason of his Primacy,
viz. his Successorship in St. Peter's chair, as appears below, 25. n. 2. [See
also Syricius (Bishop of Rome A.D. 389.) his Epistle ad Episcopum
Tarraconensem, a city in Spain: -- Nobis major cunctis Christianae religionis
zelus incumbit. Portamus onera omnium, qui gravantur: Quinimo haec portat in
nobis Beatus Apostolus Petrus, qui nos in omnibus (ut confidimus)
administrationis suae protegit, and tuetur, haeredes. See Leo, sermon. 1. de
natali Apostolorum, thus speaking to Rome: -- Per sacram Beati Petri sedem,
caput Orbis effecta, latius praesides religione divina, quam dominatione
terrena. And his Epist. 58. to Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople, and Ep. 66.
to the Bishops of Chalced. Conc. in answer to the Letter sent from them; where
he has these words: Nihil Alexandrinae sedi ejus pereat dignitatis, quam per
Sanctum Marcum Evangelistam B. Petri Discipulum meruit. Antiochena quoque
Ecclesia, in qua primum praedicante Apostolo Petro Christianum nomen exortum
est, in paternae [i.e. Patrum Concilii Niceni] constitutionis ordine perseveret
etc. and Ep. ad Marcinamum Augustum, he says: -- Habeat Constantinopolitana
civitas gloriam suam. -- Alia tamen ratio est rerum saecularium, alia divinarum
-- c. And, in conc. Chalced. 16. sess. see the answer of the Roman Legates: --
Contradictio nostra his gestis inhaereat, ut noverimus quid Apostolico viro
Vniversalis Ecclesiae Papae defer valeamus. And see the confessions of the
Council of Chalcedon it self, in Act. 2. -- Petrus per Leonem locutus est; and
in their Epistle to Leo, set down below, 25. n. 2. which clearly shows them not
to have held the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome to have sprung only from the
Secular greatness of the city, but also from the Succession of S. Peter. I have
staid the longer upon this, because of that passage in Dr. Hammond Schism. 5.
c. 4. s. See the words of Anacletus, Ep. 3. (if those Epistles he his) in Dr.
Field (5. l. 31. c. p. 515.) to the same purpose as Leo's. -- See Cyprian ( Ep.
55. ad Cornelium, Bishop of Rome, de Fortunato and Faelicissimo Haereticis.)
Insuper navigare audent and ad Petri cathedram, atque ad Ecclesiam principalem.
-- And Ep. 52. Antoniano. Cum Fabiani locus, id est, cum locus Petri --
vacaret; factus est Cornelius Episcopus i. e. of Rome after Fabianus. --
Irenaeus, who lived in the 2d. Age, (3. l. 3. c.) Maximae, and antiquissime,
and omnibus cognitae, a gloriosissimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo
fundatae and constitutae, Ecclesiae, eam, quam habet ab Apostolis, traditionem,
and annunciatam hominibus fidem, per successiones Episcoporum usque ad nos
pervenientem, indicantes, confundimus omnes eos, qui per sui placentiam etc,
praeterquam oportet, colligunt. -- Hosius, in the Council of Sardica, can. 3.
concerning Appeals to the Bishop of Rome, proposing thus: -- Si vobis placet,
S. Petri Apostoli memoriam honoremus, ut scribatur Julio Romano Episcopo etc.
-- Hieron. Ep. to Damasus, concerning the word Hypostasis, whether he might
admit it; -- Ideo mihi cathedram Petri, and fidem Apostolico ore laudatam
censui consulendam. -- Apud vos solos incorrupta Patrum servatur authoritas,
[alias, haereditas.] -- Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, Beatitudinis
tuae i. e. cathedrae Petri communione consocior; super illam Petram adificatam
Ecclesiam scio. And in another Ep. ad eundem. -- Si quis cathedrae Petri
jungitur meus est. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 36. Quod mox idem decessor meus ut agnovit,
directis literis, ex authoritate S. Petri Apostoli, ejusdem Synodi acta
cassavit. And l. 6. Ep. 37. Eulogio Episcopo Alex. -- Quis nesciat sanctam
Ecclesiam in Apostolorum Principis soliditate firmatam etc. -- Cum multi sint
Apostoli, pro ipso tamen principatu sola Apostolorum Principis seeds in
authoritate convaluit, quae in tribus locis unius est. Ipse enim sublimavit
sedem, in qua etiam quiescere and praesentem vitam finire dignatus est. Ipse
decoravit sedem, in qua Evangelistam discipulum misit. Ipse firmavit sedem, in
qua septem annis, quamvis discessurus, sedit. Cum ergo unius atque una sit
seeds, cui ex authoritate divina tres nunc Episcopi praesident, quicquid ego de
vobis boni audio, hoc mihi imputo. Council. Genesis 8. at Constantinople, can. 21.
-- Quisquis autem tale facinus contra sedem Petri Principis Apostolorum ausus
fuerit intentare etc. By these passages you see he Primacy and Privileges
(whatever they were) of the Roman Bishop, anciently imputed to his Succession
in the Sea of S. Peter and S. Paul, and not (or not chiefly, or only) to the
Secular eminency of Rome.]

But a chief reason also of the so high advancement of these three cities above
all the rest, (notwithstanding that there were some other Apostolical Seats,
Jerusalem, Ephesus, preferable before Alexandria, and many other cities more
dignified, as was urged by the Roman Bishops against that clause in Conc.
Chalced. [propter imperium civitatis Romae] than either Alexandria, or
Antioch,] seems to be, because these cities, in the beginning and first
spreading of Christianity in those several quarters of the world, the East, the
West, and the South, were replenished with a much greater number of Christians
than others, and were the Mother-churches of all the rest. These three cities,
as Dr. Hammond notes, ( Schism. 3. c. p. 58.) having the honor to disperse
Christianity in a most eminent manner to other cities and nations. For the
Churches of Asia were converted by Emissaries from Antioch, ( Act. 13.2, 4.)
and those of Egypt etc, from Alexandria; and the Western, from Rome. Concerning
which, see the testimony of Innocentius the first, Pope, A. D. 408. in his
Epistle to Decentius Bishop of Eugubium, quoted before 3.. Tho I do not deny,
that Alexandria in Egypt, having bin the Seat of the Successors of Ptolomy, and
Antioch in Asia of the Successors of Seleucus; and, under the Romans, being the
place of Residence of those their Governors, who were set over the adjacent
Provinces; this might somewhat advance the propagation of Christianity more
from these cities of so great resort, than from others.

The Sea of Constantinople advanced to a Patriarchate, in the next place to
Rome.
A. D. 381. Constantinople, being now made great, by the Seat of the Empire
translated thither, its Bishop was advanced into a fourth Patriarch; and that
in the second place next to Rome; which thing was also confirmed in the 4. Genesis
Conc. Chalced granting him ( Act. 16.) aequa senioris regiae Romae privilegia,
i.e. (as they there, and in their Letter to Leo ( Act. 3) explain themselves,)
to exercise, in such a sense, as the 2d. General Council had decreed before
them, a Patriarchal authority; in ordaining the Metropolitans of certain
Provinces, and the Bishops also in some others; as also to have the last place
of Appeal ( Can. 9.) in respect of those parts of the Church, with this salvo
annexed in behalf of the Roman Bishop; omnem quidem primatum, and honorem
praecipuum (secundum Canones) Antiquae Romae Archiepiscopo conservari; and (as
it is said in the 2d. General Council 5th Can. to which former Canon they refer)
-- Constantinopolitanae Civitatis Episcopum habere oportere primatus honorem
post Romanum Episcopum, propter quod sit Nova Roma. tho this priority of the
Bishop of Constantinople to Alexandria and Antioch was in this Council of
Chalcedon much opposed in the behalf of those two Sees ( Dioscorus then Bishop
of Alexandria being excluded from this Council for Heresy, and so at this time
incapable of pleading for himself) by Leo the then Bishop of Rome. And it
seems, that the former 5th Canon (but now recited) made by the Bishops in that
part of the 2d. General Council which was assembled at Constantinople, as also
the three other Canons there preceding it (which were recited in Council.
Chalced. Act. 16.) were either unknown, or not at all regarded, by the other
part of the 2d. General Council, the Western Bishops, who were assembled
shortly after that time at Rome. For thus says Leo of these Canons or Acts, in
Ep. to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, -- Nunquam a praedecessoribus tuis
ad Apostolicae Sedis transmissa notitiam; and thus his Legates in Conc. Chalced.
16. Act. -- Quae in Synodicis Canonibus non habentur. Neither indeed was any
such Canon mentioned by the Constantinopolitan Bishops of the 2d. General
Council, when they writ to Damasus concerning its Acts. (See 1. conc.
Constantinop.) Nor was this foresaid 5th Canon, (when most opportunely it
might) but only the Nicene 6th Canon pleaded by S. Chrysostom against
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, offering to judge and depose him. Wherefore
Baronius conceives it to be made only by a part of that Council, after
Timotheus the Bishop of Alexandria was departed thence. But, however, this
Patriarch was, not long after that contention of Leo's, rather by their not
contradiction, than approbation), indulged that honor also by the Roman
Bishops themselves, (doubtless as conceiving it no abridgment of their own
authority,) some Metropolitans being taken from the other Patriarchates, The
great extent of this Patriarchate in latter times.
and subjected to it. The great extent of which Patriarchy (in latter times
especially) if you be curious to know, see Dr. Field 3. l. 1. c. where he
assigns, for one reason of such an enlargment of its jurisdiction, the
conversion of sundry nations and people to the Christian faith by that Bishops
Suffragans, and Ministers.

A. D. 550. the Bishop of Jerusalem, out in honor to the Holy City, The Sea
of Jerusalem raised to a Patriarchate in the 5th place.
was made the 5th Patriarch; (after some honor and respects beyond other
Bishops first given (or rather wished) to him by the Nicene Council; see 7.
Canon.) some Bishops both from that of Alexandria and Antioch being translated
to his Jurisdiction.

The authority of Patriarchs, and other Ecclesiastical Governors, for the
ordinations, or confirmations, and for judging the causes (upon appeal) of
their inferiors.
and the Patriarch was to ordain or confirm the Metropolitans subject unto him,
either by imposition of hands, or by mission of the Pall. [See Council. Chalced.
27. c. and 16. Action: where, advancing the Constantinopolitan Bishop to
Patriarchal authority, in the second place to Rome, they conclude, oportere and
ipsum potestatem habere ordinare Metropolitanos, etc. and ut penes eum sit,
hunc, qui electus est, confirmare, repudiareve. See 8. Genesis Conc. Constant. 17.
c. -- See Dr. Field 5. l. 31. c. p. 518. -- Patriarchs were, by the order of
the 8. General Council Can. 17. to confirm the Metropolitans, subject unto
them, either by imposition of hands, or giving the Pall. -- And 5. l. 37. c. p.
551. Without the Patriarch's assent none of the Metropolitans subject unto them
might be ordained. And -- What the bring (says he) proves nothing that we ever
doubted of. For we know the Bishop of Rome had the right of confirming the
Metropolitans within the precinct of his own Patriarchship, as likewise every
other Patriarch had: and that therefore, he might send the Pall to sundry parts
of Greece, France, and Spain, (as Bellarmin alleges,) being all within the
compass of his Patriarchship. -- See Bishop Bramhal, ( vindic. 9. c. p. 257.
etc. What power the Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province, the
same had a Patriarch over the Metropolitans and Bishops of sundry Provinces
within his own Patriarchate. And afterward: Wherein then consisted Patriarchal
authority? in ordaining their Metropolitans, (for with inferior Bishops they
might not meddle,) or confirming them, in imposing of hands, or giving the
Pall, in convocating Patriarchal Synods, and presiding in them, etc, -- when
Metropolitical Synods did not suffice to determine some emergent differences or
difficulties. Thus he. Neither might any Metropolitan upon any cause separate
himself from the communion of his Patriarch, before the examination and
sentence of a Council first passed in his behalf. See 8. General Council, 10.
c. whose words are, -- Nullus Clericus ante diligentem examinationem and
Synodicam sententiam a communione proprii Patriarchae se separet, licet
criminalem quamlibet causam ejus se nosse praetendat; nec recuset nomen ipsius
refer inter divina mysteria. Idem statuimus de Episcopis erga proprios
Metropolitas; similiter and de Metropolitis circa Patriarcham suum. -- Qui vero
contra fecerit, ab omni Sacerdotali operatione and honor decidat. Ante
Synodicam sententiam, i. e. of a Council superior to the Metropolitan: for the
lower cannot judge the higher, no, not tho assembled together in a council, See
Dr. Field l. 5. c. 39. p. 567.) as an Episcopal Synod cannot judge the
Metropolitan.] And the firmlier to bind and confine the inferior, to the
judgment of the superior, orders of the Clergy, the Church made frequent Canons
against their starting aside by appeals to the judgment of Seculars, whether of
others, or also of the Emperor himself. See Council. Antiochen. 11. c. 12. c. --
Council. Sardica. 8. c. Council. Chalced. 9. c. Si Clericus adversus Clericum
habeat negotium, non relinquat suum Episcopum, and ad saecularia judicia non
concurrat etc. -- Conc. Melevitanum 19. c. Placuit, ut quicunque ab Imperatore
cognitionem judiciorum publicorum [i.e. Ecclesiasticorum] petierit, honor
proprio privetur, etc. And see Conc. Generale 8. c. 17. and 21. This for
Patriarchs superiority over, and their cotfirmation of, Metropolitans.

Next, amongst the Patriarchs themselves; Roman Patriarch, by those words of
Leo, ( Ep. 54. ad Martianum, the then Emperor,) concerning Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople. Satis est, quod praedicto vestrae pietatis auxilio, and mei
favoris assensu, Episcopatum tantae Vrbis obtinuit. And, -- custodire debuit,
ut quod nostro beneficio noscitur consecutus, nullius pravitatis cupiditate
turbaret. Nos enim vestrae fidei, and interventionis habentes intuitum, cum
secundum suae consecrationis authors ejus initia titubarent, benigniores circa
ipsum, quam justiores, esse voluimus; quo perturbationes omnes, quae operante
Diabolo fuerunt excitatae, adhibitis remediis leniremus. Thus discourses the
Pope to the Emperor, conscious of all those proceedings, concerning his
establishing of the Constantinopolitan Patriarch: and by the suit made to the
Pope, concerning the settlement of Flavianus in the Patriarchy of Antioch; of
which see Theodoret, hist. Eccles. 5. l. 23. c. Likewise concerning the
confirming of superior Patriarchs by the inferior, that is true, which Dr.
Field (5. l. 37. c. p. 551.) says, in answer to such places urged by
Bellarmin, That the manner was, that the Patriarchs should (upon notice given
of their due Ordination, and Synodal letters, containing a profession of their
Faith) mutually give assent one to another. Therefore Cyprian, Antoniano Ep.
52. speaks thus concerning the legitimate election of Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
whom Novatianus endeavored to supplant. Factus est Cornelius Episcopus, cum
Fabiani locus vacaret, quo [loco] occupato de Dei voluntate, atque omnium
nostrum consensione firmato, quisquis jam Episcopus [Romae] fieri voluerit,
foris fiat necesse est etc. But that which Dr. Field adds there, viz. That the
confirming of the great Bishops of the world pertained no otherwise to the
Bishop of Rome, than the right of confirming Him pertained unto Them, cannot
justly be defended, even from his own concessions elsewhere, 5. l. 34. c. p.
528. etc. of which see more below 24.) For no other Bishop could be a lawful
Patriarch, without the approbation of the Bishop of Rome, the prime Patriarch:
whose withdrawing his communion from any was withdrawing the communion of the
whole Church, which has always continued united to this Apostolic chair; and
yet the Bishop of Rome was lawfully such without the approbation of every other
Patriarch, so long as his election is not disallowed by the conjunct Hierarchy,
or the whole representative of the Church gathered togegether in a Council, as
it happened in the Council of Constance. He may have an authority over other
Bishops or Patriarchs single, which none of them singly has over him: and yet
all of them conjoined may have the same authority over Him, as he has over any
of them single; one singulis major, may be minor universis. Of which see more
below, 22. n. 2. and in 2. Part. 20.

11. n. 2.
Likewise, Appeals were permitted from inferior Ecclesiastical, to superior,
Judges and Courts; but not of all causes and persons whatever to the supreamest
Court; lest so should be no end of contentions. So the inferior Clergy in their
differences might appeal from their Bishop to their Metropolitan and his
Council, Provincial, or National, who were finally to determine such
controversies; and such persons to acquiesce in them. Again; Bishops might
appeal from their Metropolitan, or from any inferior Courts, to their
Patriarch, and his Council; whose final decision, in ordinary contests, they
were to rest in; and who, from the remotest of his Provinces, upon appeal,
might either bring the cause to be heard by himself, if the moment of the
business so required; or send e latere suo presbyteros, (to use the expression
of the 7th can. of Sardic. Conc.) or depute some other Bishops of that, or some
other neighboring, Province, to hear the matter, where it was acted: Or
lastly, command the Appealant to acquiesce in the former sentence given. See
for both these, the Appeals of inferior Clergy, and also of Bishops, Conc.
Chalced. can. 9. (compared with Conc. Nic. 6 can. and Conc. Constable. 1. can. 5.)
-- Si Clericus adversus Clericum habet negotium, -- agitetur apud proprium
Episcopum. -- Si Clericus adversus suum vel alium Episcopum habeat causam, apud
audientiam Synodi Provinciae conqueratur. Si vero contra ipsius Provinciae
Metropolitanum Episcopum Episcopus sive Clericus habeat controversiam, pergant
ad ipsius Diocesis (a word in those times of larger extent than that of
Province; one Diocese containing in it many Provinces) Primates, aut certe ad
Constantinopolitanae regiae civitatis sedem. -- Ad Constant. sedem; because by
the Eastern Bishops both in this, and in the second General Council, the second
Dignity amongst the Patriarchs, or Primates, after Rome, was conferred on him;
and therefore by this Canon we may gather, That the same repair, as was in such
causes permitted to be made in the East to the Constantinopolitan, might as
Canonically be made in the West to the Roman, Patriarch. For whatever
privilege the Constantinopolitan Bishop had, the Roman had in the first place.
See Conc Sard. can. 3, 4, 7, 17. -- Can. 3. (proposed by Hosius, President
formerly in the Nicene Council,) Si in aliqua Provincia aliquis Episcopus
contra fratrem suum Episcopum litem habuerit, unus de duobus ex alia Provincia
advocet Episcopum cognitorem. Quod si aliquis Episcopus judicatus fuerit in
[aliqua] alia causa, and putat se bonam causam habere, ut iterum Concilium
renovetur, si vobis placet S. Petri Apostoli memoriam honoremus, ut scribatur
ab his qui causam examinarunt, Julio Romano Episcopo: and si judicaverit
renovandum esse, judicium renovetur; and det Judices. Si autem probaverit talem
causam esse, ut non refricentur ea, quae acta sunt, quae decreverit confirmata
erunt; si hoc omnibus placet: Synodus respondit, Placet. -- Can. 4. Cum aliquis
Episcopus depositus fuerit eorum Episcoporum judicio, qui in vicinis locis
commorantur, and proclamaverit; agendum sibi negotium in urbe Roma, alter
Episcopus in ejus Cathedra, post appellationem [ i. e. to Rome] ejus qui
videtur esse depositus, omnino non ordinetur, nisi causa fuerit in judicio
Episcopi Romani determinata. -- Can. 7. Si Episcopus accusatus fuerit, --
congregati Episcopi regionis ipsius judicaverint; and de gradu suo eum
dejecerint, si appellaverit; qui dejectus est, and confugerit ad Episcopum
Romanae Ecclesiae, and voluerit se audiri, [which was the course which
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, and Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, had take
just before this Council, tho the no Bishops of the Western Patriarchy, who
also were members of this Council,] si justum putaverit, [ i.e. Romanus
Episcopus,] ut renovetur judicium vel discussionis examen, scribere dignetur
his Episcopis, qui in finitima and propinqua Provincia sunt, ut ipsi diligenter
requirant, and juxta fidem veritatis definiant. Quod si is, qui rogat causam
suam iterum audiri, deprecatione sua moverit Episcopum Romanum, ut e latere suo
Presbyterum mittat, fit in potesta^e Episcopi [ i.e. Romani] quid velit, and
quid aestimet. Et si decreverit mittendos esse, qui praesentes cum Episcopis
judicent, habentes ejus authoritatem a quo destinati sunt, erit in suo
arbitrio. Si vero crediderit Episcopos sufficere, [ i.e. without his Legates,]
ut negotio terminum imponant, faciet, quod sapientissimo consilio judicaverit.
Can. 17. Si Episcopus forte iracundus (quod esse non debet) cito and aspere
commoveatur adversus Presbyterum sive Diaconum suum, and exterminari eum de
Ecclesia voluerit; providendum est, ne innocens damnetur, aut perdat
communionem, and ideo habeat potestatem is, qui abjectus est, ut Episcopos
finitimos interpellet, and causa ejus audiatur, ac diligentius tractetur, quia
non oportet ei negare audientiam roganti, etc.

Thus (probably with some eye to the Justification of Julius his proceeding,
concerning Athanasius, 11. n. 2.
which were reproached by the oriental Arian party) this great Council
assembled about twenty years after the Nicene, and establishing the Decrees
thereof; having the same President, or chief Prolocutor, in it, with the
Council of Nice, ( Hosius Bishop of Corduba) and several other Bishops of the
Nicene Council, and men eminent in sanctity, (to omit Athanasius), Maximus
Bishop of Jerusalem, Paphnutius, Serapion, Spiridion, and other: called
Ecumenical by Socrates, l. 2. c. 17. both the Emperors concurring in the
calling thereof: and it being subscribed, tho not by the Arrian party (a few in
comparison, bearing the proportion of 76 to about 300; who seeing, they should
be over-voted, departed from the Council), yet by the Orthodox Oriental, as
well as Western, Bishops, namely, by Athanasius, by Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem, and by the Bishops of Palestine, (who mostpart adhered to and the
Athanasius, and the Nicene Decrees), by Diodorus Bishop of Asia minor, etc.
(see the Council).

Notwithstanding all which, some have endeavored to disauthorize the Canons
thereof, as giving the Roman Bishop too great an authority. See Spalatensis l.
4. c. 8. n. 34. where against these Canons he urges: a. That, in corpore
antiquo Canonum universalis Ecclesiae, quo Oriens semper usus est, nullus
Sardicenfis Canon locum habuit: b That Patres Africani Canoni Sardicensi nihil
defer voluerunt, ubi enim cognoverunt Canonem non esse Nicaenum, illum
contempserunt. That Zosimus, si Sardicenses tunc Canones fuissent alicujus
authoritatis, non eum dixisset esse Nicaenum; sed id quod erat aperte dixisset,
esse Canonem Sardicensem and servandum. g Lastly, that Photius, about Anno D.
860 express negavit Nicolao Papae Canonem Sardicensem 13 um ejus ordinationi
objicienti se Sardicense Concilium, aut alia Pontificum decreta, habere vel
recipere. But in answer to these. To a I oppose,

1. What Cardinal Perron replied long since to Causaubon, 1. l. 53. c. -- That
the leaving these Canons out of the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae universalis is
against the Faith of all the Greek Canonists, Photius, Zonaras, Balsamon,
Harmenopulus, and against the Greek impressions even of Basil, Wirtenberg, and
other Protestant towns; and, in sum, against the verity of all the Greek Codes,
as well Printed, as Manuscripts, of all the Libraries, Occidental, and
Oriental. Thus Perron.

2. What just cause can be alleged for the rejection of these Canons?
Spalatensis alleges this, (ibid.) quia Sardicae factum est schisma. But this
Schism and departure being made by an inconsiderable party, (these some 76, and
the other some 300, with the prime Patriarch joined with them, and some eminent
Oriental Bishops amongst them,) lest they should be overpowred; how could they
do more to disauthorize these Canons, by being divided from the Council, than
they could have done, by residing in it, and voting against them? But the
dissenting votes of so few in the council surely could not weaken its acts;
which receive force, not from all, (for what acts almost have such universal
consent?) but from the much major part thereof. But if these Canons, without
the concurrence of those persons, were invalid; so was also the Anti- Arrian
Creed of this Council, and their sentence in the behalf of Athanasius. And
indeed hence, where there is any Schism by some part, no act of the Church can
thence-forward be valid. For example: What act of the Church Catholic could be
valid at that time against the Arians, if these of Sardica were not?

3. Let it be granted, that these Canons, rejected at first by these
Schismatics, were afterward for some time, in the East, omitted by the
Catholics in their collections of the Churches Canons; yet it seems
sufficient, that the Oriental Church of latter times, when the Arians were
crushed, acknowledged them, as well as the West; which we find done by the
Council, Constantinopolitan. in Trullo. Can. 2. Obsignamus reliquos omnes
Canones, qui a sanctis nostris Patribus etc expositi sunt, -- similiter and ab
eis qui Sardicae convenerunt.

4. For the equity of these Canons, if we consider any obligation which they
lay upon these Western parts of the Church, in respect of the Bishop of Rome,
it is no greater than the acknowledged-General Council of Chalcedon lays on
the East, in respect of the Bishop of Constantinople, Can. 9.

5. However it be; the acts of such a Council, wherein the Western Bishops are
conceded to have unanimously agreed, are obligatory to the West; and
particularly to Africa, from whence were present therein 35 Bishops consenting
thereto; and no dislike thereof afterward professed by the African Church of
that present time. Nay Gratus, Primat of Carthage, who was present in this
Council, quoteth the authority thereof in 1. Conc. Carthag. 5. Can. -- Mamini
in sanctissimo Concilio Sardicensi statutum -- c: But had its Canons bin
disallowed by the African Church, his quoting them would have prejudiced his
matter. Therefore To b I say; neither were these Canons opposed by the African
Council (which contested with Zosimus about them) above 60 years after, as
known to them to be Sardican Canons, but only because they were utterly
ignorant thereof. for it is clear by S. Austin's words, contra Crescon. 3. l. 34
c. and Ep. 163. ad Eleusium, that he, who may be presumed as knowing as any
other of that Synod, knew of no Sardican Decrees at all, save those made by the
separated Arians, I know not where, and called by them Sardican Canons; of
which he came to have notice only casually from the Donatists; and, perusing
the Book they showed him, found them to be made by the Arians; because (says
he) legi Athanasium and Julium illo Conc. Sardicensi fuisse improbatos. (Ep.
163.) But it had bin some advantage to his matter then in hand, had he produced
any true and Orthodox Council of Sardica, opposite to this, who defended
Athanasius; but of this he is silent. Neither will this altogether seem so
strange, when as in another matter we find him confessing himself ignorant also
of a Canon of Nice, that There may not be two Bishops resident of the same
place at once. See Austin Epist. 110. Quod Concilio Nicaeno prohibitum fuisse
nesciebam, nec ipse [ Valerius, the former Bishop of Hippo] sciebat. Neither
did Zosimus, in all probability, know these Canons, which he urged to the
Africans as the Nicene, to have bin the Canons of Sardica; for else we would
have pressed them for such, being thus as obligatory to the Africans, as if
they had bin the Nicene. To ^ Photius, a single person his rejecting these
Canons, when opposite to him, in a matter so nearly concerning himself, 200
years after the Eastern Council in Trullo had acknowledged them amongst the
rest, is to be looked on as a piece of passion: and his own putting these
Canons also amongst the rest in his Nomo-canon, (see Balsam. in Nomo-can.
Photii) is a sufficient self-condemnation.

Thus much for vindicating the authority of this Council. Of which thus Mr.
Thorndike. Epilog. 3. l. 20. c. p. 181. -- This difference came afterward to be
tried by a General Council at Sardica, etc. For surely the Council of Sardica
was intended for a General Council, as the Emperor Justinian reckons it, being
summoned by both the Emperor Constantius and Constance out of the whole Empire.
[and] when the breach fell out, and the Eastern Bishops withdrew themselves to
Phillopopolis, the whole power, in point of right, ought, I conceive, to remain
on that side which was not the cause of the breach. But the Success
sufficiently shows, that it did not so prevail, [was not obeyed, and
submitted to by all, as a General Council,] for many a Council [which followed
after this about the Arian opinions,] might have bin spared. The sovereign
regard of peace in the Church suffered not those, that were in the right, to
insist upon the acts of it, as I suppose. In the mean time the Canons thereof,
whereby Appeals to the Pope in the causes of Bishops are settled, whether for
the West, which it represented, or for the whole [Church] which it had right to
conclude, [those Bishops that voted in it] not having caused the breach,) shall
I conceive [them] to be forged, because they are so aspersed? they having bin
acknowledged by Justinian, translated by Dionys. Exiguus, added by the Eastern
Church to their Canon Law? Or, shall I not ask [rather], what pretense there
could be [in these Canons] to settle Appeals from other parts to Rome, rather
than from Rome to other parts, had not a preeminence of power, and not only a
precedence of rank, bin acknowledged originally in the Church of Rome? Thus Mr.
Thorndike heartily of this Famous Council.

Rome urged, A Digression concerning the controversy between the Bishops of
Africa and Rome about Appeals.
by mistake, to the 6th Carthaginian Council, contesting with him about
Appeals, for Canons of Nice. By mistake, I say: For these two Canons are found
verbatim the same, with those, which the Pope sent to the African Bishops; as
appears by their Epistle to Boniface, wherein the Canons are set down: And the
17th Canon, it seems, was understood (I say not whether rightly) by the Bishop
of Rome in such a sense; as that it established his, as well as the finitimi
Episcopi's, receiving the appeals of Presbyters. which appears, by his pressing
that canon to them; by his admitting the appeals of Apiarius only a Presbyter,
the occasion of this controversy; and by the African Bishops opposing him in
their Epistle to Celestine,, as well concerning Presbyter's as Bishops appeals
to Rome. These canons of Sardica (as I have showed out of S. Austin) it is
probable that the African Bishops had not seen, tho they had the consent also
of their predecessors; there being no less than 35 Bishops from Africa in that
council, ( Athan. Apol. 2.) and therefore, upon their not finding them amongst
the Nicene, as was pretended, nor knowing them to be of the orthodox council of
Sardica, they request; That neither the appeals of Presbyters, nor yet of
Bishops, might thenceforth be admitted, from thence, by the Roman Bishop, but
that their causes might finally be decided by their Metropolitan, or a
Provincial Council, defending themselves with the 5th and 6th canons of the
Nicene Council: Their words are these. -- Impendio deprecamur etc, ne a nobis
excommunicatos in communionem ultra velitis accipere; quia hoc etiam Nicaeno
Concilio definitum facile advertet Venerabilitas tua. Nam etsi de inferioribus
clericis vel laicis videtur ibi praecaveri, quanto magis de Episcopis voluit
observari, ne in sua provincia communione suspensi a tua sanctitate vel
festinato, vel praepropere, vel indebite videantur communioni restitui? Decreta
Nicaena [can. 4.6.] sive inferioris gradus clericos, sive ipsos Episcopos, suis
Metropolitanis apertissime commiserunt. -- Maxim quia unicuique concessum est,
si judicio offensus sit cognitorum (i.e. of the judges of his cause) ad
concilia suae Provinciae, vel etiam universale, provocare. Their reasons are,
-- Vnicuique Provinciae gratiam Spiritus sancti non defuturam etc. -- nisi
forte quisquam est qui credat, uni cuilibet posse Deum nostrum examinis
inspirare justitiam, and innumerabilibus congregatis in Concilium sacerdotibus
denegare. Therefore they desire him, that neither their causes might be judged,
by himself at Rome; for Quomodo ipsum transmarinum judicium ratum erit, ad quod
testium necessariae personae vel propter sexus, vel propter senectutis,
infirmitatem etc, adduci non poterunt? nor by his Legates a latere in Africa;
for hoc nulla invenimus Patrum synodo constitutum. -- and nulla Patrum
definitione hoc Ecclesiae derogatum est Africanae. much less; that he would
send executores Clericos quibusque petentibus, -- ne fumosum typhum saeculi in
Ecclesiam Christi -- videamur introducere. insr. 25. n. 1.
Executores etc, who by the Secular power, the Emperor's officers there,
forced, if need were, the observation of the Bishop of Rome's decrees. See
(Aust. Ep. 261.) the complaint S. Austin makes to the Pope of Antonius his
threats. From which proceedings, they complain in their letter to Bonifacius,
that they had suffered much formerly, and more than the Canons he urged, should
they be found in the Nicen Council, did impose upon them. And the same dislike
of Appeal to Rome may be found, before these times, in S. Cyprian, (Ep. 55. to
Cornelius Bishop of Rome) at least in reference to those particular persons,
Fortunatus and Felicissimus, notoriously guilty, and most justly condemned by a
Council in Africa; where he pleads thus: Nam cum statutum sit omnibus nobis,
and aequum sit pariter, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est crimen
admissum, and singulis pastoribus portio gregis sit adscripta, quam regat,
rationem sui actus Domino redditurus: oportet utique eos, quibus praesumus, non
circumcursare, sed agere illic causam suam, ubi and accusatores habere and
testes sui criminis possint; nisi si paucis desperatis and perditis, minor
videtur esse authoritas Episcoporum in Africa constitutorum.

Rome and Africa. Meanwhile it is plain; that then Appeals were ordinarily made
from Africa to the Bishop of Rome, and his decrees submitted to, and executed
there, and this not only before, but presently after, this contest. See below
23. and Leo's 85 Ep. ad Episcopos Africanos. where he writes thus concerning
Lupicinus, an ejected African Bishop, appealing to him. Causam quoque Lupicini
Episcopi illic jubemus audiri. Cui multum and saepius postulanti communionem
hac ratione reddidimus: quoniam cum ad nostrum judicium provocasset immerito
eum, pendente negotio, a communione videbamus fuisse suspensum. In which
Epistle also he says; Quod nunc utcunque patimur esse veniale, inultum
postmodum esse non poterit, si quisquam id, quod omnino interdiximus, usurpare
praesumpserit. Manifest also, that they did at that time what he appointed
concerning Apiarius: and promised observance of the two Canons, till the return
of the copy of the Nicene canons out of the East; and, after this return, some
expressions in their letter they let fall, as if they would not offer to throw
off altogether his interest in their affairs. Impendio deprecamur, ut deinceps
ad vestras aures hinc venientes, non facilius admittatis. [Upon which words
Spalatensis comments thus. (4. l. 8. c. 32. n.) Rogant, ut Episcopi non tam
facile audiantur, [i.e. a Roman Pontifice,] nisi videlicet notoria and
manifesta adsit suspicio in propriae Provinciae Episcopis omnibus, aut maxima
eorum part. For he grants there, ubi gravis and notoria est suspicio erga
proprios and primarios Judices, Ep scopos reos potuisse ad aliena [or extera]
judicia, praesertim vero ad seeds Apostolicas recurrere. and quotes for it S.
Austin Ep. 162. in Caetilian's case.] -- And voluit observari [ i.e. the
Council of Nice,] ne in sua Provincia communione suspensi, a tua sanctitate vel
festinato, vel prapropere, vel ind^bite, videantur communioni restitui. And the
22. canon of the Milevitan Council, held by them about the time of this
contest, prohibits transmarine Appeals only to the inferior Clergy: Placuit, ut
Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel caeteri inferiores Clerici, in causis, quas habuerint
etc non provocent, nisi ad Africana Concilia, vel ad Primates Provinciarum
suarum etc.

Africans in this matter, Whether transmarine Appeals in some cases very
necessary,
yet here may be made still a Quaere; Whether, in a controversy between
Bishops and their Metropolitan; and much more in controversies between
Metropolitans, or Primates; or also Patriarchs themselves, such transmarine
Appeals were not necessary, and were, at all, or at least justly, by the
African Bishops, in any-such cases, opposed. For the mere proving of an
opposition engages us no more to the opinion of one side than of the other;
neither may we argue the Bishop of Rome unjustly claimed it, because they
opposed it; no more than that they unjustly opposed it, because he claimed it.
As for the 5th Nicene Canon urged by them, themselves grant it, and it is
manifest to any Reader, to speak in express terms only of inferior Clergy; and
in their application of it to Bishops, they qualify it with a -- ne festinato,
ne praepropere. For the common practice of former times, in Athanasius, etc,
shows, that the Roman Bishop was not prohibited by these Canons to admit into
his communion any Bishop, excommunicated by his Province, if he found him
wrongfully Suspended; and therefore it is true also, that the 6th canon,
Episcopos suis Metropolitanis apertissime commisit, but not in every case
unappealably to Superiors, as appears by the African Bishop's qualification in
that Epistle. Ne festinato, ne praepropere, quoted before. As for the several
Reasons they give, to these it may be replied on the other side: That the
Patriarch, tho he were neither more prudent, nor better informed from others in
difficult matters, nor more assisted from Heaven, (yet it is probable, that such
might, as having a more choice election, both be more knowing, and, according
to the eminency of his place, assisted, both with a wiser Council, and a
greater portion of God's Spirit,) yet must he needs be a less partial Judge in
such matters; because not so nearly interessed, in the cause, nor in the
persons, as the Metropolitan often must be; or also other Bishops, who live
upon the place, and are subject to his power. That the Provincial Councils,
which they mention, tho their judgment were never so entire, were not always to
be had, and were much seldomer assembled than the Canons appoint; much rarer
yet Councils universal: neither of them (by reason of the great trouble) fit,
upon every such difference, to be called. And hence fails that Apology, which
Dr. Field (5. l. 39 c. p. 563.) makes for the Africans in these words. The
Africans, tho within the Patriarchship of Rome, disliked the Appeals of Bishops
to Rome; because they might have right against their Metropolitans in a general
Synod of Africa, wherein the Primat sat as President: for otherwise Bishops
wronged by their Metropolitans might by the canons appeal to their own
Patriarch. Thus far he. Therefore the Africans, denying this, went against the
canons. That the canons of the Council of Sardica, which the African Bishops
(then) knew not of, were sufficient to warrant his receiving of such appeals;
and if any former African decrees be pleaded against him, much more may these
of Sardica, for him. That many cases are not matter of fact, where witnesses
are necessary, but questions de jure, where the fact is confessed; and that in
such, no more plea can be made to have them tried at home, than the Mosaical
Legalists of Antioch could justly have demanded not to have this matter
arbitrated at Jerusalem; or Arius of Alexandria, at Nice. That for the
convenience of hearing witnesses, where necessary in such appeals, it was
ordered indeed anciently, that, whenever it could safely be done, such causes
should be arbitrated in the same, or some adjoining Provinces; by some Judges,
either sent thither, or there delegated by the Patriarch, (of which the 7th
canon of Sardica seems to take special care,) in the non-observance of which
canons some Roman Bishops perhaps may have bin culpable, and caused great
affliction to their subjects: but yet, that other exigencies might occur,
(every cause not being fit to be decided by delegates,) which required the
trial to be at the Patriarchal residency, to which the trouble of witnesses
must give place; which trials at Rome are also allowed by the Council, (see
Conc. Sard. can. 4.) And this grave Assembly, we have no reason to think, but
that they weighed the troubles of such appeals, as well as the Africans
afterward, or we now; but thought fit to admit smaller inconveniences, to avoid
greater mischiefs; namely, in the intervals of Councils, schisms and divisions
between Provincial, and between National, Churches, by the Church her having
thus so many Supremes, terminating all Spiritual causes within themselves, as
there were Provinces or countries, Christian. See Dr. Field, allowing such
appeals, (below,. 20.) and especially S. Austin, Ep. 162. where he justifies
the appeal of Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage, wronged by a Council of 70.
Bishops held in Africa, whereof was President the Primat of Numidia, whose
power and authority Dr. Hammond equals to that of Patriarchs, ( Schism 3. c. p.
58.) to a transmarine judgment, (tho Donatus his party much crying out against
such appeals, and tho it was in a matter merely of fact; namely, whether
Caecilian was ordained by some, who were traditores sacrorum Codicum igni, in
time of persecution,) because such judgment was dis-engaged in the quarrel. His
words are, -- Sibi [i.e. Caeciliano] videbat apud Ecclesiam transmarinam, a
privatis inimicitiis and ab utraque part dissensionis alienam, incorruptum and
integrum examen suae causae remanere. -- And again, Qui [i.e. Caecilianus]
posset non curare conspirantem multitudinem inimicorum, [ i.e. in Africa,] cum
se videret and Romanae Ecclesiae, in qua semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit
Principatus, and caeteris terris -- per communicatorias literas esse
conjunctum, ubi paratus esset causam suam dicere: (for all Churches had power
to clear and examine his cause, in respect of entertaining communion with him,
and sending their communicatory letters etc. tho all Churches had not such
power, in respect of righting him against his adversaries, but only his
superior Patriarch): Again, -- An forte non debuit Romanae Ecclesiae Melchiades
Episcopus cum Collegis transmarinis Episcopis illud sibi usurpare judicium,
quod ab Afris septuaginta, ubi Primas [Numidiae] Tigisitanus praesedit, fuerat
terminatum? Quid, quod nec usurpavit? Rogatus quippe Imperator Judices misit
Episcopos, qui cum eo sederent, and de tota illa causa, quod justum videretur,
statuerent. This transmarine judgment here you see S. Austin justifies,
notwithstanding the Donatists might have used the foresaid (. 12.) plea of the
African Fathers of the 6th Council, and of Cyprian; especially in the trial of
a matter of fact.

Caecilians cause, before I leave it, I must not conceal to you, what Calvin (
Instit. l. 4. c. 7. s. 10.) relates thereof, in prejudice of the Pope's
authority: objecting there; That Caecilian had his cause tried indeed by the
Bishop of Rome; but, by him only as the Emperor's Delegate; and not by him
singly, but with other special Delegates joined with him; that, from this
judgment, an appeal being made by Caecilian's adversaries, then the Emperor
Constantine, so great an honorer of the Church's privileges, appointed the
Bishop of Arles in France; Qui sedet Judex (says he) ut post Roman.
Pontificem, quod visum fuerit, pronunciet. And again, an appeal being made from
him also, ('it is further urged), That the Emperor judged the cause, after all,
himself. For answer to which, I refer you to the relation of this story by St.
Augustine, against the Donatists, Epist. 162. where you will find those
Assessors to be joined by the Emperor to the Bishop of Rome, ad preces
Donatistarum; who well knew Melchiades much favoring Caecilian's cause. (You
may see Constantine's Letter to Melchiades, and Marcus, one of his Assessors,
in Eus. l. 1. c. 5.) The Donatists, here cast, pretending some new evidence,
requested of the Emperor yet another hearing of their cause; upon which, --
dedit Ille (says St. Austin) aliud Arelatense judicium, aliorum scil.
Episcoporum [this was the Council of Arles, assembled in Constantine's time, of
which see more below 23. n. 7. consisting of two hundred Bishops, as Baronius
conjectures out of St. Austin, which Council included, with more added to them,
Caecilian's former Judges] non quia jam necesse erat; sed eorum perversitatibus
cedens, and omni modo cupiens tantam impudentiam cohibere. -- Afterward they
importunately appealing also from this Council to the Emperor's own judgment;
He, very earnest by any means to quell this growing division in the African
Churches, cessit eis (says St. Austin) ut de illa causa post Episcopos
judicaret, a sanctis Antistitibus postea veniam petiturus: dum tamen illi quod
ulterius dicerent non haberent, si ejus sententiae non obtemporarent. See
likewise Dr. Field's concessions ( l. 5. c. 53. p. 682.) concerning this
business, both that the cause was judged by a Synod at Arles; and that the
Emperor's hearing the cause after them was irregular. After this you may review
what truth there is in the objection of Calvin.]

African and Roman Bishop, arising from these Canons of Sardica there urged.
Against which Canons whereas it is pretended; 1. That they authorize the Roman
Bishop only to judge such causes by his Deputies upon the place, often said by
Dr. Field; see in him p. 530. 2. That the 9th Canon of Chalcedon, a Council
following this, in ordering the Appeal ad Constantinopolitanae regiae civitatis
sedem ut eorum ibi negotium terminetur, contains something contrary to them.
The first appears not true; by can. 4. Sard. -- [ and proclamaverit (i. e.
Episcopus depositus) agendum sibi negotium in urbe Roma -- and nisi causa
fuerit in judicio Episcopi Romani determinata]: By the privilege granted to the
Constantinopolitan, and inferior Patriarch to the Roman, Con. Chal. c. 9. [ ut
eorum ibi negotium terminetur]: By the ordinary practice of the Roman Bishops
in those early times; thence therefore is the African Expostulation with him,
[Quomodo judicium transmarinum ratum erit, ad quod testium necessariae personae
etc. adduci non possunt?] And the like you may see urged by Cyprian, see Field
p. 563. Lastly, by Dr. Field's confession (l. 5. c. 34. p. 531.) That the Pope
with his Western Bishops might examine and judge, at Rome, the differences
between two Patriarchs; or between a Patriarch and his Bishops; as it is clear
he did, a little before the Sardican Council, judge at Rome the cause of
Athanasius); how much more then, the differences, when of moment, of the
Subjects of his own Patriarchy? To the second, it is confessed, That that Canon,
in respect of some parts, namely of the East; and of some differences, namely
of Bishops there, with their Metropolitans; does restrain those of Sardica: But
first, The African Controversy was before the Council of Chalcedon. Again, for
the West at least, it must be granted, that those Canons stand good still, and
are not weakened, but strengthened rather, and imitated by Chalcedon; which
Council thought fit, in this Canon, to give that authority which Sardica
conferred on the Roman, to a Seat inferior to the Roman; much more therefore
may the Roman See, if the Constantinopolitan, have such privileges. But lastly,
we know also, that in this point of the Bishop of Constantinople's Dignity and
Power, the Eastern Bishops of that Council were opposed by the Bishop of Rome
and his Legates.

Sardican Decrees, concerning these Appeals from inferior to superior
Ecclesiastical Judges, see the eighth General Council, can. 26. (against which
Council, tho the Grecians, in Conc. Florent. sess. 6. oppose the Decrees of
another following it, yet it is not contradicted in this I quote out of it, by
that, or any other later Council). -- Vt qui se laesum arbitrabitur a proprio
Episcopo possit Metropolitanum appellare, qui datis dimissoriis ad se causam
advocet. Liceat tamen Episcopis provocare ad Patriarcham, si crediderint se
injustitiam pati a Metropolitano, a quo litibus finis imponatur. After which
Canon, I will set you down that passage of the English Bishops, upon their
relinquishing the Sea of Rome, (in their Book of the Institution of a Christian
man, in Sacr. of Orders, quoted by Dr. Hammond, Schism c. 5. and much relied on
by King James in Apol. pro juramento fidel. p. 124.) that you may see whether
things were well-consider'd by them. -- It was (say they) many hundred years
before the Bishop of Rome could acquire any power of a Primate over any other
Bishops, which were not within his Province in Italy. And the Bishops of Rome
do now transgress their own profession made in their Creation. For all the
Bishops of Rome, always when they be consecrated and made Bishops of that See,
do make a solemn profession and vow, that they shall inviolably observe all the
Ordinances made in the Eight first General Councils; among which it is
especially provided, that all causes shall be determined within the Province
where they begun, and that by the Bishops of the same Province: which
absolutely excludes all Papal ( i. e. foreign) power out of these Realms. Now
the Canons the Bishops refer to, are -- Conc. Nic. c. 6. 1 Conc. Constable. c. 2,
3. and Conc. Milevit. c. 22. which Canons, how little they make for their
purpose, see below 19, etc. and before, 14. But the Pope making solemn vow to
observe Conc. 8. can. 26. as well as these, did he vow contradictions? or, if
these contradicting, does not, in Ecclesiastical constitutions, the later stand
in force? Again; for not appealing of all persons in every cause to the supreme
Ecclesiastical Court, see Conc. Milev. whereof St. Austin was a member, Can.
22. Placuit, ut Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel caeteri inferiores Clerici, in causis
quas habuerint, si de judiciis Episcoporum questi fuerint, vicini Episcopi eos
audiant, and inter eos quicquid est, finiant adhibiti ab eis ex consensu
Episcoporum suorum. Quod si and ab eis provocandum putaverint, non provocent
nisi ad Africana Concilia, vel ad Primates Provinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina
autem qui putaverint appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in communionem
suscipiantur. But note here, that this Canon was made only concerning inferior
Clergy, not Bishops (tho some mistakingly urge it against any appeals
whatever;) and (as Bellarmin says) was ratified by Innocentius Bishop of Rome,
quoting his Epistle (among St. Austin's the 93.) tho indeed that Epistle
confirms nothing else save their Decrees against Pelagius. But however, this is
a thing, it seems by Bellarmin, that the Pope will not oppose. See about this
non-appealing, Dr. Field l. 5. c. 39. p. 562. where he brings in also further,
to confirm this, the Imperial Constitution Justin. Novelae Constable. 123. c. 22.
Lastly, see Bell. ( de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 24.) confessing a restraint of some
appeals, not allowed to be made to the Patriarch; where he says, Quaestio de
Apellationibus ad Romanum Pontificem non est de appellationibus Presbyterorum
and minorum Clericorum, sed de appellationibus Episcoporum, etc. Therefore in
that 'foremention'd contention between Zosimus Bishop of Rome and the African
Bishops, met in the 6th Council of Caerthage, about the appeal made to Rome of
one Apiarius an African Presbyter, who had a controversy only with his Bishop,
the deciding of which by Canons is referred to the Metropolitan and his
Council, or to the Episcopi finitimi, ( Conc. Sard. can. 17.) it may be made a
question, whether the Pope was not mistaken in it, (if he contended not only
for appeal of Bishops having controversy with their Metropolitans, but also
countenanced that of Apiarius); considering what was delivered in the Canons
above cited, Those not subjected to any Patriarch for Ordination, yet subjected
for decision of Controversies,
and what is also conceded by the Cardinal.

As for those Churches, who were under no Patriarch, i. e. in respect of their
Metropolitan's receiving his Ordination from any Patriarch; as Cyprus is
conceived by some to be, from Conc Ephesians. can. 8. and Conc. Constable. in Trullo,
can. 39. (If these Canons do not prohibit rather the Patriarch of Antioch from
hindering the Metropolitans of Cyprus to ordain other Bishops without his
concurrence or consent, as the [Rem novam] in the beginning of the 8th Canon of
Ephesus, and other expressions, seem to import. see below 19.) Yet 1. Aug.
Epist. 162. where he has discoursed it at large. 2. Sardica [Si Episcopus
etc.] being delivered indefinitely, obliged the Cyprian Bishops as much as any
other. For the Law of a Legislator, who has power to oblige all, obliges all,
if none be therein excepted. Now General Councils have just authority of
decreeing a subordination, as they please, of Ecclesiastical Persons and
Courts, for the unity and peace of the Church; or else their common practice
has mistaken the right. The same may be said of the obligation of the 9th
Canon of Chalcedon, etc. According to which Canons, since experience has
showed, and you may see it in Dr. Field's concessions, that many of those, whom
the Protestants make independent Primates (as those of Carthage, Millain, etc.)
have yielded to the Patriarchal jurisdiction; the practice of these Primates
(if allowed by them) infers the duty of the rest: if disallowed, they must
charge such Primates, not to have known or maintained their own privileges. But
3ly, Cyprians, or other, be the like; there being the same reason of all, the
preserving of the unity and communion of the whole Church Catholic, in which
one Church is not more concerned than others. Therefore Dr. Field ( l. 5. c.
30. p. 513. where, in answer to Bellarmin's pretending a Monarchical Government
of the Church as necessary, he goes to show how her unity might well be, and
was anciently, preserved without it, by several subordinations which were in
the Church) discourses thus: If a Synod consisted of the Metropolitans and
Bishops of one Kingdom or State only, the chief Primate was Moderator: If, of
many [Kingdoms], one of the Patriarchs and chief Bishops of the whole world
[was Moderator]: every Church being subordinate to some one of the Patriarchal
Churches, and incorporate into the Unity of it. 3ly, The actions of a whole
Patriarchship were subject to a Synod Ecumenical. And l. 5. c. 39. p. 563. he
quotes, the Emperor's Decree ( Novel. 123. c. 22.) that Bishops being at
variance were finally to stand to, and not to contradict, their own Patriarch's
judgment. And Gregory's ( l. 11. ep. 54.) addition to it; That if there be no
Patriarch, then the matter must be ended by the Apostolic See, the Head of all
Churches. -- And accordingly we find in the Patriarchal Councils of the West,
all the Western Churches whatever (I dispute not here, whether subject, or no,
to the Patriarch) assembling in them, and subject to the prevailing Votes and
Decrees.

Constantinople. Every Province not supreme, for finally determining the
differences arising therein.
The words are these; Episcopi, qui extra Dioecesim sunt, ad Ecclesias, quae
extra terminos earum sunt, non accedant; neque confundant and permisceant
Ecclesias. Alexandriae quidem Episcopi solius Orientis [ Aegypti says another
Translation] curam gerant, servatis honoribus Primatus ecclesiae Antiochenae,
qui in regulis Nicaenae Synodi continentur. Sed and Asianae Dioecesis Episcopi
ea quae sunt in Asia, and quae ad Asianam tantummodo Diaecesis habeant curam.
Thraciae vero etc. And c. 3. Non invitati Episcopi ultra Dioecesim accedere non
debent super ordinandis aliquibus, vel quibuscunque disponendis Ecclesiasticis
causis. Manifestum namque est, quod per singulas quasque Provincias
Provincialis Synodus administrare and gubernare omnia debeat; secundum ea quae
sunt in Nicaea definita. -- 5. c. Veruntamen [as it is in one Translation]
Constantinopolitanus Episcopus habeat honoris primatum post Romanum Episcopum
etc. The title to which Canons, being all joined into one, in one Translation
is, De ordine singularum Dioeceseon; and de privilegiis, quae Aegyptiis,
Antiochenis, Constantinopolitanisque debentur. These Canons are urged to prove;
That all Provinces are for power absolute, and supreme: That every cause and
controversy between any persons should be determined finally within the
Provinces, where the matters did lie; and that by the Bishops of the same
Provinces, from whom might be no further appeal: and, That no Bishop should
exercise any power out of his own Diocese, or Province; and consequently,
neither the Roman Bishop, out of his Province in Italy. And, because here
follows some preeminence granted to the Constantinopolitan Bishop post Romanum,
that this may not be thought to contradict what goes before, they say, that
this preeminence of the Constantinopolitan Bishop is dignitatis only, not
potestatis. To all which I answer,

1. That these Canons are capable of another interpretation; namely, That
neither Patriarch, nor Primat, or Metropolitan, should meddle in the affairs of
any other Patriarchy, or Province coordinate, and over which he had no
Jurisdiction in such affairs; i. e. over which, neither by ancient custom, nor
constitutions of Councils, he could claim any such Superiority. (See the
limitation, Council. Ephesians. c. 8. -- Quae non prius, atque ab initio etc. and
Can. Apostol. 36. Quae illi nullo jure subjectae sunt; a clause clause still
retained in these canons, to preserve the prerogatives Patriarchal.) Not those
of Alexandria with the affairs of Antioch, [solius Aegypti curam gerant,
servatis honoribus Ecclesiae Antiochenae,] without encroaching upon them; or
the Patriarch of Alexandria or Antioch meddling with the Ordination of Bishops
in the Provinces subjected to them. Nor those of Asia with those of Thrace; to
whom Thrace owed no subjection. Again, That in every Province the Provincial
Synod be the supreme and last Court, above any other authority in that
Province; and exclusively to the judgments of the Bishops of any neighboring
Provinces, which are only coordinate with it. See them below, 28. called by
Gregory, Episcopi alieni Concilii; and. 26. this interpretation further
confirmed.

2. That their interpretation of these canons cannot be true: 1. Alexandria,
and of Antioch, which are here mentioned, had more than one Province subjected
unto them, (yet all called their Diocese or Province, taken in a larger sense);
and the Bishop of Constantinople, who is not mentioned or limited in the 2d.
Canon (Conc. Constantinop.) as others, had several of the Provinces here-named,
as Pontus, Asia, Thrace, subjected to him, and that by this very Council. For
which see Conc. Chalced. Act. 16. -- Centum and quinquaginta Deo amantissimi
Episcopi [i.e. the Fathers of this Constantipolitan Counci] rationabiliter
judicantes etc Vrbem [Constant.] in Ecclesiasticis ( sicut illa [Roma])
majestatem habere negotiis, -- and his, qui de Ponto sunt, and de Asia and
Thracia dioecesibus, Metropolitanos ordinari a praedictae Constant. Sedis
sanctissima Ecclesia; where these Fathers expound what was meant here by
Episcopi Thraciae gubernent quae Thraciae, in the words following: namely, ut
unusquisque Metropolita praefatarum Dioecesium -- ordinet suae regionis
Episcopos, sicut divinis Canonibus [i.e. the canons of Nice, and these of
Constantinople] est praeceptum. Thus are Pontus and Asia etc subjected to the Sea of Constantinople, tho not for the ordaining of their Bishops, yet for the
ordinations of their Metropolitans, and also for Appeals: as may be seen in
their 9th. and 16th. canons, which seems to be the meaning of that Majestas in
Ecclesiasticis negotiis, which they gave him post Romam. And all this they do,
after these very canons were first recited in the Council; -- definitionem
sanctissimorum Patrum sequentes ubique, and regulam, and ea quae nunc relecta
sunt [i. e. these canons] centum and quinquaginta Episcoporum etc. Which to
confirm to you yet farther, see the Subscriptions of those Bishops of Asia, and
Pontus, etc, of one, -- Ego gratum habeo sub sede Constantinopolit. esse,
quoniam and ipse ordinavit; of another, secundum sententiam Patrum 150
voluntate propria subscripsi. Therefore the Primacy post Romanam, granted by
Constable. Council. Constantinopol. to the Bishop thereof, was not dignitatis only,
but potestatis, (and therefore much more the Primacy of Rome,) as the Chalcedon
Fathers expound these canons. But, if we say, that they misunderstood, yet then
they have at least sufficiently reversed them, and nulled their force, because
they, coming after the other, have made a contrary decree, which at least in
matters of Ecclesiastical constitution, annulleth the former. viz. That
Provincial Councils may finally determine all causes thereof, exclusively to all
others whatsoever: for so they would not be subject to Patriarchal, nor
Universal Councils; nor would any appeals from them at all be lawful; contrary,
to what is said but now, ( Con. Chalc. 9. c. see likewise the can. of Sardica.)
and to the known common practice of Antiquity; (of which hereafter follow many
instances.) and also in the 8th. canon of this very Council which they urge,
(as it is extant in Balsamon,) examinations of matters are remitted from
Provincial Councils to a greater Synod of the Diocese. Quod si evenerit, ut
Provinciales Episcopi, crimina, quae Episcopo intentata sunt, corrigere non
possunt, [placuit etc] tunc ipsos [accusatores] accedere ad majorem Synodum
Dioecesis illius etc.

3. It may be answered; Whatever these canons mean, that, one part of this
Council sitting at Constantinople, the other at Rome, they received no
confirmation from those at Rome: (See, for this, what is said before, 7.) And
it is observable, that tho there is mention made in them of Antioch and
Alexandria, yet is there none made of the limitations of the Roman, or the
Western, Diocesses; no, nor yet of limiting the Constantinopolitan Bishops,
whom they ordered to be the second to Rome: for we read not in them,
Constantinopolitanae Dioecesis Episcopi, ea quae ad Constantinopolitanam
tantummodo Dioecesim pertinent, gubernent.

Lastly, Patriarchs themselves,. 20. n. 1. The Patriarchs also subjected to the
judgment of a superior Patriarch.
and those who had complaints against them, (according to Dr. Field's
concessions, 5. l. 39. c. and 34. c. p. 530.) might appeal to, and were to be
judged by, those of their own rank, in order before them, assisted by inferior
Bishops. And the Bishop of Rome, (says he p. 568.) as first in order amongst
the Patriarchs, assisted with his own Bishops, and the Bishops of him that is
thought faulty, [tho these latter I do not always find necessary, The power of
Jurisdiction (not only primacy of Dignity) of the Bishop of Rome above the rest
of the Patriarchs and Bishops.
or present at such judgments, as appears in the instances here following]
might judge any of the other Patriarchs; and such as had complaints against
them might fly to him, and the Synods of Bishops subject to him; and the
Patriarchs themselves, in their distresses, might fly to him and such Synods
for relief and help. Tho (says he) of himself alone he had no power to do any
thing. And (5. l. 52. c. p. 668.) when (says he) there grows a difference
between the Patriarchs of one See, and another; or between any of the
Patriarchs, and the Metropolitans and Bishops subject to them; the superior
Patriarch (not of himself alone, but with his Metropolitans, and such
particular Bishops as are interested) may judge and determine the differences
between them. And (5. l. 34. c. p. 531.) -- He assents to the saying of
Gelasius Bishop of Rome, urged by Bellarmin: That no other particular Church or
See may judge the Church of Rome; seeing every other See is inferior to it.
Thus He. Whose Concessions if it may be thought that they are too free, and too
indulgent to the Church of Rome; and therefore that the testimonies of this
single person ought not to be so much pressed, as I have, and shall press them
in this discourse; I first advertise you, that they are such as seem forced
from him most-what in his answers to the authorities out of the Primitive
times, collected by Bellarmin: and then I desire, that, any perusing the same
authorities, would try, if himself can shape any less-yeilding answer that may
be satisfactory, (except this; the utter rejecting and renouncing all such
Authorities which, prudent men see, would give too much advantage to the Roman
cause,) and I am content that Dr. Field's concessions, and whatever is built
thereon in this discourse, be cancelled, and nullified. But, in some manner to
second Dr. Field's judgment and relation of this matter, I will add to it
several concessions of the Archbishop of Spalato, a copious writer also on this
subject; who of the ancient privileges of Patriarchs, and, amongst them,
especially of the Roman, speaks thus. 3. l. 10. c. 26. n. Sicut Metropolitanus
Episcopus suffraganeos suos errantes corripere and corrigere debet and
emendare, ita si Metropolitanus erret sive in moribus, sive in judiciis and
actis suis, ne etiam in hoc Synodus semper cum incommodo conveniat, a
Patriarchis voluit Ecclesiastica consuetudo and lex Metropolitanos emendari;
nisi tam gravis sit causa and publica, praesertim fidei, ut totius regionis
Synodus, sive and Oecumenica debeat convenire; [of which cause surely the
Patriarch is to judge, since he only, not they, has the authority of
convocating such Council.] Ita in Council. Chalced. cap. 9. statutum est, ut si
adversus Provinicae Metropolitanum Episcopus vel Clericus habeat querelam,
petat Primatem Dioeceseos, aut sedem Regiae Vrbis Constantinopolitanae, and
apud ipsam judicetur. Et in octava Synodo Generali Canon expressus ponitur de
Potestate Patriarcharum and Metropolitanorum sub his verbis, Haec sancta and
magna Synodus tam in seniori and nova Roma, quam in sede Alexandriae etc
priscam consuetudinem decernit in omnibus conservari, it a ut eorum Praesules
[the Patriarchs] universorum Metropolitanorum, qui ab ipsis promoventur, (sive
per manus impositionem, sive per Pallii dationem) Episcopalis Dignitatis
firmitatem accipiant, habeant potestatem; viz. ad convocandum eos urgente
necessitate ad Synodalem conventum, vel etiam ad coercendum illos and
corrigendum, cum fama eos super quibusdam delictis forsan accusavenit. So 4. l.
4. c. 5. n. of the Constantinopolitan Patriarch he says: Jam introductam
consuetudinem ut causae Ecclesiasticae totius Orientis, quae in propriis
Provinciis terminari vix possent, ad Sedem Constantinopolitanam deferrentur,
Concilium hoc Chalcedonense bis confirmavit. And 9. c. 1. n. of the Roman
Patriarch thus. -- Quia Patriarchae ( ut disserui 3. l. 10. c.) alia Privilegia
habent in quibus superant Metropolitanos, habebit etiam Romanus Pontifex omnia
Patriarchalia Privilegia; Palli^m sibi subjectis Metropolitanis illud
petentibus concedere etc eosdem a lege Divina vel sacris Canonibus deviantes
corripere, and in officio continere; controversias inter eosdem exortas
componere, causasque eorundem interdum [i. e. in causis gravioribus] audire and
decidere; totius Patriarchatus Concilia convocare. -- Romanum tamen Patriarcham
adhuc in quibusdam peculiari quadam ratione supra omnes etiam Patriarchas
excellere jam ostendo. He goes on there 14. n. -- Ex loco sui primi
Patriarchatus sacrorum Canonum primus habebatur, and praecipuus observator,
custos, ac vindex; quos si alicubi violari cognosceret, acer monitor
insurgebat. [He seems loath to say, judex, tho he has said it before.] -- 15.
n. Secundum Privilegium Episcopi Romani fuit, ut ad ipsum quicunque Episcopi
cujuscunque Provinciae and Regionis [not only of his Patriarchy] qui se ab
Episcopis propriae Provinciae gravari sentirent, in judiciis Ecclesiasticis,
tanquam ad sacram anchoram, confugerent; apud ipsum innocentiam suam probaturi:
[he seems loath to say, that they repaired to him to have their causes heard and
judged by him, and to have restitution to their places from him; tho nothing is
more clear than this, in Athanasius his, and many other cases instanced-in
below: but presently he confesses,] -- Romani Pontifices de facto eos sedibus
suis restituebant, and ab objectis criminibus tanquam si essent supremi judices
absolvebant; and this so anciently as Cyprian's time, and before the first
General Council of Nice.] -- 16. n. -- Romanus Pontifex propter summam ipsius
existimationem, commune quasi vinculum and nodus erat praecipuus Catholicae
communionis in tota Ecclesia. -- Catholicae communionis dux and arbiter, ut cui
ipse suam communionem vel daret, vel adimeret, caeterae quoque Ecclesiae omnes
ordinary darent pariter, vel adimerent. (So elsewhere he says, (8. c. 2. n.)
Communio cum Ecclesia Romana maximi semper facta est in Ecclesia totius Imperii
Romani universali.) Propter summam ipsius existimationem, says he; but he
mentions not the cause which the Ancients give, because it was Prima Seeds
Apostolica, and Cathedra Petri and Pauli; for if he were so then [ Dux etc,]
for this reason, so he ought to be to all Christians still. -- 17. n. Quartum
fuit Privilegium, ut nihil grave in Ecclesia universali, nisi consulto prius
Romano Pontifice, statueretur, aut tractaretur; cujus etiam in his non modo
Consilium, sed consensus quoque enixe requireretur. [He joins.] Ita tamen ut
absolute necessarius non esset; neque si abessent, Definitiones cassaret, aut
impediret. But this is contrary to the ancient Church-Canon, Sine Romano
Pontifice etc. see below 21.. and how else will he void the Heretical acts of
the 2d. Ephesine Council? -- Lastly, 12. c. 5. n. thus he speaks of the Legates
of the Roman Bishops. Medio tempore [in which time he reckons Leo Magnus to be,
and might-truly have gone higher had he pleased, but Leo was before the 4th
General Council] Romani Pontifices coeperunt aut extraordinarios Legatos a
latere suo in alienas Provincias mittere, aut ordinarios in ipsis Provinciis
habere, alicui ex illius Provinciae Episcopis suas vices committentes, and
utrosque cum potestate jndiciaria and non sine jurisdictione. Eorum totum munus
hoe medio tempore fuit rebus fidei in illa Provincia superintendere, and
observare, ne quid ipsa fides detrimenti patiatur; Canonum observationi
invigilare, and corrigenda corrigere, and reformare; and judicia, quae
putabantur Romam esse deferenda, leviora absolvere, graviora Domino Papae
refer. Thus He.

And indeed, 20. n 2.
frequent examples there are of the Bishop of Rome's using a judicial
authority, in some matters, over the chiefest members of the Universal Church.
Frequent examples of wronged both Bishops and Patriarchs, appealing and
repairing unto him for redress, even in early times when his power is said to
have bin so great. Which redress he afforded them; By summoning their
adversaries also, tho under another Patriarchat, to appear before him: By
examining their cause, and declaring them innocent by and with his own
Patriarchal Council, or with so many Bishops as could well be convened, if the
cause were of moment: By allowing and retaining them in his communion: By
declaring the proceedings and acts of their adversaries (when discovered by him
to be against the former Ecclesiastical Canons) null and void. Whilst He, as
the prime Bishop of the world, seemed to have a superintendency in the interval
of General Councils, for the observation of the Ecclesiastical Canons
established by former Synods, not only (if we may judge by the practice of
those ancient and holy Bishops of Rome) over his own Patriarchat, but over the
whole Church; of which see more 21. and 25. etc. by writing to other Patriarchs
and Synods, to do the same, and to permit them quietly to enjoy their
Dignities; by pronouncing the sentence of Excommunication upon refractory
offenders, tho it were those of the highest Dignity: see below 23. n. 5, 6. 25,
etc.

And lastly, if the greatness of the cause, and of the opposition, and their
non-acquiescence, in his judgment, so required, by calling other Bishops of
what Dignity soever before him, and his Council, or by citing a General Council
for their relief. See Dr. Field ( l. 5. c. 35. p. 536, 538.) Now why such
repair was made to him, and such primacy and power given him, beyond all other
Bishops, by ancient Church-custom and Canons; whether from the Dignity of the
imperial City, where he was Bishop; or whether from St. Peter and St. Paul's
last residence in this their most eminent seat, and Martyrdom there, leaving
the Regiment of the Church of God, which they both finally exercised in this
place, in that Bishop's hands when they died; (for some reason there must be,
that Antiquity so specially applied Seeds Apostolica (when as many others were
so too) to that See beyond all others; and that the Appealants, and others,
made their honorable addresses to it, not as Seeds Imperialis (for such
addresses to Rome ceased not to be still, when the Emperor's chief residence
was in the East), but as Seeds Apostolica); or whether for both these (for both
these are compatible enough) it little concerns me to examine. Only, de facto
such honor and respect to be given him is most evident. So those famous
Worthies of the Church (amongst others), Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria,
Paulus and Chrysostom Bishops of Constantinople, and Theodoret (a Bishop in
Syria) when oppressed at home, appealed to the Bishop of Rome with his Western
Synods, (see Field, l. 5. c. 39. p. 570.) In which Appeals, what the Pope's
power in those times was accounted to be, and what interest his Authority
challenged in respect of the Eastern parts of the Church, I think you will
remain partly well satisfied (notwithstanding the great contests in this
matter), if you please to read these quotations, which, traveling through by five
or six of the first Ages, with some trouble to my self, I have transcribed, to
save your pains; lest perhaps you should not have the opportunity, or the
leisure, or (at least) the curiosity, to seek them in their several Authors.
Wherein yet, I could wish, if you seriously seek satisfaction in this matter,
you would review them, I being forced, for avoiding further tediousness, to
omit many circumstances.

Sozomen, This power exemplified in the primitive times, to the end of the 6
Age, the days of Gregory the Great, extending to 36.
who lived in the fifth Age, contemporary to St. Leo; where, concerning Paulus
Bishop of Constantinople, and Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, their repair
to the Bishop of Rome, Julius; he says: Cum, propter Sedis dignitatem, cura
omnium ad ips^m spectaret, singulis suam Ecclesiam restituit; scripsitque ad
Episcopos Orientis eosque incusavit, etc. -- deditque mandatum ut quidam
illorum, omnium nomine, ad diem constit^tum, accederent. -- Quinetiam minatus
est se de reliquo non passurum, etc. The 11th Chapter of the second Book of
Socrates, where he says; Julius Bishop of Rome sent Letters to the Oriental
Bishops, etc. quoniam Ecclesia Romana privilegium praeter caeteras obtinebat;
and that Paulus and Athanasius, ad suas ipsorum Ecclesia^s redibant literis
Jul^^ confisi: concerning which privilege we have less reason to rely on the
judgment of those Arrian Bishops, opposing and scoffing at them, than on the
orthodox Paulus and Athanasius, acknowledging and seeking relief from them. See
the second Apology of Athanasius against the Arrians; wherein he says:
Judicatum est non semel secundum nos, sed saepius ac saepius: primum quidem in
nostra Provincia etc. -- Secundo Romae: nobis, caeterisque adversariis Eusebii,
ad ejus criminosas literas in judicio comparentibus. Fuere autem in eo consensu
plures quam 50 Episcopi; the Pope with 50 of his Western Bishops hearing his
cause. The Epistle of Julius to the Oriental Bishops assembled at Antioch,
written before the Council of Sardica (and so before the 7th Canon thereof was
composed) and published by Athanasius, in that his second Apology, wherein are
such passages as these unto them, -- Quum iidem illi [those sent from the
Eastern Bishosp] authors mihi fuerunt, ut vos convocarem, certe id a vobis
aegre ferri non debuit, sed potius alacriter ad citationem occurrere. -- Cur
igitur and in primis de Alexandrina civitate nihil nobis scribere voluistis? An
ignari estis, hanc consuetudinem esse, ut primum nobis scribatur, ut hinc, quod
justum est, definiri possit? qua propter si istic hujusmodi suspicio in
Episcopum concepta fuerat, id huc ad nostram Ecclesiam referri oportuit. --
Quae accepimus a Beato Petro Apostolo, ea vobis significo. -- And the same
thing which Julius mentions here [ An ignari estis hanc consuetudinem esse,
etc. and before it, Oportuit secundum Canonem and non isto modo judicium fieri,
etc.] is also found urged by Innocentius (amongst S. Austin's Epistles, Ep.
91.) Quod illi [i. e. Patres] non humana sed divina decrevere sententia, ut
quicquid de disjunctis remotisque Provinciis ageretur, non prius ducerent
finiendum, nisi ad hujus sedis notitiam perveniret, ubi tot a hujus authoritate
justa quae fuerit, pronunciatio firmaretur; indeque sumerent caeterae Ecclesiae
velut de natali suo font etc. and mentioned in Socrates l. 2. c. 13. Canonibus
nimirum jubentibus, proeter Romanum nihil decerni Pontificem, and in Sozomen,
l. 3. c. 9.

[Concerning which Canon, much stood upon, 22. n 1. A Digression concerning the
meaning of that ancient Canon; Sine Romano Pontifice nihil finiendum.
give me leave to dilate a little, before I produce any more Authorities.
Nothing (say some) (of great consequence for the Unity and Communion of the
Church, or also which should universally oblige) to be concluded without him;
that is, without his knowledge, or without asking his consent. So Calvin,
Instit. l. 4. c. 7. s. 8. ut absente Romano Episcopo universale de religiose
decretum non fiat, siquidem interesse non recuset. The same says Dr. Field, p.
651. No; not only so: for this, as Bellarmin replies, will signify no more
privilege to this See, than any other Patriarch had; and why canonically and
singularly is that granted to one, which is common to all?

In the second place therefore; Nothing to be concluded by Councils without
him, i. e. without his giving his consent: For in this sense, and not only in
the former, Julius and the Roman Bishops urged it; and, that anciently it was
taken in this sense, is showed by the frequent Appeals of Bishops and
Patriarchs to the Bishop of Rome (not so to others) for redress from the
Decrees of Councils; and those Councils, some of them, in some sense General
(as the second Ephesin Council) General, for the meeting, but not for the vote;
since neither the Roman Patriarch, nor his Legates, nor the Western Bishops did
vote with them, when they thought themselves injured thereby. So Flavianus
Bishop of Constantinople (see Leo Epist. 23. ad Theodosium, -- Quia and nostri
fideliter reclamarunt, and eisdem libellum appellationis Flavianus Episcopus
dedit. And Conc. Chalced. Act. 3.) and Theodoret appealed to him from the
second Ephesin Council, which sided with Eutyches. So Athanasius, and Paulus,
and Chrysostom, from several, and numerous, Eastern Councils. Without his
giving his consent then, nothing of moment stood firm,

But thirdly, Without his giving his consent indeed, but so amply understood,
as that this his consent involve also that of all the Western Bishops of his
Patriarchy (few of which, excepting the Pope's Legates, could be personally
present at those remote Councils of the East): or of so many of them, as he
could conveniently call to Council (against whom it was presumed he would do
nothing, as a person standing wholly singular, and universally dissented from);
for, these making so considerable a part of the Church, and as it seems by that
passage in the Epistle of the Eastern Bishops to Julius ( Sozomen l. 3. c. 7.)
esteemed more numerous than the East; it was most unreasonable, that any thing
of moment, and worthy the cognizance of a General Council (amongst which this
was one, removing Bishops of note from their Seats, or from the Communion of
the Church, which might cause great Schisms) should stand in force without
their approbation: And upon this that Canon of Chalcedon, advancing the Bishop
of Constantinople (so much urged) justly could have no force, till afterward it
was condescended to by the Bishops of Rome; because as not he, so neither the
Western Bishops allowed it. Neither upon this could the fifth
Constantinopolitan Council be justly called General, no more than the 2d
Ephesin Council (which being never confirmed, was never accounted such),
when as neither the Bishop of Rome, nor his Legates, nor his Western Bishops,
would be present therein (upon a difference between them and the Orientals: not
de fide, wherein both sides agreed, but de personis; Theodorus, Theodoret, and
Iba,) until it was afterward confirmed also by the Pope and his Western Party,
not long after the ending thereof (because they found it not so injurious to
the Council of Chalcedon as was at first feared): in like manner as the first
Constantinopolitan Council, where none of the West was present, was counted the
2d. General Council from such a post-confirmation of the West. See what is said
below, 25, n. 3. and 26. -- But perhaps we may ascend yet a step higher.

4. Nothing to be concluded by General Councils without his giving his single
personal consent, 22. n. 2.
tho both Western and Eastern Churches were all united in their vote, (yet I
think it cannot be showed, that the Roman Bishop ever opposed such an universal
Vote, where his Western Bishops were joined with the East against him,) by
reason of the dignity and primacy of his See. For so it was thought fit to be
ordered by ancient Canons concerning Metropolitans, in respect of their
particular Provinces; that nothing may be done without them: (see Conc.
Antioch. can. 9. and Apostol. Can. 35. etc.) and the reason given; -- Sic enim
unanimitas erit: and so it is ordered concerning Princes and their Parliaments,
for the more peaceable government of States; and why may not this Canon have
the same meaning for St. Peter's chair, in respect of General Councils?
Especially since it is not denied; That as they can conclude nothing without
him; so neither might He, without Them, ( i.e. in the time of their sitting, or
assembly,) do any thing which was obligatory to the whole Church. He may indeed
in the interval of Councils take care of the due observance of former
Ecclesiastical Canons, and, perhaps also, for the present peace of the Church,
(see 18. and below, 34.) decide dubious matters, upon appeals made to him for
the peace of the Church, till such Council meet: for it is both necessary in
general, that some standing supreme Tribunal there be, where, in the vacancies
of General Synods, Suits should be finally terminated; and also the practice of
Appeals from all parts of the Church, for matters of moment, to Rome, do show
his in particular to be that Tribunal. So Metropolitans also do act single,
when their Provincial Councils are not convened, who in time of those Councils
may act nothing without their concurrence. But yet when a General Council sits,
it may upon mature deliberation reverse any thing he has done without it;
correct any error he has committed; neither do his laws prescribe to it. To
which purpose hear what S. Austin says, Epistle 162. in a judgment given
against the Donatists, before the Nicen Council, by the Roman and some other
Bishops. -- Ecee putemus illos Episcopos, qui Romae judicarunt, non bonos
judices fuisse; restabat adhuc plenarium Ecclesiae universae Concilium
[Nicaenum,] ubi etiam cum ipsis Judicibus causa possit agitari; and si male
judicare convicti essent, eorum sententiae solverentur. Solverentur, therefore
till such Council such sentence was obliging. The issue therefore of such
mutually limited power is only this, (which can neither damage the Churches
doctrine, nor discipline); That where both (the Council, and this prime
Patriarch) agree not, no new law, no change can be made; but all things must
remain in statu quo prius, which state of things is no way alterable by the
Bishop of Rome: for this Canon, if it give him a negative power against what is
to be established, it does not so for what has bin established, as well by the
former Bishops of Rome, as former Councils. See the concession of Zosimns to
this purpose, ( apud Gratianum. 25. q. contra statuta.) -- Contra statuta
Patrum condere aliquid vel mutare, nec hujus quidem Sedis potest authoritas.
Apud nos enim inconvulsis radicibus vivit antiquitas, cui decreta Patrum
sanxere reverentiam. Which former Synods, if he shall happen to trespass
against, and incur the guilt of heresy, upon evidence of the fact, he is
condemnable and deposable by the Council: of which see more 2. part.. 20. So we
find a Pope, Honorius, condemned of heresy, as a Monothelite, by the 6th
General Council. but this was done by the Pope, as well as the Council. Hear,
what a Bishop of Rome, Adrian the 2d. says concerning this matter, (in the 8th
General Council. Act. 7.) Romanum Pontificem de omnium Ecclesiarum Praesulibus
judicasse legimus; de eo vero quenquam judicasse non legimus. Licet enim
Honorio ab Orientalibus post mortem anathema sit dictum, sciendum tamen est
[quod] qui fuerat super haeresi accusatus, propter quam solum licitum est
minoribus majorum suorum motibus resistere, vel pravos suos sensus libere
respuere; quamvis and ibi nec Patriarcharum nec caeterorum Antistitum cuipiam
de eo, quamlibet fas fuerit proferre sententiam, nisi ejusdem primae Sedis
Pontificis consensus proecessisset. and what that Council says, Can. 21. --
Sed ne alium quenquam conscriptiones contra Sanctissimum Papam senioris Romae
ac verba complicare, vel componere liceat etc, quod and nuper Photius
[Patriarch of Constantinople, whom this Council deposed] fecit, and multo ante
Dioscorus, [Patriarch of Alexandria.] Quisquis autem tale facinus contra Sedem
Petri Principis Apostolorum ausus fuerit intentare, aequalem and eandem, quam
Illi, condemnationem [ i.e. deposition] recipiat. Porro si Synodus Vniversalis
fuerit congregata; and facta fuerit etiam de Sancta Romanorum Ecclesia quaevis
ambiguitas aut controversia, oportet venerabiliter, and cum convenienti
reverentia de proposita quaestione sciscitari and solutionem accipere, aut
proficere, aut profectum facere, non tamen audacter sententiam dicere contra
summos Senioris Romae Pontifices. Thus that Council in opposition to Photius
his former violences toward the Roman See; and thus much of that old Canon,
mentioned in the Epistle of Julius to the Orientals, assembled at Antioch. Who
since they made an Arrian Creed contrary to the Nicene, and condemned
Athanasius, and some other Orthodox Bishops, which things were done, if not by
the major party, yet by the prevailing; it is as reasonable to affirm, That the
same persons only, that did these things, writ that Letter to Julius, so
invective against the authority of the Roman See, and not the major part; whom
Spalatensis, to add the more authority to this Letter, contends to have bin
Catholic. (See his 3. l. 8. c. 3. n. etc. 4. l. 8. c. 11. n. etc.) However it
is clear, that Julius his proceedings are justified against them, both by the
Occidental Orthodox Bishops, and by Athanasius, and other orthodox Bishops of
the East, and by the Council of Sardica, and by the Ecclesiastical Historians.
See Sozomen, 3. l. 7. c. and 9. c. where the same persons that writ to Julius,
(the Historian says,) contra Concilii Nicaeni decreta res gesserunt, and were
accused by Julius, (9. c.) quod clam contra fidem Concilii Nicaeni novas res
moliti fuerunt. See Socrates 2. l. 7. c. their changing the Nicene Creed. Thus
much concerning the meaning of the ancient Canon. Now to go on.]

See ( in Athanas. Apol. 2. and Socrates 2. l. 19. c. and Epiphan. Haer. 68.)
Valens and Vrsatius, 23. n. 1.
two Bishops, one in Mysia, the other in Pannonia, both very gracious with the
Emperor Constantius, and leaders of the Arrian faction, (upon repentance of
their error, and also calumnies against Athanasius) repairing to Rome, and
delivering to Julius, libellum poenitentiae, and begging pardon and
reconciliation, tho afterward they relapsed.

See the 3d, 4th, and 7th Canons of the Council of Sardica, set down before,
11. (in which great Council are reckoned by Athanasius, one present in it, ( in
2. Apolog.) some Bishops present from our Britanny, [ Episcopi Hispaniarum,
Galliarum, Britanniarum, etc.] Neither is this any wonder; since they were also
at Conc. Arelat. 11 years before that of Nice, see Hammond schism. p. 110.)
which canons seem to confirm appeals to the Bishop of Rome, and to authorize
him to hear and decide the causes (by himself or his Legates) of those Bishops
also, who were not under his Patriarchy. For it is not limited to the Western
Patriarchy, but generally proposed, [ Si in aliqua Provincia Episcopus etc.]
Can. 3. and the motive proposed by Hosius, formerly President of Nice, is
general, not more concerning one part of the Church than another, [ the
honoring of S. Peter's memory,] and these canons were made by that Council not
long after Athanasius (a Bishop not subject to the Roman Patriarchy, but
himself a Patriarch) his appeal to Rome, and the judgment of his cause (by
witnesses brought out of the East, and his adversaries counter-plea) there:
which judgment and sentence as the Eastern Bishops at Antioch much slighted and
undervalued, so this Sardican Council approved* and if these canons respected
all in general, then, since the Bishops of our Britanny also were there, this
was their act, as well as of the rest, and obliged Britanny to the same
subordinations with the rest.

See the Epistle of St. Basil ( Epist. 52.) to Athanasius, 23. n. 2.
about the suppression of Arrianism in the East; wherein he says, -- Visum est
consentaneum scribere ad Episcopum Romanum, ut videat res nostras, and decreti
sui judicium interponat. -- authoritatem tribuat delectis viris. -- qui acta
Ariminensis Concilii secum ferant, ad ea rescindenda, quae illic violenter acta
sunt, etc. -- See the two Epistles of St. Hierom to Damasus Bishop of Rome,
desiring to know, what he should hold concerning the word Hypostasis, applied
to the Three Persons of the Trinity; and with whom communicate in the East, --
wherein thus he; Quoniam vetusto Oriens inter se populorum furore collisus,
etc. ideo mihi Cathedram Petri, and Romans 1.8. sidem Apostolico ore laudatam
censui consulendam. -- Apud vos solos incorrupta Patrum servatur haereditas. --
Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, Beatitudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae
Petri communione consocior: super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio. --
Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit profanus est, -- etc. -- Ideo hic
colleg as tuos Aegyptios Confessores sequor [communicating with them] -- Non
novi Vitalem: Meletium respuo: ignoro Paulinum. [There being much division and
distraction in the Church of Antioch (under which St. Hierom lived) between
Meletius, and Paulinus (successively Bishops thereof), and Vitalis a
Presbyter]. -- Cui apud Antiochiam debeam communicare, significes. --
decernite, si placet, obsecro: non timebo tres Hypostases dicere, si jubetis.
-- And in the second Epistle; In tres parts scissa Ecclesia ad se rapere me
festinat. -- Ego interim clamito; si quis Cathedrae Petri jungitur, meus est.
Meletius, Vitalis, atque Paulinus [every one of them, tho of several tenents]
tibi haerere se dicunt: possum credere, si unus [only one of them] hoc
assereret; nunc vero aut duo, aut omnes mentiuntur. Idcirco obtestor, ut mihi
literis tuis, apud quem in Syria debeam communicare, significes. Thus S.
Hierom. To which Bellarmin adds Erasmus (a moderate man) his comment upon it;
-- videri sibi Hieronymum his verbis asserere, omnes Ecclesias subjectas esse
Apostolicae Sedi* At least it seems, in times of schisms and divisions, this
Father thought it (for the season mentioned) the safest way to adhere to the
Romans See: yet speaks he not of the B. of Rome as judging singly, whom he
thought liable to Heresy [saying, in catalogo Scriptorum, some such thing of
Liberius subscribing Arrianism (tho indeed much apology may be made for
Liberius in this matter, yet not such as can free him from all fault, he
subscribing only, and that when he was tired out with banishment and other
cruelties, the Sirmian Creed, which only omitted Consubstantialis, see Part 2.
41.)] but of him joined with his Council, or with his Western Bishops.
Therefore he says, apud vos solos etc. -- and -- Decernite, si placet,
obsequor, etc. Therefore the more strict vindicators of the Roman inerrability
in matters of Faith, take not the Bishop thereof singly and unsynodically, as
his private judgment may inform, or passions incline him, especially upon some
violence and terrors used (as in Liberius it was); but, as assisted with his
Council, he weighs, judges, and defines such matters (see Bell. de Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 2, 3, 4.) in a time when a General Council is not, nor cannot so
conveniently be had. In which intervals, it may be presumed, Christ is not
wanting to the supremest Guide of the Church, using what helps he has at hand;
considering what he says, Mat. 18.19, 20. And Dr. Field, in answer to these
places of Hierom (p. 547.) goes thus far: Thirdly, we say, it is more than
probable, that the whole Western Church shall never lose or forsake the true
profession, (and therefore he may truly be judged a profane person that eats
the Paschal Lamb out of the Communion of the same); tho sometimes the Bishop of
Rome in person be an Heretic, other of his Colleagues continuing faithful. But
then; I ask, according to this, when as not none at all, or a few, but most, of
his Western Colleagues are joined with the Bishop of Rome (in which Communion,
no instance in Antiquity can show him to have been Heretical), and only a few
in the West divided from him, which will seem safest (to those who will be
guided by authority) in St. Hierom's opinion, to adhere to Cathedra Petri, or
the Cathedra elsewhere opposing it? As for what is urged (by Dr. Field, ibid.)
out of St. Hierom (Epist. ad Evagrium) to counterbalance these, of a depraved
custom in Rome; when as this was no way patronized by any Episcopal
Constitution; and of his holding Presbyters and Bishops, and again Bishops of
Alexandria, and Tanais, ejusdem meriti and sacerdotit; when as he means
ratione ordinis, not jurisdictionis; or jure divino, not ecclesiastico; for so
he says in the same Epistle; Quod postea unus electus est, qui caeteris
praeponeretur, in schismatum remedium factum est. Factum est, i. e. by the
Apostles, or the Councils; which sufficiently justifies his allowance of, and
submission to, Patriarchal authority. These places seem to me of no force to
null, or to qualify, his former expressions to Damasus. See Optatus, who
disputes thus ( l. 2.) against the schismatical Donatist Bishops; Videndum est,
qui and ubi prior Cathedra sederet, -- Negare non potes scire te in Vrbe Roma
Petro primo Cathedram Episcopalem esse collatam, -- in qua una Cathedra unitas
ab omnibus servaretur, ne caeteri Apostoli singulas [Cathedras] sibi quisque
defenderent, ut jam schismaticus and peccator esset, qui contra singularem
Cathedram (.i. e. Petri) alteram collocaret. Ergo Cathedra unica sedit prior
Petrus, cui successit Linus, Lino Clemens, etc. Damasus, Damaso Siricius, hodie
qui noster est socius Cum quo nobis totus orbis, commercio formatarum, in una
communionis societate concordant. Vestrae Cathedrae vos originem reddite. --
Sed and habere vos in urbe Roma, partem aliquam dicitis, -- Quid est hoc quod
pars vestra in urbe Roma Episcopum civem habere non potuit? -- Vnde est quod
claves regni vobis usurpare contenditis, qui contra Cathedram Petri vestris
praesumptionibus and audaciis sacrilegio militatis? -- Probatum est nos esse in
Ecclesia sancta Catholica; apud quos and symbolum Trinitatis est, and per
Cathedram Petri, quae nostra est, and caeteras dotes apud nos, esse etiam
Sacerdotium, etc. [I hope none will say, that Optatus argues thus, because St.
Peter's Chair happened in his times to be orthodox, but because he took it for
granted, that it must be orthodox (and so all the Churches joined to it)
because St. Peter's Chair].

See Damasus Epist. 5. ad Africanos, 23. n. 3.
-- Instituta esse majorum, ut cuncta, quae possit aliquam recipere
dubitationem ad nos quasi ad caput, ut semper fuit consuetudo, defer non
dubitetis. Of whom thus Spalatensis, l. 7. c. 5. n. 23. Ex non Apocryphis
Damasum primum observo, qui talis sui privilegii metionem fecit, ipsum vero ad
sola majorum instituta refert. See the Epistle of Siricius Bishop of Rome, A.
D. 389, to the Metropolitan Bishop of Tarracon in Spain, c. 15. Explicuimus ut
arbitror (Frater charissime) universa quae digesta sunt in querelam; and ad
singulas causas, de quibus ad Romanam Ecclesiam, utpote ad caput sui corporis,
retulisti, sufficientia (quatuor opinor) responsa reddidimus. Nunc
fraternitatis tuae animum ad servandos canones and tenenda decretalia
constituta magis ac magis invitamus, ut haec in omnium coepiscoporum nostrorum
perf^rri facias notionem, -- ad universos Carthaginenses, atque Baeticos,
Lusitanos, atque Gallicos, etc. See the Epistle of Zosimus (a Bishop of Rome in
St. Austin's time) ad Episc. Salonit. where prohibiting the admitting of Monks,
and also Laics, immediately to be Bishops, without their passing through, and
continuance for some time in, inferior Ecclesiastical Functions, he says; --
Hoc autem speeialiter, and sub Praedecessoribus nostris, and nuper a nobis
interdictum constat, literis ad Gallias Hispaniasque transmissis. -- Ad te
potissimum scripta direximus, quae in omnium fratrum and Coepiscoporum
nostrorum facies ire notitiam. -- Sciet, quisquis hoc, postposita Patrum and
Apostolicae Sedis authoritate, neglexerit, a nobis districtius vindicandum etc.

See the Epistles of the African Bishops, 23. n. 4.
(in the 5th Carthaginian, and in the Milevitan, Councils, held there against
P^lagianism, amongst whom was S. Austin) sent to Pope Innocent I; and his
Answers to them, (being amongst S. Austin's Epistles, the 90, 91, 92, 93.)
where the 92. the African Bishops begin thus. -- Quia te Dominus gratiae suae
praecipuae munere in Sede Apostolica collocavit, talemque in nostris temporibus
praestitit, ut etc. and see the close thereof. And (in Epistle 90.) -- Hoc
itaque gestum, Domine Frater Sancte, charitati tuae intimandum duximus, ut
statutis nostroe mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae Sedis adhibeatur authoritas.
And S. Austin ( Retract. 2. l. 49. c.) speaks of the same business in this
language: -- Postea quam Pelagiana haeresis cum suis authoribus ab Episcopis
Ecclesiae Romanoe, prius Innocentio, deinde Zosimo (cooperantibus Conciliorum
Africanorum literis) convicta atque damnata est, scripsi etc. And Possidonius,
S. Austin's Collegiat, ( in vita August. 18. c. thus. -- Et cum iidem
(Pelagiani] perversi Sedi Apostolicae, per suam ambitionem, eandem perfidiam
persuadere conabantur; instantissime etiam Conciliis Africanis sanctorum
Episcoporum gestum est; ut So Papae urbis Romae, and prius venerabili
Innocentio, and postea sancto Zosimo ejus successori, persuaderetur; quod illa
Secta Catholica fide and abominanda and damnanda fuisset. At illi tantae Sedis
Antistites suis diversis temporibus eosdem notantes, atque a membris Ecclesiae
[i. e. Catholicae] praecidentes datis literis ad Africanas Orientis and
Occidentis Ecclesias, eos anathematizandos and devitandos ab omnibus Catholicis
censuerunt. Et hoc tale de illis Ecclesiae Dei Catholicae probatum judi^ium
[where he seems to call the Pope's judgment the Catholical] etiam p^issimus
Imperator Honorius audiens and sequens, suis eos legibus damnatos and inter
haereticos habere debere constituit. And see the Bishop of Rome's answers,
wherein he vindicates the universal authority of that See; something of which
is quoted before, 21.

After which judgment in Africa, both Pelagius, and Caelestius (his chief
disciple) made their appeals to Rome, to Zosimus the Successor of this
Innocentius, under such forms as these: Si forte quispiam ignorantiae error
obrepserit, vestra sententia corrigatur, -- and, -- Emendari cupimus a te, qui
Petri and fidem and sedem tenes: and were (upon a false relation of their
tenants) favored there, to the great offense of the African Bishops, but
afterward also condemned by that See; and their condemnation published from
thence to all Churches. See for what is said the authorities in S. Austin, and
others, quoted by Baronius, A.D. 418. See S. Austin contra Julianum, 1. l. 2.
c. where, urging against Julian the testimonies of the Occidental Fathers for
Original sin, he says thus: -- An ideo contemnendos putas, quia Occidentalis
Ecclesiae sunt omnes. -- Puto tibi eam partem orbis sufficere debere, in qua
primum Apostolorum suorum voluit Dominus gloriosissimo Martyrio coronare. Cui
Ecclesiae praesidentem beatum Innocentium si audire voluisses, jam tunc
periculosam juventutem tuam Pelagianis laqueis exuisses. Quid enim potuit vir
ille Sanctus Africanis respondere Conciliis, nisi quod antiquitus Apostolica
Seeds and Romana cum caeteris tenet perseveranter Ecclesia? -- Non est ergo cur
provoces ad Orientis Antistites etc. See S. Austin's Epistle 261. written to
Caelestine, Bishop of Rome, in his old age; as appears in the end of the
Epistle, [si meam senectutem fueris consolatus,] and probably after the contest
of the African Council about Appeals, that Council being held 419. and
Celestine made Bishop of Rome 423. who outlived S. Austin, who died, 430.
Ludov. de Angelis, lib. 4. c. 6. It was written concerning one Antonius, for
whom S. Austin had procured the Bishopric of Fussala, a place formerly in his
own Diocese: but being very remote from Hippo he obtained, that a new
Bishopric might be erected there; which Antonius, for some miscarriage, being
by the neighboring Bishops of Numidia removed from that Bishopric, yet not
utterly degraded, had appealed to the Bishop of Rome, and had much threatened by
this Bishop's power, to procure a restorement to his place. In this Epistle,
thus S. Austin beseeches the Pope. -- Collabora obsecro nobiscum: and jube
tibi quae decreta sunt omnia recitari. -- Existat exemplo, ipsa Apostolica
Ecclesia judicante, vel aliorum judicia firmante, quosdam pro culpis nec
Episcopali spoliatos honor, neque relictos omnimodo impunitos. Quia ergo etc.
subveni hominibus opem tuam in Christi mesericordia poscentibus: non sinas ista
fieri [i.e. Antonius to be restored by force] obsecro te per Christi sanguinem,
per Apostoli Petri memoriam, qui Christianorum praepositos Populorum monuit, ne
violenter dominentur inter Fratres etc. This he says against the Executores
Clericos of the Roman See, many times using unjust violence; but we see he
declines not the Bishop of Rome's judgment, but hopes to have it favorable to
his cause. -- See likewise his Epistle 157. to Optatus: wherein he mentions a
legation imposed upon him and some other Bishops, for some Ecclesiastical
affair, to Caesarea in Mauritania. -- Quo nos (says he) injuncta nobis a
venerabili Papa Zosimo Apostolicae Sedis Episcopo, Ecclesiastica necessitas
traxerat. Of which also thus Possidonius Vit. Aug. 14. c. -- In Coesarinsem
Mauritaniae Civitatem venire venerabilis mentoriae Augustinum cum aliis
Episcopis, Sedis Apostolicae literae compulerunt, ad terminandas viz. aliquas
Ecclesiae necessitates, etc, [which shows what authority the Roman Bishop used
over the African in this Fathers time;] where S. Austin did many good offices
for that Province, and had successful disputes with Emeritus, the Bishop of
that city. (See Possid. vit. Aug. 14. c. Aug. de gest. cum Emerit.)

See the Epistle of Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, 23. n. 5.
to Celestin Bishop of Rome, wherein he says, concerning Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople, before condemned by any General Council. At quamvis res ita
habeat, non prius tamen illius communionem confidenter disserere ausi fuimus,
quam haec ipsa pietati tuae indicaremus. Digneris proinde quid hic sentias
declarare, quo liquide nobis constet, communicare ne nos cum illo oporteat; an
vero libere eidem denunciare, neminem cum illo communicare, qui ejusmodi
erroneam doctrinam fovet and praedicat. Again, see the great authority, that
Celestin Bishop of Rome, used against the same Nestorius, which authority was
approved and submitted-to by Cyril, and the Alexandrian and also the Ephesine
(the 3d. General) Council. Thus Celestin writes in his Epistle to Cyril:
Nostrae Sedis authoritate ascita, nostraque vice and loco, cum potestate, usus,
ejusmodi sententia exequeris, nempe ut nisi december dierum intervallo ab hujus
nostroe admonitionis die numerandorum, nefariam doctrinam suam conceptis verbis
anathematizet etc, illico Sanctitas tua illi Ecclesioe prospiciat. Thus
Celestin to Nestorius: -- Post unam and alteram admonitionem etc, nisi nunc
tandem quae perverse docuisti per te corrigantur, in posterum and a nostro
consortio and ab omnium Christianorum coetu alienum te fore nihil quicquam
dubites. -- Upon this, thus Cyril, and his Alexandrian Council, to Nestorius.
-- Quod sane, nisi juxta tempus in literis Celestini sacratissimi
reverendissimique Romanorum Episcopi expressum, praestiteris; certo scias
nullam tibi deinceps cum Episcopis and Sacerdotibus Dei consuetudinem, nullum
sermonem, nullum denique inter eos locum futurum esse. -- All which proceedings
see approved in the Acts of the Ephesine Council, Tom. 2. c. 5. and then see
the sentence of the Council against Nestorius, running thus: Per sacros
Canones, sanctissimique Romanae Ecclesiae Episcopi Celestini Patris nostri
literas, lachrymis suffusi and pene inviti, ad lugubrem hanc sententiam
urgemur. See the like things related by Evagrius, 1. l. 4. c.

See the Epistle of S. Chrysostom, 23. n. 6.
Bishop of Constantinople, (in banishment, being deposed by a Synod held
there,) appealing to Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and sending to him some of his
Bishops, wherein he bespeaks him thus: -- Quamobrem ne confusio haec omnem,
quae sub coelo est, nationem invadat, obsecro ut scribas; quod haec tam inique
facta (and absentibus nobis, and non declinantibus judicium) non habeant robur,
sicut neque natura sua habent: illi autem, qui adeo impune egisse deprehensi
sunt, poenae Ecclesiasticarum legum subjaceant. Upon which suit the Bishop of
Rome called a Synod of his Bishops, and pronounced the proceedings of
Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria, to be against the canons, and void. (See
Field, p. 536. and Epist. Innocent, apud Binnium.) And is said, by Baronius,
A.D. 407. (who quotes for it many authors, Gennadius, Nicephorus, Glycas; to
which may be added, Georgius, Patriarch of Alexandria, in the Edit. Savil. of
Chrysostom, 8. Tom. p. 248.) after he heard of Chrysostom's death in
banishment, to have excommunicated both Arcadius, the Eastern Emperor, and
Eudoxia, and Theophilus, his chief oppressors. But this fact is denied by Dr.
Field upon the silence of Historians more ancient. In Innocentius's letter to
Arcadius we find these words: Itaque ego minimus and peccator, cui thronus
magni Petri Apostoli creditus est, segrego, and rejicio te, and illam, a
perceptione immaculatorum mysteriorum Christi Dei nostri. Episcopumetiam omnem,
aut Clericum ordinis sanctae Christi Ecclesiae, qui administrare aut exhibere
ea vobis ausus fuerit, ab ea hora, qua praesentes vinculi mei legeritis
literas, dignitate sua excidisse decerno, etc. The truth of this Epistle I
decide not; but it is certain, that S. Ambrose, before this, excommunicated the
Emperor, his Father: and if Arcadius his violences to holy Chrysostom his
Bishop deserved the like Ecclesiastical censure, I know not who, after
Chrysostom's death, could inflict it more properly than the first See. which
also was defended in it by Honorius brother to Arcadius, and Emperor in the
West. See, the Epistle of Theodoret, a Syrian Bishop, appealing from the 2d.
Ephesine Council (by which he was (in absence) condemned and deposed as a
Nestorian) to Leo Bishop of Rome, whom he sues to in these terms: -- post tot
sudores and labores, ne in jus quidem vocatus sum condemnatus. -- Ego autem
Apostolicae vestrae Sedis expecto sententiam, and supplico and obsecro vestram
sanctitatem, ut mihi opem ferat, justum vestrum and rectum appellanti judicium,
and jubeat ad vos accurrere, [for the Emperor had confined him to Cyrus the
place of his Bishopric,] and ostendere meam doctrinam vestigia Apostolica
sequentem. And his Epistle to Renatus, one of the Bishop of Rome's Legates in
the 2d. Ephesine Council: -- Te precor, ut sanctissimo Archiepiscopo Leoni
persuadeas, ut Apostolica utatur authoritate, jubeatque ad vestrurn Concilium
adire. Tenet enim sancta ista Seeds gubernacula regendarum cuncti orbis
Ecclesiarum. -- Habet enim sanctissima Romana Seeds omnem per orbem Ecclesiarum
principatum, cum multis aliis de causis, tum maxim, quod haereticae labis
immunis permansit, [this was long after the times of Liberius; by which it
appears, Antiquity imputed no Arrianism to this See,] and Apostolicam gratiam
immaculatam servavit. Whose cause Pope Leo accordingly judged, and cleared him:
and afterward, the General Council of Chalcedon, after due examination (some
there also opposing Theodoret) did the like. (After examination) I say; (For
the Pope's, and his assistant Bishops sentence, it seems, was not accounted so
authentic, and unrepealable, that a General Council might not review, examine,
and, if seeming to them erroneous, reverse it;) upon which judgment of the
Council (concurring with his) Leo thus answers Theodoret. -- Quae nostro prius
ministerio Dominus desinierat, universae fraternitatis [ i. e. of the Council]
irrefragabili firmavit assensu; ut vere a se prodiisse ostenderet, quod prius a
prima omnium Sede firmatum, totius Christiani orbis judicium recepisset; ut, in
hoc quoque capiti membra concordent. -- Nam, ne aliarum Sedium ad came, quam
caeteris omnibus Dominus statuit praesidere, consensus videretur assentatio,
inventi prius sunt, qui de judiciis nostris ambigerent etc. See Socrates
Eccles. Hist. 50 l. 15. c. where he speaks thus concerning the reconciling of
Flavianus, Patriarch of Antioch, to the Roman See. Theophilus [ i. e. the
Patriarch of Alexandria] odio in illum [i.e. Flavianum] restincto, Isidorum
Presbyterum misit, uti Damasi [ Siricii it should be, says Baronius] animum in
Flavianum exulceratum mitigaret, doceretque in usu Ecclesiae esse, si propter
populi concordiam peccatum a Flaviano commissum remitteret. Quocirca communione
Flaviano ad hunc modum reddita [therefore he had bin formerly by the Roman
Bishop excommunicated] populus Antiochenus ad concordiam reducitur, [therefore
formerly in the want of that communion they had refused some obedience and
submission to him.] After these clear evidences of the Roman Bishops power, now
to look a little back into the former ages; wherein, by reason of the
persecutions by heathen Princes, the Church's discipline was not altogether so
perfectly formed.

See Athanasius de sententia Dionysii Alexandrini; 23. n. 7.
where he relates how Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria (living above fifty years
before the Nicene Council) was accused by some of Pentapolis, as erroneous in
the Doctrine of the Trinity, to Dionysius the then Bishop of Rome; and
thereupon writ an Apology to purge himself, -- Quidam ex Ecclesia recte quidem
sentientes, sed tamen ignari etc. Romam ascenderunt, ibique eum apud Dionysium
ejusdem nominis Romanum Praesulem accusaverunt. Re comperta Alexandrinus
postulavit a Romano Praesule, ut objecta sibi indicaret, -- [and] non rixandi
animo, sed sui purgandi, Apologiam scripsit. Here it seems A. D. 266. (long
before the cause of Athanasius his) addresses were made by the Alexandrians to
the Roman Bishop. See St. Cyprian, contemporary to Dionysius, to procure the
deposing of Marcianus Metropolitan Bishop of Arles in France, because he sided
with Novatian; writes thus to Stephen Bishop of Rome about it; -- Dirigantur in
Provinciam and ad plebem Arelatae consistentem a te literae, quibus abstento
Marciano, alius in locum ej^s substituatur. Where Dr. Field ( l. 5 c. 37.)
grams, Cyprian rather writ to him to do this, than did it himself, because the
Roman Bishop was Patriarch of the West. And it appears from his 68th Epistle,
that, in his time two Bishops of Spain, Basilides, and Martialis, ejected for
giving their consent to some Idolatry, appealed to the Bishop of Rome, to
restore them to their Dignities. -- Romam pergens [i. e. Basilides] Stephanum
collegam nostrum, long positum, and gestae rei, ac tacitae veritatis ignarum,
fefellit; ut exambiret reponi se injuste in Episcopatum, de quo fuerat just
depositus. In which Epistle he censures Stephen indeed, but not for receiving
Basilides his appeal, or hearing his cause, but for judging it amiss: yet some
way excuses him also, as misinformed, -- Neque enim tam culpandus est ille
(says he) eui negligenter obreptum est; quam hic execrandus, qui fraudulenter
obrepsit. But had Stephen had no just authority to judge this matter, or
reponere Basilidem in Episcopatum; St. Cyprian would not have accused him of
negligence; i. e. in believing, without seeking better information, what
Basilides or his friends said; but of usurpation, and intrusion, and tyranny,
in judging in matters no way belonging to him: But he, allowing the Western
Patriarchs authority over the Gallican Bishops, (as appears in the last
instance) could not rationally deny him the same over the Spanish. Therefore
that which this Father says before, that Basilides his appeal and Stephen's
sentence, ordinationem jure perfect am rescindere non potuit, is to be
understood with reference to the justness of the cause, not of the authority.
(For one may rightly be accused of injustice, either who does a thing, and has
no just power to do it; or who has a just power to do a thing, and has no
just cause.) And therefore the Spanish ought to seek a reversion of such
sentence, by presenting to their Patriarch perfecter informations. Else surely
his sentence, who is granted to have the supreme authority to judge, is to
stand; and he must give account thereof to God.

And yet higher; before Cyprian's time (about A.D. 200) we find (in Eus. Eccl.
Hist. l. 5. c. 22, etc.) that, in a controversy about the celebration of
Easter (whether on the Lord's day, or on the same day with the Jews) after many
Provincial Councils (in a peaceful time of the whole Christian Church) called
in several Countries, as well of the East (as Egypt, Palestine,) as of the
West, who all agreed with the Roman Bishop, excepting Polycrates Bishop of
Ephesus, and the Bishops of Asia minor, who (assembled in Council, as the rest)
resolved to continue their custom of keeping it the same day with the Jews; and
in a Letter to Rome signified so much. We find, I say, that Victor, then Bishop
of Rome, either intended, or also executed, an Excommunication upon Polycrates
and his party, as pertinaciously retaining a Mosaical ceremony, which might be
an introduction to more. Executed an excommunication; not negative (as Dr.
Field would have it, p. 558.) by withdrawing his own communion from them; but
privative and authoritative, by rejecting, and debarring, them from communion
of the whole Catholic Church; (tho indeed debarring them from the Roman
communion, debars them also from all others, that communicate with the Roman;
for those who may not communicate with an Heretic, neither may communicate
with any others, who by communicating with such Heretic, make themselves
partakers of his sin). This seems to me clear, by the words of Eusebius. Victor
-- totius Asiae Ecclesias a communionis societate abscindere nititur, tanquam
in haeresin declinantes, and literas mittit, quibus omnes simul (absque
discretione) ab Ecclesiastico faedere segregaret. -- Extant Episcoporum
literae, quibus asperius objurgant Victorem, velut inutiliter ecclesiae
commodis consulentem. [Ecclesiae, i. e. universalis]. And of Iraeneus, who,
amongst the rest, reprehended him, -- quod non recte fecerit abscindens a
corporis [ i. e. Christi, not Romanae Ecclesiae] unitate tot and tantas
Ecclesias Dei. And by Polycrates his Letter ( Eusebius. l. 5. c. 22.) to the
Church of Rome; wherein it appears, both that he assembled his Asian Bishops at
the Bishop of Rome's intimation; and that some censure had been threatened him
from thence, upon nonconformity; to which he answers, That it were better to
obey God than men. His words are, Sexaginta and quinque ^nnos aetatis gerens,
-- non perturbabor ex his, quae ad terrorem proferuntur; quia and majores mei
dixerunt: Obtemperare oportet Deo magis quam hominibus. As for Irenaeus, or
other Bishops, reprehending this fact or purpose of Victors, it was not because
he usurped or exercised an authority of Excommunication over the Asiaticks, not
belonging to him; but that he used such authority upon no just, or sufficient,
cause: namely, upon such a declination from Apostolical tradition (vel per
negligentiam, vel per imperitiam) in so small a matter; some compliance with
the Jews, to gain them, partly excusing such a practice. Thus a Prince, who
has lawful power to inflict punishments upon his subjects when delinquent, is
reprehensible when punishing the innocent. To this of Victor, I may add another
Excommunication, not long after this, by Stephen Bishop of Rome; either
inflicted, or at least threatened, to some of the Asian Churches in Cyprian's
time, that held the necessity or Rebaptization upon the Baptism of Heretics.
Concerning which, see Eusebius. Eccl. Hist l. 4. c. 4.6. See St. Austin's Epistle
162) the great care and superintendence which Melchiades (Bishop of Rome before
Sylvester in Constantine's time) used over the African Churches in the Schism
of Donatus; -- Qualis (says he) ipsius Melchiadis ultima est p^rlata s^ntentia
[ i. e. in judging the cause of Donatus] qua neque collegas [ i. e. the African
Bishops] in quibus nihil constiterat, de coll^gio suo [from his Communion]
ausus est removere; and Donato solo, quem totius mali principem invenerat,
maxim culpato, sanitatis recuperandae optionem liberam caeteris fecit; part
tus communicatorias litteras mittere etiam iis, quos a Majorino [a Donatist
Bishop] ordinatos esse constaret; ita, ut quibuscunque in locis [in Africk] d^o
essent Episcopi (quos diss^nsio geminasset) eum confirmari vellet, qui fuisset
ordinatus prior etc. alteri autem eorum plebs alia regenda provideretur. O
filium Christianae pacis! and patrem Christianae plebis! Thus St. Austin of
Melchiades Bishop of Rome his ordering the African affairs. See the Council of
Arles (called by Constantine before Nice; see in Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. his
Epistle summoning the Bishop of Syracuse to it), in which were some Bishops
from England (see Bishop of Derry Vind c. 5. p. 98. Hammond Sch s. c. 6. p.
110.) sending their Decrees to Sylvester then Bishop of Rome, and in their
first Canon thus bespeaking him; Quae decrevimus, significamus, etc. -- De
observatione Paschae Domini, ut uno die and tempore per omnem orbem observetur;
and juxta consuetudinem literas ad omnes tu dirigas. Now to go on in the
occurrences of the fifth Age.

See the Epistles of Leo (Bishop of Rome before, and in the time of, the fourth
General Council) the 53d. Epistle to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople; 23. n.
8.
the 54th to the Emperor Marcianus; the 55th to the Empress Pulcheria; wherein
he vindicates the derivation of his authority, not from the Imperial City, but
the Apostles; and concerning that Act of the Bishops in Conc. Chalc. advancing
the Bishop of Constantinople above the second Patriarch, of Alexandria (which
he judged contrary to the Nicene Canons), he says, (Epistle to Pulcheria)
Consensiones vero Episcoporum sanctorum Canonum aepud Nicaenum conditorum
regulis repugnantes, unita nobiscum vestrae fidei pietate, in irritum mittimus,
and, per authoritatem Beati Petri Apostoli, generali prorsus definitione
cassemus, etc. His Epistle 84. to Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica: -- Sicut
Praedecessores mei Praedecessoribus tuis, ita etiam ego dilectioni tuae,
priorum secutus exemplum, vices mei moderaminis delegavi; ut curam, quam
universis Ecclestis principaliter ex divina institutione debemus, adjuv^res,
and long^nquis ab Apostolica Sede provinciis, praesentiam quodammodo nostrae
visitationis impenderes, [see below 25. n. 13. where the same things are said
of the Bishop of Constantinople, as here of Thessalonica:] promptum tibi
agnoscere, quid vel tuo studio componeres, vel nostro judicio reservares. And,
in the close of the Epistle, -- Magna dispositione provisum est, ne omnes sibi
omnia vendicarent; sed essent in singulis Provinciis singuli, quorum inter
Fratres haberetur prima sententia, [Metropolitans,] and rursus quidam in
majoribus urbibus constituti solicitudinem susciperent ampliorem, [Primats, or
those amongst them deputed by the Patriarch,] per quos ad unam Petri Sedem
universalis Ecclesiae cura conflueret, and nihil unquam a Capite suo
dissideret. This is spoken of the Church Universal. To which may be added that
expression of his quoted before,. 6. Caput orbis effecta latius praesides
religione divina, [now], quam dominatione terrena [formerly.] Seconded by
Prosper, 2. l. de vocatione Gentium. -- Roma per Sacerdotii Principatum amplior
facta est arce Religionis, quam solio Potestatis: and (lib. de Ingratis.)

Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris
Facta Caput mundo; quicquid non possidet armis,
Relligione tenet, etc. --
To the latter of these places Dr. Field ( 5l. 34. c. p. 529. etc.) answers. --
That more were subject to it than ever were under the Roman Empire, as it had a
presidency (amongst them) of Order and Honor, not of Supreme power. To the
other he says: -- The care of the Universal Church is to be understood only in
respect of things concerning the common faith, and general state of the Church;
or of the principal, most eminent, and highest parts and members of the same:
[Be it so; for of such only we speak:] none of which things might be
proceeded-in without the Bishop of Rome, and his colleagues. -- So a little
before, p. 528. he says: -- All things generally concerning the whole Church
were, either to take beginning, or (at the least) to seek confirmation from the
Roman Bishops, before they were generally imposed and prescribed. But Quaere,
whether, if this Bishop denied his consent, the rest might proceed no further
without it; and whether, if he refused to confirm such acts, they might not be
at all imposed; and whether, as the eminentest persons in their differences
might be judged by Him, so they were bound to submit to his (as to their
Superior's) judgment? Else, if he mean only, that they were first to ask his
consent, or judgment; but upon a denial or a displeasing sentence, might
proceed to establish things against it; how consists this with that conclusion,
-- ut nihil unquam a capite suo dissideret? To search a little further, to see
if the Dr. speaks plainer. Below, in the p. 530. he says: -- In cases which
concerned the principal Patriarchs, whether they were differences between them,
and their Bishops; or between themselves; the chief See, as the principal part
of the whole Church, might interpose it self: -- So as other Patriarchs
likewise of the higher thrones might interpose themselves in matters concerning
Patriarchs of the lower thrones. -- But I ask; How interpose? by judging and
determining the causes of their inferiors? by excommunicating, and deposing etc
the persons obnoxious noxious and criminal? But then the Presidency of Rome
will be a presidency of Power over the rest of the Church, and not of Honor
only. And must not he mean some such thing by interpose, since in his instances
there, this interposing proves to be judging, excommunicating, deposing, etc?
and so he grants, that the ordering and settling of things of the Church of
Antioch, the 3d. See, did pertain to the Patriarch of Alexandria, the 2d. See;
and he goes on, and says: That the Bishops of inferior thrones might not
judge the superior; and therefore, That John of Antioch of the 3d. See is
reprehended (Act. Conc. Ephesians.) for judging Cyril Bishop of the 2d. See: and
Dioscor^s, Bishop of the 2d. See, is condemned in the Council of Chalcedon (in
their Ep. ad Martian. Imp. and ad Leonem Act. 3.) for this thing, among others,
That he presumed to judge the first See, [ i. e. the Bishop thereof, Leo. Where
note, That both John's and Dioscorus his judging was excommunicating their
superior Bishops, and done not singly, but with their Council of Bishops. And
again observe, That had the Eastern Bishops at Antioch judged or excommunicated
Julius the Bishop of Rome, who communicated with Athanasius, they might justly
have incurred the like censure. Neither could they justly say so, as they do,
in their Epistle to Him, ( inter decreta Julii, if it be not forged,) contraria
celebrabimus, and vobiscum deinceps nec congregari, nec vobis obedire --
volumus, sed per nos quicquid melius elegerimus agere conabimur; nor urge the
5. Can. of Nice against him, supposing his a superior Court.] He proceeds; That
no other particular Church or See may judge the Church of Rome, seeing every
other See is inferior to it, but that the Sea of Rome, i. e. the Bishops of
Rome, and the Bishops of the West, may judge and examine the differences, etc,
but neither so peremptorily nor finally, but that such judgment may be
reviewed, and re-examined, and reversed, in a General Council. Let this be
agreed-to: but I ask; Is it no power that this See has over the rest, because
this power is subordinated to a General Council? But if it be granted to have
the supremest power next to that of a General Council, then when no General
Council is in being, is it not actually pro tempore the supremest? and do not
its determinations stand good, and oblige, till a General Council be assembled?
Else, what will this mean which the Dr. says; The first See must judge and
examine the differences of all others, (but none it,) if, it judging and
examining, none are bound to submit or obey? And from this, [namely, that the
first may judge i. e. excommunicate (for this is the thing which is meant by
judging, above in the case of John Antioch. and Dioscorus Alexand.) inferior
thrones, not they it,] it will appear, that the excommunications of the first
See are either authoritative and privative in respect of other Sees, i. e.
rejecting them from the communion of the Church Catholic; or, if they are
negative only, i. e. withdrawing her self only from the communion of others,
(of which two sorts of excommunication see Dr. Field, 5. l. 38. c. p. 558.
Bishop of Derry's vindicat. 8. c.) that no other Church may use a negative
excommunication toward the first See, i.e. may not withdraw themselves from
the communion thereof; but only it may do so toward others. For some
excommunication is granted here to die first See toward others, which others
have not toward it. I ask therefore, John Antoch. excommunicating the second
See, and Dioscorus Alexand. excommunicating the first, (disallowed by two
General Councils,) was it negative, only, by way of Christian caution; or
privative, and authoritative, by way of Jurisdiction? Take which you will, yet
it is clear, both by the Councils, and Dr. Field's, concession; that in such
manner, the second or third See might not excommunicate the first; and that in
such manner, the first might excommunicate the second or third. But indeed, it
is manifest, That the excommunication both of John and Dioscorus was
authoritative; neither would they have presumed singly to have done it, but as
having a party of a Council of other Bishops, who were not subject to them,
joined with them. Yet thus also were they, by the Ecumenical Synods, censured,
for making themselves heads of a Council against their Superiors, the second
and first See. And as manifest it is, that the Bishop of Rome's censures were
authoritative; many times deposing, as well as excommunicating, Bishops not
under the jurisdiction of his Patriarchy: as also John Antioch: deposed Cyril
Alexand. As for Dr. Field's very cautiously every where joining the Western
Bishops with the Bishops of the first See, in his exercising such judgment over
other Sees; he must either mean the Bishops of his ordinary Council, and such
others, as (according to the exigent) he can conveniently advise with which may
be conceded to Dr. Field: or he must mean all the Bishops of the West assembled
in a Patriarchal Council. But if so; their ordinary practice anciently in
judging such appeals and causes, shows it was otherwise; and reason tells us it
could not be thus, unless so great a body could be so often convened, as such
appeals were necessary to be terminated. Thus much of Dr. Field's answers. Now
to go on in our quotations out of Leo.]

See his Epistle to Dioscorus, Bishop of Alexandria. 25. n. 1.
-- Quod a Patribus nostris propensiore cura novimus esse servatum, a vobis
quoque volumus custodiri, ut non passim diebus omnibus Sacerdotalis ordinatio
cel^bretur, sed -- mane ipso die Dominico. Vt in omnibus observantia nostra
concordet, illud quoque volumus custodiri; ut cum solennior sestivitas
Conventum populi numerosioris indixerit, -- sacrificii oblatio indubitanter
iteretur. Epistle 46. to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, written to him
about receiving some Bishops and others in the East, followers of Eutyches and
Dioscorus, upon their penitence, to the peace of the Church. -- Licet sperem
dilectionem tuam ad omne opus bonum esse devotam; ut tamen efficacior tua fieri
possit industria, necessarium and congruum fuit, fratres meos Lucentium
Episcopum, and Basilium Presbyterum (ut promisimus) destinare, quibus tua
dilectio societur; ut nihil in his, quae ad Vniversalis Ecclesiae statum
pertinent, aut dubie agatur, aut segniter; cum residentibus vobis, quibus
executionem nostrae dispositionis injunximus, ea possint agi cuncta moderation
etc. -- De his autem qui in hac causa gravius peccavere, -- si forte
resipiscunt, -- horum satisfactio -- maturioribus Apostolicae Sedis Conciliis
reservetur; ut examinatis omnibus etc, quid constitui debeat, aestimetur. And
afterward, -- Si de aliquibus amplius fuerit deliberandum, celeriter ad nos
relatio dirigatur, ut, pertractata qualitate causarum, nostra, quid observari
debeat, solicitudo constituat. And see the Rescript of the Emperor Valentinian
the Third, (quoted by Baron. Anno 445. inter Novel. Theod. tit. 24.) in the
time of Leo, a little before the Council of Chalcedon, sent to Aelius his
Vicegerent in France, about quieting the difference between the Archbishops of
Arles and Vienna, after that the cause, upon appeal, had bin decided by Leo
against Arles. Wherein the Emperor has these words: Cum Sedis Apostolicae
primatum, S. Petri m^ritum, -- sacra etiam Synodi firmarit authoritas, ne quid
praeter authoritatem Sedis illius inlicitum praesumptio attentare nitatur; hinc
enim demum Ecclesiarum pax ubique servabitur, si Rectorem suum agnoscat
Vniversitas. Haec cum hactenus inviolabiliter fuerint constituta; Hilarious --
contumaci ausu etc. -- His talibus -- per ordinem religiosi viri urbis Papae
cognitione discussis, certa in eundem Hilarium -- lata sententia est. Et erat
ipsa quidem sententia per Gallias, etiam sine Imperiali sanctione valitura. --
Sed nostram quoque praeceptionem haec ratio provocavit, ne ulterius -- cuiquam
Ecclesiasticis rebus arma miscere [as it seems Hilarious, or some in his behalf,
had done,] aut Praeceptis Romani Pontificis liceat obviare. -- Omnibus pro lege
sit, quicquid sanxerit Apos^olicae Sedis authoritas: ita ut quisquis
Episcoporum, ad judicium Romani Antistitis evocatus, venire neglexerit, per
Moderatorem ejusdem Provinciae adesse cogatur; per omnia servatis, quae Divi
Parents nostri Romanae Ecclesiae detulerunt. -- And the like orders had bin
made by Emperors formerly, it seems, by that rigorous power used in Africa by
the executors of the Bishop of Rome's orders there, of which (as you have read
before 12.) the African Bishops so much complained.

See the Epistle of the 4th. G. Council at Chalcedon (the most numerous, 25. n.
2.
I think, of any Council which the Church has had) to the same Leo Bishop of
Rome, in which are these expressions. -- Quam [fidem] velut auro textam seriem
ex vest Christi and praecepto Legislatoris venientem usque ad nos ipse [Leo]
servasti, vocis Beati Petri omnibus constitutus Interpres, ejus fidei
beatificationem super omnes adducens. -- Quibus [i. e. Episcopis congregates in
Concilio] Tu quidem, sicut membris caput, praeeras, in his, qui tuum tenebant
ordinem, benevolentiam praeferens, etc. -- In vineam irruens [ i. e. Dioscorus
Bishop of Alexandria, a supporter of Eutyches] quam optime repperit plantatam,
evertit -- and post haec omnia insuper and contra ipsum, cui vineae custodia a
Salvatore commissa est, extendit insaniam, id est contra tuam quoque
Apostolicam sanctitatem; and excommunicatione meditatus est contra te, qui
corpus Ecclesiae unire festinas. -- Haec [ i.e. the Honors they conferred on
the Sea of Constantinople] velut a tua sanctitate fuerint inchoata, --
roboravimus, praesumentes; dum noverimus, quia quicquid rectitudinis a filiis
fit [alluding to themselves] ad Patres recurrit [alluding to Leo] facientes hoc
proprium sibi [ i. e. appropriating their Children's actions to themselves].
Rogamus igitur, and tuis decretis nostrum honora judicium; and sicut nos cupidi
in bonis adjecimus consonantiam, sic and summitas tua filiis (quod decet)
adimpleat. Sic enim and pii Principes [the Emperor etc. very desirous of the
advancement of the Sea Constantinopolitan^] complacebunt [will be well pleased]
qui, tanquam legem, tuae sanctitatis judicium firmaverunt; and
Constantinopolitanae seeds suscipiet praemium, quae omne semper studium vobis,
ad causam pietatis explevit, etc. -- Eutychen pro impietate damnatum suae
tyrannidis decretis innoxium statuit [ i.e. Dioscorus, who by a party in the
second Ephesine Council restored Eutyches, who was a Constantinopolitan
Presbyter, and an Archimandrita, Abbot of the Monks there, to his former degree
and dignities] and dignitatem, quae a vestra illi oblata fuerat sanctitate,
(quippe ut ab eo, qui hac gratia fuerit indignus) ille restituit]. Where know;
that Eutyches, deposed by Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople in a Synod there,
appealed (or pretended it) to the Bishop of Rome; to whom also the Emperor sent
Letters in his behalf; which Bishop of Rome also, after the business known,
ratified his deposition. Concerning which appeal of this Presbyter (where it
appears, that, in matters of Faith, and of great consequence, the causes of
Presbyters and inferior Clergy might be brought to the examination and sentence
of the chief Patriarch) Leo having (by a miscarriage) received as yet no
Letters from the Bishop of Constantinople, writes thus unto him; Epist. 8. --
Accepimus lib^llum Eutychetis Presbyteri, qui se queritur -- immerito
communione privatum, maxim cum -- libellum appellationis suae se ass^rat
obtulisse; nec tamen fuisse susceptum: -- Quibus rebus intercedentibus, necdum
agnoscimus, qua justa a communione Ecclesiae fuerit separatus. Sed respicientes
ad causam, facti tui nosse volumus rationem, and usque ad nostram notitiam
cuncta deferri; quoniam nos nihil possumus, incognitis rebus, in cujusquam
partis praejudicium definire, priusquam universa, quae gesta sunt, veraciter
audiamus]. Thus Leo to the Bishop of Constantinople. To return to the Epistle
of Conc. Chalc. In the same it is said, -- Episcopis v^tam finientibus, multae
turbae nascuntur absque rectore etc. [therefore they say they gave some power
to the Constantinopolitan Bishop for the ordering and settling them]. -- Quod
nec vestram latuit sanctitatem, quum maxim propter Ephesios, unde quidam vobis
saepius importuni fuerunt. Leo therefore exercised some authority over the
Church of Ephesus. Again; Considentes, quia, lucente apud vos Apostolico radio,
and usque ad Constantinopolitanorum Ecclesiam, consuete gubernando, illum
spargentes, hunc saepius expanditis, eo quod absque invidia consueveritis
virorum bonorum participatione ditare domesticos. Where they say, the Roman
Bishop dilated his beams to the governing of the Church of Constantinople. And
see their Epistle likewise to the Emperor; -- Velut signaculum sacrae
doctrinae, Concilii hujus a vobis [the Emperor]. congregati predicationem,
Petri sedis authoritate, roborantes. But yet, tho thus courted by them, in his
answer to that Council, Epist. 59. he approved not the preferment of the Bishop
of Constantinople before Alexandria. -- Quantumlibet extortis assentationibus
sese instruat vanitatis elatio [ i. e. of the Constantinopolitan Bishop] and
appetitus suos Conciliorum aestimet nomine roborandos, infirmum atque irritum
erit quicquid a praedictorum Patrum [ i. e. Nicene] canonibus discreparit.
Quorum regulis Apostolica seeds, quam reverenter utatur scriptorum meorum, etc.
poterit sanctitas vestra lectione cognoscere; and me, auxiliante Domino, and
catholicae fidei, and paternarum traditionum esse custodem.

See Evagrius Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 18, 20, 21. 25. n. 3.
And the Epistle of Felix Bishop of Rome A. D. 484, to Acatius Bishop of
Constantinople; where we find Felix appealed, and complain'd-to, by John the
wronged Bishop of Alexandria; and (being assisted with a Council of Forty-two
Western Bishops) excommunicating Peter, who then unjustly possessed the
Patriarchy of Alexandria; as being an Eutychian also, and not submitting to the
Council of Chalcedon (see Evagrius l. 3. c. 21.) and excommunicating Acatius
also, Bishop of Constanstinople (after he had first cited him to Rome, and also
written to the Emperor Zeno, to compel him to appear, upon the complaints of
John Alexand. rationem de rebus, quas Johannes ei objectasset, redditurus, as
Evagrius has it) for his communicating with Peter a condemned Heretic, and
many other crimes. See his Epistle; at the end of which the form of his
Condemnation runs thus: Sacerdotali honor and communione Catholica [not only
Romana] nec non etiam a fidelium numero segregatus sublatum tibi nomen and
munus ministerii sacerdotalis agnosce: sancti Spiritus judicio, and Apostolica,
per nos, authoritate damnatus. Which proceeding of Felix being much disliked by
some in the East, because a Synod was not specially summoned for the purpose,
especially seeing he was Bishop of the Princely City; see Gelasius, the
successor to Felix, A. D. 494. his vindication of this act of the Apostolic
See without a Council (at least an Oecumenial one) in his Epistle ad Episcopos
Dardaniae, an Eastern Province not far from Constantinople: which Epistle is
worth the reading, over, the rather, because some places being urged out of it
by Bellarmin, Dr. Field, in his answer to them, has these words: Truly there
cannot be any better proof against the pretended Supremacy of the Popes, than
this Epistle. In this Epistle then Gelasius pleads thus: -- Sabellium damnavit
Synodus: nec fuit necesse, ut ejus sectatores postea damnarentur, singulas
viritim Synodos celebrari: sed, pro tenore constitutionis antiquae, cunctos qui
vel pravitatis illius, vel communionis, extitere participes, universalis
Ecclesia [ i e. in a Council] dixit esse refutandos. -- Considimus, quod nullus
jam veraciter Christianus ignoret, uniuscujusque Synodi constitutum (quod
universalis Ecclesiae probavit assensus) nullam magis exequi sedem prae ceteris
oportere, quam primam, quae and unamquamque Synodum sua authoritate confirmat,
and continuata moderatione custodit; pro suo scil. Principatu, quem Beatus
Petrus Apostolus Domini voce perceptum [I suppose it should be percepit]
Ecclesia nihilominus subsequens and tenuit semper and tenebit. Haec [i. e.
Seeds Apostolica] dum Acacium certis comperisset indiciis a veritate Apostolica
deviasse, diutius ista non credens, quippe quem noverat executorem saepe
necessariae dispensationis suae [i. e. Sedis Apostolicae] per triennium fere
monere non destitit, etc. cur tanto tempore, dum ista gererentur -- non ad
sedem Apostolicam, a qua sibi curam illarum regionum noverat delegatum, refer
curavit [i. e. Acatius]? -- Tandem aliquando missis literis profitetur
[Acatius] se Alexandrino Petro, quem, expetita Apostolicae sedis authoritate,
executor ipse quoque damnaverat, absque sedis Apostolicae notitia, communione
permixtum. Beati autem Petri seeds, ne per Acacium in Petri consortiurn
duceretur, ipsum quoque a sua communione submovit, and multis modis
transgressorum a sua societate fecit alienum. -- Quo tenore Timotheus etiam
atque ipse Alexandrinus Petrus, qui secundam sedem tenuisse videbuntur, non
repetita Synodo, tantummodo sedis, Apostolicae, ipso quoque Acacio postulante,
vel exequente, probantur esse damnati. -- Nec plane tacemus, quod euncta per
mundum novit Ecclesia, quoniam quorumlibet sententiis ligata Pontificum seeds
B. Petri Apostoli jus habeat resolvendi; utpote quae de omni Ecclesia fas
habeat judicandi, neque cuiquam de ejus liceat judicare judicio: siquidem ad
Illam de qualibet mundi part canones appellare [aliquem] voluerunt, ab illa
autem nemo sit appellare permissus. -- Sed nec illa praeterimus, quod
Apostolicae sedi frequenter datum [or dictum] est, ut more majorum, etiam sine
ulla Synodo precedente and solvendi, quod Synodus inique damnaverat, and
damnandi, nulla existente Synodo, quos oportuit, habuerit potestatem. Sanctae
memoriae nihilo minus Johannem Constantinopolitanum [ i. e. Chrysostomum]
Synodus etiam Catholicorum Praesulum certe damnaverat, quem simili modo seeds
Apostolica etiam sola, quia non consensit, absolvit. Itemque S. Flavianum
Pontificem Graecorum congregatione damnatum pari tenore, quoniam sola
Apostolica seeds non consensit, absolvit, potius quam, qui illic receptus
fuerat. Dioscorum secundae Sedis praesulem sua authoritate damnavit; and impiam
Synodum [ i.e. sec. Ephesians.] non consentiendo summovit sola: and authoritate, ut
Synodus Chalcedonensis fieret, sola decrevit. -- Ponamus tamen, etiam si nulla
Synodus praecessisset, cujus Apost. seeds recte fieret exequutrix, cum quibus
erat de Acacio Synodus ineunda? Nunquid cum his, qui jam participes tenebantur
Acacii, and per Orientem totum ( Catholicis sacerdotibus [such he calls those
who adhered to the Council of Chalcedon] violenter exclusis, and per exilia
diversa relegatis) socii evidenter existentes communionis externae [i. e. extra
Ecclesiam Catholicam] prius se ad haec consortia transferrent, quam sedis
Apostolicae scita consulerent? -- Concilio nec opus erat post primam Synodum,
nec talibus habere licebat. -- Quae congregatio facta Pontificum [i.e. in
Italia Occidentalium] non contra Chalcedonensem, non tanquam nova Synodus
contra veterem primamque, convenit; sed potius secundum tenorem veteris
constituti, particeps Apostolica exequutionis effecta est; ut satis appareat,
Ecclesiam Catholicam, sedemque Apostolicam, quia alibi jam omnino non posset,
ubi potuit and cum quibus potuit, nihil penitus omisisse, quod ad fraternum
pertineret pro intemerata fide and sincera communione tractatum. -- ] -- In
this Epistle (amongst others) two things must not be passed by unobserved: 1.
One; That he contends, he ought not to call to a Council Bishops condemned by,
and professedly opposing, a former General Council; which being granted,
Councils may be rightly called General, when they consist not of all, but only
of all Catholic Churches. 2. The other; That in the final sentencing and
determining of greater persons and causes in the Eastern Church, the Bishop of
Constantinople was employed only from him, and as his Delegate. -- See the
Epistle of Pelagius the 2d. (Bishop of Rome A.D. 580.) -- Vniversis Episcopis,
qui illicita vocatione Johannis Constantinopolitani Episcopi, ad
Constantinopolim convenerunt. Wherein he vindicates the authority of the Roman
See against John, assembling a Council there without his consent and leave: and
calling himself Universal Bishop (seeking to exalt himself above Rome, probably
from the supreme dignity and great flourishing of that Imperial City in those
time; in which times also the poor City of Rome labored under great
afflictions and desolations by the Goths, Longobards, etc. [whereof Gregory
writing to the Empress (4. l. Ep. 34.) says, Viginti autem jam and septem
annos ducimus, quod in hac urbe inter Longobardorum gladios vivimus,] and from
the Emperor Mauritius his countenancing him in it. Out of which Epistle some
words are quoted by S. Gregory his Successor, (4. l. Ep. 36.)

Pelagius, as he has these passages: Vniversalitatis quoque nomen, A
Digression concerning the title of Universalis Episcopus assumed by the
Constantinopolitan and declined by the Roman, Bishops.
quod sibi illicite usurpavit, [i.e. Joannes Constant.] nolite attendere etc.
Nullus enim Patriarcharum hoc tam profano vocabulo unquam utatur; quia si
summus Patriarcha [tho it were the Patriarch of Rome] Vniversalis dicitur,
Patriarcharum nomen caeteris derogatur. Sed absit hoc, absit, etc. --
Jactantiam tantam sumpsit [ i. e. Jonannes Constant.] ita ut universa sibi
tentet ascribere, and omnia quae soli uni capiti cohaerent, (videlicet
Christo,) per electionem Pompatici sermonis [ i.e. Universalis] ejusdem Christi
sibi studeat membra subjugare. -- Si enim dici hoc licenter permittitur, honor
Patriarcharum omnium negatur; and fortasse is in errore perit, qui Vniversalis
dicitur, and nullus jam Episcopus in statu veritatis invenitur. I say, as he
has these passages, for which he is quoted by the Reformed, as making much
against the power, which the Bishops of the Roman See claim; so has he other
(as it were an Antidote) in the very same Epistle, wherein he establishes
clearly that authority of the Roman Bishop, which they oppose. Whence it
follows; either that these places are urged by the Reformed in a mistaken
fence, or that he palpably contradicts, himself, and that with the same breath,
as it were. Thus therefore says he in the same Epistle: -- Relatum est ergo ad
Apostolicam Sedem Johannem -- vos ex hac sua praesumptione ad Synodum convocare
Generalem; cum Generalium Synodorum convocandi authoritas Apostolicae Sedi B.
Petri singulari privilegio sit tradita, and nulla unquam Synodus rata legatur,
quae Apostolica authoritate non fuit fulta. Quapropter quicquid in praedicto
vestro Conventiculo -- statuistis, ex authoritate. S. Petri Apostolorum
Principis and Domini Salavatoris voce, qua B. Petro potestatem ligandi atque
solvendi ipse Salvator dedit, quae etiam potestas in Successoribus ejus
indubitanter transivit, Praecipio, omnia quae ibi statuisti, and vana, and
cassata esse. -- Multis denuo Apostolicis, and Canonicis, atque Ecclesiasticis
instruimur regulis, non debere absque sententia Romani Pontificis Concilia
celebrari. -- Orate Fratres, ut honor Ecclesiasticus nostris diebus non
evacuetur; nec unquam Romana Seeds, quod (instituente Domino) Caput est omnium
Ecclesiarum, Privilegiis suis usquam careat, aut exspolietur. -- Haec (Fratres)
valde cavenda sunt, and praecepta Domini, atque sanctae Sedis Apostolicae, quae
vice Domini Salvatoris legatione fungitur, monita fideliter amplectenda and
peragenda. Lastly, being consulted by them concerning the subordinate judgments
of the Church, he writes thus: -- Non oportet ut degradetur, vel dehonoretur
unaquaeque Provincia, sed apud semetipsam habeat judices [i. e. for its judges]
Sacerdotes and Episcopos singulos, viz. juxta ordines suos; and quicunque
causam habuerit a suis judicibus judicetur, and non ab alienis; id est, a suae
justis judicibus Provinciae, and non ab exteris; nisi (ut jam praelibatum est)
a judicandis fuerit appellatum. Si vero -- inter ipsius Provinciae Episcopos
discrepare coeperit ratio etc, ad majorem tunc Sedem referantur. [As to the
Constantinopolitan or Antioch.] Et si illae facile and just non discernuntur,
[i.e. which is the major Seeds in respect of that Province,] ubi fuerit Synodus
regulariter congregata, Canonice and just judicentur. Majores vero and
difficiles quaestiones (ut sancta Synodus statuit, and beata consuetudo exigit)
ad Sedem Apostolicam semper referantur. Whereby you see, that the first See of
Rome interessed her self not in all, but the highest and difficultest matters
of controversy, where former judgments were ununanimous, or were appealed
from. Likewise, by the former passages it is plain, that Pelagius challenges
that Supremacy to the Roman See, which is denied by Protestants; and allows
the term of Summus Patriarcha, as Summus implies some power and jurisdiction
over all the rest, whereby they become subordinate; but not of Vniversalis
Patriarcha, as Vniversalis implies, that there can be none besides, (for that
only is universale, extra quod nihil) and is a term whereby all the rest are
degraded. And in this fence also afterward Gregory, Pelagius his Successor,
arguing against the same John Constant. took the same word, when he says, Ep.
34. Constant. Augustae. -- Despectis omnibus praedictus Frater and Coepiscopus
meus, solus conatur appellari Episcopus. (See the same again Ep. 38. Johanni
Episcopo Constant.) And Ep. 32. -- Vniversa Ecclesia cum statu suo corruit,
quando is, qui appellatur Vniversalis, cadit. -- But neither Gregory nor
Pelagius denied it (at least as applied to the Roman Bishop) in that sense, in
which the Reformed urge it; i.e. as it implies a Supreme power in some one
Bishop over all the rest; and as it intimates, not, praeter quem nemo sit, but,
qui, remanentibus partibus integris, ipse caeteris superemineat, (as Baronius
has it). Since in the same place, where they deny the one, as it were with the
same breath they maintain the other; and since in that sense this Title was
sometimes given to the Roman Bishops, tho Pelagius and Gregory do not like the
name, because so easily interpretable in a sense not justifiable; or rather
jealous that the Constantinopolitan Bishop, as presiding in the Imperial City,
in using that word, unjustly sought to undermine them in their Primacy, (at
least for the Eastern parts of the Church); they extend the sense of the word
to its whole latitude, and further than, in all probability, he meant it, to
make it be the sooner laid aside. But not long after, within two or three years
of Gregory's death, by the Emperor Phocas (offended with Cyriacus the then
Patriarch of Constantinople) as this title was taken from the
Constantinopolitan, so was it inoffensively applied to the Roman, See: (Yet
without the attribution or access of any authority to that See, which cannot be
showed to have bin formerly practiced by it,) as also this title had bin
aforetime in the Council of Chalcedon given that Bishop, without any
contradiction of those Fathers. See Council. Chalced. Act. 3. Thus much
concerning the Title of Oecumenicus, or Vniversalis.

Roman Bishop, see the Epistles of Gregory the Great: who, tho with Pelagius
his Predecessors he much disrellished the name of Universal Bishop or Pastor,
yet it appears out of these, that he both claimed and exercised such an
universal superiority and jurisdiction over other both Bishops and Patriarchs,
as the Reformed will by no means approve and (as we may gather by his words, 4.
l. 37. Ep.) thought a vindication of his just authority well consistent with
true humility. There he says; -- Dum Praedicator egregius dicat, Ministerium
meum honorificabo, ( Romans 11.13.) qui rursus alias dicens, -- facti sumus
parvuli in medio vestrum, (1 These. 2.7.) exemplum proculdubio nobis se
sequentibus ostendit; ut and humilitatem teneamus in mente, and tamen ordinis
nostri dignitatem servemus in honor: quatenus nec in nobis humilitas timida,
nec erectio sit superba. This premised, see what follows in the same Epistle:
-- Johannes Constantinopolitanus in Constantinopolitana urbe -- Synodum secit,
in qua se Vniversalem appellare conatus est; quod mox idem Decessor meus [ i.e.
Pelagius] ut agnovit, directis literis, ex authoritate Sancti Petri Apostoli,
ejusdem Synodi acta cassavit. -- Cujus ego quoque sententiam sequens, similia
praedicto consacerdoti nostro scripta transmisi. And 2. l. 10. Indict. 37. Ep.
Episcopo Salonitano, [an African Bishop:] -- Quod autem vos fatemini
Ecclesiasticos ordines ignoran non posse -- valde contristor, quia cum rerum
ordinem scitis, in me (quod pejus est) sciendo deliquistis. Postquam enim ad
Beatitudinem vestram, and Decessoris mei and mea, in causa Honorati
Archidiaconi, scripta directa sunt, tunc contempta utriusque sententia,
praefatus Honoratus proprio gradu privatus est. [Whose cause, tho only an
Archdeacon, upon appeal Gregory having heard, cleared him, and ordered him to
be restored to his place.] Quod si quilibet ex quatuor Patriarchis fecisset,
sine gravissimo scandalo, tanta contumacia transire nullo modo potuisset. Tamen
postquam fraternitas vestra ad suum ordinem rediit, nec ego meae, nec
decessoris met injuriae memor sum [By which it seems Gregory's orders at last
were obeyed.] And 2. l. Indict. 11. Ep. 32. to the same Archdeacon Honoratus,
he writes thus. -- A cunctis tibi objectis capitulis te before absolventes, in
tui te ordinis gradu sine aliqua volumus alteratione permanere, ut nihil tibi
penitus mota a praefato viro [ i.e. Episcopo Salonitano] quaestio qualibet
occasion praejudicet. -- 11. l. Ep. 42. Episcopo Panormitano, [in Sicily.] --
Illud autem admonemus, ut Apostolicae Sedis reverentia nullius praesumptione
turbetur; tunc enim status membrorum integer manet, si caput fidei [this must
needs be Apostolicam sedem] nulla pulset injuria, and canonum manet incolumis
authoritas. -- l. 7. epist. 64. Episcopo Syracusano -- Nam quod se dicit [ i.e.
Primas Byzancenus, an African Primate, of whom Gregory says a little before,
that in quodam crimine accusatum, piissimus Imperator eum, juxta statuta
canonica, per nos voluit judicari] Sedi Apostolicae subjici; si qua culpa in
Episcopis invenitur, nescio quis ei Episcopus subjectus non sit; cum vero culpa
non exigit, omnes secundum rationem humilitatis aequales sunt.

[ Nescio quis ei Episcopus subjectus non sit: i. e. says Dr. Field [ l. 5. c.
34. p. 534.) of those Bishops only within his own Patriarchship, Greg. Epist.
54, 11; where Gregory quotes, and seems to acquiesce in, the the Emperor
Justinian's Constitution, Novel. 123. c. 22. Si autem and a Clerico aut Laico
quocunque aditio contra Episcopum fiat, propter quamlibet causam, apud
sanctissimum ejus Metropolitanum secundum sanctas regulas and nostras leges
causa judicetur. Et si quis judicatis contradixerit ad beatissimum
Archiepiscopum and Patriarcham referatur causa, and Ille secundum canones and
leges huic praebeat finem, [I may add out of the Nov. it self], nulla part
ejus sententiae contradicere valente. Whence, thus much is yielded to Dr.
Field; That the Bishops of his own Patriarchy have some subjection to the
Bishop of Rome, and his Courts, as he bears the Office of a Patriarch over
them, which others of another Patriarchate have not. And therefore we see his
Letters, most frequently directed to the Bishops, and negotiating the affairs
Ecclesiastical, within this Circuit; which Bishops (as the Doctor rightly
notes) he calls Episcopos suos l. 4. c. 34. To the Empress [sed ut Episcopi mei
me despiciant, etc. id peccatis meis deputo.] But yet this I suppose is yielded
by the Doctor (see before 20.) that both the Bishops of other Patriarchies, and
the Patriarchs themselves, in some cases also (but not in all wherein the rest)
were subjected to the judgment and sentence of the first See. And in such sense
might he say; Nescio quis Episcopus etc. As for the place of Gregory and the
Imperial Constitution urged:

First, concerning Gregory observe, that he writ this to the Emperor's Prefect,
in the behalf of one Stephanus a Bishop, qui invitus ad judicium trahebatur;
and qui ab Episcopis alieni Concilii [ i. e. who were not his proper Superiors,
but of a distinct Province from him] quos hab bat suspectos, judicabatur. In
his behalf therefore Gregory quotes this Imperial Constitution; where
Patriarcha prabeat finem is opposed by Gregory (as likewise by Justinian) to
Episcopi alieni Concilii, or also to any Civil Judges meddling therein: who
(according to Novell. 123. c. 21.) might not hear Ecclesiastical Causes at all.
[the words are these, Si autem Ecclesiastica causa est, nullam communionem
habeant judices civiles circa talem examinationem, sed sanctissim^s Episcopus
secundum sacras regulas causae finem imponat. To which effect see the
Constitution quoted in the beginning of Gregory's Epistle [ Si quis contra
aliquem Clericum, etc.] After which Constitution urged, Gregory goes on thus;
Contra haec si dictum fuerit, quia nec Metropol tanum habuit, nec Patriarcham
[take Patriarch here in what sense you please] dicendum est, quia a S^de
Apostolica, quae omnium Ecclesiarum caput est, [this is his reason for it]
causa haec audienda ac dirimenda fuerat, sicut and praedictus Episcopus
petiisse dignoscitur, qui Episcopos alieni Concilii judices habuit omnino
suspectos.

Secondly, For the Imperial Constitutions of Justinian, they, so far as they
concern Ecclesiastical matters, are only Ratifications of the Church's Canons,
and no way opposite to them; who every where commands proceedings and judgments
to be made secundum sacras regulas, and in the beginning of his Codex, to show
his submission in these things to the Church ( tit. 1. l. 8.) writes thus to
the Pope in particular; Nec enim patiemur quicquid, quod ad Ecclesiarum statum
pertinet, quamvis manifestum and indubitatum sit quod movetur, ut non etiam
vestrae innotescat sanctitati, quae caput est omnium sanctarum Ecclesiarum. To
whom also when the Emperor sent his Creed, Agapetus the Pope answered Firmamus,
etc. non quia La^cis authoritatem praedicationis admittimus, sed quia studium
fidei vestrae patrum nostrorum regulis conveniens confirmamus atque roboramus.
( Agapet. Ep. 6.) Now if you examine those Constitutions ( Novell. 123. c. 22.)
they are only these: That two Bishops, ejusdem Concilii, under the same
Metropolitan, being at variance, are referred to the judgment of their
Metropolitan and the Council Provincial. If this refused; then to that of the
Patriarcha Dioeceseos illius, nulla part ejus sententiae contradicere valente.
The same course is appointed, if a Clergyman have any thing against his
Bishop; or Bishop, or inferior Clergyman, against his Metropolitan: But in the
differences between a Bishop and his Patriarch, or also between two Patriarchs,
he orders nothing. Now what thing is there, in all this, prejudicial to the
formerly-asserted authority of the Roman Bishop? For (1.) by these within the
compass of his own Patriarchate he is the supreme and final Judge, upon all
Appeals, as well of other Clergy, as of Bishops; and (2.) so is he also of all
other Bishops and Metropolitans, whosoever are not subjected to any other
Patriarch; and (3.) also in other Patriarchates, where greater contests happen
between them and their Bishops, or with one another; here also he interests his
power (see before 20. and 26.) for any thing in these Imperial decrees
expressed to the contrary. Nay further, (4.) he, as Caput omnium sanctarum
Ecclesiarum (to use Justinian's style) where he judges other Patriarchs to
neglect their duty, or sees them overborn in heresy, or other matters of great
concernment, for the peace and safety of the Church; he, I say, as appears by
many instances above, has exercised authority also over the inferior Clergy of
other Patriarchats. as he did in the degradation of Eutyches a
Constantinopolitan Prerbyter, (see before 25. n. 2.) an act approved by the
same Council of Chalcedon, that in their 9th. Canon referred the final decision
of the ordinary controversies of any Province to their own Bishops, or
Patriarch.

Gregory's writings.] 5. l. 24. Ep. where the Bishop of Ravenna telling S.
Gregory, that some said he had no Canonical authority to judge the difference
between the said Bishop of Ravenna, and a certain Abbot who had appealed to
Gregory: he says, -- Nunquid non ipse nosti, quia in causa, quae a Johanne
Presbytero contra Johannem Constantinopolitanum fratrem and coepiscopum nostrum
orta est, secundum Canones ad Sedem Apostolicam recurrit, and nostra est
sententia definita. Si ergo de illa Civitate, ubi Princeps est, [i. e.
Constantinople, where the Emperor then resided] ad nostram causa cognitionem
deducta est, quanto magis negotium quod contra nos est [done within our own
Patriarchat against our authority,] hic est, veritate cognita, terminandum. --

See Ep. 63. to the same Sicilian Bishop: where answering to some objecting,
Quomodo Ecclesiam Constantinopolitanam disposuit comprimere [i.e. Gregory,] qui
ejus consuetudines [i.e. in ordinatione Missae] per omnia sequitur? he, denying
that the Church of Rome followed the customs of the Greeks, replies thus: --
Vnde habent [i.e. Graeci] ergo hodie, ut Subdiaconi lineis in tunicis
procedant, nisi quia hoc a Matre sua Romana Ecclesia perceperunt? And, -- Nam
de Constantinopolitana Ecclesia, quod dicunt; Quis eam dubitet Sedi Apostolicae
esse subie^^am, quod and Lominus piissimus Imperator; and frater noster
Eusebius [I conceive it should be Cyriacus, who, at the first especially, was
very compliant with Rome, see Greg. Ep. 6. l. 31. Ep. and 28. Ep.) for there
was no Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople in Gregory's time,] ejusdem Civitatis
Episcopus, assidue profitentur. And see (10. l. 31. Epistle) the form of
submission (taken by Gregory's Substitutes) of those who returned to the unity
of the Church, from the Schism which maintained the tria Capitula of the
Council of Chalcedon, which were condemned in the 5th General Council. which
submission was, -- Promitto tibi, and per te Sancto Petro Apostolorum Principi,
atque ejus Vicario, Beatissimo Gregorio, -- semper me in unitate Sanctae
Ecclesiae Catholicae, and communione Romani Pontificis per omnia permansurum.
--

A Digression concerning the Patriarchship of Raverna and Justiniana 1a urged
by Dr. Hammond.
And because Dr. Hammond ( schism 6. c. p. 115. and 5. c. 8..) quotes, and much
stands upon, the Patriarchship of Ravenna erected to this dignity (as he says)
by the Emperor Valentinian, and of Justiniana 1a, and of Carthage erected by
the Emperor Justinian; the one being his native soil, the other recovered by
him from the Vandals; erected, as utterly independent on the Roman Patriarch,
(tho Dr. Field grants all these places to have bin contained under his
Patriarchy, 38. c. p. 560.) and this without any contradiction from the said
Patriarch; upon which instances chiefly he there builds this position, [That it
is, and has always bin in the power of Christian Emperors and Princes, within
their Dominions to erect, or translate Patriarchates]: I will also set you down
some passages in these Epistles of Gregory, (one who lived after, and not long
after, these Emperors,) which show these Primats to have had still dependence
(as others) on the Roman See; and, either not to have had conferred on them at
all, or at least not to have enjoyed, with that Church's consent, those
privileges he pretends, 1. For the Bishop of Ravenna, Gregory's Epistle (2. l.
54. Ep.) to John 3d. Bishop of Ravenna, (the same that, as Dr. Hammond says (
Answ. to S. disarmed, p. 156.) stood much upon his special rights in opposition
to the Roman See,) where, Gregory reprehending him for an unseasonable using of
the Pall, has these words: -- Quod been hanc consuetudinem generalis Ecclesiae
[contrary to what he used] noveritis, vestris nobis manifestissime
significastis Epistolis; quibus Praeceptum beatae memoriae Decessoris nostri
Johannis Papae nobis subditis, transmisistis annexum, continens omnes
consuetudines ex privilegio Praedecessorum nostrorum concessas vobis
Ecclesiaeque vestrae, debere servari. [The Privileges of Ravenna therefore,
whatever they were, are, in this contest, pretended by the Bishop thereof, to
be received (not from the Emperor, or not from him singly, but) from the Sea
Apostolic, contrary to what Dr. Hammond affirms, p. 156. and this only is
pleaded by John Bishop of Ravenna; That the privileges granted to his See by
former Roman Bishops could not be annulled by Gregory the present. But such
privileges were denied by Gregory to have bin formerly conceded to Him by his
Predecessors; hence he proceeds thus afterward, in the same Epistle. -- Aut mos
omnium Metropolitanorum est a sua fraternitate servandus; aut si tuae Ecclesiae
aliquid specialiter dicis esse concessum praeceptumve a prioribus Romanae Vrbis
Pontificibus; quod haec Ravennati Ecclesiae sint concessa, a vobis oportet
ostendi. -- And to the same Bishop about another thing amiss, (4. l. 1. Ep.) he
writes in this style: -- Proinde Fraternitas tua hoc, quolibet in loco factum
sit, emendare festinet; quia ego nullo modo patiar, ut loca sacra per
Clericorum ambitum destruantur. Vos itaque ita agite, ut mihi hac de re
correctam causam sub celeritate nuntietis. -- See 5. l. 8. Ep. his sending the
Pall to Maximinianus Bishop of Ravenna, and confirming his privileges. In which
Epistle, urged by S. W. Dr. Hammond ( Answ. to Schism disarmed, p. 151.) will
have these words [omnia Privilegia quae tuae pridem concessa esse constat
Ecclesiae, nostra authoritate firmamus, and illibata decernimus permanere] well
to consist with the independency of that Church, for such privileges, on the Sea of Rome; and with the Emperor's conferring these privileges to all
succession, without any joint authority of the Pope; and, bringing in
[provocatus antiquae consuetudinis ordine] without mentioning the words
immediately before, [Apostolicae Sedis benevolentia atque antiquae
consuetudinis ordine provocatus,] he makes these words refer not to the Popes,
but to the Emperor's former grant. But meanwhile judge you, if the Emperor
might of his own accord erect Patriarchies, or confer such privileges without
the Bishop of Rome's authority; whether [ authoritate nostra firmamus, and
illibata decernimus etc, and Apostolicae Sedis benevolentia] be not, not only
needless, but also ridiculous. But if the Patriarch of the West's [authoritate
nostra firmamus] was necessary to what the Emperor did, then are all such
instances rendered useless to the Doctor, who can show no such [firmamus] to the
late erected Patriarchats. And, were not such testimonies extant, yet the
rescript of the same Emperor Valentinian (quoted before p 86.) seems a
sufficient proof, that no such privileges, as were prejudicial to the Roman
See, were granted by him. 2. Justiniana 1a; that he continued to receive the
Pall, as other Primats, from the Bishop of Rome; and that he had locum
Apostolicae Sedis, not the place of a, but of the, Apostolic See; namely, as
the Pope's standing delegate for those parts subordinate to him; (the phrase
being frequently used in this, but I think never in the other, sense): lastly,
that the Bishop of Rome deputed the judgment of causes to him, and, for some
misbehaviour in his place, passed Ecclesiastical censures upon him; I say for
these things see 4. l. Indict. 13. Ep. 15. Johanni Episcopo 1 ae Justinianae
newly elected: -- Pallium vero ex more transmisimus, and vices vos Apostolicae
Sedis agere, iterata innovatione, decernimus. Iterata innovatione; which argues
the first concession, that he should have locum Apostolicae Sedis, was from the
Roman Bishop; which Baronius ( Anno 535.) says, Justinian, with much
importunity, obtained of Vigilius: after Agapetus his Predecessor had made a
demur to grant it, as being a thing too prejudicial to his
Neighbour-Metropolitans. And see 10. l. 5. Indict. 34. Ep. where he refers the
cause of Paulus Bishop of Dyaclina to the examination of the Bishop of
Justiniana 1a. And see 2. l. Indict. 11. Ep. 6. to the same Bishop, where
reprehending him for a singular act of injustice, he says, -- Quod vero ad
praesens attinet, cassatis prius atque ad nihilum redactis praedictae
sententiae tuae decretis; ex Beati Apostolorum Principis authoritate
decernimus, triginta dierum spatio sacra te communione privatum, ab omnipotenti
Deo nostro tanti excessus veniam cum summa poenitentia ac lachrymis exorare. --
Quod si etc --; contumaciam fraternitatis tuae cognoscas adjuvante Deo severius
puniendam. -- After these see Justinianan's Constitution it self, ( Novell.
131. cap. 3.) which runs thus. -- Per tempus autem Beatissimum 1 ae Justinianae
Archiepiscopum habere semper sub sua jurisdictione Episcopos Provinciarum
Daciae etc. -- and in subjectis sibi Provinciis locum obtinere Sedis
Apostolicae Romae, secundum ea quae definita sunt a sanctissimo Papa Vigilio.
-- Which last words, how reasonably Dr. Hammond ( Reply to Cath. Gentl. p. 96.)
interprets, that Vigilius defined, that the Bishop of Justin. 1a should be, for
ever after, an absolute and free Patriarch, independent on the Bishop of Rome,
or why the Emperor should require such a definition from Vigilius, who (as the
Doctor holds) had no right to hinder it, I leave to your judgment, after that
you have well considered what is here alleged. And see likewise this confessed
by Dr Field, 5. l. 38. c. p. 561. The same may be said of the Bishop of
Justiniana the first; who was appointed the Bishop of Rome's Vicegerent in
those parts, upon signification of the Emperor's will and desire that it
should be so. Thus he. And hence was this power conferred upon him finally to
determine causes, namely as the Pope's Delegate for that purpose; and this
exclusively, not to Rome, but to other Metropolitans within those Provinces
newly subjected to him; from whom to him, not so from him to them, Carthage, he
is pretended only to be admitted to the like privileges with Justiniana 1a.

Thus have I set you down (to save you the pains, 31. n. 1.
or to prevent the usual neglect, of searching them in the Authors) some of the
most notable passages for the first 600 years, (wherein you may find Calvin's
confession ( Instit. 4. l. 7. c.) true, nullum fuisse tempus, quo non Romana
Seeds imperium in alias Ecclesias appetiv. rit, but, I add more, obtinuerit,
too,) showing (as I think) several ways, not only the honor and dignity,
before, but the authority and power of the Roman See, over, other Churches, not
only those under its Patriarchy, but the Eastern also: the Eastern, not only
single, but joined in Councils; power, not only which Roman Bishops claimed,
but which Councils allowed, testified, confirmed, and established; and the
greatest Bishops in the world repaired to for justice; the most of those Roman
Bishops, whose authorities I have cited, being eminent for sanctity, and having
the same title and reputation of Saints, as the other ancient Fathers: and the
two last of them being quoted by Protestants, as inveighers against an
Universal Bishop as a forerunner of Antichrist, (that you may fee how much
authority even the most moderate have assumed). and all these transactions
being before the times of the Emperor Phocas; who by some Reformed (see Dr.
Hammond, reply to Cathol. Gentl. 3. c. 4. s. 14. n.) is said to have laid the
first foundations of the modern Roman Greatness, in declaring him Episcopum
Oecumenicum and Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, (tho indeed Phocas his act was only
(in a quarrel of his against Cyriacus Bishop of Constantinople) adjudging the
style of Oecumenicus, before much disputed between those two Bishops, as you
have seen, not fit to be used by the Bishop of Constantinople, and due only to
the Bishop of Rome). and that Paulus Diaconus ( de gestis Romanorum, 18. l.
quoted by Dr. Hammond) meant no more; see what the same Paulus says ( de
gestis Longobardorum 4 l. 37. c.): and being of those ages, wherein Dr. Field,
through his 5th book, denies to have bin any Roman Supremacy of power. If it be
said that the Roman Bishops, out of whose writings many of these authorities
are produced, then claimed what others denied; I think some other quotations
(intermingled) out of those who were no Roman Bishops will show this to be
untrue.

Besides,. 31. n. 2. In the chief causes of all other divisions from the Roman
Church (excepting that of the late Reformation) the Roman Church (in the
judgment of the Reformed) the more Orthodox.
my chief intention here was not to declare, quo jure such jurisdiction was
either claimed, or yielded to; but that de facto that power was so long ago
assumed, which being now challenged, is by our men denied; and (I may add)
assumed with good success to the Church of God during those first Ages. The
Bishops of Rome having patronized no Heresies at all, as all the other
Patriarchs, at some time or other, did. Such were in the Sea of Constantinople,
Macedonius, Nestorius, Sergius, Arch-hereticks: in Alexandria, Dioscorus, the
grand Patron of the Eutychians: in Antioch, Paulus Samosatenus, the Father of
the Paulianists, etc. All which Heresies, and several other, which took root in
the East, were suppressed, and the Unity and Uniformity of the Church's
Doctrine and Discipline preserved, by the overruling power, the threats, the
censures, of this See; as any, not over-partial, Reader of the Ecclesiastical
History, will easily discern. And perhaps I may venture a little further; That
to this day, in the chief point and occasion of breach, for which any other
Church besides the Reformed, stands divided from the Roman Communion, the
Reformed do justify the Roman tenent against those Churches. The chief matter
of the division of the Greek Church from the Roman was besides that of the
Bishop of Constantinople's using the style of Occumenicus, and the procession
of the Holy Ghost; as appears by the disputation in the Council of Florence
(where both Churches (the Eastern now falling into some distress) heartily
sought for an accord) almost wholly spent about this point. Now in this article
the Reformed do side with the Roman Church; and, so far also as we allow of any
superiority, we adjudge the prime place not to the Constantinopolitan, but the
Roman Patriarch. The chief Doctrine, for which the other Orientals (as the
Assyrian Churches, the Jacobites, Armenians, Cophti, Aethiopians, Maronites,
etc. of which see Field l. 3. c. 1, etc.) stand separate from Rome, whilst
their public Service and Liturgies much-what accord with the Greek, or Roman,
is either Nestorianism, or Eutychianism, or Monothelitism, imputed unto them;
in which also the Reformed adhere, against them, to the Roman judgment. The
like may be said in the ancienter controversies of the Roman Church with the
Asian Churches, about Easter; and with the African, and some of the Asian,
about Rebaptization. Thus in the main causes of differences with the Eastern
Churches, the Reformed will grant, Rome to have continued orthodox, and that
had the other been bound effectually to have received their laws in these
controversies from her, they had been better guided; or at least, that, for
those 600 years, she happily moderated the great Questions of the Church by her
supereminent authority. But if it be said again; That the Bishops of Rome now
claim much more power, than the instances above show them anciently to have
used; I desire to know first, before this be examined, whether we will grant
them so much; for whilst we complain, that they now adays claim more than is
due to them, is it not so, that we deny them not the more, but all? And have
they done well, who have used the Bishops so, who have used Kings so, upon
pretense of their exercising an illegal power?

By the instances above, judgment may be made of the sense of many other
(controverted) Sayings of the Fathers.
which are quoted before 6. To which I will here add that which follows, in
Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 3. who speaks there, how Heretics may be easily confounded
by the unity of the Tradition of Apostolical Doctrine. -- Ad hanc enim
Ecclesiam [ i. e. a duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo Romae fundatam] propter
potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est,
eos qui sunt undique fideles; in qua semper ab his, qui sunt undique fideles,
conservata est ea, quae ab Apostolis est traditio. In qua, i. e. in unione and
adhaesione ad quam, Apostolical Tradition is more certainly preserved in all
other Churches. Let therefore [potentiorem principalitatem] (if so you can make
any sense) be referred (as it is by the Reformed) to the Roman Empire, not
Church; yet the certain conservation of Tradition Apostolical, which is the
Father's reason of other Churches repairing and conforming to this, that cannot
be applied but only to the Church, not as seated in the Imperial City, but as
founded by the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul. Of which Church
Tertullian (de praescript. Haereticorum) also says, -- Ista quam faelix
Ecclesia cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum sanguine suo profuderunt. And, after
him, thus Cyprian in his Ep. 45. to Cornelius Bishop of Rome (not to urge any
of those passages in his Book de Unit. Eccl. Cath. which perhaps seem capable
of the exposition which the Reformed give them) -- Nos singulis navigantibus [
i.e. from Afric into Italy] rationem reddentes, scimus nos hortatos eos esse,
ut Ecclesiae Catholicae radicem and matricem [ i.e. Ecclesiam Romanam]
agnoscerent and tenerent. -- And afterward, -- Ne in urbe [in Rome] schisma
factum, animos absentium [ i.e. of those in Africk] incerta opinione
confunderet [which party they should adhere to] placuit, ut per Episcopos istic
positos [African Bishops residing at Rome] literae fierent] to the African
Provinces] ut te, universi collegae nostri, and communicationem tuam, id est,
Catholicae Ecclesiae unitatem pariter, ac charitatem, probarent firmiter ac
tenerent. And Epist. 52. Antoniano Fratri [a Bishop not communicating with
Novatianus] -- Scripsisti etiam ut exemplum earundum literarum ad Cornelium
[the Bishop of Rome] Collegam nostrum transmitterem, ut depositum omni
solicitudine jam sciret te secum, hoc est, cum Catholica Ecclesia, communicare.
(The like expressions to which we find in Ambrose, Orat. in Satyr. where he
says of his Brother Satyrus, about to receive the Communion, that percunctatus
est Episcopum, si cum Episcopis Catholicis, hoc est, si cum Romana Ecclesia,
conveniret) -- And thus Cyprian again, in his Epist. 55. ad Cornelium de
Fortunato and Faelicissimo haereticis [who condemned in Africa, appealed to
Rome.] Post ista adhuc insuper navigare audent; and ad Petri Cathedram atque ad
Ecclesiam principalem, unde unitas sacerdotalis exorta est, a schismaticis
[Fortunato etc.] literas far; nec cogitare eos [ i. e. tales] esse Romanos
(quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est) ad quos persidia habere non
possit accessum. Add to these, in the 46th Epistle, the confession of those who
returned to Cornelius from the Schism of Novatianus, made in this form; -- Nos
Cornelium Episcopum sanctissimae Catholicae Ecclesiae, electum -- a Christo
Domino nostro scimus, etc. concluding, Nec enim ignoramus unum Deum esse, unum
Christum, unum Spiritum Sanctum, unum Episcopum in Catholica Ecclesia esse
debere. Vnum, i. e. I suppose unum supereminent in power to the rest, the
better to preserve the Church's Unity.

Rome, which upbraid him for challenging such power, seem to me good arguments,
that such power and authority, over other Churches and Bishops, was then so
early assumed by him. So Tertullian ( de Pudicitia c. 21.) living in the
beginning of the third Age, when now a Montanist, and rigidly opposing the
Absolution, and restitution to the Church, of lapsed Christians, tho penitents
(which thing was practiced by the Bishop of Rome), mentions there in Irony his
Titles of Pontifex Maximus, and Episcopus Episcoporum; and thus expostulates
with him, -- Vnde hoc jus Ecclesiae [ i. e. of absolving such sinners] usurpas?
Si quia dixerit Petro Dominus; super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam:
Tibi dedi claves regni Coelorum; vel quaecunque alligaveris etc. Qualis es!
evertens atque commutans manifestam Domini intentionem personaliter hoc Petro
conferentem etc. [But note, that Tertullian here in the Protestants judgment
errs, absolution of sinners penitent being not personal to Peter, or the
Apostles, but common, not only to the Roman Bishop, but all the successive
Clergy, for ever.] -- So Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea Cappadociae in his
Epistle to St. Cyprian (the 75th amongst Cyprian's) when very passionate in the
matter of Rebaptizing those formerly Baptized only by Heretics, and (as it
seems by Eus. Ec. H. l. 7. c. 4.) either punished or threatened with
Excommunication by Stephen Bishop of Rome for it, and also being his opposite
in the controversy about Easter, thus inveighs against him; -- Ego in hac
part just indignor -- quod qui sic de Episcopatus sui loco gloriatur and se
successionem Petri tenere contendit, super quem fundamenta Ecclesiae collocata
sunt, multas alias Petras inducat, and Ecclesiarum multarum nova aedificia
constituat, dum esse illic [ i.e. Heretical Churches] baptisma sua authoritate
defendit -- Stephanus, qui per successionem Cathedram Petri habere se
praedicat, nullo adversus haereticos zelo exeitatur etc. [ i.e. in disallowing
and nulling their Baptism] -- Eos autem qui Romae sunt non ea in omnibus
observare, quae sint ab origin tradita; and frustra Apostolorum authoritatem
praetendere, scire quis etiam inde potest etc. -- where he blames their keeping
of Easter differently from others in the Asian Churches. -- Qui gloriatur, qui
praedicat, qui praetendit: therefore such titles, and such gloriation there
was; and such authority challenged by the Roman Bishops (which he calls in that
Epistle [ruptio pacis]) long before the Nicen Council; and the judgments, and
the pretended Apostolical traditions of these Bishops, tho by these mistaken
men censured and opposed, yet by the orthodox followed and embraced.

Cyprian against the acknowledgment of any such power or superiority of one
Bishop over another; and consequently of the Bishop of Rome; the one out of the
Council of Carthage (in his works,) wherein, being President, he says, --
Neminem judicantes, aut a jure communionis aliquem, si diversum senserit,
amoventes. Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum
constituit, aut tyrannico terrrore ad obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos
adigit; quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia libertatis and potestatis
suae arbitrium proprium; tamque judicari ab alio non possit, quam nec ipse
potest judicare. Sed expectemus universi judicium Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
qui unus and solus habet Potestatem -- de actu nostro judicandi. -- And the
other, in the close of his and the Councils Epistle to Stephen, (Epistle 72.)
where he says: -- Haec ad conscientiam tuam Frater Charissime [i.e. Stephane]
-- pertulimus; credentes etiam tibi, pro religionis tuae and fidei veritate,
placere, quae and religiosa pariter and vera sunt. Caeterum scimus quosdam,
quod semel imbiberint, nolle disponere, nec proposstum s^um facile mutare; sed
salvo inter collegas pacis and concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria retinere.
Qua in re nec nos vim cuiquam facimus, aut legem damus; cum habeat in Ecclesiae
administratione voluntatis suae arbitrium iberum unusquisque Praepositus [or
Bishop,] rationem actus sui Domino redditurus. -- In the first of these places,
the Father speaks of all Bishops having their free votes in the Council; none
lording it over the rest, nor they to give account of such vote, save to God
alone. This seems clear from the words immediately preceding: -- Superest ut de
hac ipsa re singuli quid sentiamus proferamus, neminem judicantes etc. [which
words they are pleased not to mention with the rest.] In the second, he only
says of himself and the Council, That they did not vim facere, nor legem dare
cuiquam Collegarum. By which colleagues, he means not Stephen the Bishop of
Rome, or any foreign, but only some African, Bishops: who, having no such
former custom of rebaptizing any, dissented from that Council's judgment; as
may be collected both from the words preceding here -- credimus tibi placere,
and from the former Epistle 71. to Quintus, where he says, Nescio qua
praesumptione ducuntur quidam de collegis nostris, ut putent eos qui apud
haereticos tincti sunt, quando ad nos venerint baptizari non oportere, [this
being spoken of his collegues] Et qui hoc illis patrocinium de authoritate sua
praestat, cedit illis and consentit etc. [this being spoken of Stephen, who
countenanced his African colleagues.] But be these colleagues whom they please;
of them I ask, Were they subordinate and subject to this Council, or not? If
they were; then [legem non damus] must not be made equivalent to [non licet
dare.] And, in doubtful matters (as this must needs be on Cyprian's side, going
against the former general practice of the Church except that of his
Predecessors) it is many times great prudence legem non dare, where there is a
legislative power: or if they were not subordinate; then indeed, non licuit
legem illis dare. But this rule [ non licet etc.] cannot be extended to other
Governors, where there is a subordination of others to them. Now, as there are
Bishops and Councils coequal, who therefore may not give the law to one
another, (as the Bishop of one Diocese, or one Provincial Council, cannot
regulate another); so there are Bishops and Councils superior to others: as
above an ordinary Bishop, are Metropolitans, Primats, Patriarchs: above
Councils Provincial, are Patria chal, General. Therefore either S. Cyprian's
words must not be so far extended, as to assert, That no one Bishop nor Council
has any power over another, but all Bishops left to their supreme liberty,
only rationem reddituri Domino of their actions, (contrary to the universal
practice of the Church; such superior Councils ordinarily censuring, and also
anathematizing Bishops); or, in the judgment of the Reformed, who also maintain
such subordinations, S. Cyprian must be in an error. Now, in the vacancy of any
General or Patriarchal Council, the Patriarch, at least for his own
Patriarchat, (as Cyprian was within the Roman Patriarchat,) is the supreme
Judge, and therefore Cyprian not exempt from all subjection or subordination to
Him. See for this Dr. Field's concessions, (before 18.) Supreme judge; for the
executing of the former Ecclesiastical Canons, and preserving of the doctrines
formerly established, and determined by Councils. Supreme Judge thus, over
Provincial, not only Bishops but Councils, for from these may be made appeals
to him; and a confirmation of their decrees is fought for from him. See that of
Milevis and of Carthage in S. Austin's time, (before, 23. n. 4.) neither ought
they to promulgate any doctrine not formerly determined by former Councils
against his approbation and consent. See before, 22. (Therefore Cyprian might
not make a contrary Decree to the Western Patriarch, so as to necessitate those
under his Primacy to the obedience thereof, as neither he did.) But how far on
the other side they stand obliged to conform to the judgment of him, or also of
his Provincial Council, when defining any such new point against theirs, (the
case here between Stephen and Cyprian,) I determine not: Especially considering
the liberty Cyprian took to dissent from Stephen, and considering, what
Bellarmin ( de Council. 2. l. 5. c.) and before him S. Austin, grants, that by
such dissent he ceased not to be a good Catholic; and considering also the
liberty S. Ambrose took, at least, in a ritual, of practicing contrary to the
custom of the Roman Church. See de Sacram. l. 3. c. 1. Non ignoramus quod
Ecclesia Romana hanc consuetudinem [i.e. de lotione Pedum] non habeat, cujus
typum in omnibus sequimur and formam. -- In omnibus cupio sequi Ecclesiam
Romanam, [ in omnibus; that is, which I can reasonably assent to,] sedtamen and
nos homines sensum habemus: Ideo quod alibi rectius servatur, and nos recte
custodiamus, ipsum sequimur Apostolum Petrum etc. But neither is Cyprian's
authority, whatever he did in this matter, nor any decree of an African Council
(as Dr. Hammond Schism 6. c. p. 128. urges a canon of an African Council in
Anastasius his time, A.D. 401. (the 71. in Balsamon, the 35. in Crab and
Binnius,) which imports thus much; That laws made at Rome do not take away the
liberty of another National Church to make contrary laws thereunto;) a
sufficient argument clearly to decide this point; namely, that the African
Churches, being subject, to this Patriarch, might promulgate a Doctrine
contrary to his judgment. For there is no more reason we should justify
Cyprian's, or an African Council's, authority against the Bishop of Rome and
his Council, than this Bishop's and his Council's, against theirs; where if
Cyprian for his person were a Martyr for Christ, so was Stephen too.
Especially, when we find Cyprian so much erring in the matter of this
controversy, whilst he says, ( Epist. 74.) Pompeio -- Qui [Stephanus]
haereticorum causam contra Ecclesiam Dei asserere conatur, -- And when we
consider the modest and safe grounds Stephen went upon [Nihil innovetur nisi
quod traditum est] having the former custom of the Church on his side, to which
St. Cyprian pleads, Consuetudo sine veritate est vetustas erroris; and ( Epist.
71. Quinto Fratri), Non est consuetudine perscribendum, sed ratione vincendum.
Whereas, in this contest, it had bin an happy thing for the Church, and had
saved St. Austin many sheets against the Donatists, had he and his Council
acquiesc'd in the judgment of their Patriarch. Thus much to those places
objected out of Cyprian.

African Council, I find the passages in Binnius (with whom the Dr. says
Balsamon agrees in setting down this Canon, but indeed there is some
difference, and Balsamon's Translation hardly intelligible) otherwise then the
Doctor (in his Reply to Schism Disarmed p. 209.) relates them.) The business
there consulted upon, was about the readmission of the recanting Donatists, not
only to the Unity of the Catholic Church, but also to the former Dignities,
which such had held in the Church: concerning this a Council had been held
already in Italy by Anastasius and his Bishops; wherein it was decreed, that
such Donatists should not be admitted to their former honors and places; and a
Letter was to this purpose sent to the Africans by Anastasius. Concerning which
Letter, first this Council says, Recitatis epistolis beatissimi Fratris and
consacerdoti nostri Anastasii, quibus nos paternae and fraternae charitatis
solicitudine and sinceritate adhortatus est, ut etc -- Gratias agimus Domino
nostro, quod illi optimo ac san^^o Ant^stiti suo tam piam curam pro membris
Christi (q^amvis in div^rsitate terrarum, sed in una compage corporis, constable
tut^s) inspirare dignatus est. Then in Can. 33. they say, onsideratis omnibus
etc. eligim^s cum memoratis hominibus [the Donatists] leniter and pacifice
agere, upon this reason; that so they might reduce, together with them, many
others seduced by them. Lastly, in c. 35. which is the Canon urged, they say;
Itaque placuit ut literae mittantur ad fratres and co^p scopos nostros [ i. e.
those of the Council which Anastasius had held in Italy] and maxim ad sedem
Apostol^cam, in qua praesidet memoratus venerabilis Frater and Collega noster
Anastasius, quo noverit habere Aphricam magnam nec ssitatem, ut ex ipsis
Donatistis, quicunque transire voluerint etc. in suis honoribus suscipiantur,
si hoc paci Christianae prod^sse visum fuerit; i. e. (as they explain
themselves afterward in the same Canon) that such Clerks of the Donatists
should be admitted to their former Dignities, upon whose reconcilement depended
the gaining and reduction of a multitude also of other Souls, who were their
followers. This then they were to write to the Pope and the Bishops of the
Italian Council; that such Donatist-leaders might be readmitted not only into
the Church's bosom, but to their former places. They go on: Non ut Concilium*
quod in transmarinis partibus de hac refactum est [who had decreed the
contrary] dissolvatur; sed ut illud maneat [the Council stand good] cirea eos,
qui sic transire ad Catholicam volunt, ut nulla per eos unitatis compensatio
procuretur ( i. e. who do not procure the uniting of many others) per quos
autem -- adjuvari manifestis fraternarum animarum [of those under the Donatist
Clergy's Spiritual Conduct] lucris Catholica unitas visa fuerit, non eis obsit,
quod contra honores eorum -- in transmarino Concilio statutum est. Then,
contracting what is formerly said, they conclude thus; id est, ut ordinati in
part Donati, si ad Catholicam correcti transire voluerint, non suscipiantur in
honoribus suis, secundum transmarinum Concilium; exceptis his, per quos
Catholicae unitati consuletur. Now some difference there is, between their
writing to the Pope, and the Bishops of the former Council; ne obsit, for some;
and maneat for the rest; and their decreeing against the Pope and that Council,
ne obfuerit for any. Now this close is thus Englished by the Doctor our of
Balsamon; That they that have bin Ordained on the part of the Donatists, shall
not be proceeded with according to the transmarine Synod, but shall the rather
be received, as those that take care for the Catholic Unity. How well, I leave
to your judgment.

The Protestants ordinary Replies to these, to me seeming not satisfactory.
Now to these several instances, which I have drawn out of the primitive times,
the answers which are usually made by some (for you must expect, that nothing
is said by any side, which is not replied to by the other) are such as these;
That such places, as speak of the Primacy and Principality of the Roman Bishop,
speak only of that of Order and Dignity, not of Power or Authority; --
Apostolicae Cathedrae Principatus; i. e. say they, quoad dignitatem, non quoad
potestatem, -- Rector domus Dei; -- Ecclesiae Catholicoe, or universalis
Episcopus; i.e. say they, Vnus erectoribus domus Dei; unus ex Episcopis, etc.
-- That such places as mention appeals to the Bishop of Rome, speak of them as
made to him, non ut ad Judicem, sed ut ad ejusdem fidei fautorem, ut ejusdem
fidei professores in communionem suam admitteret, -- non ob aliquam
jurisdicendi authoritatem, sed ob amicam communionis ejusdem societatem. That
the like addresses were made to other Patriarchs and Bishops for their
communion and assistance, as to him; and that his Letters were requested, and,
in behalf of sufferers, directed to all parts of Chcistianity; not by virtue of
any authority he had to correct, but by reason of the power he had (from the
reverence they gave to the dignity of his place) every where to persuade. That
such places of Fathers, or Councils, as affirm, that no public affairs of the
Church may be transacted without the Bishop of Rome, are not appropriate
therefore only to him; but verified as much of the rest of the Patriarchs, as
of him. That those places which mention his censuring, excommunicating,
deposing Clergy, that were not under his own Patriarchy, speak not of any
authoritative or privative excommunication (to use the Bishop of Derry's
expression, Vind. c. 8.) by way of jurisdiction, excluding such from the
communion of Christ; but only of a negative, in the way of Christian
discretion, by withdrawing him, or his, from communion with them; for fear of
infection, for declaring his non-currence with, or countenancing of, their
fault, etc. There being great difference (as Dr. Field observes p. 558.)
between excommunication properly so named, or authoritatively forbidding all
men to communicate with such and such; and the rejecting only of them from our
communion and fellowship. [And I also confess and grant, such negations of
communicating with others anciently used: and amongst rest used also by the
Bishop of Rome, who often prohibited his Legates and others from communicating
with some other Bishop (as with the Bishop of Constantinople, when he used the
style of Vniversalis,) or from going to, and being present at, their
celebration of Divine Service; when he did not excommunicate the other, nay
when also he admitted the ministers of the other, and those who communicated
with the other, to come to his communion and celebration of Divine Service. See
Gregory (6. l. 31. Ep. to Eulogius and Anastasius) indulging this to those, who
were sent from Cyriacus Bishop of Constantinople to him. But that all the
Bishops excommunications of those without his Patriarchy were only such, this
is the thing denied.] -- That the like may be said of his confirming or
restoring his fellow-Bishops; that it was done, not by way of forensical
justice, but fraternal approbation: and that all other Patriarchs used
excommunicating, deposing, acquitting, and restoring, in the same manner,
allowing or withdrawing their communion from their fellow-Bishops, as they saw
fit; and that they confirmed the Roman Bishop by their communicatory letters,
as he them. [Which things, how well they agree with the above said forms of
such Ecclesiastical censures, and with other practices of the Roman Bishops
toward others, much differing from the practices of other Patriarchs either
toward him, or toward others; how well they agree with the addresses made
from both Church-governors and Councils, upon differences and contentions in
the Church, to Rome; addresses not used in the same manner to the other
Patriarchs, (yet would have bin done equally to them also, had all Patriarchs
bin esteemed in their power equal); especially how they agree with what is said
24. and 18. upon reviewing the instances I have given, I leave to your
judgment.] -- That the places, which speak of his judging causes, and
inflicting such Ecclesiastical censures etc, speak not of him singly, but as
joined with his Western Bishops; they meaning, by this, not some of his Western
Bishops only, (whose assistance the Roman Bishop ordinarily uses in all his
judgments,) but his whole Patriarchal Council. -- That those places, which do
argue, joining-with the Roman, to be joinning with the Catholic, communion,
(see before 23. n. 2. and n. 3. and 32. as it must needs be, that, if God has
appointed any person or Council as a supreme Guide, whom the rest ought to
obey, such members, as do not obey, cannot be Catholic,) are spoken only with
respect to such a Roman Bishop at such a time, who, in their opinion, held the
true Profession; and not, that all the Roman Bishops at any time have, or
shall, hold it; those, who made these expressions, accounting the Roman Bishop
orthodox and catholic, because he then was of such a faith as they approved;
not the faith orthodox and catholic, because it was the faith of the Roman
Bishop, or which he approved. So Spalatensis, in answer to the places produced
out of S. Hierom. in 23.. says, (4. l. 10. c. 23. n.) Quod Hieronymus Damaso,
hoc est Petri cathedrae, consociari velit, significat privilegium illius
Cathedrae adhuc Hieronymi tempore vigens circa fidei puritatem: and 88 n. --
Quasi dicat: quia nunc [not perpetuo] in terris video Apostolicam doctrinam
Romae maxim puram conservari, ideo in his dissensionibus volo tibi adhaerere.
[Which answer circularly makes him to judge first in what Church the true
doctrine is, who is to seek what Church to adhere to, to be guided by it to the
true doctrine. Whereas those, who submitted to the Roman, as the most orthodox,
gathered it to be orthodox, as being S. Peter's Seat, and the prime Apostolical
See.] That most of these testimonies and examples are not alleged out of the
first and purest times; non esse ex prima antiquitate, sed post Nicaenam
Synodum; cum schismata and partium studia in Christianos valere coeperunt. Yet
then; that as their pride claimed much, (as they claimed indeed great authority
from the beginning,) so were they by the resoluteness of their fellow-Bishops
as much opposed; and what they decreed, seldom executed. And lastly, That much
more dominion over the Church of God, than is showed here to have bin then
practiced, is now assumed, (but what is this to the vindicator only of their
ancient practice?) and, That were it not assumed, yet many and unsufferable are
the inconveniences of so remote a Judge of Appeals. (But see concerning this
what is said before,. 14.) To such exceptions as these, I will trouble you with
no reply: If you do not find the former passages (reviewed) sufficiently to
justify themselves against these limitations and restrictions, and to
vindicate much more authority to the Apostolical See than is here confessed,.
37. Such power anciently exercised by the Bishop of Rome, not only exercised
jointly with a Patriarchal Council, (which is by some pretended.)
for me you may admit them for good answers.

Hitherto I have bin showing you the subordinations of Clergy, for regular
Ordinations; for settling doctrine and discipline in the Church; and for
deciding differences; and amongst these, (from 11.) the great power given to
Patriarchs; and amongst and above them (from 21.) more particularly, the power
and preeminence the Roman See has anciently challenged, or others yielded to
it. In the next place observe; That the exercise of this power anciently lay
not in the Roman Bishop, or other Patriarchs, only as joined with, or President
in, a Patriarchal Synod; nor in Primates and Metropolitans, only as President
in a Provincial; (a refuge, which many willingly fly to, in their defense of a
dissimilitude of the present, to the ancient Government of the Church by them;)
but in them, as using only their private council, or the assistance of such
neighboring Bishops, as could without much trouble be convened: Of which I
shall give you an account out of Bishop Bramhal, and Dr. Field, who have made
it up to my hand.

Thus then Dr. Field, (5. l. 30. c. p. 513.) -- Provincial Councils were by
ancient canons of the Church to be holden in every Province twice every year.
It is very necessary (say the Fathers of the Council of Nice) that there should
be a Synod twice in the year in every Province; that all the Bishops of the
Province meeting together may in common think upon those things that are
doubtful and questionable. -- For the dispatch of Ecclesiastical business, and
the determining of matters in controversy, we think it were fit (say the
Fathers in the Council of Antioch) that in every Province Synods of Bishops
should be assembled twice every year. [To the same effect he quotes Conc.
Chalced. 18. c. see likewise Canon. Apostol. 38.] -- But in process of time,
when the Governors of the Church could not conveniently assemble in Synods
twice a year, the Fathers of the Sixth General Council decreed, ( Can. 8.) that
yet in any case there should be a Synod of Bishops once every year for
Ecclesiastical questions. Likewise the Seventh General Council ( can. 6.)
decrees in this sort: -- Whereas the Canon wills judicial inquisition to be
made twice every year by the assembly of Bishops in every Province; and yet for
the misery and poverty of such as should travel to Synods, the Fathers of the
6th General Council decreed it should be once in the year, and then things
amiss to be redressed, we renew this latter canon. -- But afterward many
things falling out to hinder their happy meetings, we shall find that they met
not so often, and therefore the Council of Basil appoints Episcopal Synods to
be held once every year, and Provincial at least once in three years, [and so
does Conc. Trident. 24. sess. 2. cap. pro moderandis moribus, corrigendis
excessibus, controversiis componends, etc.] which accordingly were kept every
third year by Carlo Borrhomeo, Metropolitan of Millain. And so in time, causes
growing many, and the difficulties intolerable, in coming together, and in
staying to hear these causes thus multiplied and increased, (which he
confesses before to be just considerations,) it was thought fitter to refer
the hearing of complaints and appeals to Metropolitans, and such like
Ecclesiastical Judges, limited and directed by canons and Imperial laws; than
to trouble the Pastors of whole Provinces, and to wrong the people by the
absence of their Pastors and Guides. Thus Dr. Field.

And much what to the same purpose Bishop Bramhal, ( Vindic. p. 257.) What
power a Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province by the Canonlaw,
the same and no other had the Patriarch over the Metropolitans, and Bishops of
sundry Provinces, within his own Patriarchate: But a Metropolitan anciently
could do nothing out of his own [particular] Diocese, without the concurrence
of the major part of the Bishops of his Province; nor the Patriarch in like
manner without the advice and consent of his Metropolitans and Bishops. Wherein
then consisted Patriarchal authority? -- In convocating Patriarchal Synods and
presiding in them; in pronouncing sentence according to plurality of voices,
when Metropolitan Synods did not suffice to determine some emergent difficulties
or differences. -- I confess, that by reason of the great difficulty and charge
of convocating so many Bishops, and keeping them so long together, until all
causes were heard and determined; and by reason of those inconveniences which
did fall upon their Churches in their absence, Provincial Councils were first
reduced from twice, to once, in the year; and afterward to once in three
years. And in process of time the hearing of Appeals, and suchlike causes, and
the execution of the canons in that behalf, were referred to Metropolitans,
until the Papacy swallowed up all the authority of Patriarchs, Metropolitans,
and Bishops]. Thus the Bishop. Now concerning what they have said, note



so that, as it is plain by many former instances, that the Patriarch ordinarily
did, so it is all reason that he should, decide some appeals without them: tho in
some cases extraordinary, and of great consequence, such Councils also were
assembled.

3. Since, where they speak of the Metropolitans judging matters alone, Rome's
managing Ecclesiastical affairs by himself alone, i. e. without a Patriarchal
Synod; yet themselves think it reasonable to do the same thing, themselves
alone, i. e. without their Provincial Synod; authorizing their High Commission
Court, and blaming his Consistory. Now what is allowed to Patriarchal
proceedings, without Councils, in respect of appeals from their several
Provinces; the same it is, that, in the differences and contests of Patriarchs
themselves, and of other greater Bishops, (since it is meet for preserving the
Church's peace and unity, that some person, or assembly, should have the
authority to decide these; and since it is unreasonable, and for the great
trouble thereof not feisible, that a General Council, or also Patriarchal, in
all such differences, should be assembled); the same (I say) it is, that, by
ancient custom and Ecclesiastical canons, has bin conferred on the Bishop of
Rome with his Council, (tho granted liable to error); He being more eminently
honorable than the rest, by reason, of the larger extent of his Patriarchy; of
the great power and ancient renown of that City, which in Spiritual matters he
governed; but especially, of the two greatest Apostles, Peter and Paul, there
ending their days in the government of that See, and leaving him there the
Successor of their power. Yet is this office of supreme judicature so committed
unto him, that his judgments only stand in force till such a meeting; and may
be reviewed, and, where contrary to former canons, reversed, by it; concerning
which see the saying of S. Austin, quoted before, 22. -- Restabat adhuc
plenarium Ecclesie universae Concilium etc. and the saying of Zosimus, quoted.
22. n. 2. and the Epistle of Gelasius, quoted 25. n. 3. and what is said 22.
Now, all Metropolitan and Patriarchal authority in the intervals of Councils
being limited to the execution of Conciliary Laws and Canons, or, at least, to
the acting nothing against them, if the question be asked, who shall judge
whether so they do? I answer, none but a superior Council; till which their
judgment stands good. For (as I have largely showed elsewhere) if Litigants
once may judge of this, when their Judges judge rightly, and not against the
laws, and accordingly may yield or substract their obedience; such obedience is
arbitrary. In civil Courts, Princes, or their Ministers, are obliged to judge
according to, or not against, the laws of the Kingdom; may the litigant
therefore reject their judgment, when it seems to him contrary to these laws? I
believe not.

38. That it is schism to deny obedience to any Ecclesiastical power
established by Ecclesiastical Canon: and that no such power can be lawfully
dissolved by the power Secular.
Thus much having bin said of the authority and jurisdiction given, by
Ecclesiastical constitutions and ancient customs and practice, to some
Ecclesiastical persons above others; and amongst them, supereminently above all
the rest, to the Roman Bishop; and given to these persons, not only as joined
with Councils, but as single Magistrates, in the vacancy thereof; in the next
place, these Propositions also I think must necessarily be granted. First; That
whatever authority is thus settled upon any persons by the canons and customs of
the Church, concerning the managing of affairs not civil, but merely Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical, cannot be annulled, and dissolved, nor cannot be conferred,
contrary to the Church's constitutions, on any other person, by any Secular
power; neither by Heathen and unbelieving Princes, who were enemies to the
Church; nor by Christian much less: because these are in Spiritual matters Sons
and Subjects of the Church, and now obliged to obey her laws; neither by the
one, who so might easily hinder the propagation of Christianity; nor by the
other, who, if happening at any time to be Heretical or Schismatical, might
easily hinder the profession of the Orthodox faith, or disturb the Church's
peace. Thus Grotius, a great Lawyer, ( in Rivet. Apol. discuss. p. 70.)
Imperatorum and Regum aliquod esse officium etiam circa res Ecclesiae, in
confesso est. At non tale, quale in saeculi negotiis. Ad tutandos, non ad
violandos Canones jus hoc comparatum est. Nam cum Principes filii sint
Ecclesiae, non debent vi in matrem uti. Omne corpus sociale jus habet quaedam
constituendi, quibus membra obligentur; hoc jus etiam Ecclesiae competere
apparet Act. 15.28. Heb. 13.17. where he quotes Facundus saying of Martianus:
Cognovit ille quibus in causis uteretur Principis potestate, and in quibus
exhiberet obedientiam Christiani. -- And -- Obedite Praepositis, etiam Regibus
dictum. -- See this discoursed more largely in Success. Clerg. 64, 65. 2. And
further; That it is Schism to deny obedience to any Ecclesiastical power so
established, and never since by the same Ecclesiastical laws reversed. I say
here, concerning matters Ecclesiastical, not Civil; therefore, let that
Proposition of Dr. Hammond ( schism 6. c. p. 129.) for me stand good, [That a
Law, tho made by a General Council, and with the consent of all Christian
Princes, [i. e. of that time,] yet, if it have respect to a civil right, may in
this or that Nation be repealed, [i. e. by that Prince's Successors]; provided
only, That the ordaining or confirming of inferior Governors and Officers of
the Church; the assembling of Synods; and decision of controversies of
Religion; the ordering Church Service and discipline; the Ecclesiastical
censures upon delinquents, and the like, for preventing or suppressing of
Heresy, Schism, and Faction; and for preserving the Church in unity of
doctrine and practice: Provided (I say) that such things be not reckoned
amongst civil rights; as they may not be; because all these were things used by
the Church under the heathen Emperors, even against their frequent Edicts: yet
could they not have bin lawfully so used, if any of these had encroached on
civil rights; in any of which civil rights, the heathen Prince might claim as
much lawful power to prohibit them, as the Christian can. And because all these
were continued to be used by the Church also under Christian Emperors, without
asking their leave to decree such things, or subjecting them to their
authority, or depending on their consent, (only with humbly desiring their
assistance, yet so as, without, it, resolved to proceed in the execution
thereof as under Heathen; as clearly appeared under the the Arian Emperors;)
yet which thing she could not lawfully have done, were any of these entrenching
upon another right. For example; the 6th Canon of Nice, and 5. Can. of
Constant. Council, would have bin an usurpation of an unjust authority, if the
subordination of Episcopal Sees, and erecting of Patriarchs had belonged to the
Prince. Upon the same grounds let also those instances (collected by Bishop
Bramhal, Vindic. 7. c.) of several Princes and States, on many occasions
opposing the Pope's authority, stand good and be justified, so far as he does
not show these Secular powers to have opposed him in any right belonging to
him, by Church-canons, in Ecclesiastical matters. But if in any of those
examples, they are also found to oppose him in these, the proving of such facts
to have bin done, justifies not their lawfulness to be done. Tho also he
confesses, that this fact of Hen. 8. in abolishing the usurped (as he calls
it) jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome within his Dominions, he cannot fellow
abroad. See what he says, Vindic. 7. c. p. 184.. Neither do such facts, as he
urges to be done abroad, hinder such Princes for living still in the external
communion with the Church of Rome; which facts he urges as a defense of the
Reformed's necessary relinquishing this communion. Again, I said, That no such
Spiritual authority can he conferred, or translated to others, contrary to such
Church Canons, etc. Else, whenever it is not contrary to these Canons, I grant
that Inferior Councils, or Church-governors, or also Secular powers with their
consent, may change and alter many things, both in respect of Ecclesiastical
persons and affairs: therefore many cases concerning the Kings of England, with
such consent of inferior Councils or Church-governors, erecting or translating
Bishoprics, etc. (instanced in by D. Hammond or Bishop Bramhall) are
justifiable, where any wore not contrary to the Laws of the Church, i. e. of
superior Councils: but in any other examples, where such Laws are transgressed,
either by the Prince, or also by their particular Clergy, the proving such
facts to have bin done, justifies not their lawfulness to be done, tho such
acts were done without any express or present control. Things being thus
explained, I say, (to give a particular instance of the former proposition), No
Prince or Emperor, Heathen or Christian, etc. can, for his own Dominions,
dissolve or abrogate the authority, concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, of those
Patriarchs or Primates constituted (or confirmed) in the 6th Canon of the
Council of Nice, (the Church not commanding obedience to Patriarchs at random,
or to such as the Secular Prince should set over us; but also nominating and
constituting, from time to time, the Sees, which had or should have such
preeminence), if these be since by no other General Council reversed: nor can
any, who by that Canon is subjected (for instance) to the Patriarch of
Alexandria, deny obedience in such Ecclesiastical matters to him without
Schism; tho his Secular Prince should command the contrary, or subject him to
another.

And if these things here said be true, then also so far as the Bishop of
Rome's Authority is found to be confirmed, in matters Spiritual, by the
Church's Canons, and ancient custom, over any Churches Provincial or National,
it will be Schism for any such Christian Prince or People to oppose it; so
long, till the like Council reverseth it. Hence; to those three pretended
rights of the Roman Bishop over the Church of England, whereby Schism is said
to be incurred, mentioned by Dr. Hammond (see Schism p. 138.) namely, his right
1. As St Peter's Successor; or 2. By conversion of the Nation to Christianity;
or 3. By the voluntary concession of Kings; I suppose I may add a 4th, with his
good leave; namely, his right by ancient Constitutions and Canons of the
Church; and may rightly affirm, that if any such right could be proved, the
English Clergy must be Schismatics in opposing it, tho all the other pretenses
be overthrown: For such a sort of Schism Dr. Hammond mentions p. 66. It may be
observed indeed in our writers: That they freely determine; 1. That the Secular
Prince has a just external authority in Ecclesiastical affairs committed to
him by God to enforce the execution of the Church's Canons upon all, as well
Clergy as Laity, within his Dominions (a thing denied by none). 2. Again; That
the Secular Prince has no internal Ecclesiastical authority delegated to him
by God, as to Administer the Sacraments, to Absolve, Excommunicate, etc. 3.
Again, That the Secular Prince has no just authority to determine any thing
concerning Divine Truths; or perhaps other Ecclesiastical affairs without the
Clergy's help and assistances. But whether such Ecclesiastical Determinations,
or Laws, are obligatory when the Prince makes these, being assisted only with
some small portion of the Clergy, and opposed by the rest; or also by a
superior Council, or Court Ecclesiastical: Or, whether the Prince, against
these, provided that he have some lesser number of Clergy on his side, may
reverse former Canons, or enact new, to oblige the Clergy and Laity under his
Dominion: This they seem to me not freely to speak to; most what to pass over,
and some of our later Writers, when they are forced upon it, rather to deny it.
And indeed neither is there any thing in the Oath of the King's Supremacy
(except it be in that general clause [I will defend all Jurisdictions, etc.]
granted), nor in the 37 Article of the Church of England (which treats of the
King's power in Ecclesiasticals) that may seem to affirm or determine it. For
whereas the Oath in general makes the King only supreme Governor in
Ecclesiasticals, he may be so for some thing, and yet not for every thing (not
therefore the supreme decider of all Divinity controversies). And whereas the
34th Article expounds the Supremacy thus, [That he is to rule all estates and
degrees committed to his charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal; and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil-doers]. All
this he may do, and yet be tied in all things to the Laws of the Church; and to
leave to the Church's sole judgment who are evildoers, or Heretical persons,
etc. when any controversy arises in Divine matters, about the lawfulness of
some Practice, or truth of some Tenet.

Bramhall and Dr. Hammond may extend to the confirmation of the foresaid
assertions. The Concessions of B. Bramhall und of Dr. Hammond, in this matter.
The Bishop ( Vindic. c. 8. p. 232.) has this proposition (indeed with
application thereof to the Pope, as guilty therein), To rebel against the
Catholic Church, and its representative a General Council, which is the last
visible Judge of controversies, and the supreme Ecclesiastical Court, either is
gross Schism; or there is no such thing as Schismatical pravity in the world.
To rebel against such a Council; i. e. against the constitutions thereof in
affairs merely Spiritual; therefore if their Canons establish such and such
Patriarchates, to rebel against these will be Schism. So (p. 269.) he says, In
cases that are indeed Spiritual, or merely Ecclesiastical (such as concern the
Doctrine of Faith, or Administration of the Sacraments, or the Ordaining or
Degrading of Ecclesiastical persons [I add, or those mentioned but now 38.
which relate not to the Civil State, but merely to the well governance of the
Church] Sovereign Princes have (and have only) an Architectonical power, to see
that Clergymen do their duties [ i. e. according to such Church-decrees].
Else, had Princes in such matters a negative or destructive power, this would
be the right of Heathen Potentates also; and the primitive Church guilty of
Rebellion in disobeying, in these things, their strictest prohibitions. Again
(p. 257.) he says; Thus neither the Papal power, which we have cashiered, nor
any part of it, was ever given to any Patriarch by the ancient Canons; and by
consequence the separation is not Schismatical. Therefore it seems it had been
Schismatical, had such power been given him by the Canons.

Hammond, and( c. 3. p. 54.) he says, It is manifest, that as the several
Bishops had Praefecture over their several Churches, and over the Presbyters,
Deacons, and People, under them; such as could not be cast off by any, without
the guilt and brand of Schism; so the Bishops themselves of the ordinary
inferior Cities, were (for the preserving of unity, and many other good uses)
subjected to the higher power of Archbishops, or Metropolitans. Nay, we must
yet ascend one degree higher, from this of Archbishops or Metropolitans, to
that supreme, of Primates or Patriarchs; the division of which is thus cleared,
etc. -- And (p. 60.) The uppermost of the standing powers in the Church, are
Archbishops, Primates, and Patriarchs, to whom the Bishops themselves are
appointed in many things to be subject; and this power [I add, and the
particular Sees to whom it shall belong, and subjection defined and asserted by
the ancient Canons; and most ancient (even immemorial Apostolical) tradition
and custom is avouch'd for it [I add, especially for the eminency of the Roman
See] as may appear, Conc. Nicaen. Can. 4, 6. -- Conc. Antioch. c. 9. c. 20. --
Conc. Chalc. c. 19. etc. After all which, p. 66. of the same Chapter (the Title
of which is, Of the several sorts of Schism) he concludes, That there may be a
disobedience and irregularity, and so a Schism, even in the Bishops, in respect
of their Metropolitans, and of the Authority which these have by Canon and
primitive custom over them. Which was therefore to be added to the several
species of Schism set down in the former Chapters. Where, tho the Doctor is
pleased not to name particularly Patriarchs, yet the quotation p. 54. [ We must
yet ascend etc.] and p. 60. shows you, that he, upon the same reason of
Church-Canons and primitive Custom, does and must hold, that there may be a
Schism also in the Metropolitans (and consequently in all those under the
Metropolitans) in respect of their Patriarch. The uniting, as of several
Diocesses in one Metropolitan, and of several Provinces and Metropolitans in
one Primate, so of many Nations and Primates in one Patriarch, exceedingly
conducing to the peaceable government and cohesion of the Church Catholic, and
suppression of Heresies and Schisms, oft'ner National, than Diocesan only, or
Provincial. Quae vero est causa (says Grotius in his first Reply upon Rivet.
ad Art. 7.) cur, qui opinionibus dissident inter Catholicos, maneant in eodem
corpore, non rupta communione; contra, qui inter Protestants dissident idem
facere nequeant, utcunque multa de dilectione fraterna loquantur? Hoc qui recte
expender it inveniet, quanta sit vis Primatus. Which Primacy St. Hierom
observes, even amongst the Apostles themselves ( adversus Jovinianum l. 1. c.
14.) Super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia; licet id ipsum in alio loco super omnes
Apostolos fiat; and cuncti claves regnorum Coeli accipiant, and ex aequo super
eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: tamen, propterea, inter duodecim unus
eligitur, ut capite constituto, schismatum tollatur occasio. Capite, that is,
not only in dignity, but also in some authority; else can such Head not remedy
Schisms. Patriarchs therefore, as well as Metropolitans, much conducing to the
removing of Schisms, and preserving the Church's unity, I suppose, whatever the
Prince or Emperor should attempt against such Metropolitan or Patriarch, either
to oppose him in the managing of those spiritual matters, and to deny him to
exercise (either by himself or his Ministers) his jurisdiction in any Province
which is by Church Canons subjected unto him, or to depose him from his See, or
to transfer his authority and jurisdiction on some other, whom he more approves
of (as if Valentinian, much affected to the Arrians, should have transferred
St. Ambrose his Archiepiscopal jurisdiction upon Auxentius, an Arrian Bishop,
whom he much affected; as his Mother Justina, I think, actually did, wanting
only possession of the Church; which Ambrose, assisted also by the people,
stoutly resisted) yet still* according to Dr. Hammond's judgment, as long as
the Canons of the Church remain the same, it would be Schism in any to disobey
such Metropolitan (or to side with the Prince), and Schism in the Prince
himself as well as in the rest. Again, -- S. W. replying thus upon these words
of his ( Schis. p. 125.) [the Canons of Councils have mostly been set out, and
received their authority by the Emperors]; That never was it heard, that an
Emperor claimed a negative Voice in making a Canon of a Council valid, which
concerned matters purely spiritual; nay, not disaccepted them decreed
unanimously by the Fathers, but all the world looked upon him as an unjust and
tyrannical Encroacher. To this Dr. Hammond ( Ans. to Schism Disarmed p. 203.)
speaks thus; For the appendage etc. I need not reply; having never pretended,
or seemed to pretend, what he charge on me concerning the Emperor's negative
Voice in the Council: what I pretended I spoke out in plain words [that the
Canons have bin mostly set out, and received their authority, by the Emperors,
(and this receiving their authority is (I suppose) in order to their powerful
reception in their Dominions) and this he acknowledges -- and so we are
Friends. Thus Dr. Hammond. Now all that which S. W. there acknowledges, is,
That the supreme Secular power is obliged to see, that the Church's Decrees be
received, and put in execution. By Dr. Hammond's consent then, a negative Voice
the Prince has not, to reverse or contrary the Church's Canons in spiritual
matters; only he thus may be said to give authority to them (methinks the
phrase is very improper, and liable to be mistaken) to see them in his
Dominions to be put in execution. Note, that what is said here of the Secular
Prince, is also to be said of any particular Clergy, in respect of superior
Councils. Again, that what is said of the Prince or Clergy of the same Age,
wherein such Canons are enacted, is to be said of their successors, till the
same authority which imposes, abrogate such Canons. (As in Civil Governments
the same Laws which bind the Parents, bind the Children, without the
Legislative power's asking their consent).

Several pretenses to weaken such Canons (to me seeming) vain.
many the pretenses to null their force; but to me seeming invalid and vain. --
Grotius ( Disc. Riv. Apol. p. 69.) bringing forth against Rivet the testimony
of Blondel, [non negari a Protestantibus dignitatem Sedis Apostolicae Romanae;
neque primatum ejus super Ecclesias vicinas; imo aliquatenus super omnes; sed
referri hoc ab iis ad jus Ecclesiasticum]. Rivet (Grot. disc. dialys.) thus
replies to it; -- Ad jus Ecclesiasticum; Hoc est, ad institutum humanum: Quo
postea abusi sunt Episcopi Romani ad Monarchiam stabiliendam. Itaque quod ab
hominibus initio concessum, cum ad jus Dei evertendum postea fuerit conversum,
merito possessoribus injustis denegatur. (See the same plea in Bishop Bramhall,
Vindic. p. 252. etc.) That Institutum Ecclesiasticum is jus humanum: True. And
that it may be taken away: True. By the Church, that conferred it; i. e. by
another General Council, but not by Laics, or some few Ecclesiastics. and may
be denied injustis possessoribus. True; so much as they possess unjustly; i. e.
contrary to Canon.

Bramhall ( Vind. c. 9.) makes in answer to that objection, [That the English
have cast off Canonical obedience, I seem to me very infirm: As this, (p. 257.)
Since the division of Britain from the Empire, no Canons are, or ever were, of
force with us, further than they were received, and by their incorporation
became Britanick Laws. True; as to any Secular coactive power in the execution
of them, which is derived only from the Prince. Like unto which is that
passage, p. 268. We draw, or derive, from the Crown, liberty and power to
exercise actually and lawfully upon the subjects of the Crown, that habitual
jurisdiction which we receive at our Ordination. And that in Reply to B.
Chalced. c. 7. p 291. That Ecclesiastical persons, in excommunicating and
absolving, are the King's substitutes; i. e. (as he expounds himself afterward)
by the King's application of the matter; namely, his Subjects, to receive their
absolution from such Ecclesiastical persons. No more true, than that any King's
Subjects may not lawfully receive Baptism, or turn Christian, without his
License. Some or other Clergy may and ought to do these things, both Preach,
Baptize, Absolve, and Excommunicate, in any Prince's Dominions, as their duty
shall require, tho the Prince gainsaying. Of many Clergy capable to do it,
that one of them, not another, shall be nominated and admitted to do it, may
belong to Princes. Are then the Canons and Constitutions or the Church, made in
her representative (a General Council) not obligatory to the several members of
the Church, (I mean, as to the extent of Ecclesiastical Censures upon
Delinquents,) save where their temporal Sovereign first admits them? What if
these be Heathen? What if Heretic? Again, if the actual exercise of their
Office he held from the Crown; then have they no authority over any Nation or
Province, if the Secular power deny it them: And what Secular power denied it
not in the primitive times? Or is this a privilege of Christian Princes only
over God's Clergy, not of Heathen? Do Christ's Ministers gain this by
converting Kings to the Faith, that they lose their former power over their
Subjects? But what if such Christian Prince prove Heretical or Schismatical?
What if he silence or banish the Orthodox, are they to obey Him now rather than
God? Is their Commission from Christ, to go and teach all, and consequently
that, Nation, upon such a Prince's Edict voided, or lying dormant? And may they
now forbear speaking the things which they have heard? We cannot but speak
(said the Apostle, when the Magistrate silenced them) Act. 4.20. The same thing
may be said of the unlawfulness of Princes prohibiting any authorized for this
purpose by the supreme Magistrates of the Church-Catholick, from entering their
Dominions (except those who are known to be sent on secular designs). So
(suppose in a State overrun with Arrianism or Socinianism) an Heretical Prince
cannot justly forbid the entrance of Patriarchal Missions to reduce him and his
Subjects to Truth. And again, an Orthodox Prince cannot reasonably exclude such
Missions, who consent with him in judgment, and whose intendments are
spiritual. -- As this also, p. 256. The King and the whole Body of the Kingdom,
by their Legislative power substracting their obedience from a just Patriarchal
power, and erecting a new Patriarchate within their own Dominions, it is a
sufficient warrant to all English men, to suspend their obedience to the one,
and apply themselves to the other. May then Princes and States, in
Ecclesiastical affairs, make Laws contrary to those of the Church? Or, have
they a Legislative power in Spirituals, contrary to General Councils? I had
thought their power had in these things been only Architectonical; to see
things done according to the Church-Decrees. And may they nominate Patriarchs
contrary to those the Church elects? Or may some small part of the Clergy do
these things against all the rest of their Body? Or, the Prince, or that
particular Clergy erring in thus doing, are the people obliged to, or excused
in following, them in their error? -- As this, p. 254. The sentence of the Law,
and the notoreity of the fact are sufficient [ i. e. for inferiors to deny
their obedience to Superiors] the sentence of the Judge [ i. e. of a General
Concil] is not necessary. We know who have lately made use of such principles,
of Inferiors judging of the evidence of laws, and facts, to the confusion and
destruction of a most flourishing temporal Kingdom. Are inferiors then not
liable to be mistaken, and plead clear sentence of law, and notoreity of fact,
where others as judicious think there is no such matter? But whither tends
this? That if we find the Patriarch clearly usurping some power the Church
canons have not given him, we are thence-forth free from yiedling any obedience
also to that authority which the Canon has given him. Apply this to a temporal
Governor, and it seems an unreasonable consequence. and we are convinced in it
by the example of many Nations, who having made resistance to their Patriareh
in some injunctions, conceived by them not Canonical, yet continue still their
obedience in the rest. Consider the late contest of the State of Venice, and
the present opposals both of France and Spain in some matters (See Vind. 7. c.)
How can the Bishop then reasonably make use of those examples, wherein (
Vindic. 7. c.) he has copiously showed other Princes, casting off the Pope's
usurpations and oppressions, to have retained still submission to his
Supremacy, to prove or countenance, that Hen. 8. might lawfully cast off, both
those, and also his Supremacy? Especially since it cannot be showed, but that
it is absolutely in his power, who has the sword, to cast off only so much as
he pleases, and retain the rest. Unless the sword in England cannot divide
usurpations and lawful rights, as beyond the Seas now it does, and did here
before Hen. 8. but must necessarily cut off both at once. -- As this ( p. 253)
When a Steward chosen in trust by his fellow servants, violates his trust, and
usurps a dominion etc, it is not want of duty, but fidelity, [for such
servants] to substract their obedience from him. -- But what, when most of the
servants say, he does no such thing in those matters, wherein the rest accuse
him; and therefore continue their obedience to him? and also the Master of the
house, for the peace of his family, has ordered, that the rest in all
differences shall be swayed with the votes of the major part? shall not this
small part, in departing from the whole, and rejecting their governor, and
setting up another Steward of their own, or every one assuming to be his own
Master, be held guilty of making a division in the family? -- So ( p. 129. and
p. 134.) Many extortions and rapines, and violations of rights, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, committed by such Patriarchs, -- are urged: But will these
things, done contrary to the Canon, make a rejection of Canonical obedience to
such authority lawful? Is it a good argument, against a King; He has bin
tyrannous, or done many things against law, therefore depose him and his
succession, or hereafter yield him no obedience, where due by the laws? Or,
against Bishops; They have usurped some unjust power, or, otherways much
violated their function; therefore root out Episcopacy, and yield no more, tho
never so Canonical, obedience unto them? Thus, as we have measured to others,
it has bin meted to us again. But, if it be meant, That obedience, such as is
Canonical, to Patriarchs, infers the violation of any civil rights; the
contrary I think is showed elsewhere (in Authority of Clergy derived* from
Christ,) more at large, whither I remit you. tho perhaps this may be enough to
answer it, That General Councils, who made the Canons, were of the contrary
opinion to him. Nay, if it should be said, that such preeminences, as, not the
Canon, but only some of the Roman writers, more obsequious to the Papacy, give
to the Bishop of Rome, are injurious to Civil rights: yet the Bishop himself,
after some vehemence against them, seems to wipe off this aspersion in saying
thus. ( Vindic. 8. c. p. 243.) The best is; that they, who give these
exorbitant privileges to Popes, do it with so many cautions and reservations,
that they [such privileges as they give him] signify nothing, and may be taken
away with as much ease, as they are given. -- Which afterward he shows in the
particulars of his Infallibility, and his temporal power. Did Popes practice
therefore only what these write, much wrong could not be done. -- Again, in his
Replication to Bishop of Chalced. p. 230. it is urged, -- That to whom a Kingdom
is granted, all necessary Power is granted, without which a Kingdom cannot be
governed: and ( p. 238.) that had the Britannick Churches bin subjected to the
Bishop of Rome by General Councils, yet it had bin lawful for the King and
Church of England to substract their obedience from the Bishop of Rome, and to
have erected a new Primate at home amongst themselves, upon the great mutation
of the state of the Empire, and great variation of affairs since those times.
-- For to persist ( says he, p. 241.) in an old observation, when the grounds
of it are quite changed; and the end, for which the observation was made,
calls upon us for an alteration; is not obedience, but obstinacy. And, ( p.
243.) We pursue the same ends with them, [i. e. General Councils] -- that is,
the conforming of the one regiment [i. e. the Ecclesiastical] to the other, [i.
e. the Civil.] Thus he; for Princes taking away the Bish. of Rome's authority,
(supposing General Councils had conferred any upon him) Yet, p. 293. speaking
of that clause in the oath of Supremacy, [that no foreign Prelates ought to
have any jurisdiction within this realm,] he says, A General Council is
neither included here, nor intended.) To which it is easily answered; That there
is no Church-canon detracting, from Princes, any of that power, without which a
Kingdom is not governable; that the division of one Empire into many Dominions,
does not necessarily require any alteration of the Economy of the Church, as
appears in those States, which conforming to these Canons, still subsist and
flourish, without any disturbance of the civil peace. (But Quaere, whether the
throwing-off these Canons, has not bin the destruction of a Kingdom; whose
ruin took its beginning from divisions in Religion.) -- That the Church's end
in constituting, I say not of Metropolitans or Primats, but of superior
Patriarchs above them, and of an Ecclesiastical Supreme, (to whom, from several
countries, might be the last appeal of greater controversies in Religion) was
not the conforming of the Ecclesiastical government to the Civil, (which end
the Bishop pleads,) but the conserving of the Church, tho sojourning under
never so many temporal Scepters, still as one body and government united in it
self, free from being divided and cantonized. Which end is frustrated, if so
many Princes as there are, there become so many independent Ecclesiastical
Supremes. Nay, but rather, the more the Civil Governments are multiplied, the
more need there is in the Church of but one, or a few, Supremes. That there may
not be so many modes or sects in Christianity, as there are Princes. So Vindic.
p, 145. Many inconveniences by foreign jurisdiction are urged: That (as the
Bishops of Rome exercised it) it was destructive to the right ends of
Ecclesiastical discipline, which [discipline] in part is to preserve public
peace and tranquillity, to retain subjects in due obedience, and to oblige
people to do their duties more conscientiously. -- (See likewise p. 146.) To
the actual exercise of the foreign jurisdiction of Patriarchs I have nothing to
say: as one Patriarch may use it culpably, so the next may use it justly. But
the foreignness of the jurisdiction is no way guilty of the things here
objected. Nay, where are these ends of discipline more failed, than where this
Patriarchal jurisdiction has bin banished? Do not we see in other Kingdoms,
not deserting the Patriarch, the things abovenamed, both Royalty and
Episcopacy, peace in the State, and in the Church of such countries, better
preserved? What former Prince, or Clergy, of this Kingdom, under the
Patriarch's obedience, (take him with all his faults,) have suffered more, than
these in our days have done, since that yoke broken? What subject, trained up
in his Principles, has bin so disobedient? But 2ly; Is any one free from a Law
or Canon, to eject it, when he can give some reason that it is inconvenient?
Or, did not the wisdom of those, who established such Canons, and such
subordination to Patriarchs, see their jurisdiction (for example, in respect of
Africa) to be foreign, and weigh the inconveniences thereof, as well as we now
do? but they weighed these together with the benefits, serving for preserving
unity; for doing more entire justice being less engaged; for deciding
controversies more truly, being persons of more eminent wisdom, enabled with a
more selected Council, etc. (See before,. 14.) And now have other Nations lost
their reason, who, notwithstanding the foreignness of the jurisdiction, in
obedience to the Church-canons, submit to this power? But what if a Patriarch
should change the Bible into an Alcoran, (as he urges elsewhere, Reply to
Bishop of Chalced.) "should, in Spiritual matters misguide us? I answer, when
you can find any to obey, who may not be faulty in his government, leave the
Patriarch, and go to him. Are we more secure, then, under the Supremacy of a
Secular power? or of some other Archbishop? What if the Secular power throw
down Bishops, destroy the public Liturgies, silence the orthodox Ministry,
etc? And what if the Archbishop change the Bible? or will we be our own
Supreams, and blot out the name of Canonical obedience?

Hammond's plea ( Schism 6. c. p. 115.) seems to me not true, nor his proofs
and instances sufficient, and the assertion in the consequences thereof
dangerous to the government and unity of the Church Catholic: where he says,
That it is, and has always bin, in the power of Christian Emperors and
Princes, within their Dominions, to erect Patriarchats, or to translate them
from one city to another. And therefore (says he) whatever title is supposable
to be acquired by the Pope in this Island, upon the first plantation of the
Gospel here, [ whatever: I will therefore suppose his title to have bin from
ancient Churchcanon and custom, whereby he has bin confirmed Patriarch of the
Western Provinces; I say, not that such a thing was, now, but suppose such a
thing were,] this cannot so oblige the Kings of England ever since, but that
they may freely remove that power from Rome to Canterbury, and subject all the
Christians of this Island to the Spiritual power of that Archbishop or Primate,
independently from any foreign Bishop. -- I say, this Thesis seems to me very
untrue; if he mean, That Princes may do any such thing by their own just power,
without the authoritative concurrence of the Church, or contrary to her former
Canons and ancient Customs, (as his instancing in Ravenna and Justiniana prima,
and Carthage, and Grado, formerly under the jurisdiction of the Roman
Patriarch, imply, that he means thus); For example: I say, it is not lawful,
supposing ancient Canons or immemorial custom (to use his own word) of the
Church, had made the Roman Bishop Patriarch of the West, or of France, for the
King of France either with or without the consent of his own particular Clergy
within his Dominions, to erect a new Patriarchate, or elect another Patriarch.
This I think is plain from the Discourse and the Concessions preceding. And he
seems to say the like himself ( Answer to Schism Disarmed, p. 164.) A power
Princes have to erect Metropoles; but if it be exercised so as to thwart known
Canons and Customs of the Church, this certainly is an abuse. Thus he. But how
it coheres with what else is said there, I see not. But if secular Princes have
such power to set up Patriarchs within their own Dominions, I ask, whether
General Councils have not also the same; and that within the same Dominions of
Secular Princes? Will he deny this power to Councils, or at least their power
to do it within the Secular Prince's Dominions? But then the Church has no
power to do it at all. For where are the Church's Subjects, for whom she makes
Laws, as she thinks fit, but under the government of some or orther Secular
Power? But the contrary of these things is most evident; and many are her
canons to this purpose. The Council of Chalcedon, the same, upon two Canons of
which Balsamon founds, and by which the Doctor proves, this authority of
Princes to make Patriarchs, did erect Constantinople into a Patriarchy next to
Rome (which also was done before by Conc. Constant. 1. but not confirmed by the
Roman and Occidental Bishops): and this not only to an empty Dignity, or
precedence in place, but to a real jurisdiction over some of the Emperor's
Provinces, to receiving and judging appeals, etc. see Conc. Chalc. Act. 16. and
Can. 9. and 16. And when the Bishop of Rome much opposed this Act of the
Council, the Emperor then making Constantinople the Seat of his Empire, and
much desiring the advancement of its Bishop, yet appeared not at all in this
promoting of him, nor claimed any such right as due to him; tho this happened
long after Valentinian is pretended to have advanced Ravenna to a
Patriarchship, and independency on Rome. Nor the Council, in their Letter to
Leo (see Act. 3.) pleaded any such power as belonging to the Emperor at all
(but to themselves) only they say, Nos carantes tam piissimos and Christi
amicos Imperatores, qui super hoc delectantur, quam clarissimum senatum, etc.
and sic enim and pii Principes complacebunt, etc. This power then cannot with
any modesty be denied to Councils. If both of them then have this power, and
that in the same place (as I have showed it must be) what if they disagree?
Suppose the one gives Rome jurisdiction over Ravenna, the other exempts it, and
makes Ravenna supreme for it self; who must be obeyed? If the Prince may
reverse what the Council has done, then their Canons in these Spiritual
matters are subordinate to his Edicts; then [Sedes Romana in omnibus and per
omnia prima] ( Conc. Chalc. Act. 16.) holds no longer than during the Emperor's
pleasure. Then why so much courting Leo's consent for a thing in the Emperor's
gift? Or does Dr. Hammond here mean only a power in Princes to make some
inferior Patriarchs, subordinate not only in Dignity, but Jurisdiction to these
supreme ones (as the name of Patriarchs in some times has been communicated to
inferior Bishops): But then this Thesis of his, if true, will serve little to
his purposes, as long as he leaves his Patriarchs under the yoke of a superior?
You see how I cast about, and yet cannot set these things straight. The Doctors
proofs for what he says are these:

The Emperor Justinian's erecting Justiniana Prima into a Patriarchate, with
independency on Rome, and afterward Carthage to the like privileges: And, the
Emperor Valentinian's constituting Ravenna an independent and Patriarchal Seat.
To which instances, see what I have said before in this Discourse, 30. and what
authority the Western Patriarch exercised over the Doctor's Patriarchs, both
after Justinian's days, and before; which argues either them not made
Patriarchs in such an independency on any superior, as the Doctor imagines; or
the Emperor's act disobeyed by the Western Patriarch, as contrary to the
Canons. As for the reason he gives, to secure the lawfulness thereof ( Answ. to
Schism Disarmed p. 112.) ( because never checked at, nor noted as an
intrenchment on the jurisdiction of the Church of Rome (that we discern, or is
pretended) either by any Council, or by any Bishops of the Church then living:)
It seems many ways insufficient; because, if there be a Canon prohibiting it,
hence it will become unlawful: and many things may be unlawfully done, and yet
not actually questioned and condemned: And again, may be condemned; and yet not
this condemnation recorded: Yet is there record enough of the condemning of any
such Supremacy in those Bishoprics, in the authority we find used over them
still by the Roman Patriarch. Next, he urges the 12th Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon, as intimating, that this Prince's making Patriarchs was a frequent
(I suppose he means, and allowed of by the Church) usage in the East, at that
time. And after this, the 17th Canon Conc. Chalc. and Can. 38. Conc. Constant.
in Trullo. Which Canons (he says Schis. p. 119.) do more expressly attribute
this power to the Prince; or yield it to be a power belonging to the Prince.
But being a little exagitated for this by the Replier; especially when Balsamon
(whose judgment the Doctor much follows) says, the Church by these Canons
conferred this power on the Prince; he (in his Answer to him p. 174) says
thus: Whether it were from God immediately conferred on them, and independantly
from the Church; or whether the Church, in any notion, were the medium that God
used now under the Gospel to confer it on them, truly I neither then was, nor
now am, inclined, either to enquire, or take upon me to determine. Now to see
what may be deduced from them, in this matter of no small moment, I will
transcribe you these three Canons. -- Conc. Chalc. can. 12. Pervenit ad nos,
quod quidam, praeter Ecclesiasticos ordines, affectantes potentiam per
pragmaticam sacram [ i. e. by an Imperial Constitution] unam Provinciam in duas
dividant, ita ut ex hoc inveniantur duo Metropolitani Episcopi in eadem, una,
esse Provincia. Statuit ergo sancta Synodus deinceps nihil tale attentari a
quolibet Episeopo. Eos vero qui tale aliquid attentaverint, de proprio gradu
cadere. Si quae vero antea civitates per pragmaticum [alias, literis
Imperialibus] Imperialem Metropolitani nominis honor decoratae sunt, nomine
solo perfruantur: and qui Ecclesiam ejus [Civitatis] regit Episcopus [ i. e.
nomine solo Metropolitani perfruatur,] [Salvis scilicet verae Metropoli
privilegiis suis]. Privilegio Metropolitano Episcopo jure proprio reservato. --
Can. 17. [Statutum est, or decrevimus, alias singularem Ecclesiasticarum
rusticas Parochias] Per singulas* Ecclesias rusticanas Parochias sive
possessiones manner immobiles apud eos Episcopos, qui eas retinent, etc. -- Si
vero quaelibet Civitas per authoritatem Imperialem renovata est, aut si
renovetur in posterum, civilibus and publicis ordinationibus etiam
Ecclesiasticarum Parochianarum sequatur ordinatio. -- In another Copy; Si qua
vero civitas potestate Imperiali novata est [ i. e. noviter constructa] aut si
protinus innovetur, civiles dispositiones and publicas Ecclesiarum quoque
Parochiarum ordines subsequantur. -- Conc. Constant. in Trullo, can. 38. --
Canonem, qui a Patribus factus est [referring to this Canon Conc. Chalc.] Nos
quoque observamus, qui sic edicit: Si qua civitas a regia potestate innovata
est vel innovabitur, civilem ac publicam formam Ecclesiasticarum quoque rerum
ordo consequatur. In the first of these, Conc. Chalc. c. 12. there is the
Emperor by his Letters making another City (upon the ambition and solicitation
of the Bishop thereof) Metropolitan in a Province, wherein there was a
Metropolitan already; but this fact of the Emperors disallowed by the Council,
as a thing against Canon, (which Canon was, as the Doctor acknowledges, That
there should be but one Metropolitan of one Province) and ordered, that, for
the future, whatever Bishop sought such a thing should be degraded; and for
what was already past, that the City and Bishop should enjoy the Title of
Metropolitan, but none of the Privileges; but that these be still retained to
the former Metropolitan. When As the Doctor pretends, it was the Prince's
right, both to confer the Title and the Privileges of Metropolitan on what
City he pleased. One would think then, according to this the Doctor says, That
the Council, if the Bishop were faulty and offended against the Canon, in
soliciting such a thing, should punish him only; another person, whom they
approved, being substituted in his place to enjoy the rights, which the Prince
had conferred upon it; and not, that they should by their authority (as if
these things were in their disposal, not in the Prince's) continue the Title
only, and reverse the Privileges, and fix them to their former possessors. The
Bishop might have been punished, and yet not the Emperor's act rescinded by
them, as to the new Metropolitans power or privileges; as it is plain, it was.
Yet Dr. Hammond makes use of this Canon (by showing such things were then done
by Princes) to prove, that suppose the Bishop of Rome were Patriarch of France,
yet the King of France might lawfully make the Bishop of Paris Patriarch, and
confer the Pope's privileges on him. This S. W. (replying upon his Treatise of
Schism) wonders at; and the Doctor endeavors to clear all, in following
Balsamon's judgment, and distinguishing between the Prince's erecting such a
Metropolitanship (...), of his own motion, when (he says) it stands good: Or
upon base solicitation, when the Council (it seems) may reverse it. But I ask;
when such a thing is done of his own inclination, stands it good, if against
the Canon [that there should be but one Metropolitan in one Province]? if so,
what means he to say ( Answ. p. 164.) A Prince's power to erect Metropoles, if
exercised so by him, as to thwart known Canons and Customs of the Church, this
certainly is an abuse. And again (p. 165.) 'Such power stands valid to all
effects, if duly exercised by him, without wrong to any, [ i. e. other
Metropolitan.] As for that which is urged from the Canon of a Council held
under Alexius Comnenus, an Eastern Emperor after 1080, what is established by
such a Synod, not General, is too weak to overthrow any former rights of the
Church. Neither is Balsamon's (a later Greek Writer's) authority much to be
stood upon in this controversy. Neither speaks he home in this point, whether
the Patriarch is to admit what the Emperor does (...) after he has represented
to the Emperor, that it is against the Canons. Thus much of the 12th Canon. In
the 17th Canon, and the 38th in Trullo: Here is only (upon the Emperor's
building a new City, (or perhaps upon his transferring the Civil right and
privileges of having the seats of Judicature, etc. from one City in a Province
unto another), and upon this subjecting some other inferior Cities or Towns
(called Parochia's) when being the jurisdiction of an ordinary Bishop, (see
Hammond Schism p. 57.) unto it); the subjecting also of the Bishops of those
Parochiae under that City, to the Bishop of that City. Where note, First, that
these Canons speak only of the subjecting of Parochial Bishops to new
Metropolitans, where new Cities are builded; and not of altering any thing in
the jurisdiction of old; which the 12th Canon of the same Council so expressly
opposes. Secondly, Only of subjecting Parochial Bishops to new Metropolitans;
not of subjecting Metropolitans to new Patriarchs, nor yet to new Primates. For
it is most clear, that this very Council, that made this Canon, never dreamt of
any power the Emperor had to erect a new Patriarch (as I have showed before
43.) and much less Leo the Bishop of Rome, who confirmed these Canons; yet
vehemently opposed the Council seeking to erect Constantinople into a
Patriarchy; much more would he have opposed the Emperor. Thirdly, Whatever
privilege the Emperor here receives; methinks their ordering that such a thing
should be done [subsequatur] is far from sounding, that they yielded such a
thing to belong to the Emperor by right, as Dr. Hammond expounds it ( Schis. p.
119.) But then, if the Emperor hold such privilege from the Church, the
Church, when they please, may resume this power; for so himself argues,
concerning any privileges which Secular Princes have formerly conceded to the
Bishop of Rome; and then hear, what the 21th Canon of the 8th General Council
says (if we will trust later Councils, not far distant in time, better to
understand the concessions of former), Definimus neminem prorsus mundi
potentium quenquam eorum, qui Patriarchalibus sedibus praesunt, inhonorare, aut
movere a proprio throno tentare. Sed omni reverentia and honor dignos
judicare, praecipue quidem sanctissimum Papam senioris Romae, etc.

etc.) the power of changing the seat of a Bishop, or dividing one Province
into many; as likewise, the presenting of particular persons to several
Dignities in the Church, which also private Patrons do, without claiming any
superiority in Church Matters, (some of which seem of small consequence as to
Ecclesiastical affairs): Yet are not these things justly transacted by the
Prince's sole Authority, without the approbation first of Church-Governors: But
the same things may be acted by the Church alone, the Prince gainsaying; if he
be either Heathen or Heretic, (which also shows his power when orthodox, in
the regiment of the Church, to be only executive and dependent on the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate's). No persons are, or at least ought to be put into
any Church-dignities, without the authoritative consent and concurrence of the
Clergy; who, if they reject such persons (tho presented by Princes) as
unorthodox, or otherwise unfit, they cannot be invested in such Offices Hear
what the 8th General Council says of this matter, Can. 22. Sancta and
universalis Synodus definit, neminem Laicorum principum vel potentum semet
inserere electioni vel promotioni Patriarchae, vel Metropolitae, aut cujuslibet
Episcopi, ne videlicet, etc. Praesertim cum nullam in talibus potestatem
quenquam potestativorum vel caeterorum Laicorum habere conveniat. -- Quisquis
autem saecularium principum and potentum vel alterius dignitatis Laicae
adversus communionem ac consentaneam atque Canonicam electionem Ecclesiastici
ordinis agere tentaverit, Anathema sit. The transplanting of Bishoprics, and
division of Provinces, probably was never ordered by Princes; but either first
proposed, or assented-to, by the Clergy (see that instance of Anselm, Hammond
of Schis. p. 122.) or upon some more general grant, indulgently made to some
pious Princes from the chief powers of the Church. Tho Historians commonly in
relation of such facts, mention only the King's power, as by whose more
apparent and effectual authority such things are put in execution: in which
things negative arguments [that such persons, as are not mentioned, did not
concur; especially when they are mentioned to concur in some other acts of the
same nature] are very fallacious. But imagine we once the power of erecting
Patriarchies and Primacies, and by consequence of the bestowing and
transferring the several privileges thereof, solely cast into the hands of a
Secular Prince, and then this Prince not orthodox (a supposition possible); and
what confusion and mischief must it needs produce in such a body as the Church;
strictly tied in Canonical obedidience to such Superiors, and submitting to
their judgment, and decisions, in spiritual matters; by which the King may sway
the controversies in Religion, within his own Dominions, what way he pleases;
unless we will imagine, there shall be no Ecclesiastics at all of his own
persuasions, whom he may surrogate into the places of those who gainsay. Such
were the times of Constantius. And by such violent and uncanonical expulsion
and intrusion of Prelates, the face of Religion was seen changed and re-changed
so often here in England within a few years (according to the fancies of the
present Prince), as if there were in her no certain form of truth. And the same
thing we have seen done before our eyes in our own days: The removing,
inducting, deposing, promoting Ecclesiastical persons, as the Secular power
pleases; being also a changing of the Church's Doctrine as it pleases. Thus
much to what Dr. Hammond has said, Schis. p. 120, etc.

Schis. p. 125.) he makes three instances; in the fact of the Kings of Judah;
in the fact of St. Paul; and in the fact of the Christian Emperors; tending to
this purpose, that their authority is supreme in Ecclesiastical causes, as well
as Civil, and therefore may erect Patriarchies. His words there are: The
authority of Kings is supreme in all sorts of causes, even those of the Church,
as well as Civil, -- as appears among the Jewish Kings in Scripture: David
ordering the courses of the Priests: Solomon consecrating the Temple: Hezekiah
(2 Chronicles. 29. -- 2 King. 18.) and Josiah (2 King. 22.) ordering many things
belonging to it. And so St. Paul appealed from the judgment of the chief
Priests, to the Tribunal of Caesar. So in the (...), the whole third Book is
made up of Justinian's ( i. e. the Emperor's) constitutions, De Episcopis,
Clericis and Sacris. And the Canons of Councils have (mostly) bin set out (and
received their authority) by the Emperors.

Concerning the first instance here, of the Kings of the Jews; I must remind
you of what Dr. Hammond has conceded, set down before,. 40. That Kings are so
Supremes in Ecclesiastical matters, that they have no negative voice in the
decrees of Councils; so that David, Hezekiah, etc, if we speak only of their
Kingly, not of a Prophetical, power, did (nor could lawfully do) nothing of all
that they did about the Priests, or the Temple, contrary to the orders and
rules of the Priests: but only according to these, in which they had always the
Priest, not opposing but, concurring with them in all their new models or
reformations, (as is showed elsewhere in Authority of Clergy derived from
Christ, p. 47.) tho the King, as the chief Executioner (and perhaps first
motioner also) of such designs, is singly named. But if Dr. Hammond callenge to
the Prince more authority than this, for some Ecclesiastical matters; namely,
those of external order, (as he calls them, Answ. to Schis. disar. p. 187, and
195.) and urges ( Schis. p. 124.) a saying of Constantine's to that purpose; (
Eusebius. de vita Constant. 4. l. 24. c.) (...): which he translates, Ye are
Bishops of the Church, for those things which are celebrated within it; but,
for external things, I am constituted Bishop by God. As if Princes may govern
and administer these, without, or against, the judgment of the clergy: then I
demand; Whether erecting Patriarchates, subordination of Bishops,
Metropolitans, Primates, etc, ordering of their Councils how often to be kept,
by whom called, directing of Appeals, Fasts, Festivals, etc, be reckoned by him
such things of external order? If they be; then General Councils in ordering
these things, (for example, the Nicene Council in composing their 6th Canon,)
either were only the Prince's deputies and instruments, and all such canons
were void without his ratification; or else they usurped an authority not
belonging unto them: for their canons we find full of such orders. But if they
be not; then Dr. Hammond's external orders will be nothing to the matter he is
discoursing of. As for the words of Constantine; it seems plain to me by the
chapter preceding, that he speaks here of his playing the Bishop over those
persons who were without the Church; both gentes subjectas Romano imperio, and
legiones; quibus (says Eusebius by the Emperor's injunctions) Idololatriae
fores clausae erant; repressumque quodvis idolis sacrificandi genus etc, over
which persons the Bishops of the Church had no authority; and I conceive the
words ought to be rendered thus. Ye are Bishops(...), for or amongst those,
[persons] I say; S. W. says [affairs] which are within the Church, but I am
Bishop for the persons or affairs without the Church. But the Doctor's
translation seems forced, both to the words, and to the context: in which I
appeal to any, that will take the pains to consider the words, and to view the
place. Besides that, I see not how the Emperor can call the prohibition of
sacrificing to Idols, the observing of the Lord's day, etc, things of external
order, as the Doctor will have them. --

Concerning the second; S. Paul's appeal from the the High Priest and the
Sanedrim to Caesar, (by which the Doctor seems to justify such Supremacy of
the Prince above the clergy, that from the highest court of Ecclesiastics, in
matters Ecclesiastical, appeals may be made to him, and to him, tho an
infidel,) I demand, Whether the H. Priest and Sanedrim were the highest
Ecclesiastical Court, or Council, by God at that time appointed for deciding
the controversies of Religion, (such as S. Paul's is by him supposed to be) or
no. If it were; then ought the controversy at Antioch to have bin brought
before them, and not before the Council of the Apostles: If it were not; then
the Doctors instance fits not his purpose. But, the Apostle here accused of
sedition, and, before any judgment given, laid wait for to be killed by his
very Judges, who justified him, in some part, for his religion, [the tenent of
the resurrection,] appeals to the Sovereign power for his necessary protection,
from the violence of those, who, in Spiritual matters, had no reason to judge
him. As for any appeal, in these matters, from the highest Ecclesiastical court
to secular Princes, it has bin often prohibited to the clergy in several
Councils, (see before,. 9.) and is so, as I conceive, by S. Paul (1 Cor. 6.1,
6.) to unbelieving Princes, such as Caesar was.

To the third, the Emperors constitutions, such as are in matters purely
Ecclesiastical, it is sufficient to say, that such never were contrary to any
laws of the Church; or when they were so, were so often void, in Dr. Hammond's
judgment; who grants the Emperor to have no negative voice in Councils, i.e. to
annull any of their constitutions; but surely he annulls them, who lawfully
enacts contrary. Such therefore were his Ecclesiastical constitutions, (so far
as lawful,) as that the clergy consented to, or at least dissented not from,
them. Which shows the legislative power primarily in them, not in him. For
there cannot be two Lawgivers in the same matters, over the same persons, both
whom they shall be obliged to obey, unless they can obey contradictions.
Therefore if the Emperor in these Church Matters have no negative voice in
respect of the decrees of Councils, they must needs have a negative voice in
respect of the decrees of Emperors; and so how much of his laws they disallow,
or deny, is cancelled. As for the other expression, [that Canons of Councils
mostly receive their authority by Emperors,] see before, 40. how S.W. has
caused the Doctor to explain himself, in his answer to Schism disarmed.

That obedience due may not be withheld upon Governors undue claims.
cannot be annulled, etc. by Seculars; and, That it is Schism to oppose any
authority so established]. Next; This proposition also I think undeniable: That
none may substract obedience from any in matters, where it is due, because such
person requires also obedience in matters, where it is not due: But, that
whilst the one is opposed, the other ought to be yielded. Therefore should the
Patriarch make a breach upon the Civil rights of Princes, or their Subjects,
these may not hence invade his Ecclesiastical: And if the Priest (Patriarch, or
Bishop) would in some things act the Prince, therefore may not the Prince
justly take upon him to act the Priest; or to alter any thing of that Spiritual
Hierarchy established by Christ, or by the Church; much to the good, but
nothing at all to the damage, of Temporal States. If any thing happen to be
unjustly demanded, it excuses us not from paying justs debts. The Office must
not be violated for the fault of the Person. Neither can never so many
examples, brought for such things, done by Princes, That Ecclesiastical
Councils may change their former Eccl. Laws, tho Lay-Magistrates may not.
be a sufficient warrant to any Prince, to do the like; much less, to advance
beyond such patterns, and do something more. See before 42.

After these, a third proposition must also be granted: That tho Seculars,
Princes or others, cannot; yet Councils may, change some former Ecclesiastical
Laws and Customs; and when they do so, are to be obeyed in their change.
Therefore the [(...)] in the Nicene Council, and [Jura, quae jam inde ab initio
habent, serventur]; and [nullus invadat Provinciam, quae non prius atque ab
initio sub illius fuerat potestate] in the Ephesine Council (frequently pressed
by Dr. Hammond, see Sch. p. 61, 65, 100.) so far as these refer not to
Apostolical traditions, but Ecclesiastical constitutions, must be understood to
oblige all the Church's subjects only so long, till the Church shall think fit
to change any thing in them. Nor did they hinder, but that afterward she
advanced (the Roman Church at last yiedling also her consent) the Sea of
Constantinople (contrary to (...)) both before Alexandria and Antioch, into a
Supremacy, the next to Rome. In whose power it is (as in Secular Lawgivers) to
alter her Laws at pleasure. Nor can any G. Council decree, that no General
Council after them (in matters of humane institution) shall change their
Decrees. That Prelates, and others, stand obliged to those Church-Canons, which
in a superior Council are made with the consent of their Predecessors, till
such Councils shall reverse them.
of which by later Canons (made by the same authority) they receive a restraint.

The truth of this fourth proposition also I think ought not to be doubted of;
That where the Bishops or Metropolitans (suppose subjected to no Patriarch) yet
are present in Councils presided in by one, or more Patriarchs, and do consent
to the Decrees thereof; such Provinces, and the Prelates thereof, stand obliged
to those Decrees; and cannot afterward at pleasure reverse them, and restore to
themselves their former liberty. Else Metropolitans, who are under no
Patriarch, will be liable to the Decrees of no Councils at all; no not of such,
wherein they appear, wherein they vote, wherein they oblige themselves. But,
supposing, they are as free as Patriarchs themselves; yet where in Councils
many Patriarchs meet, the vote of the major part obliges all. (Review what is
said before 18.)

Reflections on what has been said.
in relation to the Church of England.

Rome, That the Church of England seems obliged in as much observance to the
Roman See, as the former instances have showed the Orientals to have yielded to
it.
nor the Nicene or other Canons had constituted the Bishop of this City sole
Patriarch of the West (of which thing review what is said before 3.) yet) she
is bound to render so much not only honor, but submission also, to that See
(for what cause soever it was, that such was given to that last Seat of the two
great Apostles Peter and Paul, as it has been showed by the instances made
above, in those primitive times,) that the whole Church of God, the Oriental
Churches and Bishops, the Patriarchs themselves, and even Cyprus (so much
pleaded; concerning which review 18.) have rendered unto him, in appeals,
decision of controversies, approbation of Prelates, Ecclesiastical censures,
etc. For example: If the rule (spoken of 22.) [ praeter, or sine, Romano
Pontifice nihil finiendum] have any obligation upon the Oriental, the same it
will have upon the English, Bishops, or Synods. And the same power the Roman
Bishop has of receiving or hearing Appeals (suppose from Alexandria, as in
Athanasius his cause; review 21.) the same he has in those from England: For
what exemptions can England plead, more than Alexandria?

That the Church of England seems obliged to yield the same observance to the
Roman See, as other Western Provinces, upon the 6th Nicene Canon.
her Neighbors; who still continue obedience to that See. And the Mos antiquus
obtineat, seems to put all the Occidental coast of the world, who ever were
then already, or whoever thenceforward should be, converted, under his
jurisdiction, (see 3). In which Canon, as not Britain, so no other Western
Province, is particularly named; tho it appears, from some instances above,
that before Nice, both Spain, and France, and Africa were Christian, and
subject to the Roman See, (see 6.) And then was the British Nation also
already Christian; three of its Bishops being present at the Council of Arles
in France, ten years before this of Nice, (see Hamm. Sch. p. 110.), and many
suffering Martyrdom here in Dioclesian's days; amongst the rest, the famous St.
Alban. And the Arms of Lichfield, representing many mangled Bodies, are said to
be born in remembrance of the many Christians, who in that persecution suffered
there. Christian yet higher; before Tertullian's and Origen's time, who
testify so much of it, ( Orig. in Ezech. Hom. 4. Quando terra Britanniae ante
adventum Christi in unius Dei consensit religionem? Quando terra Maurorum? etc.
Nunc vero, propter Ecclesias, quae mundi limits tenent, universa terra cum
laetitia clamat ad Dominum Israel. Tertull. adv. Judaeos, c. 7. Cui [Christo]
crediderunt, -- jam Getulorum varietates and Maurorum multi fines, Hispaniarum
omnes termini, and Galliarum diversae nationes, and Brittannorum inaccessa
Romany loca, Christo vero subd ta; see also his Apologet.) Christian in the
days of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, A. D. 183. says Venerable Bede, Hist. Ang.
l. 1. c. 4. At which time, (Christianity, by the late favorable Edicts of
Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius, enjoying much tranquillity), one Lucius or
Lever Maur, a King of some part of Britain, bearing some affection to the
Religion or Christians, from their good conversation which recommended it, and
also for the miracles which confirmed it, is said to have sent two learned men,
Elvanus Avalonius [or of Glastenbury], and Medvinus de Belga [or of Wells], to
the Bishop of Rome, to desire from him, some holy men to instruct him in
Religion; and some Roman Imperial Laws to direct him in his Civil Government:
Which Bishop sent to him Fugatius and Damianus, by whom this King, and his
Queen, and many others, were converted to the Faith, and received Baptism etc.
Where, his having already with him men learned in the Scriptures, (see Spelm.
Apparat. p. 12.) and yet sending for others from the Roman Bishop; and his
sending to the Bishop of Rome so remote, when as there were then many Christian
Bishops in France, and particularly the famous Irenaeus Bishop at Lions, at
that very time, (methinks) show plainly, that the Britains had learned already,
that there was some preeminence and authority attributed to him, superior to
the rest of the Occidental Prelates. as likewise does the title of that
Bishop's letter to Lucius, (but it is much doubted whether this letter be
authentic); Scripsit Dominus Elentherius Papa Lucio Regi Britanniae, ad
correctionem Regis, and Procerum regni Britanniae; others read it, ad
petitionem. In which letter, whereas it is urged (see Hammond Schis. p. 109.
and Bramh. vindic. p. 155.) that he calls the King vicarium Dei in regno suo;
it is to be observed, that he styles the King so, before he was Christian; and
seems to urge it in respect of civil laws; which laws the King desiring that
they would send unto him from Rome, the Bishop advises him with his Council
rather to take them out of the Bible, the law of God, whose Vicar he is, than
out of the Roman or Caesar's laws. But let it be granted in Ecclesiastical
matters also that he is Vicarius Dei, that is, in promulgating the
Ecclesiastical laws, and enforcing them upon his subjects, with the denouncing
of temporal punishments; but not in making them; for this the Bishop of Rome
cannot alienate from Synods to Princes. Christian, yet higher, in the days of
Tiberius: Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae [Britannicae] verus ille Sol
universo orbi praefulgidum sui lumen ostendens, radios suos primum indulget, id
est, praecepta sua, Christus. Tempore (ut scimus) summo [extremo] Tiberii
Caesaris; quo [tempore] absque ullo impedimento, ejus propagabatur religio,
indicta (Senatu nolente) a Principe morte delatoribus militum ejusdem;
[Christianorum,] alluding to Hegesippus his story of Tiberius.] Thus says
Gildas, a Britain, who writ in the end of the 5th age; and therefore why may
not mos antiquus, concerning the presidency of the Roman See over the West, be
meant of this, as well as the other anciently-Christian Provinces there? But
when ever Britain first became Christian, tho such were after the passing of
that canon of Nice, yet many converted since the last conversion of the Saxons
here in England (as the Germans, and some other Northern nations, some of them
converted by the English) have also come under the jurisdiction of that See
upon the same account; namely of this Bishops having committed to him the
primacy over the whole Church, or at least the Patriarchate of the whole West.
And therefore Austin the Monk required subjection to this Bishop, not only of
the Saxons, as converted by him; but also of the Britains, who were Christian
before: subjection, not upon this title of conversion, but from the submission
which was thought otherwise due to this prime Apostolic See. [The judgment and
actions of which holy man (by this Nation to be had in eternal veneration)
ought not so easily to be condemned or slighted; since he was blessed here with
such success, and honored by God with so many miracles. Of which miracles of
his, and his companions, Gregory, who sent him, overjoyed, writes thus to the
Patriarch of Alexandria, Ep. 7. l. Indict. 1.30. Ep. -- Jam nunc de ejus
[Augustini] salute and opere ad nos scripta pervenerunt; quia tantis miraculis
vel ipse, vel hi qui cum eo transmissi sunt, in gente eadem coruscant, ut
Apostolorum virtutes in signis, quae exhibent, imitari videantur. -- And to
Austin, thus in another Epistle, (9. l. 58. Ep.) exhorting him to the
preservation of his humility in receiving so high favors. -- Scio quod potens
Deus per dilectionem tuam in Gente, quam eligi voluit, magna miracula ostendit;
unde necesse est, ut de eodem dono caelesti, and timendo gaudeas, and gaudendo
pertimescas, etc.]



That this Nation chiefly (if not only) owes its conversion to the Roman See. 1.
3. This title of Conversion seems not wanting (so much as is pretended) for
the plea of the Roman Jurisdiction. For 1. for all the rest of this Nation,
except the ancient Britains, namely for the Saxons, and those other invaders,
who followed them, this title is not disputed. so that, what was Pope
Innocent's pretense (see before, 3.) concerning other parts of the West, may be
Gregory's, and his Successor's, concerning the chief body of this Kingdom,
(supposing that the Church's customs or canons did entitle any authority upon
this ground): and for whom the Roman See has performed the same maternal and
fundative offices as for the rest of the West; it seems not unreasonable, that
they should return her the same duty, as do the rest. To that objection of Dr.
Hammond ( Schism p. 114.) in behalf of these Saxons liberty; That S. Paul's and
his Substiture's converts, yet were not all subjected to one and the same See;
it is granted to him, That conversion does not of it self necessarily induce
subjection to the converter, or to his See: but nevertheless it is as true, That
the Church (upon whose customs and canons such subjection is pleaded) in her
appointing some chief and Patriarchal Sees, for the preserving by such
subordinations unity and peace amongst her several members, has used this of
conversion, as a chief motive (tho not this always, or the only, motive) to
subject several Churches rather to such a Mother Church, than to another. See
before, 6.)

This for the Saxons,. 54. n. 1.2.
and others, whose race most-what we English are. But then for the Britains
also, it seems, That tho their conversion might have its first beginning in
Tiberius his reign, or very early; yet it was for the most part of it wrought
in latter times by several degrees, after their subjection to the Roman Empire,
either by Christians, who flowed in hither from Rome, and Italy, and other
Provinces nearer hand, (especially in times of persecution,) with the Roman
Officers and Lieutenants, (some of which before, were favorers, and after
Constantine's time, were also professors of Christianity, as amongst the rest
Theodosius, who was Valentinian's Lieutenant here, before Emperor): or by
several Missions from the Pope of Rome made either to plant and propagate
Christianity in these Islands of Britain and Ireland, or to reform it.

Such was that Legation of Fugatius, and Damianus, 54. n. 2.
mentioned before, 52. and such that, afterward, of S. Germanus a French
Bishop, famous for learning and sanctity, about A. D. 430. whom (as Prosper, a
French Bishop, who lived also in those times, relates) Pope Celestin, hearing
that Pelagianism had gotten some footing in this Island, sent hither for the
suppression thereof. Prosper's words are in Chronico; -- Pelagianus, Severiani
Pelagiani Episcopi filius, Ecclesias Britanniae dogmatis sui insimulatione
corrupit; sed, ad actionem Palladii Diaconi, Papa Caelestinus Germanum
Altisiodorensem Episcopum vice sua mittit, ut deturbatis Haereticis Britannos
ad Catholicam fidem dirigat. Vice sua, as his Legate; as if the care of such
reformation did some way especially concern the Pope; ad actionem Palladii, at
the suite and request of Palladius, a zealous opposer of, and writer also
against, Pelagianisme. In this Legation, another holy French Bishop, Lupus, is
mentioned also to have accompanied Germanus into Britanny; of which two Bishops
Bid indeed ( Hist. 1. l. 17. c.) delivers the story thus: That, upon the
request of the Britain Clergy (so unwilling to receive Pelagianism, as unable
sufficiently to confute it) these two Bishops were sent hither by a Council in
France. But, what Bid says, being taken out of Constantius, one who writ at a
greater distance from Germanus his times than Prosper did, is liable to the
more doubt. and 2ly, this may well consist with what Prosper says; since all
those Occidental Synods had a subjection to the Western Patriarch, and might
receive directions from him. The same Prosper says, that the forementioned
Palladius was, by the same authority, and care of the same Pope Celestine,
ordained Bishop, and sent into the more Northern parts of this Island, to the
Scots. -- Ad Scotos in Christum credentes ordinatur a Papa Celestino Palladius,
and primus Episcopus mittitur. See the same in Bid, 1. l. 13. c.

Besides these Germanus and Palladius, Bid and others make mention of Ninyus a
Britain, who finished his studies at Rome, and was made Bishop, and sent from
thence, not long after the other, for the conversion of the Picts, a Nation
lying between the Scots and Britans. Episcopus Reverendissimus, and
Sanctissimus vir, de natione Britonum, qui erat Romae, regulariter fidem and
mysteria veritatis edoctus, says Bid, Hist. 3. l. 4. c. -- Quem, audiens
Romanus Pontifex quosdam in occiduis Britanniae partibus necdum fidem Christi
suscepisse, ad Episcopatus gradum consecravit, and praemissae genti, data
benedictione, Apostolum destinavit. ( v. Broughton's Monasticon Briton. 7. c.
and Capgrave Catal. Sanctorum.) Likewise Patricius, who finished the conversion
of the Irish begun by Palladius, is said to have received his education, and
learnt his Divinity from Germanus, and Lupus; and going to Rome, and there made
Bishop, accepisse ab Apostolica Sede ad ejus Gentis conversionem Apostolatum. (
V. Baron, A.D. 431. Sigebert Chronol. and Sir H. Spelman A.D. 449. who out of
Matt. Westmon. says, both of Palladius and Patricius, ad Britanniam pervenisse
missos a Papa Celestino, ibique praedicasse verbum Dei.) Dubritius also, the
first Archbishop of Caerleon that we know of, (to which Archbishop only the
British clergy, in their conference with Augustine, acknowledged their
subjection,) was another Disciple of S. Germanus; and by him, and Lupus, with
the consent of the King, and a Synod of the Clergy, consecrated Bishop, and
possessed of this Archbishopric. See Spelman A. D. 512. and Apparat. p. 25.
and in the same manner did this British Archbishop receive his Commission from
Germanus, sent by the Roman See, as the English Bishops from Augustine; by the
persuasion of which English or Saxon Bishops also, afterward both the Scots,
and some at least of the Britains, about A. D. 700, were reduced from those
errors, whereof Augustine had taxed them, and conformed to the Customs of the
Church Catholic. V. Bid Hist. l. 5. c. 16, 19, 22. Several of which English
Clergy also in those days traveled to Rome, the more perfectly to learn the
Laws and Customs of the Apostolic See; or also there to receive their
Ordination. and St. Wilfrid, among the rest, went thither three several times,
and sat there also in a Synod, and being twice ejected out of his Bishopric,
twice had his cause heard there, and was twice restored by the Pope's Letters.
See these things in Bede's Hist. l. 5. c. 20, 21. -- l. 5. c. 12. -- l. 3. c.
4, 7, 29. -- l. 4. c. 1. These particulars I have set down, to show the care,
interest, authority, esteem, which the Roman Bishops had in these two Western
Islands in all those ancient times, wherein History gives posterity some light
to know, what was done in them.]

But next; however these things be: Yet supposing only then the subjection of
the Saxons, 54. n. 3.
and the English Clergy (upon this title of Conversion), to the Roman See, it
seems the Britains, for the present, can claim no liberty from the same
subjection; because those in Wales being subject to the Bishop of Carleon, or
afterward to St. David's; and St. David's being subject to Canterbury; [I
suppose this Canonically done; of which see Sir Hen. Spelman's Appar. p. 26.
that it was ordered so by a Council at Rhemes, and by the Pope; to both which
were made Addresses about it. As for the Bribery that is by some supposed in
it; I see no reason why it should not be judged an uncharitable suspicion,
being a thing every where imputable, when rich and poor contend;] subjected
also at that time, when Canterbury was professedly subject to Rome, in the
Reign of K. Hen. I. Hence it follows, I say, that these Britains must needs be
subjects also to that See, to which must Canterbury is subject; and that
Church, has which any Jurisdiction over Canterbury, will also have the same
over St. David's; (suppose in Appeals, or the like). And again, those Britains
who were out of Wales, dispersed among the Saxons, becoming subjects to the
Saxon Bishops there, who were the Pope's subjects, must also be subject to the
Pope.

Yet fourthly; 55. n. 1. And has in ancient Councils, together with other
Churches, subjected it self to that See before the Saxon Conversion.
If the Britains were not converted by that See, it may be showed, that they
had submitted themselves, and joined with the rest of Christianity in those
Conciliary acts, which had given some supremacy of Jurisdiction, to the Sea of
Rome, (amongst others) over them. For we find some of the Britain Bishops
present, as at the Council of Ariminum; where, as Severus ( Hist. l. 2.) and
Spelman ( Appar. p. 24.) say, three of them, being poor, were maintained on the
Emperor's charge; so, before this, at the Council of Sardica (assembled some
twenty years after that of Nice) as Athanasius, who was also present there,
himself witnesses (see before 23. n. 1.) and therefore may the Canons of that
Council be presumed, amongst the rest, to be ratified by them, or at least,
being passed by the major part of that Occidental Council, to oblige them. Now
what honor these Canons give to the Roman Bishop, how they constitute him
supreme in Appeals, see before 11.

[Against this (urged by S. W.) Bishop Bramhall ( Rep. to S.W. 4. p. 24.)
replies; 1. That it does not appear, 55. n. 2.
that the British Bishops did assent to that Canon. 2. That the Council of
Sardica was no G. Council after all the Eastern Bishops were departed, as they
were before the making of that Canon. 3. That the Canons of the Council of
Sardica were never received in England, or incorporated into the English Laws;
and that without such incorporation, they did not bind English Subjects. 4.
Lastly, That this Canon was contradicted by the great General Council of
Chalcedon. To which I answer: That this Council at least was a full and
complete Occidental Council. That Canons passed by the most part of such a
Council, are obliging to the rest contradicting, whether Persons, Churches, or
Christian States. That where no contradiction of any person, Church, or State
appears, they are presumed to assent, (in justification of which, see a more
large discourse in Par. 2. 4. and 24.) That if the Canons of Councils only
receive force in a Christian State by being incorporated into their Laws, then
by being expunged again at pleasure out of these, they lose their force: And
then where is the Church's authority in her Decrees, which are valid only till
any particular State pleases to eject them? That thus he will find, either not
all Canons, which he grants obliging, incorporated into the English Laws, (I
mean those before the Reformation), or more; namely, those of Councils held
since the first four, or seven or eight, Ecumenical ones. Lastly, that the
Council of Chalcedon nowhere contradicts or reverseth this Canon, for the
Western Provinces at least, but rather establishes it, in giving the Patriarch
of Constantinople like privilege in the East; even the Cypriots not being
exempted therefrom. (See before 11.)

From this Council, 55. n. 3.
twenty years after Nice, let us ascend to the Council of Arles in France,
convocated by Constantine the Emperor ten years before that of Nice, (of which
see before, 23. n. 7.) and in this also we find the presence and subscription
of Britain Bishops (see Hammond, Schis. p. 110. Bramh. Vind. p. 98.) of which
Bishops, thus Sir Hen. Spelm. A. D. 314. Aderant e Britannia celebriores (ut
videtur) tres Episcopi (surely in Dignity much preceding, and much ancienter
than the Bishop of Carleon] nempe Eboracensis, Londoniensis, and de civitate
Coloniae Londinensium (quae alias dicitur Camelodunum) una cum Sacerdote
Presbytero, and Diacono, qui and canones assensu suo approbabant, and in
Britannia redeuntes, secum deferebant observandos. Now, there you may review
the first Canon thereof, settling the matter of Easter to be kept through all
Churches on the same day; and the divulgation of this through all Churches
committed to the Bishop of Rome, secundum consuetudinem.

Therefore the speech of the Abbot of Bangor (urged by Dr. Hammond Schis. p.
111. 56 n. 1.
and B. Bramhall Vindic. p. 103.) that he knew no obedience due to him, whom
they called the Pope, but the obedience of Love. where B. Bramhall says;
Observe what strangers the Britains were to the Papacy, that man whom they
call the Pope; seems (if perhaps authentic) full of ignorance; who, after all
that power exercised by this man called the Pope over the whole Church of God,
especially over the Western Provinces, and so much respect returned him from
them, as is set down above in this discourse (for I have made scarce any
quotation but before, or in, this Abbot's time), after the presence of the
Britain Bishops at so many famous Councils, after so many holy Bishops sent
for the conversion of these Islands by the Bishop of Rome's delegation, should
be such a stranger to his Person, or Authority, or his Titles (the like Titles
to which given him in this Abbot's, see given him in Cyprian's, time, 33.)
after A. D. 600. Where also you may observe; That the Irish Bishops yielded all
obedience to this Roman Bishop at this very time, when the British thus denied
it; as appears, both in that they are said by Bid (the South Irish at least)
to have returned very early to a right observation of Easter, ad admonitionem
Apostolicae Sedis Antistitis ( Hist. l. 3. c. 3.) And also in that about this
time they sent Letters to St. Gregory, then Bishop of Rome, to know, after what
manner they ought to receive into the Church such as were converted from
Nestorianism; to whom he sends his orders concerning it, directed Quirino
Episcopo and caeteris Episcopis in Hibernia Catholicis, Epist. 61. of l. 9.

And as for this plea, 56. n. 2.
of the Brittain's subjection only to the Archbishop of Caerleon, you may note;
That the first Archbishop of this City, that is known or spoken of, is
Dubricius; who, after much service done by him against Pelagianism, was
consecrated Archbishop by Germanus and Lupus, sent from Rome, as is said above
54. n. 2. the third or fourth from whom possessed that Chair when Austin came.
Meanwhile, before Austin's coming, the Britains had other Bishops preeminent
to Caerleon, a Bishop of York (the chief Bishop of the whole Nation, as that
City then was the principal City, the Roman Praetorium being there. See Spelm.
Appar. p. 22.) a Bishop of London, and of some other places, who were present
at the Council of Arles, where is no mention of Carleon's Bishop; of which
Bishops, Todiacus Archbishop of York, and Theonus Bishop of London, being
persecuted by the Saxons, fled into Wales with their Clergy, A. D. 586. Within
eleven years after whose flight thither, Augustine came into England, and upon
it their persecution in part ceased. Now there being no mention of any
opposition made, by any of these Bishops or their Clergy (which in eleven years
space could not all be deceased) to Augustine, but only by the Welsh under
Caerleon, it is probable, that they conformed to the rest of the West, in such
submission to it is Patriarch, as was due to him by the Canons of those
Councils, which their predecessors had allowed; and was rendered to him by
their neighbour-Prelacy of Ireland (see Greg. l. 9. Ep. 61.); as likewise, that
they celebrated Easter according to those Conciliary Canons, and the Roman
manner; and lastly, that, returning into some of those parts of Britain from
whence they fled, 57. n. 1. The Brittain's observation of Easter different from
Rome not agreeing with the Orientals; and no argument, that they received
Christianity from thence.
they aided Augustine in the conversion of the Saxons.

2. That Argument, [That the Britains were not formerly converted by any sent
from Rome, but rather by Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes, or some other
Eastern Doctors, because their observation of Easter was contrary to the usage
received at Rome, (see Ham. Sch. p. 113. Bramh. Vind. p. 104.)] seems of no
force. 1. Because the observation of the Orientals (those of Asia minor only
excepted) was the same with the Roman (see Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 5, c. 21.);
and it is to be presumed, Joseph, or Simon, had they founded this Church, did
celebrate this Feast on no other day than Peter, and James, and Paul, did. But
2ly, Tho the Brittain's observation, when Austin the Monk came hither, was
found contrary to the Roman; yet so it was also contrary to the Quarto-Decimans
of Asia. For the Britains observed it on the Lord's day only, as well as the
Romanists; only their Lord's day was that which happened from the 14th day of
the Moon in March inclusively, to the 20th day; but the Lord's day of the
Romanists was from the 15th to the 21th, [the 14th day, tho it were also the
Lord's day, being avoided, because it was the Judaical observation]; or indeed
rather, because (as Ceolfrid the Abbot discourses it at large to Naitan, King
of the Picts, in Bid, l. 5. c. 22.) with the Jews also the first day of the
Paschal Feasts, or of unleavened Bread, was not the 14th but the 15th day of
the Moon, to which 15th day (as in all other Festivals) the even preceding,
wherein the Paschal Lamb was eaten, is reckoned to belong as the beginning
thereof (and not to the 14th); therefore this Even also began the use of Bread
unleven'd, Exodus 12.18. So that the Britain's kept it a week sometimes before
the Romanists, namely, when the Lords day fell on the 14th. Of this thus Bid,
( Hist. 3. l. 4. c.) Quem tamen [diem Paschatis] non semper Luna 14 ma cum
Judaeis, ut quidam rebantur, sed in die quidem Dominica; alia tamen, quam
decebat, hebdomada, celebrabant. and so he says, ( hist. 3. l. 25. c.) that
Oswy King of Northumberland (observing the Britain and Scotch mode] brake up
his Fast, and solemnized the Feast, when the Queen with Prince Alkfrid
continued their Fast, and kept that day their Palm Sunday. Therefore to Colman,
in a dispute before these Princes, urging (as the Asian Churches had done) the
practice of S. John the Evangelist, desiring in their variance from the Western
Churches, to adhere to those in the East; Wilfrid returns this answer: That the
Scots and Britains neither followed the example of S. John, [ i. e. according
to the Asian Churches,] nor S. Peter, [according to the West,] nor did their
celebration of Easter agree either with the [Judaical] Law, or the Gospel;
because they kept not Easter but on a Sunday. See Bid, ib.

This Error perhaps was propagated to the Britains (not long before) from the
Scots. 57. n. 2.
Or both Britains and Scots might incur at first a mistake therein, from the
rudeness and ignorance of those times, overrun with civil wars, (which Bid
also hinteth, Hist. 3. l. 4. c. -- Sciebant enim resurrectionem Dominicam prima
Sabbati esse celebrandam: sed ut Barbari and rustici, quando eadem prima
Sabbathi venerit, minime didicerunt. Or it might arise (as Bede ib. 3. c. says
it did) from some of their Doctors misunderstanding the Egyptian computation or
Cycle of Anatolius. Whose writings also Colman, the Scotch Bishop, urges in
their defense in the disputation had before K. Oswi about this matter; and
Wilfrid there also shows them to be orthodox, and mistaken. v. Bed. 3. l. 25.
c. But upon what ground, or in what time soever this erroneous custom began
here, (since we find those Bishops, which were sent from Rome (see before, 54.
n. 2.) from time to time so welcomly entertained, and so readily submitted to,
by these two Islands, and in particular find S. Germanus, who came hither two
several times, solemnly keeping his Easter here with the Britain clergy, (see
Bid, 1. l. 20. c.)) it follows; either that their observation of Easter was
then altogether catholic; or that, if it was otherwise, yet by reason that the
difference happens not every year, but only then, when the Lord's day
chances to be on the 14th of the Moon, i.e. only once in many years, it was
then by these Bishops not taken notice of, till the coming hither of Augustine;
who first appears about A.D. 604 to have observed, and endeavored to have
reformed it, in the Western Church of Britain. and afterward his Successors,
and others, well-instructed in the Churches practice, to have endeavored the
same in the North and in the Scots. concerning which controversy letters being
sent to Rome to consult the Pope, several answers also were directed from
thence to the Scots condemning their practice. v. Bid 2. l. 19. c. Yet was it,
still, retained for some time both by them, and the Britains; till, after a
fuller conviction, about A.D. 700, or not long after, both were at last reduced
to the Catholic observance, (See Bid 5. l. 16, 19, 22, c.) as the South-
Irish were, by the Pope's admonition long before. Bid 3. l. 3. c. Meanwhile
many Saints and holy men there were, who so observed it, as their Ancestors had
misled them, in this observation also being much more tolerable than the 14
mani. Neither does it seem any great fault in them, but only in those of later
times, in whom obstinacy after due information of the Church's decrees made it
so.]

3. After this decree of the Church Catholic, 57. n. 3.
whenever manifested to them, it cannot be denied, that the Britains became now
schismatical; as offending both against the canon of Arles, mentioned before,
(where were present some of their own Bishops,) and afterward against that of
Nice. This business being one of the two causes of the meeting of that famous
Council; and being by them unanimously settled all the world over. Whose words
are these, in their Epistle to the Church of Alexandria. Socrat. Hist. 1. l. 6.
c. -- Quod autem ad omnium consensum de sacratissimo festo Paschatis celebrando
attinet, scitote, quod controversia de re suscepta prudenter and commode sedata
est; ita ut omnes Fratres, qui Orientem incolunt, jam Romanos, nos, and omnes
vos sunt consentientibus animis in eodem celebrando deinceps sedulo secuturi.
And hence it was, that in those later times, when the Churches orders were well
known here in England, the Ordinations by the British or Scotch Bishops were
accounted unlawful; and several of the Saxon Kings, to preserve themselves from
the Schism, sent their clergy, to be consecrated Bishops, into France, (amongst
whom S. Wilfrid was one), and to be consecrated Archbishop, to Rome. See Bid
Hist. 3. l. 17. c. 28, 29. c. -- 4. l. 1, 2. c. and elsewhere. Where also S.
Chad, the holy Bishop of Lichfield having bin consecrated (in the vacancy of
the Sea of Canterbury, and some other orthodox Sees) by three Bishops, two of
which were Britains, and unconformable to the Church, (tho the third, Wini,
Bishop of Winchester, was ordained in France, and orthodox, ( Bid 3. l. 7. c.)
Theodore, the next Archbishop of Canterbury, is said Ceaddam arguisse, non
fuisse eum rite consecratum, -- and Ordinationem ejus denue Catholica ratione
consummasse. And the same was observed also in the Ordination of Presbyters. v.
Bed. 4. l. 2. c.

4. Lastly, 57. n. 4.
It seems also clear enough, that they followed not the practice of their
Forefathers herein; both from the presence of the former Britain Bishops in the
Council of Arles, which determined this matter, (of whom see what Sir H.
Spelman says above, 55. n. 3.) and also from Constantine's letter, Socrat.
Hist. 1. l. 6. c. to persuade the Asian Churches to uniformity with the rest of
the world. In which he writes thus. -- Quoniam modus ille eximius decorusque
esset servandus, quem omnes Ecclesiae totius orbis parts, vel ad occidentem,
vel ad meridiem, vel ad septentriones, incolentes, servant, ac nonnullae quoque
quae in locis ad orientem spectantibus habitant. But lest you may think [ omnes
Ecclesiae and c] may admit some small exception of the Church of Pritanny,
afterward he names it in particular, (which thing he might also experimentally
know, from some part of his education there.) In me recepi etc, ut quod in urbe
Roma, in Italia, in Africa, in toto Aegypto, Hispania, Gallia, and Britannia,
etc, -- una and consentiente sententia conservatur etc; unless we will say the
Scotch and Welsh Bishops anciently to have observed Easter in this fashion,
whilst the rest of the British Bishops, viz. York, London, etc, kept it in the
Roman manner. Add to this what Bid says of the origin of this Error in the
Scotch Nation, (and the same may be presumed in the British,) ( Hist. 2. l. 19.
c.) -- Nuperrime temporibus illis hanc apud eos haeresim exortam, and non totam
eorum gentem, sed quosdam ex iis, hac fuisse implicitos. Which Honorius, and
other Roman Bishops, with their letters (see Bid ib) endeavored as soon as
might be to suppress. And judge you by these things, how justifiable those
proceedings of the Britain Clergy or Councils of that time mentioned ( Bram.
vind. p. 104.) were in opposition to Augustine the Monk; who only required of
them in this thing to follow the tradition of the Church; and objected against
them, -- quod in multis Romanae consuetudini immo universalis Ecclesiae
contraria gererent; and quod suas traditiones universis, quae per orbem sibi
invicem concordant, Ecclesiis praeferrent. All which was true, and the
proponent also confirmed this truth before them with a miracle, restoring his
sight to a blind man. See Sr. H. Spelm. A.D. 601.

Bramhal's vindic. p. 97.) that in the Britains ancient subjection to the Roman
Patriarch there should appear no more footsteps of any acknowledgment thereof;
no such intercourse of Epistles between him and British Prelates, in a nation so
anciently Christian, as those of other Western Provinces: The reason thereof
seems to be; because Christian Religion, tho early planted here, yet made
little growth, lighting in a soil then very rude and barbarous, and being
miserably oppressed and disturbed, from its very first appearance, with wars
foreign and civil; the lately subdued natives either taking up arms against the
Romans, to shake off their new yoke; or, when the more civilized part submitted
thereto, invaded by their Northern and Western neighbors, the Picts, and
Scots, and the Irish; and their former conquerors the Romans, by reason, of
civil divisions between the Emperors themselves, and afterward of the frequent
inroads into the Empire of barbarous Nations, no way able to protect or succor
them. Lastly, (upon their calling in other foreign auxiliaries, the potent
Saxons), forced to combat also with those whom they brought-in for their aid
for almost two hundred years, till at last they became their slaves. Thus did
this poor Nation live in much distress (see Gildas, and S. H. Spelman in his
Apparat. p. 12.) even from Constantine's time, when Christianity elsewhere
enjoyed some rest, until the settlement of the Saxons, and their conversion to
Christ. Which also may be the reason, that for the first 600 years, in those,
elsewhere so learned and nourishing times, there are not extant, or at least
not divulged, the works of any one Britain writer (born and residing here) in
theological matters, excepting Gildas; nor so much as the names known to
posterity of the chief British Bishops who lived in these times, save of a very
few, (see Spelm. apparat. 22. p.) who for the 300 years between Constantine's
days and the coming of Austin, mentions some three or four Bishops of York the
prime Seat, and as many of London; and the first known Bishop of Caerleon,
after A.D. 500.

Britain only, but the Saxon also, That the English nation is sufficiently tied
to such subjection by the Decrees of latter Councils, wherein her Prelates have
yielded their consent.
be originally free from any subjection due to the Roman Patriarch, both in,
and after, the days of Archbishop Augustine. Yet by the 3d. and 4th.
Propositions made before, ( 48. and 49.) such liberty can be no way pretended,
(see Hammond schis. p. 65. 100. Bramh. vindic. p. 96.) if frequent canons of
latter Councils, especially, wherein the English Bishops have bin present, and
given their suffrage, have restrained it. Now how many Councils are there since
600 or 700 years after Christ, (as the 8. General Council, the Lateran,
Constance, Basil, Florentine, etc,) whereof the English Bishops were either
members, or at least in absence accepted their Acts; which have confirmed to
the Bishop of Rome those jurisdictions over the whole Church, (excepting the
Question of his Superiority to General Councils,) or at least over the Western
part thereof, (conformed-to likewise by the ordinary practice of the English
Prelates,) which the present Reformation denies him? See the 8th and 15th
Session of Council. Constantiense (much urged by Protestants, as no flatterer of
the Pope, and wherein, the Council voting by Nations, the English were one of
the four,) condemning, against Wickliff and Huss, such Propositions as these.
Sess. 8. -- Papa non est immediatus Vicarius Christi and Apostolorum. -- Summus
Pontifex Ecclesiae Romanae non habet primatum super alias Ecclesias
particulares. -- Sess. 15. -- Petrus non fuit, neque est Caput Ecelesiae
sanctae Catholicae. -- Papae praefectio and institutio a Casaris potentia
emanavit. -- Papa non est manifestus and verus Successor Apostolorum --
Principis Petri, si vivit moribus contrariis Petro. -- Non est scintilla
apparentiae, quod oporteat esse unum Caput in Spiritualibus regens Ecclesiam,
quod [caput] semper cum ipsa militanti Ecclesia conservetur, and conservatur.
-- Now these canons of a Council, supposed not General, but Patriarchal only,
are obligatory, at least, to the members thereof, and consequently (by what is
said 40.) to their posterity, until a Council of equal authority reverse them.

6. Whereas Dr. Hammond thinks to free Prince and People, That the principle,
upon which Dr. Hammond sets the English clergy and nation free from such former
obligations, has bin showed to be erroneous.
or from any concessions that the clergy, or the former, or also the present,
Prince, has made to the Bishop of Rome, or to any other Patriarch, upon this
ground which he builds much upon; [That it is in the power of Christian
Princes, within their Dominions, to erect or translate Patriarchates.] For thus
he says, ( Schis. p. 115.) -- To put this whole matter out of controversy; it
is, and has always bin in the power of Christian Emperors and Princes, within
their Dominions, to erect Patriarchates, or to translate them, etc. -- And ( p.
132.) -- "Upon that one ground laid in the former chapter, the power of Kings
in general, and particularly ad hunc actum, to remove Patriarchats, whatever
can be pretended against the lawfulness of the Reformation in these Kingdoms,
will easily be answered. -- And ( p. 137.) -- "The whole difficulty devolves to
this one enquiry, Whether at that time of the Reign of Hen. 8. the Bishop of
Rome had any real authority here, which the King might not lawfully remove from
him to some other. -- And ( p. 138.) -- The 3d. will appear to have received
its determination also by the absoluteness of the power of our Princes, -- and
by the rights of Kings, to remove, or erect, Patriarchats. -- And ( p. 140) --
"If the Pope held his Supremacy here in England by the Title of Regal
concession, [ as Dr. Hammond holds he did, see p. 138. 142.] then he may
dispose it from him to some other, as freely as the same King may upon good
causes remove his Chancellor etc. And ( p. 142.) -- Thus certainly the King,
being the fountain of all power and authority, as he is free to communicate
this power to one, so is he equally free to recall and communicate it to
another. -- And this takes-off all obligation of obedience in the Bishops to
the Pope at the first minute that he is by the King divested of that power. --
Which freedom from that obedience immediately clears the whole business of
Schism, as that is a departure from the obedience of a lawful Superior. -- Thus
He. Now I say, whereas he builds so much on this ground, to remove thereby all
difficulties and objections; I think, I have above (by the first Proposition.
38. and by answering his proofs thereof,. 43, and also by so many contrary
examples brought in the former part of this Discourse) sufficiently showed it
to fail him, and to be untrue. Only here observe one thing concerning this
right of Princes; That the Doctor [it being much pressed by S. W. (upon the
Doctors quoting some Church-canons for it, of which review 44.) That if Princes
had any such right, they had it not as their proper right, independent on the
Church, or her canons,] in his answer to this ( p. 174.) seems somewhat
uncertain and wavering, by what Title Princes hold it. His words there are. I,
that meant not to dispute of such mysteries of State, desirous to unite the
Civil and Ecclesiastical power, and not to sow seeds of jealousies and
dissensions betwixt them, finding the same thing assumed by Kings as their
right, and yielded them by the Church to be enjoyed by them, thought I might
hence conclude this to be unquestionably their due; but whether it were from
God immediately conferred on them, and independently from the Church, or
whether the Church in any notion were the medium that God used, now under the
Gospel, to confer it on them; truly I neither then was, nor now am, inclined
either to enquire, or to take upon me to determine. -- And afterward. -- If it
were not formerly the Prince's right, but the Church's, then sure it is become
so by that donation. Now then if Princes should happen to hold this right only
from the voluntary concessions of the Church or Councils, or particularly from
the clause of one canon passed in the Council of Chalcedon, (upon which canon
the Doctor ( Schis. p. 120) confesses, Balsamon, a great stickler for Regal
authority, to found it,) then I leave to their consideration, whether the same
reason he pleads (upon the instance of former Kings of England conceding
Supremacy to the Pope) for Princes reversing the donation of their right when
they please, may not be returned him for the Church or her representative, the
Council. For if the Prince cannot give his right away, but so that he may
recall and resume it, so neither can the Church. And then, after so many canons
in, and since, Chalcedon, reserving to such particular nominated Patriarchs
their privileges, (the Church of England according with the rest,) and
extending this their jurisdiction over some Princes subjects at least, who have
the same power and rights as the Kings of England; and expressly prohibiting
Princes to remove Patriarchs, (8. Genesis Counc. can. 21.) where will his plea be?

That some rights once resigned, and parted with, cannot afterward be justly
resumed.
) suppose the erecting and translating Patriarchates to be the Prince's right;
and that originally: yet it may be such a right, as once parted with, cannot be
resumed by the former owner. For such rights there are, as, once passed away,
are not to be retracted; and such as we may alienate not only from our selves,
but from our successors, if such be the purpose of our donation. And why this
right may not be numbered amongst such, I yet seek a reason. If it be said; the
King cannot divest himself of such a right, without which his Regal power
(which he intends to keep to him and his successors entire) cannot subsist, I
willingly grant it. But the Regal power may well subsist, without the right of
constituting or translating Patriarchs. For the Regal power is entire in a
Prince not Christian; yet such Prince has no power to erect or remove those
Patriarchs, who have a Spiritual Supremacy over his, so many as are Christian,
Subjects. Again; the Prince, when Christian, as now, being a Son of the Church,
must also be subject to some Patriarch, i. e. supreme Church Power (giving to
him Ecclesiastical Laws, and (if need be) inflicting Ecclesiastical censures,
etc.) or other; and so must also his successor, if Christian. Neither does his
power to choose or appoint the person bearing such Office, any way lessen such
submission, so far as it is due; neither does it impose any more submission
upon his successor, than is due. Why therefore this may not be a right
alienable and partable with, I see not. When As the Kings electing a Spiritual
Supreme to be over him, seems not to be like the choosing of a Chancellor, or
other Officers to serve under him (as the Doctor compares it, Sch. p. 140.)
but, rather like the people's electing a Temporal Soveveraign. Now such people,
in electing such a Temporal Prince, transfer not their dominion and power
(which every single person had before over himself) upon him, or submit their
obedience to him, durante beneplacito, or quamdiu se been gesserit; been, i. e.
in their judgment (for so, who obeys only so long as he pleases, needs to
obey only what he pleases; for so soon as any thing displeases, he may change
his Governors. So, to make instance in the matter in hand, if Ambrose upon just
cause exercise some Ecclesiastical censure upon Theodosius, Theodosius may
presently remove Ambrose his Metropolitan power to another); but we tie them to
Allegiance; and tell them of their former right now given away, and bind the
Children and Successors to the act of their Forefathers.

Thus much of the Authority and Subordinations of the several Ecclesiastical
Persons and Orders. In the next Part, I will proceed to show you the Authority
and Subordinations of these, as they are united in several Bodies of Councils.

FINIS.

