THE DEAD-MAN TESTAMENT: OR, A LETTER WRITTEN, To all the Saints of GOD in
Scotland, Fellow-Heirs of the Blessing with those in England:

For a view of the present Work of GOD against the Mystery of Iniquity; and for
Unity and Love amongst themselves, in this day of the Lord's merciful
dispensation; and of the judgment of the Whore.

BY THOMAS WOOD, Sometimes Inhabitant of Leith, lately departed* this present
life.

And supplied by one of his own Contrymen, a lover of the true spiritual
Beauty of Zion.

Published by Authority.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, 1651.

HAving perused this Book, Entitled, The Dead* Man's Testament; I do find it
to be Orthodox and sound, and likewise useful for the Lords People, namely,
those to whom it is directed, I do therefore allow it forthwith to be Printed
and Published. Given under my hand at Leith, November. 25. 1651.

TIMO. VVILKS.

A LETTER, WRITTEN, To all the Saints of GOD in Scotland, Fellow-Heirs of the
Blessing with those in England, Grace, peace, and love, with a rich Increase of
all spiritual and heavenly gifts, be plentifully multiplied upon all you the
Israel of God for ever.
I Desire to write to you (dearly beloved) not in any considence of mine own
ability, being so unworthy; but in the love and light of his Spirit, who is our
wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification, and redemption I desire to say
something to you the sons and daughters of GOD, as the Lord himself has named
you, 2. Cor. 6. For I know (beloved) even by experience in my self, that in
this day of the fierce wrath of GOD upon this Land, the working of his Divine
Providence, in much love and mercy toward you, may be too much looked upon,
even by you his precious People, with the dark eye of natural reason and sense
rather, then in the clear light of the Spirit of Truth, as his love is constant
with you in Jesus. Because of the great distress upon this Nation, and wrath
over this People, and because of your own sufferings in your bodily condition
with the rest of the Nation; as also because the outward glory of this National
Church, and beautiful appearance of holiness and worship therein, is now much
defaced; Therefore even ye the freely Beloved of GOD, are in danger (looking
naturally upon these things) to conceive hard and dishonorable thoughts of
your kind and merciful Lord, as if he were not fully pacified nor well pleased
with you, in his dearly beloved Son; but were yet pleading a Controversy with
you in his displeasure for your Iniquities, as he is doing indeed with all the
ungodly of the Land. But (Beloved) although ye suffer in your bodily condition
with the rest of the Nation, yet your spiritual condition is nothing impaired
thereby, nor the free love of your Welbeloved any whit diminished: For those
sufferings, which in the Justice of God are curses to the wicked, are in the
mercies of your God, turned unto blessings to you: They are the fatherly
chastisements of your gracious Lords Hand upon you, in abundance of love, for
teaching you more of himself in the Spirit, and of his Heavenly Consolations;
and therefore they can do you no evil, but good. Your Fathers wisdom and
love, make all things work for your good: He has delivered you out of the
power of evil, and darkness, and translated you into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, Col. 1. 13. where ye have your life hid with Christ in God, above the
teach of either temporal or eternal evils; for by one offering, your Lord
has perfected for ever all you that are sanctified, Heb. 10. And therefore
rejoice evermore in the comfortable assurance of his free love, even with
strong consolation; for your Lord called you to have free access always, even
with boldness unto the most Holy Place, within the Vale of his Flesh, and has
covenanted with you, to remember your sins no more, Heb. 10. 18, 19, 20. What
reason then (Beloved) have your hearts to be troubled or afaid for any outward
shadow of evils; for ye have your abiding in the shadow of the Almighty. And as
for the decay of the glory of this National Church, and Formality of Worship,
wherein naturally we did too much glory, as did the Jews in the Temple, I
trust (Beloved) your GOD will let you see, that in all this great and terrible
Work, both he, and his Instruments have had thoughts of love toward you his
dear People, and is only pleading with all the profane in the Land, for the
abuse of his holy Things, and purging all you his Saints (who are his true
Church indeed, in whom he takes delight to dwell) from much corruption and
deformity of the multitude, that so ye may shine as Light amongst a perverse
Generation: for the beauty of this National Church (Beloved) has not been
that purely spiritual and holy beauty of the Immaculat Spouse of Christ, and
Kings Daughter, all lovely and fair within, Psalm. 45. And therefore, be not ye
offended (dear People) although your Lord, for his own glory and your comfort,
cast down, or pluck up that which not himself by his Spirit, but men by humane
wisdom or policy had builded or planted: Neither mistake ye the working of his
Divine Hand, as if he were robbing you his People of any of his own spiritual
or heavenly Ornaments of free love, which himself has put upon you; for his
gifts toward you in these things are without repentance. But as he is renting
his holy Things from the profane multitude of the Land, to whom men had
blindly cast them, and who carelessly trod them under foot; so is he in much
love purging you his peculiar People from these National, Whoorish or
Babylonish Ornaments of worldly power and glory, humane wisdom and policy,
and counterfeit holiness, and worship wherewith ye were fallen in love, and much
defiled: for the Mystery of Iniquity has been very depthly and deceitfully
working in this National Church, both in regard of her constitution or
Members, being builded (by the Policy of men, rather then by the Spirit of our
Lord Jesus) of all the profane multitude of ignorant Atheists, Witches,
Blasphemers, Drunkards, Scolders, and Mockers of Godliness in the Land, under
the name of a true Reformed Church of Christ, and a communion of the Faithful;
and in regard of that confused, mixed Power and Government, under the name of a
true Spiritual Church Power and Government of Christ, wherewith this Multitude
was ruled and governed; And lastly, in regard of that confused or mixed
Doctrine and Worship, wherewith this Multitude was taught, and wherewith they
profanely worshipped, or rather highly provoked the Lord to anger: for alac^
(beloved) this beauty of this National Church, has consisted more in
Multitudes of People, Humane Power and Policy, and forms of godliness in
Worship, then in any real beauty or work of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; For
the Office-bearers of this Church, not contenting themselves (as did the
Apostles) with such a number of you the Saint, to the Members of their
Church Communion or Body, as it pleased the Lord Jesus to separate out of the
worldly Multitude, and call into a Church Communion, by the power of his own
Word and Spirit, neither with that alone spiritual and divine power of him who
is our Noble Ruler, left us in his Testament, wherewith to govern his own
Spouse in spiritual and holy beauty, as separate from the World; but that the
Church might have some appearance of glory in the eyes of the Multitude, and
that their persons might be holden in admiration by all men, because of
advantage, these Office-bearers thought fit to have all the whole Nation to be
Members of their Church. And because it was impossible for them, as the Lord's
Ministers, to rule those by the power of the Word, who had never found the
power of the Word, or to govern the ignorant Multitude, as Members of the
Church, by the spiritual or Church Power of Christ, whom he himself had never
brought into be Members by his spiritual power, therefore they were
necessitate, (otherwise the Church could not stand in a National Constitution)
to join to their Ecclesiastical or Church Power, the Temporal power of the
Civil Magistrate, for governing the Church, and compelling all the multitude
of Fornicators, Whoremongers, Drunkards, Blasphemers, Brawlers, Scolders and
Calumniators (Fighters excepted, as not belonging to Church Censures) to appear
before their Sessions and Synods, for giving satisfaction, although not to GOD
(who approves no compelled service) yet to the Church or Ministry, by
extorted verbal acknowledgment of sin, making their repentance upon the Pillar
several Sabbaths before the Congregation; which few or none would perform,
till they were compelled thereto: And so, making a confused mixture of both
Powers, Spiritual and Temporal, employing the Civil Power in the government
of the Church, and the Ministerial or Church Power in the government of the
State, what they could not do by the Word, they performed by the Sword, for
confining all to their judgment, and for ordering all the whole unreformed
Multitude, in one Church communion and Body, casting the holy things of the
House of GOD, profanely and confusedly unto all. And so (beloved) whereas GOD
has proclaimed a perpetual enmity between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed
of the Serpent, these men would make agreement betwixt them: But what communion
has Light with Darkness, the believer with the unbeleever, or the Temple of GOD
with Idols, 2. Cor. 6. And these things being considered (dearly beloved) it
may appear to all you who are spiritually minded, that this National
Church Government and power, whereby it was acted over all People, has not
been the purely Spiritual and Divine Power of our Lord Jesus, which he himself
(upon whose shoulders is the Government) has left us in his Testament or New
Covenant, whereby to rule his own Church, but has rather been worldly o^
national; or like that detestable, counterfeit, mixed Power of that
many-headed Beast, or Man of sin, who by taking to himself the power of both
Swords Spiritual and Temporal, has by that false power, under pretense of
Religion, and the Work of GOD, subjected all Nations to his obedience,
tyrannized over consciences, persecuted the Saints, compelled all to his
judgment, and to receive his Mark; and so ordered all as one communion or
body, under the name of the Catholic Church, and under that color, has
deceived the whole Inhabitants of the World, ruling ambitiously over Peoples
and multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, Rev. 17. Which power and government,
with all his false doctrine, and worship, The Lord Jesus (who comes to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all you that believe) is now to
consume by the Spirit of his mouth and by the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

And as there has been a detestable confusion, and adulterous like mixture, of
the civil and Ecclesiastical power, in the government of this Church, which
has maintained a confused mixture in her Members, so has there been the like
confusion also in her Doctrine: for by the doctrine that has been publicly
maintained, that this Church so constitute of all people, and so governed by a
mixed Power, has been a Church most gloriously reformed, and worthy to be a
Pattern to all others, and that there ought to be in her no separation, but all
to be continued in one Communion. And although the meetings of all people upon
civil occasions, were lawful and expedient, yet by this Doctrine, the
meetings of you the Lords People, upon occasion of mutual conference, mutual
edification, and comfort, were taught to be unlawful, and unexpedient, and
that the civil power might suffer none to enjoy their liberty in the Nation,
but such as were compelled to the judgment of the Church. Whereupon several
of the Saints out of Conscience, refusing in some things, to conform, have been
exposed to sufferings, and in the more substantial Point, the Preaching of
Christ Jesus, and free Justification by Faith, in him, has been much obscured,
and darkened, by the doctrine of works, free Grace, and the everlasting love of
God, without, and before all good Works, has been so sparingly, and darkly
taught that almost, it could not be perceived, but the doctrine of the Law, and
Works of Reformation, so largely and frequently holden forth, that almost
nothing else could be heard, or known. In which confused mixture of the Law,
Gospel, Faith, and Works, in the point of Justification, and acceptance with
God, the mystery of iniquity has wrought very deeply, and obscurely, without
being perceived, as it did in the time of the Appostles: for the comforts of
the Word have been applied to all the multitude, upon their performance of
duties, and the threatenings of the Word, likewise unto all the multitude,
Believers, and unbeleevers, upon their failings in these performances. So that
neither the miserable condition of the wicked, has been clearly holden forth,
for casting them down, neither the glorious condition of you the Saints of God,
for building you up in the Faith, and increasing your strength and comfort: For
whereas the whole profane multitude should have been plainly informed of the
Law and curse, in the full extent thereof, that they evidenced themselves to be
yet lying in bondage, in the estate of wrath and condemnation, under the power
of the devil, and sin; and therefore could not be esteemed members of the
reformed Church of Christ, nor of the number of Gods people, but by the
contrary, the whole profane multitude, who evidenced themselves to be open
blasphemers of God, and mockers of you his people, and of all sincerity and
Godliness, has been taught and denominat, by this doctrine, to be Covenanted
people of God, faithful Brethren, faithful Sisters, members of the true
reformed Church of Christ, and of the Communion of Saints, to whom the Seals of
the Covenant arightly appertained. And as the condition of the wicked has not
been holden forth, but a crying, Peace, Peace, to whom there was no peace, so
neither has your condition, who are the people of God, but as the Promises
have been applied, to the profane multitude, as one body with you, so the
threatenings have been applied to you, as one body with them: for whereas the
blessing of the Gospel, abundance of Grace and everlasting Righteousness, and
free unchangeable Love, should have been plainly holden forth, and applied to
you his precious People, only upon your embracing of Christ, and the free
Promise by Faith, without, and before all good Works, Ye being freely justified
by Grace, without the Works of the Law, Romans 3. But by the contrary, the Law,
and wrath have been applied to you, with the profane body of the land, and ye
have been taught as one body with them, that because of your breach of
Covenant, and failings in Reformation, and duties, your God was not yet
pacified with you, but was yet provoked to anger, and entering in controversy
with you, for your sins, as with the rest of the land, as if the Constancy of
Gods Favor and Love, which he has sworn and promised to you, depended upon
your performances, or Works of Reformation. And as by this preaching of
promises, upon performances, the wicked have been hardened in their course of
formality, in hearing the Word, Singing of Psalms, receiving the Sacraments,
and such like, being thereby esteemed holy, both by themselves, and the
Ministry, and to be members of the Church, so likewise by this preaching of
threatenings, upon your failings and infirmities, even ye the Lords people,
(whom the Son has made free indeed) have been kept in much weakness and
bondage, and in a legal temper, under continual fears and terrors of Gods
displeasure, and anger to the great weakening of your Faith; and diminishing of
your Spiritual Strength, and comfort. Of Good Works, it is granted, must be
taught, but not as proceeding from fear of wrath, and displeasure, for not
performing thereof, but as proceeding from the Strength of God in us, thr^ugh
the assurance of his constant Love: For this love of our God increases our
joy, and this joy of our Lord, in us, is our strength against sin, Neh. 8.

And as there has been a confusion in the members, and the government, and the
doctrine, so has there been in the worship of this Church: for this it is
evident, that a worldly, carnal, and corrupted people can perform nothing
(whatsoever they pretend) but a worldly carnal and corrupted worship. They
cannot worship in Spirit and Truth: For the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. And therefore, if it be granted, that many of
the people maintained to be members of this National Church, and Performers of
worship, in singing of Psalms, receiving the Sacraments, were but a worldly
and carnal people, not acquaint with the life of God, nor with the Ministry
of Faith, then it follows, that much of the worship performed by this
national Church was but a carnal, corrupted; and sinful worship, detestable
in the eyes of the Almighty: for, whatsoever is without Faith, is sinful, and
abominable. And therefore the Lord has been highly provoked, by the carnal,
and faithless worship, performed by the multitude, in our Solemn Assemblies:
For the sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord.

But, beloved, that which much has served to fill up the cup of the Lords
wrath, against this national Church, has been in taking the Covenant: for the
Ministry not trusting the Power of God, in the hearts of his Saints, for
defending his Truth, thought good (as going down to Egypt for help) to combine
all the whole Nation together, as one body, one Church, in that solemn band,
wherein all the ignorant multitude, who knew not what they were doing, were
taught by the great and solemn Oath of God, to protest. Firstly, that they had
long and duly examined their Consciences, in matters of true and false
Religion. Secondly, that they were now fully persuaded by the word, and Spirit,
in the Truth of Religion. Thirdly, that under all the pains contained in the
Law, and danger both of soul and body, in the day of Gods fearful judgment,
they should defend the Truth of Religion. And was it not evident, (Beloved)
that the multitude of this land, invited by the Ministry, to enter into that
solemn Covenant, had never examined their Consciences, in matters of true and
false Religion; Neither were they ever persuaded by the Word, and Spirit of
God, in the Truth of Religion; and therefore could never defend that which they
knew not: for the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God.
So that, in binding themselves by such a solemn Oath, under such horrible
pains, to defend that which they never knew, they bound themselvesover to the
curse of the Law, wherein the Ministry was chiefly isntrumental. The leaders
of this people have caused them to err, and they that are led of them are
destroyed. And therefore the blood of the ignorant multitude, so engadged by
their leaders, and thrust forth by them, as sheep to the slaughter, for
defending that whereof they had no knowledge, lies heavily upon the heads of
the Ministry.

And lastly, Concerning the Assemblies of this Church: Ye know (beloved) how
corrupt, mixed, and confused they were; and that in these respects. Firstly, in
respect of their frequency. It is much to be admited upon what account
Church Assemblies were, so frequent in this Nation. We can find no president
for it in Scripture: No more is read, but of the Assembly at Jerusalem, Acts
15. and of Paul's calling the Elders of the Church of Ephesus together, Acts 20.
v. 17. It cannot be denied, but the Church now and then, may call Assemblies,
upon some grave and weighty occurren^ or other; whether it be, v. g. for
discussing and composing matters of controversy, as did the Council at
Jerusalem, or for some seasonable, extraordinary and necessary word of
exhortation and admonition. Upon which account, the Elders of Ephesus did meet.
But I would fain know upon what account be their weekly Presbyteries,
half-yearly Synods, yearly General Assemblies, and continual
Church-Commissions in this Land. Is it imaginable there can be fit matter for
such frequent meetings? No verily* What Cases of Conscience in finding out the
point of justification, and matter of controversy, in discovering the Mystery
of Iniquity have provoked such meetings? What grave and extraordinary word of
admonition has flowed from them, so often as they have been called? Or shall
we think, the Lord's people (whom we judge, the the only fit object and
subject of Church meetings) so ignorant, so backward, and so unruly, that they
stand in need of such frequent Assemblies? We dare not think so, unless we
should impung, their willingness in the day of the Lords power, Psalm. 110. Their
cheerfulness in obedience, by the love of Christ, which constrains them, and
the terror of GOD, whereby they persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. and the eminency of
their knowledge, (being all taught of GOD, Isaiah 54.) whereby none of them
needs to teach another; but all of them know the LORD, from the highest of
them, to the lowest of them, Jeremiah 31. That which engages them to their
duty, is the law put in their inward parts, and written in their hearts. It
indeed, and not to multiplication of Church Assemblies keeps them loyal to
the Crown royal of Heaven. Such Ecclesiastical powers use often to restrain
Christian Liberty, but seldom, or rather never promove the just freedom and
liberty of the Saints. Secondly, in respect of the matter propounded, and
discussed in these Assemblies. Know ye not (Dearly beloved) in them nothing for
the most part was to be heard, but needless debates, and vain janglings? Any
thing heard in them, was rather to minister Question, then godly edification,
which is in faith. How many tables and endless genealogies were heard amongst
them? which the Holy Ghost disclaimeth. We learn no matter in Church Assemblies
from the Word, but grave Cases of Conscience, or matter of Controversy, Acts
15. and of seasonable and necessary admonition for the good and edification of
the Church Acts 20. But the LORD knows the Assemblies of this Church did not
content themselves therewith, but went far out of their sphere. They could away
with nothing so much, as to examine the Books of Sessions, Presbyteries,
Synods, and Commissions. They were not ashamed to rob the Magistrate of his
right, as their due. Nothing could satisfy them, but proceeding against
Fornicators, Malignants, and all such delinquents; as if they, and they only
had had right to the temporal sword. Nothing could be done in Parliament, but
what was ratified and allowed by them. They pushed indeed with the two horns of
the beast: for the matter of such Assemblies, is an acting with both swords,
Temporal and Spiritual. And to color all this, there was a doing great
wonders, by making fire come down from Heaven, on the Earth, in the sight of
men, in establishing Popish Pennances, or mo^k Repentances. O! what deal of the
Spirit, did they pretend in these things? And thus they deceived them that
dwell on the earth. Thirdly, in respect of the manner of proceeding in these
Assemblies. It is known, they carried on things in a State-way, and not in a
Church way: They did not take every thing to the Law, and the testimony, but
they disputed every thing as Lawyers standing close by formalities, Law quirks,
and Church* Constitutions i^ not of State also as the grounds and ways of
their procedure. They did not proceed, because it seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to them, but because it seemed good to them, and was according to the Acts
and Practice of the Church. Oh! was not this the over-word in, and touchstone
of these Conventions. Fourthly, in respect of the Members of these Meetings
indeed they were answerable to their National Church; such as were Members of
the one, so of the other. And it can not be forgotten, how their Ruling-Elders
did not only sit as Ciphers in them (the Ministers taking all upon them) but
also they had no more Office-power, but pro tempore, yet I can see no reason,
why all other officers of Christ's Church, so well as Ministers, may not enjoy
their office-power, vel ad vitam, vel ad culpam. And for my self, I saw no use
they made of them, but to carry on things by plurality of voices, as if the
matters of Christ's House had depended from the consent and opinion of men, and
not from his own authority, according to the Word and Spirit. Fi^tly, in
respect of the power they did arrogate to themselves: What they did, they did
not as Councels, but as Court-Judicatures; they did not proceed by way of
advice and counsel, and upon this account, for it seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, but by way of command; and upon this accomp^, We enact and
ordain. Sixthly* in respect of their outward pomp and glory. O! how much were
they backed with the powers of this World? And it is observable, these
Assemblies of late, did begin with the accession of the Kings Commissioner
thereto, An. 1639. and I hope their pride has perished with the accession of
the Viceroy to the General Assembly, 1651. The reign and rise of Classical
Power are from the earth, Rev. 13. 11. and therefore it cannot but parish with
the earth. The fall of carnal and worldly powers will beget its ruin.
Seventhly, in respect of their tyranny; O! how much did they lord over GOD'S
heritage; they thought it their duty to Lord over their Consciences, to plant
over, and transplant Ministers from them at random. And I believe, the Lord, of
late has given them plantation, and transplantation, beyond what they desired.
They thought it no sin, to restrict people to forms of worship. To emit
Declarations, Catechisms, and stinte forms of Family Worship, and directions
anent worshipping in public, in their own stinted and Presbyterian way, They
made it their great business; even as their lips only had preserved
knowledge, and all had been obliged to lay what they said, or rather to swear
what they spoke. They thought it no Heresy, to emit Acts against the private
Assemblies of the Saints, and their going, from one first day of the week, to
another, to hear those Preach, of whom they expected most for Edification,
although their Parish Priest had been an idiot, void of the Saving knowledge of
God. They exhorted repentance out of all, and whosoever would not take their
mark upon them, they restrained their Liberty, by bills of excommunication, and
casting them over into the hands of the State. Such indeed had not liberty to
buy and sell, amongst them. Any who denied their Acts, and did not idolize
their Covenant (of which they made a State-Engine, for establishing worldly
powers) was forthwith to be excommunicat. No wonder: For, though they had
Lambs horns, yet did they speak as dragons, Rev. 14. 11. Eighthly in respect
of the proud title, they did assume to themselves. They were not ashamed,
Popish-like to call themselves the Church, even as if holiness and knowledge had
been only to be found amongst them in their own account, they were the
Inheritance and Church of GOD, by way of eminency and special propriety. What
is this, I pray you (beloved) but the Man of sin, sitting in the Temple of God,
exalting himself above God as God, or that is worshipped. Beware of this Whore
(dearly beloved) and Come out of her, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues.

POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Christian Reader,
I Must needs tell thee shortly what the Author of this Letter was, how far he
proceeded in it, and how it came to my hands. The Author of it was a most
Religious body, and much persecuted for the Truth. He lived here in Le^th, in a
most private and mean condition. And though he was blind in the eyes of his
body, yet (as appears) not in the eyes of his mind. In him our Lord has
made it appear, that he perfecteth his praise by the mouth of Babes, and
chooses the foolish things of this World, to confound the Wise. His purpose
was to emit this (he did not fear to profess Christ openly, though many of the
rulers, who believe in Him d^re not profess Him because of the Seribes and
Pharisees, yet before he closed it, he gave up the ghost. And he wrote no more
of this Letter, but till you come to that which is spoken Page 12. concerning
the Assemblies of this National Church, which I have supplied, at the desire of
a Religious Officer of the English Army. (...) in the interim know, I did read
an imperfest and undigested Scroll of the Authors, wherein he had hinted at
several of these things, concerning the foresaid Assemblies, which I express,
viz. Their ruling by plurality of voices, their debating things of no (...),
and passing by the out searching the Mystery of Godliness, and of Iniquity,
together with their employing the temporal sword of the Magistrate in the
matters of Christ's Church and Kingdom. But I durst not adventure to set down
these things in the Authors own words and way, though I had once intended it:
for he had (...) (...) and confusedly d^^^^^ed them being called by GOD from
hence before he had (...) them, and had taken them to his second thoughts. Upon
which account I have digested the last part of this Letter, in mine own way and
manner (though in nothing d^screpant from his purpose) lest had I done: other
ways (he having departed hence before he had (...) (...) leaving the leaving
the close of it, (...) (...) (...) the last part of it, should have been
inferior to the rest, as possibly it is as yet. Howsoever (Dear Christian
Reader) take thou my good, thin^ for my good say, embrace this Letter kindly,
and fare thou well.

FINIS.

