Systema Horti:Culturae Or The Art of Gardening By J. W. Gent.
engraved ornamental title page border, depicting floral garlands, two
flower-filled urns and a flower-filled basket. Printed for W: Freeman in
Fleetstreet. F. H. van. Hove. scul.



Systema Horti-culturae: OR, The Art of Gardening.In Three Books.

The I. Treats of the Excellency, Situation, Soil, Form, Walks, Arbours,
Springs, Fountains, Waterworks, Grotto's, Statues, and other Ornaments of
Gardens, with many Rules, and Directions, concerning the same.

The II. Treats of all sorts of Trees planted for Ornament of Shade,
Winter-Greens, Flower-Trees, and Flowers, that are propagated or preserved in
the Gardens of the best Florists, and the best Ways and Methods of Raising,
Planting, and Improving them.

The III. Treats of the Kitchin-Garden, and of the Variety of Plants
propagated for Food, or for any Culinary Uses: With many general and particular
Rules, and Instructions, for the making Hot-Beds, altering and enriching any
sort of Garden-ground, Watering, Cleansing, and Adapting all sorts of Earth to
the various Plants that are usually planted therein. To the great Improvement
of every sort of Land, as well for Use and Profit, as for Ornament and Delight.

Illustrated with Sculptures, representing the Form of Gardens, according to
the Newest Models. The Fourth Edition. To which is added the Gardener's Monthly
Directions. By J. Woolridge, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Freeman, at the Bible over against the
Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet, 1700.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ARTS as well as Habits, are subject to that Fate of being in Mode, as might be
instanced in several, besides this curious Art of Horti-culture: which never
declines when once it is become National, only varies in Form, according to the
several temporary Humors of such that place their Oblectations in it. As for
that part of Gardening, which is for the propagation of Trees for Pleasure, and
beautifying Seats with vegetative Ornaments, scarce any part of the World, but
estimates it a more than ordinary value. As for that part which is for Flora's
use, the extreme hot or cold parts are little adapted to it, those in the
temperate Zone the most: For these lustrious Beauties affect not Sol's
scorching rays, nor can their tender lovely Faces endure Hyem,'s too great
severity; yet of the two extremes, the cold is the most tolerable, there being
naturally more Flowers in the Meadows of the Russian Territories, than in those
of Guinea. But as for that part that relates to Esculent Plants, all Nations
delight in it for the raising of such as are most proper for their Climate*
Nature it self has directed us where, and in what parts Gardens are to be
planted with advantage, having spontaneously exposed to our view many curious
Plants; which made Varro to say, Divina natura dedit agros: which is in effect,
that divine Nature has indicated unto us those Grounds that are fit for these
uses: There rests only our Care and Industry to Till and Manure them, which was
an Exercise appropriated unto us from the beginning. That our English Soil then
is generally fit for all these Uses, may appear from its aptness to produce
naturally so great variety of Trees for Beauty and Shade, Flowers for Delight,
and edible Plants also if they are sown in it; which is a sufficient
encouragement for the Ingenious farther to prosecute this Art, which is of late
years much improved in every part thereof. It was not long since that our
choicest Avenues were first planted with those Ornamental Shades that now are
become common, and that our best Gardens were only worthy of those natural
Beauties that now flourish in every ordinary Partir: Many of our now vulgar
Dishes of Tillage, also, were but lately esteemed as Rarities. And as this Art
has with its Subjects increased of late years; so have the Instructions, or
Treatises, written to that effect, been multiplied. The affections of our
Countrymen so naturally tending that way, have given great encouragement to
such Publications, some whereof are very large and voluminous; others there are
that are more accurt, and treat only of some particular Plants, and ways of
ordering them. And as the Art it self was at first lame, so have the Directions
for its Improvement been; that if an inquisitive person desires to be informed
of the different Ways, Methods, or Means to order his Garden, etc. he must
procure many several Tracts, and those differing very much in their Rules and
Prescriptions the one from the other, and delivering many fabulous Stories, and
directing you in erroneous ways, affirming them to be true that are merely
suppositious; some of them are only translated out of other Languages, which
were written for other Countries, whose Horti-culture (as their Climate) varies
very much from ours. All which Inconveniences I have here endeavored to avoid,
by contracting into a small Pocket-Volume, the Names of the most and principal
kinds of Ornamental Trees and Flowers, with their proper Ways and Methods of
ordering; and an account of all such Esculent Plants that are here usually
planted for culinary uses: Together with the Method and Manner of selecting
Grounds for Gardens, and the making, forming, and adorning them; and the
improving, preserving, altering or renewing the several sorts of Earths, for
all hortulane Plants, wherein as near as may be I have not troubled you with
unnecessary, insignificant, useless, nor false Directions; but have inserted
only such as either I have actually experimented to be true, or have them from
Persons or Authors of good repute; or that are deduced from solid Principles.
Also I have not swelled this small Tract, nor troubled your patience, with the
many unnecessary Names nor Characters of the various species of Flowers, and
several other Plants; but nominated the more principal; the other being, rather
to be selected when in their prime by your Eye, than confided in from lame
Descriptions. It is better to trust to the integrity of a Gardener, than such
Directions as are usually written, and seem to emblazon the Fame of a poor
simple Flower, which when you see its highest luster in the best part of your
Garden, (as by the description and the price you gave for it, it should
deserve) you are ready to remove it to the most abject place of your Groves. It
may be objected, that there are many things in this Treatise that have been
formerly written of, and therefore it seems to be superfluous. It is true, very
able Pens have written of this Subject; but they themselves could not write
without mentioning some things, and those not few, that had been published
before: It being very rare to find a Treatise in this Age, wholly of a new
Subject; and any would esteem it a grand deficiency in the improvement of this
Art, if none should have written of it since Mr. Parkinson, Sir Hugh Platt,
Meager, and several others, because these had written before on the fame
Subject. I hope therefore that this Objection will have no place against this
Tract, the rather, because it has the Characters (that Mr. Austin has
proposed in his Epistle Dedicatory, before his Treatise of Fruit Trees) that
Books of this nature should have, Viz. 1. That they be of small Bulk and Price,
wherein I hope I have conformed, considering the variety of Matter herein
Discoursed of 2. Then the Style be plain, and suited to the Vulgar: In this I
am sure I have not transgressed: for I have waved as near as I could, all hard
Words, and intricate Expressions (now in Mode) not in any wise suitable to this
plain, honest, and ruslick Employment. 3. That these Books for Instruction, be
Experimental: As to this proposal I have exactly observed it. You will also
find several Matters here treated of, that have not as yet been mentioned in
any Book of this kind, and many Experiments very useful and beneficial, that
were never made public before. My principal design being not only to excite or
animate such as have fair Estates, and pleasant Seats in the Country, to adorn
and beautify them; but to encourage the honest and plain Countryman in the
improvement of his Ville, by enlarging the bounds and limits of his Gardens, as
well as his Orchards, for the increase of such Esculent Plants as may be useful
and beneficial to himself and his Neighbors. Many there are in this Kingdom,
that out of small portions of Land, have by their Industry and Ingenuity in
this very way of Improvement, maintained themselves and their Families, and
acquired over and above wherewith to enlarge their Possessions. Several parts
beyond the Seas, in Holland, Flanders, France, Switzerland, (of a near
temperature of Air with us) can show multitudes of Examples of this nature:
Italy also in Pliny's time, now the Garden of the World, was then improvable by
this way of Tillage: As appears' by that History of C. Furius Cresinus, who out
of a small piece of ground raised more advantage, than his Neighbors out of
their greater Possessions; but then not without the Imputation of Sorcery; such
was the Ignorance and Envy of that Age.

In this Country, in many places, Ignorance, Sloth, and Envy, are great
impediments to this way of Improvement; no Country in the World being without
some persons fraught with lazy and envious Humors. Therefore we cannot be
exempt from them, the best of Airs naturally nourishing the worst of Animals,
and the best of Gardens naturally producing the worst of Weeds.

As for slothful men, they are the greatest burden to themselves; but envious
men, although they are so great an afflicton to themselves, (as Horace
observed, that the Sicilian Tyrants never invented the like Torment) yet are
they also the worst Neighbors to good Husbandry, not only by a constant
depraving the endeavors and ingenuity of the Industrious, but using all means
they can to impede or prevent their prosperity: Like unto him that poisoned the
Flowers in his own Garden, because his Neighbor's Bees should get no more Honey
from them. Against such as those every ingenious and industrious man ought to
be well provided with a competent proportion of patience and discretion, and
not to be discouraged from prosecuting his intentions of improving his Ville,
Vide Vinetum Britannicum.
either by this way here proposed, or by some of the ways formerly treated of
for the planting of Fruits, Systema Agricultura.
or some other ways of Husbandry more advantageous than the old beaten way, so
much by some contended for, there being no Land, especially the smaller Farms,
but is capable of improvement by some of those Methods proposed: Although I
know that there are many that contend for the ancient way of Husbandry, and
living upon our Growths and Manufactures, as of old we have done, slighting and
contemning the Improvements that are daily made in all manner of Husbandry and
Horti-culture, and in all Mechanic Arts and Manufactures, seeming to emulate
the felicity of former Ages, not considering the great mutations that are made
in the World, as well in the various Occupations and Exercises of men, as in
things of higher Natures.

There are several Objections may be raised against Improvement of Lands by
Garden-Tillage: Some of which I will take notice of in the ensuing Work, but
others are so slight as not to deserve mentioning. They all seem to proceed
from the same principle, with those who would not have their Neighbors breed
Cattle at an easy rate, lest they should hinder them from selling theirs at a
dear rate; and that would not have the Farmers that live on the dry Lands, sow
any Clover, St. Foyn, or such like, because the Productions of their lower and
richer Lands should yield them the greater price; endeavoring to reduce all
places to their old natural way of Husbandry, all Lands to yield no other
Commodity, than what it will spontaneously produce, despising Art and Industry,
deeming them as Innovations. Nevertheless I hope I may excuse these persons,
being our own Countrymen, from such stupid Ignorance, and impute it to their
Interest which thus by asseth their Judgments, and puts them sometimes to the
charge of a Contest, which their Ignorance only would never provoke them to.

J. W.

The TABLE OF Chapters and Sections.
BOOK I. OF Gardens of Pleasure, and the solid Ornaments thereof, Page 1 Chap.
I. Of the Situation and Soils of a Garden, and their Improvements, Page 7
Sect. 1. Of the Situation of a Garden, ibid. 2. Of the different and most
natural Soils for Gardens, Page 9 3. Of the Improvement of such Soils, Page 19
Chap. II. Of the Form of a Garden, and its Fencing and Enclosing, Page 14
Sect. 1. Of the Form of a Garden, ibid. 2. Of Fences and Enclosures to a
Garden, Page 19
Chap. III. Of the Walks, Arbours, and Places of Repose in Gardens, Page 27
Sect. 1. Of Walks and Materials for them, ib. 2. Of Arbors and Places of
Repose, Page 37
Chap. IV. Of Springs, Rivers, Fountains, Waterworks, and Grotto's necessary
for a Garden, Page 37 Sect. 1. Of Springs, Page 38 2. Of Rivers, Page 40 3. Of
Fountains, Page 43 4. Of Waterworks, Page 46 5. Of Grotto's, Page 51
Chap. V. Of Statues, Obelisks, Dials, and other invegetative Ornaments. Page 54
BOOK II. OF the diverse Trees, Flowers, and Plants, that beautify and adorn a
Garden, Page 58 Chap. I. Of Trees for Ornament and Shade, Page 59 Sect. I. Of
Winter-Greens, ibid. 2. Of Variegated or Gilded-leafed Plants, Page 66 3. Of
Trees propagated for their beauty and shade, Page 71 4. Of the propagating and
planting the said Trees, Page 76
Chap. II. Of Flower-Trees, Page 78 Sect. 1. Of the various kinds of Roses,
Page 79 2. Of ordering of Rose-Trees, Page 83 3. Of diverse other
Flower-bearing-Trees, Page 85
Chap. III. Of Bulbous-rooted-Flowers, Page 92 Sect. 1. Of Tulips, ibid. 2. Of
Hyacinths and Starflowers, Page 97 3. Of Daffodils, Page 98 4. Of Lillies, Page
99 5. Of Saffron*Flowers, Page 101 6. Of several other Bulbous-rooted Flowers,
Page 102 7. Of the Iris, Bulbous and Tuberose, Page 104
Chap. IV. Of Tuberose-rooted-Flowers, Page 106 Sect. 1. Of Anemonies, ibid. 2.
Of Peonies, Page 111 Chap. V. Of diverse other select Flowers, Page 112 Sect. 1.
Of Gilliflowers, ibid. 2. Of Stock-Gilliflowers, and Wall-flowers, Page 118 3.
Of Auricula's, Cowslips, and Primroses, Page 122 4. Of the Lilly of the Valley
and Hellebor, Page 124 5. Of the Hepatica, Gentianella, and Dittany, Page 125
Chap. VI. Of Flowers raised only from Seed, Page 126 Chap. VII. Of some more
vulgar Flowers, Page 131 Chap. VIII. Of such tender Exotic Trees, Flowers, and
Plants, as require the Florists care to preserve them in Winter, Page 132 Sect.
1. Of Perennial Greens and such Plants as will not endure Cold, Page 133 2. Of
such Plants as will least endure the Cold, Page 138

BOOK III. OF Esculents or Plants for Food, Page 145 Chap. I. Of such Plants as
are Perennial or continue over the Year, Page 150 Chap. II. Of Esculent Roots,
Page 158 Chap. III. Of Beans and Pease, Page 170 Chap. IV. Of Cabbages and
Cauli-flowers, Page 175 Chap. V. Of Melons, Cucumbers, etc. Page 180 Chap. VI.
Of Sallad-herbs, Page 184 Chap. VII. Of Sweet Herbs, Page 189 Chap. VIII. Of
some other Esculent Vegetables, Page 192 Chap. IX. Of general Improvements and
miscellaneous Experiments, Page 195 Sect. 1. Of improving Garden-ground by
labor only, ibid. 2. Of several ways of enriching Garden-Earth by mixtures,
Page 202 3. Of Watering Gardens, Page 211 4. Of making hot Beds, Page 219 5. Of
Miscellaneous Experiments. Page 222
Now added: The Gardener's Monthly Directions, Page 243 January, Page 247
February, Page 249 March, Page 250 April, Page 252 May, Page 254 June, Page 256
July, Page 257 August, Page 259 September, Page 261 October, Page 263 November,
Page 264 December. Page 266



Systema Horti-culturae: OR, The Art of Gardening.
BOOK I. Of Gardens of Pleasure, and the Solid Ornaments thereof.
THE Excellency of a Garden is better manifested by Experience, which is the
best Mistress, than indicated by an imperfect Pen; which can never sufficiently
convince the Reader of those transcendent Pleasures, that the Owner of a
complete Garden, with its magnificent Ornaments, its stately Groves, and
infinite variety of never-dying Objects of delight, every day enjoys: Nor how
all his Senses are satiated with the great variety of Objects it yields to
every of them: Nor what an influence they have upon the Passions of the Mind,
reducing a discomposed Fancy to a more sedate Temper, by contemplating on those
Miracles of Nature Gardens afford; deemed Miracles, because their admired and
strange Forms and Effects proceed from occult Causes.

The Original of Gardens was from a Divine Hand: And they also long since
delighted in by the wifest of Kings, and in the principal esteem ever since by
the best of Men: The Heathen dedicated them to Priapus the Son of Venus, and
celebrated them as Objects of Admiration and Delight, and left their immortal
Names to Posterity; as the Gardens of the Hesperides, Adonis, Alcinous, etc.
The memory of the latter being yet fresh in the Isle of Corfu, where in a most
delicious Situation it formerly was supposed to be, as a late Traveller M.
Francis Vernon 's Letters to the Royal Society, N. 124.
has affirmed.

Tarquin the proud, (a Roman King) thought no place more worthy than his Garden
to give Audience to an Ambassador sent unto him: And the Glory and Pride of the
Romans in the time of their Emperors, was in nothing more seen than in their
Gardens, which for the infinite delight they took in them, they dedicated to
Venus their Goddess of Pleasure, and gloried more in their Chaplets and
Garlands of curious Greens and Flowers, than our vain Contemporaries now do in
their richest party-colored Habits, which he that reads what Pliny observed of
them will readily believe.

The learned Dr. Brown in his Tract of Garlands, takes notice, that the use of
flowery Crowns and Garlands, is of no slender Antiquity; for besides the old
Greeks and Romans; the Egyptians made use of them at their Festival
Compotations: And that this practice extended as far as India: For at the Feast
with the Indian King, it is peculiarly observed by Philostratus, that their
Custom was to wear Garlands, and come crowned with them to their Feasts.

The use of them also was very frequent and common, the ends thereof being
many; for they were Convivial, wherein they had respect unto Plants, preventing
drunkenness; or discussing the exhalations from Wine. Festival, their solemn
Festival Garlands being made properly unto their Gods, and according contrived
from Plants sacred unto such Deities. Sacrificial, which were selected under
such considerations. Honorary Crowns were Triumphal, Ovary, Civical, or
Obsidional, and had little of Flowers in them, being made generally of Laurels,
etc. Funebrial Garlands, which had little of beauty in them besides Roses,
while they made them of Myrtle, Rosemary, etc, under symbolical Intimations.
But our florid and purely ornamental Garlands, delightful unto Sight and Smell;
not framed according to mystical and symbolical Considerations, are of more
free election; and so may be made to excel those of the Ancients: We having
China, India, and a New World to supply us, besides the great distinction of
Flowers unknown unto Antiquity, and the varieties hereof arising from Art and
Nature.

The Italians, in the time of their ancient Glory, thought no Palace nor
Habitation complete without its Garden, on which they spared for no cost, as
well in their forming them, as for the naturalizing several exotic Plants they
brought from Africa, and other foreign places. which Gardens they have from Age
to Age so improved, that it is now become it self the Garden of the World. And
as Architecture, that splendid Art, has spread it self with other Sciences,
into these Northern Climates, so has the Art of Gardening been handed along
with it, as though the former were imperfect without the latter. The Glory of
the French Palaces, so often represented to our English eyes in Sculpture, are
adorned with their beauteous Gardens before them; which wanting, they would
seem without luster or grandeur.

Neither is there a noble or pleasant Seat in England, but has its Gardens for
Pleasure and Delight; scarce an ingenuous Citizen that by his confinement to a
Shop, being denied the privilege of having a real Garden, but has his Boxes,
Pots, or other receptacles for Flowers, Plants, etc. in imitation of it: What
curious Representations of Banquets of Fruits, Flower-pots, Gardens, and such
like, are painted to the Life, to please the eye, and satisfy the fancy of
such, that either cannot obtain the felicity of enjoying them in reality, or to
supply the defect the Winter annually brings?

So that we may without vanity conclude, that a Garden of pleasant Avenues,
Walks, Fruits, Flowers, Grots, and other Branches springing from it, well
composed, is the only complete and permanent inanimate object of delight the
World affords, ever complying with our various and mutable Minds, seeding us,
and supplying our Fancies with daily Novels.

All curious pieces of Architecture, Limning, Painting, or whatever else that
seem pleasant to the eye or other senses at first sight or apprehension, at
length become dull by too long acquaintance with them. But the pleasures of a
Garden are every day renewed with the approaching Aurora.

While with succeeding Flowers the year is crowned,
Whose painted Leaves enamel all the ground;
Admire not them, but with more grateful Eyes
To Heaven look, and their great Maker prize.
In a calm Night the Earth and Heaven agree,
There radiant Stars, here brighter Flowers we see.
Gardens, as if immortal never decay,
And fading Flowers to fresher still give way. Rapinus.

Such is its pre-excellency, that there is scarce a Cottage in most of the
Southern parts of England, but has its proportionable Garden, so great a
delight do most of men take in it; that they may not only please themselves
with the view of the Flowers, Herbs, and Trees, as they grow; but furnish
themselves and their Neighbors upon extraordinary occasions; as Nuptials,
Feasts, and Funerals, with the proper products of their Gardens.

Flowers in many things convenient are,
Our Tables, and our Cupboards we prepare
With them; and better to diffuse their scent,
We place them in our Rooms for Ornament.
By others into Garlands they are wrought;
And so for Offerings to the Altars brought.
Sometimes to Princes Banquets they ascend,
And to their Tables fragrant Odours lend. Rapinus.

It furnishes our Kitchen and Tables with various Esculents, as well satisfying
Nature, as pleasing our Appetites; it yields us various Spirits, Essences,
Perfumes, Waters, Unguents, Conserves, Perserves, and many other necessary,
useful, and pleasant dietical, and medicinal Curiosities, which the same
Rapinus has elegantly expressed in his Poems on the same Subject, and at last
concludes:

I should too tedious be, of I should sing
The mighty aids which Herbs and Flowers bring
To the Diseases Men are subject to:
For these the Gods with Virtue did endue.
CHAP. I. Of the Situation and Soyls of a Garden, and their Improvement.
SECT. I. Of the Situation of a Garden.
IT may seem needless to say any thing of the Situation of a Garden, it being
so absolute a Concomitant to your Habitation, that a Garden remote or by it
self, is neither pleasant nor useful. Therefore wherever your House is, near
it must be your Garden.

But in case you have not yet laid the Foundation of your intended Residence;
then may you consider what Ground or Soil is best for your Plantation and
Partirre, without which you can never make the other complete.

Therefore as near as you can, let the Soil be good, deep, and light, that
Trees and Tillage may prosper in it, and then you need not question but Flowers
will thrive there: Let it have the free and open Air to the East and South, but
the South-East is to be preferred, and the North defended by tall Trees, which
are better than Hills, which give too great a reflection of Heat in the Summer,
and impede the cool Breezes that frequently come out from that Coast. If the
whole Garden be at some distance defended by tall Trees, it will very much
break the fierce Winds, and ferene Airs, that in the Winter and Spring usually
annoy the most delicate Plants and Flowers, and will also yield a cooling,
refreshing, sweet, and healthy Air and Shade, in the hottest Seasons.

If the Soil be dry and warm, a plain Level is best for a Garden, but if it be
cold or moist, then declining or shelving toward the Sun, is the best
position; because by Fosses, or by the Walks, only the Water naturally glides
from it. And in such a Garden, Trees, Plants, and Flowers, will thrive
exceedingly.

These Rules are good where you are to make your election, what sort of ground,
and where you design your Seat: I might have also added, the springs of Water
in or near your Garden, are great additions to the Improvement, Beauty, and
Glory of it, but that it is hoped few will seat themselves where that Element is
wanting; unless it be for the sake of some pleasant Grove, Prospect, or
delicate Air, Woods and Water, being two of the best Ornaments of the Seat,
which may be had in most places, together with a good Air; but seldom Water and
a good Prospect.

If you are fixed or limited to a place or situation, that puts an end to
Election, and then you are to consider the Nature of the Soil you are on, what
it is apt to produce, how to be corrected and improved.

SECT. II. Of the different, and most natural Soyls for Gardens.
LAnds are usually inclinable to Loam, Clay, Chalk, Marle, or Sand.

A Loamy Land is usually free, and apt to Vegetation, warm and easy to Till,
the sadder the Color the better; if it be free from Stones and Gravel, with a
sandy mixture and mellow withal, it is esteemed the best for Gardens, for the
most sorts of Fruits and Flowers.

There is much Land that is mixed with Clay in too great a proportion, which
makes it apt to bind, and is cold and moist in the Winter season, retaining
wet too much, and apt to chap in the Summer; it is injurious to most Fruits and
Flowers, and therefore has most need of help of any other.

Chalky Land is generally very sweet, and kind to many Plants that are not very
tender, it being cold in the Winter, and suffers not its Plants to put forth
early in the Spring; it is not difficult to be corrected, and made more natural
to the choicest Fruits and Flowers.

Marle is a very good mixture in Land, so that it be not in too great a
quantity, it being much of the nature of Chalk, but easier to be tilled and
improved.

Sandy Land is very warm and free, very apt for Vegetation, and amicable to
most of our choicest Fruits and Flowers; but if the Sand predominate, it will
require a constant supply of proper Soyls to enrich it.

SECT. III. Of the Improvement of such Soyls.
THere are many parcels of Land lying near Towns, Villages, and Houses, that
are of that excellent mixture of Loam, and other Earths, that they are capable
to entertain most of the delicate Fruits, Flowers, and other Curiosities, that
are fit to be planted or propagated in your best Partirs, without any other
mixture or composition, other than convenient dung of Oxen, Cows, Sheep,
Pullen, Pigeons, and sometimes old and rotten Horse-dung, to preserve it in
its due and wonted fertility; it being by continual weeding, and the attraction
of the Plants you furnish it withal, apt to sterilize. So that where your
ground is thus naturally fertile and prone to vegitate, you need take no other
care than to apply proper Soyls or Compositions, according as the nature of
your Plant requires, or to maintain it in its full vigor.

Claiy-Land being cold, moist, and stiff, is to be converted by labor, and
mixtures of a contrary nature; if you dig it often, the Sun, Rain, and Frost
will make it more friable and fertile: For take Clay, and lay it on any other
Land, it will in time dissolve, and unite in minute parts with it, that you
shall hardly discern it; so also it will be much altered by culture on its own
Basis, the wet being carefully drawn from it by declining Canals for that
purpose, Water being the only thing that maintains its stubborn nature, if it
rest on it.

But to accelerate the operation, and make it speedily more benign; Sand is an
excellent Ingredient, especially that taken up in the bottoms of Rivers, or
where hasty currents have left it at the foot of Hills, or Sea-sand where it
may be had. Any old Thatch or corrupted Vegetables, as Weeds, Fern, etc. buried
in the Trenches as you dig it, drains the wet from it, and makes it more
mellow. But above any thing, Peat-ashes, Turf-ashes, or any Ashes
proportionably, and well mixed, is the highest Improvement, you can add to your
cold, stiff, and moist Land. There are several other Additions that will
improve it, as Rotten-wood, Saw-dust, the bottoms of Piles of Wood great and
small; but these being not to be had in any great quantity, will serve only in
these Beds, where you intend to plant your choicest Flowers; but Chalk, Lime,
Marle, and such like, although they sweeten it at the first, yet in the end it
unites with the Clay, and is soon converted into its own nature.

Chalky-Land usually yields a good rich surface, therefore you must avoid
planting too deep in it, and where you can with convenience, the sinking your
Walks, and with the same matter to raise your Borders, is a very good
Improvement of this sort of Land. You may also deal with it, as with the
Claiy-Land, though in a more moderate way, for Chalky-Land is naturally cold,
and therefore requires warm Applications; and is also sad, and will the better
bear with light Composts, which is the reason that Chalk is so great an
improver of light, hot and dry Grounds, especially having suffered a
Calcination.

Lands seated on Marle, are usually very rich, although cold and heavy; you
need not doubt of the depth of it: for the turning it up, and exposing it to
the Air, converts it into good Earth; a mixture of light and warm Soil
exceedingly advantages it.

Sandy-Lands, or Land that has a competent mixture of Sand in it, is the
warmest and lightest of all, and according to its fatness; it is the most free
and apt to produce the most of Vegetables you plant in it. Sandy-Lands are best
improved by mixture of Chalk, Lime, Marle, the sediments of Ponds, Lakes, or
standing Waters, and need a more constant supply of such Additions than any
other, unless you have the command of some Spring or Stream of Water to
irrigate it, and prevent the Suns exhaling the moisture it so easily parts
withal, for we may constantly observe in rainy Summers, what vast products
Sandy-Land will afford us, compared with the dry. The same you will find in
your Gardens, but the hot Dungs are here to be neglected, and the more cooling
made use of.

The best for light Sandy-land, is Cow Dung, being cool and fat.

Some Plants delight in moist and boggy Lands, and where the Situation of the
Garden will not afford a Natural Bogg, an Artificial may be made, if you have
the command of a Spring to feed it, or that you draw not water very deep to
moisten it often by hand; it may be made by digging a large Pit in such place
you think most convenient, where if the Earth be not tenacious enough to detain
the moisture required, you may line the bottom and sides with Clay well
tempered and trodden down, and fill it with Earth taken from a Bogg; in which
being duly watered by some small current led thereto, or by frequent
irrigations, your curious Aquaticks may be propagated as well as in the Natural.

There are several other sorts of Land, that are known by several other Names,
which I might here enumerate, but these being the general, and most Lands
falling under some or one of these capacities, I shall not trouble you with
them here, brevity being my study.

But if your Lands or Grounds within the precinct of your Garden, be somewhat
of a different nature or quality from these before mentioned, yet may those
general directions, as concerning that Land it is nearest of Nature unto, serve
for your Land. And if you have any Trees, Plants, or Flowers, that delight in
Land different from the more general part of your Plantation, then may you
compound your Mould in some place proper for such Plant; directions for which
you will find dispersed in this succeeding Tract, especially when I come to
treat of Esculents.

CHAP. II. Of the Form of a Garden, and its Fencing and Enclosing.
SECT. I. Of the Form of a Garden.
AS before was observed concerning the Situation, so now may it be as to the
Form, that if ye are already limited and bounded, by reason of the Situation
engraving of a formal garden laid out in a circular form in front of a manor
house, with walks enclosing a central fountain and quadrants planted with fruit
trees. The outer circular walk is planted with cypress trees, the inner with
firs and flower-beds. Several figures are walking in the garden. The garden
plan is framed in the foreground by a scene depicting ladies relaxing beneath
trees. Engraved by Frederick Hendrick van Hoave (1628?-School). F. H. Van. Houe
fec:
pg 15.

of your House, and the contiguous parts about your intended Plantation, you
must cast it into as good a Form and Model as you can; but if you are at
liberty, then may you make your Election of what Form pleases you best.

The Round is very pleasant, and some curious Gardens there are of that Form in
Foreign Parts. The Walls about such a Garden are very good for Fruit, the
Winds being not so severe against a round, as against a straight Wall. The Walk
also that circundates that Garden is not unpleasant, for that you may walk as
long as you please in it, always forwards without any short turning; some
straight Walks there may be, that tend from the Circumserence to the Center.
The several Quadrants may be sub-divided and planted with Fruits; the Borders
of the round Walk, and the cross Walks being sufficient for Flowers and Plants
of Beauty and Delight. At the Center of this Garden, may be placed a Fountain,
or in defect of water a Banqueting House, or House of Pleasure.

A rude Draught of such a Form is here presented to your View, the outermost
Walk being adorned with Cypress Trees, the inner parts of the Grass-Plats with
Firr-Trees, and the Quadrants within the lesser Circle, planted with variety of
Fruit Trees, and the principal Walks round and straight, bordered with Flowers
and delightful Shrubs and Plants.

Encompassed with a Pallisade in the Center of your Garden, is a Fountain of
Spring Water always flowing, serving not only to refresh the Spirits of such
that delight in the sight of it, but is necessary in dry and hot Seasons, to
preserve your choicest Plants from Injury.

The Square is the most perfect and pleasant Form that you can lay your Garden
into, where your Ground will afford it; every Walk that is in it being
straight, and every Plant and Tree standing in a direct Line, represents it to
your Eye very pleasing. The delight you take in walking in it, being much the
more as you are less careful: For when you walk in a Round or Circle, you are
more subject to trespass on the Borders, without continual Thoughts and
Observation of your Ground.

You may divide the Plot you intend for your Gardens into three parts, by Walls
or Pallisades: The middle part may be sub-divided into Gravel-walks,
Grass-plots, edged with Borders, planted with your most select Plants, Shrubs,
and Flowers.

If your Partition-fences on the sides be Walls, there may be raised the
choicest Wall-fruits; those that require most heat, on the most Sunny-side; and
Fruits that r^quire but little, on the most shady, as Cherries and Plumbs will
thrive where there is not much of the Sun; and Currants flourish most where
there is all Shade; under such Walls, that most pleasant Fruit the Rasberry
delights to grow, it being a Fruit wherewith that Northern cold Territory of
Lapland abounds.

engraving of a formal garden laid out in front of a manor house in a pattern
of four square grass-plots divided by walks bordered with flower-beds; each
square centres on a statue, and at each main corner is an ornamental
flower-pot. Several figures are enjoying the garden. The far end of the garden
is fenced with a pallisade and gate leading into an orchard where a gentleman
and a lady are walking arm in arm. Engraved by Frederick Hendrick van Hoave
(1628?-School). F. H. Van. Houe fec.
pg 17



But if your Partition-fences be of Pallisades, they may be adorned with
perennical Greens, and other hardy Shrubs, and Flower-bearing Trees.

The other two parts, you may convert the one of them into an Orchard, the
other into a Kitchin-Garden, which will be no small Advantage or Ornament to
your Seat, and middle Garden of Pleasure.

But if you are willing to celebrate so fair a spot of Ground, as the whole
Square, to the delights of Flora; then may you divide it into larger Squares,
and Grass-plots, leaving only Borders on their confines for your variety of
Plants.

The new mode of Gravel-walks and Grass-plots, is fit only for such Houses or
Palaces, that are situated near Cities, and great Towns, although they are now
become Presidents for many stately Country Residencies, where they have
banished out of their Gardens Flowers, the Miracles of Nature, and the best
Ornaments that ever were discovered to make a Seat pleasant. But it is hoped
that this new, useless, and unpleasant Mode, will like many other Vanities grow
out of Fashion.

A Draught of the Square Garden I have here given you, which may be varied as
every Designer pleases; each principal Walk is bordered with Flowers; each
principal Corner with Flower-pots, and the middles of the greater Squares with
Statues. The farther end fenced with a Pallisade, that the prospect of the
adjacent Orchard may not be lost; where now the Statues stand, if Water be to
be obtained, Fountains would be placed with more delight.

The infinite variety of Forms that might be drawn and here represented to you,
would but increase your Charge; when perhaps every Builder may better please
himself in the shape and contrivance of his Garden, than any other can do for
him.

But these few Rules are not amiss to be observed, viz. That you endeavor to
make the principal Entrance into your Garden, out of the best Room in your
House, or very near it, your Walks being places of Divertisement after a
sedentary repast. The Aromatic Odors, they yield pleasant Refreshments after a
gross Diet; such innocent Exercises being the best digestive to weak Stomachs.
Let there be some other Door into your Garden; for Gardeners, Laborers, etc.
And let your principal Walk extend it self as far as you can in length,
directly from your House, Adorned with the choicest Plants for Beauty and
Scent, and that there may be a Succession of them through the Year, not without
Flower-plots, which grace the best of Gardens.

If your Ground you intend for a Garden, lie on the side of a Hill, your Walks
may be made the one above the other, and be as Terraces the one to the other;
the declining sides of them, being either of Grass alone, or planted with Fruit.

If your House stand on the side of a Hill, and you must make your Garden
either above it, or below it, then make your Garden below it, for it is much
more pleasant to view a Garden under the Eye, than above it, and to descend
into a Garden, and ascend into a House, than on the contrary.

As for all other Forms and Scituations of Ground above your House, you must
vary your Models according to the place.

SECT. II Of Fences and Enclosures to a Garden.
WHen you have discovered the best Land, and pleased your self with the
compleatest Form you can imagine for your Garden; yet without a good Fence, to
preserve it from several Evils that usually annoy it, your labor is but lost.
Your Fences must be considered of according to the place you reside in, and
nature of the Soil, and is either of Brick, or Stone, of Earth, Pale,
Pallisade, or Quick-setts.

Of all which the Brick-Wall is the best, 1. Of Brick-Walls.
it being the warmest (except Board) and very dry and con-natural to Fruit. And
where Brick are plenty, it is not a dear Fence, considering that their Form
much accelerates the raising your Wall, and their even Joints require but
little Mortar. You may also make the Wall much thinner with Brick, than any
other Material, (Square Stone only excepted) because you may make Nieches at a
reasonable Distance, or Square Pillasters on both sides or only one side, which
will support the Wall, although very thin in the Intervals: This Wall needs no
other coping than Bricks, set on edge side-ways without any over-hanging or
dripping, as has been used.

By which means of building them thin in the Intervals, with Nieches or
Pillasters, at fit distances and slender copings, almost half the materials are
saved in the building of them, and most of the workmanship.

These Walls are very kind to Fruits, under which they bear abundantly: The
Nieches and Pillasters conduce very much to the breaking off the cold Winds,
and shelter the Fruit from them.

Next unto the Brick, Stone-Walls are preferred, 2. Of Stone-Walls.
the square hewn Stone out of the Quarry, especially Sand or Freestone is the
best, the cold white Stone like unto Chalk, or Limestone is not so good. The
rough Heath-stone or Burre is very dry and warm, but by its unevenness is
inconvenient to tack Trees against, unless you disperse here and there in the
building some small squares of Timber, or Brickbats, in the Joints whereof
Nails will enter and take. Flints are very cold and uneven Joynted, and
therefore the worst of all Stone for a Garden Fence.

All Stone Walls must be well coped, left wet insinuates it self between the
Stones, and decay it in a little time. A coping of Tyle is the best, if made to
carry off the drip 3 or 4 inches from the Wall.

In many places where Stone is dear, and 3. Of Walls of Earth.
Brick scarce, and Lime and Sand not near, Walls are often made by a Compost of
Earth, and Straw tempered with it. This Earth must be either of a clayish
nature, or have a little mixture of Clay in it; it must be well wrought and
mixed with long Dung or Straw, which serves to hold it together until it be
thoroughly dry; and then according to the skill of the Workman, wrought up into
a Wall, and covered with Thatch, being not able to bear a more weighty coping.

These Walls well wrought, and well coped and preserved dry, will last many
years, and very warm and kind to Fruits, that is, to such that are content to
be humble, these Walls being rarely built high.

In the building these Walls, pieces of wood, or hooks of Iron ought to be
placed in, at convenient distances, standing three or four inches without the
Wall, to which Poles or Rails are to be fastened, and to them your Fruit Trees,
there being no tacking Trees to the Wall it self.

This way of Fencing is much used in some parts, and somewhat resembles the
French way of making Walls for Fruit; for whatever they are made of they are
plastered over, and hooks of Iron or Sheeps shank-bones placed in the building
of the Wall, at some convenient distance to affix the Poles unto, as in the
small French piece called the Planters Manual, adapted only for that Country,
may be observed. Also Rapinus at large describes the making of that Wall, and
both of them prescribe the plaistering of them, as well to destroy the vermin
that would otherwise shelter themselves in the rotten cavities of those
Mud-Walls, as to accelerate the maturation of your Fruits.

So that here in England where other Materials are scarce, and such a stiff
Loam in the place, these Mud-walls may prove beneficial, not only for security,
warmth, and privacy, but for the advancement and melioration of your Fruits,
more especially if Lime be not wanting to make a Plaster to cover it after
that French mode.

It is not improbable that a mixture of Loam, Lime, Sand and Gravel, or small
Sand-stones, may by being raised between two Planks, and so by degrees to the
height of a Wall, and then well defended by a light coping, make a very good
and durable Fence and Shelter for your best Fruits. This seems to be the same
way that Pliny mentions. The Walls to be made in his time, which then had
continued many Years, and not impaired, resisting all weathers; he mentions
Turrets and Sconces to have been made after this manner, Lib. 35. Chap. 14.

Good Oaken Timber sawn into Pales make 4. Of Pales.
a very good Fence, and not dear where that Timber is plenty: Next unto Oak,
Fir, or Deal Boards will serve; but scarce any other Board will endure the
mutability of the weather long.

These Boards ought to be well seasoned, else will they shrink and chap
exceedingly, which will be inconvenient, as well by rendering your solitary
Walks less private, as by admitting cold breezes to your tender Fruits; but in
case your Board do not meet in the dryest and hottest Seasons, you may add a
small Battin to each Interval, fixed to each Rail by Nails between the Boards,
that the swelling and shrinking of the Board may not injure the Battin.

These boarded Fences are the warmest for your tender Fruits, and maturates
them beyond any other; but being subject to decay, are not repairable without
damage to your Trees.

I have already mentioned the most principal, 5. Of Pallisades.
and best Fences for the outsides of your Garden, for privacy, security, and
advantage to your Fruits. There are yet other necessary Fences, for the
cantoning or dividing your Garden into lesser parts for the several uses you
design them for, or for the security of some particular parts of your Garden,
or Fruits, or Flowers, from the hands of every one that may otherwise have
liberty or occasion to walk there; yet not to impede or diminish the pleasure
in viewing those objects of delight thus defended.

These open Fences are made of board of about three or four inches broad, and
three or four foot long, either nailed to, or let through two Rails, with heads
cut either round, or like a Lance, and painted white with Lin-seed Oil, and
white Lead, two or three times over, to make them endure the weather.

But the best material to make these Pallisades withal is Iron, so framed as
are the Iron Balconies in London; save only that these appear above the Rails
with square painted heads which seem most beautiful; by reason that Flowers and
other delightsom Plants appear so plain through them. This Fence is also
permanent and needs no repair.

In imitation whereof, there is newly made in some few Gardens a Pallisade of
Boards, of about three or four inches broad; which as before were set
flat*wise, each place in the Pallisade, is now set edge-wise, the upper Rail
running through each Pale, and the foot cut with an Ox Mouth, and set on an
Arras Rail, either near the ground, or resting on a ground-pinning of Brick.
The head of each Pale is about three or four inches above the upper Rail,
divided into two parts, the middle vacancy being about one third part of the
whole breadth, the two extreme parts for about four or five inches, being cut
with square pyramidical points, do very much resemble those made of Iron. As
you stand against them they appear open, and every thing very conspicuous
through them like the Iron; but as you view them obliquely they appear full,
only their sharp heads more open and not unpleasant. These Pallisades, although
they require somewhat more Timber and Workmanship than the ordinary sort, yet
are by far the more complete and beautiful, every motion of your Body from its
place, begetting a variety in the object.

These open Fences are much more pleasant and useful in your Partirs and inward
Gardens, than close Walls; for these prevent not your view of the whole, nor
hinder the free Air from your Plants, which is as necessary in some degree as
warmth, which ought to be obtained from Shelters and Fences at a distance, not
by too great a reverberation of heat, and stifling in the Summer for want of
Air, either of which proves fatal to most Flowers.

Gardens are oftentimes secured by quick Fences, 6. Of Quick Fences.
whereof the most easy to propagate is that of the white Thorn, which being
well planted in double, treble, or more Chests or Rows of Plants, and kept
weeded and defended for three or four years, will thrive very well in most
sorts of Land; and being kept clipped, sheer'd, or cut with a sharp hook, will
grow so thick that a Bird cannot find its way through, and from the ground to
six it seven foot high, it will prove a very great security against bad
Weather, evil Neighbors, and Cattle; but is a shelter for Snails, and other
Vermin that will constantly annoy your best Plants, and are not therefore to be
planted near your Partir, wherein you plant your best Flowers.

A Quick Hedge of Holly is the most beautiful, and most compact of any; but the
tediousness of its growth is enough to discourage any man from attempting its
propagation, its Seed being two years before they appear above the ground, and
its Plants long before they let you know of their like or dislike of the Soil.

Pyracantha planted for a Fence, proves very strong by reason of its sharp
Thorns, and stubborn Branches. Sweet-bryar also is very good, and makes a
fragrant Fence; but the White-thorn will not give way to either of them, being
easily propagated, most tonsile of any, durable, of a delicate color, and
early appearing in the Spring.

CHAP. III. Of the Walks, Arbors, and Places of Repose, in Gardens.
IT is not the least part of the pleasures of a Garden, to walk and refresh
your self either with your Friends or Acquaintance, or else alone retired from
the cares of the World, or apart from Company that sometimes may prove
burthensom to you, and when your own Lassitude, or the Heat, Rain, or scorching
beams of the Sun, render the open Walks unpleasant, to repose your self under
some pleasant Tree, or in some Covert or Shade, until you are willing to try
the Air again.

SECT. I. Of Walks, and Meterials for them.
WHerefore to accommodate you for all 1. Stone-Walks.
Seasons wet or dry, hot or cold, it is convenient to have Walks and Places of
Repose in your Garden. As for Walks, the best for the Winter and wet Seasons
are those paved with Stone, about the breadth of five foot, in the midst of a
Gravel-walk, of about five or six foot Gravel on each side the Stone, or of
Grass, which you please, for on these flat Stones may you walk securely
under-foot in all Weathers, without prejudice to your self or Walks.

Next unto the paved Stone are the Gravel-walks 2. Gravel Walks.
walks to be preferred, which if made with a fine skreened red Gravel, do very
much adorn your Garden; and being laid round, and kept rolled with a
Stone-roler, cast off the Water, and are very useful in moist Weather to walk
on.

The Gravel-walks are best under your Fruit-walks, because the beams or rays of
the Sun reflect from them against the Walls, much better than from Grass, and
very much advantage your Fruit.

The great inconveniences these Walks are subject unto, are Weeds and Moisture:
To prevent the Weeds, you must be sure to remove all manner of earth clean from
the place before you bring in your Gravel; and in case the Earth be not stiff
enough of it self, it would not be amiss to support the sides with two or three
courses of Brick, or at least a Brick set on end edge by edge, to prevent the
falling in, or mixture of the said Earth with your Gravel; yet so that the
upper part of your Brick may be an inch beneath the surface of your Walk, that
it may not be discerned. If your Ground be good and apt to run to Weeds, seven
or eight inches deep ought your Gravel to lie, lest the Weeds find their way
through: you ought also to cleanse the Ground under, from the Roots of Grass,
Weeds, as Nettles, Docks, etc. least they find their way through the Gravel.
You may fill your Walk with ordinary coarse unskreened Gravel five or six
inches, and after that is levelled, then lay on your last Course of fine
Gravel, and roll it well: if your upper Course of Gravel be two or three inches
thick, and at any time your Walk grow discolored or mossy, you may stir it
with a Spade as far as the fine Gravel lies, and finely rake it, then roll it
again, and it will appear to be as fresh as at the first.

The other inconvenience these Walks are subject unto is Moisture, especially
after a Frost, which very much loosens the Gravel, and long soaking Rains make
it apt to stick to your Feet: For the best red Gravel has a mixture of Clay or
Loam in it, which makes it in dry weather bind the better; to prevent which,
several Expedients are lately made use of: Some do grind or beat small the
shells of Fish gathered on the Seashore, and therewith add a thin coat on the
Gravel, which by constant rolling incorporates with it, and is not apt to
adhere to your Shoes, as is the Gravel it self. Others that live near to
Brick-kilns, make use of the refuse parts of Bricks that are under burnt, which
will easily pulverize, and lay that on the Gravel-Walks, which prevents the
same inconvenience, and adds much to the beauty of your Walk, and is easily
renewed as there is occasion.

On the edge of your Gravel-Walks, you may lay on each side a narrow Walk of
Turf for your use in hot weather; or when you are willing to favor your Feet
or your Gravel, which being kept out strait on the edges, beautifies your
Gravel.

But if you will have your Walk only Gravel, then will it be necessary to edge
it with Brick three or four inches above the surface to prevent Earth or
Rubbish from intermixing with it; Bricks set on one end side by side, is the
securest and most lasting way for this purpose.

Walks of Grass are very pleasant, and much 3. Green Walks.
to be preferred in the Summer to any of the other, being cold and easy to the
Feet. They are either made by laying them with Turf, or by raking them fine,
and sowing them with Hay-dust or Seed (which may be had at the bottom of a
Hay-mow or Rick) and well rolled and weeded from all gross Weeds, will soon
become a fine Grass-walk; if these Walks also be laid a little rounding, they
will cast off the water the better, and be more commodious for your use than if
flat.

A Water-table on each side, of two or three inches deep, cut every year anew,
not only receives the waste water, but preserves the Grass or Weeds from mixing
with your Borders, and presents your Walk much more pleasant to your eye, than
if it were otherwise.

To destroy Weeds in the Gravel-walks, or paved Walks, where you cannot
conveniently eradicate them, you must water it with very salt Water, or with
the Liquor they have at the Salters, which they call Bittern, which absolutely
destroys all Vegetation, where it is cast in an indifferent good quantity.

It is none of the least oblectations a Garden 4. Of Terrace-walks.
affords, to have Terrace-walks, on which you have the benefit of the Air, and
prospect on your Garden. These in former Ages (and now also in more hot
Countries) were much celebrated, the Hortipensiles or Pendant-gardens, were
after this manner made above the ordinary level, for the advantage of the Air,
and pleasure of the Eye, and somewhat to add to the magnificence of the Place,
being very beautiful as well as commodious.

They are usually made where much Earth or Rubbish is to spare, which would
cost time and labor to remove; and here is disposed of to advantage, with the
only expense of a Wall on the outside to support it; or if you please on both;
but the inner-side to your Garden may be made declining, and clothed with
Turf. The Wall on the outside surmounting the Top of the Walk about three
foot, and on the Edge toward your Garden may be set a Rail, or Rail and
Ballisters, or a Pallisade, or a quick tonsile Hedge of about the same height
the Wall is of, that neither side prevent the Air, nor impede your Prospect.

In some Gardens where water is at your command, the sinking of an Aquaeduct,
or Piscary, will afford you Materials for your Terrace-walk; both of which are
best and most proper to be made at the farthest distance from your House.

SECT. II. Of Arbors and Places of Repose.
TO make your Garden pleasant at all times, and in all seasons, either in
respect of the great variety of weather, or your own disposition or
indisposition, it will be very necessary to accommodate it with places of
Shade, to skreen you from the scorching Sunbeams, Canopies to preserve you
from the Rain, and Boxes to seclude you from the too cold Breezes: That
although you are not willing to expose your self too much in the intemperate
Air, or your present inability or unaptness for a Walk be such, that you cannot
with delight enjoy it, yet that you may not lose those exhile rating Pleasures
your Garden most times affords.

For cool Recessss in the hottest times, it 1. Of Arbours.
has been usual to erect or frame Arbors with Poles or Rods, and plant them
about with shady Trees, which are an Ornament to some Gardens; but to be
rejected, 1. Because they require much repair, and care to preserve them; for
in your Garden of Pleasure you ought to be frugal of cost and pains; left your
Delights become occasions of Prodigality, and your Recreations burdensome to
you. 2. Because the Seats are apt to be moist and foul, it being apt to impair
your health to sit on a cold Seat, Salubrity being one of the advantages
expected from a Garden. 3. After a shower in the Summer, is the pleasantest
time to recreate your Senses amongst your odorous Plants, and then this place
of recess is wholly useless, the dripping continuing long after the shower. 4.
The usual cool breezes that you will sensibly feel in those Arbors to your
prejudice, balance all the conveniences you can expect from them.

But if the Weather and time of the day invite you to sit in the Air without
inconvenience, a Seat under the shade of some Platanus, Lin-Tree, or the like,
is much more pleasant, than to be Hood-winked in an Arbor.

You may have a Seat made of thin and light 2. Of Seats.
Materials, and painted with a white color in Oil, or as best pleases your
fancy, which may be moveable with a little help, and placed sometimes in one
place, and sometimes in another, as the weather happens. This Seat may be made
close behind, and covered, that being set with the back to the Wind, will be
both warm and dry.

In the Nieches of your Wall may you place Seats covered over, that you may
rest your self in at your pleasure: At the ends of your Walks are the most
proper places for such Seats, that whilst you sit in either of them, you have
the view of your Garden.

The best Form for these Seats is round, the one semicircle within the Wall,
the other without with a Cupulo, the outward part to be supported by three or
four, or more columns of Timber or Stone, the other part resting on the Wall,
the top covered with Lead, Slate or Shingle, with its due Cornish about that
part that is off from the Wall.

Or you may make them of a long square Form, about two Foot in the Niech of the
Wall, and as much without, covered as the round, but casting the drip side-ways
or backward.

Having several of these Seats facing to each Coast, be the Wind or Sun either
way, you have a place to defend your self from it.

You may also cover your Benches or Stools with Mat, and lay the Floors with
Board, which will much conduce to your own ease and health.

Arbors, Benches, and Seats are very necessary, 3 Of Pleasure-houses.
being present expedients for them that are weary; but that which crowns the
pleasure of a Garden, is a place of repose, where neither Wind, Rain, Heat, nor
Cold can annoy you.

This small Edifice, usually termed a Pleasure-house or Banqueting House may
be made at some remote Angle of your Garden: For the more remote it is from
your House, the more private will you be from the frequent disturbances of your
Family or Acquaintance, and being made at an Angle, part within your Garden,
and part without, you will have the priveledges and advantages of Air and View,
which otherwise you will want, and which render it much more pleasant than to
be without them.

The Windows and Doors, the one or other respecting every Coast, may be glazed
with the best and most transparent Glass, to represent every Object through it
the more splendid, with skreens of painted and printed Sarcenet, to prevent in
the day, and shutters of thin Wainscot in the night, others from disturbing
your solitary Repose.

Also you may reap the pleasure and advantage of the Air from either Coast, by
opening that side of your small Edifice, from whence you would receive it,
excluding on the other side that which might otherwise annoy you.

In the other corner of your Garden, or some 4. Of Repositeries for tender
Plants.
opposite place to such Pleasure-houses, may you erect another of the same Form
to answer it as to your view, which may serve as a place to preserve your
tender Plants in, during the extremity of the Winter, and is usually termed a
Green-house, because several Winter-Greens are therein preserved, that will not
endure the severity of that Season; in it also may you dispose on shelves your
dry Roots of Flowers and Seeds, until the time of the year mind you of
interring them.

On these small Edifices may you bestow what cost you can afford, and make them
(as they deserve to be) the principal Ornaments of your Ville.

It is not unusual to raise a Mount with the 5. Of Mount.
waste Earth or Rubbish, you may otherwise happen to be troubled withal, at
some convenient distance from your House, on which as on your Terrace-walks,
you have the advantage of the Air and prospect, and whereon you may erect a
Pleasure or Banqueting House, or such like place of Repose.

The most famous of this kind, is that near Marlborough, whether first raised
by Art or Nature is not yet determined, however it has a most pleasant and
easy ascent, and from the Summit whereof you have a good Air, and a fair
prospect.

CHAP. IV. Of Springs, Rivers, Fountains, Waterworks, and Grotto's, necessary
for a Garden.
IT is not to be denied, that a kind and fruitful Soil may produce all sorts of
Plants proper for a Garden of Pleasure, Use, or Advantage, which may render
such a Place delightful; yet cannot such a Garden ever be said to be complete,
nor in its full splendor and beauty, without this Element of Water. Wherefore
Rapinus advises thus.

You then who would your Villa's Grace augment,
And on its Honor always are intent:
You who employ your time to cultivate
Your Gardens, and to make their Glory great,
Among your Groves and Flowers let Water flow;
Water's the Soul of Groves and Flowers too.
Besides the particular uses you may put it to in watering your several
Gardens, it is very pleasant to have your Piscaries, Rivulets, Fountains, etc.
about your Ville.

SECT. I. Of Springs.
MAny pleasant Seats, Vills, and Gardens there are, that are very well situate
for Air and Prospect, that are of themselves dry, which defect may be supplied
from Springs of Water rising at some distance, and may be conveyed by Pipes to
such places in your Ville, or Garden as you desire.

In places where Wood is plenty, the Elm is Of Pipes for Water.
the most proper material to make Pipes withal, for the conveyance of water
from the Spring to your Garden, not being subject to be torn by Frost, as are
the leaden or earthen Pipes, either of which you must be sure to lay deep
enough below the surface of the Earth, that the Frost may not reach them.

Leaden Pipes are the most convenient where water is to be raised to any
considerable height, being not apt to grow leaky, nor to decay; but you must be
sure to lay them deep in Clay as you can; but not in any mixture of Lime, or
such like, left it decay the Metal: also you must have a Turn-cock at the
lowest part of your Pipe, where must be a passage, that out of it you may let
the water at the beginning of a Frost, to prevent the Pipes from breaking.

Earthen Pipes may be made of about three foot in length, and made to fit the
one into the other; and as they are laid deep in a soft Bed of Earth, Clay, or
Sand, the joints may be closed with a cement of Quicklime, Linseed-oyl, and
Cotten-wool, and bound about the joint with a piece of Leather, and a turn or
two of Pack-thread: But these Pipes are not for forcing the water to any
height, being apt to break, but are very necessary, cheap and sweet for the
conveyance of any Spring without force, to the place you desire.

Sometimes it happens that Springs lie concealed in the Earth, which may, if
discovered, prove very useful in your Ville, and pleasant in your Garden, which
to discover, observe the Precepts of Rapinus:

Where small declining Hillocks you perceive,
Or any Soil where Flags and Rushes live,
Where the fat ground a shiny moisture yields,
If Weeds and prickly Sedge overspread the Fields;
There hidden Springs with confidence expect,
For sedgy places will to Springs direct.
Also several Rusticks there are, that can direct you to the nearest Spring,
being acquainted with the nature of the Soil and Place.

These if they lie above or level with your Garden, may be brought by Pipes
into it; but if they happen to lie below it, then must you erect Cisterns or
Receptacles above your Springs, that they may command your Garden, and raise
the water into them by Machins made for that purpose, moved by men, horses, or
the wind; which when full, may serve to supply your Garden for a certain time,
and when expired, the said Cisterns may be again filled by the former means.

SECT. II. Of Rivers.
Although small Crystalline Springs brought in Pipes may be sufficient to
irrigate your Groves and Plants, and supply your Grotts and Fountains, and add
very much to the Splendour of your Garden; yet,

-- If my Advice you take,
In the low Places of your Garden make,
Besides the other Springs, large Trenches too,
To which from every part the streams may flow.
For little Brooks and Springs are not so good,
Nor please so much as a more noble Flood. Rapinus.

A fair Stream or Current flowing through or near your Garden, adds much to the
Glory and Pleasure of it: On the Banks of it may you plant several aquatick
Exoticks, and have your Seats or Places of Repose under their Umbrage, and
there satiate your self with the view of the Curling Streams, and its nimble
Inhabitants. These gliding Streams refrigerate the Air in a Summer Evening, and
render their Banks so pleasant, that they become resistless Charms to your
Senses, by the murmuring Noise, the Undulation of the Water, the verdant Banks
and Shades over them, the sporting Fish consigned within your own limits, the
beautiful Swans, and by the pleasant Notes of singing Birds, that delight in
Groves, on the Banks of such Rivulets.

Where such a Stream or Rivulet cannot naturally glide through your Garden, but
near unto it, it is probable that part of it may be raised by some Machine, at
some distance from your Garden, and by an Aquaeduct conveyed through it, which
will be more commodious (the charge only excepted in the bringing it thither)
than the natural Current. 1. Because natural Currents are usually in the lowest
grounds, which are not so proper for a Garden, as a declining or ground above
the level of the adjacent Lands. 2. For that an Artificial Current is not
subject to those Extravagancies, that the natural usually are, by overflowing
after hasty Rains. 3. Those Waters that are brought by Art, are easily carried
off again, and may be conducted to several parts of your Garden, on the Edges
of your declining Walks, whether they decline little or much; if but little,
then may Canals be made in the natural Earth, without any danger of decay or
wearing, as Rapinus observed of the Water running through the Gardens of
Lian-Court.

For by the Gardens side the Rivers pass,
From no steep Cliff, but down a bank of Grass.
But if your Garden lie on a more declining Bank, then are your Aquaeducts to
be paved and edged with Stone or Brick, lest the Velocity of the Current by
degrees eat away the Earth before it: These Aquaeducts may be carried almost
level, and have their Precipices at several distances, as the form of your
Garden will bear: These Water-falls will appear very pleasant, if made broad at
the end, as the same Poet tells you,

Nor should it less deserve of our Esteem,
When from an even Bed diffused the Stream,
Runs down a polished Rock, and as it flows,
Like Linen in the Air expanded shows.
4. Waters brought in by Art, may better be confined in Canals regularly made,
and Fish kept in them, easier preserved than in the natural, where Inundations
usually unstock your Piscaries; therefore if you can, choose rather to bring a
fair Current of Water through your Garden, above the level of the main River;
if it cannot be done by an ordinary Aquaeduct, yet may it by an Engine placed in
the River, where the one part of the Water shall constantly raise another for
your purpose, the manner of making and ordering whereof is not proper for this
place; therefore for your further information,

-- Vide Systema Agriculturae. SECT. III. Of Fountains.
FOuntains are principal Ornaments in a Garden; scarce a famous Garden in
Europe without its Fountains, which were primarily, intended for Bathing, and
are in the more Southern Countries used for that purpose to this day. The
Italians bestow very great cost in beautifying them for that use: The French
are very prodigal in their Expenses about Fountains, and several curious
Gardens in England have them; but here only for Ornament. They are generally
made of Stone, some square, others round or oval, and of diverse other forms,
some flat in the bottom, others round like a Basin.

Into some the Water is cast by Pipes from the sides, out of the Mouths of
several Figures representing Animals, or out of the Pipes of Eurs of Stone
standing on the brim of the Fountain, or the Water is cast from some Figure or
Statue erected in the middle of the Fountain, or from a Pipe standing upright
in the midst of it.

There must also be wast Pipes or Cavities to convey away the Water from such
Fountains, which must be so made, that at your pleasure you may drain your
Fountains, and cleanse them, and must be of capacity to carry off all the Water
as it comes, left it annoy your Garden, for the greater quantity of Water you
have, the more pleasant will it appear.

Plenty in Fountains always graceful shows,
And greatest Beauty from abundance flows.
But where neither Springs nor Rivers can be obtained to complete your
pleasures, yet for use and a little for delight, may Water be procured from the
Heavens, by preserving the drips of the House, and conveying it to some Cistern
made for that purpose in your Garden, which may resemble a Fountain, or make a
fair Receptacle in your Garden, for the Water that may be gained from the
declining Walks of your Garden, or from adjacent Hills, as Rapinus directs.

But if the place you live in, be so dry,
That neither Springs nor Rivers they are nigh;
Then at some distance from your Garden make,
Within the gaping Earth a spacious Lake,
That like a Magazine may comprehend
The assembled Floods, which from the Hills descend.
engraving of seven different kinds of ornamental fountain, in three
compartments. In the upper compartment are shown: a fountain raising a single
ball (or dome) of water; a fountain raising a double ball (or domes) of water;
a dragon-shaped fountain; and a crown-shaped fountain. In the middle
compartment are shown: a statue of a woman with water fountaining out of one of
her nipples (into the face of a lady walking nearby with a gentleman); and a
fountain shaped like an oak tree. In the lower compartment is shown a musical
fountain which operates a water-organ. Engraved by Frederick Hendrick van Hoave
(1628?-School). F. H. Van. Houe fec:
pg. 45

Here follows a DESCRIPTION Of several sorts of FOUNTAINS.
I. THE Ball raised by a Spout of Water. II. The Water representing a double
Glass, the one over the other. III. A Dragon or such like, casting Water out of
its Mouth, as it runs round on the Spindle. IV. A Crown casting Water out of
several Pipes as it runs round. V. A Statue of a Woman, that at the turning of
a private Cock, shall cast Water out of her Nipples into the Spectators Faces.
VI. The Royal Oak with Leaves, Acorns, and Crowns dropping, and several small
Spouts round the top. VII. The Cistern into which the Water flows by the Pipe
A. the Air issues out at the Pipes b b b. the ends whereof make the Musical
sounds in the Trough of Water at C. which is supplied with Water, by the Pipe
D. which in time dreins the Cistern, which wast Water precipitates into E. and
from E. into the common Drein.
These Waters are to be preferred for the irrigation of your Plants to any
other, and in case you make your Cisterns well, and Cement the Joints of your
Stone with Parisian Cement, or with our own Lime compounded with Lin-seed Oil,
they will retain the Water for a long time.

SECT. IV. Of Waterworks.
BEsides those natural Courses that are proposed, for the leading the Water
from the one place of your Garden to the other, after it is entered into its
limits, there are several ways of ordering it, where it is either Naturally or
Artificially advanced above the level of your Garden.

The docile Streams will any shape put on,
A thousand different Courses they will run. Rapinus

Therefore the Water must be conveyed from some Cistern or Conduit, standing
above your Garden, at some distance by Pipes, or else it must by some Artifice
be raised into a Cistern of Lead over some Lodge or Grot in your Garden, that
from thence it may by smaller Pipes be secretly conveyed to your several Works.

As to the Fountains where it may be cast through various Figures, as before
was hinted in the last Section.

Or it may be made to rise in the midst of a Fountain or your Grotto, through
the Branches of an Artificial Tree, each Sprig being hollow, that it may
continually drop with Spouts on the top, for the erecting of greater quantities
of Water.

Or it may rise in one small upright Stream, carrying a Ball of Wood on it,
which being exactly round, and placed on the mouth of the Pipe, and the Water
by the opening of a stop cock made for that purpose, admitted by degrees; the
Ball will rise and be supported by the Spout of Water, to five, six, or seven
foot high, after the same manner as a single Pease may be elevated by your
Breath on a Straw; but in case your Ball be apt to fall, then may you perforate
it through the Center smoothly and exactly in the middle, and place this small
hole directly on the middle of the mouth of the Pipe, and so raise the Ball by
degrees, and the small spout of water that passes through the Center of the
Ball will preserve it in its due posture.

By a Copper Cylinder made to fit on the top of the Pipe, out of which the
water violently flows, to take off and on at pleasure, may you sometimes make
the water resemble a large Glass inverted, by placing a flat piece of Copper on
the top of the Cylinder, and leaving only a narrow circular passage under it,
for the water freely to flow out of it on every side. Another Pipe or Cylinder
of a lesser size, made to rise off the middle of the said flat piece of Copper
or Cap, with a like Cap on the top of it, and a passage left as before, will
cause the water issuing out of both the Cylinders the one over the other, to
present a Glass within a Glass, both inverted.

Also Crowns, Birds, Beasts, made of light Brass or Copper, hollow and easy to
turn on a Cylinder, the one end of the Cylinder is to be set on the top of the
Water-pipe, the other end to force the water with certain thin Vanes in the
inside of your hollow Figure, which will make it to move swiftly about,
ejecting the water out of the sides or mouth of the Figures in its motion,
which is very pleasant to behold.

Secret Pipes may be under the Ground, the ends not appearing above it, that
when any Ladies unawares, or casually walk or stand over them, by the turning
of a stop cock, you may force the water upright under their Coats, to their
sudden surprise.

You may also place on Pedestals of about three foot high, several Figures at
about three foot distance, ten or twenty of a side: The interval between these
Figures may be 8 or 10 foot over. Through these Pedestals and Figures small
Pipes must be brought, that the Water may out of the mouth of the Figures be
ejected into the Air; the one Figure directing it toward its opposite Figure
beyond it, and a little sideways, so that at the turning of a stop-cock, each
Figure shall cast out a stream of Water over like a Rainbow, that you may walk
under these Spouts, as under so many Arches, without any drop falling on you.

But that which is very delightful, is the singing of the Nightingal, exactly
imitated by the motion of the Water, and is thus performed: In some Cavity of
your Grott or other Edifice where you desire at any time to hear this Music
you must place a large Cistern of Lead, containing ten, twenty, or thirty
Gallons as you please: This Cistern must be well clothed on every part (except
the useful passages for Pipes) into it: near the top must the Water be let in
freely through a Pipe of about an inch diameter; then you must have also near
the top, two, three, or four small Pipes issuing out, tending a little
downwards, at the end of which you must fix your Pipes made of Brass, or other
Metal, made before you fix them like an ordinary Fistula, wherewith Children
exercise themselves in their pastimes, so that when you try it with your
Breath, and hold the lower end in Water, it shall Pipe and chuck as the
Nightingal sometimes both; you may make two, three, or four of these of several
sizes, the biggest not large, and they will give some distinction in sound,
these being fixed to the ends of the small Pipes issuing out of your Cistern,
and the lower ends of them dipping into a Trough of Lead, a little below the
bottom of the Cistern; when by the turning of a stop-cock, the Water flows into
the Cistern, it expels the Air through these Pipes, which give you your
desired Music, until your Cistern be full, then must you stop the cock, that
the Cistern may empty it self again, and be ready for another time.

The Pipe through which it empties its self, may be at the bottom of the
Cistern, of about the diameter of one third part of an inch, so that the Pipe
that supplies the Cistern with Water, must of necessity be of Capacity
sufficient to afford Water enough for this under Pipe, and to enforce Air for
the musical Pipes, therefore this emptying Pipe you may lessen as you find
occasion.

The Water that runs through this lower Pipe, may descend into the Trough that
is under the musical Pipes, to supply that with Water.

Instead of this lower Pipe, you may have a Siphon made in your Cistern, the
inner foot of it to reach the bottom of the inside, the neck thereof to be near
to the top of it, but not altogether so high, the outer foot of it somewhat
lower than the bottom, that when the Water flows into the Cistern, and stops
the inner foot of the Siphon, the Air forthwith gives you your Music until the
Cistern be full, then of its self the Water passes through the Siphon until the
Cistern be empty. In this way, less Water will make your Music, because there
is no decrease of it until the Cistern be filled, but then you must not desist
until it be full, else it will not flow out of the Siphon. You must also supply
the Through before your musical Pipes with Water from some other Pipe,
therefore the former way is the more facile.

By this means may you make many Musical Artificial Sounds, and to continue in
proportion according to the quantity of your Water, and capacity of your
Cistern; the Water that flows in wast from it, being made to fall from one
precipice to another, which with its murmering Noise intermixed with the
Musical Pipes, makes an excellent charming Harmony, especially none of it being
in view, but concealed in Rock-work made for that purpose.

SECT. V. Of Grotto's.
IT oftentimes happens that in these Northern Climes, the Aestival heats are
more troublesome than they are nearer the Zodiac, the Sun continuing here
longer above the Horizon in the Summer season, than in those parts, which
occasions that intemperancy that many times we are sensible of; for as we have
less of the presence of the Sun in the Winter, so have we that defect supplied
in the Summer.

But those that inhabit more Southerly, and have the Sun more perpendicularly
over them, are more sensible of the acute heat of that bright Orb about the
middle of the day, generally than we are; and therefore about the heat of the
day, they usually sequester themselves from their ordinary Occupations, and
betake themselves to their shades and cool places of Recess for some few hours.

Such that have convenient places in their Villes, make themselves Grotto's or
Caves in the Earth for that only purpose, on which some have bestowed so much
Cost and Labor, that those Grotts have been the Object of Admiration of, and
part of the Subject of several Histories written by several Travelers and
Strangers, as are their Baths and Fountains.

For the same reason may our Grotts be as necessary for us, to repose our
selves in the time of our Summer faint Heats, although they are not here so
constant every year as in those parts, yet are they less tolerable, for want of
these nocturnal breezes they usually enjoy.

Therefore either in the side of some declive of a Hill, or under some Mount or
Terrace artificially raised may you make a place of repose, cool and fresh in
the greatest heats. It may be arched over with Stone or Brick, and you may give
it what light or entrance you please. You may make secret Rooms and Passages
within it, and in the outer Room may you have all those before mentioned
Waterworks, for your own or your Friends divertisements.

It is a place that is capable of giving you so much pleasure and delight, that
you may bestow not undeservedly what cost you please on it, by paving it with
Marble, or immuring it with Stone, or Rock-work, either natural or artificially
resembling the Excellencies of Nature. The Roof may be made of the same
supported with Pillars of Marble, and the Partitions made of Tables of the same.

The most famous of this kind that this Kingdom affords, is that Wiltonian
Gratio near unto Salisbury, on which no Cost was spared to make it complete,
and wherein you may view or might have lately so done, the best of Waterworks,
far excelling what Rapinus thus sings of late Richlieu's Place in France.

Here variously disposed the Fountains run,
First headlong fall, then rise where they begun;
Receive all forms, and move on every side,
With horrid noise, Chimaera gaping wide;
Out of her open Mouth the Water throws,
For from her Mouth a rapid Torrent flows.
From her wide Throat, as Waves in Circles spout
A Serpent turning sprinkles all the rout.
But they that cannot command the Water to crown the pleasures of their Garden;
yet are there few that cannot find some convenient place for this purpose, it
being as necessary in them to avoid the liquefying Air, as in other places the
unpleasant Breezes.

CHAP. V. Of Statues, Obelisks, Dyals, and other invegitate Ornaments.
IN all places where there is a Summer and 1. Statues.
a Winter, and where your Gardens of Pleasure are sometimes clothed with their
verdant Garments, and bespangled with variety of Flowers, and at other times
wholly dismantled of all these; here to recompense the loss of past Pleasures,
and to buoy up their hopes of another Spring, many have placed in their
Gardens, Statues, and Figures of several Animals, and great variety of other
curious pieces of Workmanship, that their Walks might be pleasant at any time
in those places of never dying Pleasures.

Herein the ancient Romans were excessively prodigal, sparing of no Cost to
adorn their Avenues, with curious Figures for their Winter diversions, as well
as with rare Plants for their Summer delights. Which vanity (although one of
the most excuseable is descended on the Italians, whose Gardens are the Mirrors
of the World, as well for those Ornaments, as for their excellency of the
Plants that are propagated in them.

This Mode of adorning Gardens with curious Workmanship, is now become English;
how many Statues made by excellent Art, are there to be seen in His Majasties
Gardens, and in the Gardens of diverse of the Nobility of England? But what
great pity is it, that in many places remote from Cities and great Towns, these
Statues should drive out of their view those natural Beauties that so far
exceed them?

Much more Ornamental are Statues placed in Groves and Shades, and in or near
your Borders of the choicest Plants, than on the naked surface of the Earth,
which later beget not that surprise in the Spectators, as the other.

Statues are commendable in the midst of Fountains, and green Squares in
Groves, and at the end of obscure Walks.

In the room of Statues in the midst of your 2. Obelisks.
green Squares, Obelisks, or single Columns may not be improper, so that the
Workmanship be accordingly. Neither can there be a more proper use for an
Obelisk, than to support a Globe with its Axis duly placed respecting both
Poles, and its circumference on the Equinoctial Line, exactly divided into
twenty four parts, and marked with twice twelve hours, that on it at a distance
by the shadow only of the Globe on its self, you may discern the hour of the
day, and observe how the Day and Night, and Summer and Winter happen throughout
the Universe.

Many Dials of various and curious Workmanship are made, and may be placed on
Pedestals in the midst of the Squares instead of Statues, which better become
the shades.

Dials of Glass, were it not for the Casualties 3. Dials.
they are subject unto, pre-excel any other for Beauty, especially the Globe
with its Axis through the midst, and duly elevated with small Beads on it,
placed at their due distances according to the Lines of the Celestial Globe,
painted on the superficies of your orbicular Glass, which will not only give
you the true hour of the day, but all other variations that a Dial can direct:
But more of these things in another place.

Other ancient Ornament of a Garden, are Flower-pots.
Flower-pots, which painted white and placed on Pedestals, either on the
Ground, in a straight line on the edges of your walks, or on your Walls, or at
the corners of your Squares, are exceeding pleasant.

They are usually made of Potters Clay, and burnt, which when full of Earth,
and frozen in the Winter are apt to break, unless you place another ordinary
pot of Earth in the inside of it, wherein to plant your Flowers, you design to
propagate in them.

But to prevent that casualty of breaking, some are made of Lead well painted
and gilt, which are much to be preferred.

One of the pleasures that may be esteemed 5. Of an Aviary.
belonging to a Garden, is an Aviary, which must be near your house, that you
may take some delight in it there, as well as in your Garden, and that you may
in all seasons take care of its Inhabitants: As for its bigness, manner of
making and ordering, it is not proper in this place to be discoursed of, we
being rather for an Aviary at large, that the whole Garden with its Groves and
Avenues may be full of these pretty-Singers, that they may with their charming
Notes, rouse up our dull Spirits, that are too intent upon the Cares of this
World, and mind us of the Providence, the great God of the Universe has over
us, as well as these Creatures.

BOOK II. Of the diverse Trees, Flowers, and Plants, that beautify and adorn a
Garden.
CHAP. I. Of Trees for Ornament and Shade.
HAving lightly passed over the Site, Form, Security, and dead Ornaments of
your Garden; it is time now to give you an account of such Vegetating
Ornaments, that are proper and very well becoming the Gardens of the most
curious. And because the Cypress is the most beautiful and most celebrated
Tree, I shall begin with Perennial Greens.

SECT. I. Of Winter Greens.
OF all the Trees that have been propagated 1. Of the Cypress.
in our European parts, none have yet merited that esteem as the Cypress has
done, it being the most uniform, streightest, and most slender of any other,
preserving its Verdure throughout the year.

Its natural Country is Candia, where (as Pliny writes) if a man plow the
ground, and not sow it with some other thing, Cypresses will come up, and
presently show above ground; from whence they have been spread into the most
parts of Europe, so far as the extreme cold will give them leave.

Their Seed seldom or never ripens here in England; but such as you have from
foreign parts, you must sow about the beginning of April, which when come up
and carefully watered and weeded, you may remove.

These Trees may be either planted as Standards, or in Hedges, and clipped as
other tonsile Hedges usually are: if you intend them for Standards, at about
three or four years the middle shoot ought to be cut off near the top, aad the
whole Tree cut into a pyramidical Form, and not bound as is the usual custom,
only clip them, not late in the year, left the Frost prove too fierce and kill
your Trees.

For if they are not close bound but clipped and stand not in a cold moist
Ground, they will endure the hardest Frosts, and sharpest Winds: For I have
known many that stood in the lowest part of the Garden killed with the
extremity of cold, when others that stood on a Terrace, more obvious to the
cold Winds escaped; and for no other reason, as I could judge, but their dry
and healthy Soil they grew in.

As the Cypress for its Beauty, so the Laurel 2. Of the Laurel.
for its Glory, has been in great esteem with the Ancients, whose Branches
have crowned the Heads of Emperors in their Triumphs; and those that were
Victors in War, or any solemn Games; The Laurel Branches are also Emblems of
Peace, and of pre-excellency in any ingenious Science or Enterprise, the
ancient Romans attributed unto it an extraordinary property it had against the
evil effects of Thunder and Lightning, and therefore planted it near unto their
Houses and Lodgings.

It is one of the best ornamental Trees you can plant either for beauty or
shade, it will cloth your most shady Walls, and will endure the most scorching
beams of the Sun, it will mount to twenty or thirty foot in height, and be
content to be humble and tonsil, no Weather will annoy it, it delights most in
moist Ground.

In watery Vales, where pleasant Fountains flow,
Their splendent Leaves the lovely Laurels show.
And agrees best with a cool shady place which is equal to a watery.

They grow tall, and bear great plenty of Berries, from which the Trees are
easily propagated, or from Layers, or slips, set in a cold moist place.

The Laurus Tinus is a Shrub yielding sweet Laurus Tinus.
scented Tufts of white Blossoms in the Winter, as well as the Summer, is
easily propagated from Suckers or Layers, and deserves a place amongst the best
of your perennial Greens: There are two sorts, the one with a narrow, the other
with a broad Leaf.

The Bay Tree, our old English Plant is a fine The Bay Tree.
oderiferous Tree, but worn out of that great esteem that formerly was had of
it, by the more beautiful and hardy Laurel.

Few Greens exceed in Beauty, either in 3. Of the Phylirea.
Branch or Leaf the Phylirea, which spreads so fairly, and near the ground, and
rises to that height, and so easily managed with the Shears, that it is
esteemed one of the most pleasant Plants that Nature yields, it is very hardy
and endures our generally most severe Winters, having never known them nipp'd
with fierce Cold, but (Anno 1663, and since in Anno 1683.) and then the
Branches being for the most part cut off, the Tree reassumed its former Luster.

It is raised of Seeds, and may be increased by Layers, and sometimes by Slips,
it will not easily bear a remove till the coldest Seasons are over.

There are two sorts of it, the one with a smaller and more edged Leaf than the
other, which yields great plenty of Blossoms in the Winter, and lasts until the
Spring, which Blossoms are of a strong Scent, by reason of a gummy Matter
adhering to them, which the Bees wonderfully affect, which blooming Trees, if
there were many of them near your Apiary, they would very much help your Bees,
before much of other Food was to be found by them in the Spring; but the barren
Tree is the more beautiful.

These Trees may be cut into any form high or low, in Hedges or in single
Trees, and will cover a Seat or Bower in a short time, and more neatly than any
Tree whatsoever.

A Species of the same is the Alaternus, a 4. Of the Alaternus.
hardy pleasant Shrub, not aspiring to that height as the Phylirea, but is apt
for Hedges, and easily managed.

Most of the ancient Gardens of England 5. Of the Box-Tree.
were formerly beautified with this never-dying Box, because you might have
reduced it to any form or shape high or low, but by reason of the ill savor
emitted from it, and by its spreading Roots continuing long in a place,
sterilizing the confining Earth, it is now banished out of our Gardens.

Our modern Planters have brought into 6. Of the Engh-Tree.
our Gardens to adorn our Walks, the Engh-Tree, which growing tall and stour
against all Weathers, and its small Twigs sticking close to the Trunk, clothing
it always green, no Sun nor shade offending it, is one of the most ornamental
Trees you can desire. The Engh-Tree may be clipped and reduced to any form, but
easily to the complete form of the Cyprus.

I should undervalue the Judgment and Opinion 7. of the Holly.
of our best Acborist Mr. Evelin, if I should not numerate the Holly amongst
the most select of our Hortense perennial Greens, which he esteems to be the
most incomparable for Use, Defense, Sight and Ornament; I need say no more of
it, seeing his learned Pea has sufficiently emblazoned its frame.

The Firr-Tree is rather for the Woods, 8. Of the Firr.
than for the Garden, yet by reason of the slender and aspiring Trunk of the
straight Firr, and the facil keeping and preserving its Branches in a complete
circular order, it does very well become a Garden, planted at the corners of
your Squares, or in direct lines at a little distance from your Walks.

Having one of these Trees whose top was perished, I clipped it with my Shears,
and reduced it to a fine Conick shape, and find it as easy to be managed with
the Shears, as any other Plant.

The Norway Firr is easily managed with Shears, and kept in the form of a
Cypress, growing thick on the sides when clipped, and being planted thick in
Hedges, may be clipped as other tonsile Plants, and make a very neat and close
Fence.

They are easily propagated from the Seed taken out of the Clogs, and sown in
March, and very well endure a remove; all other sorts of Firr and Pines,
besides the straight small leaved Firr are to be excluded your Garden of
Pleasure, being not capable of being reduced to a complete form.

For the rarity of it more than for its beauty, 9. Of the Cedar.
may the famous Cedar find a place in your Garden, the Name whereof is
sufficient to revive those stupendous relations of the Magnitude, Durableness,
Excellency and Virtues of that most sacred of Trees.

Not unbecoming your Gardens, is the Ilex, 10. Of the Ilex.
or ever green Oak, which is hardy, though slow in growing, and propagated from
its Seed, or by Layers.

The greater Tree Stone Crop is a beautiful 11. Of Tree Stone Crop.
Green, not common, but raised from Layars, and preserved in some Gardens.

The Strawberry Tree, as it is so termed from 12. Of the Arbutus.
the red Berries it usually bears, although difficultly raised from Seeds or
Layers, and with the like difficulty removed whilst young, yet thrives very
well in the warm part of your Garden, adding much Beauty to it, by its green
Leaves all the Winter, and its Berries in the Autumn.

One of the most Vulgar, yet most useful and 13. Of Rosemary.
necessary Greens is the Rosemary, a Plant natural to many places in Spain, but
here nourished in the warmest places of our Kitchin-Gardens; I have observed in
some Country Gardens, a dwarf-kind of Rosemary kept sheared, that has been
exceeding comely, the Plant is easily managed, did not the most severe colds
destroy it, but that dwarf-kind is the more hardy.

The large double Rosemary is the more Ornamental to a Garden; but that with a
double blossom the more rare.

The Pyracantha, or ever green Hawthorn, 14. Of Pyracantha.
is a complete Tree for a Fence, its Thorns being strong and sharp; it is also
very beautiful when its Berries are ripe, which are of a Coralline red, its
Leaves ever green, but not very thick.

The Arbor vitae, so called from its ever green 15. Of Arbor vitae.
and hardy Leaf, may be planted to make up your number of Greens, for its
Rarity, but not for its Beauty, any more than the Savin, which is much like it.

The Celastrus or Staff-Tree, bearing a few 16. Of Celastrus.
green Leaves over the Winter, and as Mr. Rea advises, is fit to be mixed with
Pyracantha, for the making of the ever green Hedge.

The Juniper-Tree although usual in the Woods, 17. Of the Juniper-Tree.
or Commons, yet deserves a place amongst our choicest Winter-greens, it being
capable of any form, growing tall like the Cypress, or spreading as you are
willing to order it.

These ever green Plants have in them a strong resinacious Juice, that
fortifies them against the Cold, and is the cause of the continuing of the Leaf
so long on the Stalk, as may be observed in the Firr and Pine, what an
abundance of that Terebintine Sap do they contain, enduring the most fierce
Colds the Northern Climate yields; the Cypress and the Rosemary both yield a
very hot and resiny Sap.

The Holly affords us out of its Bark, that 18. Of the Holly.
glutinous Bird-lime, that ensnares the heedless Fowl, which diffuseth
naturally into its Leaves, enables them against all the inconveniences of
Winter and Cold. The Phylirea has a very strong Sap that preserves it. And all
the other Winter Greens have more or less of the like resinous and glutinous
Sap or Juice, that is not so easily preyed upon by extreme Colds.

SECT. II. Of Variegated or Gilded-leafed Plants.
THose perennial Greens are very Ornamental, planted in their proper places of
your Garden and Avenues, by reason of their perpetual Verdure, that the Winter
that seems elsewhere most barren, here amongst these Greens appears like a
perpetual Spring; yet must they give place to the most beautiful of Trees and
Shrubs of the same kind (as to their durableness) by reason of their
variegations, much excelling those that are of a plain color.

For what can be more pleasant than to have Groves or Walks (when the Flowers
that are but for a day are retired) apparalled with gilded party-colour
Garments, some with yellow and green, others with white and green, emulating
the two royal Metals, that by the Gilder's hand adorn the Palaces of Princes.
The most excellent of all which gilded Plants is the Holly, 1. Gilded Holly.
whose Bark as well as Leaf, is variegated with a bright yellow; the more
yellow the Leaf is, the more beautiful is the Plant; some are stripped
throughout the Barks and Berries: If vulgar green Holly be so glorious and
refreshing an Object, as Mr. Evelin has Characterized it to be, then certainly
the same with a due mixture of a bright yellow must pre-excell. In fine,
whosoever has once seen this Tree, will not think any perennial Green equal to
it, for it is like the true Scarlet-dy which present, debaseth all other
Colors.

The gilded Laurel is a very pleasant Tree, 2. Gilded Laurel.
although inferior to the Holly, for want of that Oriental Verdure and more
polite Leaf; but this Plant is more rare to be obtained than the gilded Holly.

Of Phylirea, also there is a sort that is much 3. Gilded Phylirea and
Alaternus.
variegated with white, and is very pleasant, as the like there is of
Alaternus, which is not altogether so hardy as that of the Phylirea, yet both
both worthy of your care.

The Leaves of Box are on some Trees gilded 4. Gilded Box.
with an edge round each of them with yellow, but these Trees do not annually
produce all their Leaves gilded: sometimes they are green, and sometimes
gilded; yet are these Trees not to be wanting in your golden Grove.

There is besides the Rosemary that is gilded 5. Gilded Rosemary.
with yellow, a sort of it variegated with white, very delightful to the Eye,
and not so common as the yellow; both these are to be preserved under warm
Walls, or other Fences to secure them from the too severe Winds; but the white
is the more tender.

The Periwinckle is a low creeping Plant, some 6. Gilded Periwinckle.
bearing white, some blew Flowers, growing wild in many places, and scarce
worthy of a place in a Garden, except for the covering the Ground in the Shades
of your Groves and Avenues, with its ever green and running Branches; but the
gilded Periwinckle whose Leaves are exceeding well variegated, much resembling
the gilded Phylirea or Alaternus, is as complete an Ornament for clothing the
Earth of your golden Grove, as any of the gilded Trees are for the more lofty
part of it.

And although your gilded Trees are most 7. Gilded (...)
becoming in a Grove or Walk, and the Periwinckle be proper for an humble
Ornament, yet some Plants of a middle rank or degree, may not unbecome so
splendid an Object; of which none can be more suitable than the Lilly, whose
verdant shining pale-green Leaves are curiously painted by Nature's Pencil with
yellow, appearing at a great distance, as well as near very beautiful; these
Leaves from the Ground to the top of the Stalk, from the Spring to the Autumn,
being much more comely than the Blossom which is the fair white Lilly.

It is known to all Naturalists, that the best 8. Gilded Nightshade and
Mugwort.
Garden Ground is most prone to Weeds, which are its Spontaneous productions,
and seeing that Weeds are expected in our Grove, as well as in our Garden, it
were better that it were in part supplied for want of gilded leaved Flowers
with gilded Weeds, whereof the Nightshade, otherwise a noisome Weed, but with
its variegated Leaves, and here and there thinly dispersed, and gilded Mugwort,
another Weed of the like nature, would make a good mixture with the other
richer Dies, like the ordinary Colors in a Picture, which serve to illustrate
the more excellent.

Some other sorts of gilded Plants there may 9. There is also variegated
Wood-bine.
probably be; but these are all that I have hitherto observed. As these have
been casually met withal, and from them others have been raised, so by the same
reason may other sorts be discovered, that yet have not been observed.

For traveling through some part of Glamorganshire, and discoursing of these
variegated Greens, one of that Country assured me, that in that Country was a
very large Holly with all its Leaves curiously gilded, growing wild in a Wood,
which was not unlikely, for from the Woods they first came, but that which was
most strange, was, that the same Tree should be neglected, and not a great
number of Plants raised from it.

The Reasons why such variety of Colors should appear in the Leaves of Trees
and Plants, are not easily discovered, seeing that we may observe the like in
the various Colors of some sorts of Beasts and Birds, whereof no account has
been yet given; and they as well as these are also apt to degenerate. But the
reason of such a variegation of Colors may be supposed to be a Defect in
Nature, because the more sterile the Land is wherein they grow, the better are
their Colors preserved, and the more rich the Ground is, the sooner do they
degenerate. And as these curious Plants are by accident, or some secret
inclination of Nature undiscovered unto us, so they are the more to be valued,
and on them may we the better bestow our delight and admiration.

Thus will we conclude this Section, of monstrous 10. The Embroidered Elder.
Curiosities in the Leaves of Plants, with that of the Elder-Tree. It happened
that about two years since, (being Anno 1674.) a Gordener near London, by
accident discovered in a Hedge an Elder-Tree, whose Leaves seemed to be
embroidered, by the swelling of the Veins that spread themselves throughout the
Leaf, and appearing of a different color from the rest of it, they being of a
curious Texture, made them appear to the Eye most beautiful and rare, which
Tree he transplanted into his Garden, as no small curiosity.

These gilded party-colored Branches, would well have became those Crowns and
Garlands so frequently used by the Ancients, had they been then known, and
might (some of them at least) have been incerted in Dr. Brown's Catalogue of
Coronary Plants.

SECT. III. Of other Trees propagated for their Beauty and Shade.
BEsides these perennial Greens and other Rarities in Nature, that seem to take
up 1. Of the Platanus.
so large a room in your Plantation, yet are there other Trees that in the
Spring, and throughout the Summer, do very much adorn your Groves and Avenues,
and cool and refresh those that delight to walk in them in the heat of those
seasons. The most principal of which is the Platanus, a Tree so much admired by
the ancient Romans, that they preferred them before any of their own Native
Productions, and that for their Shades only, it so absolutely excluding the
Beams of the Sun in the Summer, and admitting them in the Winter. The Branches
are but thin and slender, the Leaves broad, and of color pleasant, the Tree
grows large. Pliny records that in his time, a Plane-Tree was of that
bigness, that being hollow within, eighteen persons usually sat on Benches in
it, and supped with Licinius Mutianus its owner. This Tree delights in Water:
for the Tree that grew to that bigness, had a cool Fountain adjoining to it;
and those that had not so convenient a place for it, yet it seems by Pliny, out
of their extraordinary affection to it, irrigated it with better Liquor. He
also tells you of another, that the Emperor Caligula had in his Ville, in which
was a capacious Room, that fifteen Persons might sit at a Repast, and yet space
enough for their Servitors to wait on them. In truth, the World does not yield
a more beautiful Tree for shade than the Plane. It grows and prospers well, if
planted in a moist Ground, or be constantly watered whilst it is young, and will
soon arrive to your desired bigness.

Unto the Platanus, 2. The Tilia.
High shooting Linden, next exacts your care,
With grateful Shades, to those who take the Air.
This Tree seems to contend with the Platanus for Beauty and Shade, only its
Leaves are not so fair, but for its conick or pyramedical Form, it exceeds most
Trees, and for its sweet scent, wherewith it persumes the Air in the Months of
July and August, there is no Tree comparable to it of that magnitude. The Bees
will testify it, who in innumerable multitudes gather on the rows of these
Trees, when they are in Blossom. They are reducible almost to any Form, if
planted at a distance they spread, if near they aspire. They delight in moist
and good ground, and are very quick of growth. The many large Avenues planted
of them in most places, sufficiently demonstrate their Beauty, Shade and
Flavor.

The Horse Chestnut for the Beauty of its 3. The Castanea Equina.
Leaves in the Spring, and the complete from of its Bole, is not unworthy of a
place amongst the best of Trees for Shade and Ornament. This Tree is very
lately made English, being brought in its Seeds or Nuts, from Constantinople.
It prospers very well here in good light Mould, it buds all the Winter, and
until it springs, are covered with a shining glutinous matter or Gum, and
about the beginning of May, it usually makes its whole Years shoot in eight or
ten days, and then dilates its Leaves, more pleasant than which scarce any Tree
yields. In the same Month it puts forth many Branches of Flowers, so mixed,
that they seem to be enameled, and are very beautiful; in some years, a few
of those Blossoms are succeeded by Nuts, in form of Chestnuts included in a Coat
or outward Shell.

Christ's Thorn, so named, for that it is said to 4. Paliurus.
be the same wherewith our Savior was Crowned at Jerusalem, near which is the
natural place for its growth. This Tree may be placed in your Garden as a
Rarity, as may that which is yet a greater wonder called,

The Glastenbury Thorn, being in appearance 5. The Glastenbury Thorn.
a vulgar white Thorn, yet budding and yielding plentifully its Blossoms in
December. I have for several years observed it in Blossom at Christmas,
sometimes it blossoms before, if the Weather be mild, but if the Cold be very
severe, it will retard it: Those Blossoms are succeeded by Berries and Leaves,
although in the Winter, as the ordinary white Thorns are in the Summer. They
that read and believe the Divinity of the Monastery of Glastenbury, may the
more easily believe the report of this Tree, that by its blossoming on the
twenty fifth day of December, it does not only indicate unto us the very day of
our Savior's Nativity, but condemns our sloth and contumacy in not rejoicing
with it at so glorious a dispensation.

This Tree flourished many years in Wilton-Garden near Salisbury, and I suppose
is there yet, but is not altogether so exact to a day, as its original from
whence it came was reported to be, it is probable the Faith of our Ancestors
might contribute much toward its certainty of time. For Imagination does
operate on inanimate things, as some have observed.

Thus have you a brief account of the most delightful, pleasant, and
ornamental Trees wherewith to beautify your Garden, Avennes, and Groves, which
are shady and cool Recesses from the noise and cares of the World, and the hot
Gleams of the Sun, and are an artificial Epitome of the larger Woods, Forests,
and Groves, so much celebrated by the Ancients, who attributed unto them most
Divine Honor.

Here you may in a small Room, and at an easy Expense, reap the advantage of
those more ample Possessions.

Thus blessed is he, who tired with his Affairs,
For from all noise, all vain applause; propares
To go, and underneath some silent Shade,
Which neither Cares nor anxious Thoughts invade,
Does for a while himself alone possess,
Changing the Town for Rural happiness:
He if he please, into the Groves may stray,
Listen to the Birds, which sing at break of day. Rapinus.

SECT. IV. Of the Propagating and Planting the said Trees.
THE several Trees beforementioned, are variously propagated and removed at
various times, being many of them Exoticks: And therefore the nature of the
Climate is to be considered.

Such of them that are natural to this, or a more Northerly Climate, may be
removed at any time of the Winter, but the nearer the Spring the better, and
are generally raised of Seed, as the Holly, the Eugh, the Firr, the Pyracantha,
and the Glastenbury-Thorn. The Laurel, Laurus Tinus, the Bay, the Tilia, the
Castanea Equina, although raised by Layers as well as by Seeds, yet will endure
a Winter removal.

The Cypress, the Pine, the Cedar, and the Celastrus are more tender, and
although they are raised of Seed only, yet ought they to be removed in the
warmth of the Spring about March or April. As also the Plants, Slips, or Layers
of the Phylirea, Alaternus, Ilex, Arbutus, and Rosemary, whether from Seed or
Layers, because they are brought hither from a more Southerly Country.

The Slips or Layers of all your gilded Plants, deserve your care in removing
them, as the plain Trees of the same kind ought to be.

The Box, the greater Tree-stone Crop, Arbor Vitae, Savin, Platanus, and the
Paliurus, are increased by Slips and Layers only, which must be laid or slipped
in the Spring, and (except the Paliurus) may be removed all the Winter, the
Paliurus only in the Spring.

It is observed, that it is the best way of planting the Box, to strip away the
Leaves from the Slip, and not to wind the Stem, but to set it whole without
winding.

It is also said, that every Slip of a Bay Tree will grow, if set in March, the
great Leaves being stripped off, but they must be shaded, and sometimes watered if
need require, else they will not so easily take root.

The gilded Trees or Plants must be increased by Layers, Slips, or Graffs, for
it is observed, that by raising them from Seed they degenerate, by reason that
the Hawes or Seeds of the white Thorn come not up the next year after they are
sown: It will be somewhat tedious for such as delight in Curiosities, to wait
for the production of the Glastenbury-Thorn from the Seed; therefore the best
and most expeditious way of raising this Rarity, is by grafting it on a common
white Thorn.

The Holly-Berry continues the like time in the ground before it springs, but
the Berries cleansed of their mucilage before they are planted, very much
accelerates their springing: The Berries of the Eugh require the same ordering.

The Juniper Trees are propugated, either by Plants taken from the Woods, or by
their Seeds or Berries, which will soon come up.

CHAP. II. Of Flower-Trees.
AFter your Garden, Avennes, and Groves, are reduced into such form as you
dedesire, and those adorned so far as necessarily they ought to be, with those
graceful and immortal Greens and other pleasant Trees yielding shade and
delight; it then behooves you to furnish those intervals that remain, and the
borders of your Walks with Flowers, the wonders of Nature, for the richness and
variety of their Colors, Scents, Forms and Seasons. Amongst all which, those
Shrubs or Trees yielding so great a variety of those Objects, are most to be
prized, and of these is the Rose to be preferred.

SECT. I. Of the various kinds of Roses.
THere is no Flower-bearing Tree that yields so great variety, nor any Blossoms
so beautiful as the Rose, nor do they only adorn but perfume your Gardens.

Now I perceive from whence the Odours flow,
While on the Roses kinder Zephyrs blow.
Out of the prickly Stalk the Purple-Flower
Springs, and commands the Vulgar to adore,
The Garden-Queen does now her self display,
Soiling the Luster of the rising Day.
Between the Tulip and the Gillyflower, they are the greatest Ornament to a
Garden, whereof the yellow Province-Rose is the most beautiful, 1. Of yellow
Roses.
where it brings forth fair and kindly Flowers, which has been obtained by
budding a single yellow Rose on the stock of a flourishing Francford Rose near
the Ground; when that single yellow is well grown in that Branch, inoculate
your double yellow Rose, then cut off all suckers and shoots from the first and
second, leaving only your last, which must be pruned very near, leaving but few
Buds, which will have the more Nourishment, and yield the fairer and more
entire Blossom.

This Tree or a Layer, from a Rose of the same kind delights most, and blows
fairest in a cold, moist, or shady place, and not against a hot Wall.

The single yellow Rose is scarce worth the planting, except for the use
aforesaid.

The nearest in Color to the former is the 2. The Austrian Rose.
Austrian Rose, being but single, yet in much esteem for its Blossom, whose
Leaves are of a Scarlet color within, and on the outside of a pale yellow.

The sweetest and most useful of Roses is the 3. The Damask Rose.
Damask, which in my Lord Bacon's time, was by him observed not to have been in
England above one hundred years; of these Damask kinds, there is one that
bears Blossoms with the first, and so continues with new Blossoms, until the
Frosts prevent it, and is therefore called the Monthly Rose, and is not
inferior in smell to 4. The Monthly Rose.
the Damask, and deserves a place amongst your most select Plants; this seems
to be the Rose that Pliny mentions to be growing in Spain, that blow and flower
all the Winter.

The Damask Province Rose differs from the 5. The Damask Province Rose.
ordinary Damask, in that only it is very double and fair, but not so sweet.

The Damask-Rose with some of its Leaves 6. The York and Lancaster Rose.
marked with a faint blush, is usually termed the York and Lancaster-Rose. I
suppose because it was the first variegated Rose that was here known after the
uniting those two Houses or Roses.

But the best of Damask-Roses and inferior 7. Mrs. Heart 's Rose.
to none other, is the Damask completely striped, usually called Mrs. Hart's
Rose; it is a very plentiful bearer, the Flowers exceeding sweet and very
beautiful, and that Garden is defective that is without it.

There are two Roses bear the name of Belgick-Roses, 8. The Belgick-Rose.
the one of a Blush Color, bearing many Flowers at the end of a Branch, and
those very sweet, and this Tree is esteemed the greatest bearer of all Roses.
The other is of a red Color, very double and beautiful, and in good esteem.

The ordinary Red-Rose is generally known; 9. The Red Rose.
the Hungarian-Rose is little better, and the Red Province is esteemed only for
its fairness, as is the Dwarf Red Rose for its humility.

The Rose that most illustrates the whole kind 10. Rosamundi.
is the Rosa-mundi, being Red elegantly stripped with White, two so diverse
colors appearing plainly at a distance; its Scent is weak, but that defect is
supplied by its Beauty.

The Marbled-Rose is a very fair red Rose, 11. The Marbled Rose.
fully and curiously marked or dappled with dark Colors, that it very much
resembles Marble, from whence it has its Name, and deserves a place amongst
the best Roses.

The Velvet-Rose is the darkest of all Roses, 12. The Velvet Rose.
and its Leaf much resembling Velvet; it is not very double, but some more than
others. This Tree, and the Rosa-mundi, are very great Encreasers.

The Francford-Rose yields large shoots, 13 The Francford-Rose.
and is fit for the budding of the yellow Rose on it, the Flowers not much to
be commended, nor is that of the Rose without Thorns, or the Virgin-Rose.

The Cinamon-Rose is in esteem only for its 14. The Cinamon-Rose.
sweet Scent and early Blowing, being the first of Roses.

The Vulgar white and blush Roses are known 15. The white Rose. 16. Rosa Canina.
to most. The Rosa Canina, so called from its whiteness like unto a Dogs Tooth,
yet not so perfectly white as the Vulgar, but much more double, and for that
reason is esteemed.

The double Musk-Roses, flower later than any 17. Musk Roses.
other Roses except the Monthly-Rose: Their Scent gives them their Name, and
deserve a place in your Garden; but the single called the Spanish Musk-Rose, is
not of such value.

One sort of the Musk-Roses keeps on its 18. Ever green Rose.
green Leaves all the Winter, which property has imposed its Name; its Flowers
are single, yet not to be slighted by the curious.

The Vulgar Sweet-Briar for its excellent Odor 19. Double Eglantine.
in the Spring, deserves a place near your House or places of Repose; yet not
so much as that which bears a double Blossom, for which it is preferred to it,
and is one of the best of Odoriferous Plants.

The Gelder-Rose, or Gelderland-Rose, supposed 20. The Gelder-Rose.
thence to have its Name, or rather Elder-Rose, from the likeness of its
Branches to Elder, having the name of a Rose, I place it here, although not in
any thing resembling it. It is a hardy Tree, and yields great plenty of
Snow-white Bunches of Blossoms, and very well becomes a Garden, or a Chimney
with a due mixture.

There are diverse other species of Roses, as the Cristal-Rose, the Damask
Musk-Rose, the Great Apple-Rose, so called from the bigness of the Berries or
Apples that come after its small single Blossoms are fallen, etc. But these
must give way to those before mentioned, and therefore it is needless to say any
more of them.

SECT. II. Of Ordering of Rose-Trees.
ROses have been in so great esteem from all Antiquity, that the curious have
been very diligent in their propagation, amendment and discovery, several
having been in several Ages produced that were not known to the Times
preceding, and various ways have been invented and found out for their
propagation, improvement and preservation.

The more excellent sorts of them have succeeded very well by grafting on the
Stock of the common Sweet-Briar.

And by inoculation may they be increased on the Stocks of the common
Rose-Trees; the time for this work is about Midsummer.

And when you have thus obtained one Tree of a sort of the more Rare, you may
multiply them by laying them, which may be done without the help of Boxes or
Pots, the Branches being pliable, and the Tree it self humble, only by bending
down the Tree, and laying the Branches in the Earth, and covering the middle of
them, being first pricked with an Awl about some joint, that is to be under the
Earth. This may be done in the Spring, sometimes watring the Layers in dry
Weather, then in the Autumn most of the Sprigs will have taken root, and are in
their prime to be removed; these will never degenerate, and all Cions
proceeding from them, will be of the same.

To make Roses bear early, they must be planted in a very warm place, or on a
declining Bank toward the Sun, and irrigated with Water, enriched with the
hottest Dungs or Shavings of Horn and Lime steeped in Water: Some say warm
Water will accelerate their blowing.

To make them bear late, the way approved of by several upon Experience, is at
the time when they begin to bud, to clip or shear off all the Buds, and when
other Roses have done blowing, these will shoot forth new Buds; thus may you
annually continue this pleasant Flower longer than naturally it would, by
cutting some of your Trees, that they may succeed the other.

Some say, if you cut the tops of the Trees in the first of the increase of the
Moon after the Blossoms are faded, that another show of Blossoms will appear
about Michaelmas; but the other is the more certain way.

To have Roses until Christmas, you may plant the monthly Rose in some Niech of
your South-wall, and you will have Rose-buds fresh and fair in October, and in
mild Winters in November, which by Shutters artificially made, may be defended
from the Cold (sometimes admitting the Sun) until Christmas, you may add
artificial warmth to them if you please: I have had fair Roses-buds in
November, with younger by them, which might have been thus preserved.

Musk Roses are to be planted against a high Wall or side of some Building, and
not checked in their growth upwards, lest you hinder their bearing.

SECT. III. Of diverse other Flower-bearing Trees*
BEsides the great variety of Colors and delightful Scent that the Roses have
for the greatest part of the Summer yielded you, yet there are several other
sweet and pleasant Objects Nature has furnished you withal; if you will lend
your assistance to convey them into your Garden, of whom none are more
gratefully odoriferous than the Jassmins.

Nor knows he well to make his Garden shine,
With all delights, who fragrant Jassemine,
Neglects to cherish. -- Rapinus.
The most common is the Yellow Jassmine, 1. Yellow Jassemine. 2. White
Jassemine.
but the White far exceeds it in Beauty, and yielding one of the most
Odoriferous Flowers in Nature, as the perfumes made thereof Witness. In the
Autumual Season, these last furnish you with many Blossoms for a long time,
until the Frost prevent them; both these require the help of a Wall or
Pallisade, their Branches being but slender and weak, yet enduring the most
severe Colds.

The Indian Jassemine, or the Mexican 1. Indian Jassemine.
Tlilxochitle is a Plant requires a tall Wall to aspire against: At every Joint
it has small Claws or Tendrils, insinuating into Brick, Wood, or any other
penetrable substance, and requires but small assistance to prune it, it affords
a beautiful Scarlet Blossom in America, being one of the Ingredients to the
famous Drink Chocolate.

The two former Jassemines are great Encreasers, and all of them may be
increased by Layers.

Nor inferior to the best of the former, 4. The Persian Jassemine.
is the Persian Jassemine, for that it is a beautiful Shrub, yielding in the
prime of the Summer most pleasant and well scented Blossoms, which welcome you
to the choicest Flowers, Trees will yield. As the Persian Nuts and Iris, so the
Persian Jassemins precede in Blossom, all others in respect of time, and
therefore are the more valued; they are easily increased by Layers

Not much unlike in Blossom to the last, is 5. The Lilack.
the blew Syringa Pipe-Tree, or Lilac, the white is more rare, being but of
humble growth, the Bark of a whitish Color, the Leaves of a very pleasant pale
Green, affording you Branches of fine scented white Flowers in April and May,
and is a Tree yielding Suckers plentifully, but the best is that of a purple
Color, which two last very well merit Room in your choicest Avenues.

This is another Tree, that bears the name 6. Syringa.
of Syringa or Lilac, which never rises so high as either of the other, but
bears many Clusters of Flowers, of a faint white or wild Primrose color,
yielding a strong Sweet, almost like unto that of Orange Flowers.

The double blossomed Pomegranate Tree, is 7. Balaustium.
esteemed the rarest of all flowring Trees, yielding so pleasant a Branch, and
a much more lustrious Blossom.

Pomgranates next their Glory vindicate,
Their Boughs in Gardens pleasing Charms create.
Nothing their flaming Purple can exceed.
From the green Leaf the golden Flowers proceed.
This Tree deserves the choicest place in your Garden, and under the warmest
Wall, being tender whilst young, but after very hardy; the Flowers are double,
fair and beautiful, exceeding all others, born by Trees: they are easily
propagated by Layers.

This delicate Plant deserves a little of your Care and Assistance, in
separating from it the many Suckers that usually proceed from it, and keep it
to a few or but one Branch, and sometimes enrich the Ground with well consumed
Hog's dung; For it is the plenty of Nourishment makes them apt to Blossom, and
too many Branches or Suckers rob them of it; You need not House them, but if
you doubt your Wall stands too open to the cold Winds, which only can hurt
them, it is but taking a Mat, or placing a Skreen before them in the Winter, to
defend them from it.

The Dwarf Almond is a very humble Shrub, 8. Dwarf Almonds.
bearing in April many fine Peach-coloured Blossoms, and is a very pleasant
Plant, and yields plenty of Cions; it deserves a place in your Garden, and
needs not to be Housed, it enduring all Weathers; In some Years it bears
Almonds of a very bitter taste.

The Mezerion, from whence soever transported, 9. Mezerion.
is one of the most hardy Plants in Nature, sending forth its pleasant,
beautiful, and odoriferous Flowers in the coldest Seasons of this Northen
Climate, usually in January, and continues in Blossom in February and March,
after them Leaves, and then its Coralline Berries, by whom it is increased. The
Shrub is of a very soft consistence, and although Cold will not kill it, yet is
it very tender in the choice of its Ground; I suppose a light Ground, or a very
moist, are not proper for it, Heat being more offensive to it than Cold.

There are three sorts of them, the one of a Peach color, another more red
being not so 10. The Sena-Tree.
common, the other and the most rare is the white

There are two sorts of Sena-Trees, the great Bastard-Sena, and the
Scorpion-Sena, both of them yielding a pleasant Leaf, and fine yellow blossom,
not unbecoming a good Florists Garden; they are slender and require the help of
a Wall, endure all Weathers, are tonsile, and therefore reducible into any
order, and are increased by Seeds, Layers or Suckers.

The Shrub Spirea is a small Tree, bearing 11. Spirea Frutex.
small Peach-coloured Blossoms about the Month of August, it is a hardy Tree,
and is increased by Layers.

The Judas-Tree yields a fine purplish bright 12. Arbor Judae.
red Blossom in the Spring, and is increased by Suckers and Layers.

The Bean-Trefoyl, so termed from the likeness of its Leaves to the Herb
Trefoyl, and its 13. Laburnum.
Pods to Beans, it affords many fine yellow Blossoms, and is a very pleasant
though common Tree; it is increased by Seeds, Cuttings, and Layers, and
requires some artificial helps to support its weak Branches; there are three
kinds of these, the smallest is called Cytisus secundus Clusii.

Not much unlike to the yellow Jessemine is 14 Spanish Broom.
the Spanish-Broom, only its Flowers are like our ordinary Broom, as are the
Cods, only larger: It flowers in May, and is increased by Seeds and Suckers.

The double Virgins-Bower is a climbing 15. Virgins Bower.
Tree, fit to cover some place of Repose, or to be supported by Props for that
purpose; it bears many dark blew double Flowers in July, August, and until the
Cold prevents them: You may cut off most of the smallest branches in the
Winter, it shoots early, and spreads very much in a Summer; it is easily
increased by Layers.

There are of them single, both purple and red, but this is to be preferred.

The Honey-Suckle, especially either of the 16. Woodbinds.
more generous kinds of it, is a Plant which though vulgar, yet deserves our
Pains in propagating it. The double and the red are the most choice, and are
easily propagated by Layers.

Periploca is a Plant that twists it self about 17. Periploca.
a Pole as does the Hop; it lives over the Winter, and yearly puts forth small
blew Blossoms, is increased by Layers, and entertained in Gardens only for
variety sake, and not for its beauty.

Of the Shrub-Mallow, there are two sorts, the Purple and the White; they
endure the 18. Althea Fruticosa.
Winter, are usually planted Standards, bring forth their Flowers in August and
September, until the Wet or Cold prevent them; the Tree is increased by Layers.
The Blossoms resemble the Blossoms of a Mallow, whence it has its Name, and is
a fair Autumnal Ornament to your Garden, for it buds and blows very late in the
Year.

Hypericum-Frutex is a Shrub yielding abundance 19. Hypericum. Frutex.
of small slender shoots, which in May, are very thick set with small white
Blossoms, that the Tree seems to be all hoary with Frost, or covered with Snow:
It is increased by Suckers, and endures all Weathers, and very well becomes the
choicest Gardens.

There is a sort of Peach-Tree, yielding double 20. Double flowered Peach Tree.
Flowers fair and beautiful, deserves a place under your Wall.

The like there is of Cherries, a sort that bears 21. Double flowered Cherry.
a fair white Blossom very double, but yielding no Fruit, as does that of the
Peach, yet a welcome Plant to a good Florist.

There are Apple Trees and Pear Trees, that yield double Flowers, but they are
not so much regarded.

Thus by propagating and preserving such Flower-bearing-Trees and Shrubs, may
you have your Garden and Groves replete, with great variety of curious Flowers
from the end of January, when the hardy Mezerion exposes its several colored
sweet scented Blossoms to your view, until the cruel Frosts and Winds check the
Monthly Rose, Althea Fruticosa, Virgins-Bower, and white Jessemine; and so
throughout the whole Summer between those two extremes, and that without the
trouble of removing, altering, shading, skreening from Cold or other
inconveniences, which most other Flowers are subject unto, and are therefore
much rather to be preferred; yet if you are willing to undergo the little
trouble of defending the Monthly Roses or White Jassemines, you may have
Blossoms from these later, and Roses even until Christmas.

CHAP. III. Of Bulbous-rooted Flowers.
NEXT unto the Flower-bearing-Trees are those of Bulbous-roots to be preferred,
for their easy propagation and management, and durableness in all seasons hot
and cold.

SECT. I. Of Tulips.
OF all Bulbous-rooted Flowers the Tulip has obtained, and not undeservedly,
the preference, yielding so great a Variety, that they are not here to be
enumerated, every year producing new Flowers. Nor is it all the words I can
invent, can convince you of the beauty of these Glories of Nature, but must
refer you to the choice your self, or Friend for you, can make out of that
Magazine of Varieties that are collected by the ingenious Florists.

Their Colors are various, from the deepest dye of any other Flowers to the
purest White, intermixed with the brightest Yellow, transcendent Scarlet, grave
Purple, and many other compounds of these inclining to the Blew and Green.

Many double Tulips are now raised, whereof there is some variety.

Their Season of blowing continues long, the Praecoces or early Tulips,
beginning some of them to blow at the Vernal Aequinox, the Medias which are the
prime, continue all April, and sometimes the half of May, till the end whereof
the Serotines or late flowring Tulips continue.

When the principal of them display their Colors in the heat of the day, there
is not a more glorious sight in Nature, nor is it to be imitated by Art, no
Limner, nor Painter dares pretend to so great skill: But as all things else
that are in excess are soonest apt to decline, so these that exceed all others
in beauty and luster, soonest fade; not any of them continuing in its Glory
above eight or ten days, unless the mildness of the Weather, or some artificial
shade preserve them; nor are they succeeded by any other from the same root.

Tulips are not only preserved by taking them up yearly, when the stalks are
turning yellow, or begin to be dry, but are by that means multiplied and
increased exceedingly. The usual way is to take them up at that convenient
time, and spread them thin on some board or floor until they are through dry,
then cut off the stalks, and so let the roots lie in some box or boxes, or
other convenient places until September, or October, in a dry place, but not in
the Sun or Wind; then separate the main Bulbs from the lesser Chives, taking
all that are large (and round though small) for Roots that will yield you
Flowers the next year, and set them in the places appointed for them, but let
the ground be dug or otherwise loosened, that the Root may the better dilate
it self and increase, for in a narrow or stiff hole, your Root will remain till
the next year as you left it.

It is not good to take them up after they have shot their Fibers or small
Sprigs, until after they have flowered, lest it hinders their flowring, and
perhaps perish them.

When you plant them, stick into the ground by them small sticks marked with
the numeral Letters, which you may do ad infinitum, and in a small Book for
that purpose, may you insert the mark and name of the Flower.

When you take them up and disperse them into Boxes or other Receptacles, you
may transfer the marks with them.

The ground you plant them in, ought not to be too luxurious; this Noble Flower
is content with a little Room and poor Soil.

In the worst Mold this Flower better thrives,
And berren Earth miraculously gives
More beauty to it, than a fertile ground,
And when least strong, it is most comely found.
The vulgar field or hazle Earth, with a little mixture of Sand in it is best,
for the richness of the Soil causes them to run (as they term it) into dark and
plain Colors. But if your ground be naturally rich, or that your Tulips have
grown several years in it, you may abate it, and supply it with that which is
fit, or lay a bed of sandy Earth about a finger thickness below the bulb, when
it is in its proper place, that so the Fibers may receiv a check. Tulips may be
raised in January and February on hot beds, but they must be the praecoces that
are to flower early.

Some prescribe to plant your Tulips in a natural Earth somewhat impoverished
with Sand, so that a little below the root the Earth may be better within reach
of the Fibers.

If the ground be dug where your Tulips stood the last year, it is equal to
a change of Mould, the Roots rarely falling into the same Earth again where
they were before.

Your small Cions or Off-sets you may plant in a Bed by themselves, which will
furnish you at another time with great variety

As Tulips run or degnerate, take them up and plant them in your outward
Groves, your prime Colors will multiply fast enough.

Tulips that are apt to decline toward a sadder Color, may be taken up a
little before they come to flower, and laid in the Sun to abate their luxury,
which will make them come better the year following.

From such Tulips that have their Tamis, (that is, the seed-like things that
stand up about the Seed-Vessel) and bottoms of dark Colors, and their
Seed-Vessel three square, may Seeds be obtained when they are thorough ripe in
June or July, that may after a long expectation afford you great variety of
Flowers. These Seeds may be sown in September, and every two years removed
until they yield Blossoms; but this labor and patience are too great for an
ingenious, and fit only for a dull Florist.

The often removing of the roots of Tulips and their Off-sets into various
ground, gives you a great increase, and great variety of Colors, without that
tedious way of raising them.

It is not good to let a Tulip stand too long after it has blown, lest by
weakening the root it may prevent its blooming the next year.

The next of kin to the Tulip is the Fritillary, 2. Of Tritalines.
whereof there is some variety, as the white, yellow, red, dark colored, some
of them checquered, and thence called the checquered Tulip, but the double is
the most rare; their seasons and manner of ordering much like that of the
Tulip, only the dry Roots ought to be planted about the beginning of August.

SECT. II. Of Hyacinths and Star-Flowers.
THE Hyacinths are all bulbous rooted, except the tuberous rooted Indian
Hyacinth, which we reserve for the Conservatory. The sorts of them that are
termed Muscaries or Grape-flowers, whereof there are many diversities, as
yellow, ash-colored, red, white, blue and Sky-colored, are pretty things, and
may for variety-sake, but not for their beauty be planted.

But there are other varieties of them, as the fair hair'd branched Jacinth,
the fair curled hair'd Jacinth, the blue, white, and blush, starry Hyacinth of
Peru, and the blue Lilly-leaved starry Hyacinth, that yield fair Flowers on
large Stalks that adorn your Garden and Flower-pots These flower in May and may
be removed in August, they lose not their Fibers, and are therefore not to be
kept long out of the ground.

There are several sorts of them that lose their Fibers, and may be kept longer
out of the ground, and are to be preferred to the other, for that they come
early in the year from February until April, and are very sweet and well
colored.

The principal whereof is the great Oriental Hyacinth, called Zimbul Indi, or
Pas toot, or Celestial Hyacinth, from its fair blossoms.

Some are more double, as well white as blue, and therefore are to be esteemed;
the vulgar are some white, some of a cream color, others of a deep blue, and
some of a pale, but all are very becoming a Garden in the Spring of the year,
before they are over-matched with Flowers of a nobler hue.

The nearest of kin unto the Hyacinths, are Of Star-flowers.
the Star-flowers, whereof some of them are valuable, as the Ornithogalum
Arabicum, or Star-flowers of Arabia, which flowers in May; the great white Star
of Bethlehem in June; the Star-flower of Naples in April, and the Aethopian in
August: These of Arabia and Aethiopia are tender, and coming out of so hot
Countries, will not endure our severe Winters, therefore their Bulbs must be
planted in rich warm Earth in Boxes or Pots, and secured in Winter from Frosts.

SECT. III. Of Daffodills.
THE Narcissus is a Flower so well known, that its needless to spend many words
on it, but for its great variety, bright color, and early flowring, the better
kind of them deserve to be planted here and there under your Groves and
Avenue's and other Shades, where they prosper very well, and waste no ground:
They are hardy Plants, and multiply much; some of them are white and sweet
scented, blowing late in the Spring; some are single, others double, and others
very double, some bear many Flowers on a Stalk, others but one; so that from
the end of February to the beginning of May, they furnish you with Flowers for
your Pots.

The Junquils are of the same kinds and afford some variety, and flower much
about the same time with the Daffodils.

The Leucoium or Bulbous-Violet is reckoned amongst the Daffodils; it is
sometimes called the Snow-drop, because it shows its Snow-white Flowers
sometimes in January, and generally not long after, for which early blowing it
is esteemed.

SECT. IV. Of Lillies.
UNder this Name have been of old many famous Flowers. Some imagine the most
illustrious Tulip was once intended by it, when Solomon's Glory was esteemed
inferior to one of them; but there is little reason for that opinion: for in
Pliny's time, near about the time of our Savior's being upon Earth, the Lilly
was in great esteem; than which, no Flower was more in request in the choicest
Gardens, except the Rose, which Solomon himself admired as well as the Lilly;
and then the Tulip was but a hedge Flower and so remains in the Asian
Continent, as is reported: Neither is there any Flower of that transcendent
whiteness (an Emblem of purity and Innocence) as the Lilly.

But there are of several Colors and Seasons, Flowers that are of that Family:
As for the Spring, the Crown Imperial, single and double Crown Imperial.
orange-coloured, red and yellow, they are but dull Flowers.

Then there are the vulgar Red Lilly; single Red Lilly.
and double, whereof only the double is worthy your notice,

The White Lillies, both single and double, White Lilly.
are planted in most Gardens for their Color, and the use of their Roots,
which in Pliny's time added much to the reputation of the Plant.

Of Martagons there is great diversity, the Martagon.
Imperial, the White, white spotted, Red and red spotted, Yellow and yellow
spotted, with diverse other variations, but none of great value.

SECT. V. Of Saffron Flowers.
THE Colchicums or Meadow Saffron, so Of the Colchicum.
termed, being first taken out of the Meadows. These Flowers are called Naked
Boys, because they appear naked out of the Earth, and are withered and gone
before the green Leaves appear.

Of these Colchicums there is some variety besides the plain color, some
striped, others chequered, whereof the Colchicum Chio is the most beautiful,
but the double is the more splendid, gracing your Garden in the Autumn when
most other Flowers are faded. All these variegated and double Flowers are to be
esteemed for that they come so late in the year, and make a delicate medly:
they put forth their green leaves early in the Spring following, and when those
wither they may be taken up and increased, and replanted about the end of
August following.

The Crocus or Saffron-flower, so called from Of the Crocus.
its resembling that Plant in Root, Leaf, and Flower. There are great variety
of these Flowers and much variegated or striped with White, Yellow, and Purple,
their three principal Colors.

They bring forth their pleasant, but short Blossoms in February and March;
there are some of them Autuminal that flower in September and October, as does
the true Saffron: the Roots are taken up when the Leaves wither, and planted
again about a Month or two before their flowring time: they increase very much,
and adorn the edges of Borders, or close under Walls or Pales.

SECT. VI. Of several other bulbous roated Flowers.
THere are several other bulbous rooted Flowers, which for variety are to be
entertained, as the Moly, whereof there are many Of the Moly.
different sorts that are in flower in May, June, and July, and serve to mix in
your Flower-pots and Chimnies: they are planted and increased as other hardy
Bulbs.

The Asphodils are of no great beauty; but Of Asphodils.
may be planted and increased as other Bulbs, for their variety,

As may the Phalangium or Spider-wort, whereof Of Spider-wort.
there are the White and the Blue; some flower in May and June, but the Blue in
August and September.

Gladiolus or Corn Flagg, there are several Of Corn. Flagg.
sorts, Red and white, and serve only for Flower-pots and Chimnies, are hardy,
and to be planted and increased as the other Bulbs.

Of the Satyrions, or Bee-flowers, or Gnat-flowers, Of the Orchis.
there is some diversity, they are taken out of the Fields and Meadows, are
very beautiful where they are remote from the place of their extraction, they
are very tender, and therefore are cautiously to be removed, they are to be
taken up Earth and all, unless you can observe to find them when dry, you must
endeavor to plant them in ground connatural to that from whence they came.

The Doggs-tooth Violet, so called from the Of Dens Caninus.
likeness of its Bulb to Doggs-tooth, there are of them purple, Red, White, and
Yellow they are much in esteem being brought far, and difficult to be obtained,
not increasing in this Country; they are planted in good natural (not dunged)
Soil, about the middle of August, and flower in March.

The Cyclamen of Sowbread for their curious Of the Cyclamen.
and odoriferous Blossoms, are received in the Gardens of the best Florists.

The Grecian Cyclamen from far they bring, Rapinus.

The Red and White both flourish in the Spring.
Some sorts of them also flower in the Autumn, and one or other of these
Beauties adorn your Garden from April to October.

Their Roots do not lose their Fibers, and are therefore difficulty removed,
their time of removing is in June or July, or before their time of blowing.
They are raised of Seeds which must be sown, as soon as ripe, in Poxes, and
then at two years end transplanted into your Garden, where they will endure any
Weather.

SECT. VII. Of the Iris, Bulbous, and Tuberose.
TO conclude this Chapter of Bulbous-rooted Of the Bulbous Iris.
Flowers, I shall here insert the Iris, there being of them as well with
Bulbous as Tuberose Roots, not that they are inferior in beauty to any of
those preceding, except the Tulip, but that I am unwilling to divide them whose
Flowers retain the same Form, although they differ in their Roots.

Now Iris springs which from the heavenly Bow
Is named, and does as many Colors show:
Its Species, and its Tinctures different are,
According to the Seasons of the year.
Rapinus.

The Bulbous afford very great variety, some of them (as the Persian) flowering
in February or March, others in April, May, June, and July, There are some of
them very fair and beautiful; their Colors are either blue, purple,
Ash-colored, peach-coloured, Yellow, White, or Variegated. Their Roots may be
taken up as soon as the Leaves begin to wither, for soon after they are quite
withered, the Bulbs will issue out more Fibers, and then it is too late to
remove them, otherwise you may keep them dry till Auguct.

They delight in a good Ground, but not too rich, on a sunny bank, but not too
hot to the South or West; the Eastern Aspect is the best.

Those Flower-de-Luces, white tuberous Roots, Of the Tube-rose Iris.
are not altogether so various as the Bulbous, yet affording to the ingenious
Florist many curious Flowers; the best and most excellent whereof is the
Chalcedonian Iris, vulgarly called the Toad-Flag from its dark marbled Flower.
This Species of them ought to be carefully ordered, else it will not thrive
well, it requires a warm and rich Soil to be planted in, and because it is apt
to shoot forth its green Leaves before Winter, it expects to be a little
defended from the Cold. These Bulbs may be taken up when the Leaves begin to be
dry, and kept some time in the House, and then replanted in September, or
October, which will make them thrive the better.

The other sorts of the Tuberose rooted Flower-de-Luces, are much more hardy,
and increase exceedingly in good Ground, and are therefore not so fit for your
choicest Garden.

CHAP. IV. Of Tuberose Rooted Flowers.
AFter having passed over those curious Plants and Flowers, that are with the
least pains and Care to be planted, propagated and preserved, I shall now give
you a brief Account of such that are a little more difficult to be managed, yet
require they no more trouble than they sufficiently recompense with their most
pleasant Flowers: The most select whereof is the Anemone.

SECT. I. Of Anemones.
THE Anemone, which is a Grecism, signifying Wind, thence it is called the Wind
Flower, for that it is observed never to open, but when the wind blows, or at
least in those Countries where it is naturally produced, it may have that
property. It was in great esteem amongst the Ancients, for the beauty of its
Flowers mixed in their Chaplets and Garlands, although then there were not a
tenth part of that variety of them, that now the curious have collected and
propagated.

It is one of the Beauties of Nature, and the most excellent that Season can
afford, bearing such different Flowers, that they make the cold March almost
equal in Glory to the Summer, which is a wonder that such soft Flowers and
Tyrian and Scarlet Dies should be produced in so early a Season, which are
usually the effects of a continued Calidity.

What angry Deity did first expose,
To the rough Tempests and more rigid Snows,
The soft Anemone, whose comely Grace,
A gentler Season and a better place
Deserves: for when with native purple bright,
It shows its Leaves to the propitious light,
With different Colors stripped and curled Flames,
Encompassed it our love and wonder claims.
There is not any other that outvies
This Flower's curled Leaves or numerous Dies,
Nor the Sidonian Art could e're compose,
So sweet a blush as this by Nature shows. Rapinus.

As of the Tulips, so of these, the best way is to please your self in your
Election from the view of them. The usual descriptions can never sufficiently
nor satisfactorily inform you of their real worth.

They are generally of two sorts, broad leaved Anemones, and narrow leaved
Anemones, those with narrow leaves much resemble Parsley, whence they were
anciently called Rose Parsley, or the Parsley Rose.

The Soil wherein they delight must be fat and rich, manured with Sheeps dung,
and Neats dung, with a little mixture of Lime, all thoroughly rooted.

About the end of September, or beginning of October, you may plant your
Latifoles, or broad leaved Anemones about three fingers deep, and about a Month
after your Tenuifoles or narrow leaved Anemones which yield their Flowers after
the other.

But if you design to have them more early, you may plant them sooner, and with
Mats secure them against the Cold, and give them all advantages of the Sun and
warm Rains, for the Frosts are very apt to nip their Leaves when above ground,
and impede their flowering for that year.

If you desire Anemones to flower late, then keep them out of the ground as
long as you can, some will abide out of the ground until February or March, and
plant them in shady places, or artificially shade them. Thus you have Anemones
after the usual natural time of flowering.

When their green Leaves turn yellow, or about the end of June, or in July, you
may take them up, and preserve the Roots dry, till the season for interring
them, for after they have lost their Fibers, they are apt to perish by the
humidity of the Earth: the place you keep them in ought to be cool as well as
dry.

It is very injurious to the Latifoles to break their Roots, which should only
be parted as they are naturally apt to be divided, but the Tenuifoles will
endure an easy Rupture or Scissure.

If you preserve your Anemone Roots in a cool place, until the middle of
January, and then plant them, they will be the more secure from the injuries of
bad weather; much Wet prejudiceth as well as severe Cold.

As your Anemones are prejudiced by overmuch Wet, so do they require and
deserve a little irrigation in very dry Springs, and will sufficiently gratify
you; a little shade will also advantage them in the hottest time of the day.

In May will these Flowers bear Seeds, which gathered and sown in July, in good
sifted Earth, in Beds or Boxes, will produce great Varieties in the third or
fourth year after.

Mix the Down that contains the Seeds, with some fair dry Earth, and rub it
together in a wooden Vessel, and the Seeds will mix with the Earth, by which
means you may sow them equally; be sure to sow them not too thin.

After you have sown your Seeds, sift Earth upon them about half a finger in
thickness; when they have been come up about a Month, sift more Earth finely
over them about half an inch, and cover them at some distance all the next
Winter.

The August following, you may remove them into convenient Beds, where they may
remain till they bear Flowers, at which time you may cull them as you please.

Forget not a gentle irrigation of your young Anemones in dry Weather, for it
will much forward them, as will a little artificial shade at opportune Seasons.

The Ranunculus or Crowfoot, being so near Of Ranunculus.
in resemblance to the Anemone, differ very little from them in their ordering.

They exceed all Flowers whatever in the richness of their Colors, nor is
there any Flower so fine and fair, as are the larger sorts of them.

Their times of Flowering, taking up, and planting, are near about the same
time as the Anemones, but they agree better with a richer Mold than the other.

They are not so apt to multiply their Roots, unless their Ground be rich and
light; therefore it is by the most skilful prescribed, to lay a broad bed of
old Thatch or almost rotten Straw, and on that to sift fine rich Earth six or
eight inches thick, and therein to plant your Ranunculus's, wherein they will
thrive and increase.

If you plant them early in the Winter, they must be defended from the sharp
Winds and Frosts, but if late, there is no necessity of it, they are somewhat
more tender than the Anemone.

Irrigation in a dry season, much advantages this Flower, as it does the Anemone

SECT. II. Of Peonyes.
THis although a common Flower, yet yields the fairest and most double Blossom
of any, and very well becomes your Chimney or Flower-pots. But the White,
purple, and changeable Peonyes are acceptable in the Gardens of the best
Florists, and the single Peonyes in the physic Garden, for their specifical
virtues of their Roots against the most dangerous of Diseases.

The manner of their planting and ordering is known to most that have any
interest in a Garden, only it is necessary to understand, that September and
october are the fittest times for their transplantation

CHAP. V. Of diverse other Select Flowers.
SECT. I. Of Gilliflowers.
NOtwithstanding the Flower-bearing Trees are complete Ornaments with little
trouble; the Bulbous rooted Flowers so illustrious that they merit great esteem
from the most curious, being less subject to Casualties than most others, and
the Tuberose Roots yield such incomparable Beauties in the Spring; yet must
they concede to the Gilliflower, the pride of the Summer, that has its scent
as pleasing as its variegations beautiful.

Lovely Carnations then their Flowers dilate,
The worth of them is as their Beauty, great.
Their smell is excellent. -- Rapinus.
Their Colors are not many, but infinitely and variously compounded, and being
so easily and frequently raised of Seed, do annually produce new mixtures, and
those have imposed on them new Names, that it is impossible to give you a true
account of them; therefore it will be more proper for you to please your own
fancy, or confide in the integrity of a Gardener, than to trust to the lame
descriptions you may meet withal, or to the florid Names that are given them,
on purpose to beget your admiration of such that little deserve it.

Their times of Flowering are generally in July and August; sometimes the early
Buds may yield you Flowers in June, but their latter Buds in September and
October and by careful defending them in November.

The right Dutch Gilliflowers rarely produce Seed here, but when they do you
must preserve it from wet till it be ripe, then gather it and lay it by in the
Husk, until the Spring.

In May, after the cold Nights are spent, is a good time to sow these Seeds,
which ought to be on good Earth, in some shady place where it may have the
Morning or Evening Sun only.

They should be sown thin, and the Earth sifted over it half a Finger thick.

In August or September following, you may remove them into their proper Beds,
and the Summer following, they will inform you of their worth by their Flowers.
The single and poorer sort reject, and those that blow fair and whole, or are
well marked, preserve.

For the first Winter after sowing them, there is little danger of their being
hurt by Cold, in that particular they are like the stock Gilliflowers, which in
their first Winter are extreme heardy, and in the second very tender.

You may plant your best Gilliflowers in Pots filled with Earth for that
purpose, that you may give them Sun or Rain, according to the Season of the
Year, and as they require.

Plant them not under a Wall or other Fence, that may reflect the heat of the
Sun upon them, for they delight in an open Air, and not in intemperate Heat.

Great Rains, especially in the Winter and Spring, Prejudice them much,
therefore you are to defend them from it equally as from Cold. Those Flowers
that are planted in Beds, and not in Pots, are to be defended from Wet and Cold
as there is occasion, by some Cover or Shelter to place over them, which must
be open at the top, or on one side: The fittest for this occasion, are old
Bee-hives, with a Door of about a Span square on the side that may be open off
from the Weather, which you defend them against.

You may increase your Flowers by laying them in June, July and August, but in
June or July is the best time, the method is this: First trim your Slip you
intend to lay, by clipping off the side Leaves, and topping the other, then
with a sharp Penknife cut a Tongue half through, from one of the middle Joints
under the Slip, to the next Joint toward you, beginning next the Root, and
cutting upwards, loosen the Earth under it, and with a small hooked Stick force
it down, that the Tongue or Slit may open, and the end of the Slip point
upwards cover it with Earth, and water it, which irrigation must be reiterated
according as the drought of the Season requires it.

If the Slips be so high that they cannot be bent to the Ground with ease, then
take a small Earthen Pot with a slit on the side, in which you may dispose of
your Slip as you desire.

About a Month after, your Layers will have taken Roots, then may you take them
off with some of the adhering Earth, and plant them in their places prepared
for them.

But if any should not have taken root, you may anew lay them, and make the Cut
a little deeper, and so let them remain till the Spring, and then you may plant
them out as you see fit.

Plant your Layers not too deep, for thereby many a good Plant has been
spoiled.

A Cave or Pit made in some place in your Garden, would be very convenient to
place your Pots of Flowers in for there no Winds nor severe Frosts can annoy
them, the driving Rains also cannot much offend them.

The Morning Sun is the most benign to your Gilliflowers; therefore you may
defend your most choice from the Afternoon Sun, by some artificial Skreen, in
case you have no place naturally posited for that purpose: This to be done
before, and in blowing time.

To have Gilliflowers or Carnations (as they are vulgarly termed from those
ancient English Flowers that were usually of a Flesh Color) during the most
part of the Winter, they may be placed in Pots, in some convenient Room open to
the South, and to be shut at pleasure to defend them from the Cold, unless to
give them the benefit of the warm Sun at Noon sometimes, or a little Southerly
Rain; into which Room may be conveyed some warmth from your ordinary Fire, or
else a Fire therein on purpose. I suppose a Lamp may be maintained burning at
an easy Expense in a close Room, which may be sufficient to defend them from
Frost; a constant though small Heat will effect much the Lamp may also be
enlarged as the Room or severity of the Weathee requires; the smoke of the Lamp
may be conveyed away by a Funnel over it for that purpose: thus may many other
Rarities be preserved over the Winter at an easy Charge.

The Earrh about your Gilliflowers, ought to be; renewed once in two Years at
the least, for by that time they have exhausted the better and more
appropriated part of the Earth or Soil.

Your Flower Pots ought to have holes in the bottom, to let out the superfluous
moisture and also in case you are willing to water your Flowers, you may dip
the Pots half way into a Tub of water prepared, the one after the other; and
the Earth will attract the Water through the holes, which is much better than
sprinkling.

If you have any Gilliflowers that are broken, small, or single, you may graff
on them other Gilliflowers that are more choice, but graff them in the most
woody part of the Stalk; the best way is by whip-graffing.

Pigeons Dung being the hottest of Dungs, applied about the Roots of
Gilliflowers, makes them flower the more early.

To defend your Gilliflowers from the injury of Cold and Frost, such of them
that are placed in Beds and not moveable; some have prescribed to take two
slender Wands or bending Sticks, and fix each end in the ground on each side of
the Flower, that the Sticks may Arch-wise be across over the Flower, which is
said to defend them by some Magical Virtue.

If your Gilliflower or Layer be inclinable to shoot up in the Summer with one
single stem, suffer it not to blossom that Year, but nip or cut the stalk off,
lest it give you a fair Flower and never thrive after.

Pinks though mean Flowers singly of themselves, Of Pinks.
yet the common red single sort of them, planted on the Edges of your Walks
against the sides of your Banks do not only preserve your Banks from foundring,
or mouldring down, but when in Blossom, are a very great Ornament, and most
excellently perfume your Guard.

Sweet Williams, Sweet John's, and London Sweet Williams.
Pride, are pretty Fancies, and near of kin to the old English Gilliflower.

SECT. II. Of Stock-Gilliflowers, and Wall-flowers.
THE Lucoium or Stock-Gilliflower is a Flower Stock-Gilliflowers.
of much Beauty, delicate Scent, and some Variety; a good Garden cannot be said
to be well stored without them, nor a Flower-pot well adorned without some of
these; they continuing long in Blossom, from April till the Frost prevents
them. They are generally raised of Seed, and the first Winter, because they
have not yet spent their finer Spirits; they are very hardy and endure any
Weather, but the next Winter they are very tender.

With curled Threads and top-divided now,
Along the Margin of your Borders grow
Stock-Gilliflowers, whose blushing Leaf may fear,
And justly too, the sharpness of the Air.
The double, whereof some are stripped, and some plain, are very pleasant; but
the double yield no Seed.

The single have generally four Leaves in a Blossom, but if there be five
Leaves, the Seed thence produced, will bring double Flowers.

The white single usually produce double Flowers, as also do those that are
stripped with white.

The yellow double Stock-Gilliflower is the most rare of any.

The Seeds of those kinds that usually produce double Flowers, being often sown
in the same Soil, will degenerate into all single, and by degrees into all
plain Colors, as I have tried. Quaere, if they will do the same if sown in
barren Earth.

There is another sort of Double Stocks, that are not raised from Seed, only by
Slips and Layers, that is more durable than the Seedlings.

Those raised of Seed will sometimes abide the second Winter if it be mild, or
the Stocks well defended; if you take away the blowing Sprigs, the precedent
Autumn, it will much further their duration.

They may be laid as other Plants are, and being kept secure from violent
Colds, will endure the Winter.

They may be planted out in Slips, if you take such as are not spired to blow,
and cut them from the Stock, and slit the end in three or four places about
half an inch, and peel the Rind back as far as the Slit, and take away the
inward Wood: Then set this Slip with the Rind spread every way about two or
three fingers deep, water it and shade it, until it has taken Root; by this
means may you maintain your stock of Double-Stocks, without the two years
expectation.

The Seeds from which you expect to have double Flowers, must be sown at the
full of the Moon, or in two or three days after, and when come up four or five
inches high, take them up and plant them out, which prevents their running up
to stalk, which labor you may reiterate twice before Winter.

If you remove, water, and shade them every time to preserve them, (it being a
Summer work) and do it the first time three days after the Full, and twice more
before the next Change, and again three days after the next Full, and once more
before the succeeding Change, (all these removes to be in barren Ground.) Then
at the third Full Moon, eight days after remove them again into rich Ground,
wherein they are to stand. It is said that it Sir Hugh Plat.
will make them bring forth double Flowers.

It has been long observed that the Moon has great influence over Plants,
(over Animals it is very conspicuous.) From Pliny to this day, most Authors
have been of that Opinion. And if it has any such influence, then surely it is
in the doubling of Flowers, for we daily observe that many sorts of double
Flowers will degenerate themselves into single, and that most of those double
we have (which are of the kinds usually single) are propagated by Art and
Industry, and why may not the Lunar influence contribute much thereto? The
French Poet was of that Opinion, although differing as to the time, Till it be
full Moon, from her first increase.
The Season's good; but if she once decrease,
Stir not the Earth, nor let the Husbandman,
Sow any Seed; when Heaven forbids it is vain.


The same Poet adds. Some in preparing of their Seed excel,
Making their Flowers a larger compass swell;
Thus narrow Bolls with curled Leaves they fill,
Helping defective Nature by their skill.


Often removing them does not only contribute to their worth, but duration.

The Keiri or Wall-flowers, so termed, for that the single kind naturally
affect to grow on old Walls, and that the double need the assistance of some
Wall or other support, are hardy Plants, though not altogether secure in the
most severe Winters, and the better sort of them, that is, the double white,
and the double red, very pleasant both to the Eye and Smell; they are easily
increased by Slips and Layers.

SECT. III. Of Auricula's, Cowslips, and Primroses.
BEars-ears or Auricula's, considering their Of Auricula's.
size, are the finest Flowers the choicest Gardens yield, affording a very
great variety in Form as well as in Color, and are not only beautiful to the
Eye, but pleasant in Scent.

In your Election of them, it is better to trust your Eye, or confide in an
honest Gardner, than in the lame descriptions of them, as before was hinted
concerning the choice of Tulips and Gilliflowers, only that the double is the
most rare, and the Windsor Auricula the most splendid of all the rest.

Of late years these Flowers are very much improved, not only for their great
variety of plain Colors, and their bearing upright large Bunches of Blossoms,
but for their many beautiful sorts of stripes they yield, that all the Colors
that have been observed to be in that Flower plain, are now found to be mixed
in the various sorts of stripes, that they are lately become the most beautiful
Ornaments of the Spring. The greatest variety, and the most beautiful of these
Flowers, as well as of Tulips and Gilliflowers, are to be seen in the Garden of
the great Collector and Propagator of these and all other curious Plants and
Flowers, Mr. George Ricketts of Hogsder, who supplies with them the best
Florists.

They adorn your Garden in April and May, and some of them again about the end
of August, and until the Frost prevent them.

If you crop off the Buds that offer to blow late in the Autumn, it will cause
your Auricucula's to yield you the fairer Flowers in the Spring.

They delight in rich Soil and shady, but not under the drip of Trees.

They must be often removed, once in two years at least, and the Ground
enriched, else they will decay.

The striped and double must be removed oftener, or else they will degenerate.

If you set them in Pots (which is the best way to preserve them) fill the Pots
almost half full with sifted Neats-dung, the rest with a good light Mold
enriched with the same Dung.

In the Winter place them in the Sun, but in the Summer in the Shade.

Defend them from wet in the Winter, but they endure all cold very well.

You may raise them from Seeds, by carefully gathering the Seeds, and
preserving them in their Umbels till about August or September, when you must
sow them in Boxes almost filled with the Mixture you made for the Plants, and
about a Finger thick at the top with fine sifted willow Earth, or dried
Cow Dung, beaten small and mixed with the Earth, in which sow your Seeds mixed
with Wood-ashes, then cover them with the same mixture of Earth sifted thereon,
about April following they will come up, then may you plant them abroad, and
they will yield you Flowers, some the August following, others the next
succeeding year.

There are sown very pleasant Cowslips of Cowslips.
several shades of Red, the hose in hose, the green Cowslip, and the double
Cowslip, that are worth your Planting, they are very hardy, and must be
sometimes removed, or they are apt to degenerate.

The same is observed of the Primroses, which Primroses.
yield the like variety of Colors, and are entertained for their early
welcoming in the Spring.

On a broad Leaf the Primrose first will blow. SECT. IV. Of the Lilly of the
Valley and Hellebor.
THE Lilly Conval although wild in some Lilly of the Valley.
places Northward (as many fine Plants are in one place or other) is yet
entertained in many good Gardens for its rich scent, almost equalling the
Orange-flower, the use of this excellent Flower in several preparations, and
its specific properties and virtues in some Diseases, makes it the more
acceptable; it is easily propagated from Plants, is hardy and delights in the
shade.

The black Hellebor flowereth about Christmas, Hellebor.
and for that cause only is respected, and not for its Beauty: the best sort of
white Hellebor with red Flowers, is a Plant in great repute amongst Florists,
it Leaves making also a comely show, and Flowers in April and May.

Our Ladies-slipper (an Helleborine) is much Calceolus Mariae.
valued by most Florists, although wild in many places of the North of England,
it is probable, by reason of its Name occasioned by the likeness its Blossom
has to a Pantofle or Slipper.

It yields its Flowers early in the Summer, is a hardy Plant in respect of
Cold, but not very apt to be increased.

SECT. V. Of the Hepatica, Gentianella and Dittany.
THE Hepatica or Liverwort is a very pleasant Hepatica.
humble Flower, never rising high, yet yielding its variety of pretty Blossoms
in March; the double and the white are most regarded, and do deserve your
labor and care, which is not much, to plant and propagate them.

The Gentianella is another very low Plant Gentianella.
yielding in April or May many Blue Flowers of a deep dye, and are therefore
regarded by most Florists. Dittany.


Fraxinella or Dittany is a hardy Plant, annually furnishing you with tall
Stalks full of not unpleasant Flowers in June and July, and is raised by Plants
or Seeds.

CHAP. VI. Of Flowers raised only from Seed.
THE great diversity of Flowers we have hither to had the pleasure to name, may
be propagated by diverse other ways according to their respective Natures, than
by Seed; but there yet remain several Flowers not unworthy your care, that are
raised by no other means than by Seed, as the Larks-heels or Larks-spurs,
whereof the Larks-spurs.
Tipped Rose Larkspur is the prime, is a very pretty Flower and well becomes your
Walks in July and August, or early if sown before Winter, and defended from the
most severe Frost: They are generally sown in April; the best will degenerate
being often sown in the same Ground.

The variety of Columbines single and double, Columbines.
plain and stripped, makes them acceptable in a good Florist's Garden, they are
sown in the Spring, the young Plants endure the Winter, and the next year they
yield their Flowers. The Roots will continue three or four years; these will
also degenerate unless the Seed be changed.

There is no Flower can be more glorious Of Poppies.
than the Poppy, were it as good as great, and as sweet as well colored, and
as lasting as it is nimble in growth; but their ill smell and soon fading,
makes them the less regarded.

The Holly-hocks far exceed the Poppies for their durableness, and are very
ornamental, Of Holly-hocks.
especially the double, whereof there are various Colouers; the black or dark
colored Holly-hock is esteemed the best; they are sown one year and flower the
next; they may be removed in August or September, from your Seminary into their
proper places of growth, which should be near some shelter from the Winds,
because of their height.

The Antirrhinum, Snap-dragon, or Calves-snout, Of Snap-dragons.
so called from the form of its Blossom, is sown in Gardens, because it flowers
long, and will grow in any place, as on Walls, etc. and serves for Chimneys and
Flower-pots, else it is (in a Garden) of no great beauty nor smell.

The Musk Scabious is one of the species of Of the Sultan's Flower.
Scabious or Blew-bottles, and so named from its most pleasant scent, and
called the Sultan's Flower, because the Grand Seignior affected to wear it in
his Turbant.

This, though mean to the eye, yet, is a Plant worthy of place among your
choicest Flowers; in kind years and good ground it will come up, being sown in
April, and flowers in August: You may for the more certainty raise it in a hot
Bed; it is also said, that if it be sown in August, the Plants will endure the
Winter, and blow fair the next year.

The Amaranthus purpureus is a fine delicate Plant, bearing such curious Tufts
of several Of Amaranthus.
Colors, like unto Silks dyed in Grain. The Seeds being sown in a hot Bed in
March, and then raised under Glasses in the hottest place of your Garden, and
often irrigated, will produce those Tufts in August and September following,
and do deserve your care as much as any Plant.

Of Marigolds there are diverse sorts besides Of Marigolds.
the common, as the African Marygold, a fair large Yellow Flower, but of a very
naughty smell, and another sort much fairer of the same color and of little or
no savor at all, and for that reason is received into some good Gardens. They
are raised of Seed sown in April, by some in a hot Bed, but they will in a
seasonable Spring thrive well enough without, and yield their beautiful Flowers
in August and September following.

The Greater Convolvulus is raised by Seed Of Bindweed.
in the Spring, and more certainly in a hot Bed, they twine about sticks of
about half a yard high, and yield there bright blew Flowers were in August and
September, they blow in the Evening, and the next Morning the Sun withers them,
but the Blossoms renew every Evening till the Frosts prevent them, they are a
comely Evening Ornament to a Garden.

The Marvail of Peru, so termed from its wonderful Of the Marvail of Peru.
variety of Flowers on the same Root, it is in many things like the
Convolvnlus, and is by some called the Flower of the Night, it is more tender
than the other, and is therefore to be raised in a hot Bed.

It is observed that the Flowers of the Marvail of Peru, that are of one
Color, produce Seed, the Flowers whereof will also be but of one Color.
Therefore if you would have variable Flowers you must take the Seed from such
Flowers that be variable, and sow them apart from the other.

Lupines are here sown in Gardens annually Of Lupines
for the sake of their Flowers; but in Italy an ordinary Pulse sown in the
Fields for food for their Cattle, and in those hotter Countries they have a
Property, as Pliny relates, of turning their Flowers and keeping their course
with the Sun, whether the Air be cloudy or clear, and that they serve instead
of Clocks or Dials for the time of the day, and by some other Motions, as
Prognostics for the Husbandmen to judge of the Weather. But in these colder
parts we propagate them merely for Flowers. which are the greater and the
lesser blue, the white, and the yellow, which last is regarded the more for its
sweetness

There is a sort of kidney Bean that yields Of the Searlet Bean.
a fine scarlet Blossom, for which it is esteemed.

The Pease everlasting is so called, because, although Of the Everlasting Pease.
it be first raised of Seed, yet it annually produces new Branches, which
furnishes you with many Blossoms of a reddish color, and are not unbecoming a
good Garden.

The Sensible Plant, so called, by reason that Of the Sensible Plant and humble
Plant.
as soon as you touch it the Leaf shrinks up together, and in a little time
dilates it self again. And the Humble Plant, so called, because so soon as you
touch it, it prostrates it self on the ground, and in short time elevates it
self again, are both of them raised in hot Beds, and preserved with great care,
being the most tender Exoticks we have.

Although the two last yield no Flowers, Noli me tangere.
yet deserve a place in your Garden, and here in this Tract; and because they
shall not be alone, I will conclude this Chapter with an odd plant called Noli
me tangere, because when its Pods are gross and not fully ripe, if you offer to
take either of them between your fingers, it will fly in pieces, and cause the
unwary to startle at the sudden snap and surprise; this Plant is annually
raised from Seeds, and only for Fancy propagated.

CHAP. VII. Of some more Vulgar Flowers.
THere are many Flowers that either for scent or show are raised in the more
ordinary Country Gardens, that several Florists have taken a great deal of
pains and care exactly to describe, and the Manner and Method of propagating
them, which here shall only be named, As the Aconites or Wolfbane, Pilewert,
Crowfoot, Batchelors-Button, Marsh-Marigold, Hollow-root, Monks-hood,
Cranes-bill, Bell-flowers, Champions, Nonsuch or Flower of Bristol,
Princes-feather or Common Amaranthus, Dames Violet or Queens Gilliflowers,
Rockets, Double-Pellitory Double-Featherfew, Double Camomil, Double Dog-Fennil,
Double Lady-smocks, Double Dasies Toad-Flax, Fox-gloves, Grove-Thistles,
Scabious, Blew-bottles, Moth-Mullens, Nigella or Fennel Flower, Thorny-Apple,
Balsame Apple, Apple of Love, Candy Tusts Snaill-flowers, Satten-flower, and
Flower of the Sun: These every Colona knows how to plant, sow, or propagate.

CHAP. VIII. Of such tender Exotic Trees, Flowers, and Plants, that require
the Florists care to Preserve them in the Winter.
TO complete your Pleasure, and make your Garden an Object of Delight, which is
generally placed on rare or unusual Subject's, as well as on vulgar Beauties,
you may make it capable of nourishing and preserving such natural Curiosities
that cannot endure to be exposed to the rough, fierce, severe, and cruel Blasts
that Boreas usually emits into our English Eden: And have therein your Brumal
as well as your Aestival, Odoriferous Flowers, and pleasant Greens, that
nothing may be wanting in your terrestrial Paradise, that Industry and Cost may
obtain.

SECT. I. Of Perennial Greens, and such Plants that cannot endure Cold.
AS in the former part of this Treatise we began at the more hardy Winter
Greens, so here it will be not unproper to observe the same order. And as there
we named the famous Cypress first, so here shall we begin with the most beloved
odoriferous Myrtle, so highly Of the Myrtle.
esteemed by Romans, the great Admirers of Rarities, before the Foundation of
Rome: That the sweet perfume thereof when burned, became an Atonement for the
Offense the Romans had committed in ravishing the Sabine Virgins. And its
Sacred Branches (being first consecrated I suppose) were sufficient to purify
them from so Venial a Sin. In memory of which Offense, and Satisfaction, on
that very place the zealous Romans then erected a Sacrd Temple dedicated to
Venus Cloacina, the Goddess Cloacina.
of such pleasures and patroness of the innocent Myrtle. Myrtle Trees were also
by the same Romans planted and propagated as Omens or Prognostics of good or
evil to their State and Government. So superstitious were they ever esteemed.

In Pliny's time there was an old Temple and Altar that had been consecrated to
Venus Myrtea.

Cato mentioned the Conjugal Myrtle, which Pliny supposes to have proceeded
from that which was dedicated to Venus Cloacina, and used it seems in their
Marriages.

Pliny attributes a strange effect to it, that if a man has a great Journey to
go on foot, and carry in his hand a Stick or Rod of the Myrtle-Tree, he should
not be weary nor think his day long and tedious: It Is probable its operations
are more vigorous in such places where it naturally delights, than here where a
kind of force is put upon it. But we here in England can second this Virtue in
that of an Elder-stick, which if a young Horseman carry in his pocket, although
he ride hard and far, yet shall he not be galled; as some affirm.

There are several sorts of Myrtles here known in England; there is the broad
leaved Myrtle, and the narrow leaved Myrtle, both very fine sweet smelling
Shurbs; but the most elegant is that which in the Autumn affords such plenty of
double white Blossoms, being a Plant very worthy the care of the most ingenious
Florist, and are not so great a vexation as delight; whatever Mr. Rea's opinion
is, Rapinus seems to be of another.

Despise not humbler Plants, for they no less,
Than Trees, your Gardens Beauty do increase.
With what content we look on Myrtle -Groves!
They are not so tender but an easy defense will make them endure hard
Winters. I have known many Trees planted on Borders, endure several Winters,
that have not been over severe, and never in the greatest extremity required
but a Tilt from the Wind and Snow.

The Plants produced from Layers are the most hardy, those from Seeds the most
tender, the same it is with most odoriferous Herbs, as Thyme, Marjerom, Hysop,
etc.

If planted in Pots or Boxes they are easily removed into your more open Green
Houses, or Vaults,

There is a sort of Myrtle with a large Leaf called Spanish Myrtle, that will
endure all Weather without shelter.

There are the Indian yellow, and the Spanish Of the Indian Jassemine, and
Spanish Jassemine.
white Jassemines that are very curious Shrubs, and yield most fragrant
Flowers, equalling almost the Orange-flowers, and deserve a place in your more
open Green House or Vault, where a mean defense will preserve them from the too
great severity of the Winter.

Cytisus Maranthe lunatus, is a Plant sown as Of Cytisus Lunatus.
ordinarily in the Asian Territories, as common Pulse are here, and is both
Branch and Seed, the best Food for all their Cattle, and is a great encreaser
of Milk in Beasts as well as in Women, but here with us preserved as a rarity
in Pots or Cases, and so to be disposed in great Colds, into the Conservatory.

The Oelander or Rose-bay, is a Plant bearing Oelander.
some of them blush, and some white Flowers, and will prosper if secured from
the most violent cold, as the other beforementioned Plants are.

The same may be said of Laurus Indica, although Indian Bay.
as yet a great stranger.

The Maracoc, usually termed the Passion-flower, Maracoc.
from the Thorns and pointed Leaves it has representing the Thorns werewith
our Savior was Crowned, and Nails wherewith he was nailed to the Cross as the
Authors of the name imagined.

This Plant increases much by Cions naturally growing from it, and if the Root
be preserved from the extremity of the Frost, it will yield many beautiful
Flowers yearly in August.

Snails as naturally affect this Plant, as they do the Fruit of the Nectarine
Tree, and as Cats do the Marum Syriacum and therefore care must be taken to
defend it from them.

Ornithogalon or the Star-flower of Arabia, Star-flower of Arabia, and of
Ethiopia.
which yields a beautiful Flower in May, as that of Aethiopia in August, must
be preserved as the other plants.

The Indian flowring Reed, if often watered Indian Reed, and Indian Fig.
and secured in the Winter, yields store of Flowers, but the Indian Fig is a
very low Plant growing one Leaf on another, and is therefore called Leaf upon
Leaf, and only preserved Cistus Mas.
in the Winter for the rarity of it, no Plant in Nature being like it.

The Male Cistus is a plant of no great esteem, yet preserved for the rarity
thereof, as is the Cistus Ledon.

The Indian Jucca not only affords us its Jucca.
sharp-pointed Flag-like Leaves, but sometimes its beautiful Flower, and is
preserved only for the rarity thereof, and usually prescribed to be defended
from the Winter cold, but by some affirmed to endure the most severe Weather.

Periploca or Virginian Silk, of little value, Virginian Silk.
is much of the same nature, for the defense of those Plants which only suffer
in extreme Colds; a slight Shelter may serve, either as they stand abroad in
their proper places, or by removing them into some Garden-House, not so close
as the Conservatory for the more tender Plants ought to be.

Or a Vault or Cave may be made a little within the surface of the Earth, about
the edges wereof may be disposed as you think fit your several Pots or Boxes.

Or you may sink a hole for each single Pot or Box, so that the Plant may be a
little below the surface of the ground, over which an ordinary Shelter from the
Wet may serve, or if you sink it deeper, it will defend your Plant the better.

For as the Earth in the Summer preserves Plants, or what else you place
therein, cool from the scorching Rays of the Sun, so does it from the
extremity of Cold in the Winter: Neither has the Wind, or Morning Air in that
Season, so great an advantage over a Plant thus posited, as it has if it be on
a level.

SECT. II. Of such Plants that least endure the Cold.
OTher Plants there are whose descent have been from a more hot Climate, and
are of themselves of a more tender Nature, than the other before mentioned.

Whereof the Orange-Tree is the most principal, Of the Orange.
and deservedly in great esteem, not only for its Beautiful (though acid)
Fruit, but for its most fragrant Flowers, of which is made so rich an Essence,
and whose distilled Water is of so transcendent Virtues, that they will
sufficiently recompense your diligence and care in nourishing and preserving
the Tree.

These Trees preserved in strong Boxes may be with ease removed into your
Conservatory, and thence in the Summer placed in several Places of your Garden.

NO Tree your Gardens, or your Fountains more
Adorns, than what the Atlantic Apples bore.
A deathless Beauty Crowns its shining Leaves;
And to dark Groves its Flower luster gives;
Besides the splendour of its golden fruit.
Of which the boughs are never destitute.
They are raised of the Kernels sown in March in Cases of rich Earth: These
Fruits were unknown in former Ages to the Europeans, and the Trees have not
been long introduced; and not many years has that more noble kind, the China
Orange been propagated in Portugal and Spain, which annually furnish us with
those pleasant Fruits, yet there in a few years have they degenerated, as to
size and taste: It Is probable the Kernels of those may prosper better with us
than the African, China being not so hot.

The Fruit with us, although it ripeneth not so well as in Spain, yet in such
years that our old stock of imported Fruit is decayed; they serve for many
Physical uses. But the Flowers here are much more valuable than the Fruit.

Therefore if a Wall be built near the House, and well defended behind, and on
either side from cold Winds, and several Leaves or Doors of close Board made to
shut before your Wall, and the top well secured from Rain; against this Wall
may you plant your Orange Trees, and prune them against it without ever
removing them; only in the Spring season, you may open your Leaves or Doors by
Degrees, and at length open it quite before and on the top, only in the main
stays until the next Winter. In the building of this Wall may you contrive
Concavities, through which the heat of Fire made in several places for that
purpose, may pass behind your Trees, or you may have other Fires in this Shed
as in your Green-house.

The most proper Earth wherein to Plant your Orange Trees, is that which is
taken out of a Melon, or Cucumber-bed, and equally mixed or tempered with a
fine loamy Earth, and so to remain the whole Winter, then sifted into the Cases.

Instead of the fat Earth of a Melon, or Cucumber-bed, you may use Neats-dung,
and order it as the Melon Earth.

Before you put your Earth into your Cases, lay on the bottom a good quantity
of Osier or Withy Sticks, or such like, which will preserve it light; if they
are in a small quantity mixed throughout, it will be the better.

Place them in your Conservatory before any Frosts happen, and in hard Weather
give them some warmth.

As the Spring appears, so acquaint them by degrees with the Air, opening the
Doors at Noon first, and shutting them again, then for a whole Day, if the
Weather permit. The like discretion you must use when you set them into your
Conservatory, not to shut them up too close until extremity of Weather require
it.

As the Trees grow large, so you may enlarge your Cases, and take out the
Trees, Earth and all, and place them in your new Cases.

I have heard of a Gentleman that annually makes a Shed or House over his
Orange-Tree, and as the Tree increases, so he enlarges his House, and that
his Tree is very large, and bears plentifully.

You must gather the Flowers as they blow, leaving but few to knit into Fruit,
else will your Tree spend it self in Fruit.

You must take care to brush the Spiders Webs off this Tree very gently, for
they delight to work on it; the fragrant Blossoms attracting many Flies.

The Kernels may be Planted in hot Beds, and will bring fair Plants the sooner.

Easy Stoves or Heats will serve until the Frosts be very hard; then you must
kindle greater Fires, but let not any Fire come too near your Trees, nor any
Smoke annoy them. But if your Conservatory be made very close with Mats, that
Water will not freeze in it, then there needs not any Fire.

You must water them gently when you find they require it, which may be
discerned by the Leaf which will soon complain, but give them rather too little
than too much, and wet not the Leaves.

You ought to renew and alter the Earth as tenderly as you can, by abating the
upper part of it, and stirring it up with a Fork, taking heed to the Roots, and
applying the prepared Earth in the room of it, which may be done in May and
September.

If you kindle some Charcoal, and when they have done smoking, put them in a
hole sunk a little into the Floor, about the middle of it; it is the best
Stove, and least annoys your Plants.

The Water wherewith you irrigate your Orange Trees, ought to be prepared as
well as the Earth, you may therefore mix it with Sheeps-dung, or Neats-dung,
and let it stand two or three days in the Air or Sun, and it will be very fit
for your purpose.

Lemmons may be ordered after the same Lemmons.
manner as the Oranges, but they are not capable of giving you so large a
requital.

Amomum Plinii, so called, being a Plant by Amomum Plinii.
him esteemed, and by him reported to be naturally growing in diverse parts of
Asia, and yielding a rich and costly Berry, used in Perfumes, is now nursed up
in our Climate, by careful preserving it in the Winter in the close
Conservatory, where it requires the same care as does the Orange-Tree.

Geranium nocte olens, which smells pleasantly Geranium.
in the Night only, is a tender Plant, and deserves a place in your
Conservatory.

The Tuberose Hyacinth, famous for its aspiring Head and most fragrant Flowers,
seeming to contend with the Orange-Tree, is a very tender Plant, impatient of
Cold or Wet.

The Root must be taken up in April, carefully parted without breaking the
greater Fibers, and then replanted, the bottom of the Pot filled with prepared
Earth, but the Roots covered only with natural fresh Earth, and then the Pot
filled with Earth prepared, as before; place this Pot in a hot Bed, and there
let it stand without watering until the Root spring, then set the Pot under a
South-wall; in dry Weather water it easily. In August it will yield its rich
Flowers, and in September it must be removed into the Conservatory.

In September you may take up the Bulbs of this Plant, and preserve them in dry
Sand, or when the Roots are dry, lay them up in Papers in a warm Closet.

The Blue Borage-leav'd Auricula, being Blue Borage leaved Auricula.
leaved like Borage, yields fine blue Flowers; it is a rare and tender Plant,
and set in a Pot may be preserved in your Conservatory, from the extremity of
the Winter.

Bears-Ears Sanicle, is almost of the form of Cortusa Matibioli.
an Auricula, is a Plant usually raised of Seed, planted in Pots, and preserved
as other tender Plants.

Mastich Thyme is a Plant of a curious Scent, Marum.
and vulgarly known, apt to be increased by Slips, and as apt to be destroyed
by Cold, and is worthy of your care to preserve it.

Assyrian Mastich is of the same nature, but Marum Syriacum.
so absolute a bait for Cats, that they will come far and near to it, to devour
it, unless you preserve it with the sharpest Thorns or Furze. These and
Mastichs are best preserved by placing them within the Earth, and covering them.

But the most rare and curious Exotic, is the Lilly of Japan, which is raised
in some more Southerly Climate, and being brought into this Country, yields a
fair Branch of Flowers much like red Martagons, and when the Sun shines on it,
the whole Flower resembles Cloth of Gold; although the Root may live over the
year, yet it is said it never bears any more Flowers in this Climate.

Several others there are, that are not only tender, but rare and acceptable
Plants to the ingenious and careful Florist, wherewith, according to the
magnitude or capacity of his Green-House, or measure of his time he can spare
about them; he may easily furnish himself with all from the great Conserver of
these Rarities, Mr. George Rickets of Hogsden.

BOOK III. Of Esculents or Plants for Foods.
AS a Garden is the greatest Ornament to your Seat without doors, for the
variety of Pleasures it yields, so is it of as great advantage and satisfaction
for the variety it affords you of curious Aliments and Condiments at your
Table; not any Dish of Meat can be completely served up, without a share of
some Hortulan or other Vegetable.

The meanest Cottager may well afford that little ground (if he has any) that
is contiguous to his Tenement, for the propagating of some or other of these
Esculents we are now to treat of: It is not the heat or Colors, Fatness or
Barrenness of his Land can excuse him here, for there is no Land but is apt to
bring you some Fruit or other of your Labor, and wherein some of these Plants
do delight: If it be a dry hot sandy Land, Carrots will prosper in it; if cold
and dry, then Turnips, if hot and moist, then Pease, Beans, and most sorts of
Tillage; if cold and moist, then Cabbages, Beans, etc. will not disdain it;
Thus may some sort of Tillage or other be adapted to every sort of Land.

The accidental or casual thriving of Plants or Seeds in the various sorts of
Lands has, within the memory of Man, very much encouraged our Rusticks to a
farther improvement of this part of Husbandry, not only because the products of
their Labors have often found a good Market for curious Pallats, but because
they have been frugal Meats for their own Families, and sometimes necessity
also (which often makes Men ingenious) has put them upon the propagation of
these Esculents, which have served as Meat, Bread and Drink, in such years that
Corn has been scarce. For in a great part of the World, the Inhabitants never
were acquainted with the making of Bread of Corn, but sometimes of the Roots of
some Plants that grew amongst them, which they eat with their hunted Venison,
or with their Milk, as in Ireland they eat Potatoes; thus here in England,
Carrots, Turnips, Cabages, and many other Roots and Plants have been both Bread
and Meat, for the Husbandman and his Family, who have in many places subsisted
long on this Food; and these Esculents being of themselves of a fine
nutrimental and moist nature, have not required so much Drink as other Meats
more dry and salt usually do: These kind of Diets are at a far less Charge and
trouble to the Pater-familiae, than those of Flesh, Bread, Cheese, etc.

And if the Case were truly stated, and the Times compared, the improvement and
propagation of these Esculents has been one Principal cause of the deadness of
the Market for Corn, which probably may be objected against this design.

To answer which you may consider, that cheap Food is one of the greatest
encouragements for the peopling of a Country, for this very reason many
thousands have deserted England, to settle in Ireland and elsewhere, to our
great detriment, and their great advantage.

If any Farmer complain of the Effects of these Improvements, then let him make
use of the same, and set out yearly a parcel of his Farm, for the raising of
Garden-Tillage, wherewith to feed his own Family, and furnish the Market.

Then will it be objected, that in case every man should so improve a part of
his Ville, the prices of the Tillage would be low, and it would not quit the
Cost.

To answer which, It would then reduce the advantage of the one and the other
part of Husbandry to a Balance, from which no ill effect as to the general can
proceed.

It may be further objected, that seeing less Land will, by these ways of
improvement, feed a certain number of people, than the old way of Husbandry can
do, that much Land will therefore lie wast.

In answer whereunto, If you can raise as much Food on an Acre of Land, as
formerly you did on four Acres, what disadvantage to you is it in case the
three remaining Acres lie wast? but you may convert them to pasture, if you
please.

In case you object that Garden-Tillage requires more hands, to dig, trench,
set, sow, plant, weed, and gather in, thatn the former way of sowing of Corn.

Answer, This is one of the Advantages it will necessarily produce, that Man
and his Family may live and keep themselves daily employed in this method of
Husbandry, on a few Acres of Land to as equal an advantage, as by the more
ancient way they could on a great Farm: For it were much better for the
public, that the great Farms were subdivided into lesser, that the people
might have Habitations and Employments here at home to keep them from straggling
abroad, than to have so many great Farms lie so neglected, to the great
prejudice of the Commonweal: Palladius was of the same opinion, who said,
Foecundior est culta Exiguitas, quam magnitudo neglecta.

But if you will say, that by multiplying Garden. Tillage after this manner, it
will make Corn-land so low rented and Corn thereby to become cheap, to the
great detriment to the kingdom in general. Then consider, that if a part of our
Land will yield us Food sufficient, and uphold the yearly value of our Villes,
as by this Method it will cartainly do, then may there be Corn enough raised in
England, not only to balance, but under-sell our foreign Neighbors, to our
great a dvantage, and their detriment (which is almost equal to it;) for the
more of our own Growths we can vend, the more is Navigation encouraged, and the
greater Returns are made. It is when the Growths or Manufactures of other
Contries are imported hither, and in lieu of them ready Money returned, that
impoverishes us, and enriches them. Therefore when the contrary is done, it
must have a contrary effect.

The Private Advantages of the propagating Hortulans or Esculent plants, as
they are oftentimes* represented, are prodigious and incredible, therefore a
modest computation is the best encouragement; for any rational man will more
easily believe that an Acre of Turnips, Carrots, Onions, or the like, is four
or five times more profitable to the Husbandman, than an Acre of Wheat or
Barley, or such like, than if it should be said to be ten or twenty times more
profitable.

But for your Garden (where you are confined to a less Room than a Farm) which
is divided into several squares or quarters, and each square or quarter well
manured and prepared for its proper Tillage, there may you expect a far greater
increase, especially of such plants that annually produce their Fruit without
the renewing of the Gardeners Cost and Pains, unless only to cherish and
preserve them* with the planting and propagating of which sort of Esculents we
will begin.

CHAP. I. Of such Plants that are Perennial, or continue over the Year.
THE best and most select of such Esculent Of Asparagus.
Plants that continue from Year to Year, without new planting or sowing, is the
Asparagus, which deserves to be first named, because of its early and plentiful
increase it yields, the delicacy of its Meat, and the continuance of it before
any other, gains a repute above it.

So long since as in Pliny's time it was the most esteemed of any in the
Garden, although in those parts they sometimes grew wild, yet in the Gardens
were they so cultivated, that three of their Buds or Heads would weigh a pound,
and were (though common) the Romans dainty Dish: And Cato many years before
Pliny wrote very much concerning their propagation, out of the abundant regard
he had for them, being then but newly reduced to the Gardener's care.

They grow naturally wild, or at least some Bastard kind of them in the Meadows
near Bristol; but our more fair and large, usually called Dutch Asparagus are
propagated from Seed; the Ground wherein you sow them must be rich and well
tempered and prepared; then may you with your Finger prick in the Berries at
what distance you please; the best time is in January or February.

Then after two years, in March following, will they be fit to remove into the
Bed wherein they are to remain.

But the best and most expeditious way is, to buy your Plants of two or three
years growth of the Gardeners, who raise them on purpose for Sale at an easy
price.

The Bed you plant them in ought to be three or four foot wide, and about two
foot in depth, the most part within the surface of the earth, and about six
inches above, for it will settle. When you have made clean and square your
Fosse, you may fill it with good rotten Dung of any sort, with a little mixture
of earth, the best Soil is that which the Butchers make, wherein there are
Hoofs, Rams-horns, or any such cornuous substance, wherein they exceedingly
delight; it is probable woollen Rags or old Leather may do as well; with these
mixtures may you fill your Bed about eighteen inches; then cover the same with
good old rich Mold, that came out of some Cucumber or Melon Bed for about six
inches more, in the midst whereof plant your Sets, at sixteen or eighteen
inches distance in a Quincunical order, that they may lie coverd two or three
inches; plant them with their Roots spreading as much as you can. Or you may
cover the Dung with rich Mould, three inches, and then place your Sets with the
Roots spreading, and then gently cover them with the like Mold three inches.

You may make as many of these Beds, and as long as you please, leaving a two
foot interval between them, for the convenience of dressing and cutting them,
for broad Beds are inconvenient, no Tillage suffering more by treading than
these.

About three years after they are planted you may cut of them: the sooner you
cut of them, the more will the head of the Root knit, and the more in number
will it yearly yield you; and the later you cut, the more will the Root and
head grow in bigness, and the fairer Bud will you have. Some will thus grow to
be very large.

When Green Pease furnish your Table, then may you let your Asparagus run to
Seed, that they may gather strength for the succeeding year.

In the cutting the Buds remove some of the Earth with your knife, to avoid
injuring the next Successor.

In November, or the beginning of December, cut the seedy stalk close to the
ground, and cover the Beds with new warm Horse-dung, which will prevent them
from extreme Frosts, for no other will injure them.

In the beginning of March uncover them if the Weather be open, and either
before you cover them, or at this time, weed them clean, and after weeding lay
on your Bed the Bottom of a Melon or Cucumber Bed, or such like rich Earth,
about two fingers thick, to supply the usual decay they are subject unto.

You may have early Asparagus, if you take the old Roots with the Earth about
them, and place them on a hot Bed, thus will they bud in January.

By the precedent Rules will a Garden of Asparagus furnish you with Buds near
three Months of the year, without the force of a hot Bed, and that in such
plenty, that no other tillage whatever, that is the perennial (the Artichoak
only excepted) affords the like. These whilst less common, were received as
Dainties at the best furnished Tables; and now, though plentiful, are they an
usual Dish at most Gentlemen's Tables, and by degrees may come to be a more
vulgar Diet; for after their first Planting, the labor about them is but
small, and the cost less, the trouble of cutting them not so great as gathering
of Pease, nor dressing them so tedious, yet a Meat equalling the best of
Tillage, and the most salubrious of any.

About the time the Asparagus leaves you, Of Artichoaks.
the Artichoak comes in request, being one of the best of a Gardens products,
and anciently derived from Thistles, as Pliny tells us, and in his time, and
long before, had been so improved, that they became a most delicate Meat, and
were served up to the Tables of the most prodigal Romans. If then they were so
excellent, surely by a continued improvement to this day, must they needs now
be much better.

There are several kinds of them, as the more ordinary which run up tall, and
bear small heads which are very hardy, and are usually called the
Thistle-Artichoaks; the other sorts are more large, and grow low, and much to
be preferred, but are more tender and unable to endure the severity of the
Winter.

The best and largest sort is that called the Globe-Artichoak, bearing a very
large Fruit of near twelve inches over. The meanest is that called the Red
Artichoak, with the Plants whereof many have been deceived, expecting a more
excellent than ordinary Fruit, when instead thereof they produced the worst of
Artichoaks.

They are increased by Slips, taken from the sides of the old Roots at the time
of dressing them in the Spring, with as much root to them as you can.

Artichoaks delight in a rich and deep Soil, and not very dry, which Soil must
be trenched about two foot deep, and mixed very well with good old rotten Dung,
and so laid up into Beds of what form you think best, for you may go between
them as you please; the Artichoak roots very deep, and if it likes its ground
will grow very large, and continue many years.

You may plant them four foot apart at least, that they may have room to spread
their leaves, and at their first planting be fure to water them in dry Weather
until you observe them to grow.

The best times for the planting them is in the beginning of April, and you may
sow any Sallet-Herbs between them, that may be gathered and disposed of before
the Artichoaks spread too far. These Plants will some of them yield heads in
the Autumn following.

If you thoroughly water your Artichoaks with water enriched with Sheeps-Dung,
it will make them very large: Watring of them in dry Land, or in dry Years,
much advantageth them, for in moist Years they are much more plentiful and
large than in dry Years, and the better it will be in case the Water be fat.

Water drawn from Ashes, or improved by any fixed Salt, is very good for the
same purpose; for I have known that Artichoaks have been the larger for
Turf-ashes, casually with Dung laid at their Roots to preserve them in Winter.

In November, or the beginning of December, it will be a good time to secure
your Artichoaks from the Frost, by raising the Earth about them, and
encompassing them with long Dung, or any hawmy substance, but not to cover
them, lest it perish them, for it is the Frost that perishes the Roots, and the
wet and want of Air that perish the Leaves.

About London where they have great Gardens of Artichoaks, they cannot so well
cover them with long Dung; but instead thereof they cut off all the Greens,
which they sell for feeding of Cows, after the rate of 20 s. per Acre, as they
themselves tell me, and then cover the plants over with Earth, to defend them
from Frosts; so that it is not necessary to preserve the Greens over the Winter.

But this way of covering them with Earth did not preserve them in the great
Frost of 1683 when all so covered were killed; and at the same time those that
were covered well with long Dung were preserved, in the smaller Gardens remote
from London: and some that were buried in Dung all that winter, being cast out
of the Gardens, were found in the Spring to be living.

Some prescribe to whelm over them an earthen Pot, Bee-hive, or such like open
at the top to give them Air, which may serve if the Winter be not too sharp.

About the middle of March, you may gently move the Dung from them, and at the
end, the Earth that was cast up, and the first week in April may you dress
them, by digging deeply about each Root, and slipping of every Set as low as
possibly you can, leaving two or three of the greatest and most distant the one
from the other for Bearers, then fill them up round with good old Dung or rich
Soil mixed with the Earth, and they will afford you fair Heads.

If you would have latter Artichoaks, you must cut the first Crops betimes, or
expect them from your new set plants.

A small spot of ground thus planted and ordered, will furnish your Table with
many of these Fruits in a year, and are equal to the best of Vegetables for
Food; charge and trouble and very little in comparison of the advantage.

They will continue six, eight or ten years, sometimes twenty years and more,
according to the goodness of the Land they grow in, and then must be renewed
when you perceive them to degenerate; which they surely do if they like not the
ground.

The young Buds of Artichoaks may be eaten raw with Pepper and Salt, as usually
Melons, Figs, etc. are eaten.

The Chard of the Artichoaks, which is the Stalk of a young Artichoak, arising
out of an old Root, and preserved from the Air, and from heading, by winding it
about with Straw, to blanch it and make it tender, is by the French esteemed an
excellent Dish.

The Roots, Stalks, and Leaves of them, whilst young and tender, are delicate
Meat, especially if so preserved and blanched as is by some affirmed; and it is
not improbable, for I have often found that by covering a Winter Bud to
preserve it from Frost, the Snails have greedily devoured it.

Those esculent Herbs that are perennial, because they are not so much used for
Food as for Condiment, I shall discourse of in another Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of Esculent Roots.
THere are several Roots that have afforded us great plenty of substantial,
pleasant Of Turnips.
and wholesome Food, whereof the Turnip is esteemed the best; there are several
sorts of them, the round, long, and yellow, of which the round is the most
common, though the others are very good; the long are usually called Navews;
they have been an ancient Food throughout Europe Southward, and have been very
much improved in England of late years.

They will grow on the meanest Land in its first tilth, and much the more if
the Season prove moist or dripping. The Season of sowing them is about
Midsummer, that they may be ready to improve upon the Autumnal Rains, which
makes them much sweeter than the Vernal.

They are fickle at their first coming up in a too dry Season, and if (being
sown early) they happen to fail, you may at the end of July, or beginning of
August new sow your Ground.

These Seeds are much sought for and devoured by small Birds, who will smell
them in the ground, and when they first send their pale heads above the earth
the Birds will draw them out and eat of their Seeds, and leave the naked Shoots
on the ground. Those that escape the Birds in small Gardens or places, amongst,
or near to Trees and Groves, as well as in the larger Fields, the Flies in dry
and hot Summers usually devour; so that few or none escape them: which to
prevent, some have affirmed, that if you take Soot of Chimnies, and lay it in
Water, till the Water be strongly tinged therewith, and with that imbibe your
Seed, and then sow it, neither the Birds nor Flies will meddle with it.

You may sow them in April, to have Turnips in the Summer, but sowing them
after for the Winter is most seasonable.

In the Winter before the great Frosts prevent, you may take them up, and
cutting off the Greens, dispose of them in some cool place on heaps, and they
will keep long, and much better and longer in case they be laid in Sand and
covered with it.

They will root the better and larger if the Leaves spread and grow flat, than
if they stand upright or grow upwards; which to prevent, sow them not too
thick, or if they come up too thick in any place, reduce them to a convenient
number or distance of about ten or twelve inches, and supply the defects by
transplantation, and you will find that the increase of your Root shall
balance the lessening your number, for the near standing of any Vegetables
cause them to aspire upwards, as is evident in most Trees planted in Copses;
which otherwise are apt to spread.

But if the over fatness of your Ground, which is a great fault for Turnips, or
overmuch wet, cause them to run out in leaf more than in root, then treading
down the leafs will make them root the better.

The Greens or Leaves of Turnips that have been sown late, and lived over the
Winter, are usually boiled and eaten with salt Meats, and prove an excellent
Condiment.

Thus ordered, will a small spot of Ground yield you a second Crop (after
Pease, Beans, or Sallee-Herbs) of excellent Food, which the most curious plates
disdain not, and much more in value then any of Corn or Grain whatever.

Carrots have been anciently used for Meat, Of Carrots.
but not so much as Turnips have been, yet are they the sweeter Meat, and more
easily eaten without Bread, or rather better serve to supply that cefect than
Turnips, for Turnips are much the better Condiment, but Carrots the pleasanter
Food.

There are two sorts of them, the yellow, and the Orange, or more red: the last
of which is by much the better.

They delight in light Ground with a mixture of Sand; if it be rich or heavy,
you must take the more pains in digging it, to make it as light as you can.

If you dung your Land the same year you sow your Carrots, you must be sure to
bury your Dung so low that the roots may not extend to it; for as soon as they
touch the Dung they grow forked.

The Season for sowing them is in February or March, in dry Weather.

To make them large, you must do with them as with the Turnips, only they will
admit of a greater number on the same quantity of ground than the other.

If sown between Beans set in wide rows, after the Beans are taken up your
Carrots will thrive, and you may have a second Crop, but these not so fair nor
early as those that are sown in Beds by themselves.

To improve this and other Roots, gather your Seeds from the highest aspring
Branches; and sow them as before is directed; then when you take them up,
select the fairest, and preserve for Seed the next year, then Plant them, and
take the Seeds from the highest tops as before.

Carrots are preserved as Turnips, over the Winter; but if you will have
Carrots early in the Spring, you must sow them in August, and preserve them
from the Frost in the Winter by covering them with Pease-haum: But these are
not so good as those that are sown in the Spring.

Next unto Carrots are Parsnips in great Parsnips:
use for a delicate sweet Food, and were so esteemed in Plinys time, and by him
reputed to be excitatives unto Venus; an argument that they are very
nutrimental.

They delight in a richer Soil than the Carrots, but as light and well stirred
as may be, else in every respect to be ordered as the Carrots, but are not to
stand so thick.

The Skirret or Skirwort-Root, was also a very ancient Dish amongst the Romans,
and is the sweetest, whitest, and most pleasant of Roots, and by Physicians
esteemed a great restorative, and good for weak Stomachs, and an effectual
Friend to Dame Venus.

Skirrets delight in a very Rich, Light, and Of Skirrets.
not too dry Soil, for in moist Summers they are fairest.

They are increased by Plants divided in February or March, and set in single
Buds at six or eight inches distance, and in a dripping year, or otherwise, if
they be watered in dry Seasons, you will have a very plentiful increase the
succeeding Winter; you may also Plant them here and there on the edges of your
other Beds.

They endure the Winter very well, and you may take them up at any time before
the Spring be too forward, if the Frosts prevent you not; when you take the
Roots, cover the tops in Earth for your farther increase.

The Root Scorsonera is as yet not common, Of Scorsonera.
but very much commended by some to be good Meat, after the outer Rind is
scraped off, and the Root steeped a while in Water, to take away that little
bitterness it has.

They are said to lie in the ground all the Winter, and from year to year
without any prejudice, but will still grow bigger and bigger, although they
yearly run up to Seed.

They are increased either by Seed, or by Slips, as the Skirrets, or by cutting
the Roots in several pieces, which planted in good ground at about eight or
nine inches distance, in March, will yield a considerable increase, or may be
planted at any other time, they being hardy.

They are esteemed to be very cordial and excellent in Fevers.

Potato's are much used in Ireland and in America Of Potato's.
as Bread, and are of themselves also an usual Food.

They grow in any good mellow ground, and are increased by cutting the Roots in
pieces, and planting them as the Scorsonera.

These and the Jerusalem Artichoaks, which Of Jerusalem Artichoaks.
are by much the meaner Food, although somewhat like them, may be propagated
with advantage to poor People, a little ground yielding a very great quantity,
as the many small Welsh Territories adjoining to the Highways in those parts,
planted with them, plainly demonstrate.

The Red Beet or Roman Parsnip, and the Of Beets.
White Beet were amongst the ancient Romans, and by several are now used as
well in Root as in Leaf at the Table.

Beets delight in a rich and deep Soil as does the Parsnip, and must be sown
about the same time or rather set about fifteen inches asunder, because their
Leaves are large.

Or you may sow them in a Bed promiscuously, and when they are grown a little
then transplant them, and they will yield fairer Roots, the other being apt to
be forked.

There are Chards of Beets as well as of Artichoaks, and after the same manner
may be prepared.

You must take them up before the Frost prevent you, and house them as before
was directed for Turnips and Carrots.

After the same manner plant the best for Seed as was directed for Turnips and
Carrots.

Radishes in the more Southern Countries Of Redishes.
are a delicate Meat, especially if sown in brackish Lands, or watered with
brackish Waters, and therefore were they in such esteem with the Egyptians,
where were the daintiest and sweetest Radishes in the World.

The Greeks also so highly preferred them to all other Meats, in regard of
their good nourishment, that in an Oblation of Garden-fruits unto Apollo, in
his Temple at Delphos, they dedicated the Beet in Silver, the Turnip in Lead
but the Radish in beaten Gold: Also Moschian the Greek Writer had so great an
esteem for the Radish, that he compiled a whole Book of it, as Pliny relates.

These in our more Northern Clime attain not to that degree of maturity, as to
become Food, except it be the Leaves, which boiled are eaten with salt Meats.

But are very much regarded as a Sallade for their biting and quick taste,
especially in the Spring, eaten with Salt.

There are three sorts of Radishes, the small eating Radish, the Horse Radish,
and the black Radish.

The first is that which has been so much in repute, and is now ordinarily
eaten, and is raised of Seed.

To have them early they must be raised on a hot Bed, with a snfficient
thickness of good rich light Moul, that they may have depth enough to root in
before they reach the Dung.

To have large and clean Radishes, make. holes as deep as your finger about
three inches distance, into each hole drop a sound Seed (or two if suspicious)
and cover the Seeds a little, leaving the rest of the hole open; thus will they
grow to the height of the hole ere they dilate their Leaves, and yield you a
long and transparent Root.

You may sow them all the year, those in the Winter in hot Beds, those sown
after Midsummer will not run to Seed that year.

They delight in rich and light ground, and require watring, for in dripping
years they prove fairest.

The Horse Radish is increased by Plants, as Horse Radishes.
well as from Seeds, and used by many as an excellent and wholesome Sauce.

The black Radish is so mean a Root that it Black Radish.
finds no place in a good Garden.

Onions are an ancient Food, especially of Of Onions.
the Egyptians, and are much esteemed of by the Spaniards, who eat them as
Englishmen do Apples, for in the hotter Countries they are a little milder than
here.

There are several sorts of them, the Strasburgh Onion, red Spanish, white
Spanish, and the English, the red the most tart, and the white the mildest; the
ordinary English are not so fair as those of Biscay or St. Omers, but these by
often sowing degenerate.

Sow Onions in February, or beginning of March, between the full of the Moon,
and the last Quarter, and they will head very well and not run to Chibols.

They delight in good Land well tempered and freed from Weeds, they extend not
their Fibers far downwards, therefore in your sowing them tread your Bed or
beat, it flat, then sow it with your Seed as equally dispersed as you can, and
not too thick, then sift over in fine rich Earth, a finger thick at most; by
this means the root will grow larger, and not be apt to run into the ground,
for an Onion and a Turnip, the more on the surface they grow, the fairer they
prove: This I had from an experienced person.

Omons sown with Salt are said to prosper and grow large; it is not improbable,
because they seem to extract much of the blackish moisture of the Earth.

You may sow Onions all the year for the use of the young Onions or Scallions;
those sown in Autumn may be covered with Straw or pease-haum, and so preserved
all the Winter, and will be early Chibols or Scallions in the Spring.

You may plant small Onions, or such that are grown or beginning to shoot in
the Spring, in deep holes, and they will prove good Chibols.

There is a distinct species of Chibols or Ascalonian Onions in France, that
are increased by Off-sets as the Eschalots, but they are not usual with us.

The use of Onions is generally known, and the advantage they bring to the
careful Gardener very great. Of Garlic


The use of Garlic is as ancient as that of Onions with the Egyptians, who had
them both in very great esteem, as now our Welsh have Leeks, and used to swear
by Garlic and Onions, deeming them Sacred, because they afforded them so much
rare Food: much after the same manner do our ancient Britains dedicate the Leek
to their Saint David on his day, and Aegyptian-like, some of them are known by
their Magazine of Garlick-fume, at a great distance.

Garlic is planted by Off-sets in February or March in good rich Soil, and it
will increase wonderfully. About the end of June you must tie the Leaves in
knots, which will make them head, and prevent their spindling: it may be taken
up in August when the Blade withers.

Much of it is eaten in Wales and Scotland and some part of England, and much
more of it would be spent for its wholsomeness were it not for the offensive
smell it gives to the Bystanders, which is taken away by eating of a Beet-root
roasted in the Embers, as Menander (a Greek Writer quoted by Pliny) says.

Eschalots are now from France become an Of Eschalits.
English Condiment, and are increased and managed near after the same manner as
the Garlic, only they are to be set earlier because they spring sooner, and
take up as soon as the leaves begin to wither, which is before the Garlic.
They must not lie in the ground long after, for either they rot in the ground
or the Winter kills them.

They give a fine relish to most Sauces, and the breath of those that feed on
them is not offensive to others, as it is of those that feed on Garlic or
Onions: they are apt to degenerate, being planted two or three Years in the
same ground, therefore it is best to renew your plantation with new plants
lately brought from France, within two or three Years.

Leeks were in use as anciently as Onions or Of Leeks.
Garlic, not only in foreign parts, but here in Britain, as is evident by the
constant use of them by the Welsh, who propagate an abundance of them,
insomuch, that I have seen the greatest part of a Garden there stored with
Leeks, and part of the remainder with Onions and Garlic.

By reason of their mild nature they are much used in Porrage, which has
derived its Name from Porrum a Leek, though now from the French, we call it
Pottage.

They are raised of Seeds, as the Onions, and sown about the same time.

About August, plant your Leeks in very fat rich Ground, and make the holes
deep with a setting Stick, wherein plant them, but fill not the hole with
Earth; Water them once in two days with Water enriched with fat Dung, and they
will be very large and white.

Plant the best for Seed, as you do the Onions; and the Seed-bearing stalks of
both must be supported by Sticks and Threads, else they will lean to the Ground.

Sives, being a diminitive kind of Leek, is Of Sives.
next to be mentioned; they are increased by parting them, and Planting them in
single Heads early in the Spring; if Planted in good Land they will multiply
exceedingly, they stand many years, and are a pleasant Sauce and good Pot-herb.

CHAP. III. Of Beans and Pease.
GArden-Beans are an ancient Food, esteemed by Pliny the principal of all
Pulse, they are a very strong and nourishing Meat. Pythagoras forbid his
Scholars the eating of Beans, only (as is supposed) because they were a rough
Meat, and disturbed their sedate minds in the Night, and are not therefore so
good for Philosophers nor Students. The greater sort which we vulgarly call
Sanwich Beans, are by much to be preferred for their fruitfulness and goodness.

They may be set in November, and at any time after till May, but most securely
in February or March, for if they begin to spire, and very severe Frosts happen
after it, they may be all destroyed. Probatum est.

It is not good to set them promiscuously, but in double ranges, at three foot
distance at least, the Ranges running from North to South, the Sun will comfort
and ripen them the better.

If you cut off the Stalks of your Beans near the ground; when they are first
ripe, the Roots will spring again, and in seasonable Years you may have a
second Crop about Michaelmas.

From whence we may conclude, that if you cut off your Beans that are set in
the Spring, at such times as they begin to blow, then they will germinate again
into more Branches and bear late, much better than if they were Planted late,
which extreme drowth usually hinders from coming to perfection.

There is a small sort of Bean called a Spanish Bean that ripens early, and
therefore to be preferred,

Kidney Beans were as ancient a Food as the Of Kidney Beans.
other, and in very great esteem with the old Italians; yet within the Memory
of Man were a great rarity here in England, although now a known and common
delicate Food.

They delight in a warm, light, and fertile ground, which being well stirred,
and about May Day, or very little sooner, planted with the Kidney-Beans, at
about a foot apart, and two fingers deep, will yield you an extraordinary Crop.

You may either set tall Sticks near for them to twine about, or let them lie
on the ground, but if you are straightened in room, those on Sticks will yield you
the greatest increase.

Of these there are 4 sorts, 1. The Scarlet Bean, which yields a rough husk,
and is not the best to eat in the shell as Kidney Beans usually are eaten, but
is reputed the best to be eaten in the Winter when dry and boiled. 2. The
Painted or Streaked Bean, which is the hardiest although the meanest of all,
and is known, the dry Bean being all over streaked with a dark Color. 3. The
large White Bean, which yields a fair and delicate Pod. 4. The small White
Bean, which except in size is like the latter, but esteemed the sweeter.

There is another sort much like the last, thaat Bona Vista's.
is natural to the Island Bona Vista, and thence taken and propagated in the
Summer Islands, from whence some certain persons have them dry, and esteem them
as delicate Meat; they will flourish well here in Branch, but our Summers are
not long enough to bring them to maturity, Quaere, if raised on a hot Bed.

Pease are of diverse kinds, and some of them Of Pease.
the sweetest and most pleasant of all Pulses; the meaner sort of them have
been long acquainted with our English Air and Soil; but the sweet and delicate
sorts of them have been introduced into our Gardens only in this latter Age.

There are diverse sorts of pease now propagated in England, as three several
sorts of Hot-spurs, the long, the shorts and Barns's Hot-spur. Sandwich, five
sorts of Rouncivals, the Gray, White, Blue, Green, and Maple Rouncival. Three
sorts of Sugar Pease, the large White, small White, and Gray Sugar Pease. The
Egg-Pease, Wing Pease, and Sickle Pease; whereof the Hot-spurs are the most
early, pleasant, and profitable of all others. The Sugar Pease with crooked
Cods, the sweetest of all. The large white and green Rouncival, and the great
Egg-Pease we shall more particularly advise to be propagated in our Gardens.

The Hot-spurs are the speediest of growth of any, that being sown about the
middle of May will in six Weeks time return ripe again into your hands, no
Vegetable besides being so quick in its growth and maturity; therefore let
these be the first that you sow, if sown in February or March, they will come
earlier than any other sort sown before Winter; but if you sow them in
September, and can by Fences of Reed, or otherwise defend them from extreme
Frosts, you may have ripe Peascods in May following.

The large Sugar Pease (which many take to be a fair white sweet Pease
succeeding the Hot-spur, but erroniously) is a tender Pease Planted in April,
and ripe after Midsummer, the Cods are very crooked and ill-shaped, which being
boiled with the unripe Pease in them, are extraordinary sweet. The greatest
discouragement in raising these, is that their sweetness attracts the small
Birds unto them, to their total destruction, unless carefully prevented; which
is a sufficient Argument of their pre-excellency.

The large white and green Rouncivals, or Hastings, are tender, and not to be
set till the cold is over, and then not very thick, for they spread much, and
mount high, and therefore require the aid of tall sticks, every one knows the
worth of them.

There is another very large gray, but extraordinary sweet Pease, that is
lately propagated, it is tender but very Fruitful, and deserves a large Bed in
your Kitchen Garden.

They delight in a warm light Soil, if it be rich, the Pease are the fairer, if
lean the Pease are the more early, and spend better, especially when dry.

They are set with a Dibble to more advantage than sown in Rills or Furrows,
but either way should be by a Line, and the roughs eighteen inches or two foot
apart, as the ground is in goodness, that you may go between them to haw, weed,
or gather them.

If you keep the ground between them bare, they will ripen the sooner, for the
heat of the ground will contribute much thereto.

If you raise the Earth about them when they are about a hand breadth high,
they will flourish the better.

If you set or sow them in the beginning of, or before Winter, you must inter
twice as many Pease as you need to do in case you stay till February or March,
because the Cold and Mice will destroy a part.

Ground laid in deep Furrows from East to West, and Pease sown or set on the
South declining side of each Furrow, will defend your Pease better in the
Winter, than if they were sown or set on a Level. For on the Wiltshire Plains,
the Husbandmen leave their Land after it is sown with Wheat, as rough and
clotty as they can, to shelter their Corn in Grass from the severity of the
cold Winds in the Winter.

Pease on Sticks will bear more, but on the ground will ripen sooner.

CHAP. IV. Of Cabbages and Caulyflowers.
THere is not a more ancient nor nor common Cabbage.
Esculent Plant than a Cabbage or Caulwort, nor any Garden Aliment so wholesome,
if Cato that lived near two thousand years since, and Chrysippus and Dieuches,
two famous Physicians more ancient (that wrote each of them a Volume of the
excellent Virtues of this Plant) may be credited, or the Country wherein they
wrote considered. Pythagoras himself, long before Cato, had not so mean an
opinion of Beans, but he had as high of this. Ever since those Times we have
had the consent and approbation of all our European Territories (except the
more severe Northern) that Cabbages and Caulworts are a good and wholesome Food,
as their constant and vulgar use of them in every place sufficiently manifest.
Here in England not a Village without them; and if there be a House without a
Garden, or a Garden without a Caulwort, yet the Inhabitants or Owners of them
will furnish themselves from the Market: yet are they not so addicted to the
use of them here as in France, Holland, Germany, etc. where (in Germany) that
famous City of Wurtsburgh is said to derive its Name from the great plenty of
Wurts, as they call them that grow about it.

We have here many sorts of them besides the common which are known to every
one, as the Dutch Cabbage, the large sided Cabbage, the white-headed Cabbage,
the red Cabbage, perfumed Cabbage, Savoy Cabbage, and Russia Cabbage.

The first that heads is a small white Cabbage, The Dutch Cabbage.
called the Dutch-Cabbage, and comes in Season before the common English
Cabbage, and is very sweet, notwithstanding it has not felt the Frost, which
is a great improver of the taste of most Cabbage.

The Cabbage that is now much in request is the large-sided Cabbage it is a very
tender plant, The largefided Cabbag.
sown not till May, planted out in July and in the Autumn is eaten as the best
Cabbage in the World.

The large white-headed Cabbage, which is The white-headed Cabbage.
the biggest of all Cabbages, is worthy your care for its greatness sake,

There is a sort of red Cabbage, and another The red Cabbage.
inclining to purple; they are small and grow near the ground, and are planted
only for varietysake, and to garnish Dishes, etc.

There are some sort that have a Musky Scent, Perfumed Cabbage.
and are therefore called perfumed Cabbages, which are not unworthy your Care.

But one of the best sorts of all is the Savoy The Savoy Cabbage.
Cabbage, almost as hardy as our common English Cabbage; the Winter Plants head
very well, being Planted out in the Spring, as the ordinary Cabbage are, the
heads when the Frosts have touched them turn yellow, and then are delicate Meat.

These that are raised of Seeds, in the Spring will have but snall heads,
which, as also those without heads in the succeeding Winter, are exceeding any
ordinary Caul or Cabbage.

The Russia Cabbage is the least and most The Russia Cabbage.
humble of all the Cabbages, growing very near the ground; is very pleasant
Food, hardy and quick of growth: So that you need not be without all the
Summer. The Winter Plants heading early, and the Spring Plants arriving to
maturity in seven weeks after they are sown.

Sow all your Cabbage Seeds that you intend for Winter Plants in Argust, or
beginning of September, and when they are grown with Leaves about three Fingers
broad then draw them and plant them out in fresh and rich Land, where they may
remain all the Winter and at Spring replant them where they are to stand for
Cabbages. These are those they call Ledger Plants that produce the fairest
Cabbages.

You may sow your Seeds in the Spring, in March and April, for Cauls for the
whole Summer; and some of them, if the Year prove dripping, or they sometimes
watered will head.

At the transplanting your young Plants, water them with water that is enriched
with dung.

Before the great Frosts surprise you, you may take up your hardest Cabbages,
and after they have hung up by their Roots about a fortnight, to drain the
water from them, you may either lay them in some Cellar, where they will keep a
long time, or Plant them deep in the ground close one to another, and cover
them with Hawm or Straw until you have occasion to use them.

Those you intend for Seed, you may plant in rich Soil indifferent deep, and
cover them from the Frosts, and in the Spring they will quickly aspire.

Beside these variety of Cabbages, Caul, and Sprouts springing from the old
decapitated Stumps there is a perennial Caul, being usually called Sheer-Wurt
or Sheer-Caul that will continually yield you a green Mess whenever you have
occasion, and deserves a place in your Kitchen Garden, and is raised of Seed as
the other.

There is also a sort of Caul that is very much curled, and is very good, and
by some much esteemed.

But the German Colewort exceeds all other for its delicate Taste, and its
hardiness against the greatest severity of the Winter, although not yet
commonly propagated.

There is a Species of Cauls much more excellent Of Cauly-flowers.
than any of the former which are Cauliflowers, which merit a far greater
esteem at the Table than the Cabbage for a time, their prime Season lasts not
above two Months. But afterward the Cabbage becomes a better Dish, which is
welcome to any Man's Table six Months together, and the Sprouts and green Caul
all the residue of the year.

Their Seeds are sown in August or September on Beds, where they may be
defended all the Winter by Mats or other close Shelter to preserve them from
Frosts.

In the Spring about the end of March, it is a good time to plant them out in
Plants where they should stand, which in a dripping Spring, or by diligent
watering will yield you fair Flowers, but if they are not watered, they will
bring forth ragged and divided Flowers.

You may Sow their Seed in February on a hot Bed, and have Flowers within a
Month after those that were Sown before Winter.

Those that are of one growth usually Flower about a time, which to prevent,
you may remove some of your Plants once every Fortnight, for two, three, or
four times, as you think good, which will keep them back from Flowring, and so
you may have them one after another as you please: Or you may cut off your
Flower before it be fully ripe with a long Stalk, and set it in the ground as
far as you can, and it will retain its ripening, but you must shade it, and
give it a little Water, lest it wither.

CHAP. V. Of Melons, Cucumbers, etc.
MElons or Muskmelons, as they are usually termed from their pleasant Of Melons.
Scent, are in the more Southern Countries, not unworthily esteemed the most
delicate Fruit the Kitchen Garden affords, for in those warmer Airs they attain
a greater degree of Maturity, which exceedingly adds to their Gust and
Salubrity, however here in England being raised in the first of the Spring, and
having thereby all the prime of the Summer, and heat that Nature and Art can
give them, they are a pleasant and a modish repast, and therefore deserve your
singular care in their propagation and management.

There are several sorts of Melons, and called by several Names, but those most
usually known are the large ribbed Melon, and the small round Melon.

They are sown in February at the full of the Moon in your hot Bed (the making
whereof you shall find at the end of this Book) the Seeds first steeped in Milk
twenty four hours, and then set two or three in a hole about an inch deep.

When your Seeds are in the ground, cover up your Bed to preserve it warm, and
when they are come up, then cover them with drinking-glasses, leaving room for
a little Air near the ground.

Toward the end of April you may remove your Melon Plants out of the hot Bed,
into the Bed wherein they are to grow all the Summer, which Bed, or at least
certain large holes in it, is to be of very rich light Mould; the best time for
this Work is in an Evening after a fair Day.

At their first removal they must be watered and defended from Sun and Cold,
three or four days together, and afterward from the Cold.

When the plants grow large, you may cover them either with glass Bells made
for that purpose, or with square Cases of Glass made by the Glasiers for the
same use. Be sure keep them close at Night, and give them some admission of Air
under the Glass, or at the top in the day time.

To prevent Frosts from hurting your Plants, and Hail from breaking your
Glasses, if you have any forewarning of either, you may cover your Glasses with
pease-straw or Mats.

When you water your Melons (which they expect only in very dry and hot
Weather) water them at half a foot distance from the Root and not wet the
Leaves.

Place a Tile under each Melon, it will lie the warmer upon it, and nip off the
small shoots that exhaust the sap from the more leading Branches.

Some prescribe to cover your Melon Bed two or three inches with Sand, to
increase the heat of the Sun by reflection, but Tiles under the Fruit may do as
well.

Also it is advised that you shelter your newly removed plant from the heat of
the Sun at Noon, and until four in the Afternoon, as well as from the Cold, and
that until the plants have gotten Leaves broad enough to cover their Stalks and
Roots from the parching Sun.

When your Melons are as big as Tennis-Balls, then nip off the shots at some
distance beyond them at a Joint, and the Melons will grow large.

Melons are known to be ripe when the Stalk seems as if it would part from the
Fruit, when they begin to gild and grow yellow underneath, and by their
fragrant Odor they yield which increases as they more and more ripen.

But every Melon appears not alike in Color when mature, therefore you must
consider their difierent Natures. If they are to carry far, then gather them
when they begin to ripen, but if they are to spend immediately, then let them
be through ripe.

When you gather your Melons, you may put them before they be cut into a Bucket
of cold Water, for a minute of time, to refresh them, which will make them eat
cool and pleasant, and with an excellent Flavor; as it will mend a Bottle of
Wine in hot Weather.

Leave some part of the Stalk to the Melon, lest by being broken too near, the
Melon languish and lose the richness of its taste: Let them not when you gather
them be too green, nor over ripe.

Preserve the Seeds of those that are most early ripe, and prefer those Seeds
that lodged at the sunny side of the Melon.

Cucumbers have been in very great esteem in Of Cucumbers.
the more Southern Countries, and of late years are much improved in England,
and become a general Condiment for the hot Season of the year, as they are
Crude from the Garden, and for the more cold Season as they are preserved in
pickle.

There are two sorts of them, that is, the large green Cucumber, vulgarly
called the Horse-Cucumber, which the French call Parroquets. Parroquets.
And the small white or more prickly Cucumber, these are best for the Table
green out of the Garden, but the other to preserve.

They are planted aad propagated after the same manner as are the Melons, only
they require more watring, and withal they are much more hardy.

Although watring makes the Cucumbers more fruitful, yet they are more pleasant
and wholesome if they have but little Water.

Pompeons are much more hardy then Melons Of Pompeons.
or Cucumbers; yet are they tender in their first springing, and therefore are
not usually planted until April, and then for some time after they are come up
defended from the Cold.

They must be planted in Rich old Dung, and require a large place to ramble in,
they will lay their Fruit on the Ground, or on Scaffolds made for that purpose,
or on Pales or dry Hedges.

There are lesser sorts of them that are lately Of Squashes.
brought into request that are called Squashes, the edible part whereof boiled
and served up with Powdered Beef is esteemed a good Sauce.

These and several others of the smaller kinds of Pompeons are raised and
managed as the Pompeon or Cucumber.

CHAP. VI. Of Sallad-Herbs.
BEsides the great variety of Esculent and Alimental Plants which we have
already named, the greatest part whereof may be eaten by themselves, and not as
Sauces or Sallads, there yet remain several excellent Herbs and Plants that are
of great use in the Kitchen, and are very pleasing and wholesome at the Table,
the Principal whereof is the Lettuce, which contendeth with any of the Of the
Lettuce.
former named Plants for Antiquity; it is an excellent Summer Sallad, cooling
and refreshing, and for that use has it been always propagated: And although
there be several sorts of them, yet that one Cabbage-Lettuce being the best,
eaten either raw or boiled, the other may be neglected.

They are usually sown in February and March, and unless the Weather prove very
cold, they will flourish and yield you a Spring Sallad in the beginning of
April, but if defended by any good defense, then will they be fit for use
before that time.

Those that are sown in March or April in good rich Land will head very well;
yet it is said they will head better if transplanted whilst they are young,
although some are of another opinion.

Lettuce sown in the Autumn, then transplanted and preserved over the Winter,
will head in the Spring before any that are sown and transplanted in the Spring.

The sorts of Lettuce that are usually accounted are, the Cabbage, Lumbard,
Roman, Arabian, Savoy, Rose, Red and Curled Lettuice.

You may blanch the largest Roman Lettuce when they are at their full growth,
by binding them up with Straw or raw Hemp, or by covering them with Earthen
Pots fit to enclose them, and afterward heating the Pots with long Dung.

Purslain in some moist Islands between the Of Purslain
Tropicks is a natural wild Plant, but here in England is propagated with some
difficulty, and used as an excellent Sallad.

It is tender in the Spring, the Frosts usually nipping it, but rather the
drought or small dew Snails, for I have known more than once the Seeds of
Purslain, that have been spontaneously fallen in the Autumn, to flourish in the
Spring, notwithstanding the Winter, which indeed was not very severe.

But to have it early, you may sow it on the hot Bed, or in April, in any rich
soil finely dressed, and after the Seeds are sown, to clap over the Bed with
the back of your Spade, and water it, for it delights in moisture.

If it be sown thin, or transplanted apart, it will yield you fair Plants,
either for Seed, or to pickle, or to boil.

When the Seed looks very black, then gather the stalks and lay them abroad in
the Sun, which will the better maturate the Seed; lay them on a Board or Cloth
to preserve them from spilling and house them in the night, and expose them in
the day until they are ripe.

It is said that the Seed of three or four years old is better than the new.

Corn Sallad is well known to be an early Corn Sallad.
and excellent Sallad in the first of the Spring; it is first raised by sowing
of its Seed, but afterward it will sow it self.

Spinach is known to be an excellent Herb Spinach.
crude or boiled, it is raised of Seed sown early in the Spring, but much
better if sown in September, that it may gain strength to withstand the Winter,
as is by some affirmed; these Winter Plants are fittest for the Lent season,
the Spring Plants for the Summer.

Endive, Succory, Beets and Orach, are all Endive, etc.
them good Sallads boiled and are raised of Seeds in the Spring.

Of Sorrel, there are several sorts, but the Sorrel.
largest is most proper for your Garden, serving for many uses in the Kitchen,
it is raised most easily of Plants which should not be set too near, it being
apt to spread and grow large.

There is an Herb called Patience, that is Patience.
planted by Sets in some Gardens, and makes a very good boiled Sallad,

Borrage and Bugloss are very well known for Borrage and Bugloss.
the excellent properties of their Leaves and Blossoms, and are not to want a
Room amongst your best Gulinary Herbs.

Chervil may be sown in the hot Bed to make Chervil.
an early Sallad, or in March for other times: The Seed lies long in the
ground, you may therefore sow it at several times, that you may have it young
and tender throughout the Summer. This Sallad is much preferred for its fine
biting taste, before many other dull Herbs, There is another sort of it called
sweet Chervil.

Allisanders are sown in the Spring, and live Allisander and Sceleri.
over the succeeding Winter, and are blanched by surrounding them with long
Dung, or covering them with Pots, and then are they fit to make an excellent
Sallad, after the same manner is Sceleri ordered. Some set the Plants deep in
the ground, as before was directed for the Leeks. Thus Beets, Succory, Endive,
Lettuce, and these two Plants so blanched, make very good Sallads.

Smallage is an Herb some use in their Pottage, Smallage.
and is raised by Seed.

But Parsley is the most universally used in Parsley.
the Kitchen of all Garden Herbs. Pliny said of it so long since, that scarce
any man there was but loved it, and that it was in so great repute in his time,
that in Achaia they honored it by Crowning the Victors in their sacred Games
with Chaplets of it, and as diverse were the opinions of Physicians then as now
of the virtues and qualities of it. This however we know, that it is an
excellent Ingredient in most Pottages Sawces, and Sallads, its way of sowing is
genernlly known.

Nasturtium or Garden Cresses are sown in Garden Cresses.
many Gardens for culinary uses.

Nasturtium Indicum, Indian Cresses or Yellow Indian Cresses.
Lark-spurs, from a Flower are now become an acceptable Sallad, as well the
Leaf as the Blossom. They are raised for early Sallads in the hot Bed, but sown
in April, will grow very well on ordinary Garden-ground, and give you a
plentiful increase of Leaves and Blossoms. The Buds before they are thoroughly
blown, are an excellent Sallad pickled, as Clove Gilliflowers and Cowslip
Blossoms usually are.

Tarragon for its fine biting taste is much used Tarragon.
by some in their Sallads, and is increased by Cions and Tops.

There are several other Herbs that are nourished and propagated in Gardens for
the use of the Kitchen, as Blood-wort, Clary, Arach, Lang de beuf, Nep,
Violets, Strawberries, Carraways, Fennel, Dill, Mustard Seed, Rocket, Rampions,
Ramsons, Sage of Jerusalem, and Marigolds. The Methods of raising and
increasing them being so well known, as also their Uses, that it would be
superfluous here to describe them.

CHAP. VII. Of Sweet Herbs.
BEsides all those before mentioned, there Of sweet Herbs.
are diverse sweet Herbs, as they are termed, that are very necessary for the
compounding many excellent Condiments and to add a relish to the best Pottage,
which shall be here briefly enumerated.

Garden Mints were universally used for Sauces Of Mints.
in Pliny's time, and much commended for their singular Virtues, especially the
young red Buds in the Spring, with a due proportion of Vinegar and Sugar,
refresh the Spirits and stirs up the Appetite, and is one of the best
Sallads the Garden affords. There are diverse sorts of Mints, but the red Garden
Mint is the best.

Sage is also an Herb or Shrub much used in Of Sage.
the Kitchen, and the young Leaves thereof, especially of the red Sage, is a
very wholesome Sallad in the Spring. The Slips thereof planted in April or May
are very apt to grow.

There are several sorts of Sage, the red green, small, and variegated, but the
red is the best for most uses.

Of Marjoram there are several kinds: the Of Marjoram.
fine sweet, which is yearly raised of Seed sown in May, the vulgar sweet,
raised by Slips, and the pot Marjoram by the same way; there is also of this
latter sort some that is party-colored, or White and Green, and some only
White, propagated for variety sake; the use of these is commonly known.

Thyme was anciently celebrated for its great Of Thyme.
plenty of Food it yields for Bees; as Virgil writing of Bees,

At fessae multa referunt se nocte minores,
Crura Thymo plena. --
But those that youthful be, and in their prime,
Late in the Night return, laden with Thyme.
Pliny says, that by the plenty or scarcity of the Blossoms of Thyme, you may
foresee the plenty or scarcity of Honey for that year: But the worth of this
Herb is not so much to be disputed in this place, as the usefulness of it in
the Kitchen where it ought not to be wanting.

Of Thyme there are many sorts. The Vulgar English, the Lemon Thyme, so called
from its most exact smell like a Lemon; Gilded Thyme, Musk and Mastich Thyme,
which last is incomparably sweet, and ought to be carefully preserved; any of
the other are fit for the Kitchen.

Of Savory there are two sorts, the Summer Of Savory.
and Winter. The former is so called, because it is annual and raised of Seed:
it is usually sown amongst Onions, because there is an ancient Tradition, that
the growing of it there makes the Onions the more sweet; if you let some of it
stand to shed its Seed, it is so hardy that it will come up again the
succeeding Spring although the ground be again dug.

The Winter-Savory is so called, because it lives over many Winters, and is
increased by Cions as well as by Seed; the uses of both are very well known in
the Kitchen.

Hysop is nominated amongst culinary Herbs, Of Hysop.
although not so much in use in the Kitchen: as for Medicine or its natural
sweetness, it is so vulgar an Herb, that every one knows its propagation.

There are many other sweet Herbs that are Of several others.
useful in the Kitchen, although not so generally as the former, but according
to the particular occasions that require them, as Pennyroyal, Sweet Maudlin,
Tansie, Balm, Basil, Burns and Ceast-Mary, also Lavendar, and Cammomil are not
to be wanting, though not excellent, in any Case.

CHAP. VIII. Of some other Eseulent Vegetables.
THere are some Plants, Herbs, or parts of them, that are Esculent either of
themselves, or in Condiments, that are not usually propagated in Gardens for
that purpose, as the young Buds of Hops boiled do much resemble Asparagus in
the eating, and are very pleasant and wholesome where the other are not to be
had; the young shoots of a new lopped Elder-Tree being boiled are esteemed a
most excellent Dish; the ordinary Buds of Elder, and the red young tops of
Nettles, and of Watercresses, and also of Brook-lime, every Herb-woman can
tell you are good Spring Sallads or Pottage-herbs.

The green tops of young Pease cut off and boiled are reported to be a most
delicate Dish, quaere, Whether if they being cut off, the remaining Roots will
not emit new shoots, and produce a fair Crop of later Pease; If they will, then
may you have late Pease better this way than by sowing late.

Green Corn bruised yields a Juice that is used in the Kitchen in Esculents,
and so may be reckoned amongst the number, notwithstanding my Lord Bacon did
not esteem it Esculent.

Champignons, Mushromes, or Mousserons, have Mushromes.
been ever reputed a dainty Dish, in the choice and preparing of which the
ancient Romans took a great delight. Yet then were several Persons poisoned
with the use of such of them, that were of a venomous nature, and in these
colder Climates some sorts of them are not much to be confided in.

Those that are edible here with us, are either Mushromes of the Woods, and
grow by the Borders of Woods and Forests, and are very large; or Mushromes of
the Meadows and sweet Pastures, which grow frequently where Cattle feed, which
usually flourish in the Autumn, and are most esteemed, because of their Beauty
and whiteness above, and Vermilion beneath, having also a pleasant Scent with
them.

It is said that you may raise Mushromes in Beds in your Gardens, by preparing
a Bed with the Soil of Mules or Asses, and covering it over four Fingers thick
with rich Dung, and after it has laid a while to cool, then to cast on it the
parings and refuse of Mushromes, and old rotten Mushromes with the Water used
about them, and in a short time your Bed will produce them. Or such Water
poured on Melon Beds will cause it to send forth Mushromes.

It is probable that these, though unperfect Plants, may have a Seed, which
sown in an apt place may produce others of the same Species.

My Lord Verulam in his Natural History Century 6.
gives a very good Character of them, imputing unto them two strange
Properties: The one, that they yield so delicious a Meat; the other, that they
come up so hastily; I have known one of about a foot in diameter, almost round
and full, of scarce twice 24 hours growth.

The same honorable Lord tells you, that it is dangerous surfeiting with them,
and gives you several Reports, that the Bark of white or red Poplar cut small,
and cast into Furrows well dunged, will cause the Ground to put forth Mushromes
at all Seasons of the year fit to be eaten.

He also adds a Report, that Hartshorn shaven or in small pieces mixed with
Dung, and watered, puts up Mushromes.

CHAP. IX. Of General Improvements, and Miscellaneous Experiments.
SECT. I. Of Improving Garden Ground by Labor only.
HAving thus briefly given you a particular of ornamental, as well as useful
Parts and Materials for your several Gardens, and the specifical ways of
preparing, ordering, and managing of the various Plants, Flowers, and other
Curiosities usually growing in them, it now remains that something be said as
to the more general manner of improving your Ground, and preparing of Dungs,
Soils, and Composts proper for your use, and making of hot Beds, with many
other things necessary to be known by such that delight in the improvement of
Hortulans.

Of the general mixtures of the Earth the one with the other, to qualify their
Natures by adding that of a contrary, I have before discoursed. Of the
preparation of Earth without any such mixtures, Sir Hugh Platt has given you
an Aenigmatical Description, calling it his Philosophical Garden; his Precept
is, To pave a square Plot with Brick (if covered with Plaster of Paris the
better) making up the sides of Brick also, plaistred likewise; let it be of a
convenient depth, fill it with the best vegetative Saturn which you can get,
that has stood two years, or one at the least, quite within his own Sphere,
make contrition of the same; and be sure to avoid all obstructions, imbibe it
with Aqua Coelestis in a true proportion: grind it once a day till it be dry;
being dry, let it stand two or three days without any imbibition, that it may
the better attract from all heavenly influence, continuing then also a
Philosophical Contrition every day, (this grinding must also be used in the
vegetable works, where the Mercury of Herbs is used instead of Aqua Coelestis)
during all the time of preparation: Then plant what rare Flowers, Fruits, or
Seeds, you please therein; the same Philosopher then tells you, That (if his
Theory of Nature deceive him not) that Saturn so enriched from the Heavens,
without the help of any manner of Soil, Marl, or Compost (after one years
revolution) will make the same to flourish and fructify in a strange and
admirable manner.

By his Vegetable Saturn may be understood, such Earth that is most prone to
send forth Plants; by its standing so long within its own Sphere, is only that
it has been covered either naturally by Turf, or artificially by Building, or
such like, that it has been prevented from wasting its soecund Nature, by
sending forth or bearing Vegetables. The best of such rested fruitful Earth, is
to be put in what quantity you please into your Brick or Stone Cistern (being
made proportionable) but not too deep lest it hinder you from stirring the
Earth to the bottom, and will not permit it to dry so easily, this must be
reduced to a fineness; therefore it would not be amiss to let it pass the Sieve
or Screen before you put it in your Cistern. The imbibition of this Earth with
Aqua Coelestis can be no other than with Rainwater, which is exhaled by the
influence of the Sun, and in the Air attracteth a volatile Nitre, which
descending with the Rain on the dry Earth is soon imbibed again; this volatile
Spirit or Nitre that thus arises in so great a quantity, is that Spiritus
Mundi that causes all Vegetation, and wherewith the Air it self is filled, and
by several ways coagulated, and by the often irrigating the Earth with it, the
Earth is the more fertilized: But this way of continuing the Contrition, or
stirring it every day to dry it, makes the Earth much easier to attract the
Water, which being added in a true or so little a proportion, that it may not
wet but moisten only, the Earth will leave its nitrous or vegetating Virtue
behind it, when the Phlegmatic part fumes away again by the stirring of the
Earth, which if it were added in too great a quantity would exhaust the nitrous
Spirit that was before in the Earth. For it is a general Observation amongst
Philosophers, that as the greater overpowereth the lesser, so if the matter you
add be volatile, and greater in proportion than that which is fixed, it is apt
to volatilize that which before was fixed, being added unto it: And on the
contrary, that if the volatile matter be less in proportion than the fixed, to
which you add it, then is that which is fixed apt to fix the volatile: Therefore
did our Author wisely add, that the imbibition should be made in a true
proportion, which is, that the Rainwater should be only for an easy
Humectation, and not too great a wetting; then he tells you, that it should
stand two or three days without any imbibition, that is, between every
humectation the Earth should be thoroughly dried as the Air or Wind can dry it,
which will take up such a space of time, notwithstanding your daily stirring
it; for the drier any open terrestrial Matter is, it does not only the more
easily attract, but more perfectly fixes that which otherwise would be more
volatile; although our Author has not given caution of it, yet it is presumed
that the square Plot or Cistern he prescribes should be covered or defended
from the Sun, which by his Rays is apt to attract much of the Spiritus Mundi,
or Matter of Vegetables, where there is plenty unfixt; as is evident from the
various Smells that are exhaled by it, and Colors also much sooner faded by
the Sunbeams than by the heat of Fire; and also from the Rain which in great
Showers is apt to over-moisten it, and in continued Rains, to prevent its
drying; therefore your Rainwater should be kept in a Cistern made for that
purpose, where the longer it remains the better it will prove; such Virtue
always increases whilst it is in its proper Matrix, as appears by Urine kept
long, which yields much more Spirit than whilst it is new.

By the Author's saying that this grinding is to be used in the Vegetable-work,
where the Mercury of Herbs is used instead of Aqua Coelestis; it is probable
here he means the expressed Juice of green Vegetables, which virtually has in
it the matter of Vegetables, and may have the same effect on the Earth in a
small quantity and little time, as the Rainwater has in a greater quantity by
the long continuation of the Operation.

This way of contrition, imbibition, and coagulation, enricheth the Earth after
the same manner, by covering it many years with Building, by which means
Saltpeter is increased: only by this Operation you may effect your Design in
one year with labor and diligence, which there you must wait many years for:
And by this may you heighten the Virtue of your Soil to a far higher degree, it
being manual, than the other which is nutural, and will not exceed the ordinary
Bounds limited in this Climate.

That our Author's Saturn is our natural and common Earth, and his Aqua
Coelestis, Rainwater, may be concluded from his own Expressions, used in the
same Description of his Philosophical Garden, which are, That if the Earth it
self after it has thus conceived from the Clouds, were then left to bring
forth her own Fruits and Flowers in her own time, and no Seeds or Plants placed
therein by the hand of Man, it is held very probable, that this heavenly Earth
so manured with the Stars, would bring forth strange and glorious Fruits and
Flowers, etc. Which is not improbable, if we consider the fertility of the
Waters of Nile, which are first exhausted in those hotter African Regions, by
the power of the Sun's influence (when in a due Latitude) and condensed by the
Air far more fruitful, as well as the Earth, in Nitre there, than in these
colder Regions, yielding that great and fertile Flood, whose precipitate or
settling Slime so far inricheth the dried and thirsty Earth, that it not only
spontaneously produces abundance of Vegetables but Animals also.

I know no reason but by observing our Author's Direction in this Climate, a
diligent Operator may advance the Virtue of our Earth to the same degree or
greater, than the Egyptian Soil, and then may it answer his Expectations, in
producing such Rarities, that by no other ways are here attainable; for if any
Man would advance or improve Nature, he must tread in Nature's Steps, and trace
her to the Foundation. Next unto this extraordinary improvement of Earth by
labor without any other mixture than Earth and Rainwater, which many will not
experiment, because of the length of time required in it, you may facilitate
the Operation by often stirring or digging your Land, and reducing it to a
fineness by skreening it, which also is a means to cleanse it from Weeds,
Stones, Worms, etc. that annoy your tender Plants; by reiterating of which Work
you expose the Earth thus opened to the Air, Frost, Snow and Rain, and
capacitate it to receive the benign Influences of the Heavens, and prevent the
exhausting of the nitrous Spirit by the growth of any Vegetables in it. This
Operation the longer you continue it the better, the time for the beginning of
it is not material, so that you let it receive the effects of both extreme
Seasons: like unto this are your fallowings of Land for several Grains,
especially the fallowings and twi-fallowings for Wheat, long before the last
plowing at the Seed-time, and in several cases a contrition or dragging after
the fallowings, which proves a considerable improvement of stiff Land. Thus may
you see how Nature is improved by Industry only, and that but by treading in
her own Steps; for Earth often trod on by Men or Beasts in the Streets or
Highways is very much enriched by such exposure, and Earth defended from the
Sun and Air, in like manner becomes fertile, although from different Causes,
the former from the volatile Nitre, and other Influences in the Air, Rain and
Snow, the latter from the Condensation of the Spiritus Mundi, or nitrous
Breathings of the Earth, and both by reason that those fertile Qualities are
not exhausted by Vegetation.

But as this latter Operation is more facile than the former, so you cannot
expect that it should produce Effects answerable to the other, which is very
much to be preferred by such that are curious; although this latter way may
yield you a sufficient Recompense for your Labor, yet the former cannot but
far transcend it.

SECT. II. Of several Ways of enriching Earth by Mixtures.
IT is without question that Earth or Mould is to be made more fertile than
naturally it is, by mixing therewith several Materials that contain in them
much of the vegetating Spirit, as the Ashes of any manner of burnt Vegetables.
For by such burning is wasted the more phlegmatic and useless moisture, and
are fixed the more solid and substantial parts: The same effect has Fire on
the Turf, or rooty surface of the Earth; this smegmatick or oily Matter that is
left by the Fire, in a moderate proportion applied to any Earth highly
enricheth it, and makes it apt for fructification, as appears by the vulgar
Experiment of Burn-beating of Land, which yields so fair Crops of Wheat and
other Grain. In which Operation the Rustic observes, that over-burning the
Turf is injurious, and that a more moderate burning makes the Ground more
fertile. The Reason is plain; for in the burning of any Vegetable, a gentle,
easy, and smothering Fire does not waste the volatile nitrous Spirit so much
as a quick, but causes much more of it to fix and remain behind.

These fixed Salts that are thus obtained, are the principal Salts that are so
much celebrated for the Improvements of Earth, to render it more fruitful,
although there are many other Salts near in affinity to these, that do in some
degree meliorate Earth, as the Salts that are in Blood, Urine, Soot, and
several other things of the like nature, by the mixture of those Materials with
the Earth, or sprinkling it with them, whereby the Rains usually carry down
their Virtue to the Roots of your Plants.

The parts of Animals, as Skins, Hairs, Feathers, Flesh and Bones, Horns,
Hoofs, etc. contain in them much of these vegetating Salts, although volatile,
yet in such compact Bodies, they continue until they are by your Plants
attracted, as many Husbandmen have made Experiments, of the extraordinary
Virtue that is in old woollen Rags, in fertilizing Land for Corn, giving ten
times the price for a load of them to lay on their Corn-ground, that they will
for a Load of Dung, and are yet great gainers by it, and fetch them from near
London into Hertfordshire into the Bargain: Wool, Hair, and Feathers, are near
of a nature, and therefore have near the same effects.

Fish, and Bones of Beasts, Flesh, etc. are generally known to add very much to
the improvement of Land; but for Garden uses, it will be more conducing to your
purpose, to let the same be thoroughly putrified, and reduced to a moderate
compost with Earth before you apply it, for all nauseous and ill savoured
Materials are to be excluded your Gardens, either for the Kitchen, or for
Delight.

Horns, Hoofs, and Skins, contain in them much of a rich volatile Salt; and it
has been anciently observed, and in such Countries where naturally the ground
is more replete with Nitre, and more fertile than here, that these Materials
have very much fertilized Garden-ground, especially for the Asparagus, that
requires strong nourishment; therefore the shavings or odd pieces of Horn, and
the lesser Horns and the Hoofs, and other excrementitious parts of Beasts, at
the common Slaughter-houses may be obtained, to make your deep Beds for
Asparagus, Artichoaks, and such like, and may not be unuseful in enriching your
Ground for your choicest Flowers.

The shreds of tanned Leather, partaking as well of the Salt of the Oaken Bark
and Lime, as of the Beast, must of necessity prove a very great Improver of
your Garden ground, and may be had in great quantities at the Shooe-makers,
where they usually burn them. These shreds soon rot, and with Rags, Hoofs,
Horns, Hair, etc. mixed with a good quantity of Earth, and laid in a Pit, and
sometimes watered, will make an excellent Compost for your Kitchen Garden, if
afterward disposed of in proper Beds.

Take Sheeps Dung and put Water to it, Of Sheeps Dung.
(in some Vessel) so much as by stirring may reduce it to a Pap, and when it is
all thoroughly dissolved, mix some fine sifted Earth with it; let the Earth be
four, five, or six times more in quantity than the Sheeps Dung, according as
the Earth is in goodness: If it be a poor sandy Earth, the more of the Sheeps
Dung it requires to enrich it; if it be a stiff Ground, the more it requires to
make it light, but an indifferent mellow Earth requires the less; for Sheeps
Dung is one of the richest of Dungs, as may be observed from the great
improvement that is made by Flocks of Sheep being folded on the poor champion
Lands, where such Land yields much Corn, when not being so improved, it will
yield but little, and this from one only folding in several Months, or
sometimes in a whole Year together: Deer and Goats Dung are much of the same
nature with Sheeps Dung. The reason of which extraordinary fertility in that
Soil is from the well chewing the Food, the long continuance in the Body, and
the not (or but little) drinking of the Beast. For Sheep and Neat chew the Cud,
by which means their Food is made fine, both these (and so do Deer and Goats)
retain their Meat longer than Horses or Swine, who feed more grossly and
hastily, the Dung of the one being like whisps of Hay, of the other like a
mixture of all sorts of Filth. Also Sheep and Deer drink but little, which make
their Dung and their Urine (which also is very rich could it be preserved) very
fertile. Neat drink much, which very much tempereth and allayeth the heat and
fertile Nature of the Soil. Earth thus mixed with Sheeps Dung dissolved, is
very excellent for most sorts of Fibrous rooted Flowers, because the decay of
the Dung (which will be in time) leaves the ground porous, that the Fibers
thereby as well insinuate themselves and spread abroad, as they do contract the
richness the Dung affords them: Tuberous rooted Flowers also affect this
mixture: Artichoaks delight in it exceedingly, and Sheeps Dung applied to the
Roots of them, and then often watered, whereby the Virtue of it may be conveyed
into them, makes the Plant yield you fair Fruit; most Garden-Tillage affect it,
for it is not only a very rich Soil, but renders the Ground light and porous,
which is very advantageous to Tillage.

A mixture of Neats Dung after the same Neats Dung.
manner, is very good for most of the same uses, as is that of Sheeps Dung. And
better in some particular Cases, for that if you have occasion to remove or
plant any good Flower in the Summer time, or out of its proper Season, such a
mixture of Earth and Neats Dung made into a liquid Pap and the Tree or Flower
placed in it, that the liquid Matter may encompass the Root, will so adhere to
it, and be so cool and moist, that it will cause the Plant to thrive as well,
as if it had been planted or removed in its proper season.

Horse Dung whilst new is the hottest of Horse Dung.
Dungs, laid in a great quantity together, by reason that a Horse chews his
Meat but little, feeds hastily, and evacuates it in a short time; so that like
chopped Straw or Hay, but beginning to ferment in the Belly of the Horse, it
continues fermenting after it is in the Dunghill; but if it be laid up with the
Litter that is usually moistened with the Urine of the Horse, and after it is
thoroughly rotten, which will be much the sooner if it lie in a moist place, or
be often watered by Rain or by Hand, and turned withal, or cast, as the
Husbandman usually terms it; it then makes an excellent Compost for your
Kitchen Garden.

In your Swine-yard, or places where Swine Swines Dung.
usually tread or feed, the Earth is very much improved by their dunging and
pissing, which trampled into and mixed with the Earth, makes it become a very
good Compost, especially to allay that rankness or over-freeness of some very
light and rich Soils, that breed the Canker in Trees, and too many Worms and
other Vermin, and Insects that destroy your choicest Plants. This Dung or Earth
so enriched, being a fat cooling Compost, may be with success used in both your
Gardens, but rather amongst your Fruit Trees, where it excels.

Asses Dung is near of the nature of Sheeps Asses Dung.
Dung, Deers Dung, etc. spoken of before, although not altogether so rich.

The Dung of all Corn fed Fowl is very hot Pigeons Dung.
at the first, especially that of Pigeons, because they feed hastily, and
evacuate the same digested in a short time, and urine not; so that their Drink
is no more but only to digest and nourish, and not to carry away any of the
Virtue of the Meat, nor lessen the strength or fertility of the Dung.
Experience has taught the Husbandman, that in the Champion Countries, where
great store of Pigeons Dung is to be had, the same sown but thinly with Barley,
makes a poor Ground yield a good Crop; for when but thinly sown, the Rain and
Air soon qualify its present heat; which if it were laid thick would burn the
Corn, especially at that season, or else make it grow too rank, which is as
great a fault as its being too short. Therefore you may well conclude, that
these Dungs laid in a heap in the open Air, and moistened by the Rain, or
otherwise, until their heat is over, will make a most rich Compost for either
Garden, but more especially for your Kitchen Garden.

I only here give you a Caution, not to use Malt-dust.
Malt-dust in your Garden; for there are many Seeds of pernicious Weeds in it,
that have passed all the imbibitions, fermentations, and exsiccations of the
Malt, and yet retain their vegetating nature, and will furnish you with new
species of Weeds out of the Fields, that your Garden before was not acquainted
withal.

The Setlings of Waters where there is least Mud of Ponds.
Current, is the best; but the Mud or Residence of any Water, unless it be
overmuch sandy, is excellent to qualify the Nature of your Ground: If your
Ground be light, then use stiff Mud; if your Ground be stiff or cold, then use
light or sandy Residences: These Mixtures are good for all sorts of
Garden-ground.

The Washings of Streets or Highways after Rain, yield great store of Settling
or Mud, that is very profitable for Garden-ground, especially the Residency of
such Water that descends from Chalky Hills, applied to light Ground. The Mud in
the bottom of Pools, wherein Horses are usually washed, is also very good, if
duly applied.

Any Ashes or other Matter whatsoever that Salts.
contains Salt, is good, so that the quantity of the Matter containing the
Salt, does not too far exceed the Salt contained in it, as usually Wood-ashes
after they have been in the Wash-house, Soap-house, or elsewhere, have the most
of their Salt extracted, and then applied to your Ground, sterilizeth it,
unless it be to a strong Clay-ground, then it will make it lighter, although
not richer.

The Ashes of any burnt Vegetables are excellent, as before we observed; a
Mixture of Lime is very good in most Grounds; but the Salt of Lime extracted by
Water, and your Ground watered therewith, is much to be preferred. It has also
this singular Property, that it makes the Worm soon leave the Place watered
therewith, and expose themselves to the Air, where they soon perish; or to the
Birds, who devour them. The same Effect is wrought by any Alkalizate Salts, or
Salts produced by Fire.

The Murc or Refuse after the Pressings of Murc.
Cider and rotten Fruit, are very good to mix with your Earth; but it must be
after it has lain a long time in some Pit or Heap, until it has lost its
Savor, and until the Seeds or Kernels are dead, lest they germinate, and
incommode your Garden.

Any drezy Wood, or the Dust of the Woodpile, Rotten Wood.
but more especially rotten Willow, is excellent to make the Earth light for
most fibrous rooted Flowers. The same is Saw-dust, if it first lie in a moist
Place, until it be rotten, and has its Acidity abated or digested.

Straw or any dry Vegetables become rotten Straw.
and mixed with Earth, makes it light and fit for your choicest Anemonies, and
all fibrous rooted Flowers.

Tobacco dried or cured, and afterward Tobacco.
mixed with your Garden-mould, will doubtless exceedingly enrich it: For it is
of a very high and strong nature, and contains much of a Volatile Nitrous
Salt in it, and is reported to be equally as effectual in the tanning of
Leather, as the Bark of the Oak; which, if it be true, as I have no reason to
doubt it, it may prove a considerable Improvement of many Country Farms, and of
great benefit and advantage to the Nation in general; either of which Uses is
better than that to which it is now usually put unto.

SECT. I. Of Watering Gardens.
BEsides the Mixture of several Materials Fat Waters.
and Composts with Land to make it fruitful, you may add enriched Waters, which
serve where you cannot conveniently change your Ground, or remove your Plant,
as in several Flower-trees, and Artichoaks, Asparagus, etc.

That Water is very good that is taken out of standing Pools, where Cattle
usually resort to shade or cool themselves in hot Weather, and leave their Dung
in it, which by the stirring of their Feet enricheth the Water; Ducks and Geese
also much improve standing Pools where they frequent.

Several Waters may be prepared, in which you may steep or macerate your Seeds
or Pulse, to make them sprout the sooner, or come the fairer, and with the same
Water may you irrigate your Ground: Many Receipts there are to that end, I
shall only mention some of them.

Take Sheeps Dung well dissolved in warm Water, and after it has stood twelve
Hours, strain it through a course Cloth with compression, for it is so slimy
that it comes through with difficulty; therefore I suppose a Decantation may
serve. To two or three Gallons of this Liquor add a handful of Bay Salt, and
somewhat a lesser proportion of Saltpeter, and let them both be dissolved in
the former Water, which to expedite, let it be made lukewarm, and stirred
often; in which Liquor let your Seeds lie for twenty four hours or more, till
they are thoroughly swelled; Pulse need not lie so long: Then take out your
Seeds or Pulse, and expose them thinly on some Floor to the Air, (not the Sun)
until they be half dry, then sow them. It is also prescribed, that the
remainder of the Sheeps Dung that was not made liquid, should be dried and
calcined, and the fixed Salt extracted out of it, and added to the former
Composition; but it is more probable that another parcel of Sheeps Dung
calcined, would yield more and better Salt, than the remaining part of the
dissolved Dung. This latter part makes the process too difficult and
troublesome, and adds but little to the virtue of it, any other fixed Salt
having the same effect as that so hard to be obtained.

This Liquor is more effectual for the watering of Plants, than it is for the
maceration of Seeds; and so are any other salt Waters. Some add a greater
quantity of Saltpeter, and Bay Salt; some only Saltpeter; others use Pigeons
Dung in stead of Sheeps Dung; also Limewater after that manner enriched with
Sheeps Dung, Pigeons Dung, or Neats Dung, is equal in virtue, if not exceeding
that, to which Saltpeter or Bay Salt is added. Every Husbandman has
experimented the Effect of Lime, the Salt only extracted by the Rains enriching
the Earth, occasioning so plentiful a Crop, the other remaining part like a
Caput Mortuum, only tempereth the Land for the future, and makes it more sad
where before it was too light, which if the Land did not require it, then does
Lime (after its Salt is wasted) much injury to the Land whereon it is laid.

Nitre or Saltpeter only, dissolved in Water, a Pound to four or five Gallons,
is held to be very effectual to enrich barren Mould. This agrees with our
Observations about Earth covered with Building, or otherwise defended from Sun
and Rain, for the generation of Nitre.

Some commend the sprinkling of Milk and Rainwater on the Beds, first sifted
over with Lime pulverized, whether by pounding or slacking with Water it
mattereth not, (neither of which can improve or abate the virtue or quantity of
its Salt, the thing we desire) and after every Watering sifting more Lime. This
way may not be amiss for such Lands, that the Caput Mortuum of the Lime
remaining after the Salt is extracted, will not prejudice, and for such Plants
that the Lime lying on the Ground will not injure. The Milk may be left out,
not signifying so much as the value of it amounts unto; the Liquor wherein
Flesh Meats (whether Fresh or Salt) have been boiled, is much better, and
easier obtained. The Salt of Lime (extracted with Water in some large wooden
Vessel) contains in it the same improving Virtue, and is less troublesome to
make use of, and free from the Inconveniences that attend the other way.

Much more might be said concerning these improving Liquids as well as Solids;
but that the most learned and experienced of Rural or Mr Evelyn.
Hortulane Authors has lately been very copious on the same Subject.

Only I may here advise the unexperienced not to water his Plants in either
Garden with a cold Spring or Well-water, if he can obtain any other; which if
he cannot, then to expose this to the Sun or Air, some time before he uses it,
or enrich it by some pinguid Mixtures, as Lime, Ashes, Dung, or such like,
which will quickly qualify it for his purpose, by abating the sudden Coldness
of it to the Plant: For it is a very great Injury to most tender Plants, to be
diluted with cold Water from the Well or Spring, and checks their Growth
exceedingly, as may be observed in a bleeding Vine, to the naked Roots of which
if you pour store of cold Spring or Well-water, it suddenly checks the
ascension of the Sap, by means whereof the Bleeding cease, and the Wound
consolidates again, before the more liberal ascent of the Sap, much more then
will it check the Growth of a weak Herb or Flower.

Also as it is observed to sow in the Dust, whereby the Seeds gradually swell
from the cold Dews of the Night and Air, and are made ready to sprout with the
next Rains; so it is not good to water new-sown Seeds, until the long defect of
Showers invite you to it, lest you wash off the Earth from them before they
have sprouted, whereby they fasten themselves the better to endure a Watering:
Some Seeds, as Radish, Lettuce, Gilliflower-seed, etc. remain not long in the
Earth, and therefore may in two or three Days, for want of Rain, be watered by
hand; but Tulip, Auricula, Parsley, Carrot-seed, etc. lie longer in the Ground,
and require not so speedy an Irrigation.

All Seed ought to be watered by the smallest or Rain-like Drops as you can,
and not too much; for hasty Watering, and hasty Showers, discover them.

For most Flowers and Plants whose Leaves lie near the Ground, it is best to
water them at some distance, by making a Ring round the Plant a little hollow,
and pouring the Water into it, whereby you annoy not the Leaves with your
discoloring Water, or chill them with the Coldness of it.

In all warm Weather the Evening is the best Season to water in, because the
Water will have time to sink into the Earth, and the Plant to attract it,
before the Heat of the Sun exhales it; but in cold Weather, and when the Nights
are cold, the Morning is the most proper time that the superfluous Moisture may
be evaporated before the cold Night overtake you, and chill your Plant.

By no means use Liquors, either naturally hot, as Spirits; or artificially
made so, by heating it over the Fire.

A Plant that delights in Moisture, or a drooping Plant, that you may suppose
Water will preserve, may be watered by Filtration; which is by placing an
earthen Pot full of Water near the Plant, and putting therein the end of a List
of Woollen-cloth, the other end thereof to hang down on the outside of the Pot
to the Ground, near the root of the Plant; by means of which List, if it be
thick enough, the Water will filtrate or distill over the Brim of the Pot,
through the List of Woollen, so long as any Water is in reach of the List in
the Pot; always observing, that the end of the List in the outside of the Pot,
be longer than that in the inside, and that the List be thoroughly wet before you
add it. The Reasons of this Operation, which many Country Colona's daily
experiment, we will not here discourse of.

To water your Flower-pot, that the Water Watering of Flower-pots.
may the easier descend to the bottom, and throughout the whole Pot, you may
before you fill it with Earth, place in it a Pipe of Lead, Latton, or such
like, close at the bottom, with diverse Holes at the sides of it; let the Pipe
extend in height to the top of the Pot, and when the Pot is full of Earth, and
planted with Flowers, and that you cannot conveniently otherwise water it, then
with a Funnel fill the Pipe with Water, and reiterate your filling of it, until
you think there is enough; and by the Holes on the sides of the Pipe, the Water
will moisten the whole Pot of Earth. The Water you use here ought to be
meliorated by some of the former ways: For Earth thus separated from the
Ground, is more apt to decay, than that which is remaining on its natural
Foundation, which continually receives an Improvement, by perspiration of the
vegetating Spirit.

There are several sorts of Watering-pots in Watering-pots.
use for Gardens; the most useful is the common Watering-pot, made of tinned
Plate or Latton; the Nose or end of the Spout whereof is covered with a Cover,
wherein are many small Perforations, that the Water may force through in small
Streams, and besprinkle your Plants or Seeds like unto Rain. This Cover is made
to take off and on, to cleanse, at pleasure.

There is another sort of Watering-pot that has a small Hole at the bottom,
and another at the top; so that when you sink it into a Vessel of Water, it
will fill by the lower Pipe or Hole, the Air passing out at the Hole at the
top, where the Handle is also: When it is full take it by the Handle, and stop
the Hole with your Thumb, and when you come to the Plant you intend to water,
you may ease the Hole whereon your Thumb lies, and as you please let the Water
out at the Pipe in the bottom; for as the Air comes in at the top, the Water
will issue out at the bottom; and so may you stop it, and open it with your
Thumb at your pleasure: With this Pot you may easily let the Water down on your
Plants that can bear with a washing Shower.

You may water any Ground by the first sort of Watering-pot, with any enriched
or thick Water, if you take off the Cover of the Pipe, and convey the same
Water about the Roots of any Plants, without fouling the Leaves or Flowers.

Also you may have a small Engine made like one of the Engines for the raising
of Water to extinguish Fire withal, and place it in a Frame to drive to and fro
about your Garden; you may fill it with Water, and the Spout or Pipe with a
perforated Cover, like unto the common Watering-pots (but not so broad as to
spread the Water so much) with this Engine may you imitate Rain over any of
your Beds at a distance, and wash your Wall-trees from Vermin, and refresh
them at your pleasure.

Any of these Watering-pots may be preserved To preserve your Watering-pots.
for many Years from Rust, (to which they are very apt) by painting them over
with Linseed Oil and Red Lead.

SECT. IV. Of making Hot-Beds.
IT is evident to all, that most Plants do naturally observe the Season of the
Year in their Germination, Growth, and Maturation; and although they are
removed into another Climate, yet do they incline to the Observation of the
same Time as they did in their own former natural Place of their Growth, as the
Persian Iris, American Strawberry, and several others, which make them the more
acceptable as they come earlier or later than others of the same Kind. So is it
with many other Flowers, Fruits, or Herbs: For we annually observe how
acceptable a Dish of early Pease is, over what they are when later and common;
and so are Asparagus, Cucumbers, Melons, etc.

The Growth of most Plants is quickened by a warm Position, as under a warm
Fence or Wall, and by an artificial Heat, as by being planted against a Place
where Fire is usually kept, or by watering them with Waters impregnated by hot
Dungs, which will very much accelerate Germination.

If you would have Herbs to sprout immediately, To raise a Sallad in few Hours.
then lay a Bed of unslak'd Lime powdered, with a Mixture of Ashes, if you
please, or without; on that a Lay of hot Dung, and on that another Lay of Lime,
and then on that a Lay of fine rich Mould, wherein sow your Seeds, as Lettuce,
Purslain, Corn-Sallad, Parsley, etc. first steeped in White Wind, or some of
the former prepared Waters, and water them, when sown, with some of the same
richest Waters, and they will suddenly appear above ground, and as you water
them, so will they prosper. This should be done within doors, lest the coldness
of the Air should impede their growth; the often watering them facilitates
their nourishment.

But the Hot-beds that are most useful, and whereon you are to raise your
tender Exoticks, and your early Flowers; and also to raise and bring forward
your Melons, Cucumbers, Cauly-flowers, etc. is usually made in February or
March, and after several manners.

Some prescribe the making of it, by laying of hot Stable-dung that has lain
in a Heap, mixing the newest with the old, and laying it about four Foot broad,
the better to preserve its warmth; three, four, or five Foot high, and as long
as you have Occasion or Materials. This Bed well trod (to excite the Heat) is
to be covered about four Inches thick with very fine rich Mould, the top and
sides of the Bed being first edged round with Board or Bands of twisted Hay or
Straw, to keep up the Mould, and keep in the Heat: Thus must it lie until it
has passed its greatest Heat, which you may prove by your Finger; for it ought
to be but warm, not hot. In case its Heat lesseneth at any time, you may
increase it by applying new Dung to the sides of your Bed; on this may you sow
your Seeds.

There must be some Frame arch-wise, or flat, over this Hot-bed, that a
Covering of Mats or Straw Hurdles* may be spread over it every Night, and in
cold Days: Make your Covering so that it may as well keep out the Rain and
Snow, as the Wind.

But the best Description of a Hot-bed, is that of Mr. Evelyn in his late
Philosophical Discourse of Earth, to this Effect; Dig a Pit about four Foot
deep, of breadth and length as your Occasions require; wall this Pit on every
side with Brick, or erect your Wall above the Ground, or part above, and part
under; then fill it with hot Dung from the Stable, and tread it well. In this
place wooden Cases of about a Foot in depth, bored full of Auger-holes at the
bottom; fill them with Earth rich and light, and add hot Dung between them; in
which Cases sow your Seeds, and these Cases and the Earth in them will be kept
warm by this means during the whole Season wherein a Hot-bed is necessary. You
may provide a Shelter against Rain and Cold over the whole, if you please; and
you may have Frames of Glass over some of your inside Cases where there is most
need; others you may leave open, as your Seeds require. By this means have you
your Pit and Cases every Year ready to your hand, requiring only a Supply of
fresh Dung.

SECT. V.
Of Miscellaneous Experiments.
THe often removing of Flowers in their proper Often removing of Plants.
Season, preserves their Colors, especially their Variegations; for long
standing in one Soil causes any Plant to degenerate; partly because the Plant
has exhausted the proper Nourishment for it out of that Place where it has
stood so long, and partly because the Soil is apt to change the Nature of the
Plant, being exotic to it, as is usually observed in Beans, Wheat, etc. sown
on the same sort of Land, although not on the same Parcel, is apt to
degenerate. Therefore removing of Plants, and alteration of the Soil, is a good
way to improve them; several Esculents grow the fairer; as Cabbages will not
loave well in case the young Plants be not three or four times removed before
the Spring. The same is observed in Lettuce, and several others. If they are
removed into improved Earth every time, they will eat more tender and better.

Flowers are in more esteem when they come early, than when they come late: To
make them early, the Means are generally known; but the retarding of their
flowering, often removing, To make Plants come late.
and preventing the usual excitements of the Sun and Air, will effect; for the
disturbing the Roots in the removal is a great hinderance to their attraction
of Nourishment, and it will be several Days after the removal before new Fibers
will shoot forth to gather new Nourishment; and the standing of a Plant
prevents the Digestion of the Sap by the Heat of the Sun and Air. This is of
great use in retarding the flowering of several Flowers, and also the growth of
several Esculents, as Cauly-flowers, etc.

It is usual to defend several tender Plants Plants to defend from Cold and Sun.
from the Cold in the Winter, to preserve them; and to expose them to the Sun
in such Winter Days that prove clear; which Exposure injureth the Plant more
than the Cold. For the Sunbeams in frosly Weather, especially if there be Snow
on the Ground, makes a Plant faint and sick: As is observed in the Laurel,
which if it grow against a North Wall, or in the Shade, although open to the
severest Winds, yet retains its green Color all the Winter; but if it stand in
the Sun, it changes yellow, only from that cause. The same is observed of
several tender Plants that are usually sheltered from the Winds, and exposed to
the Sun, yet it is not improper to give Plants Air, and also Sun, in mild
Weather, at any time of the Winter, which cannot hurt them.

The cutting off of the Buds and Branches Often cutting of Plants.
of Flowers, leaving only one, or two, or more as the strength of the Root will
bear, causes it to yield the fairer Flowers than otherwise it would do: After
the same manner if Herbs be often cut, they gather the more strength, yield the
fairer Leaf, and take better Root, and endure the Winter the better. The Cause
is, that the Sap has less to nourish, and that which is nourished must
therefore be the stronger; and the less the Sap is expended above, the more
strengthens the Root in the Ground, as may be observed in most Trees that are
lopped: And then do they afterward issue forth the fairest Branches. Some
Plants usually perish in the Winter, for want of being cut in the Summer
precedent, and from the same Cause, as Wall-flowers, Thyme, Marjoram, etc.

Some Plants are too apt to waste their Sap Plants to continue long.
in Flowers, and thereby shorten their Lives, as Gilly-flowers,
Stock-Gilly-flowers, and some others, which if their blowing Shoots were nipt
off, they would gather strength, and continue longer; for the waste of the Sap
overmuch, makes the Plant feeble, and incapable of enduring any Severity of
Winter or Summer, as is sometimes observed in young Fruit Trees, that they
blossom themselves to death; and some I have known to grow themselves to death;
for the freer the Sap is in expending it self in Branch and Blossom, the more
tender is the Root, which becomes a Prey to the Worm and Canker, as does the
Branch to the severe Air. The way to prevent which, is prescribed in the last
mentioned Experiment.

It is observed, that all Herbs wax sweeter, To meliorate Plants
both in smell and taste, if after often cutting you take the latter sprouts,
because the Sap is the longer digested, and the Root the stronger. The same is
observed of Esculents, the young Buds or Sprouts of old Roots eat more tender
than the first Cuttings.

My Lord Bacon seemed to approve of the Opinion Onions large.
that Onions wax greater, if they be taken out of the Earth, and laid a drying
twenty days, and then set again. And the more, if the outmost Pill be taken off
all over, but mentions not at what time of its growth this is best to be done;
however it is a sufficient encouragement for Gardeners to take up the Onions,
where they casually come up too thick, and plant them in thinner places.
Several Plants are so removed, as Turnips, Lettuce, etc. and are the fairer,
therefore this Observation may be of use.

Sift Ashes, or Quicklime beaten small, about To preserve Plants from Snails
and Worms.
any Plant, and it will preserve it from Snails or Worms, by reason their naked
Bodies cannot endure the sharpness of the Salt of the Ashes or Lime. So if you
water the Ground with the Water wherein Lime or Ashes have been steeped, the
Worms will soon leave the Ground, where the Water gets into their Holes, from
the same Cause. You may also in a Summer Evening (after Rain) with a Candle
draw the Worms as they lie on the Ground, and put them in a Pail, and dispose
of them as you think fit; but you must tread soft, for the least motion of the
Ground makes them retire into the Ground. Thus in two or three moist Evenings
may you clear a whole Border of the greater Worms which are most hurtful.

Snails and Worms are all of them of an Hermaphroditical nature, and are all
Breeders, and when they couple are easily destroyed, especially the Snails, who
couple from the Spring until Midsummer and after. And lay their Eggs in the
Ground, you will find them with their Bodies buried in the warm Dust, and only
their Shells above the Ground; when you take them out, you must rake out their
Eggs and destroy them, for otherwise they will lie there until they have
strength to travel, and then, some in the same Year, others in the Spring
following, you will have them dispersed amongst your tender Plants, and your
Wall-Trees, where after a Shower you may pick them off.

If you doubt of the goodness of your Seeds, To know good Seeds.
take some of them and put them in fair Water, and set them in a gentle heat
twenty four hours, and if they are good they will sprout, else not. Also you
may wash your Seeds in Water, and the dead and light will swim, and the good
and heavy will sink; but they must be all thoroughly immerged, else you may be
deceived.

Secure the Root as well as you can from the To defend Plants from Frost.
Frost; for if you defend that, the Branch seldom suffers, but if the Root be
not secured, although the Branch be never so well defended, it will perish.
Therefore earth up the Roots as well as you can, and place any ordinary defense
about the sides of the Plant, and no Frost will hurt it, (unless it be your
tender Plants that are for the Conservatory.) Thus may Gillyflowers,
Wall-flowers, Stock-Gillyflowers, Artichoaks, etc. be preserved.

Some Plants, if the Roots stand dry, the Set tender Plants dry.
Frosts rarely hurt them; which if moist, they are usually destroyed, as
Rosemary, Sage, Wallflowers, etc. Either of these will grow on a Wall, and
endure the severest Colds, but if they stand in a moist Ground, although the
Branches be ^ever so well defended, they are apt to be destroyed with great
Frosts. The cause is, that Water or Moisture stagnating about any Plant, and a
Frost following, is apt to mortify it, when a Frost shall scarce injure a dry
Plant. It is the same with young and tender Fruits, a frosty Night after a wet
Day destroys more Fruits, than ten dry Frosts can do.

If you lay Saw-dust about any Plant, it will To defend your Plants from Ants.
defend it from the busy Ants, who cannot easily pass over the Saw-dust,
because it is small and loose under them, that they cannot have any sure
footing, and so by that means are forced to steer their course another way.
Thus may you defend your Wall-Trees from Ants, by laying Saw-dust about the
Roots of them.

Some anoint the Stems of their Trees with Tar, to prevent the Ants from
ascending them, but then it is best to bind Paper about the Stems, and anoint
the Paper, for Tar is apt to injure the Bark of your Tree.

Also you may bind about the Stem of the Tree, Wool about four Fingers
breadth, which will puzzle the Ants to find a way over, or through it: be sure
to leave the Wool rough, that they may not find a way over the Threads you bind
it withal.

Many of your Flower-Trees will in some Moss to destroy.
sorts of Land, by long standing, become mossy, which not only defaceth but
very much injureth the Tree, and it is a sign the Tree dislikes the Ground it
stands in. To prevent the growing of it, and the increasing of it whilst it is
yet but newly infected, you must remove your Tree into better Ground more
natural to it, or in case you are willing to have it stand in the same place
where now it is, then you must take it up, and alter the Ground, and enrich it
as it ought to be, and then you may replant the Tree in the same place. And as
the Tree thrives and increases in Shoots, so the Moss will decline, the Sap
being wasted and expended more liberally another way.

But if the Moss has long continued on the Tree, your best way is after Rain,
that the Moss be wet and will easily come off, to scrape it off with a Knife of
Bone or Wood, for in dry Weather it will not come off so well.

Moss is a very great annoyance to Trees, Moss a great annoyance to Trees and
Ground.
and to the Ground it self, and is a manifest sign of a defect of the more
nourishing Juice that is in fruitful Plants or Soil; it is a spontaneous
Excrescence, as many other Vegetables are, which made the learned Philosopher
Van Helmont say, That its Seed distilled from the Heavens; which is no more
than if he should have said, that it proceeded from the natural inclination of
the Matter on which it grew, animated by the Celestial Influences, which gave
it Life, but the Matter on which it grew gave it form, it varying according to
the diversity of the Matter, from whence it receives its Nourishment; some Moss
being hard, some soft, some White, others Green. There is also sweet Moss that
grows on Apple Trees, and Poplar-Trees, and the Moss of the Larix-Tree is sweet
in the burning. And although all these Mosses are mere Excrescences, yet do
they bear Seed and increase, as has lately been discovered by a learned
Vertuosi, Hooks Lampas.
who by the help of a Microscope has observed the Seed-Cods or Seed-Vessels of
Moss to contain Seeds in them, no less wonderful for the greatness of number
than the smalness of bulk, which Seed-Vessels when ripe, he pressing them
pretty hard, found that there was a small Dust went out of them, which seemed
to vanish into the Air: pressing and squeezing others of them upon a Black
Plate, and examining the Powder with a Microscope, he found it to be a great
heap of exceeding small Seeds, globular, and pretty transparent, Ninety
Thousand whereof extended in length, take up no more room than the length of
one single Barley-corn, or a quarter of an Inch; and Twelve Millions of the
same Seeds laid quadrangularly, cover no more of a Superficies than one square
inch, And 1382400000 weighing only one Grain. Eighty of these superficies of
Seeds make but the thickness of a piece of fine Paper, so that they be laid in
a trigonal order, as most round Bodies usually place themselves, that is, the
round part of the Seed bearing on the concave distance, between the Seeds in
the nether laying. For the truth of which Observations and Narration, the same
Author appeals to your own Sense and Reason, in case you make use of those
artificial Helps he has for that purpose. But his Conclusion is somewhat
doubtful, that these Seeds being thus small, may be carried in the Air from
place to place, even to the tops of the highest Towers, or places remote, and
be there sown, from whence he supposes proceeds the growth of Moss, and does
not consider that these Seeds being globular and transparent, (an Argument of
their solidity and weightiness) are as incapable of being drawn up into the
Air, and carried far, as the Seeds of Pease, Radish, Purslain, Thyme, Marjoram,
etc. For their smalness is rather an impediment to their Transportation than a
help, and we find that such Seeds that have a Down or Hair with them, are more
usually carried away with the moving Air, as those of Thistles, Lettuce,
Carrots, etc. than those that are more solid and naked. Nor needs there any
such help as that of Seed, to beget Moss, for it may as well naturally proceed
from any place prone for it, as Plants of greater Bulk, it being not unusual
for Oak, Beech, Holly, Birch, and such like, to grow plentifully out of the
Ground where other Trees of another kind have been lately felled from a natural
Inclination of the Earth, and not from Seeds brought thither by the Air; the
Seeds of Oak, Beech, and Holly, being too big for that purpose. The same may be
observed in Ground inclinable to Broom, which being thoroughly eradicated and
taken away, and the Ground plowed, sown and cleansed for several Years, yet
laid up for some time, will naturally yield Broom: yet those Seeds incapable of
being carried in the Air. Also, if that be true, that all Plants are procured
Evelin 's Philo. Discourse of Earth.
of Seed, it may be questioned how so great a quantity of the Erysimum or Irio
should be sown in the Ruins, after the late great Conflagration in London,
where it was observed, that more of it grew there, than was known to be in all
Europe besides. This plentiful increase of this Plant, which is not a Denizen
in England, and observed not to grow plentifully any where but at Naples, and
that in the time of Fabius Colonna, could not well be produced of Seed, unless
you will imagine that the Seeds of most Plants pass with the Air over Sea, and
Land: But the great variety of spontaneous Productions of the Earth in
different Years, different Seasons, and different ways of tilling the Earth,
and its various Generations also of Insects and small Animals, although these
also may be raised of Seed and by propagation) is enough to convince the
Intelligent, that Moss may be a natural spontaneous Production or Excrescence
out of Trees, Plants, Soil, or any thing else capable to bear it, and that it
may be occasioned by the defect of a liberal expense of the Sap or Juices
another way,

Besides the ordinary way of killing Moles Moles to destroy.
with Traps, you may in the Spring of the Year, when they are most busy and in
their Work, cast them alive out with a Paddle-staff made for that purpose, by
standing very still whilst they work, for the least motion of the Ground
disturbs them, they having the want of their sight supplied in their hearing
and feeling. They do much mischief in a Garden, and the setting of Traps or
digging them out does also prejudice your Garden; therefore the best way is, as
soon as you perceive that they have made way into your Garden, and that they
are retired (as in the latter part of the day they usually do) into the
adjacent Grounds where they lie more quiet and out of fear, open their common
Passages, and smoke them well with Brimstone, Rosin, Pitch, or such like
combustible Matter, with Onions, Garlic, or such like mixed with it, and close
up the Holes or Passages. This will deter them from your Garden as I have
tried, and make them take to some other place, or you may take a dead Mole and
lay it in the Haunt, and that will operate the same effect.

To prevent the increases of Carterpillars, Caterpillars to destroy them.
where you find any of their Puckets, which adhere to the Twigs of Trees, in
which they lay their Eggs all the Winter, (as Silk Worms do in their Bags) take
them off and burn them, for the approaching Sun in the Spring gives life to
those pernicious Animals who multiply exceedingly.

But if the Year be dry and prone to the generation of Insects, these Vermin
are apt to be bred in abundance on Cabbages, Caulyflowers, etc. which to
prevent, there is nothing so effectual as watring, for in dripping Years they
are not so apt to breed as in dry.

To destroy Caterpillars on Trees, it is said, An ingenious way to destroy them.
that if you make a Ring of Tar toward the bottom of your Tree, then hang a
Bag full of Pismires on the Tree, that they may easily get out, and when they
cannot get down by reason of the Tar, rather than they will starve for hunger,
they will eat up all the Caterpillars: which if true, it is like the falling
upon Scylla to avoid Charibdis.

Several sorts of Flowers are apt to turn Running of Colors.
White by long standing, or removing into bad Ground, as Red and Purple
Primroses, Blew Violets, Sweet-williams, Gillyflowers, etc. which proceeds
from scarcity of nourishment, there requiring good nourishment to maintain the
dark Colors; as in Tulips, the best and lightest Colors are preserved by the
more barren Earth, when a rich Soil turns them to a plain dark Color. But
always observe, that change of Soil preserves variety of Colors, so that it be
to the degrees of fatter or leaner, as you would have your Flowers incline to
darker or lighter Colors.

It is observed that there is more of White Of the variety of Colors in
Flowers.
than of any other Color in Flowers, and least of Green, that being the
general Color, although in different Shades, of all Leaves of Plants, except
some few Rarities that are Red or White leaved, as Red Sage, White Marjorum,
Amarantbus, and some variegated Plants. In Flowers from White there are all
sorts of Shades, to the Yellow, Scarlet, and deepest Red, and to the Sky-colour
and deepest Blew, with variety of Mixtures: It is very rare to see a Plant
Green, yet there are such, as the Rose Plantain, being only a Tuft of Green
Leaves, and the Green Primrose has perfectly Green Leaves in form of a Flower,
but mixed with Purple or White Leaves. The common Parrot Tulip has a mixture
of Green in the Flower, but it seems to be an Imperfection in it, yet it
constantly blossoms alike. Black is not unusally found in the bottoms of Tulips
and Anemones, but no Flower is known to have a Black Leaf, save only the Bull
Iris.

There is a Sympathy and Antipathy in Plants: Of Sympathy and Antipathy of
Plants.
And many fabulous Traditions there are concerning them: but this is certainly
observed, that some Trees will not thrive under the shade or drip of another,
as the drip of a Walnut-Tree, and of a Cherry-Tree, are injurious to other
Trees, because the Leaf is bitter, and the drip destroys such Trees or Plants
that are under it. The like does the drip of the Leaves of the Artichoak, and
of Hemp, which destroys all other Vegetables near it, those Grounds being
free from Weeds where they grow, from that cause. Some Plants will not thrive
near others, because they draw alike Nourishment, and so rob or deprive one
another, as Strawberries and Flowers with Fibrous Roots, will not thrive
together; but Plants that draw contrary Nourishment, will prosper very well
near together, as Rue and Lettuce together, Onions and Savory, or Lettuce, or
Purstain, will grow very near and kindly together.

There are very strange Natures in several Plants, that are not by every one
observed, Perception in Plants.
which is a kind of perception in them, tending themselves to that which
nourishes and preserves them, and eschewing and avoiding that which injureth
them. As a Cucumber is observed to grow toward Water, more than otherwise it
would do in case no Water were placed near it; We may constantly observe the
natural Inclination of the Hop, the French Bean or Kidney Bean, and the
Periploca, to a Pole or Stick, and how they twist about them, and how ill they
thrive without such Helps. It is certain that they have some perception of such
Pole, for you shall easily perceive their tender Buds to bend toward it, and
at the least touch of it to twist about it. After the same manner does the
Indian Jassamine or Mexican Creeper, and the Ivy, tend toward a Wall or Tree,
and adhere to it, with love and delight. Several Fruit Trees also will flourish
better against a Wall than single, not because of the warmth or support only,
but their affection to a Wall; as the Curran-Tree will grow much fairer, and
bear better Fruit against a Wall than any other way supported, although on the
North-side of a Wall: the like is observed of some other Fruits, as Plumbs,
Filberds, etc. The Roots of some Trees will run far toward any rich, fat, or
moist place, it exciting such Roots which have a natural perception, which way
the best nourishment is to be obtained. Several Plants will also avoid that
which they delight not in, as most Trees yield or recede from others that shade
them; and many Plants planted near a Wall or other Fence, decline it, and lean
toward the more open Air, be it toward what Coast it will. The turning of a
Flower toward the Sun, or opening when the Sun appears, may be caused from the
warmth it receives from it; and the blossoming of the greater Convolvulus in
the Evening, may be caused from cool moist Air at that time, the Flower being
so tender, that it withers at the next approach of the Sun. But the
inclination of a Plant to, and aversion from any thing, must be caused from a
perception in that Plant of that in which it delights, or which it abhors.

Seasons of Sowing.
THE Seeds of some Plants prosper best when sown as soon as they are ripe, as
of Auricula's, Tulips, Anemones, etc. Others, if sown before the Winter, as
Kernels of Fruits. But most of the tender Seeds must be kept till the Spring,
as the Seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, Radishes, Gillyflowers, etc. It is observed
that the Seeds of Angelica falling of it self, or carelessly sown, when it is
first ripe thrives well, which if kept and sown in the Spring with care, as
other Seeds usually are, never grows: the reason may be, that it being a hot
Seed, its vegetative Virtue may be expended by lying in dry or warm places,
when otherways being in the Earth it may be preserved till it sprouts, which is
usually the next Rain; Walnuts, Filberds, etc. if planted before Winter, make
some progress in their timely Shoots, but are subject to receive injury from
sharp Frosts, and Vermin, which to prevent, they may be kept in Sand in some
cold or damp place, till the severity of the Cold be over: The same method may
be used in the preserving several other Seeds that are either apt to decay
before the Spring, or subject to be devoured by Vermin.

Some Plants thrive best, being removed from the places where first sown, as
Coleworts, Cabbages, Lettuce, Skirrets, and so of Flowers, as the Gillyflower,
Stock-Gillyflower, Auricula, Anemone, etc. Others like not to be removed, as
Carrots, Onions, Radish, and of Flowers, Poppies, Larks Heads, Lupines, and
several other Annual Flowers which must (if at all) be removed with care.

The Seeds of Cabbages, or Cauliflowers sown Carterpillars to prevent.
in August, or so early that they may be transplanted and well rooted before
Winter: such Cabbages or Cauliflowers are not so subject to Caterpillars, as
those that are sown late before Winter, or in the Spring; the reason may be,
that those sown later being more young and tender, are more apt to breed those
Vermin; or at least, are more easily devoured by them.

As it is said by Husbandmen, sow Wheat In what Weather to sow.
in the Dirt, and Barley in the Dust, so may we say of Garden-seeds, such that
are sown in Autumn, as Wheat usually is, may be sown in moist Earth, a day or
two or three after Rain, the Seeds will sprout the sooner, and be the better
confirmed before Winter, but if sown in the Spring, it is certainly the best
way to sow most sorts of Garden-seeds as well as Barley in the dryest Seasons,
as Onions, Carrots, Pease, Parsley, Thyme, etc. and most Flower-seeds, which
being well covered, will by the coldness and moisture of the Earth, swell and
be ready to come up the next Shower; but if they are sown in moist Weather, or
soon after a Rain in moist Ground, they are apt speedily to shoot. And in case
dry Weather either from the Wind or Sun, which is not unusual in the Spring,
happen whilst the Seeds are in their Milk or beginning to aspire; it certainly
kills such of them that are not very well covered or defended, and then is the
Seed blamed, as though the Seed were naught, which if sown in the Dust, and a
Shower happen in three or four days after, those Seeds, though never so meanly
covered, rarely fail: only here you may take notice, that such Seeds that are
apt to be devoured by Birds, as those of Cabbages, Turnips, Radishes, etc. if
they lie long before a Shower come, or be watered by hand, have need of some
defense from their Devourers.

Many sorts of Trees and Flowers naturally Of making and taking off of Offsets
or Suckers.
afford Off-sets or Suckers from their Roots, by which their kinds are
propagated: some there are that afford them very plentifully, even to excess,
as the Dwarf Almond, Hypericum Frutex, and several others; and some there are
that rarely yield any, as the Mezerion, Althea, Fruticosa, etc. It is therefore
worthy of knowledge to understand, how to cause Trees that will not naturally
afford such Off-sets, to emit them from their Roots, the way prescribed is
thus: Make bare the Roots of the Plant of woody substance, and then make an
Incision on the upper-side of the naked Root, as you do on the under side of a
Branch which you intend to lay; make the Incision from the Tree downwards, and
put a small Stone or Stick under the Lip, to keep the Cleft open, then cover
the Root over about three Inches with good Mould, and as the Lip in a Branch
that is laid, will send forth Fibrous Roots, so will this (as ingenious
Planters affirm) send forth Branches, which with the Root out of which it
springs, may be transplanted securely.

Some Plants there are, which are propagated Of propagating of Plants by
Cuttings.
or increased by Cuttings, as most sorts of Garden-Herbs, and some Trees, as
Evergreen Privett, Jassamines, Laurel, Woodbine, etc. and some Flowers, as
Wall-Flowers, Periwinkles, etc. The best time for increasing Herbs and tender
Plants by this way, is in the Spring, and from that time till the Autumn, only
observe, that if you set any Slips or Cuttings in hot or dry Weather, you must
be careful to water and shade them; but woody Plants that bear Leaves should be
slipped or cut, and planted some time before they begin to shoot, as the Woodbine
in the Autumn, and Jassamines, Laurels, etc. In the Spring, Plants propagated
this way emit their Fibrous Roots at a Joint; therefore it is best to cut them
off just at, or below a Joint, and they will take root the sooner, for so much
Wood beyond the place of rooting, is apt to rot and hinder the young Fibers.

If your Tree be so high and stubborn, that Of Propagation by Circumposition.
its Branches will not stoop to the Ground, then it is convenient to raise the
Earth to the Branch you intend to propagate, but first take off the Bark of the
Sprigs or Branch as near as you can to the Stem of the Tree, for the better
supporting the weight of the Earth: If you cannot conveniently place it so near
the Trunk of the Tree, you may support it with some Stake, or the like; then
take a Box, Basket, old Hat, Boot, or the like, and place it so, that the
Branch may go through the middle of it, and that the disbarked or cut place may
be also in the middle, then prick the Bark on the upper side of the Cut with an
Awl, or such like Tool, to cause the Branch more easily to emit its fibrous
Roots; then fill the Vessel with good Mould, and in dry Weather water it
sometimes: This Application is most proper to be done before the Sap begins to
rise, and the end of the Bark of the Branch you intend to take off, will before
the Autumn be furnished with Roots enough to feed it, without the assistance of
the old Tree; then saw or cut it off, and plant it as you desire.

Those that delight in blanched Lettuce, may To blanch Lettuce.
blanch them with expedition, by covering every Plant with a small Earthen Pot,
and laying hot Soil upon them.

It is thus prescribed: Sow it in the Spring upon To blanch Succary.
the Borders, and when it has six Leaves, replant it in rich Ground, about
eighteen Inches distance each Plant from the other, paring them at the tops:
When they are grown so large, as to cover the Ground, tie them up in several
places with long Straw, or raw Hemp, at several times as they grow fair,
leaving the other to grow larger.

Or you may gently bind them, and take away the Earth on one side of each
Plant, and couch it down gently, without bruising the Leaves, and so cover it
with Earth, and it will become white in a little time, without running to Seed:
Couch them all one way, and then they will not hinder one another.

To blanch them for the Winter, it is thus prescribed: At the first Frosts tie
them after the former way; about eight Days after make a Trench about the
height of your Plant, then pluck up your Plants, and place them in this Trench;
range them side by side, a little shelving, as they may gently touch. Cover
them with rotten Dung of the same Bed they were sown in; you may make Trench
after Trench till you have finished: Then cover the whole Bed four Fingers
thick with hot Dung from the Stable, and in a short time they will be blanched.

To preserve them from rotting, you may cover them with Mats placed aslant, to
cast off the great Rains.

Or you may take them into the House, and cover them with Sand in some Cellar,
observing to place them with the tops downwards, that the Sand may not run in
between the Leaves: Let the Sand cover them four Fingers thick; when you take
them up, shake them well with the Root upmost, that all the Sand may fall out
from the Leaves.

Cover the Plants with reasonable warm Dung, To blanch Endive.
draw them out at the first appearance of Frost; then keep them in Sand in your
Cellar: Or when they are grown to some reasonable greatness, before they shoot
out any Stalks for Seed, take them up, and the Roots being cut away, lay them
to wither for three or four Hours, and then bury them in Sand, so as none of
them may lie one upon another, or touch one another; they will by this means
change whitish, and thereby become very tender.

THE GARDENER'S Monthly Directions, Showing what is NECESSARY to be DONE
Throughout the YEAR, IN Sowing, Planting, and Propagating the most Valuable of
the Shrubs, Flowers, Esculents, and other Hortensian Plants before treated of:
And what Ornamental Trees and Flowers Are in their PRIME in each MONTH.

LONDON, Printed for William Freeman, at the Bible over against the Middle
Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
AT the first publishing this small Treatise, it was not my Intention to have
added a Calendar; by reason that I had composed a large one for Husbandry in
general, which was printed at the end of my Systema Agriculturae, which
contained many Directions to be Monthly observed in Horticulture, as well as in
Husbandry: And also for that so complete a Kalendarium Hortense was published
by Mr. Evelyn, which has not yet, nor is likely to be exceeded. But when this
little Tract of mine was the second time printed, by another Hand, in my
absence, was added about a Sheet and a half to it, calling it, The Gardener's
Monthly Directions, which was collected out of an old Piece of Husbandry, much
of it not proper, and other part of it out of use: So that I was obliged to
compose the following Calendar, which could not be done without repeating some
Things that had been published before; yet there are many necessary Directions
which ought to be observed by the Curious, not elsewhere published. Therein is
also an Account of what Beautiful and Ornamental Trees, Plants, and Flowers,
show themselves in their Splendor in each Month, that such as delight in them
may take such care that at no time their Gardens may be without fitting
Materials to adorn their Houses or Garlands.

The former Kalendars that are extant are long, and there is not much more to
be said on the same Subject: Therefore you cannot expect this to be more large
than you will find it. However, to so small a Treatise this minute Addition may
suffice, until new Matter be discovered to make it largor.

Vale.
THE GARDENER'S Monthly Directions.
JANVARY.
THIS Month is generally the coldest Month in the Year, and not seldom locked
up with Frosts, or the Gardens as well as the Fields covered with Snow, that
little can be done in the Garden: And in case the Weather should be so
favorable (as sometimes it happens) that the Earth is easily penetrable, yet
is it not safe to sow any manner of Seeds (except in Hot-beds) left a sharp Fit
of Cold chill them in their Milk, that is, after they have swelled in the
Earth, and begin to chitt, as many Seeds are apt to do as soon as they are in
the Ground, although some will endure the greatest Severities of the coldest
Winters (if deep enough) as Parsley-seed, Corn-sallet-seed, and sometimes
Purslain-seed, and several others.

But in this Month may you plant your Fences, and some Flower-bearing Trees, as
Lilacs, Roses, double-blossom'd Cherry, Woodbines, and Virgins-bower, and also
Anemonies, and Ranunculus's, if the Weather be mild, and the Ground open.

In Hot-beds now may be sown Cauly-flowers, Radish, Lettuce, and other
Salletings you are willing to have early.

Set Traps to destroy Vermin; for in frosty Weather they will easily be taken
by a Bait, when the Frost prevents them from other Food.

Preserve your choice Gilliflowers from the cold Rains, and shake off the Snow
from them.

Pick Snails out of the Crevices in the Walls, and other close-Places, where
they go for Shelter.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Laurus, Laurus tinus, Mezerion, the Bay Tree, gilded Holly, the several sorts
of Rosemary, stripped Phillyrea, Glassenbury Thorn, stripped Periwinkles,
Winter-Aconite or Wolfs-bane, black Hellebor, Primroses of several sorts, and
the double Oxslips, early Winter-Hyacinth.

FEBRVARY.
NOw the Weather begins to alter, although sometimes, January be open and
temperate, and this Month severely cold, yet for the most part the inclining of
the Sun to the Vernal Equinox, does produce a Moderation of the past Colds, and
encourage the ingenious Gardener to trim his Trees, and stir his Ground, mixing
his rotten Dung in the digging thereof, for the setting and sowing of Beans,
Pease, Carrots, Parsnips, Onions, Parsley, Spinach, Asparagus, Anniseeds,
Corn-sallet, Fennel.

Which being now sown in a fair and open Season, will come early, and prosper
well.

Lay Branches of several Trees to take root, and plant out your Cabbage Plants
to have them early.

Make your Hot-bed for Melons, Cucumbers, etc.

Plant Cowslips, Oxslips, Primroses.

Sow the Seeds of Fraxinella, Alaternus, Larks-heels, Marigolds.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Laurus, Laurus-tinus, Mezereon, gilded Holly, gilded Rosemary, stripped
Phillyrea, Glassenbury Thorn, Periwinkles, Winter-Aconite, Anemones, Crocus,
early Winter-Hyacinths, bulbous Violets, Hepatica, Persian Iris, early
Daffodils, Primroses, Oxslips.

MARCH.
THis Month produces the greatest Variety of Weather, of any other in the whole
Year; that notwithstanding the advancement of the Sun into the Northern
Hemisphere, which often produces temperate, and sometimes warm Weather; yet the
Winds that usually blow from the Northern and Eastern Regions, with the
coldness of the Earth, do so refrigerate the Air, that it is not safe to remove
your tender Plants, nor sow the Seeds of tender Herbs and Flowers, lest the
nipping Frosts or Winds, and sometimes Snows, deprive you of your expectation:
Nevertheless, in this Month are the greatest part of your Garden Tillage, and
more hardy flowering Ornaments to be removed down, or planted.

Continue still digging your Garden Grounds, mixing therewith, or rather
burying therein your rotten Dung. You may now make your Hot-beds for Melons and
Cucumbers, and also for Amaranthus purpureus, Marvel of Peru, the greater
Convolvulus, and other choice Exoticks.

Sow Beans, Pease, Carrots, Parsnips, Onions, Leeks, Parsley, Lettuce, Spinach,
Asparagus, Anniseeds, Corn-sallet, Fennel, Endive, Succory, Radish, Beets,
Scorzonera, Sorrel, Buglos, Burrage, Chervil, Sellery, Purslain, Turnips,
Cabbages, Marigolds.

Plant Skirrets, Garlic, Liquorice, Artichokes, Strawberries, Cabbage-plants.

Slip and plant Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, toward the end of the Month,
if the Weather be mild; and then also may you remove July-Flowers, or
Carnations.

Sow the Seeds of Firs, Pines, Bays, Alaternus, Phillyrea, Cypress, Laurel, etc.

Plant Cowslips, Oxslips, Primroses, Wall-flowers, Hepatica's, Auricula's,
Gentianella, Jasmines, Fraxinella.

About the beginning of this Month may you set into the Ground the Roots of the
Marvel of Peru, which you preserved all the Winter.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Sweet-bryars, Periwinkles, Anemones, Crocus's, Hyacinths, Hepatica's, Persian
Iris, Daffodils, Primroses, varieties of Oxslips, and Cowslips, Crown Imperial,
Fritilaryes, Precoce-Tulyps, Dens Caninus, Wall-flowers, Violets, Junquils,
Grape-flowers, etc.

APRIL.
IN this Month your Garden appears in its greatest Beauty, the Blossoms of the
Fruit Trees prognosticate the Plenty of Fruits for all the succeeding
Summer-Months, unless prevented by untimely Frosts or Blights. The Bees now buz
in every corner of your Garden, to seek for Food: The Birds sing in every Bush,
and the sweet Nightingale tunes her warbling Notes in your solitary Walks,
whilst the other Birds are at their rest. The Beasts of the Woods look out into
the Plains: And the Fishes of the Deep sport themselves in the shallow Waters.
The Air is wholesome, and the Earth pleasant, beginning now to be clothed with
Natures best Array, exceeding all Arts Glory. This is the time that whets the
Wits of several Nations to prove their own Country to have been the Garden of
Eden, or the Terrestrial Paradise, however it appears all the Year besides.

In case unseasonable Weather hinders not, the pleasantness and salubrity of
the Air now tempts the Sound to the free enjoyment of it, rather than to enjoy
the Pleasure of Bacchus in a smoaky Corner.

The beginning of this Month uncover your Asparagus-Beds, rake them fine as
they must lie all the Summer; uncover your Artichoaks, and when they are a
little shot out in Leaves, dress them, and with those Suckers plant new Beds,
if you have occasion for them.

Set French-beans, Pease, Hastings, and Garden-beans, for a second Crop,
Cucumbers, Melons, and sow all sorts of tender Seeds about the end of the
Month, that cannot endure the Cold; you may now sow Rosemary, Hollihock-seed,
Columbines, Larks-heels, Nasturtium Indicum, Poppies, Lupines, and all such
Flowers as are to blow in the following Summer.

Now sow Turnips to have them in the Summer; plant out your Cauly-flowers; and
as yet you may plant Cabbage-plants.

All tender Winter-greens and Shrubs may now be safely removed and cut, as
Phillyrea, Myrtles, Jasmine, Oleander, Cypress, etc. you may yet transplant
fibrous-rooted Flowers, and set the Seeds of several Trees, as of the Pine,
Fir, Phillyrea, Alaternus, etc. Bring your choice Plants out of your
Conservatory, except the Orange-tree, which will hardly yet endure the Cold.

In the Evening, after a Shower, gather up Worms and Snails.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Double-blossom'd Cherry, Syringa's or Pipe-trees, Persian Jasmine, Hypericum
frutex, Dwarf-almonds, Sweet-bryars, Anemonyes, Ranunculus's, Auricula's,
Crown-Imperial, Persian-Lilly, Fritiallaria, Tulips, Jacinths, Muscary,
Star-flowers, Iris, Dens Caninus, Vernal Cyclamens, Ladies-slipper,
Gentianella, Wall-flowers, Stock-gilliflowers, Bell-flowers, Hepatica's,
Narcissus, Primroses, Cowslips, Peonyes, Arbor Judae, Lilac, Gelder-Roses,
Laburnum.

MAY.
NOW are we entering the Summer, this Month sometimes proving very warm, and the
warmer it is the less welcome, overmuch Heat so early scorching the Fruits of
the Earth, disappointing the Gardener of his hopeful Crop, unless by his great
Pains and Industry he preserves it by watering. And sometimes, on the contrary,
cold and nipping Frosts either chill his tender Plants, or put him to the
trouble of securing them, by the continuance of his Coverings. The long and
pleasant Mornings and Evenings extremely invigorate the Natures of such that
soft Dormitories do not overmuch prevail with to decline their Enjoyments. He
that delights not in Physic, let him now exercise himself in the Garden, and
take the Smell of the Earth with the rising Sun, than which to the virtuously
inclined there is nothing more pleasant; for now is Nature her self full of
Mirth, and the Senses stored with Delights, and variety of Pleasures.

There is now but little digging in a Garden, except for the sowing of some
very tender Plants, as Sweet-Marjerom, etc.

But now Weeding is necessary, as well in your Walks, as amongst your Herbs,
Tillage, and Flowers.

You may yet plant and remove Winter-greens, and other tender Shrubs, preparing
the Mould, and mixing it with Cow Dung, and may also sow Sweet-Marjerom, Thyme,
Gilliflowers, and other Aromatic and tender Plants.

Sow Purslain and other Herbs to have them young and tender. Most of your
housed and covered Plants will now live in the open Air; only Melons and early
Cucumbers will prosper best under Glasses.

Sage, Rosemary, and several other woody Plants, thrive best slipped and planted
in this Month, a little watered and shaded if there be occasion.

You may now remove into proper Beds, Amaranthus, Mastich, Thyme, Snap-dragons,
and the young Stock-gilliflowers, at the Full of the Moon, which it is said will
make them the more double.

Such Tulip-roots that are dry, may now be taken up.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Laurus Cerasus, Cytisus Maranthe, or Horned-tree Trefoil, Hypericum frutex,
Oleaster, Shrub-night-shade, Woodbines, most sorts of Roses, Laburnum,
Horse-chesnut, Lilac, Gelder-rose, Sena-tree, Rosemary, Pinks, Tulips,
Columbines, Peonyes, Lilly conval. Iris, Anemones, Ranunculus, Cyclamen,
Fraxinella, Gladiolus, Geranium, Jacinth, Lillies, Phalangium, Orchis,
Cowslips, Ladies-slipper, Stock-gilliflower, Star-flower, Bell-flowers, great
yellow Fritillary, Starry-Jacinth of Peru, Asphodels, Gentianella, Auricula's,
Wall-flowers, Queens-Gilliflowers, Snap-dragons.

JUNE.
THe Sun is now in his most Northern Latitude, the Days at longest, the
Mornings and Evenings the most pleasant Times for Recreation, in the beautiful
Avenues of your Ville; at other times of the Day, Grotts, and shady Groves
requite your Labor and Expense in raising them, by the sweet and cool
Refreshments they afford, when the Sun's hot Aspect would otherwise prove
troublesome. The plenty of cooling Fruits and Tillage now furnish your Table,
and tempt the curious Palate to exchange a great part of its grosser Food for
Garden Dainties.

The best Employment in the Garden, now, is to prune and trim your Flowers and
Trees, to inoculate Roses, to lay Gilliflowers, and cut Herbs to distill and to
dry.

Melons, Cucumbers, and several sorts of new removed Trees and Flowers, now,
expect to be watered.

Tulip-Roots, and other Bulbs that are dry, may now be taken up and housed.

You may also take up the Chalcedon Iris, Anemonies, and Ranunculus's.

Also now remove early Cyclamens, bulbous Jacinths, Iris, Fritillaries,
Crown-Imperial, Martagon, and such others that have done blowing.

Set Saffron, and plant Rosemay, but let it be a little defended from the Sun,
and watered at the first, and plant Slips of Myrtle.

Gather Seeds of such Flowers that blowed in the Spring, and are now ripe.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Laurus Cerasus, Roses of most sorts, Wood-bines, Lime-Tree, Indian-Fig,
Fraxinella, Shrub-Night-shade, Jasmines, Spanish-broom, Martagons, Lillies,
Molyes, Asphodils, Phalangium, Iris, Corn-flag, Aestival Cyclamens, White
Hellebor, great Gentian, Bell-flowers, Campions, Queens-Gillyflowers, Pinks,
Sweet-Johns, Sweet-Williams, Columbines, Snap-dragons, Poppies, Nigella, lesser
Convolvulus, Nasturtium Indicum, Carnations, Larks-heels, Sultan's Flower,
Stock-Gillyflowers, Cornflag, Hollyhock, Muscory.

JVLY.
THis Northern Hemisphere is now warmed by the Sun's advance, by whose
influence many choice and delicate Fruits become pleasant and acceptable to the
most curious Palates; the fruitful Fields appear in their best Array, that the
Countryman may now give a guess what Harvest he is like to expect, Grotts and
shady Groves, are more seasonable to recreate your self in than the open Air,
unless it be late in the Evening, or early in the Morning, to such that can
afford time to take a Nap after Noon. Garden Fruits, and Tillage, may now be a
part of your Table-Furniture, being a cooler Diet than gross Flesh.

The Exercises in the Garden are now for the most part gathering in the Fruits
of the Labor you bestowed in the Winter and Spring Months. Now on the Ground
whence you have cleared your Pease, and other early Tillage, being slightly
dug, may you sow Turnips, Cabbage-seed; and also, if you please, Seeds for
latter Salleting, and Pease to come late.

You may now lay Gillyflowers and Myrtles, etc. inoculate Roses and other
Flower-bearing Trees.

Cut off the Stalks of such Flowers as have done blowing, and cover their Roots
with fresh Earth.

Snails that feed on your choice Wall-Fruits, early in the Mornings may be
taken off.

Slip Stocks, and other lignous Plants and Flowers, plant them, and water, and
shade them, if need require.

Sow Mezereon-Berries, and Anemones.

Take up Lillies, Martagons, Frittillaries, and Hyacinths, when the Stalks are
dry, and remove them. Take up Anemones.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Several sorts of Roses, Woodbines, Lime-tree, Oleander, Laurus Indicus,
Jasmines, Virgins-bower, Periploca, Oranges, Amorum Plinii, Agnus Castus,
Arbutus, Olive, Jucca, Molyes, the small Yellow Asphodil, Cornflag, Aestival
Cyclamens, great Gentian, Bell-flowers, Campions, Queens-Gillyflowers,
Gillyflowers, Snapdragons, Larks-heels, Indian Cresses, Nigella, lesser
Convolvulus, Marvail of Peru, Scarlet-Beans, Lupines, Scabious, Fraxinella,
African Marigold, Holy-hock, Stock-Gillyflowers, Passion-Flower, Cardinal's
Flower.

AUGUST.
THE Sun being now in its Southern declination the Air begins to cool, and it
is become very pleasant to walk after a Thundershower. Although the Beauties of
the Fields and Gardens begin to fade, yet the Profits now flow in: the Fields
clothed with Corn, ready for the Barn; the Orchards laden with all sorts of
Cider-fruits; the Avenues and Walls of your Gardens, now furnish the most
curious Palates with the most delicate Fruits; and the Kitchen-Garden the Table
with variety of Tillage. Little is now to be done in a Garden, besides
gathering in the Fruits of former Labors.

You may now sow Cabbage and Caulyflower-Seed for Winter Plants, and also
Lettuce, Spinach, Carrots, Onions, Corn-Sallet, and Marygolds, to live over the
Winter.

Sow Turnips.

Pull up your Onions, Garlic, etc. and gather your ripe Seeds.

Remove Auricula's, plant Cowslips, Oxslips, and Primroses, Campions,
Gillyflowers, Hepatica's, Crown-Imperial, Persian-Lillies, Fretillaries,
Asphodils, Spiderwort, Cholcicumbs, and Autumnal Crocus, Iris, Bulbous and
Tuberose, Lilly of the Valley, Dens Caninus, and seedling Anemones, and most
other Flowers that have blown the Spring or Summer precedent.

Plant Roses, Woodbines, and other Trees that are apt to bud before the Winter.

Plant Saffron, Strawberries, etc.

Remove your Winter-greens.

Ornamental Plants and Flowers now in Season.
Myrtles, double blossomed Pomegranate-tree, Althea fruticosa, Spirea frutex,
Monthly Roses, Jasmines, Virgins-bower, Maracoc, Sena-tree, Muskrose, Oleander,
Virginian Martagon, Indian Hyacinth, or Tuberose, Star-flower of Aethiopia, the
little hollow White Asphodil, Autumnal Cyclamen, Bellflowers, Champions,
Gillyflowers, Hollyhocks, Globe Thistle, Sultan's Flower, Amaranthus,
Larks-heels, Indian-Cresses, African Marigolds, Great Convolvulus, Marvail of
Peru, Everlasting Pease, Lupines Cholcicum, French, Marigold, Geranium Nocte
Olens.

SEPTEMBER.
THis Season is the most pleasant of all the Year for Air, it being generally
of an even Temper by Night as well as by Day: The Leaves as well as Fruits now,
are for the most part ripe, and ready to fall, which makes it the sweetest time
of all the Year for Traveling, Walking and such like Champaign Exercises. This
is one of the principal Months in the Year, wherein to employ your self in the
Garden: Now may you dig up your Flower-Beds, whose Earth wants to be altered,
renewed, or enriched, and most Trees and Flowers may be transplanted or
removed, and be thoroughly fixed before the Winter, that the Frosts will not
hurt them.

You may yet sow Turnips, though they will hardly be large, unless the Autumn
be mild: Also you may sow Lettuce, Cabbages, Cauliflowers, Onions, Spinach,
Parsnips, etc. against the Spring.

Transplant your young Cabbage Plants, and Caulyflower Plants that were sown
the last Month, it makes them short and strong: You may also plant Artichoaks
and Asparagus, but it is best in the Spring.

Plant most sorts of bulbous rooted Flowers, as Tulips, Daffodills, Cholcicums,
Crocus, etc.

Also Peonyes, Iris, Chalcedon, and Tuberose Cowslips, Oxslips, Primroses,
Hepatica, Cyclamen, Violets, and most other fibrous Roots.

Take off the Layers of your Gillyflowers that have taken Root, and plant them
in their proper places, in Beds or in Pots.

Plant Anemones to have them early, sow Auricula Seeds, sow some sort of hardy
Seeds, as Tulips, etc. that lie long in the Ground.

The great Gentian must be planted in this Month, in rich Soil, and a warm
place: The Cardinal's Flower may now be set in a Pot, that in the colder
Weather it may be removed into your Green-house, or set deeper in the Ground
and sheltred: Remove some of your tender Plants into your Conservatory.

Ornamental Trees and Flowers.
Laurus Cerasus, Myrtles, Althea Fruticosa, Amomum Plinii, Monthly Rose, Double
Virgins-Bower, Musk Rose, Sena Tree, Sweet Moly of Montpelier; The little White
Asphodil, Cholcicums, Crocus Autumnatis, Autumnal Cyclamens, Champions,
Holy-hocks, Amaranthus, Nasturtium Indicum, African Marigolds, Greater
Convolvulus, Marvail of Peru, Stock-Gillyflowers, Jacynthus, Tuberosus,
Gillyflowers.

OCTOBER.
NOW most Trees and Plants shake off their Summer Garments, and prepare
themselves for the approaching Winter; some are hardy and retain their Green
Leaves in the severest Colds; others are so tender, that although they shed not
their Leaves, yet require shelter from the Cold, which are now to be taken care
of. There is more Pleasure now in feeding on the Fruits of your Labor and
Industry, than in viewing the Ruins and Decays that this Season has made
amongst Natures Glories. There is a time for all things, as well to pluck up,
as to plant. This Month invites you to both, being the most seasonable to plant
young Trees that are not tender Exoticks, and to eradicate the old and decayed.

Carry Dung into your Kitchen Garden, and spread it, that it may rot, and the
Rain wash in the sectile part of it before the Spring.

Plant out your Cabbage and Colewort Plants to stand all the Winter, and some
of your Cabbage-plants, where they may remain in the Spring unremoved, and they
will bring early Cabbages.

Cut off the withered Stalks of Asparagus near the Ground, and weed the Beds
clean, and cover them with good rich Dung not quite rotten, which will defend
the Roots from violent Frosts, and enrich the Bed, by the Rains washing in its
Virtue.

Plant Anemones, Ranuncula's, Peonyes, Iris Calcedonca, Tulips, and other
fibrous and bulbous Roots.

Remove Hollyhock, Stock-Gillyflowers, and other hardy Plants: Sow Alaternus
and Phillyrea-Seeds.

Cut and prune Rose-Trees, and other hardy Plants.

Now house your tender Plants.

Ornamental Trees and Flowers now in Season.
Arbutus or the Strawberry-Tree, Myrtles, stripped Phillyrea, Amomum Plinii,
Monthly-Rose, Spanish Jasmine, and the Yellow Indian Jasmine, Violets, Crocus
Autumnatis, double Colchicum, Cyclamen, Stock-Gillyflowers, Marvel of Peru,
double Virgins-bower, Primroses, and Scarlet Oxslips.

NOVEMBER.
IF continued Rains (which usually happen in this Month) prevent not, we may
now feel a part of the sharp Cold the Winter brings; and gives us caution as
well in the Garden as in the Fields to provide against it. Although the
Productions of a Garden are many more than those of the Field; yet are few
Seeds sown in this or the next Month, although the Weather be open, by reason
of the hazard they are exposed to, in case of a sudden and severe Frost: Yet
those that covet to have them early in the Market, or to please their Palates,
will now sow Pease, and set Beans, and adventure the sharpness of the Winter
against their Profit or Pleasure.

Now may you prepare Beds for the planting of Artichoaks and Asparagus in the
Spring; and may also order the Asparagus Beds as was directed in October.

Cover well your Artichoaks with long Dung, to defend them against Frosts: the
want whereof lost almost all the Artichoaks in England in the hard Winter, 1683.

House and cover with Sand Carrots, Turnips, and Parsnips; and house Cabbages.

Dig up Liquorice.

Plant Tulips and Anemones. Cover your ten-tender Plants.

In open Weather you may remove hardy Trees that loose their Leaves before this
time; Roses may also yet be removed, and likewise may Lilac, ordinary Jasmine,
etc.

Peonyes, and some fibrous Roots, may now be planted.

Sow Asparagus Seeds.

Ornamental Trees and Flowers now in Season.
Arbutus, or the Strawberry-Tree, Myrtle, stripped Phyllirea, Amomum Plinii,
gilded Holly, Myrtles, Spanish and Indian Jasmine, Violets, Primroses, and
Scarlet Oxslips, Monthly-Rose, and the Musk-Rose.

DECEMBER.
ALthough this is the darkest Month of the Year, Phoebus being in his most
Southern Declination, yet it is seldom the coldest. However little can be done
in the Garden, besides cutting and pruning of Wall-trees, digging and dressing
of Ground against the Spring, and such like preparatory Works abroad; the
Evenings are long, which gives the Industrious opportunity to indulge
themselves by the Fireside over a Glass of Hearts-ease; and the Studious leave
to read what others have wrote, that he may make what he finds there, and
thinks fit, to be his own, when fairer and milder Weather too often invites him
to partake of those Pleasures the Garden yields, to the neglect of his Study.

If the Weather be open and mild, you may remove, or plant, most sorts of hardy
Trees that shed their Leaves in Winter.

Set Beans, and sow Pease, to have them early. You may now set Bay Berries,
Laurel-berries, etc.

You may yet plant Anemone and Ranunoula Roots.

Sow Asparagus.

In frosty Weather may you destroy Snails in every Corner of your Garden, and
behind the Stems of Wall-Trees.

Ornamental Trees and Flowers now in Season.
Laurel, Bays, Myrtles, Laurus-tinus, Phyllirea, plain colored and stripped
Rosemary of all sorts, gilded Box, gilded Holly, Glastenbury-thorn, Primroses
of several Colors, Scarlet Oxslip, Black Hellebor, Snow-drops, stripped
Periwinckle, and all other Winter-greens, plain, gilded, and stripped, seem
acceptable to the Curious at this Season, when the Earth is locked up, that it
cannot expose its more desired Rarities, which in the succeeding year will
every day begin to appear, as the Sun advances, and by its warm Rays sets at
liberty each Flower in its Season.

A CATALOGUE Of such Housed-Greens, Winter-Greens, Flowering-Shrubs,
Flowering-Trees, Flowers, and other curious Plants, as well Exotic as English,
that are to be Sold by Mr. George Rickets, Gardener, at the Hand in Hogsden
without Bishopsgate, London, the great Collector and Improver of the Beauties
of a Garden.
Greens that are housed in the Winter. ORanges and Lemons. Myrtles of various
sorts. The White and Red Oleander. The Yellow Indian Jasmine. The Spanish
Jasmine. The Indian Jucca. Colutea Odorata. Tree Housleek. Cytisus lunatus.
Jacobea Marina, or Sea-Ragwort. Gilded or stripped Phillyrea. Lentiscus. Indian
Fig. Marum Syriacum. Amomum Plinii.
Flower-bearing-Trees. Castanea Equina, or the Horse-Chestnut. Oleaster. Pardus
(or Pardalianches) Theophrasti. Laburnum major. Laburnum minor. Sena-Tree.
Sumach. Cassia. Lilac, Blew, White, and Purple. Pomegranat-flowers, double and
single. Jasmines, White, and Virginian. Periploca. Double Virgins-bower.
Virginian Climer. Tree Passion-flower. Paliurus, or Christs-thorn. Hungarian
Clematis. Orobus Venetus. Gelder-Rose. Double blossomed Cherry. Mezerions, Red,
Purple, White. Dwarf-Almond. Hypericum frutex. Spirea frutex. Cytisus Secundus
Clusii. Althea frutex, Red, White. Syringa, White, Purple, Persian Jasmine.
Woodbine, or Honysuckle, White, Italian, Red, Scarlet. Scorpion Sena. Amegdala
flore Africano.
Winter-Greens. Alaternus. Pyracantha. Ilex. Laurus tinus major. Laurus tinus
minor. Spanish Broom. Upright Savin. Laurels. Phillyrea augustifolia. Bay Tree.
Cypress. Norway Firr. Scotch Firr. Silver, or flat Firr. Mountain Pine.
Pinaster. Cedar of Libanus. Winter Jasmine.
Other Ornamental Trees. Cornelian Cherry. Oriental and Occidental Platanus.
Abele. Lime-Tree. Flowers and choice Plants. Cardinal's Flower, Scarlet, Blew.
Steeple Bellflower. Scarlet Gnaphalion. Double Scarlet Lychins. White Rocket.
Purple Rocket. Auricula's double of several sorts. Auricula's stripped, great
varieties. Auricula's plain Colors. Hepatica's double, Blew, and Peach-colour.
Fraxinella, White, Red. Peonies, double, White, Blush, and Purple. Asphodil,
Yellow, Red. Geranium nocte Olens. Martagons of several kinds. Lillies of
several kinds. Iris bulbous, Great varieties. Iris tuberous. Great varieties.
Hyacinthus Tuberosus. Jacinths, many sorts. Tulips, great varieties. Double and
single Anemones, many sorts. Ranuncula's, great varieties. Carnations and
Gillyflowers, very many sorts. Double Colchicums. Fritillaries. Ornithogalons.
Leucoiums. Narcissus, great varieties double and single. Globe-Flower.
Crocus's, many varieties. Primroses, many colors and sorts. Oxslips, several
colors and sorts. Polyanthos. Gentienella. Junquils. Campanula's, or
Bellflower with many others.

The same Mr. Rickets can furnish you with all the best sorts of Apples, Pears,
Cherries, Plumbs, Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarines, Vines, Currants, Gooseberries,
and all other Fruits, Standards, or for the Wall; Of all which he has great
variety.

A CATALOGUE OF SEEDS, PLANTS, etc.
Sold by Edward Fuller, at the Three Crowns and Naked Boy at Strand Bridge,
Francis Weston, at the Flower-de-luce, over against the May Pole in the Strand,
Theophilus Stacy, at the Rose and Crown without Bishopsgate, and Charles
Blackwell, at the King's Head, near Fetter-Lane End in Holborn, London.

Seeds of Roots. STrasburgh Onion-Seed. Red Spanish Onion. White Spanish Onion.
English Onion. London Leek. French Leek. Orange Carrot. Red Carrot. Swelling
Parsnap. Long Turnep. Round Turnep. Yellow Turnep. Skirret. Scorzonera.
Sassify. Potatoes. Shallots. Garlic. Rocum Bolis.
Sallad-Seeds. London Radish. Sandwich Radish. Black Spanish Radish. White
Spanish Radish. Cabbage Lettuce. Lombard Lettuce. Roman Lettuce. Arabian
Lettuce. Savoy Lettuce. Silesia Lettuce. Rose Lettuce. Red Lettuce. Curled
Lettuce. Round Spinach. Prickly Spinach. Berry-bearing Orach. White Beet. Red
Beet. Roman Beet. Curled Endive. Italian Seleree. Italian Fennel. Sampier.
Rocket. Spanish Rocket. Rampion. Hartshorn. French Sorrel. Candy Sorrel.
Cardoon. Indian Cresses. Garden Cresses. Broad-leav'd Cresses. Curled Cresses.
Chervile. Sweet Chervile. Purslane. Golden Purslane. Parsley. Curled Parsley.
Alisander. Corn-sallad. Dutch Asparagus. Cauly-flower. English Cabbage. Dutch
Cabbage. Russia Cabbage. Red Cabbage. Colewort. Curled Colewort. Sheerwort.
French Choux. Dutch Savoy. Coli-Rapi. English Melon. French Melon. Spanish
Melon. Long Cucumber. Short Cucumber. Prickly Cucumber. Pompion. Gourd. Mekin.
Pot-Herb Seeds. Endive. Succory. Borage. Bugloss. Burnet. Bloodwort. Clary.
Sorrel. Mary gold. Pot-Marjoram. Landebeef. Summer-Savory. Columbine. Tansie.
Nepp. French Mallows. Orach.
Sweet-Herb Seeds. Thyme. Hyssop. Winter-Savory. Sweet-Marjoram. Sweet-Basil.
Sweet-Maudlin. Rosemary. Lavender. Baum.
Physical Seeds. Cardus Benedictus. Scurvy Grass. Angelica. Lovage. Smallage.
Tobacco. Dill. Common Fennel. Sweet Fennel. Caraway. Cumin. Anise. Coriander.
Gromewell. Henbane. Plantain. Nettle. Foenugreek. Fleawort. Rhubard. Bur-dock.
Elecampane. Balsam. White Poppy. Cardamum. Gourd. Broom. Peony. Daucus. Citrul.
Worm-seed. Wormwood. Rue. Oculus Christi. Line or Flax. Marsh-mallow.
Flower-Seeds. Double July-Flower. Stock July-Flower. Queens July-Flower.
Wall-Flower. White Wall-Flower. Matted Pink. Mountain Pink. Double Columbine.
Virginian Columbine. Double Larks-heel. Upright Larks-heel. Rose Larks-heel.
African Marygold. French Marygold. Snap-Dragon. Candy Tuft. Sweet Scabious.
Spanish Scabious. London Pride. Capsicum Indicum. Venus Looking-glass. White
Venus Looking-glass. Venus Navel-wort. French Honey-suckle. White French
Honey-suckle. Scarlet Lychnis. Rose Campion. Noli me Tangere. Marvel of Peru.
Nasturtium Indicum. Sweet Sultan. Red Valerian. White Valerian. Greek Valerian.
Branched Sun-Flower. Canterbury Bell. Flos Adonis. Fox Tail. Iron-colour
Fox-glove. Nigella Romana. Urtica Romana. Primrose Tree. Belvedere. Amaranthus
Purpureus. Amaranthus Coccineus. Amaranthus Tricolor. Princes Feather. Green
Amaranthus. Love Apple. Thorn Apple. Double Poppy stripped. Double Hollyhock.
Lobel's Catch Fly. Goats Rue. Spanish Mallow-tree. Monks Hood. Convolvulus
Major. Convolvulus Minor. Bottles of all Colors. Globe Thistle. Great blue
Lupines. Small blue Lupines. Yellow Lupines. White Lupines. Scarlet Beans.
Everlasting Pease. Snails and Caterpillars. Horns and Hedghogs. Tulip. Anemone.
Auricula. Polianthos. Primrose. Sensible Plant. Humble Plant.
Seeds of Ever-green and Flowering Trees. Cypress. Silver Firr. Norway Firr.
Scotch Firr. Great Pine. Pinaster. Phillyrea vera. Alaternus. Phyracantha.
Arbutus. Horn-beam. Laurus Tinus. Amomum Plinii. Mezerian Berries. Cedar
Berries. Holly Berries. Laurel Berries. Bay Berries. Juniper Berries. Yew
Berries. Myrtle Berries. Ever-green Oak-Acorns. Cork-Tree Acorns. Lime-Tree
Seed. Sena Seed. Althaea frutex Seed. Laburnum Majus. Laburnum Minus. Spanish
Broom Seed. Chestnuts. Acatia. Almonds.
Sorts of Pease, Beans, etc. Barns Hot-spur Pease. Short Hot-spur Pease. Long
Hot-spur Pease. Sandwich Pease. Gray Rouncival Pease. White Rouncival Pease.
Blue Rouncival Pease. Green Rouncival Pease. Maple Rouncival Pease. Large white
Sugar Pease. Small white Sugar Pease. Gray Sugar Pease. White Rose Pease. Gray
Rose Pease. Egg Pease. Wing Pease. Sickle Pease. Windsor Beans. Sandwich Beans.
White Kidney Beans. Speckled Kidney Beans. Canterbury Kidney Beans. Lentils.
Seeds to improve Land. Clover-Grass. Hop-Clover cleans'd. Hop-Clover in the
Husk. Sain Foine. La Lucern. Spury. French Furz. Dantzick Flax. Hemp Seed.
Rape-seed. Mustard Seed. Canary-seed.
Flower Roots. Ranuncula's, all sorts. Double Anemones, all sorts. French
Anemones. Tulips, all sorts. Double July-flower, all sorts. Auricula's, double,
stripped, and plain. Poliantho's, all sorts. Primroses, all sorts. Iris,
Persian, Chalcedonian, Dwarf, etc. Crown Imperial, yellow, double and single.
Fraxinella's, purple and white. Hepatica, double, blue, and Peach-colour;
white, blue, and Peach-colour, single. Crocus's, all sorts. Narcissus, all
sorts. Hyacinthus Tuberosus. Junquils, double and single. Peonies, black, red,
purple, and stripped. Fritillaria, all sorts. Hellebor, white, black, and
Christmas. Colchicum, Chio, purple, stripped, etc. Gladiolus, all sorts.
Cyclamen Vernum, and Autumnale. Lillies, all sorts.
Sorts of Choice Trees and Plants. Oranges stripped and Hermaphrodite. Lemons.
Citrons. Pomgranats. Myrtles, broad-leav'd, Box-leav'd, Orange-leav'd,
Birds-nest, upright, and double-flower'd. Two sorts of upright Myrtles. The
upright Myrtle of Portugal. The broad-leav'd Myrtle of Portugal. The
broad-leav'd Myrtle of Spain. A broad-leav'd Myrtle, the Leaves tipped with
White, like Silver. Rhus Tritifolia and Virginianum, the Myrtle-leav'd and
Virginian Sumach. Oleander, Red and White. Phillyrea serrato folio, and
Augusto-folio, and foliis leviter serratis. Alaternus, stripped with Yellow and
White. Cytisus, Lunatus, and Secundus Clusii. Amomum Plinii. Hollies, stripped
with Yellow, with white and yellow Berries. Arbutus. Paliurus. Olive Tree.
Cedrus Libani. Aloes Americana, sive Sempervivum, Aloes of America. Agnus
Castus. Arber Judae. Platanus Orientalis, and Occidentalis. Tragacantha. Horse
Chestnut. Jessamines, Spanish yellow, Persian white, etc. Cistus, all sorts.
Geranium necte Olens. Jucca Peruana. Nightshade variegated. Woodbine
variegated. Althaea frutex, purple, white, etc. Terebenthus. Lentischus. Laurus
Tinus Latifolia. Laurus Tinus Augustifolia Laurocerasus, the Cherry-Bay. The
stripped Laurel. Juniperus Hispanicus, the Juniper of Spain. Chamela Tricoccos,
or Widow-wail. Laurus Alexandrina, Hippoglossum mas, the Horse-tongue Bay.
Laurus Alexandrina, and Genuvina, the true Bay of Alexandrina. Jacobaea Marina
incana, Sea Ragwort. Azedarach, the Bead-Tree. Piracantha* The Maracock of
Virginia. Pistatia Virginiensis Trifolia, the three-leav'd Virginian
Bladder-Nut. Jasminianum Virginianum, the Virginian Jasmine. With many other
Sorts.

At which Places you may be likewise furnished with Spades, Hoes, Reels, Lines,
Sheers, Sythes, Wyre-Sieves, Watering-Pots, Bass-Mats, Melon-Glasses, etc.
proper for the Use of Gardiners: As also, with all sorts of Fruit Trees, and
Evergreens; and Artichoke, Asparagus, Liquorice, Cauly-Flowers, Cabbage, and
Tarragon Plants.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A. AConites, vide Wolfs-bane African Marigold Page 128 Alaternus Page 62
Gilded Page 68 Time to remove Page 76
Alisanders Page 187 Almonds Dwarf Page 88 Althaea Fruticosa, vide Shrub-Mallow
Amaranthus Purpureus Page 128 Common Page 131
Amomum Plinii Page 142 Anemones Page 106 Early Page 108 Late Page 109
Antipathy of Plants Page 234 Anterrhinum, vide Snapdragon Apples of Love Page
131 Aqua Coelestis Page 200 Arach Page 189 Arbours Page 33 Arbutus Page 64 Time
to remove Page 76
Arbor Judae, vide Judas Tree Arbor Vitae Page 65 Time to remove Page 77
Artichoaks Page 153 Their ordering Page 154 Late Page 156
Artichoaks of Jerusalem Page 163 Asses Dung Page 208 Asparagus Page 150 Their
ordering Page 151
Asphodils Page 102 Aviary Page 57 Auricula's Page 122 Blue Borage-leav'd Page
143

B. BLaustium, vide Pomegranate Balm Page 91 Balsam Apple Page 131
Banqueting House, vide Pleasure-house Bay Tree Page 61 When and how to plant
and remove Page 76
Rose-Bay Page 135 Basil Page 191 Batchelor's Button Page 131 Beans Page 170
Bean Trefoil Page 89 Bears-ears, vide Auricula's Bears-ears Sanicle Page 143
Bee-flowers Page 103 Beets Page 163 To keep long Page 164
Bell-flowers Page 131 Bindweed Page 128 Bluebottles Page 131 Blood to mix with
Earth Page 203 Bloodwort Page 189 Bona Vista's Page 172 Bones to mix with Earth
Page 204 Double Virgins Bower Page 90 Box Tree Page 62 When and how to plant
Page 77
Gilded Box Page 68 Brick-walls, and their manner of building Page 19 Flower of
Bristol Page 131 Brooklime Page 192 Spanish Broom Page 89 Bulbous-rooted
Flowers Page 102 Bugloss Page 187 Burnet Page 191 Burrage Page 187
C. CAbbage Page 175 To keep long Page 176
Calceolus Mariae, vide Ladies-slipper Camomil Page 191 Double Page 131
Campions ibid. Candy Tufts ibid. Caraways Page 189 Carrots Page 160 To keep
long Page 161
Castanea Equina Page 73 Time to remove Page 77
Caterpillars to destroy Page 232 Caterpillars to prevent Page 238
Cauly-flowers Page 178 Cauleworts Page 175, 178 Cedar Page 64 Time to remove
Page 76
Celastras Page 65 Time to remove Page 76
Chalky Land Page 9 Its Improvement Page 12
Champignons Page 193 Cherry double-flower'd Page 91 Christ's Thorn Page 74
Time to remove Page 77
Chibbols Page 167 Chards of Artichokes Page 157 Of Beets Page 164
Chervil Page 187 Cistus Mas Page 136 Cistus Ledon Page 136 Clayie Land Page 11
Its Improvement ibid.
Clary Page 189 Coastmary Page 191 Colchicum, vide Meadow Saffron Columbines
Page 126 Convolvulus Page 128 Corn-sallad Page 186 Corn-flags Page 102 Green
Corn Page 192 Cortusa Matthioli, vide Bears Sanicle Cowslips Page 124 Cranes
Bill Page 131 Garden Cresses Page 188 Indian Cresses ibid. Water Cresses Page
192 Crocus Page 101 Crown Imperial Page 100 Cucumbers Page 183 Cutting of
Plants often Page 223 Cyclamen, vide Sowbread Cypress Tree Page 99 Time to
remove Page 77
Cytisus, vide Bean Trefoyl Cytisus Lunatus Page 135
D. DAffodils Page 98 Daisies double Page 131 Deers Dung Page 208 Dill Page 189
Dittany Page 126 Dog-tooth'd Violet Page 103 Dog Fennel double Page 131 Dials
Page 56
E. EArth enriched Page 195 By Mixtures Page 202
Earthen Walls Page 21 Elder embroidered Page 70 Elder Buds Page 192 Endive
Page 187 Endive to blanch Page 242
Eschalots Page 168 Esculents Page 145 Eugh Tree Page 63 Time to remove Page 76
Exotic Plants Page 132 Experiments Page 222
F. FEathers to mix with Earth Page 203 Featherfew double Page 131 Fennel Page
189 Fennel Flower Page 131 Fences Page 19 Indian Fig Page 136 Fish to mix with
Earth Page 203 Firr-Tree Page 63 Time to remove Page 76
Corn Flags Page 102 Flesh to mix with Earth Page 203 Flowers their Uses Page 6
Flower de Luce Page 105 Flower of the Sun Page 131 Flower Trees Page 78 Flower
Pots Page 56 Flowers of variety of Colors Page 234 Watering them Page 216
Fountains Page 43 Fox-gloves Page 131 Fraxinella, vide Dittany Fritillary Page
96
G. GArdens of Pleasure Page 1 Their Influence on the Mind Page 2 Their
Original ibid. Their Use and Excellency Page 3, 4, 5 Their Situation Page 7
Necessary Defense Page 8 Soil Page 9 Form Page 14 Contrivance Page 17
Garlic Page 167 Gelder Rose Page 82 Gentianella Page 126 Geranium Page 142
Gilliflowers Page 112 Late Page 116 To graff Page 117 To defend ibid.
Stock-Gilliflowers Page 118 Queen's-Gilliflowers Page 131
Gilded Plants Page 66 To increase Page 69 Time to remove Page 77
Gladiolus, vide Corn-flag Glastenbury Thorn Page 74 Time to remove Page 77
Gnat Flowers Page 103 Goats Dung Page 205 Grape Flowers Page 97 Grass-Plats
Page 17 Grass-Walks Page 30 Grotto's Page 51 Groves their Excellency Page 75
H. HAir to mix with Earth Page 203 Hastings Page 173 Hellebor Page 125
Hepatica ibid. Herbs sweet Page 189 Honey suckle Page 90 Holly Hedge Page 26
Holly Tree Page 63 Gilded Page 67 Time to remove Page 77
Hollihocks Page 126 Hollow Root Page 131 Hoofs to mix with Earth Page 203 Hop
Buds Page 192 Horns to mix with Earth Page 203 Horse-Chesnut Page 73 Time to
remove Page 77
Horse-dung Page 207 Hotspurs Page 173 Hot-beds Page 219 Humble Plant Page 130
Hyacinths Page 97 Tuberous Page 142
Hypericum frutex Page 91 Hyssop Page 191 Hooks Lampass Page 228
J. JAssemines Page 86 Their several Sorts ibid. Late Page 91 Jassemines Indian
Page 135 Spanish ibid.
Ilex Page 64 Time to remove Page 76
Improvement of Land Page 10 By Labor only Page 195
Sweet John's Page 117 Iris Page 104 Jucca Page 137 Judas-Tree Page 89 Junquils
Page 99 Juniper-Tree Page 65
K. KEiri, vide Wall-flowers Kidney Beans Page 171
L. LAburnum, vide Bean Trefoyl Ladies Slipper Page 125 Ladies Smocks double
Page 131 Lang de Beuf Page 189 Larkspurs Page 126 Yellow Page 189
Lavender Page 191 Laurel Page 60 Gilded Page 67 Time to remove Page 77
Laurus Tinus Page 61 Laurus Indica Page 136 Leather to mix with Earth Page 205
Leeks Page 168 Lemons Page 142 Lettuce Page 184 Lettuce to blanch Page 241
Leucoium, vide Balbous Violet, and Stock-gilli-flower. Lilac Page 87 Lillies
Page 99 Gilded Page 68
Lilly of the Valley Page 124 Lime Page 210 Linn-Tree, vide Tilia Liverwort,
vide Hepatica Loamy Land Page 9 Lupines Page 129
M. MAlt-dust Page 209 Shrub Mallow Page 90 Maracoc Page 136 Marjoram Page 190
Marigolds Page 128 Marly Lands Page 10 Their Improvement Page 12
Martagons Page 100 Marsh-Marigolds Page 131 Marvel of Peru Page 129 Marum
Syriacum, or African Mastick Page 143 Mastick Thyme, vide Thyme Sweet Maudlin
Page 191 Melons Page 180 Mezerion Page 88 Milk to irrigate Plants withal Page
213 Mints Page 189 Moly Page 102 Moles to destroy Page 232 Monks-hood Page 131
Moss to destroy Page 228 Moss a great annoyance of Trees and Ground ib. Mounts
Page 36 Moth Mullein Page 131 Mud of Ponds Page 209 Mugwort gilded Page 69 Murc
Page 210 Mushrooms Page 193 How to obtain them ibid.
Mustard Seed Page 189 Musk Scabious Page 127 Muscaries, vide Grape-flowers
Myrtles Page 133
N. NArcissus, vide Daffodils Nasturtium Indicum, vide Cresses Navews Page 158
Neats-dung Page 207 Nep Page 189 Nettle-tops Page 192 Nigella, vide Fennel
Flower Nightshade gilded Page 69 Noli me tangere Page 130 Nonsuch, vide Flower
of Bristol.
O. OBelisks Page 55 Oleander, vide Rose-bay Onions Page 166 To make large Page
225
Orange Tree Page 138 To order it Page 140
Ornithogalon, vide Star-flower Orrach Page 189 Of making and taking of
Off-sets, and Suckers Page 239
P. PAles Page 23 Pallisades ib. Parsley Page 188 Parsnips Page 161 Paliurus
Page 74 Time to remove Page 86, 87
Roman Parsnip Page 163 Patience Page 187 Peach-Tree double flowered Page 91
Pease Page 170 Pease-tops Page 192
Pease everlasting Page 130 Pellitory double Page 131 Pennyroyal Page 191
Peony Page 111 Perception in Plants Page 235 Periploca Page 90 Periwinkle
gilded Page 68 Phalangium, vide Spiderwort Philosophical Earth Page 196
Phillyrea Page 61 Gilded Page 68 Time to remove Page 77
Pigeons dung Page 208 Pines to remove Page 76 Pinks Page 117 Pilewort Page
131 Pipe-Tree, vide Lilac Pipes of Elm Page 38 Of Lead Page 38 Of Earth Page 39
Plants to come late Page 222 To defend Page 223 To continue long Page 224 To
meliorate ibid. To propagate by cutting Page 240 To propagate by Circumposition
ibid. Plants to defend from Ants Page 227
Platanus Page 71 Time to remove Page 77
Pleasure-houses Page 34 Pomegranate double blossomed Page 87 Pompeons Page 183
Potato's Page 163 Poppies Page 127 London-pride Page 117 Primroses Page 124
Princes Feather, vide common Amaranthus Purslain Page 185 Pyracantha Page 65
For a Hedge Page 26 Time to remove Page 77
Q. QUick Fences Page 25
R. RUnning of Colors Page 233 Radishes Page 164 Horse Radishes Page 165
Rampious Page 189 Ramsons Page 189 Ranunculus Page 110 Indian Reed Page 136
Removing of Plants often Page 222 Repository for tender Plants Page 35 Rivers
their Pleasure Page 40 Rockets Page 131 Roots Esculent Page 158 Rosemary Page
64 Gilded Page 68 Time to remove Page 77
Roses and their variety Page 79 Their ordering. Page 83 Early Roses Page 84
Late ibid.
Rose-bay Page 135
S. SAffron-flowers or Meadow-saffron Page 101 Sage Page 190 Sage of Jerusalem.
Page 189 Sallad-herbs Page 184 To raise a Sallad in few hours Page 219 Salts
Page 209 Saltpeter Page 213 Sandy Land Page 10 Its Improvement ibid.
Savoury Page 191 Sattin-Flower Page 131 Saw-dust Page 210 Satyrions Page 103
Scabious Page 131 Scallions Page 166 Sceleri Page 187 Scorsonera Page 162
Seasons of Sowing Page 237 Seats in a Garden Page 33 Seeds, good, to know Page
226 Sena Tree, its several Kinds Page 89 Sensible Plant Page 130 Sheeps-dung
Page 205 Sives Page 169 Scarlet Beans Page 130, 171 Skins to mix with Earth
Page 203 Skirret Page 162 Smalledge Page 188 Snap-dragon Page 127 Snails to
destroy Page 225 Snow-drop, vide Bulbous Violet Soot to mix with Earth Page 203
Sorrel Page 187 What Weather to sow in Page 238 Sow-bread Page 103 Spider-wort
Page 102 Spinach Page 186 Spirea frutex Page 89 Springs Page 37, 38 Squashes
Page 184 Star-flower of Arabia ibid. Of Aethiopia ibid.
Star-flowers Page 98 Statues Page 54 Stock-gilliflowers Page 118 To make
double Page 119
Free-Stone-Crop Page 64 Time to remove Page 77
Stone-Walls, and their building Page 20 Stoves of several sorts Page 141 Straw
to mix with Earth Page 210 Strawberries Page 189 Strawberry Tree Page 64 Time
to remove Page 77
Succory Page 187 Suckers cutting off Page 239 Suckers to blanch Page 247 Sugar
Pease Page 173 Sultan's Flower, vide Musk Scabious Sweet-bryar Page 26
Swines-dung Page 107 Sympathy of Plants Page 234 Syringa, vide Lilac
T. TAnsie Page 191 Tarragon Page 188 Tender Plants to set them dry Page 227
Terrace-Walks Page 31 Globe-Thistles Page 131 Thorny Apple ibid. Thyme Page 190
Mastick Thyme Page 146 Tillage encouraged ibid. Its Objections answered Page 147
Tilia Page 72 Time to remove Page 77
Toad-flax Page 131 Tobacco Page 210 Trees for Ornament Page 59 For Shade Page
71 Trees bearing Flowers Page 78
Tuberous-rooted Flowers Page 106 Turnips Page 158 To keep long Page 159
Tulips Page 92 How to order Page 93 Tulips early Page 94

V. BUlbous Violet Page 99 Violets Page 189 Virginian Silk Page 137 Urine to
mix with Earth Page 203
W. WAlks Round Page 15 Square Page 17 Of Gravel Page 28 Of Stone Page 27 Of
Grass Page 30 Terrace-Walks Page 31
Wall-Flowers Page 118 Waters Page 37 Waterworks Page 46 Fat Waters Page 211
Watering of Gardens ibid. By Filtration Page 216
Watering-Pots Page 217 To preserve them Page 218
White-thorn Hedge Page 25 Sweet Williams Page 117 Winter-greens Page 59 Rotten
Wood to mix with Earth Page 210 Woodbinds, vide Honey-suckles Wolfs-bane Page
131 Woollen Rags to mix with Earth Page 204 Worms to destroy Page 210, 225, 261

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for W. Freeman, at the Bible in Fleet Street.
THE Devout Communicant, exemplified in his Behavior, before, at, and after
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, practically suited to all the Parts of that
solemn Ordinance. The Seventh Edition, Corrected and very much Amended by the
Author. Price 1 s. 6 d. An Infallible Way to Contentment, in the midst of
Public or Personal Calamities; with particular Encouragement against the Fear
of Fire and Poverty, Evil Tidings, and Death it self. The Fourth Edition. To
which is added a Second Part, Entitled. The Peace and Joy of the Soul Procured
and preserved. Price Bound 2 s. The Whole Duty of a Christian: Containing all
things necessary both as to what he is to know, and do, for the obtaining a
Happy Eternity. To which is added more particular Directions, how to prepare
for a Comfortable Death. Price 1 s. 6 d. An Exposition of the Church Catechism,
from our Modern Authors and the Holy Scriptures, in Words at length. The Second
Edition. By the Author of the Devout Communicant. Price 1 s. 6 d.
The Four Books above named, are now Printed on Extraordinary good Paper, and a
fair Character.

A Manual of Private Devotions and Meditations, with Directions for the Sick.
By the Right Reverend Father in God L. Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester,
in 12 mo. Price 1 s. 6 d. A View of all Religions in the World, By Alexander
Ross. In 8 vo. Price 6 d. The Old Religion: A Treatise, wherein is laid down
the true State of the Difference betwixt the Reformed and the Roman Church. By
the Reverend Father in God Jos. Hall, late Lord Bishop of Exeter. Price 1 s. 6
d. Quarles Emblems. The last and best Edition, in 8 vo. Price 5 s. -- His
Argalus and Parthenia, in 8 vo. with Cuts. -- The same in 12 mo. without Cuts.
Price 1 s. Miege's last and best French Grammar, 8 vo, Price 2 s.
Politeuphenia: Wits Commonwealth, or a Treasury of Divine, Moral, Historical,
and Political Admonitions, Similies and Sentences, for the use of Schools:
Newly Revised. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Manners of the Israelites, in three Parts.
1. Of the Patriarchs. 2. Of the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt,
until the Captivity of Babylon. 3. Of the Jews, after their return from the
Captivity until the Preaching of the Gospel. Price 1 s. Thesaurarium
Mathematicae: Or, the Treasury of the Mathematics, containing variety of
useful Practices in Arithmetic, Geometry, Trigonometry, Astronomy, Geography,
Navigation, and Surveying: As also the Mensuration of Board, Glass, Tiling,
Paving, Timber, Stone, and Irregular Solids. Illustrated with several
Mathematical Sculptures on Copper Plates. By J. Tailor, Gent. The Elements of
Euclid explained in a new, but most easy Method: By that excellent
Mathematician, F. C. F. Milliet de Chales, of the Society of Jesus; now made
English: In 8 vo. Price 4 s. Dr. Harvey's Treatise of the Small Pox and
Measles. In 8 vo. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Art of preserving and restoring Health.
In 12 mo. Price 1 s. A Complete Body of Chyrurgical Operations, containing the
whole Practice of Surgery, with Observations and Remarks on each Case. In 8 vo.
Price 6 s. A New Voyage to Italy. By Maximilian Misson, Gent. In 2 Vol. 8 vo.
Price 12 s. Of Wisdom. Three Books. Written in French by the Sieur de Charron.
Made English by George Stanhope, D. D. In 2 Vol. 8 vo. Price 12 s. The Roman
History. By Laurence Echard, A. M. of Christ's College in Cambridge. In 2 Vol.
8 vo. Price 11 s. Erasmi Colloquia. In 8 vo. Price 2 s. 6 d. Cambridge Phrases.
In 8 vo. Price 5 s. A Complete Guide for Justices of Peace. By J. Bond of
Gray's Inn, Esquire; The second Edition, much enlarged, and continued down. In 8 vo.
Price 6 s. Means to preserve Peace in Marriage. By the Author of Rules of
Civility. Price 1 s. Zenophon's History of Greece. Translated by John Newman,
Gent. 8 vo. Price 4 s. There is newly printed an excellent Book, entitled,
Arithmetic; or, the Ground of Arts: Teaching that Science both in Whole
Numbers and Fractions. Originally composed by Dr. Record, and others. And now
perused, corrected, new methodiz'd, much improved; and thereto added, I. A new
Treatise of Decimals, with the Demonstration of each Rule, and the Relation it
has to Vulgar Fractions: Also why Decimals are wrought as Whole Numbers, etc.
II. Tables of Simple and Compound Interest, with the manner of Calculation, and
Use thereof, in Resolving all the most necessary Questions, concerning Interest
and Discount of Money; the Purchasing or Selling Estates, in Land or Houses, in
Present or Reversion, in Fee or for Time limited, and for Fining off Rent, etc.
III The easiest Method of Extracting the Square and Cube Roots of Numbers,
Whole or Broken, and the Use thereof in many material Instances. Dedicated to
his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. By Edward Hatton, Philomercat. Price 5 s.

