Redstreak



Vinetum Britannicum: OR, A TREATISE OF CIDER, And such other Wines and Drinks
that are extracted from all manner of Fruits Growing in this Kingdom.

Together with the Method of Propagating all sorts of Vinous FRUIT TREES.

And a Description of the new-invented INGENIO or MILL, For the more
expeditious and better making of CIDER.

And also the right Method of making Metheglin and Birch-Wine.

With Copper Plates.

By J. W. Gent.

LONDON: Printed By J. C. for Tho. Dring, over against the Inner-temple-gate;
and Tho. Burrel, at the Golden-ball under St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
1676.

THE PREFACE.
THe principal design of the ensuing Treatise, is the improvement and increase
of the most excellent Liquor this Isle of Great Britain affords; which has of
late years been brought into use, and very much admired by most, through the
means and industry of many worthy persons who have very much added to its
reputation. Yet is it not become so general a Drink as probably it may be in
time, because the greater part of the people of England are not as yet
convinced of the advantage that will arise by the propagation of the Trees that
yield this noble Drink, nor acquainted with the right method of planting them:
Neither do they understand the true and genuine way of extracting or preparing
it; Which has been the occasion that many have exclaimed against it for a mean
dull Drink.

Thus has this Liquor been undervalued by the ignorant, which did prevent a
long time many from undertaking its improvement. The Planters also have been
discouraged either by the difficulty of raising the Trees, as supposing them
not to agree well with the Soil; or in preserving them, when raised, from
Cattle, and other injuries; and the fruit from such casualties they are usually
subject unto: many also being not as yet convinced of the salubrity and
pleasantness of the Drink it self. Therefore is this small Tract adventuring
into the world in a plain and homely dress, to endeavor a Conviction of the
Countryman, not only of the feasibleness of the Raising, Propagating, and
Planting of Apple Trees, or other Fruit Trees, in most places or Soils in this
Island, and that to a considerable improvement and advantage of their Farms or
Livings small and great; but also of the times and seasons of gathering the
Fruits, and the true and right method of Grinding, Pressing, or Extracting
their Juices, and fermenting, preparing, and preserving the same when
extracted, after the most genuine and best experimented ways that have been yet
known, discovered, or made use of. For this Liquor Cider has been improved
even to perfection, as many ingenious and worthy persons can testify; and the
Method thereof may in time become practicable by the most vulgar Capacities,
from whom is expected the more Universal advancement of this design; into whom
it is not easy to infuse any thing that is Novel, although it be never so
feasible, or to be desired; as might be instanced in several points of
Agriculture, that by degrees have been introduced, and now become generally
practiced, which by them were once slighted and despised: there being no
argument so prevalent with them as Profit; nor that to be talked of, unless
demonstrated by plain Experience, which in this Tract I hope will be done to
their satisfaction. However, they need no better Argument to convince them of
the profits that arise from this part of Husbandry, than that many places in
Herefordshire, Gloucestershire; Worcestershire, etc. are highly improved by
this very Method; the Cider there made being in great quantities annually
carried to London, and several other places of this Kingdom, and sold at a very
high rate; and valued above the Wines of France, partly from the excellency of
it in it self, and partly from the alteration for the worse that French Wines
suffer by their exportation, and from the sophistications and adulterations
they receive from those that trade in them; which by the ill effects of the
latter, opposed to the virtues and pre-excellencie of the former, in all
probability will so far increase and promote the Reputation of Cider, that it
will not only continue the price and value of it, but rather enhanse it, as the
Planters and Ciderists grow more expert in planting the best Fruits, and
preparing the Liquors after the best methods. For vain and frivolous is the
Objection that is usually made, That by much planting of these Fruits, the
prices of them will be so low, that they will not quit the cost. The same might
have been made in Herefordshire, and places adjacent, where these Trees in late
years are wonderfully increased; yet in the same places, the Fruit as well as
the Cider yields a greater price now than ever it did formerly, or than it does
in any place of England (distant from London) besides: For within these three
years Redstreak-Apples have, in some part of that County, been sold after the
rate of five shillings the Bushel, and the Cider made of that Fruit been sold
for eight pounds the Hogshead. The same may be expected in other places, if
Husbandmen would take care to plant the best Fruits, etc. it being presumed
that Cider in a little time would wear out the Reputation of French Wines, and
by degrees lessen the expense of Malt; it being much to be preferred to the
former, and found by experience to be more wholesome than the Drink made of the
latter; and may in time be made at an easier rate than Ale or Beer, and yet be
a great improvement, considering that an Acre of Land planted with Apple Trees,
will by its Fruit yield more Liquor than two or three Acres of Barley can make;
and that without the annual charge of Plowing, Sowing, etc.

But the main Objection that may be made by the more sober part of this Nation,
is, That the increase of these intoxicating and inebriating Liquors, is an
encouragement to the universal vice of Drunkenness. To which it may be
answered, That that vice is not now so regnant in this Isle, as it has been in
former Ages, and now is in other European Nations, if History may be credited.
As in Virgil's time, Drinking and Quaffing to their God Bacchus was in use;
that art being then much in request, and the Goat made a Sacrifice to that God,
for cropping the tender sprigs of the Vine that yielded their beloved Liquor.

Non aliam ob culpam Baccho Caper omnibus aris Caeditur, etc.

Only for this Crime we on Altars pay
Bacchus a Goat, and act the ancient Play.
Then from great Villages Athenians have,
And where the Highways meet, the Prize is placed.
They to soft Meads, heightened with Wine, advance,
And joyfully amongst oyled Bottles dance
The Ausonian Race; and those from Troy did spring
Dissolved with Laughter, Rustic Verses sing;
In Vizards of rough Bark conceal their face,
And with glad Numbers thee great Bacchus grace.
And after him, Pliny reports that Drunkenness and Debauchery were the
principal Studies of those times and Countries; they then inventing all ways
imaginable to excite the Appetite, as if they had been born into the world to
no other end but to waste good Wine; giving great rewards to the greatest
Drinkers. He tells us the Parthians then contended for the glory of excessive
Wine-drinking; but the Italians were unwilling to part with that honor. Milain
yielding one Novellius Torquatus, that wan the name from all pretenders at that
time, who had gone through all honorable degrees of Dignity in Rome, wherein
the greatest Repute he obtained, was for drinking in the presence of Tiberius
three Gallons of Wine at one draught, and before he drew his breath again:
Neither did he rest there, but he so far had acquired the Art of Drinking, that
although he continued at it, yet was never known to faulter in his tongue; and
were it never so late in the evening he followed this Exercise, yet would he be
ready for it again in the morning. Those large Draughts he also drank at one
breath, without leaving in the Cup so much as would dash against the Pavement.
The Western parts of the world, and namely France and Spain, were by Pliny
censured for their Drunkenness with Beer and Ale, Wines being not there in that
Age so frequent. For Italy exceeded all parts of the world for its curious
Wines, there being reckoned 195 sorts of Wines. Virgil counted them innumerable.

Sed neque quam multae Species, nec nomina quae sint
Est Numerus. --
Their Names and Kinds innumerable are,
Nor for their Catalogue we need not care;
Which who would know, as soon may count the Sands
The Western Winds raise on the Libyan Strands.
But at this day no Country yields more variety, nor more pleasant Wines than
Italy. In Rome are now drank (says an Historian of their own) eight and twenty
distinct sorts of excellent Wines; and, as is reported, their Lachrymae Christi
exceeds, for its pleasant and exhilerating quality. So at this day the
Germans are much given to Drunkenness, as one of their own Countrymen writes of
them; that they drink so immodestly and immoderately at their Banquets, that
they cannot pour it in fast enough with the ordinary Quaffing-Cups, but drink
in large Tankards, whole draughts, none to be left under severe penalties;
admiring him that will drink most, and hating him that will not pledge them.
The Dutchmen are not behinde-hand with them; inviting all Comers with a Pail
and a Dish, making Barrels of their Bellies. In Poland, he is most accounted of
that will drink most Healths; and held to be the bravest Fellow, that carries
his Liquor best; being of opinion, that there is as much Valor to be found in
drinking as in fighting. The Russians, Swedes, Danes, and those Northern
Inhabitants, exceed all the rest, having made the drinking of Brandy, Aqua
Vitae, Hydromel, Beer, Mum, Meth, and other Liquors in great quanties, so
familiar to them, that they usually drink our Countrymen to death: Priests and
people, men and women, old and young do so delight in drunkenness, that they
are daily early and late found wallowing in the streets. So that comparing
other Nations and Ages with this of ours, we may well conclude, that the
Inhabitants as well as the Air of Great Britain are temperate, not too prone to
those Vices other places are subject unto; and may justly give them the
Character that was given to the Persians, That Temperance is their chiefest
Virtue: yet not to be absolutely excused; for in the best Gardens some weeds
grow, and amongst the most civil, some rude and debauched are to be found.
There is scarce any part of the world, but some of its Inhabitants are addicted
to the drinking of intoxicating Liquours; which Nature has prompted them unto,
thereby to suffocate the thoughts of futurity, proper only to Mankind. The very
Africans, Americans, and Indians delighted in them, although they were not very
exquisite in their preparation; but the Americans instead of Liquors used the
fume of a Plant, that produced the same effect; whom we think no dishonor to
imitate, even to excess; and it is probable outdo them in their own Invention,
not esteeming it a Vice. The Mahometans, which possess a great part of the
world (it is true) on a superstitious account forbear the drinking of much Wine;
because that a young and beautiful Woman being accosted by two Angels (that had
intoxicated themselves with it) taking the advantage of their Ebriety, made her
escape, and was for her Beauty and Wit preferred in Heaven, and the Angels
severely punished for their folly: For which reason, they are commanded not to
drink Wine. Yet many of them doubting of the Divinity of that Relation, do
transgress that Command, and liberally drink of the Blood of the Grape, which
the Christians prepare out of their own Vineyards, palliating their Crime, in
that they did not plant the Tree, nor make the Wine: The rest of them for the
most part taking great quantities of Opium, which has a stupifying quality
with it; and this generally when they are to look Death in the face. The
Chinese, and the other Inhabitants of the Eastern parts of Asia, are the least
addicted to Ebriety, delighting themselves with Coffee, The, and suchlike
Drinks, free from those stupifying qualities: yet are they not without their
Carouses; and those of the intoxicating Drinks prepared of Rice, Coco's, Sugar,
Dates, etc. equalling in strength and Spirit any Liquors in the World*
Therefore may we very well excuse our own Nation in the slender exercise of
this Vice, were they satisfied with our own pleasant and salubrious Drinks, and
did not spend their Healths, Lives, and Estates, as some are apt to do, on such
that are foreign and pernicious.

And it is to be hoped, that if the Gentry of England, which are for the most
part Landlords of many fruitful Villa's, will but set their own hands to the
Spade, and encourage their Tenants therein, which now delight more in the Plow;
in a little time, the plenty and excellency of our own, may extirpate the name
of foreign Drinks. This being one of the most principal and universal points
of Husbandry; Bread and Drink being the chief supports of man's life: And this
being of all parts of Agriculture the most pleasant; the Plow carrying with it,
many times, more care, cost, and hazard, and not affording the tenth of that
pleasure, as this Art of Planting does; it giving you one of the noblest
Oblectations the world affords; and has by its infinity of delight, subjected
unto it the Spirits of Emperors, Princes, and Senators.

While Fortune waited on the Persian State, Translate of Rapinus.

Cyrus who from Astyages the great
Himself derived, himself his Gardens tilled.
How often astonished Tmolus has beheld
The Industrious Prince in planting Trees and Flowers,
And wat'ring them employ his Vacant hours, and e.
Many more Examples might be here enumerated; but I hope the more Ingenious
part of Englishmen will be easily convinced of the pleasure of this Exercise,
and of the advantage also that it will bring to them and the Nation in general.
It may be also objected, that the use of Cider being now common, and the
planting of Fruit Trees become universal in this Isle, and Cider made almost in
every Village, and many Tracts already written that contain in them the most
excellent Precepts, Rules, Observations, and Experiments that can be imagined,
for the propagating of the Trees, and making this Liquor, That this succeeding
Tract may be needless. To which I answer, that although in some part it may
seem to be true what is here objected, yet is not the use of Cider fully known,
nor the planting of Trees so much increased, as to amount unto a twentieth part
of what in probability it may be in a few years; neither does one in ten of
substantial Housekeepers in the greatest part of the Nation make, or scarce
know how to make this Drink. And as for the Books that treat of this Subject,
they are but few; and what is mentioned in them of it, is but here and there a
little. The most, and all indeed that is written of it well, is in that
incomparable Tract of Mr. Evelin (his Pomona at the end of his Voluminous
Sylva) which every one that may be capable of a small Plantation, is not
willing to purchase. The consideration of all which, did induce ^ne to take
upon me the pleasure of prosecuting this design of publishing to the world
what I had done and observed in, First The Experimenting the different natures
o^ Trees and Soils, and of making them agr^^ better one with the other than
natural^^ they would do; whereby several sorts ^^ Fruit may be propagated in
such places where otherwise they could not. Secondly, In the manner of grinding
Apples, by a new-invented Engine that does much facilitat^ the labor and
charge formerly expended about it. Thirdly, In the way of fermentin^ this
Liquor, and means of purifying an^ preserving it; with several other Rule^
Directions, and Observations, more tha^ what are generally known or taken
noti^^ of; wherein I have taken as much delig^^ and pains, as the subject and
my leisure ca^ afford. And I doubt not but it will yiel^ the Reader content and
satisfaction, a^ though there may be several things insert^^ that may not seem
new, but borrowed; it so in most Treatises, it being an usual saying, Quod Nil
dictum quod non dictu^ prius, Every thing has been discoursed before; Methodus
sola Artificem ostend^ The Method and Manner of performi^^ what has been
discoursed of, is here shown and without an intermixture of the sa^^ that has
been spoken or written of the Subject, it is impossible to make it complete. But
in that it is so accurt and succinct, that without all peradventure it will not
seem tedious to the Reader to read so few lines, that are but introductory to
the End its self for which this Tract was written.

You have not only here presented to you the Art of Propagating the Apple Tree,
and preparing the Juice of its Fruit, but some select Observations and
Experiemnts in the Planting and Propagating several other Vinous fruit-bearing
trees, and extracting, preparing, and preserving their Juices: And also the
best way of making Metheglin out of the fruit and labor of the industrious
Bees, and by them extracted and collected from various Plants, or as many would
have it, only from the Oaken leaf. And the extracting and decocting the Sap of
the Birch-tree, making thereof a cool Summer-Bonello: Together with a brief
touch at the composition of Chocolette, The, etc. Concluding with a Corollary
of the Names and Natures of most Fruits flourishing in this Isle.

A TABLE of CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.
CHAP. I.
OF Drinks in general page 1 Sect. 1. Of Drinks made of the Sap of Trees 2 2.
Of the Juices of Fruits and Berries 3 3. Of Grains 6 4. Of the Extracts of
Leaves, Stalks, and Juices 8 5. Of Roots ibid. 6. Of Mixtures of diverse things
9
CHAP. II.
That the Juices of Fruits are the best of Drinks, and universally celebrated
12 Sect. 1. Their Antiquity ibid. 2. Their Universality ibid. 3. The Reasons
thereof 13
CHAP. III.
That Cider and other Juices of our English Fruits are the best Drinks for this
Country 17 Sect. 1. Its Antiquity and Name ibid. 2. Cider preferred to foreign
Wine 20
CHAP. IV.
Of the best and most expeditious ways of propagating the several sorts of
Fruit Trees for the said uses 29 Sect. 1. Of propagating the Apple Tree ibid.
2. Of the Nursery of all sorts of Fruits 34 3. Of Grafting 42 4. Of
Transplanting Trees 50 5. Of the propagating the Vine 60 6. Of the Diseases of
Fruit Trees, and their cure 70
CHAP. V.
Of making Cider and other Liquors of Apples and other Fruits 74 Sect. 1. Of
gathering and preparing Apples and other Fruits ibid. 2. Of grinding of Apples
80 3. Of purifying of Cider 91 4. Of Vessels for the keeping and preserving
Cider 100 5. Of tunning, bottling, and preserving Cider 104 6. Of making
Water-Cider 118 7. Of mixtures with Cider 120 8. Of making other sorts of Wines
or Drinks of Fruits 122 9. Of making some other Drinks or Wines usually drunk
in this Island 130
CHAP. VI.
Of the profits that may arise from propagating and preparing the said Trees
and Liquors, with the uses and virtues of them 141 Sect. 1. Of the profits
arising thereby ibid. 2. Of the uses of the said Vinous Liquors 144 3. Of the
Medicinal virtues of Fruits, and Drinks made of them 147
CHAP. VII.
A Corollary of the Names and Natures of most Fruits growing in England 155
Sect. 1. Of Apples 156 2. Of Pears 167 3. Of Cherries 171 4. Of Plums 172 5. Of
Apricots, Peaches, Malacotones, and Nectarines 174 6. Of Grapes 176 7. Of
Quinces 178 8. Of Figs, Walnuts, Nuts, and Filberds 179 9. Of Gooseberries,
Currants, Barberries, and Rasberries 181 10. Of Medlars, Services, Cornelians,
Mulberries, and Strawberries 183
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THe Ingenios, or Cider-mills, according to the descriptions in this Treatise
(either with the single Roll or with the double) are made exactly by John
Delamere a Joyner in Petersfield in Hampshire, from 20 s. to 30 s price apiece,
according as they are either single or double.

THere is lately reprinted in Folio, with large additions, a very useful Piece
of the same Authors (Entitled) Systema Agriculturae; The mystery of Husbandry
discovered: Treating of the several new and most advantageous ways of Tilling,
Planting, Sowing, Manuring, Ordering, Improving of all sorts of Gardens,
Orchards, Meadows, Pastures, Corn-lands, Woods and Coppices. As also of Fruits,
Corn, Grain, Pulse, New-Hays, Cattle, Fowl, Beasts, Bees, Silkworms, etc. With
an account of the several Instruments, and Engines used in this Profession. To
which is added Kalendarium Rusticum: Or, the Husbandman's Monthly Directions.
And Dictionarium Rusticum: Or, the Interpretation of Rustic Terms. Printed for
T. Dring, over against the Inner-Temple-gate; and sold by T. Burrel, at the
Golden Ball under St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.

diagram

CHAP. I. Of Drinks in General.
AS the Climates and Scituations of Countries, and the humors and dispositions
of the Inhabitants differ, so have they their various and different Drinks and
Liquors, and their Diets, Habits, etc. Which Drinks and Liquors are by them
also variously extracted or prepared, and out of different Subjects or
Materials. Therefore, before I begin this Discourse, it will not be amiss to
give the Reader a brief Account of such diverse Subjects or Materials, out of
which they are extracted or prepared; that he may observe how industrious the
Inhabitants of this Globe have been in every part thereof, (as it were by an
universal consent) in searching into the several natures of Plants and Fruits,
to exhaust their Blood and Tinctures, to gratify their Gusts, and please their
Fancies; that from the most remote American, to the extremest Asian, they seem
to accord in this, That that Liquor, out of whatsoever salubrious Matter
extracted, which will most intoxicate, is to be highly esteemed of; which in
every Country in the world, either some Root, Plant, Fruit, or Grain will
yield, if by humane Art it be rightly prepared.

SECT. I. Drinks made of the Sap of Trees.
As the Palm-wine is made of the Sap of the Palm tree; which the Africans and
Asians extract, either by plucking off the Flower, and fastening a Pot to the
end of the Sprig into which the Liquour will distill; or by boring a hole in the
Tree, and hanging a Pot under the same to receive it: which in the East Indies
they call Sura, in color resembling Whey; and at the first drawing is sweet
and pleasant like Wine. This Liquor boiled they call Terry, and will keep some
time; but if unboiled, suddenly turns into very good Vinegar. This Wine
intoxicates the Brain, and inebriates as other Liquors do: if distilled, it
makes Strong-water; if Raisins of the Sun are infused in it, with some other
the like Ingredients, it meliorateth the same exceedingly. Out of one Tree, two
Gallons of this Liquor may be drawn in a day, without any damage to the Tree:
Yet some have reported, that it hinders the ripening of the Fruit, and that you
must expect no Fruit from the Tree out of which you thus extract its blood;
which may be supposed to happen, when too much is drawn, or in too dry or late
a Season.

In the Molucca's they extract Wine out of another Tree, there called Laudan.

In the Caribbe Islands is a prickly or thorny Palm, out of which is also
extracted a Wine, after the same manner as before.

Also out of the Birch-tree may be extracted a pleasant Liquor, which being
necessary and useful, and to be obtained in this Climate, the manner of drawing
and ordering it you shall find in the Sequel of this Discourse.

SECT. II. Of the Juices of Fruits and Berries.
Of the Fruits of Trees. As Wine is made of the Fruit of the Vine, and is the
most common, yet the richest Drink the world affords.

Cider of the Fruit of the Apple Tree, and Perry of the Pear Tree; of more use
and advantage in these Northern Regions, than the blood of the Grape.

Drinks made of the Fruit of the Cherry, Current, Gooseberry, Rasberry,
Mulberry, Eldar, and several other Trees, in this and several other more
Northern Countries become very pleasant; as also those made of Blackberries and
Strawberries: their several Preparations are likewise herein treated of.

Coco-Nuts yield also a Milk or Oil, used in the Countries where they grow for
Drink; but being gathered green, they give a very pleasant and thin Juice,
which the Natives drink of whilst it is fresh.

In Negroland are several Fruits that yield Wine, in great esteem among the
Inhabitants, as Sebankou and Syby-Wine, etc.

In Jamaica and Brasilia, grows the Fruit Ananas, on a stalk of a foot long,
surrounded with sixteen sharp Leaves, between which is the Fruit like a
Pineapple, but much bigger; the innermost pulp whereof melts on the tongue,
and is of so delicious a taste, that it exceeds all other dainties: Of this
Fruit is made a Drink no way inferior to Malvasia-Wine.

Of the Pomegranate is extracted an excellent Juice, where plenty of them is to
be had.

The Chinese make a Drink of a sort of Fruit there, that grows on a Tree beset
with Thorns like the Lemon-tree: the Fruit is near as large as a man's head,
with a Shell over it; the Pap within is reddish, and sour-sweet like unripe
Grapes.

Coffee is also made of a certain Berry.

In the Caribbe Islands, the Tree Acajou bears a Fruit like a very fair Apple,
of which the Islanders make a Drink very much in esteem among them, being of an
excellent taste.

In Peru and Chili grows the Vnni, by the Spaniards called Murtilla, bearing a
Fruit not unlike little red Grapes, which are of a tart taste. The Wine pressed
out of this Fruit, is clear to the Eye, pleasing to the Palate, and good for
the Stomach.

In Brasilia is used a Drink called Pacobi, made of the Fruit of the Tree
Pacobebe: They also make the Drink Caoi, of the Fruit of the Ocaijba-tree,
which being stamped in an wooden Mortar, and strein'd, it first looks like
Milk; but after a few days standing, purifies, and intoxicates the liberal
drinkers of it.

SECT. III. Of Grains.
From diverse sorts of Grains are extracted several excellent Drinks. From our
British Grains, as Barley, Oats, Wheat, etc. are extracted Beer, Ale, and Mum.

The Africans in Negro-land brew their Beer of Mill, which they steep in water
till it shoots, and then dry it in the Sun, and stamp it to Meal in great
Mortars, with whom Mills are not yet in use; then they pour on it boiling-hot
water; they make it also ferment with Yeast, imitating thereby our European
Malt-drink. It is probable this Mill is the same with that Millet with which
the Dagestan Tartars make their Bragga, which they esteem very delicious, drink
freely of it, and grow suddenly drunk therewith.

On the Coast of Chili and Peru in America, the Inhabitants make a Liquor of
Mays, which grows there in abundance: they ferment it like our Ale, and drank
moderately, it refreshes; but the Inhabitants usually follow it so close, till
they are mad-drunk.

They make also a very pleasant Drink of the Grain Teca, dried in the Sun,
thrash'd, and parched in hot Sand, then ground on a square flat Stone, with a
Roller of stone, and infused in a great quantity of water.

The Chinese make excellent Drink of Rice, which is very pleasant of taste,
and preferred by them before Wine.

In the Isle Formosa not far from China, the Natives make a Drink as strong and
intoxicative as Sack, out of Rice, which they soak in warm water, and then beat
it to a Paste in a Mortar; then they chew some Rice-meal in their mouths, which
they spit into a Pot till they have got about a quart of Liquor, which they put
to the Paste instead of Leaven or Ferment: And after all be kneaded together
till it be Dough, they put it into a great Earthen pot, which they fill up with
water, and so let it remain for two months; by which means they make one of the
most pleasant Liquors a man need drink: the older, the better and sweeter,
although you keep it five and twenty or thirty years.

SECT. IV. Of the Extracts of Leaves, Stalks, and Juices.
Various Drinks are also made of the Leaves and Stalks of Plants; the principal
whereof is made of the Leaves of The, or Tea; and a counterfeit thereof of our
English Betony, but far inferior to it.

Of the Sugar-cane is none of the meanest Drink prepared; for in the East and
West Indies various Drinks are made of it.

In the more Southern parts of America, the Natives chew the Herb Cava, and put
it into a wooden Trough, and add water to it, and mix it well; which they
esteem a Royal Repast.

Of the Rindes of Pomgranates, with an addition of Cinnamon, the Persians make a
pleasant Drink.

SECT. V. Of Roots.
Several Drinks are made by many people out of Roots; as the Aethiopians make a
Drink of the Root they call Dacha, by mixing it with water, which causes
Ebriety; which Root serving for eating as well as for drinking, they take great
care to propagate.

In the Southern part of the West Indies, the Cassavi-roots, which serve them
instead of Bread, the Natives prepare (by stamping of it) to make their Drink
which they call Parranow.

The Brasilians prepare their Drink Aipu out of the Root Aipimacaxera, either
by an old toothless woman chewing the same to a Pap, and spitting it into a
Pot, on which they pour water, and afterward boiling it leisurely, stirring it
all the time it stands over the fire; or by boiling the said Root so long till
it comes to be like Butter-milk, and then letting it sand till it has done
working; which makes a very pleasant Drink.

The same people also press out a Drink from Potatoe-roots, which they call
Jetici.

SECT. VI. Of Mixtures of diverse things.
From the mixtures of several Ingredients are many pleasant and necessary
Drinks prepared; among which the several Liquors made of Honey may be included,
it being by the industrious Be extracted out of so various Materials, and made
use of by most Nations to make their inebriating Liquors withal; which rather
than it should fail of that end, some of them add Opium to the Composition.

Chocolate is also compounded of several things, and is the most esteemed in
America above any other Drink whatsoever; and much in use throughout most of
the Maritime parts of Europe.

Pale-puntz, here vulgarly known by the name of Punch; a Drink compounded of
Brandy or Aqua Vitae, Juice of Lemons, Oranges, Sugar, or suchlike; very usual
amongst those that frequent the Sea, where a Bowl of Punch is an usual Beverage.

In the East Indies they extract an excellent Liquor which they call Arak, out
of Rice, Sugar, and Dates; which is a kind of Aqua Vitae, much stronger and
more pleasant than any we have in Europe.

Thus having given you a hint of some of the most general Drinks that are in
use in most parts of the world, (every Nation having some peculiar or proper
Drink which they most affect) also of what, and after what manner, as near as I
could from such information as I find, the same are extracted and prepared; to
the end that our own Countrymen may thereby receive encouragement to attempt
the like from those Materials our British Isle affords, which I shall in this
Discourse endeavor to demonstrate to be as many and as good as are in any
place or Country in the world; and that by the true and genuine way or method
of ordering the same, a sufficient quantity of many and various sorts of Wines
and other pleasant Liquors may be here prepared, not only to suffice our own
Inhabitants, but yield a considerable supply to our Neighbors; to the great
improvement of this our Country, and the diminution of that unreasonable gain
and advantage other Nations make by the trade hither of Drink only.

CHAP. II. That the Juices of Fruits are the best of Drinks, and Universally
celebrated.
SECT. I. Their Antiquity.
IT appears by the most true and ancient History, that the first Liquor our
Forefathers used to gratify their Palates and delight themselves withal,
(besides common Water) was the Blood of the Grape; which was no sooner
understood to be so excellent and pleasant a Drink, but it set them at work to
plant and propagate that Tree, to dress and order their Vineyards, and to
extract and preserve the Juice thereof for their extraordinary Repast.

SECT. II. Their Universality.
It also appears from the observation of Travelers and Historiographers, that
the Natives of most of the known parts of the world, have made use of some
Fruit or other, naturally growing in their own Countries, as the most delicate
of their Beverages.

As the Blood of the Grape is preserved on the North-side of the Tropic of
Cancer almost in every part of the temperate Zone, unto the 49 degree of
Latitude, unless where the Laws of Mahomet forbid; whose Disciples often
transgress that Law even to excess, and much lessen that imaginary sin (as they
suppose it otherwise to be) if the Christians dress their Vineyards, and
prepare their Wines.

SECT. III. The Reasons thereof.
Neither is it without just cause that that Liquor is celebrated in those
Countries above any other Drink whatsoever, it being so Homogeneal to the
natures of those people that inhabit there. All Wines that proceed from the
Vine being of a Corroborative and Mundificative nature, and withal have an
exhilerating and vivifying faculty with them, that to those whom the too
frequent use has not abated or dulled the edge of their Virtues, they are
rather Cordials or Restoratives, than ordinary Nutriment, or familiar Medicine.

The Juice of the Apple, Cider, is for the same cause preferred on this side
the 49 degree of Latitude, where the Blood of the Grape obtains not that degree
of Maturity in the Fruit, as in the more hot Countries: And the Apple being but
a pulpy Fruit, not enduring those excessive heats and droughts those Countries
beyond that degree, and more Southerly, are subject unto. It being observed,
that in Normandy, and the Northern parts of France, Flanders, etc. their Cider
far excells their Wines: Here in England also, Cider well made of Mature
Fruits, not only excells any Wine made here, but the Wines that are made in the
most parts of France, Germany, or any other Country on this side the 40 degree
of Latitude.

The principal cause of the excellency of these Liquors above any other
prepared Drinks, is, for that this Juice or Sap is not only collected out of
the Earth by the small fibrious Roots of the Trees, but exhaled by the
attracting power of the Sun, into the Branches and Stalks, thence descending
into the Fruit, where it is by the continual animating heat of the Sun,
maturated. Which natural process of Extraction, Distillation, Concoction,
Digestion, and Maturation, far exceeds the Art of man to imitate, much less to
exceed. Wherefore, not without cause, may those Liquors be worthily preferred
to any other Drinks whatsoever: And more particularly and especially, the Juice
of the Apple in these more Northern Regions, before any other Liquors in what
Country soever prepared. Not but that those Liquors, in those places where they
grow, may be much better than any other produced there: But being transported
into a more remote Country, and of a different Climate, it begets an apparent
alteration in the Drink it self; which, together with the great difference that
is between the Inhabitants of either Country, very much derogateth from the
happy effects that such Liquor might produce, if made use of nearer the place
of its first Extraction.

And as the Inhabitants of these European, and part of the Asian Countries, do
affect, and principally esteem these Juices of the Grape and Apple: so they of
the more remote parts of Asia and Africa, put a great value on the Juice of
Coco-nut, taken either before it be quite ripe, when it yields a thin, though
immature, yet pleasant Liquor; and when more mature, then a more rich and oily
Repast.

In America, no Drink so much in esteem as Chocolate; the principal Ingredient
whereof is the Nut Cacao, which in the vast Regions there subdued by the
Spaniards, are propagated in such abundance, that the account thereof is almost
incredible; and for no other use, than to be converted into that excellent
Regallo, Chocolate.

The delicious Liquor made of the American Fruit Ananas, is also much in esteem
in Jamaica, Brasilia, and those parts.

Notwithstanding these Wines or Liquors have obtained the pre-eminence above
all other Drinks throughout the greatest part of the known world, yet are there
several sorts of more inferior Fruits that yield very pleasant and wholesome
Drinks (as before may be observed) that can never be advanced to that repute or
universal acceptance, as these last mentioned; but may nevertheless be
compared, if not preferred to any other Drinks extracted or prepared from any
other Subject than Fruit.

The Juices of Fruits being Mature, are worthily esteemed to be very grateful
to the Stomach, and of easy digestion; being, by reason of their concoction
and maturation in the Fruits, become beforehand a semi Sanguis, or half Blood,
and are not so subject to putrefaction as other Extractions of a meaner
Classis; which is also the reason, that with a due ordering of them, by a mere
natural Maturation, the most of them will keep in their full purity several
months and years; and some of them for many years increasing still in strength,
purity, and pleasantness; which no other Extracts are capable of.

CHAP. III. That Cider and other Juices of our English Fruits, are the best
Drinks for this Country.
SECT. I. Its Antiquity and Nature.
HAving tasted a little of those several Dainties that are in most Countries
liquidly prepared to please the Palate, I hope every English man, or Native of
this Isle, on his return hither, will conclude with me, that our British Fruits
yield us the best Beverages; and of these Fruits, the Apple the best, which is
here called Cider.

As for the Antiquity of this Liquor in this Country, much might be said, if
you will grant that the name Wine was formerly, as well as lately, used as a
common name to the Juices of several other Fruits besides the Grape; there
being mention made of several Vineyards that have anciently been in England; as
that of Elie, Dans Vinea Vinum, a Vineyard yielding Wine; and that of
Bromwell-Abby in Norfolk, bearing the names of Vineyards to this day.

The name Seider being British, having some Analogy with the Greek word Sicera,
is also an Argument that it was a Drink amongst the Ancient Britains, they
wanting Names for new things.

The Tradition that Tithes have been paid for Wines made of certain Vineyards
in Gloucester-shire: And Camdens testimony that there was no County in all
England so thick set with Vineyards as Gloucester-shire, nor so plentiful in
increase; the Wines made thereof not affecting their mouths that drank them
with an unpleasant tartness, etc. and adds that to be the reason why many
places in that Country, and elsewhere in England, are called Vineyards: All
these Testimonies may be as well for the planting of Orchards for Cider, as
Vineyards for Wine; the name Wine might be then used for that Liquor, as now
for other: and the preference they then gave to the Wines of Gloucester-shire
before other, in not being so tart, is a good Argument that it was so, because
the Spontaneous trees or Wildings of that Country might very well yield a
better Drink then, than the Apples formerly planted in the Orchards of other
parts of England; it being but of late years that pleasant Fruit, or good
Cider-Fruit either, have been propagated in most parts of this Country; and in
some places not any to this day.

The name of Cider from Sicera being but a general name for an inebriating or
an intoxicating Drink, may argue their ignorance in those times of any other
name than Wine for that Liquor or Juice; it being as proper for the Juice of
the Apple as the Grape, if it be derived either from Vi or Vincendo, or quasi
Divinum, as one would have it.

Also the vulgar Tradition of the scarcity of foreign Wines in England, viz.
that Sack which then was imported for the most part but from Spain, was sold in
the Apothecaries Shops as a Cordial Medicine; and the vast increase of
Vineyards in France, (A'e and Beer being usual Drinks in Spain and France in
Pliny's time) is an Argument sufficient that the name of Wine-Vineyards might
be attributed to our British Wine-Cider, and to the places separated for the
propagating the Fruit that yields it.

SECT. II. Cider preserred to foreign Wines.
Whether it be from the greater degree of concoction in the Juice of the Apple,
being thinner dispersed in the body of the Fruit, than that is which is in the
Grape, or whether it be because the greatest part of the Wines usually imported
from abroad, are not of their best extraction, or impaired by transportation;
the well-made Cider of some parts of England is to be preferred by the most
indifferent and unprejudiced Palates: as the most acute John Evelin Esquire; in the
Preface to his Pomona, has diversely illustrated, especially by that President
of the Challenge of Mr. Tailor with the London-Vintner, where the
Redstreak-Cider gained the Victory over the Vintners best Spanish or French
Wine, by variety of judges.

Wine of the Grape, although of it self, More wholesome.
being well made and preserved, without those too common Sopistications,
Adulterations, Brewings, or Compositions, is without doubt an excellent
Cordial, and taken moderately, much conducing to health and long life: yet the
constant use of it as a quotidian Drink, Experience has taught us, that it is
very injurious to the Drinker. If it be new, that is to say, under the age of a
year, or be set into a new fermentation by the addition of new Wine or Stum, it
purges, and puts the blood into a fermentation, that it indangers the health of
him that drinks it, and sometimes his life. If it be old Wine, which is
commonly the best, then the Vintners cunning in preserving it, and making it
palatable by his secret and concealed Mixtures, renders it dangerous to be
drank either fasting, or in great quantity; many having died suddenly merely by
drinking of such Wine: For there is no Drink more homogeneal to the blood than
Wine, the Spirit thereof being the best Vehicle of any Medicine to the most
remote parts that the blood circulates in: therefore if any evil mixture be in
it, the more it operates, and is soonest conveyed to the heart and all other
parts of the body.

It is recorded by Pliny, That Androcydes a noble, sage, and wise Philosopher,
wrote unto Alexander the Great, to correct and reform his intemperate drinking
of Wine, whereto he was very prone, and in his fits of Drunkenness very rude;
the immoderate drinking whereof is by him affirmed to be very dangerous and
pernicious.

As for Cider, that we have had the long and constant experience of the making
of it, and preserving it for several years in its true and genuine taste; Cider
of two and three years old being not unusual in the Cider-Countries, the late
Lord Scudamore having had a Repository on purpose to preserve it in, at his
Seat in Herefordshire, and that without any Sophistication or Adulteration, but
by the only Art of right preparing and ordering of it.

The constant use of this Liquor, either simple or diluted, has been found by
long experience to avail much to health and long life; preserving the Drinkers
of it in their full strength and vigor even to very old Age; witness that
famous History in my Lord Bacon's History of Life and Death, of eight men that
but a little before his time danced a Morris-dance, whose Age computed together
made eight hundred years; for what some wanted of one hundred years, others
exceeded. These were reported to be Tenants of one Manor, belonging to the
Earl of Essex at that time, and to be constant Cider-drinkers. And diverse other
Presidents of the like nature, Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, etc. can furnish
you withal.

If it be new and unfermented, it prejudiceth not the Drinker; nor if it be
old, so that it is unpleasantness forbids you not to drink it, but for its
unpleasantness sake.

Its agreeing with our natures, adds much to its Salubrity, because of its
innocence, it yielding also a good Spirit, which may probably prove a Vehicle
answerable to that of other Wine: At least it may make a very good Brandy,
which (when the Fruit is grown more common) in plentiful years may be
experimented and improved.

Although there is no Liquor, Drink, nor More Pleasant.
Diet alike pleasant to all, some preferring that dull Coffee before any other
Drink whatsoever; some stale Beer, others fat Ale, Mum; one Claret, another
Sack, before any other Drinks: Yet is there not any Drink known to us so
generally Palatable as Cider; for you may make it suit almost with any
humourous Drinker: It may be made luscious, by addition of a good quantity of
sweet Apples in the first operation; pleasant, being made with Pippins or
Gennet-Moyles only; racy, poignant, oily, spicy, with the Redstreak, and
several other sorts of Fruits, even as the Operator pleases. And it satisfies
thirst, if not too stale, more than any other usual Drink whatsoever.

But that which most tempts the Rustic More Profitable.
to the Propagation of this Fruit for the making of this Liquor, is, the facile
and cheap way of the raising and preparing of it; for in such years that Corn
is dear, the best Cider may be made at a far easier rate than ordinary Ale; the
thoughts whereof add much to the exhilerating virtue of this Drink, and, I
hope, will be a good inducement to the farther improvement of it.

Next unto Cider, Perry claims the precedence, ^^^ry.
especially if made of the best juicy Pears celebrated for that purpose.

The Wines or Drinks made of Plums, Juices of other Fruits.
Cherries, Currants, Gooseberries, Rasberries, yea, and of our English Grape,
may be so prepared, that they may be more acceptable to our Palates, and more
healthy, pleasant, and profitable than those foreign Wines many are so fond of.

CHAP. IV. Of the best and most expeditious ways of Propagating the several
sorts of Fruit Trees for the said uses.
SECT. I. Of Propagating the Apple Tree.
THere is no Fruit-tree in this whole Isle of Great Britain, that is so
universal as the Apple Tree; there being but few places, and but little land,
wherein it delights not: hardly any place so cold or moist, hot or dry, but
it will thrive and bear Fruit. Neither is there any Fruit-tree more easily
Propagated, nor any that bears so great a burden of Fruit, as this does:
Therefore is the planting and increasing of them more to be encouraged and
promoted than of any other, considering also the excellency of the Liquor
extracted from its Fruit. For the Propagating whereof, the first thing to be
considered is, the nature and position of the land wherein it is to be planted.

Although this Isle be styled the Queen of Isles, for its temperature of Air,
fertility of Soil, etc. that we may truly say of her as Rapinus of France,

Though to all Plants each Soil is not disposed,
And on some places Nature has imposed
Peculiar Laws, which she unchanged preserves;
Such servile Laws Great Britain searce observes:
She Is fertile to excess, most Fruits she bears,
And willingly repays the Plowman's cares.
Yet is there required some Judgment Adapting Fruits to the Soil.
from the Husbandman in placing each Tree or Plant in the proper Soil it most
delights in, or in adapting Plants to the nature of each Soil you have to
plant; for Trees will strangely prosper in ground that they like, comparatively
to what they will do if they are planted in ground wherein they delight not.

Virgil was of the same opinion, when he sang
Nec vero terrae far omnes omnia possunt, etc.
All grounds not all things bear: the Alder-tree
Grows in thick Fens; with Sallows, Brooks agree;
Ash, craggy Mountains; Shores, sweet Myrtle fills.
And lastly, Bacchus loves the Sunny Hills.
The Apple it self, which is but one kind of Fruit, yet are there several
sorts of them that delight in some places, and will not thrive in another:
which made the Kentish-men so addict themselves to the planting of the Pippin
and Codlin, because no other Apple would prosper so well in that County; which
gave them the names of Kentish-Pippin and Codlin; when in some other places
neither of those Fruits will prosper without Art, but are destroyed by that
pernicious Disease the Canker. The Redstreak also is observed to prosper
better, and yield a better Juice in some places than in other, although but in
the next Parish.

The same is to be observed in Pears: Summer-Pears will thrive where
Winter-Pears will not. Which is the first thing to be considered of, to wit,
what Species of Fruits are most natural to the Country or place where you
intend to raise your Trees; which may be known partly by observation of the
growth of Trees in the Neighborhood, and (where that satisfies not) by
experimenting variety of sorts in your Ground. And when you have resolved what
Species to propagate, then select or set out your Ground.

For the distinguishing whereof, there What sort of Land best.
are many Rules; but he that is seated or fixed in any place, and cannot
conveniently change his Habitation, must be content with his own: and if any
defect or disadvantage be in it, it may be it has some advantage that another
wants. If it lie to the North, the Trees bud and blow the later, and many times
the Fruit succeeds the better, and is the freer from the injurious South-winds
in the Autumnal Season. If it lie to the East, it has not only the advantage
of being later budden and blown, because of the cold Easterly-winds in the
Spring; but the Fruit ripens the better, the Morning-Sun in the Summer being by
much the best; and the Fruits are also freed from the Western-winds, which with
the South are the worst. If your Land be on a dry or rising ground, you may
plant them the thicker, which will cover and shade the ground the sooner, and
make them bear the better: the Fruit will also yield a more Vinous Liquor. If
your Ground lie in a cold moist Vale, the sooner may you raise a natural Fence
or security about it, to defend your Trees from cold Winds and stiff Gusts,
which diversely annoy your Trees and Fruits. The worse your Land is, the more
you have for your money; the better it is, the less charge to plant it, and the
sooner will you reap the benefit of your labor.

But if you have the liberty to choose what Land you will for planting of
Fruit Trees, then for the Cider-Fruit choose a good warm light Rye-land: for the
heavier, colder, and moister Wheat-land is not so good, the Cider being not so
clear nor Vinous.

If the Ground be very light and rich of it self, or so made by improvement,
several sorts of Apple Trees, especially the Pippin, will be so apt to the
Canker, that they will scarce ever be large Trees: Therefore a firm and strong
Land is best for Winter or longlasting-Fruit; but for the ordinary Cider or
Summer-Fruit, Land cannot be too light: The more it inclines to redness, the
better.

If the Ground be too hot, dry, shallow, Amendment of Land.
or barren, raise the land on broad Ridges, that the middle of them may be
about twenty or thirty foot distance, according as you intend to plant your
Trees: Let the Intervals between the Ridges be about seven or eight foot broad,
or more, and the Earth taken up between about a foot deep cast on the Ridges,
which will make the ground thicker than before it was, and your Trees you may
plant deeper in it than otherwise you could do; where they will thrive very
well, as may be perceived on the Banks of some land in the Hedges, that
Apple Trees will thrive better than in the level land.

If water cannot be obtained to moisten it sometimes, by small Rivulets running
through it, which will highly advance the growth and fertility of your
Fruit Trees; Chalk, Marle, or Clay laid and spread on the surface of it, will
cool and sadden it, and make the ground very rich, and yield a good Grass,
under which the Roots of the Trees will spread with delight.

Fern or any other Vegetable, nay Stones covering such Land, will preserve it
cool and moist in the Summer, as well as warm in the Winter.

If the ground be cold, moist, and spewy, endeavor what you can to drain it,
either by open Trenches or close, which are made after this manner. Dig several
narrow Trenches, one between each row of Trees, descending to some Ditch at the
lower end of your Ground, and lay in the bottom of it Alder, Frith, or Faggots
(some say Beech will last as long) and fill the Trenches again on the said
Frith or Faggots, and level your Ground as before; by which means the water
will insinuatingly pass through the said wood to the lower side of your ground,
leaving the rest the drier: But if you cannot conveniently do this, then raise
it as before is directed for your dry land.

For the mixture or composition, any Dung or sandy Soil is very good, so that
the Dung, whilst new, come not too near the roots of your Trees.

But if your Ground be of a cold Clay, or strong stiff nature, then the best
way is to cast it up as before, tempering it with Sand, or sandy compost, any
sort of Dung, or rotten Vegetables; and to plant it with the most hard Apples,
Pippins, etc. and keep the ground annually plowed or dug to the very stem of
the Tree, which will be a means to preserve the Trees from Moss, which Trees in
this sort of ground are naturally subject unto.

If Land be subject to be overflown by the swelling of Rivers, or other falls
of water, it often proves very good for Fruit, so that it be drained again, and
the water not suffered to stand too long on it, and the Land not of a cold
stiff nature.

If your Land decline a little toward Position or Situation of Land to be
planted.
the South-East, it is esteemed the best Situation of Land to plant
Fruit Trees on: First, By reason that in the Spring, Easterly-winds keep back
or check the Bud. Secondly, For that it has the benefit of the whole
Anti-Meridian Sun, which is esteemed the best in the Summer and Autumn,
dispersing the cold Dews early from the chill Fruits; the Air being warmed by
the Sun all the day, is sufficient in the evening to preserve and continue the
same heat without the Sunbeams. Thirdly, It has some advantage by this
Position from the Winds in the Autumn, that blow from the South-West and West,
usually prejudicial, and sometimes destructive to the Fruits.

If you plant your Fruit Trees in your Fencing or sheltring of land.
Hedge-rows, or sparsim here and there about your Land, your only care will be
to fence and preserve each Tree from the wrong or injury it may sustain by
Cattle, unless you graft on stocks that are already nursed up in the Hedges,
naturally defended thereby from spoil; but if in open places care must be taken
to Bush them, so that Cattle may not rub against them, nor crop them.

If you make a Plantation any where by it self, if it be not otherwise defended
by Hills or Trees, you may at the same time as you plant your Fruit, plant
other Trees on the confines of your Plantation. If your Ground be moist, then
may you plant Poplar or any other of the taller sort of Aquaticks: If a dry
Land, then Wallnuts, Ash, or any Tree that delights on dry land. For such
defense preserves your Trees from blighting Blasts in the Spring, and
destructive Winds in the Summer and Autumn.

At the same time also when you plant your Fruit Trees, it will much conduce to
the preservation of them when Mature, if you plant a good Quick-hedge of
White-thorn, which will be a very good Fence by the time that the Fruit Trees
come to bear, sufficient to keep out the Cattle from cropping the tender Twigs
of your Fruit Trees, and rubbing against their Stems; and unruly people from
destroying the Fruit.

SECT. II. Of the Nursery of all sorts of Fruits.
To obtain as well good Trees as good Fruits, is a great care. Some pretend to
raise excellent Fruits from the Kernel of the Apple, which rather carries with
it the nature of the Stalk the Tree was grafted on, than the Fruit it proceeded
from therefore I shall take little notice of it here. Although many have
pretended to have raised some new Species of Fruits by this means, Grafting
being by all, as well our Modern Planters as the Ancient, concluded to be the
best and most expeditious way to preserve the right Species of Fruits, and
accelerate their bearing. The choice of the Stock is therefore to be
considered; which most agree the Crab-stock to be the best, although many
affirm that the Wilding-stock, or of the Paradise-Apple, to be preferred: for a
Tree grafted on a Crab-stock is of longer duration than any other, the wood
being more hard, and less subject to decay, and the Root more naturally
spreading in our Soil than any other. It also not only preserves, but quickens
and enlivens the Gust of any delicate Apple.

But if the Apple you intend to Propagate be over-tart, then sweeten it on a
Gennet-Moyle or Wilding-stock, rather than on a Crab-stock.

When you are resolved on what Stocks Raising of Stocks.
you intend to graft, then provide your self with the Chaff or Murc of that
Fruit you derive your Stock from, and spread it thin over a Bed of Earth dig'd,
dressed, and cleansed from Weeds; and spread or sift Earth two or three fingers
thick lightly over it, that it may be all covered; and so let it lie all the
Winter, and in the Spring following you will have plenty of young Stocks appear
promiscuously. During the Summer, keep them weeded clean, and the Winter
following draw them where they are too thick or irregular, and transplant them
into other Beds well dressed, as before, and there let them stand until they
are big enough to graft.

Or you may obtain Crab-stocks out of the Woods and Hedge-rows, and plant them
in the places where you intend they shall stand.

Observe always, that you make your Seminary in as barren Land as, or more
barren than the place you intend to remove them into; by which means you may
raise a fair Plantation on a mean Soil: Where many have been discouraged by
removing of their Trees out of a rich Nursery into a mean Land, blaming the
Tree or Soil, when it is indeed their own ill husbandry.

The Crab-stock also thrives best when removed from a cold and dry Hilly-land,
to a warm and fertile Soil; but those raised from the Seed are the best.

It is to be observed, that the Stocks raised of Seed or Kernels emit a
downright Root into the ground, called a Tap-root, which in the removal of your
young Stocks, ought to be taken away; then will the Roots of your Stocks
spread, which will make them the easier to be removed, when they are grafted
and fit for transplantation. Also the spreading Root is the best both for the
seeding the Tree and bearing (...).

T^^s having provided yourself of Stocks, (...) of Kernels in your Nursery, or
in (...) Fields, Hedge-rows, or other places of Crab-stocks, either naturally
growing or planted there, which having stood a year or two, are fit to be
grafted on; Then you must furnish your self with Grafts suitable to your
design.

Before you cut your Grafts, consider Choice of Fruits.
what Fruits you are most inclinable to propagate. But seeing that my
intentions are only to treat of Drinks, I shall only mention here such Apples
that are proper for Cider, although otherwise useful, and to be preferred, in
some cases, before the other sorts that are less apt for the Mill.

Cider-fruit may be divided into three parts: First, Such that are for making
early Cider, or for the present drinking. Secondly, Such that are for making
the best, rich, Ovly, Spicy, and highly-relished Cider, and also long-lasting.
Thirdly, Such that are useful Fruit for the Table, yet making a very pleasant
and acceptable Cider.

As for the first Classis, the Codlin is the Cod^^^.
earliest, best bearer, and easiest to be propagated: You may graft them on
Stocks as you do other Fruit, which will accelerate and augment their bearing;
but you may save that labor and trouble, if you plant the Cions, Slips, or
Cuttings of them in the Springtime, a little before their budding; by which
means they will prosper very well, and soon become Trees; but these are more
subject to the Canker than those that are grafted.

These, of all the sorts of Apple Trees, agree best in a near Neighborhood of
their own Species; for set them as close as you will, they will thrive, and
bear very well: therefore are they fit to plant in Rows, Walks, and Avenues,
and make a very graceful and pleasant prospect.

It is usual with some to plash them to Poles, to make a Pallisade-hedge with
them; which is not commendable, because they are pithy Trees, and ill endure to
be lopt, thriving best when permitted to shoot upright, and bear the more. They
delight also in shady Groves or Walks.

The next is the Gennet-Moyle, which delights Gennet-Moyle.
most to grow single from its Company; but as for its being grafted or growing
of Sets, it is very much like the Codlin. This Fruit makes by far the better
Cider, and is for present drinking, and almost equals the best of Ciders.

There are also several other Summer-Fruits that yield very good Cider, and fi^
to be propagated, were they not too pleasant to the taste, tempting idle
persons t^ waste the Fruit, and injure the Trees.

Of the second Classis, is the Redstreak, Redstreak.
which is now the most universally celebrated for its Juice, of any Apple this
Island yields: It is one of the sorts of Wildings of Herefordshire, and for the
excellency of its Liquor, is now spread into most parts of England. There are
several sorts of them, the one more red than the other, and is called the
Red-Redstreak; another there is that is more pleasing to the Palate than the
former.

The Redstreak is to be preferred for your Plantation to any other Apple
whatsoever, especially remote from your house. First, Because it yields the
best of British drinks. Secondly, Because the Fruit is harsh and unpleasant,
not tempting the Palates of lewd persons. Thirdly, The Tree thrives in as mean
Land as any other Apple whatsoever, being a spontaneous Plant at first.
Fourthly, It Is a constant bearer, being a Wilding, enduring (more than the
greater part of other Fruit) the severity of the sharp Springs, sometimes
destructive to those that are more tender. Fifthly, The Tree bears in a few
years after its grafting, recompencing betimes the industry and cost of the
Planter; the delay whereof in other Fruits, having been a principal obstacle to
the great design of Planting. Sixthly, The Tree is low and humble, and so more
of them may be planted in a like quantity of Land, than the taller Trees, which
shade the ground more. Seventhly, The lowness of the Trees prevents the sharp
winds in the Spring, and the Fruit of them are not so apt to be blown off in
the Autumn. Eighthly, This Fruit exceeds all other Apples in the Kitchen, for
the time they last.

Others there are also that are very excellent for this use; as the Elliot, the
Stoken-Apple, several sorts of Musts and Fillets, etc. but all inferior to the
Redstreak.

Of the third Classis, are Pippins and Permains, Pippins and Permains, etc.
which make a very pleasant Cider: but of all Table-fruit, the Gilliflower and
the Marigold-apple (sometimes called John's Permain, the Kate-apple, and the
Onion-apple) are to be preferred, especially mixed, bearing with them the
marks, viz. a Streaky coat, of good Cider-apples. The Goldenrennet, the
Harvey-apple, and the Queening, are very good Cider-apples.

There are some sorts of Land on which Choice of Pears.
Apple Trees will not prosper well, and are more apt for the Pear Tree; as the
cold, gravelly, clayish, wild, and stony land, on which this Tree, especially
the more wild sort of Pear, will thrive exceeding well. Perry being near of
kin, for its excellency, to Cider, and the Pear Tree far exceeding the
Apple Tree for its greatness and fruitfulness; there having been one very
lately, not far from Ross in Herefordshire, that was as wide in the
Circumference as three men could encompass with their extended arms, and of so
large a head that the Fruit of it yielded seven Hogsheads of Perry in one year,
as I was credibly informed.

The Choakie Pears of Worcestershire and those adjacent parts, or the Horse
pear, and Bareland pear, and Bosbury-pear, are esteemed the best for the Press,
bearing almost their weight of excellent Liquor. The more colored any Pear is,
the better.

Plums are not to be rejected from our Plums.
Plantations of Wine-yielding-fruits, it being presumed that by a right
ordering, they may yield one of the best Drinks, especially the Damson; any of
them being easily propagated, and bear well.

In a good mellow Soil, scarce any Tree Cherries.
will yield more of Fruit, than the Flanders Cherry-tree, and that Fruit also
plenty of a brisk Vinous Liquor; which well prepared, is worthy of your esteem.

There is great variety of this Fruit, according to which may also the like
variety of curious Liquors be made.

Of Gooseberries, Currants, and Rasberries, ^ooseberries, Currants, Rasberries.
there is but little variety, the fairest of either being to be preferred,
yielding the best Juices, and bearing the greatest quantities of Fruit.

SECT. III. Of Grafting.
Having resolved on your Fruit, you must select your Grafts of such Trees that
How to choose Grafts.
are to be grafted from the best bearing Trees, and from such Boughs or Sprigs
that are most apt to bear; and, as a Virtuoso well observed, from the Tree, the
Spring before its bearing year, if it be a Tree that (as many usually do) bears
every other year.

As for the size, let them be but short, with two or three Eyes or Buds at
most, and those the nearer together, the better. Grafts are usually cut a
little below the Knot or Joint of the last years growth, because the wood is
there hard, and the rind thick, to shoulder well on the Stock; but the smallest
top will grow, though of the last years growth only: yet the Grafts of two or
three years growth cut short (and the Buds that are likely to blow broken off)
are best on large and well-rooted Stocks, where they make the best shoots, and
are not so easily subject to the inconveniences of the more slender.

When once the Leaf is wholly off, and To keep Grafts.
before the Tree begins again to bud, Grafts then cut, may be kept until the
Spring or Grafting-time, the ends being stuck in the ground, and transported or
carried to any remote place: If the ends be stuck in Clay, or in a Turnip, or
they bound up in green Moss, or being wrapped in oiled or waxen Leather, the
intent being to keep them cool, and from the exsiccating winds; for in frosty
and windy weather, Trees taken up and not yet planted, being laid in a Cellar,
or suchlike place, are preserved, when otherwise exposed to the wind, though
much more cold, are destroyed.

Although you may graft or inoculate Time for Grafting.
almost at any time of the year, either by beginning early in the Autumn, and
by preserving them from the cold, or by keeping your Grafts cut and stuck in
the ground in the shade, to impede their growth in the Spring, and so graft
them on the sappy Stocks, or by budding in Summer; yet the principal times for
grafting are the months of January and February, for Cherries, Pears, Plums,
and forward Fruits; and March for Apples. A mild open weather is best, and
most propitious for this work; which if that invite, it is not good to stay for
worse.

Yet observe, that a Graft sometimes before cut and stuck in the ground, and
then grafted at the rising of the Sap, takes better than those that are grafted
so soon as cut.

Several ways, in several ages, have been Manner of Grafting.
found out for the grafting of one Species of Trees into another, for its
melioration; no History mentioning its first discovery, although it has been
long practiced.

Et saepe alterius ramos impune videmus Virgil.

Vertere in alterius; mutatamque insita mala.
And often without impairing we may see
The Boughs of one graff'd in another Tree.
The most common, and, as may be supposed, the most ancient way, is the
grafting in the Stock; and that is, either by cleaving the Sto^k, or grafting
in the Rind, or by Whip-grafting.

Grafting in the Cleft, is to cut off the In the Cleft.
Stock at a smooth place at the height you intend; and if the Stock be small,
from one to three inches diameter, then cleave it, that the slit may be on the
smoothest side of the Stock; and fit your Graff, shouldering it at a Joint or
Bud, joining the inside of the Rindes exactly.

But if the Stock exceed three inches diameter, In the Rind.
or thereabouts, the best way is to graft in the Rind or Bark, which is done
with a Wedge made of Ivory, Box, or other hard wood, made of a flat half-round
form, tapering to a point; and force the same in between the Rind and the
Stock, until you have made the passage wide enough for the Graft, the end
whereof must be cut after the same form with the Rind peeled off, preserving on
as much of the inner Rind as you can, and making the Graft to shoulder well on
the Stock. Thus may you set many Grafts round the Stock; and the more there
are, the sooner will they cover the Stock.

If the Stock be under an inch in diameter, Whip-grafting.
then the best way is to whip on the Grafts, that is to say, if the Stock be
bigger than the Graft, then cut the Stock off at the smoothest place, and a
little sloping. Some place the Graff to the upper side of the Slope, and some
to the lower, which is the better way, that the Rind or Bark may cover the
sooner: on which side soever it be, the Rind must be pared away, beginning
easily, and so deeper upwards until you cut to the wood at the top; then pare
the end of the Graft accordingly, leaving it with a full and broad shoulder to
rest on the top of the Stock, and fit it aptly to the Stock, and bind it on
with Hemp, Yarn, Basse, or suchlike: but if the Graft and Stock be near of a
size, then cut the Graft aslope, and the end of the Stock likewise, and bind
them together Rind to Rind.

If the Tree and Stock stand near together, By approach.
they may be united, by paring away the Rind of both, and binding them together
until they are perfectly joined; then may you cut away the branch that formerly
led to the Graft, and leave it to extract its nourishment from the Stock.

When your Grafts are placed as they Luting of Grafts.
ought in their Stocks, then must you apply good Lute or Clay mixed with new
Horse-dung (without the Straw) and well tempered, to prevent chapping; which
preserves the heads of the Stocks moist, that the Rind or Bark may cover them
the sooner; and defends them from the extremities of cold, wet and drought: but
if the Stocks be small, a little Soft-wax well emplaistered on them, is easier
done, and preserves them better than the other. Always remember to cut the
Ligaments off those Grafts you whipped on, about Midsommer following.

Some of late have attempted to raise New manner of grafting.
Nurseries or Plantations, by whipping the Graff to a piece of a Root of a Tree
of the same species, and so to plant it in the ground, a little lower than the
grafting place, that the Earth may cover the wound, that the Root may feed the
Graff, as the Stock does in the former ways. Thus with the Root of one
Crab-tree cut in pieces, may you raise twenty or thirty Apple Trees. And thus
may you unite the Graft to a Stock of a different kind, whereby new Fruits may
be produced, and the old meliorated; the wound being within the ground, and not
obvious to the extremes of the weather. This only is objected, that the Tree
grows but slowly, most affecting expedition in these affairs.

Several sorts of Fruits are best inoculated, Inoculation.
ted, and some indifferent either way, as Cherries, Plums, etc. The time for
this work, is from the middle of June, to the middle of August, as the season
of the year is either forward or late.

The buds you are to choose from Shoots of the same years growth; which if by
carriage in the Air, or otherwise, they are a little withered, you may revive
them by setting them in water, which will make the buds come the cleaner from
the wood.

To prepare the Stock, take the cleanest part of the Stock, and cut the Rind
athwart, and from the middle thereof slit down the Rind near an inch in length,
that both cuts may resemble a T: then cut off the sprig out of which you take
your bud a little above it, and about half an inch below it, and slit the short
piece of the sprig in your hand in the midst, leaving the bud on one side; then
with your Quill in form of a Goudge, beginning above the bud, divide the Rind
from the remaining piece of the sprig, so that the bud be firm in the Rind;
which take, holding it by the piece of the stalk of the leaf which is left
uncut off; and after you have opened the place in the stock by dividing the
Rind from the wood gently and not too deep, place in the Bud, and close the
Rind of it to the Rind above, and the two lappets of the Rind of the Stock over
the Rind of the Bud, and bind it over with Woollen-Yarn. Then about a month
after observe whether the Bud (over which the Yarn was not to go) be green or
not: if it be, then unbind it, and the next Spring cut off the Stock about an
inch above the Bud.

Also the slit may be made upwards, and sothe Rind at the bottom of the
Scutcheon or Bud fitted to the Rind of the Stock below, instead of that above:
And it may be performed by cutting a square place in the Stock, and fitting
into it a square Scutcheon with the Bud in it, and binding it close.

Some sorts of Fruits may be propagated By Layers or Slips.
by Layers or Slips, as the Codling, the Gennet-Moil, and the Creeping Apple:
the Vine, Current, and Gooseberry, are also propagated by either of these ways.

Several new and good species of Fruits By Kernels.
have been raised by Kernels: but for expedition, certainty, and advantage, the
other are the better ways.

SECT. IV. Of transplanting Trees.
Having raised your Nursery, or otherwise Transplanting Trees.
provided your self of a competent number of Trees, and selected your Ground
whereon you intend to plant them; consider how to dispose of the Trees to your
best advantage, that is, to plant your tall Standard-Trees in such places where
you intend to make use of the Land for Grasing, that they may be above the
reach of Cattle. But in such places where you can dispense with the absence of
Cattle, and use the Land only for the Sithe or Spade, there it is best to plant
dwarf or low-grafted Trees, for several reasons. 1. You may plant more of them
on the like quantity of Land, because the Shadow of the one Tree does not reach
the ground of the other, as that of the tall Trees does. 2. The low Trees
sooner attain to be Fruit-bearing Trees, and grow fairer than the tall; the Sap
in them wasting in its long passage, which in the shorter Trees expends it self
soon in the Branches. 3. The lower and broad-spreading Tree is the greater
bearer, by reason the Blossoms in the Spring are not so obvious to the bitter
blasts, nor the Fruit in the Autumn to the fiece and destructive Winds. 4.
Fruit are more easily gathered from a low than a tall Tree: beating or shaking
down Fruit from such Trees, being to be rejected by all judicious Cyderists. 5.
Any Fruit on a low well-spread Tree, is better and fairer than that on a tall
Tree, by the same reason that the Tree is fairer, that is, that the Sap is not
so much wasted in the low and humble Tree, as in the tall and lofty.

Although you may remove a Tree any Time for planting Trees.
time of the year, and yet so that it may grow. But if you design to remove
your Trees that they may prosper well, and that you may choose your time; the
most proper season is at the fall of the Leaf, or when you perceive that the
Sap does no longer ascend, so as to afford nourishment to the Leaf; which is
usually about the end of September: and so you may continue removing all the
Month of October, and the beginning of November, before the more cold weather
prevents you: yet if the weather be open, you may remove till the Trees begin
to Bud.

Before you take up the Tree, it is good Observations in transplanting.
with a Marking-Stone, or piece of Chalk or suchlike, to mark one coast of
every Tree, either East, West, North, or South, as you please; that when you
plant them again, you may remember to plant that marked side to the same Coast
it tended unto before: which was anciently advised by Virgil,

Quinetiam Coeli regionem in cortice signant;
Vt quo quaeque modo steterit, qua part calores
Austrinos tulerit; quae terga obverterit axi,
Restituant.
Also Heavens quarters on the Bark they score,
That they may Coast it as it was before,
Which Southern heat susteyn'd which viewed the Pole.
And doubtless is very necessary in Trees that are large; the smaller, or such
that have grown in close Nurseries, being not capable of any considerable
alteration from any Aspect of the Heavens.

Here also note, That in case a Tree, as it stands before removal, has the
benefit of the East or West-Sun more than of the South, then where you plant
that Tree, give that side, that before had that advantage, the like again in
its new place: which although it varies from the former positive directions,
yet not from the reason of it.

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Having thus marked your Trees, take
them up with as large Roots as you can, especially the spreading Roots.
Therefore it is best to keep the Spade from coming too near the Tree: and when
you have surrounded the Tree at a good distance, endeavor to raise as much
Earth as you can with the Tree; but if it be to carry far, shake it off.

In the planting of your Trees, abate the downright Roots, leaving those that
spread: for it is observed, that the more the Root spreads, the more the
Branches; tall Trees usually extending their Roots deepest, as Virgil observed
of the Aesculus.

-- quae quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, tantum radice in Tartara tendit.
How much to Heaven her spreading Branches shoot,
So much toward Hell extends her fixed Root.
Of those Roots you leave, prune only the ends by cutting them like unto a
Hinds foot on the under-side, they will put forth new Roots the better.

In case Trees have lain some time out of the ground, or been carried in the
wind that their Roots seem to be dry, set them overnight in water, immerging
only the Roots, and it will very much revive them. Or when you plant them,
after you have added an indifferent quantity of Earth, cast in a Pail or more
of Water, as the largeness of the fosse requires; which not only quickens the
Root, but makes the Earth adhere to the Roots, which otherwise wouldly light
and hollow about them: the Air much incommoding the Root of any Plant whatever.

According to the nature of the ground or depth of the Mold, so make your hole
more or less deep wherein you plant your Tree: if it be a cold or springy
ground, then plant near the surface of it, and raise the Earth at some distance
round the Tree; but in any ground, plant not too deep: for you may observe in
many Plantations, Trees thrive best where the Roots run near the surface, and
not at all where planted deep. The Roots of themselves naturally tending either
wide or deep, as they find nutriment, although you plant them shallow; but if
you plant them deep, it is against the nature of Roots to tend upwards, although
sometimes it may so happen, but rarely.

It is good to dig the hole or fosse deep and wide, and to fill the bottom with
good Mold, either the Turfor paring of Land, or well-tempered Street-dirt, or
the sediment of hasty Currents that settle in bottoms of Pools or Ditches, or
rotten Vegetables, or burnt Earth, or any thing that will either mend or alter
the ground, and that is proper for your Trees: fill it to such a convenient
height, that you may plant your Tree on the top of it; and then add good Mold
about the Root, and dilute it with Water, as before is directed. Then level the
Earth about the Tree, so that it may not be too high to injure the bark of the
Tree, and so that the water may rather fall toward, than from the Tree.

If you plant Standards, and in an open place, it is convenient to stake them
the first year, so that you be careful to prevent galling them, by interposing
a small wisp of Hay between the Tree and stake, and planting the stake leaning
toward the coast you expect the greatest Winds: but the continuing the Stakes
for several years, ruins many a good Tree, for the Tree will expect it always
after; which weakness in a Tree may be remedied by lopping of it, and then let
it stand without staking, and it will gather greater strength in the ground
than before.

Prune the Heads of some sorts of Trees that have but small Pith, as
Apple Trees, Pear Trees, etc. when you remove them, to proportion the Branch
and Root as near as you can: but Wallnut-trees, Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, etc.
that have a large Pith, are not to be top'd, only some of the Side-branches
may be taken away.

Plant all Trees as near as you can into a better Mold than the place you
remove them from; but if you cannot observe this, yet mend the Earth in the
Fosse wherein you plant your Tree, that it may by degrees be inured to a worse
Soil.

If you have a desire to remove a Tree in the Summertime, that you cannot
obtain at any other more convenient Season, take of the Earth you dug out of
the Fosse you intend to plant your Tree in, and mix and temper it well with an
equal part of Cow Dung, and as much Water as will make it into a liquid Pap;
fill the Hole almost with this, and then let the Root of the Tree gently sink
into it; cover it over with dry Earth or Turf: This Tree will prosper very well.

As for the distance of Trees, it ought to be according to the nature of the
Tree and Soil. If it be a large spreading Tree, and a rich Soil, forty foot is
a good distance; if a Redstreak or suchlike dwarfish short-lived Tree, twenty
foot is enough between them, especially if the ground be but indifferent.

Always observe, that the greater the distance, the better the Sun meliorates
the Fruit; and if the ground be good, the better do the Trees thrive; and the
poorer or drier the ground is, the Trees being thick, the better they shadow
it, and the more do the Trees prosper.

If you design a Plantation of many sorts of Fruits in one Plot, then may you
plant your Apples and Pears the farther apart; and between them, or in
subordinate rows by them, may you plant Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, and
suchlike; and next unto them Filberds, Currants, Gooseberries, etc. so that if
ever the greater Trees spread far, by that time the lesser may be decayed: if
those do not, these may be renewed that no part of the Plot may be fruitless.

In case any Tree happen to decay, having stood long in that place, so that its
Roots have attracted and exhausted the strength of the Earth appropriate to
that Species of Fruit; In the room of such Trees remember to plant one of
another Species, as an Apple Tree in the room of a decayed Cherry, and sic de
caeteris; by which means the Roots of the latter Tree shall find new matter to
maintain their Plant, that was not exhausted by the former; most Land being
weary in time of one Plant.

After your Trees are planted, if you Of Pruning Trees.
design them for dwarf or spreading Trees, then as they spring, and are apt to
mount upwards, with the Nails of your fingers may you nip off the tops of the
aspiring Branches; which makes the side-boughs spread the better, checks the
Sap, and thereby causes the Tree to Fructify the sooner, and the better. This
way of pruning in the Summer, is easier and better for the Tree than in the
Winter, because the Sun heals the wound whiles the Branch is tender.

In pruning Fruit Trees, be cautious of cutting off the small Sprigs, which are
the more apt to bear Fruit; it being too usual for ignorant Planters to
beautify their Trees by taking off these superfluous Branches, as they term
them, whereby they deprive themselves of the Fruit.

After your Trees are planted and pruned, it is good to keep the ground open
about them, by digging or plowing it yearly, which conduces much to the
advancement of the growth of them, and their preservation from Moss and other
Diseases. This is a Winter-work: answerable unto that, in the Summer may you
spread Fearn or other Vegetables about them, especially whilst they are young;
it preserves their Roots cool and moist: both which ought to be done at a good
distance from the Trunk; it being a vulgar error to dig or soil near the Tree
only, the former being of little effect, the latter injuring the Bark; for the
Roots that gather nourishment, and feed the Tree, are those that are fibrous
and remote, seeking new and fresh nourishment, the greater being only for
conveyance of it to the Trunk.

SECT. V. Of the Propagating the Vine.
Altera frumentis quoniam favet, altera Baccho; Virgil.

Densa magis Cereri, rarissima quaeque Lyaeo.
Since one Corn best affects, the other Vines;
To Ceres sad, to Bacchus thin inclines.
A rich light sandy ground agrees best Soil for the Vine.
with this noble Plant: if the bottom be Chalk or Gravel about two foot under,
it is not the worse; if it incline much to Brambles, it will be kind for the
Vine, the flourishing of that Plant being a true mark of the aptness of the
ground for this. The richness of the Soil is not so much to be desired, as the
heat and dryness of it; for a short Vine, and full of Knots or Joints, is most
prolisick, and fittest for our Climate.

Bacchus loves the Sunny Hills, says Virgil. Situation of the Vineyard.
The declivity of a Hill toward the South is much to be preferred to a level;
a little to the East or West is not bad: if it be defended by Hills on the
North and North-East Coasts from the severity of those Winds, it will much add
to the early maturity of your Grapes. Also, a lofty Situation is not so much
infested with Mists, Fogs, and cold Dews, noxious to the Grape, as are the
lower grounds; and enjoys more of the benefit of the Sun, and is drier; which
is very advantageous in maturating this Fruit, not at all affecting moisture.

The Ground being turfie, and having Preparation of the Ground for the Vine.
not been lately broken up, may be burnbeat in June or July, which will much
enrich and highten the Land; as is now practiced in remote Countries, and was
in former Ages, else Virgil, as to barren Land, would not have said,

-- Saepe etiam Steriles incendere profuit agros,
Atque levem stipulam crepitantibus Vrere flammis.
To burn dry Stubble, and the barren Fields
In crackling flames, often handsome profit yields.
Then in December or January trench in the Ashes of your burnt Land, which may
be spread in the beginning of the Winter, before any great Rains come, lest
they wash in the salt or richness of them into the ground only under or near
the heaps, and so make the ground unequally fruitful.

Be sure to make your Ranges from East to West; for the Sun will the better
shine in between the Plants in the former and latter part of the day, and at
noon in the Summertime the Sun will shine over the Ranges; so that they will
enjoy the benefit of the Sun all the day by this means.

Having thus prepared your Ground, Sorts of Vines.
make choice of the best sorts of Grapes that are most suitable to this
Country, of which the early White Muscadine is esteemed the best; but there are
several other sorts, as the Parsley-grape which is early ripe, the Muscadella a
white Grape not so big as the Muscadine, the White Frontiniaque, the small
black Grape, by some called the Cluster-grape, by others the Currant-grape, and
the Red Frontiniaque: Also there is a New White Grape ripe before any of these,
which grows in his Majesty's Garden at St. James's, which Mr. John Rose highly
commends for a Vineyard.

Any Cuttings almost of the Vine will Choi^e of S^ts.
grow in a cool moist Ground; therefore it is good to raise a Stock of them
beforehand, against the time you plant your Vineyard. Also cuttings of Vines
that have a little of the old wood on them, will easily grow where you intend
to place them for good; but Layers are the most certain.

Mark your Ranges, that they may be The manner of planting them.
about three Foot distance the one from the other, and dig a Trench for every
Range about a Foot wide, and a Foot deep, clean in the bottom, and upright on
the sides; Then fit your Plants, Layers, or Sets of Vines, so that you leave
not above two or three eyes of the young wood upon them; Then Plant them about
two Foot apart in the bottom of the Trenches, so that the Roots lie across the
Trenches; then cover them three or four inches with the Mould, that the top of
the Sets may be even with the edge of the Trench: then cover the Plants all
along in the Trenches with Litter or Stubble of a reasonable thickness, to
preserve them from dry and piercing Winds, and from parching Heat; all which
are injurious to them the first year of their planting: be sure to leave the
tops of the Plants uncovered.

After they are thus planted, they require To Dress, Prune, and Govern the
Vineyard.
your care in Hawing them constantly, to prevent the weeds from seeding; and to
raise the loose Earth about your young Plants by little and little, as you pass
by them.

The first Pruning is to be in December or January next after your planting; at
which time you must cut off all the young Shoots close to the old Set, except
only one, which you must leave, and which should also be the strongest and most
likely to prosper; and to that likewise should you leave but two or three Knots
or Joints.

In May following, when the Vine buds, then rub off all the young Shoots or
Suckers, save only such that come forth of the Joints of the young Wood you
left in January; and continue your Hawing, to preserve your Vineyard free from
Weeds, adding still fresh Earth to your Plants as you pass by them.

In the Winter following, Prune your Vineyard as you did the last, leaving
still the best Branch or Shoot to each Plant, and about three or four Joints or
Knots. This second Winter dig your Vineyard, and lay it all level, being
careful that you touch not any of the main Roots of your Vines with your Spade.

In this third Summer; your Vines will Propping of Vines.
begin to bear; to which end you must provide Props of Hazel, Ash, or Oak,
about four Foot in length, placed behind your Plant.

In May rub off all the Suckers, leaving only such as proceed from the Knots of
the last year, and that are likely to bear Fruit. Then those Shoots that come
from those Knots, bind to your Props; and when the Fruit is of about the size
of Raddish-Seed, nip off the Branches about a span above it with your Fingers,
which is much better than to cut them. And in the heat of the day, for then
their wounds will the sooner heal.

The fourth year observe the same method, for then may you expect the complete
fruit of your labor; remembering that in every Winter you leave but one, and
that the strongest Shoot or Branch for a Standard, and not above four or five
Foot high, cutting all the rest close, unless you find any that are very
strong, to which you may leave three or four Knots or Joints, that the Branches
that proceed from them (at least the strongest) may serve for Standards for the
ensuing year. So that the Exchange of old for new Shoots, may very much advance
the increase of your Fruit.

You may bind them with small and tender Osiers, or the Rind of the Willow,
such as you can most easily obtain.

In August, when the Grapes begin to ripen, nip off such Shoots and Leaves as
too much shadow them, yet leaving a thin skreen of Leaves to preserve them from
the scorching Sun, the cold Dews, and the cool Breezes.

Remember yearly to cut off the old, and advance the new Shoots, and to tie
them to the Props about half way from the Ground; and then turn the top of your
Vine to the next Prop, and tie it to that, and so successively, which will
resemble a Row of Arches.

As you find your Ground to degenerate Of Manuring or Dunging the Vineyard.
and grow poor, which most hot Land is apt to do, you must supply it with
Manure, which must be good rotten Dung, and mixed with Lime if you can, laid and
spread over your Vineyard, that it may lie all the Winter, that the Virtue of
it may be washed into the Earth to the Roots of your Vines; and then dig it in
in the Spring, when you dig your Vineyard; but by no means let not any new Dung
come near your Vines, which will too much dry up and burn your Land, and is
injurious to all Fruit-bearing Trees, as we before observed: which labors of
raising young Branches from the old Roots, and renewing and amending the Mold
by stercoration, reiterate and continue for many years. Of pruning the Vine
against a Wall.


Many persons have opportunities to plant Vines against Walls, Houses, Barns,
etc. which will not only bear much more of Fruit, but more early ripe, having
many advantages above the open Vineyard. For the pruning of which Trees,
observe, that on every Sprig you cut off in your Winter-pruning, where you
would have Fruit the succeeding year, you leave two or three Buds: for out of
those Buds, especially the second or third, proceeds the Clusters. Also observe
to cut off the Branch asloap on one side, or under, that the Rain rest not on
the Pith of the remaining part of the Branch; the Rain oftentimes perishing the
Pith to the lowermost Bud. And forget not to leave every year some new Branches
or Shoots, and to cut off some of the old: renovation of the Branches being in
this Tree very necessary, especially if it be old.

If the Vine be cut late, it will be apt To cure the bleeding of the Vine.
to bleed, by which in warm and moist weather it loses much of its Sap or
Blood, although in cold or dry Weather it stops, and no great injury to the
Tree, it stoping of its own accord, the wound of its self healing, when the
forwardness of the Spring has thickened the Sap; unless such wounds or bruises
be great, and happen to your Vine about the end of March, or in April, then
they are dangerous: to cure which, if it should so happen, you must dig at some
distance round the Root of your Vine, with caution not to impair the Root; and
cast in a good quantity of cold Water, which not only checks (by its sudden
coldness) the too liberal rise of the Sap, but plentifully supplies the wast
that is made of the Sap or Blood (which the spreading Roots with difficulty
before had attracted) until the increase of the Spring thickens the same.

This Tree is very easily propagated, and Currants.
delights in a good free Land, and will prosper and bear very well, if the
Ground under it be kept free from Weeds and other vegetables, and sometimes
dug.

There is hardly any Tree delights more in the Shade than this: even under the
drips of Trees will it prosper very well. But against the North-wall of a
House, or other high wall, it will prosper exceedingly, and aspire to near
fifteen Foot high, and spread very broad, being tacked as other Fruit Trees
usually are; and bear very fair and good Fruit, much better than in Standards
or in the Sun.

These are easily propagated, as ar^ the (...).
Currants.

This Fruit delights in the Shade; and the (...).
colder the soil, the better will this Tree thrive and bear in it.

Thus having given you some more than ordinary Observations and Experiments for
the Raising, Grafting, Transplanting, Pruning, and renewing your Orchards,
Plantations, and Vineyards, with these sorts of Cider and Wine-Fruit-bearing
Trees, we will conclude with a translate of Rapinus, a little variated.

From Planting new, and Pruning aged Trees,
The prudent Ancients bid us never cease.
Thus no decay is in our Vineyards known,
But in their honor we preserve our own.
Thus in your Orchards other Plants will rise,
Which with your Nurseries will yield supplies
That may again your fading Groves renew.
For Trees, like Men, have their Successions too.
SECT. VI. Of the Diseases of Fruit Trees, and their cure.
Vegetables, as well as Animals, have their Diseases and Infirmities, which not
only weaken, but totally destroy them; which more usually assault the
Fruit-bearing Trees more than any other; and the finer and better any Fruit is,
the more is its Tree subject to these Diseases and Infirmities; The chief
whereof is the Canker, which The Canker.
assaulteth the best Fruit Trees, as of Apples the Pippin, Golden Rennet, etc.
of Pears the Wardens of all sorts, Burgamet, etc. Cherries and Apricocks,
penetrating the midst of the Branches, and sometimes destroying the whole Tree.
This Disease happens from several causes, as from the twisting or bruising a
Branch or Limb (which usually happens in Wall-trees, by plying them to the
Wall) and somewhat resembles the Windshake in an Oak; the cure whereof is to
cut off such Branch: also galling the one Limb against another, which you may
prevent by pruning, and cure by cutting off the parts affected. But that Canker
is the most inveterate and uncurable, that proceeds from the Soil; as either
being too rich, For as a Tree due nourishment may want, Rapinus.

So too rich Soil destroys the tender Plant,
which if you know not how to sterilize, then observe what sorts of Fruit are
free from that Disease in that ground, (for all sorts of Fruit Trees are not
subject to it in any ground whatsoever) and propagate them only.

Or by being too light; for Trees planted on heavy or sad Land, are not so
prone to this Disease, as in light and warm Land; which may be corrected by
abating much of the Earth about the Roots of the Trees, and applying cold, sad,
and heavy dirt or settlings in Ponds about them, and by cutting off the
cankered Branches. This by Experience has cured cankered Trees, and may as
well prevent the Disease.

The raising of Stocks from Crab-kernels in the same Land, and grafting on
them, is a good prevention of this Disease; for this Stock does better digest
the sweet and luscious Juice that causes this Disease, than the soft and spungy
Apple-stock; to whom also the Juice is more homogeneal, than to a stranger,
removed into it out of a more barren Soil. Vain therefore are all the Cuttings,
Parings, Slicings, Emplaistrings, and Applications that are voluminously
prescribed for the cure of this Disease.

From the Stock usually spring many Suckers.
Suckers, which extract too much nourishment from the Tree; which must be taken
off dexterously from the Root, and may be prevented by grafting on good Stocks
raised from Kernels; for Trees proceeding from Suckers, are always subject to
this Disease.

If Trees are Bark-bound, it either signifies Bark-bound.
that the ground is hard and bound about the Roots of them, or that they are
planted too deep: The remedy then is known only with this addition; That you
may slit the Bark down with your Knife, about the Springtime.

Cold, and untilled, and unmanured Land, Moss*
oftentimes produce Mossie Trees; which by digging, or constantly applying
Vegetables at the Roots of your Fruit Trees, may be prevented. The same also
may, in some measure, be rubbed off with a Hair-cloath after Rain.

Fruit suffers much from Snails, which Snails.
are to be taken off in moist weather, mornings and evenings; but most to be
destroyed in the Winter, by Boards, Tiles, or suchlike, set hollow against
Walls, Pales, or the Stems of Trees, under which they will resort for shelter;
whence you may take them by heaps.

Destroy the Webs or breed of Caterpillars Caterpillars.
in the Spring, and burning them.

Although the Birds destroy much Fruit Birds.
when ripe, and are to be scared away and destroyed, as every one knows, yet
they do not that injury as the Bulfinch does at the Spring to the Buds of
several sorts of Trees, as the Sweet Apple Tree, all sorts of Plums, Currants,
etc. which by Birdlime are taken, and your Trees secured, or else deterred by a
dry Hawk perching in the midst of the Tree.

There are many other Diseases and Infirmities incident to Fruit Trees and
Fruits, but these are the principal and most injurious, and most difficult to
cure.

CHAP. V. Of making Cider and other Liquors of Apples and other Fruits.
SECT. I. Of gathering and preparing Apples, etc.
AFter you have thus brought your Plantation to perfection, that you can gather
Fruit enough of your own to make Cider or other Liquors, according to the
nature of the Fruit; the first thing to be considered of, is its Maturity;
there being Of the ripeness of Fruit.
much Cider spoiled in most parts of England, through that one general error
of gathering of Fruit before its due Maturity. For there is scarce any Fruit in
the world, but yields very different Liquors, according to the different
degrees of Maturity of the same Fruit. As the Juice of the Coco-nut whilst
green, is a pleasant thin Drink, but when through ripe, becomes a rich Oil or
Milk: So the Juice of our European Fruits which, when most mature, yields a
pleasant Drink; if pressed before, yield but a crude and sour Liquor.

This error or neglect (occasioned partly because the several sorts of Apples
ripen not at the same time, or that the Wind prevents their hanging long enough
on the Trees, or the gross ignorance of the Operatour, or his covetousness of
having more Liquor than otherwise he should expect) has not only been the
occasion of much thin, raw, phlegmatic, sour, and unwholesome Cider, but has
cast a reflection on the good report that Cider well made most rightly deserves.

Therefore, in case your Fruit be not ripe all at one time, select such sorts
that are of a like degree of Maturity, and according to the quantity of them,
and so proportion your Vessels; and you were better make it at several times,
than spoil your whole Vintage.

Or if the Winds should beat down many of your Apples, and you are unwilling to
spoil or loose them, you may let them lie dry as long as you can before you
grind them, that they may obtain as great a degree of Maturity as they can;
and let that Cider be thoroughly fermented before it be barrel'd, according to
the Rules hereafter set down, and not kept too long, to acquire too much
acidity.

Let not any think that they advantage themselves any thing by mixing unripe
with ripe Fruit, or by grinding their Apples too soon; for they were better
loose a part of their Cider, than spoil the whole.

To prevent which ill effect, let your Fruit be through ripe; which is known,
First, By the color of them, if you are acquainted therewith, else that may
deceive you; some Apples appearing brighter before they are ripe, than others
when full ripe: the same may be observed in Pears, and especially Cherries;
some sorts requiring twelve or fourteen days thoroughly to maturate them after
they seem to be as ripe as the ordinary Flanders. Secondly, By the smell, most
Apples and Pears casting a fragrant Odor when ripe, and is a very good sign
of their maturity, although some Apples and Pears have but little smell; but
such for this purpose are to be rejected. Thirdly, By the blackness of their
Kernels, which when they are of that color, it does signify that the Fruit is
inclining to be ripe; for after the Kernels are black, the Fruit ought to hang
on the Trees some time to perfect their Maturity; the Liquor within them being
better digested and concocted by the virtue of the Sun on the Tree, than by any
Artifice whatsoever afterward.

On the other hand, be cautious of letting Fruit hang on the Trees too long,
lest they grow pulpy, which some Summer -Apples and Pears are apt to do: it so
unites the Juice with the fleshy part of the Fruit, that it is difficult to
separate the one from the other.

When your Fruits are in a good condition Gathering of Fruit.
as to Maturity, and the weather fair, then gather them by hand; which if your
stock be not greater than your number of hands, is a much better way than to
beat or shake them down; but if your stock exceed, then shake them down, so
that the ground be dry. For this purpose low Trees are to be preferred, as
before was observed.

If any of your Fruit happen to be broken, lay them by themselves, an ordinary
bruise not much injuring the Fruit; but where the skin is broken, the Spirits
exhale, for the bruise begets a fermentation, after which the Spirits first
rise, being, where the skin is whole, detained.

In some parts of England their ignorance, or rather laziness, is such, that
they scarce bestow the gathering of their Fruit to keep for their Table; how
then can you expect their care for Cider?

Some do prefer the grinding of Apples Hoarding of Apples.
immediately from the Tree, so soon as they are thoroughly ripe, because they
yield the greater quantity of Liquor: They also pretend, though erroneously,
that the Cider will drink the better, and last longer than if the Apples were
hoarded.

But if you intend to have your Cider pleasant and lasting, let them lie some
time in a heap out of the Sun and Rain, and on a dry floor, on dry Rye, Wheat,
or Oatenstraw is best, until they have either sweat out, or digested a certain
crude Phlegmatic humor that is in most of our Fruits: the same you may
observe in Nuts and all sorts of Grain. The time for this, must be referred to
your discretion; some prescribing a month or six weeks, others but a fortnight:
Be sure not to let them lie too long lest they grow pulpy, which will very much
incommode your Cider, although some are of another opinion; In medio virtus:
from ten to twenty days are the best times: the harsher the Fruit, the longer
the time.

Let them not lie on a Floor of ill savor, nor on Deal-boards, but with Straw
under them, lest they contract an ill relish, which an Apple will do in a
sweat: nor let them lie abroad, as some will do, except on dry ground, and in
dry weather, and covered. Although Rain can do them no more hurt than fair
Water mixed with the Cider, yet every sort of Apple will not bear it.

For, from the due time, place and manner of hoarding of the Fruit, is
oftentimes the Cider very good, which otherwise might have proved very bad.

By hoarding only of your Windfalls for some time, or until the time that it
was expected they should have been Ripe in, does very much meliorate the Cider
made of them, which otherwise might have been very bad.

Thus when your Fruit is duly ripe, gathered, and preserved, it is ready for
the Mill.

SECT. II. Of Grinding of Apples.
One great impediment in the improveing of this most excellent drink, has been
the want of a convenient way of grinding or bruising the Fruit. It having been
the usage or custom in most places of England, where but small quantities of
this Liquor has been made, for the Operators to beat their Fruit in a Trough
of Wood or Stone, with Beaters like unto Wooden Pestles, with long handles. By
which means three or four Servants or Laborers might in a days time beat
twenty or thirty Bushels of Apples: some part thereof into a Jelly, being often
under the Beaters, whilst other part of the Fruit by its slipperiness escapes
the Beaters; much of it also by dashing being wasted: yet by this means are
made very great quantities of Cider in several places.

But where the Fruit increased, that this way became too tedious for the
Ciderist, the Horse-Mill was and is still much in use, Grinding for the whole
Parish: That is, by placing a large Circular Stone on edge in a round Trough,
made also of Stone, in which the Fruit is put, and Ground by the single upright
Stone moved round by a Horse, as the Tanners Grind their Bark; in which Mill
may be Ground sometimes three or four Hogsheads a day; and some are so large,
that they Grind half a Hogshead at a Grist.

These Mills are very chargeable to make for any one that has but an ordinary
Plantation; and to carry your Fruit to a Parish-Mill, and bring back your
Cider, etc. is troublesome, if at any distance: And the Cider made therein,
accused of an unpleasant taste, acquired from the Rinds, Stems, and Kernels of
the Fruit which in these Mills are much bruised.

Some have taken the pains to Grate Apples on a Grater made of perforated
Latten, such that House-wives use to Grate Bread on; Others, to beat them on a
Table with Mauls: but these ways are to be rejected as idle and useless, where
you have any considerable plenty of Fruit.

To remedy the inconveniences, trouble and expenses in those several ways that
have been hitherto used, you may erect a Mill, the Ichnography whereof, you
have in the following Figure.

The Description of the Ingenio* or Cider-Mill in Fig. 1.
LEt there be two Planks a a a a, of about three Foot in length or more, and
about sixteen Inches in depth, in case your Cylinder or Roll be but one Foot
Diameter, else according to the Diameter of your Cylinder, that there be about
two Inches above and below the same. If your Planks will not bear the breadth
desired, they may be enlarged by addition of a piece of the same thickness,
without any inconvenience. Let the Planks be about two and a half, or three
Inches thick, and made to quadrate each to other. Let there be four Mortoises
in each Plank, as at b b b b, for four Transomes, to keep the two sides at an
equal distance, about half an Inch wider than the length of the Cylinder, that
it may have the more liberty to move easy without Grating. The four Transomes
may be pinned fast into that Plank that is next you when you turn, and their
Tenons made long at their other ends, that they may be two or three Inches
without the other Plank, that they may be key'd at the farther side, the better
to take to pieces when occasion requires.

c Is the Center of the Cylinder: in each Plank exactly one against the other,
there must be a hole for the Axis to run in, which ought to be strengthened with
a small Plate of Iron or Brass, to prevent wearing.

d d Shows only the Circumference of the Cylinder, which at e appears more
plainly, being made of solid Oak, or Beech, the dryer the better, and freer
from shrinking, of about a Foot or eighteen Inches in length; and if a Foot in
length, then eighteen Inches in Diameter; if eighteen Inches in lenth, then a
Foot in Diameter; after which rate you may vary as you please. This Roll or
Cylinder must be turned exactly on its Axis, which must be made of Iron of
about an Inch square, and fixed through the Center of the Cylinder: then
turning it on that Axis, with a turning Goudge and Chisel, will cause it to run
true; which is principally to be observed. The Axis must extend beyond the
Cylinder six or seven Inches at the one end, where it must be flatned an Inch
or two, with an Eye, that the Hand-wheel may be key'd on there, as at f.

This Cylinder after it is placed between the two Planks in its Frame, must be
knocked full of small Peggs of Iron, of about three quarters of an Inch in
length, made flat, and tapering like a Wedge, as at g. They must not stand or
appear a full quarter of an Inch above the superficies of the Cylinder: for the
shorter they are, the finer will your pulp or Murc be; and the higher, the
courser: you may place them in such order, that the one may stand against the
space last preceding, in a Quincunxial Order; about four or five hundred of
them will serve for a Cylinder of a Foot in length, and of the like Diameter,
and so after that rate for a greater or lesser. Thus will this Cylinder be made
rough to Grind your Apples as fine as you please. Then cut a piece of Wood of
the length of the Cylinder, and about a fourth part of its Circumference,
hollow almost to the Circumferential line of the Cylinder, as at h: this piece
must have a Pin at each side near the upper part of it, as at i i, which must
have holes in the two Planks for them to move easy in, as at k. The use
whereof is to keep the Apples close to the rough Cylinder, that they may be
thoroughly Ground; this is also governed by a moveable Transome that extends
from the one Plank to the other, through the Mortoises at l, which Mortoises
are made broad, to admit of Key's to force the Regulator or piece of Wood
nearer or farther as you please.

There must also be another piece of Wood cut hollow, made to move nearer or
farther, as occasion requires, as m, which serves as a Regulator to keep the
Apples from feeding too fast. This also may have some Iron Pegs on the
under-side of it, the better to preserve the Apples steady to their work. Which
Regulator may be forced nearer or farther by Wedges as the Operator pleases.

The pricked lines show the Boards that descend from the Hopper or Bin, to
direct the Apples to their work.

Note, that the greatest inconveniency that ever happened in several years
experience of this Ingenio, was, that mellow Apples being Pulpy and light,
would stick to the Cylinder, that it would much impede the Operation; which is
easily prevented by making the Cylinder smooth, and placing the Pegs of Iron
not too near, but leaving sufficient spaces; that when the Cylinder is wet with
the Juice of the Apples, the Pulp may fall from it in its motion; which it will
easily do, and the better, if the Pegs be not flat headed: always observing,
that the distances or spaces of one Row, may be filled or supplied in the next
two or three Rows, that the Apple may not wear in Ridges.

By this Ingenio, have been Ground very fine, sometimes four, and sometimes
five Bushels of Apples in an hour, and with no harder labor, then that two
ordinary Laborers may, the one feeding, and the other grinding, hold it, by
interchanging, all the day.

But if your Stock be so great, that this small and easy Ingenio will not
dispatch them fast enough, or that you intend it for a general use; Then may
you make your Planks the longer, and place two Rolls or Cylinders, each with a
handle as the former, the one handle on the one side, and the other on the
other side; which Rolls may be cut in Groves like the Teeth of a Wheel, and
made to fall the one Tooth in the other space, according to a in the second
Figure.

In this form the Center or Axis of the one Cylinder must be moveable, by means
of pieces in the inside of the Planks, made to be wedged nearer or farther as
occasion requires, as b b in Figure the second.

These Teeth on the Cylinders when they are moved the one against the other,
forcibly attract the Apples which are emitted under, thoroughly bruised.

Also you may turn those Teeth with a Gouge and Chisel the other way, as it
appears at c, in Figure the second, and make rough either by notching or
pegging the outward edges of both Rolls, by which means the Apples will be
attracted and thoroughly Ground.

By this Ingenio may two Workmen and one Feeder Grind twenty Bushels of Apples
in an hour; always observing, that you feed it no faster than it can well
dispatch them, because it is apt to choke. Many profitable additions may be
added to either of these ways by the ingenious, but the ignorant contemns any
thing that is novel, though nere so excellent.

When you bring your Apples to the Mill, Picking of Fruit.
as you fill them up, cast by all such that are green and unripe, rotten, or
otherwise naught, and all Stalks, Leaves, etc. that may injure yoor Cider: for
it is better to want a small quantity of your liquor, than to spoil the whole.

Some are of opinion, that Rottenness in the Apple injureth not the Cider, but
that a convenient quantity of rotten Apples mixed with the sound, is a great
help to the fermentation and clarification of the Cider. But I presume, they
mean such Apples only that have been bruised in gathering, shaking down, or
carrying, which will by lying become rotten, and (the skin being whole) be not
much the worse, only the Cider will retain a smack of them: yet let me advise,
that you admit not them amongst your Cider that you intend for keeping, but
rather make Cider of them for a more early spending: for others affirm, that
one rotten Apple corrupts a whole Vessel; which I suppose is intended only of
the putrid Rottenness.

When your Apples are grinding, it is not good to grind them too small, for
then too much of the Pulp passes with the Liquor; but if they are not too small
ground, you will have but little the less of Cider, (although the contrary be
commonly believed) because in the more vulgar way of grinding or beating, much
of the Apple escapes unbruised, unless the whole be very much bruised.

After your Fruit is ground, it is good to let it stand 24 or 48 hours,
according as your time or conveniencie will admit, so that it be all together,
or in good quantities in large Vessels; for standing thus, it not only
undergoes one degree of fermentation or maturation, but acquires color, much
commended in Cider, and also causes the lesser parts of the Apple unbruised,
easily to part with its Juice in the Press: although the general advice be, to
press it immediately from the Mill.

You may leave a passage open in the bottom of your Vat, wherein you keep your
bruised Apples, during the time of its being therein. Some of the Cider may
spontaneously distill into a Receiver placed under it; or you may have a false
bottom in the inside full of holes, that the greater quantity may be had, which
may run through some Tap or other passage into your Receiver.

Which Cider so obtained, far exceeds that which is forced out; as the Wines of
France that are unpress'd, are by much preferred to those that are pressed; and
live Honey that distills of it self from the Combs, is much better than that
which remains.

As for your Press, there is no form yet The Cider -Press.
discovered that exceeds the Skrew-press, of which sort there are very large,
that a Hogshead may be pressed at once; and as some report, that a Hogshead or
two runs out commonly before the Apples suffer any considerable pressure.

In those large Presses, the usual way is to press it in Straw, by laying clean
Wheat-straw in the bottom of the Press, and a heap of bruised Apples upon it;
and so with wisps of Straw, by twisting of it, and taking the ends of the Bed
of Straw, with it you go round your heap of Apples, which are to be increased,
until by winding round the Straw, and addition of Apples, you have raised it
two foot or more, as your Press will give leave: then apply your Board and
Skrew over it, and you may press it dry in form of a Cheese, which is the most
expeditious way, and most for advantage, of any way yet known; for a small
single Mill, after the form before described, will grind in one day, as much
as a man can well press in a good Skrew-press in another. Some of these large
Skrew-presses are made of two Skrews, and some but of one: but in case your
stock be but small, a less Skrew, and of much less price may serve, made after
the form of that in the Frontispiece; and in stead of Straw, you may have a
Basket or Crib well made, and put Straw round it in the inside, to preserve the
Pulp, which would otherwise either run through, in case the passage be wide, or
choke them, in case they be narrow; or a Hair-bag placed in a Crib or Frame
made under the Skrew, to preserve the Bag from tearing.

In your pressing, in case you intend not to use your Pulp afterward for the
making of Water-cider, usually called Purre, then is it best to press it as dry
as you can; but in case you resolve to add water to your Murc, and to press it
again, then you need not press it too hard; for your Cider will then be the
worse, and so will your Purre: For the last squeezing is the weakest, and makes
your Cider the rougher; and if any thing will, that gives it a woody taste,
unless it be prevented in the easy grinding.

SECT. III. Of purifying your Cider.
As your Vessel fills under your Press, pour it through some Streyner into a
large Vat, only to detain gross pieces of Apple, etc. from intermixing in the
Vat; from whence most prescribe to tun it immediately into the Barrels wherein
it is to be kept, lest its Spirits should evaporate: which is a mistake; for if
a Cloth only be cast over the Vat or Tun, it is sufficient to preserve it;
for there is in it a wild Spirit, that if detained, will break any Vessel
whatever that you shall strictly enclose it in; therefore to waste that, is no
injury to your Cider.

Now when it is in your Tun or Vat, it ought to be there fermented, and in some
degree purified, and from thence the pure separated from the impure, and so
Tuned into the Vessels wherein it is to be preserved, that the Dregs may not
pass with it, which will very much incommode your Cider.

In order to which, it is to be understood, that the juice of ripe Pulpy
Apples, as Pippins, Renetings, etc. is of a syrrupy and tenacious nature, that
whilst it is cold, does deteyn in it dispersed those particles of the Fruit,
that by the pressure comes with the Liquor, and is not by standing or frequent
percolations separable from it; which particles, or flying Lee, being part of
the flesh or body of the Apple, is (equally with the Apple it self, when
bruised) subject to putrefaction: by which means, by degrees, the Cider becomes
hard or acid; but if it be pressed from other Apples, as Readstreak,
Gennet-moyle, etc. that more easily part with their Liquor, without the
adhesion of so much of the Pulp, and which is of a more thin body; This Liquor
shall not be so subject to reiterated fermentation, nor so soon to acidity,
because it wants that more corrupt part that in the other comes with it.

For Wine, Ale, Beer, and other Liquors, in every degree that they tend to
acidity, they become more clear, by the precipitation, of the more gross parts
that are first subject to putrefaction by the virtue and heat whereof, the
Spirits are chased away; and so in time, as those corrupt particles were more
or less in it, is the Liquor sooner or later become Vinegar.

As Beer, whereof Vinegar is intended to be made, is never fermented, nor the
feces precipitated at the first, as it is when it is to be preserved for
drinking. And Claret Wine percolated through Rape, or the acid Murc of Grapes,
becomes a White Vinegar; so that the precipitation that is in both those
Liquors, happens by reason of their becoming acid.

If therefore you intend your Cider shall retain its full strength and body,
and to preserve it so for any considerable time, endeavor to abstract from it
that flying Lee, or Materia Terrestris, that floats in it (as sometimes it does
in Must pressed from Grapes, that has in it more of an active principle than
that from Apples) lest your Cider be thereby impaired.

Neither is it to be imagined, that that sort of Cider that is of that
tenacious nature as to keep up its Lee, is therefore stronger than that which
more easily lets it subside; any more than that thick small unfermented Ale,
should be stronger than that which has more of the Spirit or Tincture of the
Malt, and well defecated; or that Wine should be smaller than Cider for the
same reason.

Now rightly to understand the cause of this detention of Lee in the body of
the Liquor, you are to consider, that there are several sorts of Fruits that
yield a clear and limpid Juice, as a Grape, and a Common English and Flanders
Cherry, and some others; and other sorts of Fruit that yield a more gross
Juice, as a Rasberry, Black-Cherries, Plums, and some others: and that there
are some Fruits that yield a very thin and clear Juice at a certain degree of
maturity; which a little after, when more ripe, it becomes more thick and
gross; as a Gooseberry, Current, and some species of Apples and Pears.

In the Grape, and English and Flanders Cherry, the cause that the Liquid part
so easily parts from the more solid, may be from the great inequality in the
proportion of the parts, the liquid being the more, and overcoming the lesser:
which in the other, Cherries, Rasberries, and Plums, the contrary happens, that
much of the Pulp adheres to the Liquor.

Also in the other Fruits, as Gooseberries, Currants, and some Apples and
Pears, by the length of time, a through maturation causes a solution of the more
gross parts, being of themselves tender, which makes them so acceptable to the
Palate; which in Fruit more insoluble does not so happen; yet may the Juice of
those Fruits that thus may be extracted more pure and limpid, be more
excellent, and be preferred to those more gross, as it usually happens, because
of the difficulty of defecation.

One principal help to purify any Liquor, or to provoke fermentation, is
warmth, as is vulgarly practiced amongst Housewives, who in fermenting both
Bread and Beer, preserve it warm during that operation. For any liquid Body,
wherein fermentation is required, by warmth becomes more thin, that it easily
admits of a separation of the feculent parts; and like unto a glutinous Body,
the colder it is, the thicker it is, and does not so easily part with its Feces.

As has been sometime experienced in Cider, by heating a small portion of it
By warmth only.
scalding hot, and casting it into the Tun on the new Must, stirring it
together, and covering it over, has caused a good fermentation, and separation
of its Lee, making it much more fit for preservation, than if it had been
Barrel'd without any fermentation at all. It has been also observed, that cool
Cellars do protract the fining of Cider: And that Cider exposed to the Sun, or
other warmth, has more easily fermented, and become fine, for the reasons
aforesaid.

But to ferment and purify this British-Wine, or any other Vinous Liquor
effectually, By Isinglass.
you may take of Gluten piscis, Water-Glew, or Isinglass, as it is usually
termed, about the proportion of three or four Ounces to a Hoshead, rather more
than less; beat it thin on some Anvil, or Iron-wedg; cut it in small pieces,
and lay it in steep in White Wind (which will more easily dissolve it than any
other Liquor, except Vinegar, Spirits, etc. that are not fit to be used in this
Work) let it lie therein all night; the next day keep it some time over a
gentle Fire, till you find it well dissolved; then take a part of your Cider,
or such liquor you intend to purify, in proportion about a Gallon to twenty
Gallons; in which boil your dissolved Water-glew, and cast it into the whole
mass of Liquor, stirring it well about, and covering it close. So let it stand
to ferment, for eight, ten, or twelve hours, as you please; during which time,
the Water-glew being thinly and generally dispersed through the whole Mass of
Liquor, and assisted by the warmth and pretenuity of it, precipitates a part of
that gross Lee, that otherwise would have decayed it, and raises another more
light part of it, as a Net carries before it Leaves or any other gross matter
in the Water through which it is drawn, and leaves not any part of its own
Body in the purified Liquor, to alter or injure the Substance or Taste of it.
Which, when you observe that it has done working, you may draw out at a Tap
below from the Scum, or may first gently take off the Scum as you please.

This Liquor thus gently purified, may you in a full Vessel well closed,
preserve a long time, if you please, or draw it and bottle it in a few days,
there being no more Lee in it than is necessary for its preservation.

But if you will have it yet clearer and finer, you may increase your
proportion of Water-glew to double that proportion before mentioned, and make
it thereby perfectly limpid; which is but an overracking of it, and makes it
too lean and thin of substance.

This very way or Method of purification will serve in all sorts of Liquors,
and is much to be preferred in the Juices of Fruits, to that vulgar way of
making them ferment by the addition of Yeast or Tosts therein dipped, as is
usually prescribed; that being but an acid Excitation to Fermentation, all
things tending to Acidity being (as much as may be) to be avoided in our
operations.

This way also is better than the tedious ways of percolation, and racking from
Vessel to Vessel; which wastes not only the Spirits, but substance of the Liquor
it self, and leaves you but a thin and flat Drink, hardly ballancing your
trouble.

After you have thus purified your Liquor Drawing it o^f with a Siphon.
in what Vessel soever, and are unwilling, or cannot well draw it out at a Tap
near the bottom, as is usual, You may draw it from the feces over the brim of
the Vessel, by a Siphon made of Latten, or of Glass, which is the best, because
you may observe by your Eye, what impurities ascend, and avoid them by raising
or depressing your Instrument at your discretion. The Siphon is after this
form, the one end three or four Inches longer than the other, and the
hollowness of the Pipe according to the use you intend to put it into, whether
out of a great or small Vessel.

Liquors thus purified, leave behind them on their superficies, and at bottom,
a great quantity of gross and impure feces; which if from Cider, you may cast
on the pressed Murc, to meliorate your Ciderkin, or Water -Cider, if you intend
to make any.

These impurities, which are in great plenty in pulpy Fruit, and also in
Rasberies, Currants, etc. are the principal cause of the decaying of those
Liquors by their corrupt and acid nature, exciting the more vivous parts to a
continual fermentation, as is evident from the effect, and from the breaking of
Bottles (wherein this Lee remains) on the motion of a Southerly Air.

After your Liquors are thus purified and drawn off, they are to be enclosed in
some Vessel for some Weeks or Months, according as the nature of the Liquor or
your occasions will permit or require. Before that be done, it will not be
amiss to insert some observations concerning Vessels.

SECT. IV. Of Vessels for the keeping and preserving Cider.
It has been no small occasion of the Of Barrels.
badness of this Liquor, and thereby giving it an ill name, that it has been
usually ill treated, and entertained (after it has been indifferently well
made) in illshaped, corrupt, faulty and unsound Vessels; Vinous Liquors being
full of Wild Spirits that easily find Vents, through which the Air corrupts the
whole remaining Body, and also more easily, especially the Cider, like the
Apple, attracting any ill savor from the Vessel. Therefore care is to be taken
about the choice of them.

It has been observed, that the larger any Vessels is, the better Liquors are
preserved in them. In some foreign Countries Vessels being made, that one of
them will contain many Hogsheads of Wine; which being therein in so great a
quantity, is preserved much better than if divided into lesser Vessels.

Also the form of a Barrel has been found to be very material: although the
vulgar round Barrel be most useful and necessary for Transportation from one
place to another; yet is the upright Vessel, whose Ribs are straight, and the
head about a fourth or fifth part broader than the bottom, and the height equal
to the Diameter of the upper part, the best form to stand in a Cellar. The
bung-hole of about two Inches Diameter, is to be on the top, with a Plug of
Wood turned round exactly to fit into it, near unto which must be a small
Vent-hole, that after the Cider is tunn'd up, and stopped at the Bung, you may
give it Vent at pleasure; and that when you draw it forth, you may thereby
admit Air into the Vessel. This form is preferred, because that most Liquors
contract a Skin or Cream on the top, which helps much to their preservation,
and is in other forms broken by the sinking of the Liquor, but in this is kept
whole; which occasions the freshness of the Drink to the last.

It is also observed, that a new Vessel made of Oak, tinges any Liquor at the
first with a brown Color; wherefore it is convenient thoroughly to season your
new Vessels with scalding water, wherein you may boil Apple-pumis if you
please, before you put your Cider in them; which when so seasoned, are to be
preferred to any that have been used, unless after Canary, Malaga, or Sherry
Wines, or after Metheglin; which will much advance the color and savor of
your Cider: but Vessels out of which Strong-Beer or Ale have been lately drawn,
are to be rejected, unless thoroughly scalded and seasoned as before, which then
will serve indifferently well, nothing agreeing worse with Cider than Malt; for
of Cider or Water -Cider, boiled and added to Malt, has been made a Liquor not
at all grateful. Small-Beer-Vessels well scalded, are not amiss: White or
Rhenish-Wine-Vessels may do well for present drinking, or for a Luscious Cider,
else they are apt to cause too great a fermentation.

If your Vessel be musty, Boil Pepper in Curing musty Cask.
Water after the Proportion of an Ounce to a Hogshead; fill your Vessel
therewith scalding hot, and so let it stand two or three days; or else

Take two or three Stones or more of Quicklime to six or seven gallons of
Water, which put into a Hogshead, and stop it close, and tumble it up and down
till the Lime be thoroughly slak'd.

Glass-bottles are preferred to Stone-bottles, Bottles.
because that Stone-bottles are apt to leak, and are rough in the mouth, that
they are not easily uncork'd; also they are more apt to taint than the other;
neither are they transparent, that you may discern when they are foul or clean:
it being otherwise with the Glass-bottles, whose defects are easily discerned,
and are of a more compact metal or substance, not wasting so many Corks.

To prevent the charge of which, you Grinding Glass Stopples.
may, with a Turn made for that purpose, grind or fit Glass-stopples to each
Bottle, so apt, that no Liquor or Spirit shall penetrate its closures; always
observing to keep each Stopple to its Bottle: which is easily done, by securing
it with a piece of Packthread, each Stopple having a Button on the top of it
for that end. These Stopples are ground with the Powder of the Stone Smyris,
sold at the Shops by the vulgar name of Emery, which with Oil will exquisitely
work the Glass to your pleasure.

The only Objection against this way of Closure, is, That not giving passage
for any Spirits, the Liquors are apt to force the Bottles; which in Bottles
stopped with Cork rarely happens, the Cork being somewhat porous, part of the
Spirits, though with difficulty, perspire.

If Glass-bottles happen to be musty, they are easily cured by boiling them in
a Vessel of water, putting them in whilst the water is cold, which prevents the
danger of breaking; being also cautious that you set them not down suddenly on
a cold Floor, but on Straw, Board, or suchlike.

SECT. V. Of Tunning, Bottleing, and preserving Cider.
Having your Cider purified and prepared Barrelling of Cider.
in the Tun, and your Vessels seasoned and thoroughly dried, and fixed in their
places, then Tun it up into them until the Cider be within an inch or less of
the top of the Vessel, that there may be space for a Skin or Head to cover it.
Be sure to leave the Bung open, or only covered two or three days, that the
Cider may have liberty to finish its sermentation; but if it be so clear that
it will not again ferment, and that you are willing or intend to keep it long,
put in unground Wheat after the proportion of a Quart to a Hogshead, which will
give it a head sufficient to preserve it. This artificial head is only where
an admission of Air may probably be into the Vessel.

After you have thus closed up your Bung, you ought yet to leave open the small
Vent-hole only loosely, putting in the Peg, lest otherwise the wild Spirit of
the Cider force a passage, as I have known it a week after its tunning to have
heaved up the head of the Barrel almost to a Rupture; which by the easy
stopping this Vent, and sometimes opening it, may be prevented until you find
it has wasted that wild Spirit. For the Vulgar advice of barrelling up Cider
from the Press, and then stopping it close, is pernicious to this Liquor, many
having spoiled it by this means: the Spirits seeking for a vent will find it,
and the more they are pent, the longer will they be before they are expended;
which vent being neglected by the Ciderist, becomes a passage for the best
Spirits of the Cider many times, to its absolute spoiling.

The vulgar opinion of the sudden decaying or flatning of Cider, is to be
rejected, scarce any Drink being more easily preserved than this; and though
much of its Spirits be lost, yet out of its own body, whilst new, may they be
again revived, it suffering much more by too soon detaining its Spirits, than
by too lax a closure.

Stopping of Cider with Clay, if you design to keep it long, cannot be good,
it having so strong a Spirit that it will easily raise it on every Southerly
Air; nothing being better than a wooden Plug turned fit to the Bung-hole, and
covered about with a single Brown-paper wet, before you wring it into its place.

Drawing of Cider into Bottles, and Bottling of Cider.
keeping it in them well stopped for some time, is a great improver of Cider.
This is done after it is thoroughly purified, and at any time of the year: if it
be bottled early, there needs no addition, it having Body and Spirit enough to
retrive in the Bottle what it lost in the Barrel; but if it has been
over-fermented, and thereby become poor, flat, and eager, then in the bottling
if you add a small quantity of Loaf-sugar, more or less according as it may
require, it will give a new life to the Cider, and probably make it better than
ever it was before, especially if it were but a little acid, and not eager.

When your Cider is thus bottled, if it were new at the bottling, and not
absolutely pure, it is good to let the Bottles stand a while before you stop
them close, or else open the Corks two or three days after to give the Cider
air, which will prevent the breaking the Bottles against the next change of the
wind into the South.

Great care is to be had in choosing good Corks, much good Liquor being
absolutely spoiled through the only defect of the Cork; therefore are Glass
Stopples to be preferred, in case the accident of breaking the Bottles can be
prevented.

If the Corks are steeped in scalding water a while before you use them, they
will comply better with the mouth of the Bottle, than if forced in dry: also
the moisture of the Cork does advantage it in detaining the Spirits.

Therefore is laying the Bottles sideways to be commended, not only for
preserving the Corks moist, but for that the Air that remains in the Bottle is
on the side of the Bottle where it can neither expire, nor can new be admitted,
the Liquor being against the Cork, which not so easily passes through the Cork
as the Air. Some place their Bottles on a Frame with their noses downwards for
that end; which is not to be so well approved of, by reason that if there be
any the least settling in the Bottle, you are sure to have it in the first
Glass.

Placing the Bottles on a Frame, as is usual, or on Shelves, is not so good as
on the ground, by reason that the farther from the earth they stand, the more
subject they are to the variation of the Air, which is more rare in the upper
part of a Cellar or other Room, than in the lower; and a few inches will
occasion a great change, unless in a Room arched or vaulted with Stone: but
where Room is wanting, this inconvenience may be easily born withal.

Setting Bottles in Sand is by many not only made use of, but commended,
although without cause, it not adding that coldness to the Bottles as is
generally expected, being rather of a dry and temperate quality than cold; if
there be any convenience in it, it is because it defends them from the too
sudden changes of Air into heat or cold, which in open and not deep Rooms it is
often subject unto.

The placing of Bottles in Cisterns of Spring Water, either running or often
changed, is without all Peradventure the best way to preserve Cider or any
other Vinous Liquors. A Conservatory made where a recruit of a cool
refrigerating Spring Water may conveniently be had, will so long preserve Cider
until it be come to the strength even of Canary it self. Bottles let down into
Wells of water where Pumps are, that the frequent use of Buckets may not injure
them; or little Vaults made in the sides of Wells near the bottom, may supply
the defect of Spring Water in your Cellar. The reason why Water is to be
preferred for such a Conservatory, is, because the closeness of its body admits
not of a sudden rarefaction of Air, as other Materials do, but is generally of
an equal degree of coldness, and that colder than commonly the Liquor is that
is preserved; which so condenseth its Spirits, that they seek not any exition
or expansion, but acquiesce in their own proper body, where they multiply and
become more and more mature, by virtue of that innate heat the Liquor received
whilst in its Fruit. Quaere whether the warmth that is in Wells or deep
Springs, in frosty weather, incommode not these Liquors? Also Quaere whether
these cool Conservatories prevent not the breaking of Bottles stopped with Glass
Stopples, by the condensing power of the water. My self being destitute of any
opportunity to make those experiments, cannot at present resolve these Quaeries.

In some places the conveniencie of Water may easily be had for such a
Refrigeratory, both for the constant supply of cool Spring Water, and for its
evacuation again, which is as necessary as its supply: and in many places the
Ciderist may command a Spring from some place a little distant from his
Refrigeratory, but cannot so easily be rid of it again; which must be as well
considered of as the other. Therefore if you can conveniently make a Cistern in
the bottom or on the side of your Cellar that will hold water, either of Stone
or Brick well cemented, and if of Brick, plaistered with Plaster of Paris, or
with a Cement made of Linseed-oyl and Lime newly flakned, with a little
Cotton-wool beat into it, and can, as occasion requires, supply it with a
descent of cool Spring Water; your way to evacuate the same, will be with a
small Hand-pump, such as they usually use in small Vessels at Sea, and may be
had in The Form of the Vessel
a. The Bung hole. b. a small vent hole. c. the Tap.


P. 100

depiction of vessel Maritime Towns at an easy rate, with which you may pump
your Cistern or Conservatory dry once a week, oftener or more seldom, as the
warmth or coldness of the Air seems to require; and supply it again from your
Spring, or in defect thereof from some Well or Pump, whence you draw your Water
for other occasions. But if your Cistern be made in the Ground under your
Cellar, you need only lay your Brick or Stone in Clay well tempered, and laid
thick under the Brick or Stone, and on the sides of the Cistern.

Where you have not the convenience of Water, or are unwilling to be at the
expense, as in some places it may require, of making such Conservatories; there
the best way is to dig Vaults in your Cellars, under the Level of the bottom,
or to make Niches in the Walls near the Ground, and in them place your Bottles
leaning: for the more they are remote from the Air, and the more encompassed
with Stone or Earth, the cooler they will continue, and the less subject to the
inconveniences that happen from the mutability of the Ambient Air.

To accelerate maturity in your Bottle-drink, you may place them above Stairs
in some Room warmed by the Beams of the Sun; which will much hasten its
maturity, and is easier performed than any Agitation can be: but thus it will
not long continue, and caution must be had to your Bottles.

Binding down the Corks of your Bottles in case of danger, is not so much to be
commended, as well fitting them in by full Corks; because the Liquor were
better fly the Cork than break the Bottle, which must be, in case the Cork be
tied down, and the Liquor not well qualified.

In many places they boil their Cider, Boiling of Cider.
adding thereto several Spices, which makes it very pleasant, and abates the
unsavory smack it contracts by boiling, but withal gives it a high Color. This
way is not to be commended, because the Juice of the Apple is either apt to
extract some ill savor from the Brass or Copper, we being not acquainted with
any other Vessels to boil it in, or the feces or sediment of it apt to burn by
its adhering to the sides of the Vessel, it being boiled in a naked Fire.

But if you are willing to boil your Cider, your Vessel ought to be of Latten,
which may be made large enough to boil a good quantity, the Tin yielding no bad
Tincture to the Liquor. The Vessel also ought to be broad and open, for the
more expeditious wasting of the aqueous and Phlegmatic part of the Liquor,
which first flies, in case the Must be newly taken from the Press, and the
Apples ripened on the Tree, ground as soon as gathered, and pressed as soon as
ground: For it is not the boiling only, but the sudden wasting of the
Phlegmatic part, that meliorates the remainder; the Spirits in all Liquors
retiring and contracting themselves before Fermentation, as in all Musts, and
after putrefaction, as in Vinegar, and all acid eager Liquors. For observe, how
much soever you wast in this evaporation of any sort of Must, or new Wurt, by
so much is that which remains the stronger; so that you need not be so intent
to procure Ebullition, as expense of the meaner part of your Liquor. Also you
may place this Latten Vessel in another Vessel of Water, or in a thin Bed of
Ashes, to prevent the too fierce heat of the naked Fire; also you may keep it
stirring, which will expedite the Operation. Before it be quite cold, you may
ferment or purify it to what degree you please.

This Cider thus boiled and purified, to the expense of the one half, will keep
very long, and be exceeding rich and strong, and not so ill qualifyed, as has
usually been, in case you use caution in the operation, which is to be
preferred to those Spicy Additions.

It many times happens, that Cider that (...) of decay^d Cider.
has been good, by ill management or other accident becomes dead, flat, sour,
thick, muddy, or musty; all which in some sort or other may be cured.

Deadness or Flatness in Cider, which is often occasioned from the too free
admission of Air into the Vessel, for want of right stopping, and is cured by
grinding a small parcel of Apples, and putting them in at the Bunghole, and
stopping it close, only sometimes trying it by opening the small vent, that it
force not the Vessel: but then you must draw it off in a few days, either into
Bottles or another Vessel, lest the Murc corrupt the whole Mass; which may also
be prevented, in case you press your Apples, and put up only the new Must that
comes from them on the decayed Cider. The same may be done in Bottles, by
adding about a spoonful or two of new Must to each Bottle of dead Cider, and
stopping it again. Cider that is dead or flat will oftentimes revive again of
it self, if close stopped, upon the revolution of the year and approaching Summer.

If Cider be acid, as sometimes it happens by reason of the immaturity of the
Fruit, too nimble an Operation, too great a Fermentation in the Vessel, or too
warm a Situation of your Vessels wherein it is kept; this sometimes becomes
pleasant again, in case its Lee be yet in the Vessel, as is supposed by a
second operation on it, but in case it does not, if you add about a Gallon of
unground-Wheat to a Hogshead of it, it will very much sweeten it, and make it
pleasant. The same effect will two or three Eggs put in whole, or a pound of
Figgs slitt, produce, as is reported. But the surest remedy is Botling it with
a Knob of Sugar, in proportion according to the occasion.

There is some difference between a sharp or acid Cider, and a Cider that is
eager or turned. The first has its Spirits free and volatile, and may easily
be retriv'd by a small addition of new Spirits, or some edulcorating matter;
but the latter has part of its Spirits wasted, and part retired, that all
additions are vain attempts to recover it.

If your Cider be Musty, which happens either from the places the Fruit lay in
before Grinding, or from the Vessels through which the Pulp or Must has past,
or that the Cider is contained in; the Cure thereof is very difficult. Although
in some measure the ill savor of it may be corrected by Mustard Seed ground
with some of the same Cider.

Thick Cider is easily cured at what Age soever, by exciting it to a
fermentation, either by the addition of Mustard made with Sack, or by the
addition of new Pulp or Must, or of rotten Apples; Or (which will do it when
all fails) by purifying it with Isinglass, or Fish-glew, as before is directed.

Racking of Cider is much commended by some, but the operation tedious,
troublesome, and costly, by reason of the change of Vessels of different sizes,
the latter being to be less than the former. And therefore not to be endured
amongst true Ciderists, Purifying the Liquor before Tunning, being much to be
preferred.

If the Vessel before Cider be tunned up Preserving Cider by Sulphur.
into it, be fumed with Sulphur, it much conduces to the preservation of this
or any other kind of Liquor: which may be done by laying Brimstone on a Rag, or
by dipping a Rag in melted Brimstone, and by a Wire letting it down into the
Vessel, being fired, will fill the Vessel full of smoke; then take it out, and
immediately tun up your Liquor, which gives it no ill taste nor savor, and is
an excellent preserver of your health, as well as of the Liquor.

But the better way for this operation is, by making a little Earthen pot
wherein to burn your Brimstone, the cover of it to extend in a Pipe about two
Foot for your Mouth, and another Pipe to go out of the side of the Pot into the
Bung-hole of the Vessel, in which the Cider is put to be preserved: about half
way deep into the Liquor, put your Rags dipped in Brimstone, into the pot, add
Fire to it, cover your pot, blow at your Pipe, which will increase the Fire,
and drive the Fume into the middle of the Liquor in the Barrel, and also fill
the Vacancies of the Vessel; Then stop it close, by which means the Cider is
impregnated with the Spirit of Sulphur, which will give it no alteration, save
only for its salubrity and duration.

It is evident, that Cider by time changes its greenish Color, for a bright
yellow, inclining to redness.

SECT. VI. Of making Water-Cider.
It is observed that many sorts of Apples thoroughly mature, will endure some
addition of Water, without any prejudice to the Drink, especially in the Island
of Jersey, where they frequently give it a dash. This dilution is only with
Apples of a mellow and rich Juice, and is necessary to help its clarification;
the Cider it self being of too glutinous a substance, and they not acquainted
with any other way of attenuating it.

To some sorts of Fruit that are of themselves acid, crude, or of a thin Juice,
dilution is very improper; but if the Water be boiled, and let stand till it be
cold, it will be the better; that abating much of its crudity.

Water mixed with the Fruit in the Grinding, incorporateth better with the
Cider, than if added in the Vessel; and if mixed in the Vessel, better than if
added in the Glass. By the Addition of Water can no other advantage be expected
than the increase of the Liquor, as we usually make more Small Beer than
Strong, of the same quantity of Malt, for the ordinary expense in Economy.

After you have pressed out your Cider, Of making Ciderkin or Purre.
you may also put the Murc up into a large Vat, and add thereto what quantity
you think convenient of boiled Water (being first cold again:) if about half
the quantity of the Cider be pressed from it, it will be good; if as much as
the Cider, then but small: let this Water stand on it about forty-eight hours,
and then press it well. That which comes from the Press, Tun up immediately,
and stop it up, you may drink it in a few days. This being the most part Water,
will clarify of it self, and supplies the place of Small-Beer in a Family, and
to many much more acceptable.

You may amend it by the addition of the Settling or Lee of your Cider that you
last purifyed, by putting it up on the Pulp before pressure, or by adding some
overplus of Cider, that your other Vessels will not hold, or by Grinding some
falling or refuse Apples that were not fit to be added to your Cider, and
pressing it with this.

This Ciderkin or Purre may be made to keep long, in case you boil it after
pressure, with such a proportion of Hops as you usually add to your Beer that
you intend to keep for the same time, and it will be thus very well preserved;
but then you need not boil your Water before the adding it to your Murc.

SECT. VII. Of Mixtures with Cider.
There is not any Liquor that has less need of Mixtures than Cider, being of
it self so excellent, that any addition whatsoever makes it less pleasant: but
being so necessary a Drink for the preservation of health, and tending to
Longaevity, it may be the most proper Vehicle to transfer the virtues of many
Aromatic and Medicinal Drugs, Spices, Fruits, Flowers, Roots, etc. into every
part of man, beyond any other Liquor whatsoever.

With it may be made Juniper-Cider, by the addition of the Berries dried, six,
eight, or ten to each Bottle in the bottling of it, or else a proportionable
quantity in the Barrel: the taste whereof is somewhat strange, which by use
will be much abated.

Ginger may be added with good success, it making the Cider more brisk and
lively than otherwise it would be.

Dried Rosemary may be added in the Vessel, and does not make it very
unpleasing.

Wormwood imbibed therein, produces the effect that it does in Wine.

The Juice of Currants preserved simply, without any Sugar or Water, a few of
the clear drops of it, tingeth and matureth early Cider, which to some might
otherwise seem too luscious.

The Juice of Rasberries preserved, or the Wine thereof, gives an excellent
tincture to this Liquor, and makes it very pleasant, if the Cider be not too
new or too luscious.

For cooling Tinctures to Cider, the Juice of the Mulberry is to be preferred.

And next to that, the Juice of the Blackberry; both ripening about the time of
making Cider.

Elder-berries are much commended by some to be pressed amongst your Apples, or
the Juice of them added to your Cider.

The Clove-July-Flower dried and steeped in Cider, gives it an excellent
Tincture and Flavor.

Thus may the Virtues of any dried Flowers, Leaves, Roots, etc. be extracted
and conveyed into our bodies by the most pleasant Vehicle that can be obtained.

SECT. VIII. Of making other sorts of Wines or Drinks of Fruits.
Besides Cider, there are many other curious Drinks that may be prepared out of
our British Fruits: As Perry, whereof there Of making Perry.
is a great quantity made yearly in several places of this Kingdom; and its
operation so much like unto that of Cider, that we need say the less in this
place.

Pears should not be too mellow when they are ground, for then they are so
pulpy, that they will not easily part with their Juice.

If Crabs be mixed with Pears in grinding, it very much improves the Perry; the
proportion must be with discretion, according as the sweetness of the Pear
requires.

Perry, if well made, and of good Pears, will keep equally with Cider. The
Bosbury-Pear is esteemed the best to yield lasting Perry.

Although the Planting of Vineyards in this Island is not so much in use as in
the more Southerly Countries, nor are our seasons so constant for the
maturation of the Fruit of the Vine, as they are in Continents of the same
Latitude; yet may we propagate this Plant to a good effect in some warm
Scituations, and especially on the sides of Buildings, Walls, etc. and where
there are any store of them, very good Wine may be made of the great plenty of
their Liquor; and much better than any of the French Wines usually imported
here, in case caution and skill be used in its preparation.

When you perceive your Grapes to be The time of gathering Fruit.
plump and transparent, and the Seeds or Stones to come forth black and clear,
and not clammy, and the Stalks begin to wither, then gather them, for they
cannot be over-ripe; neither will Rain or Frost injure them, so that the
weather be dry some time before gathering.

Cut them off from the Branches, and not pull them, and in the Moons decrease,
preserving them from bruises as much as you can.

Here in this cold Country they are seldom Making of the Wine.
all of a ripeness, and the Stalks contain something of crudity in them;
therefore it would not be lost labor to cull or separate the more ripe from
the less, and from the Stalks, before you press out your Wine; by which means
some have had Wine comparable with the best French Wines that are pressed from
the Grapes promiscuously; and this Wine thus made of selected Grapes, will last
several years, as has been experienced.

When your Wine is tunned, leave a part of the Vessel void or empty, and stop
it up close immediately, and that very well, lest it loose its Spirits; which
vacancie you may again supply after ten or twelve days with other Wine that
has been also fermented: which repletion must be reiterated as often as there is
occasion.

If you intend to make Claret, you must Making of Claret.
let your Murc or Chaff abide in the Must six or eight days, or as you will
have it, more or less, ruff or tinctured, before you press it out; but in the
interim be sure to cover your Vat close.

North-winds are reported to be very bad for the sowring of Wines; therefore be
careful to keep them from it.

To purify Wine, take the thin Shavings Purifying of Wine.
or Planings of Beech, the Rind being peeled off, and boil them in water to
abate the rankness of them; then dry them thoroughly; and with these may you
purify Wine: about a peck will serve a Hogshead; which Chips will serve often
times, being washed, dried, and preserved.

Some meliorate their Wine by pressing Raisons of the Sun with the Grapes a
little plumped beforehand, or by boiling half the Must an hour together,
scumming it, and adding it hot to the other half: this meliorates that half
that is boiled, and causes a fermentation in the other; but this is left to
farther experience.

With well-ripened Grapes, diligent sorting them, easy pressure, and well
purifying and preserving its Juice, Wine may here be made in goodness and
duration equal to the best and most Southerly French Wines that are usually
imported hither, as has been diverse times experienced for several years
successively, by one that has produced excellent Wine of several years
preserving.

For against a Wall Grapes will ripen very well in most years, and the best of
them separated from the more immature, and from the Stalks, yield a luscious
Juice; and those gently bruised yield a thin Must that has of it self but
little of the flying Lee in it; and that also being precipitated or taken off,
the Wine will not be so apt to ferment; which is the principal cause of its
sudden decaying. This Wine preserved in your Refrigeratoty, will continue good
for several years; its Spirits thereby multiplying and heightning, that makes
it equal to those Wines that received a far greater degree of maturation in
their Fruit more exposed to the perpendicular Beams of the Sun.

There is scarce any Fruit more easily propagated Cherry-wine.
than the Cherry, nor any Fruit that bears more constantly and plentifully:
that is a tall and Orchard-Tree, the Fruit whereof yields a fine acid pleasant
Juice, and mixed with the more fat and luscious Wines of Spain, make a very
good Wine, by the addition of Sugar whereby to preserve it.

Or the Juice it self, gently pressed from the Fruit, may, by a convenient
addition of Sugar, make a very pleasant Wine, and durable, if boiled together;
but in the boiling caution must be had, lest it attract some ill savor from
the Vessel.

This Fruit is also easy of Propagation, Plum-wine.
and no doubt but some of the more juicie sort of them, especially the Damsin,
would yield an excellent Liquor, but scarcely durable unless boiled with Sugar,
and well purified, or else the Sugar boiled beforehand in water, and then
added: the Juice of the Plum being of a thick substance, will easily bear
dilution. This is easily experimented where Plums are in great plenty.

The Red Dutch-Currant, or Corinth, Currant-wine.
yields a very rich and well-colored Juice, which if suffered to hang on the
Trees six or seven weeks after they are red, will yield a Vinous Liquor, which
is to be diluted with an equal quantity of water boiled with refined Sugar,
about the proportion of one pound to a gallon of your Wine (when mixed with the
water) and after the Water and Sugar so boiled together is cold, then mix it
with the Juice of the Currants, and purify it with Isinglass dissolved in part
of the same Liquor, or in Whitewine, as is before directed for the purifying of
Cider, after the rate of an ounce to eight or ten Gallons; but boil it not in a
Brass Vessel, for the reasons beforementioned. This will raise a Scum on it of
a great thickness, and leave your Wine indifferent clear, which you may draw
out either at a Tap, or by your Siphon, into a Barrel, where it will finish its
Fermentation, and in three weeks or a Month become so pure and limpid, that you
may Bottle it with a piece of Loaf-Sugar in each Bottle, in bigness according
to your discretion; which will not only abate its quick acidity that it may as
yet retain, but make it brisk and lively.

At the time you Bottle it, and for some time after, it will taste a little
sweet-sowre, from the Sugar, and from the Current; but after it has stood in
the Bottles six or eight weeks, it will be so well united, that it will be a
delicate, Palatable, rich Wine, transparent as the Ruby, of a full Body, and in
a Refrigeratory very durable; and the longer you keep it, the more Vinous will
your Liquor be.

By the letting your Currants hang on the Trees until they are through ripe,
which is long after they are become red, digests and matures their Juice, that
it needs not that large addition of Sugar, that otherwise it would do, in case
the Fruit had been gathered when they first seemed to be ripe, as is vulgarly
used, and the common Receipts direct. Also it makes the Liquor more spirituous
and Vinous, and more capable of duration, than otherwise it would be, if the
Fruit had not received so great a share of the Sun.

The Goosberry-Tree being one of the Goosberry-Wine.
greatest Fruit-bearing Shrubs, yields a pleasant Fruit, which although
somewhat luscious, yet by reason of its gross Lee, whereof it is full, it is
apt to become acid, unless a proportion of Water sweetened with Sugar (but not
with so much as the other acid-Liquors) be added unto it; this Liquor of any
other will not bear a decoction because it will debase its color from a Wine
color to a brown not pleasant in Whitish Wines or Liquors.

There is no Shrub yields a more pleasant Rasberry-Wine.
Fruit than the Rasberry-Tree, which is rather a Weed than a Tree, never living
two years together above-ground. Nor is there any Fruit that yields a sweeter
and more pleasant Juice than this, which being extracted serves not only to add
a flavor to most other Wines or Liquors, but by a small addition of Water and
Sugar boiled together, and when cold, added to this Juice, and purified makes
one of the most pleasant drinks in the World.

Having given you a taste of most Wines Apricock-Wine.
made by pressure of the Juices out of the Fruits. You may also divert your
self with the blood of the Grape or any other of the beforementioned Limpid
Liquors, tinged with the flavor and spirituous haut-gust of other Fruits that
cannot so easily and liberally afford you their Juices. As of the Apricock,
which steeped in Wine, gives the very taste of the Fruit; also
Clove-July-Flowers, Clove-Juliflower-Wine.
or other sweet-sented Flowers does the like. You may also make experiment of
some sorts of Peaches, Nectorines, etc. what effect they will have upon those
sorts of drinks.

SECT. IX. Of making some other Drinks or Wines usually drank in this Island.
Besides such Drinks or Liquors that are commonly made of the Fruits of Trees
or Shrubs, there are several other pleasant, wholesome, and necessary Drinks,
made of Trees, Leaves, Grains, mixtures of several things, that are not to be
omitted or wanting in your Conservatory to make it complete.

As Metheglin or Hydromel, that is prepared out of Honey extracted by the
diligent Be out of several Vegetables, being one of the most pleasant and
universal Drinks the Northern part of Europe affords, and was in use among the
Ancients that inhabited these colder Countries, before Wine or other Vinous
Liquors became so generally used; and is yet in several cold Countries the most
excellent Drink that they have of their own making, where Wines and other
Vinous Liquors are not so easily nor well prepared. The Subject whereof it is
made, Honey, being to be had in every part of Europe, from the most Southerly
parts of Spain, Italy, etc. to the most Northerly. It being affirmed by
Historiographers, that there is Honey within the Arctick-Circle or Frozen Zone.

Those that lived formerly in the more Southern parts (as Pliny reports) made a
Drink compounded of Honey and tart Wine, which they termed Melitites, by the
addition of a Gallon of Honey to five Gallons of their Wine, making thereof no
doubt a very pleasant Liquor: to which Virgil seems to allude, when he sings

Dulcia mella premes; nec tantum dulcia quantum
Et liquida, and durum Bacchi domitura saporem.
-- -- Honey you may press,
Not only sweet, but shall be purely sine,
And sit to qualify your sharpest Wine.
This Drink was also called Oinomel by Dioscorides, and others in that Age.

In Swedeland, Muscovia, Russia, and as far as the Caspian Sea, they make great
store of this Drink, and Meth, which is a smaller sort of it, made of the worst
Honey, and of the refuse of all the rest.

This Metheglin or Hydromel, they prefer in those cold Countries before any
other Drinks, preparing it diversely to please their Palates; The best receipt
whereof that I have observed to be made by them is thus.

They take Rasberries which grow plentifully in those parts, and put them into
fair Water, for two or three Nights (I suppose they bruise them first) that the
Water may extract their taste and color. Into this Water they put of the
purest Honey, in proportion about one pound of Honey to three or four of Water;
according as they would have it stronger or smaller. Then to give it a
fermentation, they put a Tossed into it dipped in the Dregs or Grounds of Beer;
which when it has set the Metheglin at work, they take out again, to prevent
any ill Savor it may give; if they desire to ferment it long, they set in a
warm place; which when they please to hinder or stop, they remove it into a
cool place; after it has done fermenting, they draw it off the Lee for present
use; to add to its excellency, they hang in it a little bagg wherein is
Cinnamon, Grains of Paradise, and a few Cloves. This may do very well for
present drinking. But if you would make your Metheglin of the same ingredients,
and to be kept (time meliorating any sort of Drinks) you may preserve your
Juice of Rasberries at their proper season. And when you make your Metheglin,
decoct your Honey and Water together, and when it is cold, then add your Juice
of Rasberries which was before prepared to keep, and purify your Metheglin by
the means before prescribed, or ferment it, either by a Tossed dipped in Yest, or
by putting a spoonful of Yest unto it, to which you may add the little bag of
Spices before mentioned. Then let it stand about a Month to be thoroughly
purified, and then bottle it, and preserve it for use, and it may in time
become a curious Drink.

They also steep Rasberries in Aqua-Vitae twenty-four hours, and add that to
their Hydromel; which is a great amendment of it.

The same people also extract the Juices of Strawberries, Mulberries, and
Cherries, and make the same use of them in their Hydromel, as they did of the
Rasberries.

Many Receipts are handed from one to another, for the making of Metheglin or
Hydromel, wherein are several green Vegetables prescribed to be used, as
Sweet-Bryar-Leaves, Thyme, Rosemary, etc. which are not to be used green, by
them that intend to make a quick, brisk and lively Drink; green and crude herbs
dulling and flatning the Spirits of the Liquor to which they are added, as you
will find if you add green Hops instead of dry to your Beer: neither will any
green herb yield its virtue so easily as when dry. But Spices and Aromatic
herbs are very necessary to add a flavor to the Metheglin, and abate its too
luscious taste.

It is usually also directed, that the Metheglin when boiling, should be
scummed, to take off the filth that arises from it in the decoction: which is
not so necessary as it is pretended to be; for that scum remaining behind, will
be of use, and a help to its fermentation, and makes the Liquor afterward to
become the more limpid; and does not unite again with it, as is vulgarly
believed, it being a Maxim in Philosophy, that Feces once separated, will
never reunite.

So that if you take Honey, Live-Honey, that naturally runs from the Combs,
(and that from Swarms of the same year is the best) and add so much Honey to
clear Spring Water, that when the Honey is dissolved thoroughly, an Egg will not
sink to the bottom, but easily swim up and down in it; Then boil this Liquor
in a Brass, or rather Copper Vessel, for about an hour or more; and by that
time the Egg will swim above the Liquor, about the breadth of a Groat, then let
it cool; the next morning you may barrel it up, adding to the proportion of
fifteen Gallons an ounce of Ginger, half an ounce of Cinamou, Cloves and Mace
of each an ounce, all grossly beaten, for if you beat it fine, it will always
float in your Metheglin, and make it foul; and if you put it in whilst it is
hot, the Spices will lose their Spirits. You may also if you please add a
little spoonful of Yest at the Bunghole to increase its fermentation, but let
it not stand too cold at the first, that being a principal impediment to its
fermentation; as soon as it has done working, stop it up close, and let it
stand for a Month, then draw it into Bottles, which if set in a Refrigeratory,
as before was directed for Cider, it will become a most pleasant Vinous Drink,
daily loosing its luscious taste; the longer it is kept, the better it will be.

By the sloating of the Egg you may judge of its strength, and you may make it
more or less strong as you please by adding of more Honey, or more Water.

By long boiling it is made more pleasant and more durable.

As well in these Northern parts of Europe, as in many places of Asia, and
Africa, Of Birtch-Wine.
may we extract the Blood of Trees themselves, and make them drinkable. The
delicacy of our Liquors made of Fruits and Grains, very much abates the eager
prosecution of such designs, yet the pleasantness and salubrity of the Blood
of several Trees, have given encouragement, to some Virtuosi, to bestow their
labor and skill on them, and not in vain, The Sycomore and Wallnut-Trees are
said to yield excelle at Juice, but we in England have not had so great
experience in any, as in that of the Birch-tree.

Which may be extracted in very great quantities where those Trees are plenty,
many Gallons in a day may be gathered from the Boughs of the Tree by cutting
them of leaving their ends fit to go into the mouths of the Bottles, and so by
hanging many Bottles on several Boughs, the Liquor will distill into them very
plentifully.

The season for this work, is from the end of February to the end of March,
whilst the Sap rises, and before the Leaves shoot out from the Tree; for when
the Spring is forward and the Leaves begin to appear, the Juice, by a long
digestion in the Branch, grows thick and colored, which before was thin and
limpid. The Sap also distills not in cold weather, whilst the North and
East-winds blow, nor in the night time, but very well and freely when the South
or West-winds blow, or the Sun shine warm.

That Liquor is best that proceeds from the Branches, having had a longer time
in the Tree, and thereby better digested and acquiring more of its flavor,
than if it had been extracted from the Trunk.

Thus may many Hogsheads soon be obtained: Poor people will (where Trees are
plenty) draw it for two pence or three pence the Gallon. To every Gallon
whereof, add a pound of refined Sugar, and boil it about a quarter or half an
hour; then set it to cool, and add a very little Yest to it, and it will
ferment, and thereby purge it self from that little dross the Liquor and Sugar
can yield: then put it in a Barrel, and add thereto a small proportion of
Cinnamon and Mace bruised, about half an ounce of both to ten Gallons; then stop
it very close, and about a month after bottle it; and in a few days you will
have a most delicate brisk Wine of a Flavor like unto Rhenish. Its Spirits are
so volatile, that they are apt to break the Bottles, unless placed in a
Refrigeratory, and give it a white head in the Glass. This Liquor is not of
long duration, unless preserved very cool.

Instead of every pound of Sugar, if you add a quart of Honey and boil it as
before, and adding Spice, and fermenting it as you should do Metheglin, it
makes an admired Drink, both pleasant and medicinable.

Ale brewed of this Juice or Sap, is esteemed very wholesome.

I cannot pass by naming this famous Liquor Chocolate.
Chocolate, that was in a manner Meat and Drink to a great part of America, and
is very much used in most parts of it. The principal Ingredient is the Kernel
of the Cacao-nut, a Fruit growing in those parts very plentifully, yet in so
great esteem amongst them, that it was amongst the Natives as their Coin.

To this Fruit they add Achiote, which is made of the red Kernels of another
Fruit there growing, by decocting them to a Pap, whereof they make Cakes. Also
they add Maiz, a Grain growing in that Country; and Macaxochite, a kind of
Pepper, which tempers the cooling property of the other Ingredients: They mix
therewith the Flowers of the Tree Xochinacatlis, and Tlilxochitle, and a Gum
that drops from a Tree they call Holquahuitle, which have excellent virtues
with them; of all which the Americans compose a pleasant Drink, by decocting
the same in Wine, or Milk, or other Liquidities: And without question, Kernels,
Grains, and Flowers may here be found, that may make a counterfeit of it in
taste, and equal to it in virtue. Quaere, whether the Kernel of the Wallnut may
not supply the defect of the Cacao, if well ground.

In China, plentifully grows a Plant they Tea.
call Thea, on a Shrub much like unto our Mirtle-tree which bears a Leaf, that
the Chinese gather in the Spring one by one, and immediately put them to warm
in an Iron Kettle over the fire; then laying them on a fine light Mat, roll
them together with their hands. The Leaves thus rolled are again hanged over
the fire, and then rolled closer together till they are dry, then put up
carefully in Tin Vessels, to preserve them from moisture. Thus they prepare and
preserve their best Leaves that yield the greatest rates, but the ordinary they
only dry in the Sun; but in the shade is doubtless much better, the Sun having
a great power to attract the virtue out of any Vegetable after its separation
from its Nourisher.

Boil a quart of clean water, and then add to it a few of these dry Leaves,
which you may take up at once between the tops of your fingers, and let them
thus stand in a covered Pot two or three minutes, in which time the Leaves will
be spread to their former breadth and shape, and yield their bitter, yet
pleasant taste. This Liquor you may, if you please, edulcorate with a little
Sugar, and make it an acceptable Drink.

It Is probable some English Plants may yield a Leaf that may, thus ordered,
make a pleasant and wholesome Drink. Several do use the Herb Betony, Sage, and
other Herbs, after the same manner.

CHAP. VI. Of the profits that may arise from propagating and preparing the
said Trees and Liquors, with the uses and virtues of them.
SECT. I. Of the profits arising thereby.
WE all very well know that Advantage is the great Mark aimed at by most, and
the Haven to which the greater part of mankind steer their Course. It is that
which makes the toil and labor of so many ingenious and industrious men become
easy and pleasant to them, and makes the Husbandman wait with so much patience
for his long expected Crop; so that it is the profit and advantage that is to
be expected from these Plantations that must encourage our Countrymen to
undergo the pains and expense that these will necessarily require; part of
which advantages are before already in general touched at, but the more
particular those which are most to be respected.

I am unwilling to trouble you with so exact an account as may be taken, how
many greater and lesser Trees should be planted on an hundred or one thousand
Acres of Land, at so many foot and inches distance, like what of late has been
published to the world, by an account to an Acorn, how many of them will plant
one thousand Acres of Land at a foot distance, etc. having more of nicety than
discretion in it; only you may conclude, that one hundred Apple Trees may be
planted in an Acre of ground at about twenty foot distance; which is a good
size for the Red-streak, that Tree never growing very large: the greater
distance you plant them at, the fewer will be required: Consideration also must
be had to the goodness of the Land; a dry hungry Soil requiring more Trees:
than a more liberal, because the Trees will rarely be very large; and the more
they shadow the ground, the better, as before was observed.

The Rates and Prizes of planting one hundred of these Trees, are also easily
to be computed; you may have them at the Gardeners, brought home, planted, and
staked, if they require it, for about five pound the hundred.

The yearly profit of the Herbage or Tillage of this Acre of Ground for the
first seven years after planting, may well be employed in digging about the
Roots of the Trees, carrying off convenient and proper Soil or compost for
them, and maintaining the Fences, paying Duties, etc.

At seven years end, these one hundred Trees may, one Tree with another, yield
a bushel of Apples each Tree: for although it is not to be denied, but that
some of them may have perished, and others, as yet but young, raised in their
places, yet may some of these Trees at seven years growth bear two or three
bushels, and some a bushel and a half, which may in the whole make one hundred
bushels, which at six pence per bushel is fifty shillings; the Herbage then
will be worth at least twenty shillings per annum, although the Ground were
worth less before it was planted: The eighth or ninth year your Trees may, one
with another, and one year with another, yield you at least two or three
bushels on a Tree, and sometimes more; which at so low a rate, your five pound
first expended, and the forbearance of the profit of your Land, and interest of
your Money for seven years, will bring you in at the least five pound per
annum, the Herbage being still allowed for the maintenance of your Plantation.

But if a good Fruit-year happen, and your one hundred Trees yield you four or
five hundred bushels of Fruit, and those worth twelve pence or eighteen pence
the bushel, it will, in one year, more than retaliate all your past labor,
charge, and loss.

The like Calculation might be made of the profits arising from the propagating
of several other sorts of the beforementioned Fruits; but he that understands
the method of planting them, will easily compute the advantage.

SECT. II. Of the Uses of the said Vinous Liquors.
Besides those well-known Uses of the Drinks before discoursed of, they are
capable of being converted unto other very necessary Uses at such times as
either the Country is full stocked with it, or that you have any of it that may
not be so pleasant and drinkable as you desire.

For then you may, after due fermentation, extract Spirits, vulgarly called
Brandy, O^ making Brandy.
in great plenty, and very excellent, quick, and burning.

It being usual for Cider, when old, to burn over the fire as Claret, or other
French wine: for the older any Liquor is, if well kept, the more Spirits it
yields. Cider also has been observed to yield an eighth part of good Spirit at
an indifferent age; but if close kept in a Refrigeratory for a year or two, it
will yield much more.

Also some sorts of Cider yield a greater plenty of Spirits than others.

In France they make a very considerable advantage of the Spirits they distill
out of their bad Wines, and refuse-Grapes; which may as well be done here out
of our bad Cider, and especially out of a Liquor that may be pressed out of
Crabs when through Ripe, and Mellow; it being observed, that the roughest Fruit
yields the most Spirits.

Besides the great advantage that may be made as aforesaid, of the unpalatable
Liquors. In case they have lost their Spirits, Of making Vinegar.
as it is usually termed, or rather that their Spirits are contracted or fixed,
that they rise not in distillation from the more Phlegmatic parts; Yet will
these, or the most part of these Vinous Liquors make Vinegar, as has been
often experimented.

Take Cider good or bad, and put it up Vinegar of Cider.
upon the Rape, as the French do their bad Wines, and it will produce excellent
Vinegar, such that bears the name of White-Wine-Vinegar, and shall have a good
color and taste.

Take the Juice of Red-Currants through Current Vinegar.
Ripe, and add thereto an equal quantity of Water, and let it stand in the Sun
about three or four weeks in a Barrel with the Bung-hole covered with a
Tile-Shard only: then draw it off its Lee, and you have a delicate red Vinegar,
fit for most Culinary Uses; you may make it of the Juice alone, without any
addition of Water: but I have observed the mixed to be the sharpest. This also
may you pass through the Rape, or a few Malaga-raisins old and rotten will
serve, and doubtless it will be much the better.

The Rape our Vinegarists make use of, R^pe.
they have out of France, it being only the Husks of Grapes close pressed,
which have contracted an acidity, and is of the nature of Leaven, or Yest;
which used in an overgreat quantity, ferments even to an acidity. It is yet, I
suppose, to be experimented, whether our English Grapes, or some other Fruit,
will not make a Rape equal in virtue to the French, which is somewhat difficult
to obtain.

SECT. III. Of the Medicinal Virtues of Fruits, and Drinks made of them.
It is not to be expected that I should here give you an exact account of the
effects these Fruits and Wines have on humane bodies, it more becoming a
Graduate in the Medicinal Science. But to abate what any may enviously object
against the salubrity of them, and to encourage our Countrymen in the use of
them, I shall here give you what have been generally observed to be the virtues
of several of our Country Fruits and Wines.

As to Gardens and Orchards themselves, Of Gardens and Orchards.
they have been esteemed the purest of humane pleasures, and the greatest
refreshments of the Spirits of man: for the exercises of planting, grafting,
pruning, and walking in them, very much tends to Salubrity, as also does the
wholesome Airs found in them, which have been experienced not only to cure
several Distempers incident to our nature, but to tend toward the prolongation
of life.

The Fruits of the Earth, and especially Of Apples and Cider.
of Trees, were the first Food ordained for man to eat, and by eating of which
(before flesh became his meat) he lived to a far greater age, than since any
have been observed to have lived. And of all the Fruits our Northern parts
produce, there is none more edible, nor more wholesome, than Apples; which by
the various preparations of the Cook, are become a part of our
Table-entertainment almost throughout the year, and are esteemed to be very
temperate and nourishing.

They relax the Belly, which is a very good property in them; but the sweet
more than the sharp.

They help Concoction, eaten after meat with a little Bread: you may be
confident that an Apple eaten after supper, depresseth all offensive vapors
that otherwise would offend the Head, and hinder sleep.

Apples roasted, scalded, or otherwise prepared, according to the skill of the
Operatour, are good in many hot Diseases, against Melancholy, and the
Pleurisy; the decoction of them also with the Pulp thinly mixed, cures the
painful Strangury or difficulty of Urine, and Running of the Reins; and
edulcorated with Sugar, is good to abate a tedious Cold.

But Cider is much to be preferred, it Of Cider*
being the more pure and active part separated from the impure and feculent;
and without all peradventure, is the most wholesome Drink that is made in
Europe for our ordinary use, as before is observed.

For its specific Virtues, there is not any Drink more effectual against the
Scurvie. It is also prevalent against the Stone, and by its mundifying quality,
is good against the Diseases of the Spleen, and is esteemed excellent against
Melancholy.

Pears are near of a nature with Apples, Of Pears,
and are of as great use in the Kitchen and Conservatory: they nourish more,
especially the Warden, which baked, and well sweetened with Sugar, is held to be
one of the best Restoratives to a Consumptive man.

The Wine made of them is more full of Of Perry.
Spirit than that of the Apple, and esteemed a greater Cordial.

The uses and virtues of Grapes and Of Grapes.
their Wine, are so generally known, that it is needless to mention them.

Although Quinces yield no Vinous Of Quinces.
Juice pleasant to the Palate, yet are they not to be rejected in our
Plantation or Vineyard, for their excellency in the Kitchen and in the
Conservatory.

These Fruits, any ways preserved or prepared, are an excellent stringent and
corroborating Medicine.

The Cherry is a most innocent Fruit, and Of Cherries.
rarely hurts any, unless eaten in too great a quantity.

The Wine made of them is a very pleasant and proper Wine for the
Summer-season, cooling, strengthening, and stirring up a good appetite to Meat.

Plums are useful in the Kitchen, and Of Plums.
many sorts of them excellent to preserve.

Eaten raw, are cooling, and hurt not, unless in too great a quantity.

The Wine of them being well purified, is near in virtue to Cherry-wine.

Our English Currants are sharp, but very Of Currants.
cooling, astringent, and corroborating, and very wholesome, eaten raw: eating
too many of these, is not to be feared, they wearying the mouth before they
satiate the stomach.

The wine that is made of them is one of the most pleasant and wholesome Wines
made in this Isle; its specific Virtues are not yet vulgarly known, but
questionless excellent against the Scurvie.

Gooseberries are cooling, and open the Of Gooseberries.
Belly; the like virtue may be expected from its Wine. There is no Fruit more
innocent than this, rarely injuring any by the over-eating of them.

They are for a long season useful in the Kitchen, few Families being ignorant
of their worth.

After several other Summer-fruits are Of Rasberries.
past, Rasberries come in use for a fine cooling repast; their Wine being one
of the pleasantest Liquors that can be obtained, and the most proper for the
Autumnal season, before Cider is become palatable.

Strawberries are a pleasant cooling Fruit, Of Strawberries.
and the distilled Water of them excellent against the Stone, Gravel, or
Strangury.

Aprecocks and Peaches are not so commendable Of Aprecocks and Peaches.
in this cold Climate for their Medicinal Virtues, as they are for their
pleasant taste, and excellency in the Kitchen and Conservatory.

Unripe Mulberries crude or dried, are Of Mulberries.
of an astringent quality; but if through ripe, they relax. The Juice of this
Fruit is Anti-scorbutical, and therefore used to wash the mouths of such that
are affected with that Disease.

Figs, Walnuts, Filberds, Medlars, etc. Of other Fruits.
are not within the limits of this discourse, therefore I need not trouble the
Reader with any thing of them.

Metheglin, as it is in strength, so it is Of Metheglin.
in virtue, warming, animating, and mundisying; restoring lost Appetite,
opens the Stomach, softneth the Belly; is good against the Consumption of the
Lungs, and all Coughs and Colds; against Quartan Agues, and all Diseases of the
Brain, as Epilepsies, Apoplexies, etc. it cures the Yellow Jaundies: and there
is no better Drink against the severe pain of the Gravel in the Reins, or Stone
in the Bladder; neither is there any Liquor more conducing to Long Life than
this and Cider, as the many Drinkers thereof can witness.

The Virtues of the Liquor or Blood of Of Birch-wine.
the Birch-tree have not long been discovered, we being beholding to the
learned Van Helmont for it; who in his Treatise of the Disease of the Stone,
has very much applauded its virtues against the affects of that Disease,
calling the natural Liquor that flows from the wounded Branches of that Tree,
the mere Balsam of the Disease of the Stone. Ale brewed therewith, as well as
the Wine that is made of it, wonderfully operates on that Disease.

Also Birch-wine is a great opener, and reputed to be a powerful Curer of the
Ptisick.

Chocolate is a very great Restorative, Of Chocolate.
comforting and cherishing the inward parts, and reviving natural strength, and
has a wonderful effect upon Consumptive and ancient people, being drank hot in
a morning.

The Virtues of Thea are very much applauded, Of Thea.
throughout the Countries where it is so much drank, against all affects of the
Head, and obstructions in the Stomach, of the Spleen and the Reins.

It dries up all vapors that offend the Head, and annoy the Sight.

It digesteth any thing that lies heavy on the Stomach, and restores lost
Appetite.

In brief, it is confidently affirmed throughout the vast Regions where it is
plentifully drank, that the drinkers of this Liquor are never troubled with the
Stone or Gout.

The Virtues hereof are more largely discoursed of in the several Histories of
those parts where it is propagated, and in a Paper printed by Mr. Thomas Garway
in Exchange-alley near the Royal Exchange in London, the principal Promoter and
Disperser of this Leaf and Liquor.

A Corollary of the Names and Natures of most Fruits growing in England.
THis Tract of the propagating of Fruit Trees, and extracting, preparing, and
preserving their Vinous Juices, cannot be complete without some Account of that
variety of Fruits this Country produces; which is a task beyond my ability
exactly to perform; every County, and many parts of each County, producing some
sort or other of Fruit not known in the next; or at least giving them other
names, so that you cannot expect any exactness herein. Only a Catalogue of the
most general and useful kinds that are either fit for the Table, Kitchen,
Confectionary, or the Press, with some short Notes or Observations on their
specific natures or virtues.

SECT. I. Of Apples.
There is no Fruit growing in England more useful or profitable than the Apple;
whereof there are many sorts,

The Aromatic or Golden Russeting has no compere, it being of a Gold-colour
Coat, under a Russet hair, has some warts on it, its Flesh of a yellow color,
its form of a flattish round. This Fruit is not ripe till after Michaelmas,
lives over the Winter, and is without dispute the most pleasant tasted Apple
that grows; having a most delicate Aromatic hautgust, and melting in the Mouth.

The Orenge*Apple, so called from its likeness in color and form to an Orange,
deserves the next place, having a fine rough Gold-coloured coat, resembling the
Golden Pippin, only fairer; lives long, and is of a very pleasant taste.

The Golden-Pippin is, as was said, smaller than the Orenge-Apple, else much
like it in color, taste, and long keeping.

The Russet-Pearmain is a very pleasant Fruit, continuing long on the Tree, and
in the Conservatory; partakes of both Russeting and Pearmain in Color and
Taste, the one side being generally Russet, and the other streaked like a
Pearmain.

The Pearmain, whereof there are two or three sorts, is so excellent an Apple,
and so well known, that no more need be said of it; only the larger sort is
more pulpy than the smaller, and keeps not so well; neither is the
Summer-Pearmain so good as the Winter. They are all very good Cider-Apples, but
not to be preferred to your Cider-Plantation, being no great Bearers.

Pippins, which are of several sorts, taking their name from the small spots
or pips that usually appear on the sides of the Apple. Some are called
Stone-Pippins, from their obdurateness. Some are called Kentish-Pippins,
because they are a Fruit that agrees well with that soil; others are called
French-Pippins, having their original from France; the Holland-Pippin from the
same cause, and the Russet-Pippin from its Russet hew. They are generally very
pleasant Fruit, and of a good Juice, fit for the Table, Conservatory and
Kitchen; but not so fit for our Plantation for Cider, as the more ordinary
Fruit, being but tender bearers.

The Kirton-pippin is one of the best sorts of Table-fruit of that season,
which is from Michaelmas to Alhollantide, and yields very good Cider.

The Carlisle-Pippin, and the Bridgwater-Pippin, are much commended for
excellent Table-Fruits.

The Golden-Rennet is a very pleasant and fair Fruit, of a yellow Flesh, a good
bearer, and yields a very good Juice, and to be preferred in our Plantation for
all occasions.

The Lincoln-Rennet is preferred by some before any of the other Rennets.

The Leather-Coat, or Golden-Russeting, as some call it, is a very good
Winter-Fruit, living long, and of a good firm and yellow Flesh.

The Green-Russeting is a tough and hard Fruit, long lasting, and of a very
pleasant hautgust.

The Red Russeting is of a lesser size, an excellent Apple, and long lasting.

The John-Apple, or Deux-ans, so called from its durableness, continuing two
years before it perishes, is a good relisht sharp Apple the Spring following,
when most other Fruit is spent; although there are some Pippins will outlive
them. The Deux-ans are not fit for our Cider-Plantation, being a dry Fruit, and
as some report, that little Juice they have, not pleasant.

The Marigold-Apple, (so called from its being marked in even stripes in the
form of a Marigold; sometimes the Onyon-Apple, from the reddish brown Color,
resembling a well-colored Onyon; sometimes called the Kate-Apple, and
sometimes John's Pearmain, from its likeness to a Pearmain) is a very good
Fruit, long lasting, and fit for the Table, Conservatory, Kitchen, or the
Press, yielding a very good Juice, and to be propagated in your
Cider-Plantation, bearing every other year, even to admiration; the intervening
years but a few.

The Harvey-Apple, and the Round-Russet-Harvey, are both excellent Fruits for
the Table; and were they great bearers, no doubt but they would yield excellent
Liquor.

The Queen-Apple, those that are of the Summer, are excellent Cider-Apples mixed
with other, being of themselves sweet. The Winter-Queening is a good
Table-Fruit.

The Paradice-Apple is a curious Fruit, produced by grafting a Permain on a
Quince.

The Pome-Roy, is a Fruit of a high name, a good taste, a pulpy substance, and
not yielding much Juice; yet that which is, is very good.

The Pome-water is an indifferent good lasting Fruit.

The Golden-Doucet, or Golden-ducket, is much commended.

The Westberry-Apple, taking its name from Westberry in Hampshire, from whence
they are much dispersed into the adjacent parts, its one of the most solid
Apples that grows, of a tough rind, and obdurate Flesh, sharp and quick taste,
long lasting, and yields a very excellent and plentiful Juice, making a Cider
equal to the best of Fruits, and for the Kitchen few or none exceeding it.

The Gilliflower-Apple is of a pleasant Hautgust, and long lasting, of a thick
Rind, and hard Core, well stripped, and good for Cider, making an excellent
mixture.

Of early Apples, the Margaret-Apple is the best and most early, usually Ripe
about St. Margarets day in June. It is a fair and beautiful Fruit, and of a
pleasant taste and scent, not to be matched at that season for the Table and
Kitchen, and deserves a more general propagation.

The Jeniting is next to be esteemed, as well for its early ripening as its
pleasant taste.

The Summer-Pippin is a very pleasant Apple in color and taste, and as
necessary for all manner of uses, yielding a delicate Juice.

The Codling, so called from the use it is put unto, is a very necessary Apple
in the Kitchen, and makes a good Summer-Cider.

The Claret-wine-apple is fair, and yields plenty of a pleasant sharp Juice,
from which it takes its name, and not from the Color, it being a white Apple;
but makes a rich Vinous Liquor, which well ordered excells most of other
Ciders, especially with a mixture of sweet Apples.

The White-Wining, is a small white Apple; the Tree is a great bearer, and the
fruit juicy and pleasant, but soon perishing, and the Cider made thereof small.

The King-Apple, though not common, yet is by some esteemed an excellent Apple,
and preferred to the Jenniting.

The Famagusta is also in the number of the best early Apples.

The Giant-Apple is a large Fruit and well tasted, and the best of any
Summer-Apple for Culinary uses.

The Bontradue or Good Housewife, is the largest of Apples, a great bearer, and
good for the Kitchen, and makes good Summer-Cider.

The Cats head, by some called the Gono-further, is a very large Apple, and by
its red sides promises well for Cider.

The Spicing, of all Apples that are marked so red, is the meanest: but whether
this English Apple so called, be the same that bears the like name in France,
whereof there are Plants brought thence, I cannot determine.

The Gennet-Moyle is a pleasant and necessary Fruit in the Kitchen, and one of
the best Cider-Apples. The Fruit is well marked, and the Trees great bearers.

The White Must is a very pleasant Apple, yielding great plenty of Vinous
Liquor, bearing this name in Herefordshire, and is thought, by some, to be the
same with the Golden Runnet in Hampshire.

The Red Must is also of the same nature.

The Fox-whelp is esteemed among the choice Cider-fruits.

The Bromsbury Crab, although little better than the common, yet kept on heaps
till Christmas, yields a brisk and excellent Cider.

Eleots are Apples much in request in those Cider-Countries for their excellent
Liquor, but not known by that name in several parts of England.

The Stocken or Stoken-Apple is likewise in esteem there, although not known by
that name in many places.

The Bitter-Scale is an Apple much esteemed of in Devonshire, for the excellent
Cider it yields without the mixture or assistance of any other.

The Deans-Apple, or the name at least, is there well esteemed of for the same
reason.

As also is the Pleasantine, perhaps the same with our Marigold.

The Pureling, or its name, is not usual, but in the same parts.

The Violet-Apple is of a most delicate aromatic taste, which occasioned the
name; it is a Fruit not usually met withal; it is of a greenish color, and not
of a very firm body. Many give this name to other Fruits, which corruptly are
called

Fillets, whereof also there are the Summer and the Winter, in very high esteem
for their delicate Vinous Liquor they yield: The Summer-fillet for the present,
and the Winter-fillet for lasting Cider.

The Vnderleaf is a Herefordshire-Apple of a Rhenish-wine flavor, and may be
accounted one of the best of Cider-Apples.

The Arier-Apple, Richards, or Grange-Apples, are also reckoned amongst the
best Cider-Apples.

The Coling and the Olive-Apples, are in those parts much esteemed of for the
same uses.

But above all Cider-fruit, the Redstreak has obtained the preference, being
but a kind of Wilding, and though kept long, yet is never pleasing to the
Palate. There are several sorts of them, the Summer and the Winter, the Yellow,
the Red, and the more Green Redstreak; some sorts of them have red veins
running through the whole body of the Fruit, which of necessity must give the
Cider made thereof the richest Tincture.

The Quince-Apple, so called from its color, and is a very good Table-fruit,
and then not bad for Cider.

The Non-such is a long-lasting Fruit, good at the Table, and well marked for
Cider.

The Angels Bit is a delicate Apple for taste, and the Tree or its name proper
to Worcestershire and those parts.

The Peeling is a very good lasting Apple, and makes very good Cider; it seems
to be an ancient English Fruit, being found in old Orchards, and agrees very
well with this Air, and is a great bearer.

The Oaken-pin, so called from its hardness, is a long-lasting Fruit, and
yields excellent Liquor.

The Greening is also another old English Fruit of a green color, and keeps to
a second year, and is a good Apple.

The Lording is a fair, green, and sharp Apple, a constant bearer, being a
hardy Fruit, and for the Kitchen only, to be preferred.

Sweet Apples there are of several sorts, and their names change in every
place; so that they are rather known by their color and size, than their
names. There is one sort called the Honeycomb in some places, which is a fair
Apple, and by mixture with other Fruit, makes admirable Cider; so does the
Small Russet-sweet Apple, whose Tree is always cankery.

There is a curious Apple newly propagated, called Pome-appease; the Fruit is
small and pleasant, which the Madams of France carry in their Pockets, by
reason they yield no unpleasant scent. The Tree is a very great bearer: I
suppose this is that which is called the Ladies Longing.

The Fig-Apple is also lately propagated in this Country, the Tree yielding no
Blossoms, as is usual with all other Apple Trees; nor has the Fruit in it any
Core or Kernel: in these resembling a Fig, and differing from other Apples, yet
is a very good Table-fruit, and lasting.

The Creeper, so called from the Tree that grows low, trailing its Branches
near the ground; the Fruit is also a good Fruit.

The Indian-Crab, it is a Fruit I have not yet seen, but am informed there is
such a Tree in Hampshire that was brought from America, where it grew in the
Woods as our Crabs do. The Fruit is reported to be a very pleasant Fruit.

The Sodome-Apple, or Bloody Pippin, is a Fruit of more than ordinary dark
color, and is esteemed a good Apple.

The Summer Belle and bon, is a fair Apple, and the Tree a good bearer; but the
Fruit is not long-lasting; for a short time it is a good Table-fruit, and makes
indifferent good Cider.

The Winter Belle and bon is much to be preferred to the Summer in every
respect.

The Pear-Apple is a curious pleasant Apple of a rough coat, but the Tree no
great bearer.

The Costard, Parsley-Apple, the William, the Cardinal, the Shortstart, the
Winter-Reed, the Chesnut-Apple, and the Great Belly, are in many places Apples
of esteem: but being not acquainted with them, I can only name them. Many more
there are both French and English, which either are not made familiar to us, or
else are peculiar only to some places, or their names changed in every County,
or else are of small account; which to ennumerate would be tedious and useless.

SECT. II. Of Pears.
The next in esteem are Pears, so called from their Pyramidical form; whereof
there are so great variety, that the Kitchen and Table may be furnished
throughout the year with different Species.

The Early Susan is the first ripe, being a small round Pear little bigger than
a large Cherry. The Color of this Pear is Green, and taste pleasant.

The Margaret, the Maudlin, the Sugar, the Madera, the Green Royal, St.
Laurence, Green Chesil, and many other early Pears are in esteem for the Table
in July. But after them you have

The Windsor, the Greenfield, the Summer-Bergamot, the Orange, the Sovereign,
several sorts of Katherines, whereof the red Katherine is the best: The
Denny-pear, Prussia-pear, Summer-Poppering, Lording-pear, Summer Bon-Christien,
the Orenge-Bergamot, Hampdens Bergamot, Bezi de Hery, the Violet-pear, the
Painted Pear, so called from its delicate stripped colors; the Rosewater-pear,
the Shortneck, so called from the shortness of its form and tail; the Binfield
or Dove-pear, the great Musk-pear, the great Russet of Remes, Amadotte, the
Rousellet, Norwich-pear, the Pomegranate-pear, so called from its shape, and
the Edward-pear very pleasant, are all very good Table-fruit for their season
before Michaelmas.

The Boevre du Roy is esteemed, for the Table, the best of all Summer-pears; is
a fair brown Pear, and excellent in its season, melting in the mouth, and
thence called the Butter-pear, and bears well against a Wall. The Green
Boevre-pear is more green and larger than the former.

The Lewis-pear, or by some the Maiden-heart, is the best of all Pears to dry,
and is a good bearer.

The Bloody-pear is a good Pear, taking its name from the Red Juice it has
within its skin, and is a very great Curiosity.

The English-warden, the French-warden, the Spanish-warden, the White-warden,
the Stone-pear, the Arundel-pear, the Bishops-pear, the Caw-pear, Winter-musk,
the red Roman-warden, the Green-warden, and Winter-norwich, are excellent
baking Pears.

The great black Pear of Worcester, or Parkinsons Warden, is to be preferred to
all other Pears to bake; it bears very well against a Wall; the Pears usually
weighing twenty ounces, and sometimes more, each Pear; and being twice backed
with Sugar, exceed most Fruits.

The Diego-pear, Monsieur-John, Rowling-pear, Balsam-pear, Bluster-pear,
Emperours-pear, the Queen-Hedge-pear, Frith-pear, Brunswick-pear, Bings-pear,
Winter-Poppering, Thorn-pear, the Portail, the Nonsuch, Dionier,
Winter-Katherine, Clove-pear, Lombart-pear, Russet-pear, Saffron-pear, the
Petworth-pear, or Winter-Windsor, Winter-Bergamot, Pound-pear, and Hundred
pound-pear, Long-Bergamot, Burnt-cat, Lady-pear, Ice-pear, Dead man's pear,
Bell-pear, the Squib-pear, Spindle-pear, Dogoniere, Virgin, Gascoigne-bergamot,
Scarlet-pear, and Stopple-pear, are all very good Winter-pears, and keep
throughout the old year.

Pears that usually keep until the succeeding Spring, are the
Winter-Bon-Christien, the best of Winter-pears; the great Surrein, Little
Dagobert, the Double-blossome-pear the longest liver of all, and tastes very
well in the Spring; the Oak-pear, the great Kairville, the Little black Pear of
Worcester.

Pears that are esteemed for their Vinous Juice in Worcestershire and those
adjacent parts, are the Red and Green Squash-pears, the John-pear, the Green
Harpary, the Drake-pear, the Mary-pear, the Lullam-pear; but above the rest are
esteemed the Bosbury and the Bareland pears, and the White and Red Horse-pear.

As for the Turgorian-pear that yields that most superlative Perry the world
produces, mentioned in the Pomona of the most ingenious Mr. Evelin, I only wish
it were more generally dispersed.

SECT. III. Of Cherries.
In the next place the Cherry, so called from the French word Cerises, is
admitted to be a Fruit of general use, especially for the Palate, off the Tree,
and for the Conservatory. They are ripe on the Trees but three Summer Months,
May, June, and July; afterward to be had only in the Conservatory.

In May are the Cherries usually called from the name of this month: The Duke
and Archduke against a good Wall are most years ripe before the end of the
month.

In June are ripe the White, Red, Black, and Bleeding Hearts, Lukeward one of
the best of Cherries; the early Flanders, the Cluster-cherry bearing three,
four, or five usually on a stalk; the White Spanish-cherry, the Amber-cherry,
the Black-orleans, the Spanish-black, and the Naples.

In July usually succeed the Late Flanders, common English-cherry, Carnations a
delicate Fruit for the Table or Conservatory; Morella, or the great bearer,
being a black Cherry fit for the Conservatory, before it be through ripe, but
bitter eaten raw; only it is to be esteemed, being the last Cherry that hangs
on the Tree; the Morocca-cherry, the Egriot, Bigarreaux, the Prince-Royal, the
Portugal-cherry, the Kings Cherry, the Crown-cherry, and the Biquar, both ill
bearers: the great Purple-cherry, one of the best and latest Cherries, and a
good bearer; the Ounce-cherry, so called from its fairness; the Dwarf-cherry,
so called from the smalness of its Twigs and Fruit: there is also the common
Black Cherry, much in esteem for its Physical properties.

SECT. IV. Of Plums.
There is great variety of Plums, and they also appropriated to several uses;
they continue longer on the Trees than Cherries, and are a more pleasing, but
not a more wholesome Fruit.

The first ripe are the Red, Blue, and Amber, Primordian-plum, the Violet, Red,
Blue, and Amber, the Matchless, the Black Damasin, the Morocco, the Barbery,
the Myrobalan, the Apricot-plum a delicate Plum that parts clean from the
Stone, the Cinamon-plum, the Kings Plum, the Spanish, the Lady Elizabeth-plum,
the Great Mogul, and the Tawny-plum.

After them are the White, Red, and Black Pear-plums; the two former little
worth, but the Black a pleasant Fruit; the Green Osterly-plum, the Muscle-plum
one of the best of Plums, the Catalonia-plum much like the former; the White
Prunella, the Black Prunella, the Bonum Magnum a fair yellowish green Plum,
excellent for the Kitchen and Conservatory; the Wheaten-plum, the Laurence-plum
an ill tasted Fruit, the Bole-plum, the Cheston-plum, the Queen-Mother-plum one
of the best sort, the Dyaper'd-plum, the Marbled-plum, the Damasco-plum, the
Foderingham-plum, the Blue and Green Pedrigon, and the White not so good a
Fruit, the Verdoch good only to preserve, the Peach-plum, the Imperial Plum
one of the largest of Plums, the Gaunt-plum, the Denny-plum, the Turkey-plum,
the Red, White, and Green Peascod-plums, the White, Yellow, and Red Date-plums,
the Nutmeg-plum, the Great Anthony, the Jane-plum, the Prince-plum the last
ripe, and good for several uses. Many other sorts of Plums there are, whose
names are uncertain, and are therefore here omitted.

There are two sorts of Damsons; the Black, which is the most necessary and
best of all Plums; and the White, which is not so good as the Red: these are
natural to our English Soil, as are the Black and White Bullis; whereof the
White are pleasant in October and November, and the Black necessary for the
Kitchen in December, they usually hanging on the Trees till Christmas.

SECT. V. Of Apricots, Peaches, Malacotnnes, and Nectarins.
The Apricot, so called from Apricus, delighting in the Sun, is a kind of Plum,
but far exceeding any of the former in every respect; whereof

The Algier-apricot is early ripe; it is a small round and yellow Fruit ripe in
July.

The Masculine-aprecot is a better and earlier Fruit than the former, but not
so good a bearer.

The long, white, and Orenge-aprecot differ from the common Aprecot, as their
names tell you.

The great Roman-aprecot is the largest of all the kinds, and therefore best
for the Kitchen and Conservatory.

Peaches, from the French name Pesche, are of longer continuance than Aprecots,
and of a richer and more noble gust and savor.

The most early are the Nutmeg, both White and Red; the Troy-peach, next the
Savoy-peach, Isabella, Persian; the White-Mounsier, Newington, Belline-peach to
be preferred to the former; the Queen-peach, and the Magdalen-peach, and the
Double-blossome-peach.

After them come the Rambouillet, the Musk-peach, and the Violet-musk, both
esteemed the best of Peaches; the Crown-peach, the Roman-peach, Man-peach,
Quince-peach, Grand Carnation, Portugal-peach, Bordeaux-peach, Des-pot being
spotted, Verona, Smyrna, Pavie-peach, and the Colerane-peach; one of the latest
is the Bloody-Monsier, an excellent Peach, very red within and red without.

The Modena, Orleans Red Peach, Morello-peach, Navar and Alberges, are very
good Fruit, and come clean from the Stone.

Of Malacotonnes, as much as to say, Apples which cotton on them, there are two
or three sorts, but being late ripe and old Fruit, they are not much valued.

Nectarines, of the savor and taste of Nectar, are very pleasant Fruit,
whereof the Red Roman is the fairest, and by most esteemed the best and most
delicate Fruit for its gust, that this Island yields: By some the Muroy is
preferred, and by some the Tawny, neither of them so large as the Red Roman.

Then there is the Red Nectarine, an excellent Fruit, and by many much set by,
because it leaves the Stone.

Besides all which, there are the Green, the little Green, the Cluster, the
Yellow, the White, the Paper-white, the Painted, the Russet, and the Orbine
Nectarines, that are very good Fruit, but not to be compared to the former.

SECT. VI. Of Grapes.
The Grape is the most universal, and yields the best Juice of any Fruit
whatsoever; several sorts of them prosper very well with us.

Of which the White Muskadine is the best, bearing well, large Bunches and fair
Fruit, ripens in most years against a South-wall, and fittest for Espaliers or
a Vineyard.

The Small black Grape, by some called the Cluster-grape, and by some the
Currant-grape, is the first ripe, bears well: the Bunches are small, but the
Grapes so thick that you cannot put a Pin between them, and is a very pleasant
sweet Grape, and is fit for your propagation as any Fruit almost that grows.

The Canada or Parsley-grape, so called from the Country whence it came, and
from the form of its Leaf, which is very much divided and jagged like a
Parsley-leaf; it is ripe somewhat late, but a good Fruit.

The Black Orleans is a very good black Grape, and ripens very well with us.

The Red-muscadine is a good Grape, and ripens well in very hot years, and is
not so good as the the Black Orleans.

The Raisin-grape is a large and long Grape, but ripens not well in this
Climate.

The White Frontiniac is a Fruit of a very pleasant hautgust, like unto the
Rhinish-wine, and will ripen with us, in case it be planted against a good
Wall, and in a hot Summer.

There is also the Red Frontiniac, much of the same nature.

There are also the small Blue-grape, and the great Blue-grape, that are very
good Fruit, and ripen well with us.

The Bursarobe is an excellent, large, sweet, white Grape, and in some years
will ripen well; as also will the Muscat.

The Burlet is a very large Grape, but seldom ripening here.

There are also several old English-grapes, and some foreign, that are fit
only to make Vinegar of.

SECT. VII. Of Quinces.
There is not a more delicate Fruit in the Kitchen and Conservatory, than the
Quince; whereof

The Portugal Apple-quince is esteemed the best; it is a large yellow Fruit,
tender, pleasant, and soon boiled.

The Portugal Pear-quince is much like the former, except in its form.

The Barbery-quince is lesser than the other, as is the English-quince, which
is a harsh Fruit, and covered with a Down or Cotton.

The Lions Quince is a large yellow, and the Brunswick-quince a large white,
both very good, but all inferior to the two first sorts.

SECT. VIII. Of Figs, Walnuts, Nuts, and Filberds.
Figs are highly esteemed by some, whereof Figs.
the Great Blue Fig is most accounted of; next unto it, the Dwarf Blue-fig
being, much less in Tree and Fruit, but better tasted, and sooner ripe.

The Walnuts, (or rather Gaul-nuts, or Walnuts.
French-nuts, coming originally out of France, and corruptly called Welsh-nuts
in the Western-parts of England, the G being in time pronounced as a W, as
Guerre War, Guardian Warden, etc. and so Galnut Walnut) are universally
spread over this Country; of which there are several sorts.

The Great Double Walnut in some places ripens very well, is very sweet; but
the Kernel answers not the bigness of the Shell.

There are other sorts that are lesser, with very hard Shells, and sweet
Kernels, that ripen very well in any place.

But the best are those of a tender thin Shell, and a full Kernel, and of a
middle size.

There is another sort that grows near Salisbury of a middle size, and a very
good Fruit, called the Bird-nut, from the resemblance the Kernel has to a
Bird, with its Wings displayed at first view after the Nut is slit in the
middle.

There is also the Early Wallnut that ripens above a fortnight before any of
the other, and is of as thin a Shell and pleasant a taste as any of the other.
This Fruit I have not observed any where, but at Petersfield in Hampshire.

Also there is a very small sort of this Fruit round, and but little bigger
than a Filberd, growing at the same place.

Besides the ordinary Hasel-nuts that Nuts.
grow wild, there are Nuts that are of a thin Shell, large Kernel, and but
little Husk, that are usually planted in Orchards.

There is a large kind of these long thin-shell'd Nuts with a very fair Kernel

And also a great round Nut with a thick Shell and a large Kernel.

But the Filberds are to be esteemed above Filberds.
them, whereof there is the White Filberd, which is commonly known.

And the Red Filberd, like unto the former, only that the Kernel is covered
with a red skin, also the Shell and Leaf do incline more to redness than the
other sorts.

The Filberd of Constantinople has the Bark whiter, the Leaves bigger, and the
Husks more jagged and rent than the former. The Nuts are like those of the
white Filberd, but rounder and bigger, as Mr. Ray says in his Pomona.

SECT. IX. Of Gooseberries, Currants, Barberries, and Rasberries.
Gooseberries, so called from the use that Gooseberries.
have a long time been made of them in the Kitchen when Green-geese are in
season.

The first ripe are the Early Red, which is a fine, sharp, pleasant Fruit:
there are three sorts of them, differing only in their sizes, the biggest
being the sweetest.

There is also the Blue-gooseberry, differing little from the former, only in
color more blue, and later ripe.

The Great White Dutch-Gooseberry is the fairest and best, and fittest for our
Vineyard, and a very great bearer.

The Great Yellow Dutch differs from the former only in color.

The English Yellow-Gooseberry is known to every one, and is fittest for
Culinary uses whilst green.

The Hedgehog-gooseberry is a large Fruit, well tasted, and very hairy.

The Small rough Gooseberry is hardly worth the mentioning.

The Green-gooseberry: of this there is the greater and the lesser, both very
good, and late ripe.

Currants, or Corinths, from the Corinths Currants.
of Corinthia first taking their name; whereof there are some that have been
anciently planted in these parts: As

The English Red-curran, once in esteem, but now cast out of all good Gardens,
as is the black, which was never worth any thing.

The White-curran was, not long since, in most esteem, until

The Red Dutch-curran became native in our Soil, which is also improved in some
rich moist grounds, that it has gained a higher name, of the Greatest Red
Dutch-curran. These are the only Fruit that are fit to be planted and
propagated for Wine, and for the Conservatory.

There is another sort of Curran, newly propagated from abroad, but not to be
esteemed for the Fruit, only for Curiosity.

Of Barberries there are but three sorts; Barberries.
the ordinary sort, and Barberries without stones, and the Great Barberry,
which is a sort bearing bigger Fruit than either of the other.

Of Rasberries there are three sorts; the Rasberries.
Common wild, the large Red Garden-Rasberry, which is one of the most pleasant
of Fruits, and useful in the Conservatory, and for its delicate Juice; and the
White, which is but little inferior to the Red.

Also, I have seen formerly a Rasberry of a much darker color than the Red,
which was then termed the Black-rasberry, exceeding pleasant in taste.

There is a Rasberry-tree larger in Stalk and Leaves than any of the former,
bearing a very large Blossom; but no Fruit comes to perfection of it in this
Country.

SECT. X. Of Medlars, Services, Cornelians, Mulberries, and Strawberries.
Medlars are a pleasing Fruit, and in some Medlars.
cases Medicinal; whereof there are several kinds.

The Common English, being but small, and the Great Dutch-medlar, which is much
larger than the other, and is a good bearer.

Mr. Ray mentions a sort that are without stones, which are a great curiosity.

And the Neapolitan Medlar, much like the former, without stones.

Services are a Fruit more common than Services.
desirable, therefore I shall only name them.

The Cornel-tree bears the Fruit commonly Cornelians.
called the Cornelian-cherry, as well from the name of the Tree, as the
Cornelian-stone, the color whereof it somewhat represents. This Fruit is good
in the Kitchen and Conservatory.

The Mulberry-tree deserves more room Mulberries.
in our English Plantations, rather for the Leaf than the Fruit. Of Mulberries
there are three sorts:

The Black or Red-mulberry is known to most; the White-mulberry is smaller in
the Tree and Fruit; the Virginian-mulberry is quicker of growth than the
former, and its Fruit larger, and as pleasant. These Fruits are not to be
slighted in the Kitchen and Conservatory, nor for their Juice.

Although the Strawberry grows not on Strawberries.
a Tree, and therefore cannot be esteemed an Orchard-fruit, yet they deserve a
place under them, being humble, and content with the shades and droppings of
your more lofty Trees, and furnish your Table with variety of early and
delicate Fruit, in several kinds, viz.

The Common English-strawberry, well known to all, and much improved by
transplanting them from the Woods to the Garden.

The White-strawberry, more delicate than the former.

The Long Red-strawberry, not altogether so good as the former.

The Polonian or Great Strawberry is the largest of all Strawberries, and very
pleasant.

The Rasberry, or Green-strawberry, is the sweetest of all Strawberries, and
latest ripe.

But the best of all Strawberries, is that kind lately brought out of
New England, where, and throughout the American coast, they grow in great
plenty, and are propagated here in England. They are the most early of all
English-fruits, several years being ripe the first week in May, and continue
bearing plentifully until Midsummer, unless drought prevent them. They are the
fairest (except the Polonian) and of the best Scarlet dye of any Fruit that
grows, and very pleasant and cool to the taste. The whole Nation is obliged to
the Industry of the Ingenious Mr. George Rickets, Gardner at Hogsdon, who can
furnish any one with them: The same Mr. Rickets and Mr. Richard Ball of
Brainford can also furnish any Planter with most, or all of the choicest and
most excellent of all the Fruit Trees mentioned in this precedent Corollary.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the chiefest matters contained in this Tract.
A
A Cajou, Drink made of the Fruit thereof page 5 Aipu, a Drink 9 Ale 6 Ananas,
a Drink made of the Fruit thereof 4. 16 Apple Tree, its Propagation 25 Cider
made of its Fruit 4 Apples, their Variety 156 Gathering them 74 Hoarding them
78 Their Virtues 148 Apricocks, their several sorts 174 Apricot-wine 129 Arak
10
B
Barberries, their several kinds 182 Bark-bound to cure 72 Barley, Drink made
thereof 6 Barrels, vide Vessels Beer 6 Berries, Drink made of them 3 Birch-wine
3. 136 Its Virtues 152 Birch-ale 138 Birds to take 73 Blackberries, Drinks made
of them 4 Bleeding of a Vine to cure 68 Bottles 103 Placing Bottles 108
Bottling of Cider 104. 106 Boiling Cider 112 Bragga 6 Brandy to make 145
C
Cacao-nut 16. 139 Canker to cure 70 Caor 5 Cassavi-roots, Drinks made of them
9 Caterpillars to destroy 73 Cava, Drink made of it 8 Cherries, their several
kinds 171 Drinks made of them 4. 4. 1. 126 Their Virtues 150 Chocolate 10. 139
Its Virtues 153 Cider 4 Its Excellency 14 Its Antiquity and Nature 17 Cider a
Wine 18 The Derivation of the Name ibid. Preferred to foreign Wines 20 Manner
of making it 74 To purify it 91. 96 Faults in Cider cured 114 Mixed Ciders 120
The Virtue of Cider 149 Ciderkin 99. 119 Cinnamon used in Drink 8 Claret to make
124 Clove-July-flower-wine 130 Coco-nuts, Drink made of them 4. 15 Codlin 37
Coffee 5 Conservatories 109 Corks 107 Currants, their several kinds 182 To
propagate 68 Wines made of them 4. 42. 127 The Virtues 150
D
Dacha, Drink made of this Root 8 Diseases of Trees 70 Of Drinks in general 1
E
Elder, Drinks made of the Berry 4
F
Figs, their kinds 179 Filberds, their kinds ibid. Fruits, choice of them to
graft 37 Drinks made of them 3 Fuming of Cider 117
G
Gennet-moyl 38 Gooseberries to propagate 69 Drinks made of them. 4. 42. 129.
Their Virtues 151 Grafting 42 Grapes, their several kinds 176 Grinding Fruit
80. 88
H
Honey, Drink made of it 9 Vide Metheglin Hydromel, vide Metheglin
I
The Ingenio or Cider-mill 82 Inoculation 47 Juices of Fruits the best Drinks
12. 25
L
Land, its situation for planting 32 Laudan, a Tree yielding Wine 3 Lee, to
separate 92
M
Manuring the Vineyard 66 Mais, Drink made thereof 6 Medicinal Virtues of
Fruits 147 Medlars, their several kinds 183 Metheglin to make 130. 138 Its
Virtues 152 Mill, Drink made thereof 6 Mills to grind Fruit 80 Mixtures Drink
made of 9 Moss to prevent 72 Mulberries, their several kinds 183 Their virtue
151 Mum 6 Murtilla, vide Vine Musty Cask to cure 102
N
Nectorines, their several kinds 174 Nursery 34 Nuts, their several kinds 180
O
Oats, Drink made of them 6
P
Pacobi 5 Palm-wine 2. 3 Pears, their choice and variety 40 Their Wine or Perry
4. 122 Its Excellency 24 Their Virtues 149 Picking of Fruit 87 Plums, their
several kinds 41 Their Wine 126 Their Virtue 150 Pomegranates, Wine made of
them 5 Drink made of its Rind 8 Potatoe-roots, Drink made of them 9 Preserving
Cider 104 Pressing Cider, and the Cider-presses 89 Profits of Wines 141 Pruning
of Trees 56. 58 Punch 10 Purre, vide Ciderkin
Q
Quinces, their several kinds, 178 Their virtue 150
R
Racking of Cider 116 Rape to make 146 Rasberries, their several kinds 183 To
propagate them 69 Wine made of them 42. 129 Their Virtues 151 Redstreak 39
Refrigeratory, vide Conservatory Rice, Drink made thereof 7 Ripeness of Fruit
74 Roots, Drink made of them 8 Rotten Apples 87
S
Sap of Trees, Drinks made thereof 2 Sebankou, a Drink in Negroland 4 Services,
their kinds 183 Snails to destroy 73 Soil, choice thereof 26 Its amendment 30
Stalks of Plants, Drinks made of them 8 Stocks, the way to raise them 35
Strawberries, Drinks made of them 4 Their Virtues 151 Suckers a disease 72
Sugar-cane, Drink made of it 8 Sulphur, good to preserve Cider 116 Sura, a
Drink 2 Syby-wine 4 Siphon, the use of it in drawing off of Liquors 99
T
Tea 8. 140 Its Virtues 153 Teca, Drink made thereof 7 Terry a Drink 2
Transplanting Trees 50 Tunning of Cider 104
V
Vessels for Cider 100 The Vine, Wine made of its Fruit 4 Of Vines the several
sorts 62 Pruning of them 64. 67 Vineyards what 18 Of planting of Vineyards 60
Vinegar how made 93. 145 Unni, Wine made of the Fruit of it 5
W
Walnuts, their several kinds 179 Water-cider 118 Wheat, Drink made thereof 6
Wine 3 To make it 123 To purify it 124 Its Excellency 12 The uses and virtues
of Wines 144
FINIS.

