THE HISTORY OF THE CREATION, AS IT IS WRITTEN BY MOSES in the first and second
CHAPTERS of GENESIS, plainly opened and expounded in several Sermons preached
in London.

Whereunto is added a short Treatise of GODS actual Providence, in ruling,
ordering, and governing the world and all things therein.

By G. W. Batchelour of Divinity and Pastor of St. John Evangelist.



LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet at the sign of the gilt Cup, near St.
Austins-gate in Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND NOBLE Lords FRANCIS Earl of BEDFORD, Robert Earl
of Warwick, William Viscount Say and Seal, Edward Viscount Mandevilc, Robert
Lord Brook, John Lord Roberts, and the rest of the Honorable Lords Committees
in the upper nou^e of the high Court of Parliament, Grace and Peace with
multiplicity of all Blessings temporal and eternal.
Most Noble LORDS,
THat which the learned Doctors of the Jews do (...)
say of their Masorah, to wit, That it is an hedge or defense to the Law. We
Christians may more truly say of our weekly Sabbath, the Lords day, that it is
the hedge of defense to true Christian Religion. Masoreth sepes legi.
For as their Masorah (which was their Annotations upon all the Scriptures of
the old Testament, showing the genuine reading and signification of every word
in the Hebrew text, with what pricks, vowels and accents it ought to be, and
was anciently written and read by Moses and the Prophets, and by tradition from
Ezra, and other succeeding Fathers in all ages delivered over unto them) did
serve as an hedge and fence to keep the Scriptures of the old Testament pure
from all corruption and alteration, so that if any Scribe did in writing any
copy of them, omit or add one word or letter; or alter and change any vowell,
point or accent, his error might easily by the notes and rules of their
Masorah be discerned and amended: So the Lords holy weekly Sabbath being
rightly observed according to the Law of God, and the first institution and
sanctification of it, that is, First, by cessation and rest from all worldly
cares, and all secular affairs (in respect whereof it is called in Scripture,
(...) Sabbath, that is, rest and cessation.) Secondly, by devoting it only to
the worship and service of God, and by sanctifying it with preaching, reading
and hearing of the word, prayer, meditation, and other works of piety and
exercises of true Religion (in which respect it is called the Lords day, that
is, the day of the Lord Christ, consecrated to his honor, and to the service
and wor^hip of God in his name) It is most certainly (as we find by experience)
a strong hedge and fence to true Christian Religion, by which true piety, and
the true knowledge and worship of God, and true Faith in Christ, are upheld,
maintained, increased and continued among all Christian nations from generation
to generation. Without observation of this weekly Sabbath, and keeping this day
of the Lord Christ holy, by holy assemblies, the publik and private worship of
God, the knowledge of Christ, the memory of our Redemption by him, and of his
finishing and perfecting that great work, and resting from it in his
resurrection, the public preaching, reading and hearing of the word, and all
other exercises of Christian religion, which are the most effectual ordinary
means of grace and furtherances to eternal life and blessedness would
undoubtedly grow out of use, and at length utterly decay and vanish. This
consideration did move me to insist more largely upon this subject, and to make
many Sermons upon that Text, Genesis 2. 2, 3. which briefly relates the first
institution of the Sabbath on the seventh day in the first week of the world;
and Gods blessing and sanctifying of every seventh day in every week to be an
holy Sabbath to his people. Out of which Sermons first publikly preached to
mine own peculiar flock, I did afterward compose this Treatise at the
importunity of some of my best affected hearers, and imparted several written
copies of it unto diverse of them, having at that time no hope to get it
licensed for the Press. For by Gods special providence I having handled the
doctrine of the Creation, out of the 1. Chap. of Genesis, was by my order of
preaching and expounding of that Scripture, led along and brought to this Text,
concerning Gods sanctifying of the seventh day, at that very time when a book
of liberty for sports on the Lords day, was by the Bishops in every Diocese
sent to every Parish Church, and commanded to be publicly read by every
Minister in time of divine Service in the audience of all the people: And
because I proceeded to handle this subject, as the order of my text did lead
me; and durst not balk that part of Gods word; I was three several times
convented before my Ordinary, and admonished under pain of suspension, to
proceed no further in this doctrine, not for any error which could be objected
against any part or passage in it; but only because the times would not bear
it; And because I did not hold it fit nor safe for me to obey man rather then
God by concealing from my flock any part of Gods truth, and shunning to declare
unto them the whole counsel of God; I have undergone the high displeasure of
that Primate to whose jurisdiction my Church does belong, who upon diverse false
informations of catchers, which have bin employed to entrap me in my words that
they might have something whereof to accuse me, has caused me to be convented
before the Kings Majesty, and the Lords of his Honorable Privy Counsel, and
has charged and accused me to be a Preacher of factious and seditious
Doctrine, and for many years the great troubler of the City of London: Whereupon
I was committed close prisoner for two and twenty weeks, and through close
custody was by sickness brought near unto death, and could not obtain so much
liberty as to be confined to the limits of my brothers house for the safety of
my life, upon bail of a 1000 pound given, until by the testimony of fifty
five Neighbor Ministers of best report in and about the City, I was declared
to be innocent and free from all the crimes of which I was accused. Now blessed
be God for your happy Assembly in this most hopeful Parliament, by which I
have been eased of my strait bonds, and the times are so changed, that this
Treatise, and diverse others of my labors are licensed to pass by the Press
into the publik view of the world. I should not have dared to commend it to the
sight, and grave Judgment of your Honors; If your godly Zeal for the
sanctifying of the Lords day, and for the honoring of the name of the Sabbath
(which appeared most evidently to us all, who of late were present at the time
when that scandalous libell, entitled, Sunday no Sabbath, was most accurately
and judiciously sifted and examined by your Honors, and justly censured and
condemned to the fire) had not encouraged me to this bold attempt.

Although I have in this Treatise propounded and assayed to prove out of the
Text and other places of holy Scripture such a ground of the weekly Sabbath, as
the learned in their writings have not heretofore observed: Yet because the
end, use and scope of this discovery is most pious and godly, and it tends
altogether to heap more honor on Christ, to advance Redemption above
Creation; grace above nature, the state of Regeneration above the state of
Innocence; and to show a necessity of the change of the Sabbath from the
seventh and last, to the first day of the week, after Christ's performing and
finishing of that great work of our Redemption in his resurrection; for which
he was promised on the seventh day next after the ending of the Creation: I
hope it will give no offense, nor receive censure of novelty; but rather find
grace and acceptance in the eyes of your noble persons. That great God (who
has (as I believe and here profess) magnified his holy weekly Sabbath by
grounding it in the first institution on Christ promised; and has made it more
honorable by removing and carrying it along together with Christ the Redeemer
from the day of the promise to the day of the full performance of the great
work of Redemption) magnify your Honors, and make your persons still more and
more honorable, by noble Acts undertaken and performed for the honor of his
holy name, the advancement of true Religion; and the peace and prosperity of
this Church and Kingdom under our most gracious Sovereign Lord and King. To
whom next under God and the Lord Jesus Christ, I most humbly devote my self,
and vow to remain ever a most loyal subject; and next under him to your Honors

A most dutiful servant and daily suppliant to God for your everlasting
blessedness, GEO. WALKER.

OF The external Works of GOD in general,
PSALM. 135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in Heaven and in Earth,
in the sea and all deep places.
THE external outward works of God which follow in the next pla(...) after
his internal works, are indeed nothing but his actual execution of his
eternal counsel, purpose and decree. For the unfolding of which works in
general, and laying open of the nature, use and several kinds of them, I
have made choice of this Text. From the words and circumstances whereof, we
may easily gather all points of instruction necessary to be known concerning
the general nature, use and kinds of them.

First, here the words of the Psalmist show that he speaks of Gods outward
works, because he limits them to places and times, to Heaven, Earth, Sea and
all deep places.

Secondly, he speaks of them all in general none excepted, so the Hebrew word
((...)) which signifies all in general whatsoever, does plainly show, and also
the perfect enumeration of all places which are in the world, and wherein any
outward sensible and visible work can be done, to wit: the Heaven, the Earth,
the Seas and all deep places.

Thirdly, he shows that God is the author of these works, as he is Jehovah,
that one eternal God in whom there are three persons, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, for he says (...) Jehovah the Lord does or has done.

Fourthly, he shows that the Lord does all these works of himself according
to his own will and pleasure, and none of them all by compulsion, unwittingly
and unwillingly, but even as he pleased, and after the counsel of his will
and pleasure (...) whatsoever the Lord pleased.

Fifthly, he intimates that all these works of God come necessarily,
infallibly, inevitably and irresistably to pass, and that none of them all can
fail which God has been pleased to do, but so come to pass as he pleases
in every respect, even in the same time and place. This he intimates in that
he says every thing whatsoever the Lord pleased, he has done.

Sixthly, he shows that these outward works tend to make God known, and are
of use to bring us to the knowledge of the true God, and in and by them God is
known aright and his greatness also. This is manifest by the dependence of
this ver. on the former. For having said, I know that the Lord is great and
that our Lord is above all gods, he brings in this text as an argument and
proof saying, Whatsoever the Lord pleased that he has done, which is in
effect all one as if he had said, I know this by his doing of all his outward
works, for whatsoever the Lord pleased that he has done.

Seventhly and lastly, he shows the several kinds of Gods outward works that
they are not only creation but also actual providence which concludes in it
the government of the world, the fall of man, and the restoration of mankind
by the redemption of the world.

Works of creation he expresses, verse. 7. and works of his actual
providence, as ordering, governing and saving of his people by Christ, which
was signified in the deliverance from Egypt, he reckons up in the rest of the
Psalm both before and after my text, So then it is manifest that this text
considered with the circumstances thereof, serves abundantly for the opening of
the nature, use and kind of Gods outward works.

In the unfolding whereof, first let us note the order, coherence and scope of
it. Secondly, let us take a view of the words and sift out the true sense of
them. Thirdly let us observe out of them by way of doctrine, a perfect
description of Gods outward works in general, and lastly apply for some use
the doctrine to our selves.

The order and coherence is this, First the Prophet in the 3. first verses,
exhorts all to praise the Lord and to laud his name, more specially the Lords
servants who are continual professors in his Church. Secondly in the 3, 4, 5.
verses he gives some reasons drawn from the Attributes of God and the
consideration of his nature, to wit, because the Lord is good and his name
pleasant, and because of his own free grace he has chosen Israel, that is,
his elect and faithful Church to be his own peculiar people, and because the
Lord is great and is a God above all gods. In testifying and affirming the
Lords goodness and being above all gods, he brings for proof his own
knowledge and experience. I know (says he) that the Lord is great, verse. 5.
Thirdly he does prove God to be such a one, even so good, gracious and great
by his outward works, and shows that by them he knows God to be so, ^or he
says here in this text, Whatsoever the Lord pleased that he has done, in
Heaven and in earth, in the Sea and all deep places. So that it is plain by
the order, dependence and scope of the text, That here David extolls Gods
outward works in general, as things proceeding from his own good pleasure,
and serving to prove him to be good and gracious, and to make us know him so
great and glorious a God as he is.

In the second place, for the words themselves, they are plain and easy to
be understood at the first hearing without any laborious interpretation. They
run thus in the Hebrew, All which the Lord pleases he has done, in Heaven,
Earth, Sea and all deep places. This word (all) shows that he speaks not of
some particular works, but of all in that kind. The word Jehovah is the proper
name of God considered in the unity of his essence with all his essential
Attributes, and every one of the 3. Persons is called by this name, as they are
of the same essence and all one God. The enumeration of all the notable places
in the world wherein these works are done discovers the works which he here
speaks off, to be outward works which do not abide in Gods essence and there
only subsist as his eternal counsel, decrees and inward operations do, but
are done in time and place and have their subsistence in and among the
creatures, such as are creating, ruling, ordering, upholding of all things, and
also redeeming and restoring of all mankind. The word [pleaseth] limits the
general note or particle (all) unto all works which in themselves are good,
or else serve for good use, and so are pleasing to the Lord for the use sake.
He does not say that the Lord does all things which are done, but all things
which he pleases, that is, he does not make men sinful and wicked, neither
does he work rebellion in men, which is displeasing unto him, but he does
whatsoever is pleasing, that is, all things which are agreeable to his nature.
And whatsoever is according to his will and good pleasure, that he does, none
can hinder it. This is the true sense and meaning of the words. Now from the
text thus opened and the circumstances observed, we may gather a perfect
description of them in general showing the nature and use of them.

The description of Gods outward Works.

The outward works of God in general, are all things whatsoever the Lord God
Jehovah, that one infinite and eternal God, 3. Persons, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost does according to his eternal purpose, and after the counsel and good
pleasure of his will, work, and bring to pass, not within, but without
himself in all the world and upon all creatures therein, and that certainly
and irresistably in due time and place to the communicating and making of
himself known to men and Angels in his infinite and eternal nature and in his
goodness, grace, glory, power and all other essential properties, for the
salvation and eternal blessedness of his elect in Christ.

This description truly gathered from this Text, and the scope and order of it
and discovering plainly the nature and use of Gods outward works in general,
I will prove in every part and branch orderly and will conclude with some
application.

The first thing in it is the general matter of Gods external works, they
are things done; that is, not only actions working and operations, such as
Creation, Redemption and the like; but also things or works made, eff^cted and
done by those actions, as Heaven, Earth, Angels and other things created. For
all these are things done and wrought by God. This Branch is plainly expressed
in this word of my Text, (...) (has done) or does or has made, for the Hebrew
word signifies all these. And that Gods outward worl^s consist in doing and are
things not spoken or promised but done and wrought, Diverse testimonies of
Scripture do show, Psalm. 44. 1. David calls them works which he has done: And
Isa. 28. 21. The Prophet says, that the Lord does his work, his strange
work. And not to stand in repeating many Scriptures in a point so plain; This
is one word is sufficient that the two Hebrew words, (...) and (...) which are
used in the Scriptures to signify Gods outward works are both derived of verbs
which signify doing.

The second branch in this description comprehends in it the Author of these
works, to wit, the Lord God Jehovah, that one infinite, eternal God and three
Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost: This Branch does distinguish these
works. First, from the works of creatures which are proper to them. Secondly,
from the personal operations of God as the eternal begetting of the Son
which is proper to the Father and is his work only. That God considered in
the unity of his essence as he comprehends all the three Persons, is the
Author of these works, and that they are common to the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and every one of them has an hand in every work of this kind; though
one more immediately than another: The word Jehovah here used in the Text does
plainly show, where it is said, Whatsoever Jehovah pleased or was willing to
do, that he has done: which word is so proper to God, and signifies One God,
that it also agrees to every person in that one God. And this is also confirmed
by diverse other testimonies of Gods word, which show that in diverse of these
outward actions or works, the Father works by the Son and the Son by the
Father with and by the Spirit. The first great work of this kind, even the work
of Creation, which sometimes is attributed to the Father as more peculiar to
him, because terminatur in Patr^, as the Schoolmen speak, that is, it is
bounded and termined in the Father, and he is principium and summus terminus
creationis, the first beginning and utmost bound of creation, from whom it
first proceeded, even this is attributed to the Son and Spirit also, as being
common to all the Persons, as Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord (that is the
Son) were the Heavens made and all the host of them by the Spirit of his
mouth. 'To which add, Job 33. 4. The Spirit of God made me, and John 1. 3, 10.
and Colos. 1. 16. where it is said, that by the eternal word the Son all
things were made both in Heaven and Earth, visible and invisible, and without
him was made nothing of all that was made. So likewise in that outward work of
Judgment executed on Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19. 24. Jehovah is said to
rain down from Jehovah out of Heaven fire and brimstone, that is Jehovah the
Son from Jehovah the Father, who are both one and the same God Jehovah; yea
that these external works of God are not divided some to one Person and some
to another in the Trinity, but are common to all the Persons and proceed from
that one common essence, according to that saying of the Schoolmen, opera
Trinitatis ad extra suns indivisa. Our Savior shows most plainly, Ioh. 5.
19, 22. where he says, that as the Son cannot work of himself alone
without the Father, but he must have and see the Father working with him, so
the Father does not judge any, that is by his own proper act of judgment, but
has committed all judgment to the Son, that he may have a hand in all
judgments together with himself, and John 16. 13, 14. speaking of that
special illumination of men's hearts and inward teaching which seems most
proper to the Spirit, he says it is not of himself alone, but it is what he
has heard and received from the Father and the Son, And therefore the second
Branch is manifest that the doer of the outward works of God is Jehovah our
God, and all the three Persons in God.

The third Branch comprehends in it the outward moving cause of all these
outward works: namely, Gods own will and pleasure, for he is said to do them
according to his eternal purpose, and after the counsel of his own will.
This is expressed in the description and in the words of the Text (...)
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that is, whatsoever is according to the Lords will
and pleasure that he has done, and this is testified in other Scriptures, as
Psalm. 115. 3. where it is said, that the Lord does whatsoever pleases him, and
Isa. 46. 10. where the Lo(...) says I will do all my pleasure, and Jonah 1.
14. All which places show that first the Lord has a mind and pleasure to do
such things, and thereupon he does them. Also, Ephesians. 1. 11. It is said he does
work all things after the counsel of his will. And Acts 2. 23. and 4. 28. the
work of our Redemption by Christ, and all that he did and suffered is said to
be done by the determinate counsel of God. Therefore this Branch is manifest,
namely, That Gods will and pleasure is the only inward mooving cause of all his
outward works, and that they are nothing but the execution of his eternal will
and decree.

The fourth Branch by which these outward works are specially distinguished
from his inward operation, comprehends in it the subject wherein these works
do subsist and the circumstance of time and place wherein they are done. For
these works are not done within God himself, neither do they subsist in his
Essence, as his inward operations do, but they are, Extra Dei essentiam,
without Gods essence, they are done in all the world, and upon the creatures,
some in Heaven and some in Earth, others in the Sea and all deep places (as my
Text says) and they have their circumstances of time and place, as God has
appointed from all eternity. The Creation was in the first beginning of time in
the first six days of the world, Genesis 1. The Redemption wrought by Christ in
the midst of years between the Law and the Gospel, Hab. 3. 2. and upon the
mountain where Jerusalem stood, Isa. 25. 6, 7. The great execution shall be
at the end of the world in the last day of Judgment, and the works of Gods
government and actual providence as they are diverse, so they are done at
diverse times, and in diverse places of the world, as experience teaches, on the
very day which the Lord appointed did the flood come upon the old world, Genesis
7. 11. In the same day which God had foretold was Israel delivered out of
Egypt, Exodus 21. 41. And howsoever the words of the Apostle, Act. 17. 18.
intimate that in God (and not without him) We live, moove and have our being,
yet we are not thus to understand that these things are, and that we subsist in
Gods Essence, and that we are so in God as his inward operations and eternal
decrees are: But that we all are compassed about with Gods presence and
essential power, which are every where, and by him as by the chief efficient
cause and author of life, motion and being are sustained and upheld in life,
being and motion continually. For to be in God, that is, to subsist in his
essence, does necessarily imply coeternity and consubstantiality with God.
Quicquid est in Deo Deus est, nothing can be within his Essence, but it must be
coeternall with God and of the same Substance with him. He who denies this
must needs deny God to be immutable and most simple, free from all
composition. Therefore this Branch also is most manifest and does contain in it
nothing but solid Truth.

The fifth Branch contains in it the manner of Gods outward works, to wit;
that in respect of God himself, they are done with such power as cannot be
resisted, and in respect of the event, they are certain, infallible and cannot
fail. This is truly collected from the Text: For it is said that all
Whatsoever the Lord pleases he does, or has done, which shows that not one
jot of his will and pleasure fails but comes to pass. If his will or pleasure
could be resisted or any thing prevented which he wills to work, surely the
Devil who is so cunning, watchful and malicious would in some things have
defeated God, or this either by himself or some of his instruments: But this
Text affirms the contrary, that whatsoever the Lord pleased he has done in
all the world. Therefore in respect of God they are all unresistable, and in
respect of the event infallible. And this David testifies, Psalm. 115. 3.
saying, The Lord does whatsoever pleases him. And Isa. 46. 10. my counsel
shall stand, and I will perform all my pleasure, yea because these are
voluntary works of God and are willed and decreed in his secret counsel from
all eternity (as I have noted before) therefore they must needs be
unresistable, for Who can resist his will, Romans 9. 19.

The sixth Branch contains the principal use and effects of Gods outward
works; namely, the making of himself known in his nature and essential
attributes and so communicating himself to his elect. That Gods external
works do all serve for this use and do work this effect we may gather from
the dependence and inference of this Text. For the Psalmist having professed
that he knows the Lord to be great and that he is the only true God above all
gods, that is, who has all the essential properties of the true God, he
proves it by and from his works, and shows that by means of them he knows
it. And other Scriptures and experience confirm the same, Psalm. 19. 1. It is
said, that the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy work, day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge, and Romans 1. 20. The visible things of God are seen from the
creation of the world, clearly being understood by the things which were made:
Even his divine Power and Godhead. So the works of Gods actual providence in
governing and upholding the world, and in mooving the Heavens and the stars
in order, do show his infinite wisdom and supercelestia'l glory, Psalm. 8. 1.
His overthrowing of his enemies and the persecutors of his Church, as in the
stood of Noah, and in the drowning of Pharaoh and his host do show his power.
His giving of Christ his Son for a Redeemer abundantly testifies his infinite
goodness and bounty; his punishing our sins in Christ to the full, shows his
infinite Justice, and his pardoning of believers by Christ's satisfaction,
freely given and communicated to them, shows his infinite mercy and free
grace, as the Scriptures often testify, and our own consciences within us do
witness and our daily sense and experience do prove. And in our Redemption
and application of it we see discovered the Trinity of Persons in one God. And
while we in these things, as in a glass behold the glory of God with open
face (the veil of ignorance being remooved) we are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory, and so come to have communion with God, and the fruition
of him, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

The seventh and last Branch sets before us the utmost end of all Gods outward
works, to wit the eternal blessedness of the elect, by the communion, vision
and fruition of God in all his glorious attributes, as wisdom, power,
goodness, mercy, justice, and the rest. The Text it self intimates this Truth
to us; saying, that all these works of God proceed from his good will and
pleasure. For the good pleasure and will of God consists chiefly and
principally in willing that his elect shall be brought to perfect communion of
himself and of his glory for their eternal happiness. And what God wills
according to his own good pleasure, and does because he is pleased so to do,
it must needs aim at the blessedness of his elect by the sight and fruition
of him and his glory. Now therefore all Gods outward works proceeding fiem Gods
pleasure must needs tend to this end, and this is confirmed, Romans 8. 28. and 1
Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. where we read that all things work together for good to
them that love God and are the called according to his purpose, and that all
things are the elects, the world, life and death, things present, and things to
come, and they are Christ's and Christ is Gods, also Col. 1. 16. all things
visible and invisible were created as by Christ so for him, that they might
serve him for the salvation of his elect, and for this end and purpose Angels,
principalities and powers are said to be made subject to Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 22.
And their office and ministry and the great wonders which God does by them are
said to be for them, who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. To these
testimonies many reasons might be added, I will only call to mind that which I
have else where abundantly declared and prooved, to wit, that for this end the
world is upheld by Christ, and for his sake and through his mediation ever
since man's fall, and for this end the wicked live, even the barbarous and
savage nations, either that they may serve for some use to Gods people, or for
the elects sake whom God will raise up out of them, or that God may show his
justice and power on them being sitted for destruction, to the greater glory of
his elect, even the judgments of God on the wicked, and their damnation serve
for this end, to increase the blessedness of the Saints.

The doctrine of this description serves for to stir us up in Use 1.
imitation of God our Creator, not to content our selves with saying, purposing
and promising, or with making a show of doing good works, but to be real,
true, constant and faithful in performance of them. I or so does God,
whatsoever he promises or purposes or is pleased to doc, that he does in
Heaven and Earth. Sluggards who delight in idleness doing nothing, and
Hypocrites who say and promise and make great show of doing, but are barren of
the fruits of good works, as they are most unlike to God and contrary to him,
so they are hateful and abominable in the sight of God, and they only are
accepted of God who are active Christians, always doing good and abounding in
the work of the Lord, their labor shall not be in vain, but every one shall
receive reward according to his works which are evidences of his communion
with Christ, and of his faith, justification and sanctification; wherefore
seeing God is always reaching forth his mighty hand to work in Heaven, in
Earth, in the Sea and all deep places for our profit: let us be always doing
and studying to do good for his glory.

Secondly it serves to move and direct us in and through the outward works of
God to see and behold the infinite, eternal Use 2.
and omnipotent God, and his divine power and Godhead, and in the unity of Gods
essence, the sacred Trinity of persons, because all the persons have a hand in
every work, and that one God who is three persons is the author and worker of
every divine outward work, as this doctrine teaches. It is a common custom
among men when they see and behold the handy work of any person, to remember
the person, to be put in mind of him by the work, especially if he have
known the person before, and bear the love and affection to him of a friend
and a beloved one. So let it be with us, so often as we see and behold the
visible outward works of God, let us in them behold the face of God, and
remember his glorious attributes. Let us in the great works of Creation behold
the wisdom and power of God the Creator, in the work of Redemption the
mercy, bounty and love of God, in our Sanctification, the love and the
holiness of God, and in them all let us behold the three glorious Persons in
that one God who works all things after the counsel of his own will. The
Father by his eternal Word and Spirit creating all things. The Son sent
forth by the Father in our nature, and sanctified by the Spirit, redeeming us
and paying our ransom. The Holy Ghost shed on us by God the Father through the
Son Christ in our regeneration. And all three conspiring together to purge,
sanctify and justify us, and to make us eternally blessed in our communion
with them, and in our fruition of God in grace and glory. And let us take heed
and beware of idle and vain speculation of Gods great works which show his
glory and proclaim his glorious Attributes, Wisdom, Power and Goodness, lest
by such idle negligence we become guilty of taking the name of the Lord our
God in vain.

Thirdly from this description we may easily gather and conclude, Use 3.
that sinful actions as they are evil and sinful are not Gods works;
for God is pleased with those things which he does, and his works are
according to his pleasure, but God is not pleased with sinful actions and
evil works, he has no pleasure in iniquity, Psalm. 5. 4. If any ask, How
then can it be done if he will not and be not pleased? I answer, That in them
there is to be considered, 1. A natural motion or action proceeding from some
created power, and so from God the Creator, and this is good and of God and
according to his will as it wills things properly. 2. There is a corruption,
perverseness and crookedness of the action, this is of the Devil and man's
corruption: this God hates; but because actions thus corrupted and stained
make way for God and give him occasion to show his wisdom and power in
ouer-ruling them and disposing them by his hand to a good end and his justice
in punishing them; therefore God is pleased to continue that natural power to
the wicked which they pervert and abuse, and to overruled such wicked works
and to raise light out of that darkness. And therefore let us not impute any
evil and sinful works to God, as they are evil and sinful, nor wickedly
imagine that he is the author of sin. His hand is never in any sinful work,
otherwise then to overrule, order and dispose the sinfulness and evil thereof
to some good end and purpose.

Fourthly we are hereby admonished not to impute any work Use 4.
done in the world to fortune or chance, as worldly Epicures do, but to escribe
all works and every thing which comes to pass to the certain will, purpose
and determinate counsel of God. It is true that in respect of second causes
and purposes of men, many things come to pass accidentally and by chance, no
man purposing or intending any such thing, but in respect of God they are
certain and infallible, they all happen according to his will, and without it
not an hair can fall from our heads nor a Sparrow fall to the earth, all power
and motion is of him, and the abuse of the power and motion which is from the
Devil and man's corruption he willingly permitted, and does overruled and
dispose by his wisdom and providence to a good end. And therefore in all
casualties and accidents let us comfort our selves and rest content and be
patient knowing that they come not but by his will and pleasure.

Lastly let us rejoice in all the great works which we see done in the world,
and honor them as means tending to Use 5.
our salvation, if we be Gods faithful people, and with care and conscience
walk before him according to his word, and let the sight of them put us in
mind for our comfort, that our God in whom we trust does not lie idle, nor
slumber or sleep, but by a mighty band and stretched out arm has done all
these great things, and is continually doing and working for us, to bring us at
length out of all troubles and dangers, and to set us and establish us for ever
in eternal rest, glory and blessedness.

The next thing which in order follows after the description of Gods outward
works in general, is the unfolding and distinct handling of the several
sorts and kinds of them. And because the right dividing of them into heads,
and the reducing of all the particulars unto their proper and natural heads,
is a maine ground of light, and a sure way to the distinct handling and
understanding of them, I will therefore (before I proceed any further) labor
to divide them aright into their natural heads according to the rules of
reason and truth, and so will proceed to that which is the first in time, and
by the course and order of nature, namely the creation of the world and all
things in it. The learned though they all acknowledge every kind of Gods
outward works, and do not differ in the kinds and numbers of them: yet they
are at variance about the true division of them into their first and principal
heads.

Some divide the works of God into the works of Creation and the works of
Redemption. But this is no perfect division, the two members of it do not
contain all the outward works of God, for over and besides them there are
works of preservation and of judgment and revenge.

Others divide all Gods outward works into the works of nature and the works
of grace. The works of nature they divide into two sorts, 1. The works which
concern the first beginning of nature, that is, the works of creation, 2. The
works, which concern the preservation, which they call the works of Gods
providence. The works of grace they hold to be the works of Redemption and
restoration of mankind, by which God brings supernatural blessings to men:
But this division fails in diverse respects. First, It makes a difference
between works of nature and works of grace, whereas indeed creation and
preservation, which they account works of nature, are in some sense, works of
grace. For God of his own free grace created man in his own Image: And now and
ever since the first sm of Adam, which brought death and destruction into the
world, all works of preservation by which God preserves men in being and life,
are works of free grace, and the preserving of his Elect unto his heavenly
kingdom is a work of supernatural grace in Christ. Secondly, they err in
distinguishing between the works of Gods providence, and the works of
Redemption and restoration, whereas Redemption and restoration are principal
works of Gods providence, by which God provides for his elect in Christ, such
things as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

A third sort there are who divide all Gods outward works into these two heads
only; namely, the works of Creation, and the works of actual providence. This
I take to be the best and most perfect division. First, because under these
heads are all Gods outward works contained, and there is not any one which may
not be reduced under one of these two. For whatsoever God does, or has done,
or can do for the giving of the first being to all things may be reduced to
Creation. And whatsoever God does, or can do for the ordering, preserving and
disposing of things created, and of their being and wel-being, may be brought
under the works of his actual providence. Secondly, there is a perfect
distinction and difference between the works of creation and the works of
actual providence: So far as man's substance differs from man's misery and man's
felicity, so far does every proper work of Creation differ from the works of
Gods actual providence in their objects. And although God in the creating of
things in order did show his providence for man, in that he first made a place
of habitation for him, and all things which may serve for his use, as plants,
trees, fruits, light and other necessaries before he created him, yet this
breeds no confusion between the works of creation and the works of
preservation, for two things may go together in time and place, and may be in
the same subject (as we see, sense and understanding, hearing and seeing in one
man at the same time, and heat and light in fire) and yet they may be different
in themselves.

This order therefore I do purpose to follow hereafter by Gods assistance in
prosecuting the body of Divinity. First, I will begin with the Creation, and
will labor to unfold the nature of it in general. And then I will proceed to
the handling of all the special works thereof, every one distinctly by it self
in particular.

Secondly, I will pass from thence to the works of Gods actual providence,
under which comes the government and preservation of the world, and of al
things created, and the ordering and disposing of every thing to the proper end
of it. More especially, the fall of man into sin, misery, and guilt of
damnation. And the Redemption of man from misery and his Restoration to grace
and glory by the application and fruition of Redemption, and by true spiritual
union and communion with Christ the Redeemer, and with God the Father in him by
the inhabitation of the Holy Ghost.

Thus much for the general Doctrine of Gods outward works laid down in this
Text, and for the division of them in their several heads and kinds, unto
which all the particular outward works may be reduced.

FINIS.
(...). OF THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
GENESIS 1. 1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth.
IN this Chapter the historle of the Creation is most plainly and succinctly
written by Moses, and the works of the six days are distinctly laid down
according to the order wherein God created and made all creatures in heaven and
earth.

In the second Chapter, some things which were but more briefly and generally
laid down in the first Chapter, to wit the creation of plants, herbs, and
trees, and of birds and beasts, and especially of man and woman, and the
creation of the garden of Eden, with other circumstances; are more plainly and
fully related. And therefore I have made choice of those two Chapters, the
words whereof do give us ground and occasion to handle the doctrine of the
creation, and to discuss of all points therein needful to be known for the
glory of God, and our own profit and comforts.

In the whole history, comprehended in these two Chapters, the Spirit of God
offers to our consideration two things. First the creation as it is a work of
God, together with the several parts and degrees of it. Secondly, the
creatures produced by that work, even the whole world, and all things therein
contained; that is, the heavens and the earth, all the host of them.

Creation is here described: First, generally according to the Creation.
common nature of it, as it concerns all creatures, and is the making of them
all. Secondly, it is distinguished and described particularly according to the
several parts and branches thereof, as it concerns several kinds of things
created.

First, Creation is described generally by the name, the Author or cause, and
by the time and form of it, throughout this whole Chapter.

Secondly, it is distinguished into two branches or degrees. The first is
simple or absolute and immediate creation, which is a making of something out
of nothing. The other is secondary creation, that is, a making of perfect
things out of an imperfect matter which was before created of nothing, and was
of it self most unfit for any such substantial form and being as was raised
out of it.

Simple or absolute creation, which is a making of things out of nothing, is
laid down in the first verse: And that is here distinguished 1
into two particular branches, according to the number of the things created;
the Heaven and the Earth.

The first is, the creation of the highest heavens, and all the host of them,
as the spirit of God by Moses expounds himself more plainly, Chap. 2. 1. This
was a most perfect creating and making of things perfect in nature, form, and
being, out of nothing, and that in an instant.

The second is, the creating of the earth, that is, a rude imperfect mass, and
confused Chaos or deep, which was without form and void, and fit for no
substantial form or perfect being as yet; neither could subsist, but by the
spirit supernaturally susteining it. For so the word, Earth, is expounded in
the next verse, even to be that rude mass and deep, which he made of nothing,
that it might be the common matter of all the inferior visible world, and of
the creatures therein contained.

The second maine branch of creation, which I call secondary, or 2
mediate creation, and which is a making of things perfect out of an imperfect
matter created of nothing, is laid down historically throughout these two
Chapters, where the creation of the several kinds of creatures in the six
days is described particularly And this has also two particular branches.

The first is the creating of things out of the first rude confused matter,
which was without form and void, and full of darkness; such was the creating
of the four elements: 1. Fire, called light. 2. The Air, called the
firmament. 3. The Waters, or the Seas. 4. The Earth or dry land.

The second is, the creating of things perfect out of the second matter which
was beforehand formed, and disposed into the form and substance of elements;
such was the creation of the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the heavens; and of
the fowls in the air, and fishes in the sea, and beasts on earth, which were
all created of the second matter, that is, of the matter of the elements
brought into form.

There is besides these branches of creation, another particular creation, mixed
of simple and secondary creation, namely, the creation of man; who, in respect
of his body, was made of the dust of the earth by secondary or mediate
creation; and in respect of his soul was created by God, as the Angels were,
immediately of nothing, by a simple, absolute and immediate creation. This is
also described, First generally in this Chapter, verse 26, 27. and also
distinctly, and particularly, Cap. 2. 7.

And as this history does describe the act or work of creation, Creatures
both generally, and particularly in all the b^anches thereof: so also all the
Creatures or kinds of things created.

The Creatures are here distinguished according to the time and order of their
creation. Some of them were created in the first beginning of time, in the
first moment wherein time first began, to wit, the highest heaven with the
inhabitants thereof, the Angels; and the earth, that is, the rude mass or
first common matter of the inferior world, and all the creatures therein. Some
of them were created in the progress of time, or in times distinct, even in
six several, days, to wit, all the rest of the creatures: and they are
distinguished by the time and order of their creation. Some were created the
first day, some the second, and the rest severally in the rest of the six
days, and they are described by their several names and natures, as shall
appear hereafter, when they come to be handled distinctly.

CHAP. I.
Of the Creation in general. What the Hebrew word signifies. Of the Author,
Time, Object, and Form of the Creation. A description of it: demonstrated in
all the parts. The Manner of Creation, in four things. Angels had no hand in
the Creation. Four uses of the Point.

THe first thing now to be stood upon, is the creation in general, as it is
described in the general nature of it, by the name, the Author or causes, and
the time when it first began, and when it was done, and that chiefly in this
first verse.

First, Creation is here set forth by the name of it in this word (...),
created. Secondly, by the Author or sole efficient cause of it (...), God.
Thirdly, by the time when God began the creation, (...), in the beginning; and
wherein he perfected that work, in six days. Fourthly, by the form and
manner of it, verse. 3: God said, and it was done.

First, the word (...), created, if it be rightly understood according To
create, what. 1.
to the true and proper signification of it in this place, may give great light
to the matter in hand. I will therefore first distinguish it according to the
several significations in which it is used in the Scriptures, and will show in
what sense it is here to be taken, and then will come near to the matter.
First, it signifies properly, that extraordinary miraculous work of God by
which he gives a substance, and substantial being to things which before were
not, and does make them either of nothing, or of some matter which has in it
self no natural fitness or disposition to receive such a form, or to be
turned into such a substance: thus it is used, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. in these words,
from the day that God created man. And Psalm. 148. 5. He commanded, and they
were created.

Secondly, by a metaphore, this word signifies the extraordinary 2.
works of God, which are very like unto the creation, because they are done by
a supernatural power, and suddenly brought forth as it were out of nothing,
when there was no means, or natural disposition going before. Thus the (...)
of regeneration (in which the wicked corrupt heart of man, (...) by nature is
unfit for any holiness, and most prone to wickedness, is changed in a moment
by the Spirit of God, and becomes a clean creature and a new man) is called
creating, Psalm. 51. 12. Thus are all great and miraculous works of God called
creating: When he raises up wonderful strength out of weakness, and by
them who are as nothing, does overthrow mighty giants and strong armies; this
is called creating, Exodus 34. 10. When God of a stubborn, stiff-necked nation,
and of a people scattered, despised, and counted worse than nothing, raises up
and makes a most holy people and glorious Church, as he will do in the last
conversion of the Jews, this is called commonly in the Prophets by the name of
Creation, as Psalm. 102. 18. and Isa. 43. 7. and 65. 18. And when the Lord in
his just wrath does raise up evil, and destruction to the wicked out of good
things, which naturally turn to good; this is called creating, Isa. 45. 7. and
(...) ^^ery raising up of things without means, as Psalm. 104. 30^ When God
suddenly beyond means or expectation, by the supernatur^ll power of his Spirit
renews the face of the earth, it is called creating.

But in this place the word is to be taken in the proper sense, for making
things either of nothing, or of matter made of nothing, and of it self unfit
and without natural disposition for receiving any such form as that which God
does give unto it. The word thus expounded shows what creation is, even a
making of things out of nothing, or of rude matter undisposed for such a form
and being, as God in an instant frames one of it. And so it differs from all
other kinds of making and producing things; as from natural generation of
living cr^atures, and of clouds, rain, thunder, and the rest, which are made
by an ordinary power out of matter fitted for the form of things produced: and
from all artificall making of things, as house, and other things made by art of
matter fitted (...) (...).

The second thing by which creat (...) (...) is the author Author of creation.
and cause of it, expressed in the word (...) (...) (...) word is not here used
metaphorically, to signify Angels, false Gods, and men who are ministers and
vicegerents under God, as it is sometimes used in Scripture; but it is here
taken in the sense, which is most common and frequent in the original, that is
for the true God, and is one of his sacred Names. And it is a word of the
plural number, and in many places is joined with verbes of the plural number;
and that for this end, to teach us, that though God, whose name this is, be
but one in nature and essence; yet in that unity of essence, and in that one
eternal Jehovah, there is a plurality, that is, a Trinity of Persons. This
word therefore does here plainly intimate unto us, that Creation is an action
of the whole Trinity, and that it is the joint work of all the three Persons,
even of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; and this shows,
that neither Angels, nor false Gods, but Jehovah the true God, is the Author of
the Creation, as appears, Cap. 2. 7.

The third thing by which the Creation is described, is the time of it, both
the first time in which God began to create, and did Time.
create the highest heaven, and the rude mass, the earth; and also the
progress of time in which God created all visible things in order, and
finished the whole frame of the visible world: This is expressed in the word
(...), in the beginning, and in other parts of the Chapter which mention the
particular days in which every thing was made. For this word though sometimes
it signifies Eternity, and intimates unto us the eternal being of the Son of
God, together with the Father from all eternity, and before all worlds, as
Prove. 8. 22. where eternal Wisdom says, The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way before his works of old: and John 1. 1. In the beginning
was the Word: yet most commonly and frequently in the Scriptures, being laid
down absolutely, as in this place, it signifies either the first moment, and
beginning of all time, as in this verse, or else the first six days of the
creation, or any one of them, in which days God made and finished the whole
frame of heaven and earth, and all the host of them, as Isa. 46. 10. where God
is said to declare and foretell the end of all things from the beginning, that
is, from the six days of the creation, in which God began to speak to man and
foretell (...) end; and Joh. 8. 44. where the Devil is called a ^urtherer from
the beginning that is, from the last day of the Creation in which God made, and
the Devil marred man, and brought him under death. The time of the creation,
as here I take it in general, is not only the first moment of time, as in
this verse it signifies, but also the six days mentioned distinctly in the
rest of the Chapter. For the highest heaven, and the rude matter, the earth,
were created in the first moment of time, and all other things in the space of
six days, as the history most plainly teaches.

Some, besides that which I have observed from this word, do gather also, that
the time and month of the year in which God created the World, was the
seventh month, which we call September. The ground of their conjecture is a
Cabalisticall conceit of some Jewish Rabbis: to wit, because the letters of
the word (...), which signifies in September, are the same with the letters of
the word (...), which signifies here in the beginning; and therefore, as the
letters of the one word, if they be transposed make up the other word, so both
words agree in one time; and this beginning was in the month September. But
their ground is deceitful: First, because September, which is the seventh
month, is called in the pure Scripture Hebrew (...), 1 King. 8. 2. and (...)
is a word of the corrupt Rabbinicall Hebrew tongue, and therefore Gods Spirit
alluded not to it. Secondly, the word (...) has the letter ((...)) in it more
than the word (...). and so they do not perfectly agree. Thirdly, the Rabbis
and Cabalists do not agree among themselves in this conceit: For some of them
have another conceit, that the letters of this word are the same with the two
words (...), the first or chief house, that is, the Sanctuary. Others that it
has the same letters which make up the words (...), that is, the Covenant of
fire, to show the purity of the burnt offerings made by fire; And many other
such conceits they have concerning this word; which to repeat were loss of
time.

I am not ignorant that some learned men, and judicious divines do hold this
opinion of the worlds creation in Autumn and September, but for other reasons;
especially because Autumn is the time when all fruits come to perfection, and
therefore Gods creating of all things perfect was in that time of the year.
But this is no good reason; for many creatures have their perfection and glory
in the Springtime, as herbs, flowers, and such like. And birds and beasts,
do chiefly breed in the Spring, and the Spring revives the things of the
earth, and makes them fresh and green. And the cause why many fruits come not
to perfection till Autumn, is the corruption of the earth, and the curse laid
on it for man's sin. In the creation things when they first began were
perfect, and so would they be in the Spring and all the year, if man had not
brought a curse upon them. Therefore I leave such curious points, as not
needful to be determined; or if I incline to any opinion concerning the time
of the year, it is that the world was created in the Spring, when the day and
night are equal and both of one length in all the world, that is, in the
month (...) Abib; which is part of March, and part of April. For this. God
seems to teach, Exodus 12. 2. where he injoines the Israelites to account that
for the first month of the year, contrary to the custom and account of the
Egyptians, which they had before followed.

The fourth thing by which the creation is described, is the Object Object.
or effects, that is, the things created, even the Heavens and the Earth and
all things in them: For it is said, God created the heaven and the earth.

The fifth thing is the Form and manner of the creation, to wit, Form.
by saying, Let it be done, and it was done; this appears, verse. 3, 6, 9.
which implies also the matter and the end. Now here a question may be moved
concerning this word of God; whether it was What word it was.
(...), a word spoken and uttered with a sound, like that which God spoke from
Mount Sinah in giving the Law; or (...), the inbred faculty of reason and
understanding; or (...), an inward thought of God, caused by outward objects;
or whether it was (...), and (...), the substantial and eternal Word, the
Son of God. First, it cannot be a word spoken and uttered with a sound; for
that requires air as the medium of 1
it, and there was none when God said, Let there be light; there was no ear to
hear, nor any use of such words. Secondly, it 2
cannot be any inward thought of God, now beginning to think of the creation
and being of things; for this purpose was in God, as all thoughts are, from all
eternity. Neither is this word, the Son 3
of God, now spoken that is begotten, and not till now, as some heretics
dreamed; and this saying of God the begetting of the Son. For, the Son is God,
the creator coequall and coeternallo the Father; and that God which said, Let
there be light; and, Let there be a firmament, etc. Wherefore the true meaning
of that speech, is this: That, as God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, had
decreed and purposed, from all eternity, to create all things out of nothing;
so in the beginning, in the first moment of time, the Father, by his eternal
Word the Son and by his Spirit, not as instruments, but chief agents with
himself, did actually put his decree in execution, and that so quickly as a
word can be spoken with the tongue, which has before been conceived in the
heart; and that all was done at Gods beck and command, most easily, without any
toi^e or labor; and that, as the word spoken is the revealing of man's will, so
the creation was the declaring of Gods eternal will and purpose, by the open
execution of it; and, in a word, that God by his Wisdom, Will, Goodness, and
Power, which are his attributes, by which, as by a speaking word, he is made
known to men, did create and make all things, and, for an end, not in vain,
for his word is never in vain. Now from these things laid down plainly in the
words of this first verse; and in the verses following, we may gather this
description of creation in general, viz.

That it is, the first outward act or work, of God Almighty, A large
description of Creation.
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, performed in the first beginning of time, by
which, he immediately brought all things out of nothing, according to his
eternal purpose, and gave the first being to the world, and every creature
therein, when as they were not; and that by his own infinite goodness,
wisdom, power, and will, actually working, and like a powerful Word and
commandment, bringing all things to pass out of mere nothing, or that which
was as nothing made of nothing, without any instruments, toil, labor,
alteration or delay, for the revelation of himself and for the communion of
his goodness and glory.

This description truly gathered from this text and this history, Taken into
parts, and proved.
is in whole, and in every part confirmed by other testimonies of Gods holy
infallible Word.

First creation is an outward act or work, because it is not within 1. Opus ad
extra.
God himself, but his making of things, and giving to them a being, different
from his own essence.

Secondly, it is Gods first outward act, because it was the giving of the first
being to all kinds of creatures; in which, and upon which, he exercises all
other outward works: these two points are manifest and need no further proof.

But as for the third point, the Author or first cause, God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost: we have manifest proof of it in Scripture, able to satisfy
any reasonable mind. First, that the Lord Jehovah the only true God (not
Angels) is alone the Creator of all things. Holy Job testifies, saying, that
he alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the Sea,
Job 9. 8. And Isa. 44. 24. I, says Jehovah, am the Lord that makes all
things, that stretches forth the heavens alone, that spreads abroad the
earth by my self. Secondly, that all the three Persons are equal in this
work; and as they all are one God, so are one Creator of all things; it is
manifest, Job 35. 10. Where the Creator of all things, is called in the
plural number (...), my makers, that is, more Persons than one, even three
Persons in one God: and Psalm. 149. 2. Let Israel rejoice (...), in them that
made him: and Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creators (...): and Isa. 54. 5. The
Lord thy makers is thine husbands, the Lord of hosts is his name. For the
Father in particular, there is no doubt, all confess him to be the Creator,
and so the Scriptures testify, Prove. 8. 22, 23. and Heb. 1. 2, 3. For the Son
also we have plain texts, that by him all things were made, and nothing
without him: John 13. 10. and Joh. 5. 17, 19. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Col. 1. 16. Heb. 1.
10. And as the Spirit is one God with the Father, and the Son, so his hand
wrought with them in the Creation, as appears, Genesis 1. 2. Where it is said,
the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, that is, cherished the
rude mass, as the Hen does her eggs by sitting on them, and so gave forming
virtue to them; so the Hebrew word signifies: and Job 26. 13. God is said by
his spirit, to have garnished the heavens: and Job 33. 4. The spirit of God
has made me, says Elihu: and Psalm. 33. 6. By the Word of the Lord, (that is,
the Son) were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth, that is, his spirit.

Fourthly, for the time of the Creation, we need not stand much upon proof of
it. This Text shows, that it began in the beginning or first moment of time:
And in six days, it was perfected and fully finished, as the rest of the
Chapter shows: It was of old that God founded the earth, and made the
heavens, as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm. 102. 25. that is, in the first
beginning of times. And reason tells us, that time being a circumstance, and
inseparable companion of creatures visible, must of necessity begin together
with their being. Yet one thing is worthy to be noted in the time; namely,
That, whereas God was able in the first moment, to create all things as he did
the highest heavens, and the rude mass, which is called the earth in my Text,
and which was the common matter of all the visible world: yet he did distribute
and divide the creation into diverse acts, which are distinguished one from
another by the effects, that is, the creatures made; and by the several times
and days also wherein they were performed. Which point we will insist upon,
as it well deserves, when we come to the several acts, performed particularly
in several days of the Creation.

The fifth point in the description, is the general object, and effect of
creation, to wit, all things and the first being of them: For, here the object,
and effect, concur and are altogether the same. The world and all things
therein, and the first matter of which they were made, as they are the only
things about which the act of creation is exercised; so they are the object of
creation: And as they are things made by the creation, so they are effects of
it. Now this general object and effect, as it is truly gathered from the
enumeration of all the kinds of things created, which are numbered in this
Chapter and the next, and is plainly expressed in the description: so it is
abundantly testified in all the Scriptures; as Isa. 44. 24. and Coloss. 1. 16.
and Exodus 20. 11. where all things in heaven and earth, visible and invisible,
are said to be made, created and formed by God: Yea, the first rude matter it
self, out of which the inferior world was made, is here in my Text said, to be
created by God. And this is confirmed by reason, drawn from the nature of God,
and his Name Jehovah. For God, as this Name signifies, is an absolute essence
of himself, and the first being of all, and the Author of all being:
Therefore, every thing which is, or has being, must needs be of him, and be
his creature.

The sixth point in the description, is the matter out of which, God created
all things: under which, we comprehend two things: First, the matter improperly
so called, or Terminum a quo, from whence God brought the first being of all
things immediately: And that was either negative, even nothing, or their not
being at all; or positive, their being in Gods eternal purpose only. This was
the first matter which God had to work upon in the first immediate act of
creation. Secondly, the matter properly so called, that is either the rude
mass made of nothing, which was without form, and void; or the four
Elements, which had in them no form or being of the things created, and so
were as nothing in respect of that being which God gave to every particular
thing which he made of them. For proof of this, we have a plain testimony,
Heb. 11. 3. where the Apostle says. By faith we underst and Heb. 11. 3. opened.
that the worlds were framed by the word of God: So that the things which are
seen, were not made of things which do appear. Here it is plain that he
speaks, 1. Of creation in general, in that he says, The worlds were framed.
2. In that he denies the visible world to be made of any natural things, which
do appear to any sense; hereby he shows, that their first matter was made
of nothing; and if they had no matter before the creation, much less had
invisible spirits any matter. 3. In that he makes this a matter of faith to
be believed, not to be known by reason; hereby he shows, that there was a
creation of their first being out of nothing: for reason without faith, can
apprehend a making of things of matter fitted and prepared. 4. In that he does
not say simply, that they were not made of any thing; but says, rather, they
were not made of things which do appear; hereby he intimates, that they had
a being in Gods purpose and secret counsel before. Reason also gathered from
the present Text does prove, that no creature in the world was made of matter
uncreated, or of matter co-eternall with God: for here it is said, that God
first made the rude matter, which was without form, which he needed not to
have done, if there had been any eternal matter uncreated.

Secondly, this matter could not subsist but by the Spirit of God, exercising
his creating power upon it, as the second Verse shows: Therefore all things
were made of nothing; some immediately, as the highest heavens, and the first
matter, called earth, and the form of every thing; and some of a matter,
either that first without form, or else unfit for such a being, as God made
out of it.

The seventh thing in the description is the form and manner of 7. Manner of
creation in four things.
the creation in general, and that consists in four particulars.

1. First, that God in the creation had no moving causes to move him thereunto,
but his own will, goodness, wisdom, and power; and by them, and according
to them he created every thing. First, that God created all things by the free
liberty of his own will, and according to his own good pleasure; and was not
by any necessity compelled thereunto, it appears plainly, Psalm. 115. 3. and
135. 6. where it is said, that God has done all things whatsoever pleased him:
and whatsoever pleased him he has done in heaven, earth, sea, and all deep
places: and Revel. 4. 11. it is said, that God has created all things, and
through his will and pleasure they are created. Secondly, that God created all
things by his goodness, and according to his good pleasure, as the places last
cited do show; so also the goodness, which at the first creation did appear
in every thing created, proves it most sensibly: For as it is said of Light,
that it was good, Verse 4. and so likewise of every otherthing, that it was
good; so of all in general, which God had made, that they were very good. Now
all goodness in the creature comes from the goodness of the Creator, and is
an image and shadow of it: Therefore certainly God by, and according to his
goodness created all things. Thirdly, that God created all things by his
wisdom, and according to it, the Scriptures abundantly testify, Psalm. 104.
24. where David says, Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou
made them all! and Psalm. 136. 5. The Lord by his excellent wisdom made the
heavens: and Prove. 3. 19. The Lord by wisdom founded the earth. And this is
implied, Prove. 8. 27. where Wisdom says, When God prepared the heavens, I
was there. Fourthly, that God created all things by his mighty power and
strength, the Prophet Jeremy testifies, Jerem. 32. 17. saying, O Lord God,
behold thou have made the heavens, and the earth by thy great power and
stretched out arm. And Saint Paul affirms, that Gods eternal power is seen
from the creation of the world Romans 1. 20.
in the things which are made. Therefore the first particular concerning the
inward moving causes concurring with God, is manifest, to wit, That God by his
will, goodness, wisdom, and power created all things.

2. The second particular, by which the form and manner is set forth, is this,
That God created all things himself, without any instruments at all, by his
powerful word and commandment. This is expressed in the Text, which says,
(...), that is, God, the three persons did but say of every thing, Let it be,
and it was so. And in the second Chapter Moses makes this manifest, Ver. 4, 5,
6. where he professes, that God used no subordinate means, no not so much as
rain, or moistening vapor, or the hand of man in the creating of plants in
the earth. And Isa. 40. 12, 13. the Prophet ascribes to God alone the framing
and stretching out of the heavens and the earth, without the counsel,
direction, or ministry of any other therein. For howsoever the creation was
according to Gods eternal counsel, and in the creation of man, God is brought
in to say, Come, let us make man, as if he did consult with others besides
himself; yet this is not to be understood of Gods consulting with any other,
but of the consulting of God with himself, even the Father with the Son and
the Spirit, who were persons of the same essence with himself, and were the
same God, after whose image man was made, and had the same hand in the creating
of him. For so the words (Let us make man in our own image) do necessarily
imply. Yea, as they all are (...), the Son, as well as the Father, and the
Spirit as well as the Son, and all are included in that name; so it was the
joint and equal counsel, and the purpose and saying of them all, Come, let us
make man: so that the Son and the Spirit are (...) joint Creators and Workers
with the Father, not his instruments; and the powerful word of the creation
comes equally from all three. But as for None but God wrought in the creation.
Arguments. 1 2
Angels, or other inferior creatures, it is against all reason, yea against
all piety and Gods glory to imagine or dream, that they are instruments used
by God in the creation. First, all being is of him, who is Jehovah, the author
of all being: Now creation is the giving of being, and God only is Jehovah;
therefore creation is only of him. Secondly, in every thing which was created,
there was something made of nothing, even the substantial form; and the matter
was disposed in an instant or moment. Now this cannot be but by an infinite
power, and is an action of infinite virtue; therefore no created instrument
could concur in any act of creation. Thirdly, if God could create Angels, the
first 3.
and chiefest of his creatures, of nothing, when there was none but himself,
nor any to be his instrument, much more could he without instruments create
inferior creatures. Lastly, God proves 4.
himself to be the true God, and none besides him, by the act of creation,
Isa. 43. which proof were defective, if any creature had wrought with him in
any part of the creation. Thus the second particular is manifest.

3. The third particular, wherein the form and manner does consist, is this,
That God created all things without any toil, labor, change, or alteration in
himself at all. He was not changed from rest to labor and motion, nor from
idleness to business, nor from strength to faintness or weariness, nor from
perfect to more perfect, neither was any good added to him by the creation. For
(as Saint James says) though every good and perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from God the Father of lights, yet with him there is no
variableness, or shadow of change, Jam. 1. 17. And Isa. 40. 20. Have thou not
known (says the Prophet) have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary?
there is no searching of his wisdom, he gives power to the faint, etc. Yea,
it were against all reason to think, that God could be weary or faint in the
creation, in which he gave not only all strength, but also being to all
things. And seeing in the creation God did nothing but what he willed and
purposed so to do, and then to do when he purposed, and as he had willed to
do; and seeing he was infinite, and all sufficient, and most blessed in
himself from all eternity, if creation could not add any perfection to him,
or any glory; it only revealed his glory upon others, and communicated his
goodness to them, without change in himself, or addition to his essence. If
any object and say, that God by creation became Lord and Possessour of all
creatures, which, being good, were pleasant to him; and therefore something was
added to him, even Lordship, Dominion, and Delight: I answer, that God in
himself, and before his own eyes, had all things actually present to him from
all eternity, and as sole Lord did possess them, before they had any being in
themselves; and therefore the addition in the creation was not to him, but to
the things created, to which he gave being: and when he created things in
time, according to his eternal purpose, he received nothing to himself, but
gave to all things their being and their goodness.

4. The fourth particular, wherein the form and manner of creation does
consist, is this, That things were created, and brought into perfect being
without any delay at all, even in a moment of time; and that creation is not a
successive forming of things by alteration and change, which requires some
tract of time, but a making of them perfect in a moment, and bringing of them
at once into perfect being. This is intimated in this Chapter, where we read,
that Gods creating was but this, He said, Let things be, and they were, that
is, he made them in a moment, as it were by a word, and so quickly and readily
as a word is spoken. To which add the testimony of David, Psalm. 33. 9. God
spoke, and the e^rth was made: he commanded, and it stood fast. And Psalm. 148.
5. where he says of the heavens, and of the Heaven of heavens, and the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, that God commanded, and they were created. And indeed this
is manifest by reason drawn from the nature of creation, which is a making of
things out of nothing, and giving a form and being which was not, even in
things which were made of matter before created; as we see in the four
Elements, and in things brought out of them, there was something, even the
substantial form of them, made immediately of nothing: now between the being
of something and nothing, there is no medium, or intermiddle state; therefore
every thing created, was created in an instant, though many in a day, and
diverse kinds, one after another, and not altogether in the same moment.

The eight and last thing in the description is the end of the 8.
creation, to wit, Gods revealing himself, and communicating his glory
throughout all ages of the world, and for ever. This is confirmed diverse ways
in holy Scripture: First, by testimonies, which affirm, that for God and his
glory all things were made, that is, for the revelation and communion of God
and his glory, Pro. 16. 4. God has made all things for himself, even the
wicked for the day of wrath. And Isa. 43. 7. I have called him for my glory.
And Ver 21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my
praise. And Romans 11. 36. For of him, and by him, and to him are all things.
Secondly, by testimonies, which show, that in the event creation does turn to
Gods glory, for the revealing of him to the comfort of his Saints, as Psalm. 8.
1. and 19. 1, 2. where it is said, that the beholding of the creation makes
Gods Name excellent. And the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy-worke. For certainly, that which in time proves to
be the end, that God propounded as an end before all times: for he is
infinite in wisdom and providence. Thirdly, the holy men of God, moved by Gods
Spirit, exhort all people to praise God for his works of creation; and pray
that they may apply them to that end, as Psalm. 145. 10. Let all thy works
praise thee, O Lord. And, Psalm. 148. 5. Let them praise the Name of the Lord:
for he commanded, and they were created.

Thus much for the confirmation of the description, and every point of doctrine
therein contained: I come to the use.

First, this doctrine serves for direction and instruction diverse Use 1. By
creatures ascend to know God.
ways; in that it shows God to be the author of creation, and creation to be
his outward work, and all things to be made by him: Hereby first it leads us
in a ready way to come to the knowledge of Gods wisdom, power, goodness, and
such like excellent attributes, even by directing us to behold God in them, and
to discern his eternal power and Godhead; that he is not like the Idols, and
false gods of the Heathen, but a God of eternity, before all things, and all
times; because he is the Creator of them all: And that whatsoever excellency
is in any creature, it is in God above all measure. And therefore when we see
the mighty mass of the world, let us think how great is he which made this
of nothing. When we see the glory of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and of the
whole Heavens, let us think how glorious is he who made this glory. When we
discern the goodness, sweetness, power, and virtue which is in things
created; let us conceive, that all these are without measure in God, and in all
excellency. Secondly, by this consideration it teaches us, that And his
sovereignty over all.
God only is the true Lord and Possessour of heaven and earth, worthy to be
honored, served, and worshipped of all, and to be sought unto by prayer; and
that all thanks are to be given to him for all good things; that he has
right and power to dispose all things at his pleasure, to whom he will, and
that we ought not to murmr at his disposing; neither has any man right to
any thing but by his gift, and his permission.

Secondly, this Doctrine serves for confutation, 1. Of Philosophers, Use 2.
Confutation of six sorts of men.
who held that the World was not created in time, but was from eternity; or
that it was created of a matter which was uncreated, and had a being before the
creation, even without beginning. 2. Of those doting Jews and others, who held
that the inferior visible world was created by the ministry of Angels. 3. Of
Heretics, who denied God the Father of Christ, preached in the Gospel, to be
the Creator of the World, and feigned another God Creator, inferior to him.
4. Of the Papists, who teach that there be other Creatours besides God, even
that every Mass Priest can create of Bread and Wine the true body and blood
of the Lord Christ our Creator and Redeemer: yea, that same body, which is
already, which was made of a woman borne, and crucified, and is glorified at
Gods right hand in heaven: a strange contradiction, and horrible blasphemy,
which God ab^orres as a thing impossible: For nothing can be made that which it
is already, nor receive that being which it has beforehand. 5. Of Atheists
and Mockers, who deny God, and scoff at the last resurrection, and at the
ending of this World in the last day, all which are manifestly proved by the
creation. Lastly, of all Idolaters, who esteem and worship that for God their
Creator, which is but the image of a creature, and in nature and form far
inferior to the least creature formed by God.

Thirdly, it serves for reprehension and just reproof, First of them, who
think that God can be worshipped and pleased by Use 3. Rep^oofe to ^vo sorts.
men's giving of outward things to him immediately for his own use; as gold,
silver, meat, drink, clothes, and curious ornaments: all which God rejects
as things unusefull for him; upon this very ground, and for this reason,
because he created the whole World, and all things therein are his own
already, Psalm. 50. and Act. 17. 25. Secondly, of them, who fret and grudge, and
too much repine and grieve for the overthrow and destruction of Kingdoms,
Countries, Nations, Cities, Men, or Beasts, which God at his pleasure, and in
his justice does destroy for men's sins, and over-turne withal their glory and
being. Who is he, that in such a case dare mutter against God? For he may do
with his own what he pleases: if they offend him, he may destroy them, and
magnify his justice, and glorify his power in their destruction; and he can
repair them at his pleasure.

Lastly, here is for all that trust in God, love and serve him, Use 4. Comfort
for the godly.
plentiful matter of comfort against poverty, and all calamities, and
persecuting enemies. No poverty ought to pinch or vex them; for God their
portion is more worth then all the world: all riches, and other things are but
the work of his hands, and he can give them when he will, and will give what
he in his wisdom knows to be necessary and profitable. All strength is of
him, and he can weaken all enemies in a moment; so that if he be for us, none
can stand against us: he can raise sweet out of bitterness.

Thus much for creation in general.

CHAP. II.
Of the creature in general. Names of the creature expounded, to show their
nature. Instructions concerning the creatures. Five Uses made thereof.

BEfore I pass to the special acts or branches of Creation, I hold it fit to
insist upon the creature in general, which comprehends under it every special
kind of thing created by any act of creation. This History of the Creation,
though not in any one word, yet in one sentence does express the creature in
general, that is, the whole frame and collection of all things created, Chapt.
2. 1. in these words, Thus were the heavens and the earth finished, and all the
host of them, or all their furniture, that is, whatsoever is in them rightly
ordered and disposed, like an Army well marshalled; so the Hebrew word (...)
does properly signify. And other Scriptures, both in the Old and New
Testament, do oftentimes in one word propound to us the general consideration
of all jointly together. I will therefore first speak of the creature in
general, as it comprehends in it the heavens, and the earth, and all things in
them, and that in such words and phrases, as Gods Spirit in this and other
Scriptures is pleased to use for our instruction, and for the help and
illumination of our weak understandings. And in this general description, I
will first consider the words and phrases, by which the creature in general is
called, and will show what they do import in their signification. Secondly, I
will from thence and other Scriptures note such instructions, as may direct us
to the knowledge of the creature in general. And lastly, will make some use
and application fit and convenient.

The first name, by which the creature in general is called in the Names of
the creatures. 1
Old Testament, is the Hebrew word (...), which signifies an universality, or
perfect comprehension of all things: By this name, the whole universality of
things created, is called, Pro. 16. 4. where it is said, that the Lord has
made all things for himself; not so much as the wicked man is excepted, who is
made for the day of evil. Also, Isa. 44. 24. the Lord says, I am Jehovah that
makes all things, (...): Answerable to this are the Greek words, (...), and
(...), used by the Greek Philosophers, to signify the whole universal world,
or the universality of all things; and (...), which is commonly used in the New
Testament, where there is mention made of the creation, and the creature in
general, as John 1. 3. By him were all things made. And Romans 11. ult. Of him,
and by him, and for him are all things. And Colos. 1. 16. and Revel. 4. 11. But
yet, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 27. speaking of Gods putting all things in
subjection under Christ, says, that he must be excepted, who has put all
things under him: so here, though the words (...) and (...) do signify an
universality, and comprehension of all things; yet it is manifest by the word
joined with them, that God the Creator, who is said to make and create them,
is excepted, and all other things besides him are included.

Another name, by which the Spirit calls the universality of creatures, 2
is the Greek word (...), which answers to the Hebrew word (...); and is
always used by Septuagints, in their translation of the Old Testament, to
express it. By this name the creature in general is called, Heb. 1. 2. and
11. 3. where it is said, that God by his Son made the worlds, and that the
worlds were framed by the word of God. And in the Syriack and Hebrew
translations, the words are (...) and (...): and according to their original
and true notation, they all do signify not only an eternal duration and
continuance from the first moment and beginning of time, to the last end
thereof throughout all ages, and the eternal duration of things in the world
to come; but also all the things which are measured by this protraction and
duration of times, and of time beyond all times, even all things under heaven,
and all things above the heavens, as Angels and blessed Spirits, and all things
which shall be upheld and kept in being after the end of the world: For the
Hebrew word (...) signifies times or things, the beginning and end whereof are
hid and unknown to mortal men of short time, by reason of the long continuance
of them; and the Greek word (...), being compounded of (...) and (...),
signifies a perpetual being, and duration, or whatsoever is always, and in
all times; and it is used in Gospel to signify, not only this world, wherein
we live in this mortal life; but also the world to come, both^ the Kingdom of
glory, and also the state of all things after death; as appears, Mat. 12. 32.
and Heb. 6. 5.

The third name, by which the creature in general is called, is 3.
the Greek word (...), which is commonly translated the world; and does fitly
signify that well ordered, decent, beautiful, and comely frame of heaven and
earth, with all the goodly furniture, and well ordered host of creatures
therein contained. For it is a word, which in Greek does properly signify
beauty, decency, and comely ornament; and by it the Greeks commonly do call
the whole frame of the world, because of the beauty, and comely order of the
creatures therein: and by this name the creature in general, and the
universality of things created is called, Matthew. 25. 34. Romans 1. 20. and Ephesians.
1. 4. where the Spirit of God speaks of the creation and foundation of the
world: And lest we should think, that by this word (...), is meant only the
inferior and visible world, the holy Apostles, when they speak of it, add
the word (...), and call it (...), as appears, 1 Corin. 1. 20. and Ephesians. 2.
2. to show that there is another world, even the invisible, called also by this
name: And John 1. 3. the Evangelist having affirmed, that all things were made
by the eternal word, does in the 10. Verse show, that this (...), all things,
was (...), the world. I am not ignorant that this word is used also in a more
strict sense, and that it signifies sometimes the habitable world, or circle of
the earth inhabited by men, as Matthew. 4. 8. and John 1. 9. Sometimes men
inhabiting the earth, as Romans 5. 12. By one man sin entered into the world.
Sometimes the elect, who are the chief ones of the world, and of mankind, as
John 3. 16. and 2 Cor. 5. 19. and 1 John 2. 2. Sometimes for the carnal,
unregenerate, and reprobate multitude of mankind, as John 14. 17. Whom the
world cannot receive: And 17. 9. I pray not for the world. Sometimes earthly
things, as Gal. 4. 3. opposed to spiritual; and sometimes sinful and corrupt
things opposed to holy and heavenly, as Galat. 6. 14. But the most full and
proper sense is that which I have first named, and in that sense it is used in
all places, which speak of the creating and founding of the world; and
signifies the whole frame of heaven and earth, with the furniture of them.

The fourth name, by which the creature in general is called, is 4.
the Greek word (...), or (...), which properly signifies that which is
created, and made of nothing, by the act of creation; by this name the creature
in general is called, as it comprehends every thing created either in heaven,
or earth, or in the sea, or under the earth, Revel. 5. 13. And by this name
(...), the whole world is called, Mar. 13. 19. where our Savior says, There
shall be such affliction as was not from the beginning of the creature which
God created, that is, of the world, (...), as the word is rendered by the
Evangelist Matthew, Chap. 24. 21.

Now from these several names used by the Spirit of God in Instructions
concerning the creatures.
Scripture, to set forth the creatures in general, that is, the universality
of things created, we may observe diverse things for our instruction.

1. First, that whatsoever has any being in heaven, or in earth, either in
this world, or in the world to come, even all things which can be conceived to
have a true being, besides God himself, are created of God, have a beginning,
and were made out of nothing at the first: This, as it is laid down in my
Text, so it appears plainly by all the four names before cited; and is
confirmed by the Scriptures produced, to show the true sense of them, to wit,
Isa. 44. 24. John 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. and Revel. 4. 11. And besides these, we
have many other, as Exodus 20. 11. Psalm. 146. 6. and Psalm. 148. in which places
the heavens, and the heaven of heavens the Angels, and all the hosts of God,
the Sun, Moon, Stars, the Air, and the Meteors, the Earth, the Sea, and all
things in them are said to be made, and created by God: to which we may add,
Act. 14. 15. and 17. 24. Heb. 1. 10.

2. The second thing which I observe from these names of the creature in
general is, That the World was made in perfect beauty, fit to flourish
perpetually; and every creature, as it was created of God, was good, perfect,
and beautiful in his kind free from all discord, disorder, and corruption.
This is gathered from the names (...), and (...) by which the World is called;
the one of which signifies beauty, ornament, and decency, free from all
deformity, discord, and disorder; and the other a perpetual being, or a
perpetual flourishing in being and perfection. And the last words of this
Chapter confirm this fully, to wit, God beheld all things which he had made,
and so they were exceeding good. The words also of God himself, Job 38. from
the 3. Verse, where he sets forth his manner of creating all things in a most
excellent order, by laying the foundations of the earth sure, by measuring it
as it were by line, by shutting in the deeps within bounds, by bringing forth
the lights of heaven rejoicing, and the Angels singing joyfully, and by making
all things to flourish. Reason also grounded on the Word of God does prove this
plainly: For that which was made in perfect wisdom, and in the framing
whereof Gods eternal wisdom had an hand, must needs be most beautiful,
decent, and flourishing: For if Gods wisdom in Bezaleel and Aholiab, made them
so excellent in working curious and glorious works for the Tabernacle, much
more excellent is it in God himself. Now the Scriptures plainly testify, that
God founded the world in wisdom, Prove. 3. 19. that in wisdom he has made
all things, Psalm. 104. 24. and that wisdom had an hand in ordering all things,
Prove. 8. Therefore the creation of the World was in perfect beauty and
comeliness.

3. The third thing which we learn from these names is, That the deformity of
the world, the enmity of creatures, the corruption of man, and the confusion of
things created, were not in the world, nor in the creatures thereof at the
first; neither are they Gods handy-worke, nor things by him created: for the
world is (...), a beautiful frame: And the Scriptures call the worlds (...),
things of being, and continuance, not things deformed, corrupt, and perishing.
This also the Scriptures show, Genesis 3. that the earth was cursed for man's sake,
and man's sin came from himself, and the Serpent: And Deuteronomy. 28. 23. and
Levit. 26. God himself in the Law professes, that for disobedience and sin of
rebellious people he does make their heaven over them as brass, and their
earth as iron: And Eccl. 7. 29. it is said, that God made man upright, but they
have sought out many inventions.

I might here also observe from the name (...), that the world was also made in
a beautiful and pleasant season, even the pleasant time of the Spring in all
probability; but I love not to build opinions on such weak foundations.

And from the word (...), which signifies long lasting ages, I might observe
the ages of the world, and discuss the question about the ages and years from
the creation; but they may more seasonably be touched hereafter, when we come
to speak of the particular branches of the creation.

Now I come to the Use of these considerations: First, they Use 1. The world
not eternal.
serve to make the thoughts and conceits of Atheists and carnal Philosophers
hateful to us; to wit, that the world is eternal, and had no beginning,
neither shall have end. For here we see, that all things universally were
created of nothing, and are creatures formed by God. It is a point of faith
above all natural reason to understand, that the worlds were made of nothing,
as the Apostle shows, Heb. 11. 3. And that was it which made Aristotle, and
other witty and learned Philosophers, led by reason, doubt of the creation of
the world. Beside, when they observed the stability of the heavens, and
heavenly host, and their beautiful order and incorruptible being, this did
further them in this conceit, and made them think there should be no end of
it. But Gods Word teaches the contrary, and shows, that all things were
created and made out of nothing, except only God himself; and though they were
made perfect and good, fit to flourish for ever, and some of them have still a
great remnant of that glory and perfection, as the heavens, which change little
in many ages; yet by man's sin they are corrupted and made changeable, and so
much more, by how much more near they come to man: And this the Philosophers
felt and perceived, insomuch that many of them did acknowledge the creation,
and the end of the world; and even Aristotle himself, though he could not
conceive that the world should be made of nothing by the course of nature, yet
he did acknowledge God the Father Maker and Preserver of it; and so likewise
shall all be confounded, who are not settled in this truth: Therefore let us
look up to God, and believe his Word, and hate all blind conceits of worldly
wise men; and see and behold in the most rational and wise natural men,
denying this truth of the worlds creation, that the wisdom of the world is
foolishness, and the imaginations of the flesh enmity against God.

Secondly, this consideration of creation and beginning of all Use 2. Admire
Gods eternity.
the world, serves to make us more admire Gods eternity, and to ravish us with
the consideration of it. If there could be a man found on earth, who had lived
ever since the time of Christ, or since the days of Adam or Noah, we would
highly esteem him, and seek to him from the uttermost parts of the earth, as
the Queen of Sheba did to Solomon. But behold, all this world is but of short
continuance, created of God not many thousands of years ago. God is before it,
even from all eternity. And this world shall perish, but he endures for ever,
Psalm. 102. And therefore if we wonder at the long lasting heavens, and the
surely founded earth; how much more ought we to admire the eternity of God,
the ancient of days, before all days and times, and without beginning or end!

Thirdly, though this world be beautiful by reason of some relics Use 3.
Overlove not the world, now degenerate.
of perfection and beauty remaining from the creation; yet seeing it had a
beginning, and is corrupted by sin, and hastens toward an end, let us not set
our hearts on it, or any worldly thing; but look up to God, and have our hope
and our affections firmly set on him, whose beauties of holiness shall not
fade as the fashion of this world does; but his glory endures for ever.

Fourthly, we may here see, that the world was created for us, and Use 4. Not
God, but we need the world.
for our use, not for any need which God had of it; for God was infinitely
blessed in himself without it, from all eternity: and certainly, in that God
did not create it, and time with it, many thousands of years before he did,
this is a strong evidence, that God is all-sufficient in himself, and has for
himself no need of any creature.

Lastly, it serves to make us hate sin, as the Devils poison, and Use 5. Hare
sin: Motives.
turn from it, and be afraid to communicate with it, as we do with things
created by God; because it is not of Gods forming, but is the corruption of
man's nature poisoned and defaced: and all enmity, which is among the creatures,
vexing and destroying one another, came in by sin; and all the pleasure which
men take therein, is corrupt, sinful, and against pure nature: Wherefore let
us ascribe all deformity, disorder, and discord in the world to man's sin, as
the proper cause thereof.

CHAP. III.
Of Creation immediate, and mediate. The Hebrew words expounded. Sundry
Doctrines proposed, and made useful. Some questions discussed: 1. Of the time
of the year, wherein the world was created. 2. Of the number of the years
since this was. Of the highest heavens: 5. points proposed.

THe creation and creature in general being described out of these words, and
the rest of the history of the creation in this and the next Chapter, I proceed
to the several parts and special branches of the creation, which I will
unfold in that order in which they are here laid down, and will describe the
several kinds of creatures, which God created together with the state and
condition wherein God created them.

The work of creation considered in general, comprehends in it two special
branches, as I have noted before.

The first is simple, absolute, and immediate creation, which is a giving of
the first being to things simply and absolutely out of nothing, when there is
no matter at all to work upon.

The second is a mediate and secondary creation, which is a giving of the first
being to things out of a rude, unfit, and undisposed matter; and that
instantly, without any precedent altering, or disposing of the matter of which
they are made.

Each of these consists of two subordinate branches: First, absolute creation
is either a making of things perfect out of nothing, or a making of things
imperfect out of nothing. Both these parts or branches are here laid down in
this first verse: Of them therefore I purpose to speak out of these words; and
for the better performance thereof, I will sift the words particularly in the
first place, and so will come to the Doctrines.

And for the general meaning of the words, I have thus far laid it open, That
the first word (...), Bereshith, signifies the time The words expounded.
of the creation. The word (...), Bara, signifies properly creating of things
out of nothing, or out of a rude matter fit for nothing, and incapable of any
essential form. The word Elohim, intimates the Trinity of persons in the
unity of essence. The word Heaven, is to be taken for the Heaven of heavens, or
the highest heavens. And by the Earth, is meant the rude matter, out of which
God framed the whole inferior visible world. I now come to sift the words more
particularly, so as that they may give light to this first special branch of
creation, and to the two particular parts thereof.

The first word (...), Bereshith, which is here translated in the I.
beginning, may admit a threefold exposition: First, if we take the word (...),
as sometimes it signifies in Scripture, for the chief or principal; or for
the first fruits, which were the first and chiefest of every thing; then this
word may signify either as the Hebrew Rabbis expound it, Bereshith, in or for
the chief, that is, for Isreal's sake, who were the chief of the Nations, and
choice people of God, God created the heavens and the earth, and in them God
laid the foundation of all things created: Or else Bereshith, in the first
fruits, that is, in Christ, who is the chief and the first fruits of all; and
for the elects sake in him, God created the heavens and the earth, as some
Christians have expounded it. But if we take the word Reshith, as it is
commonly taken in the Scripture, for the first beginning of a thing; or the
first part of the being of it; or the first part and moment of time, wherein a
thing comes to have being; then may this word (Bereshith) signify the first
part of time, wherein things created came to have being; or the first part of
creation: and this may be the meaning, that in the first part of time, or in
the first part of the creation, God created the heavens and the earth; and the
creation of them was the first act of creation. This, as it is the exposition
The beginning of time here meant.
most commonly held, and generally received; so I take it to be the best and
fittest, and that which the Spirit of God chiefly intended in this place: for
though it is true, that God created all things in Christ, and for his sake, and
his elects sake especially: yet here it stands with more reason, and is more
agreeable to the scope of the place, to think, that the first part of time, or
of the creation is meant: For first, it is manifest (as shall appear
hereafter) Argum. 1.
that here Moses does not speak generally of the creation of all particulars,
which are after named in the Chapter: Neither does he by the heaven and the
earth understand the whole world, and all the particulars therein contained;
but by Heaven, is here meant the highest heaven; and by Earth, is meant the
rude mass, out of which God framed the inferior visible world. Now they only
were not created for Christ's sake, but all other things also; and they only
were created in the first part or moment of time, and in the first beginning of
the creation: therefore it stands with better reason to expound these words (in
the beginning) for the first beginning of time, or the first part of the
creation, which is the subject of this holy History; then to understand it of
Christ, that in him, and for him, the heavens and rude earth was created, and
for his elects sake, for whose use all other creatures also were created.

Secondly, the Scriptures themselves do in other places, which 2
handle the same matter, expound this word for the first beginning of time, or
the first part and moment of creation, as Psalm. 102. 26. where David, speaking
of the first foundation of the heavens, and the earth, says, They were founded
of old, that is, in the first time; for so the word (...) signifies, which he
there uses in stead of this word Bereshith; and which is translated by the
Apostle (...), in the beginning, Heb. 1. 10. and therefore it is manifest, that
here this word notes unto us the time when this first act of creation was
performed, namely, the beginning or first part of time.

Some, who held that the highest heavens and the first rude mass of the earth
were created from all eternity, and had their being long before the first
beginning of time; do here take this word Bereshith to signify from all
eternity, and do think that so it may be translated; from eternity God
created the heavens and earth. And to this purpose they bring an example, where
the words (in the beginning) signify from all eternity, to wit, Joh. 1. 1.
where it is said, In the beginning was the Word, that is, from all eternity.

But this exposition may easily be confuted by other Scriptures; for Exodus 20.
11. God himself affirms, that in six days he made heaven and earth, and all
other creatures: and therefore the heavens were not created from all eternity,
but in the beginning, in the first day of the creation. As for the words of the
Evangelist, they may easily be answered; for indeed they do not properly
signify eternity, but the first moment of time, in which God began to give
being to his creatures. And yet take these words (in the beginning) jointly
together with other words, which immediately follow in the same sentence, and
they necessarily imply and prove that the Word was eternal, and from all
eternity, coeternall with God the Father: For he who was already, and had a
being with God, and was God, and made all things in the beginning, must needs
be from all eternity, and before the first moment of time, in which he was not
made nor created; but was, that is, had a being already, yea was coeternall to
the Father: Therefore these words (in the beginning) as the Evangelist uses
them, do signify eternity; but in that he says, The Word was, that is, had
already a being with God in the beginning, when he began to give being to all
other things, this proves by necessary consequence, that the Word was eternal:
and therefore the common exposition stands sure, that here the word (Bereshith)
signifies the beginning, or first part of time.

The second word of this Text, that is, Bara, created, signifies II.
the giving of first being to all things, either simply out of nothing, or out
of matter undisposed for the form introduced (as I have noted before.) And by
a Metaphor, it signifies great and mighty works, which resemble the creation;
but here it signifies absolute creation, or giving the first being to the
highest heavens, and to the rude mass or matter of the visible world, out of
mere nothing; for they were created of no matter before existing (as all do
hold) and of their creation only this Verse speaks.

That the third word (Elohim) being of the plural number, signifies III.
three persons in one God the Creator; and that the creation was the work of
all the three persons in the Trinity, I have before showed. Here let me add
further a Cabalisticall proof, gathered from the Hebrew word (...), which
signifies the act of creation, and consists of three Hebrew letters, which are
the first letters of the three Hebrew words (...) and (...), which signify the
Father, the Son, and the Spirit: And therefore if the Caballisticall art be of
any credit, this act of creating is the work of all the three persons, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit, one and the same God.

The two last words, (...) and (...), the heaven and the earth, do IV. V.
here signify (as I have noted before) the highest heaven, and the earth which
was without form and void, that is, the rude mass and common matter of the
visible world. Some learned men do by heaven and earth understand the whole
world, in the same sense as the words are, Chapt. 2. 1. By heaven, they
conceive the highest heaven, the visible starry heaven, and the whole firmament
of the air to be meant: by earth, the lowest globe of the earth, which has
the sea intermingled with it; and by creating, they understand the whole work
of creation in general, and not that first special act, by which God made the
highest heavens, and the rude mass and matter of the visible world only. The
main reason which they have to prove this, is drawn from the Hebrew Articles
(...), which is joined with (...), and (...), which is prefixed before the word
(...), earth. The first of which Articles consists of the first and last letter
of the Hebrew Alphabet, and so implies an universal comprehension of all
things, which were created both the first and the last. The other, to wit,
(...), is of plain demonstration, and shows that this heaven and earth, as
they now stand, are said to be created here in these words. But this exposition
is plainly overthrown by the Text it self, and the reason answered without any
difficulty: First, the act of creation spoken of and intended in this Verse, is
that which was performed in the beginning, that is, in the first moment of
time, so the Text affirms: but the whole world, and all creatures in heaven
and earth were not made in the first moment of time, nor in the first day, but
in six days; therefore the whole world is not meant in these words, nor all
creatures in heaven and earth. Secondly, if the Article (...) be of general
comprehension, then each of these words should signify the whole world; for it
is added to each of them, and so the other word should be superfluous in this
place. Thirdly, we may safely grant, that these words are of general
comprehension, and yet we need not expound them of any other heaven then the
highest heaven, nor of any other earth then the first rude mass, out of which
the whole visible world was made, which was without form, and void, as it is
testified in the next words, Verse 2. For this heaven did comprehend in it the
highest heaven, and all the host and inhabitants of it, the Angels, actually.
And this earth or rude mass did potentially comprehend in it the whole visible
world, which afterward in the six days was actually formed out of it: and
therefore I take this to be the best exposition, to understand by the heaven,
the highest heaven only where the Angels and blessed Saints have their
dwelling, together with the host thereof: And by the earth to understand (as
the next Verse shows) the rude mass, out of which God after formed the whole
visible and mutable world, consisting of the starry heavens, and of the air,
water, and earth with all things in them. As for them who here by heaven and
earth understand the whole world, actually formed and made; and them, who
understand the common seed and rude matter of the heavens, both highest and
invisible, and also the visible heavens, and the inferior world; they exclude
out of this history of the creation, the distinct and special narration of the
creation of the highest heavens, and of the glorious host thereof, the Angels
and super-celestiall Spirits, contrary to that which Moses himself plainly
teaches, Chapt. 2. 1. where repeating summarily the whole creation in
general, which he had before distinctly related, and in all the parts thereof
described in the first Chapter, he says, Thus were the heavens and the earth
finished, and all the host of them, that is, the Angels among the rest; for
they are called the heavenly host, Luke 2. 13.

From the words thus expounded, we may gather an excellent description of the
first special act of creation, which is called simple and absolute creation,
and of the two particular branches thereof, to wit,

That it is that act of creation, whereby God in the first beginning did
create, and give the first being out of nothing to the highest heavens, and to
the earth, that is, the first rude mass and matter of the visible world.

The parts of this act are two: The first is that act of simple creation, by
which God created out of nothing, and gave a most perfect glorious being to the
highest heaven, and to all things therein contained. The second is that act of
simple creation, by which God gave the first imperfect being to that rude
earth, the mass, which was the common matter, out of which he formed the
whole inferior, visible, and mutable world.

In this description of the first act of simple creation, and of each branch
thereof, we may observe four things: The first is the matter both general
and special, laid down in the word Bara, created. Secondly, the author of it,
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Elohim, three persons in one God.
Thirdly, the time and order of it, in the beginning, Bereshith; it was the
first act, performed in the first moment of time. The fourth is the object or
effect, to wit, the things created, the heaven and the earth: The heaven is the
object and effect of the first particular branch; the earth is the effect of
the second. These four things considered both jointly together, and severally
by themselves, do afford unto us diverse profitable instructions, and diverse
questions to be discussed, worthy of our consideration.

First, the matter and substance of this act, is a simple and absolute
producing of real and substantial things out of nothing; yea creatures, which
of all others were most perfect and glorious, to wit, the highest heavens, and
the glorious Angels the eternal Spirits, which were made and placed there, to
stand in the sight and presence of God. Now this offers to our consideration an
excellent meditation of Gods infinite power and omnipotency, showing it self
most clearly in this first act of creation; for in that God, contrary to the
course of all other the most cunning Artificers, did immediately and absolutely
of himself, and by himself alone create, and make out of nothing in the first
beginning, the most perfect creatures of all, even the highest heavens, and the
glorious Angels and eternal Spirits; and so the first act of creation was the
most perfect and complete act of all. This teaches us, that God is of himself
infinite, omnipotent, and all Doct. 1. By the creation God is seen to be
infinitely wise, and powerful.
sufficient in power and in wisdom, able to do all things, and to perform
and bring to pass by his own mighty hand, instantly, without any help,
counsel, or advice of any other, the greatest, and most perfect, and glorious
works which can be done, named, or imagined in heaven and earth. We find by
experience and reason, that all Artificers, before they have in and of
themselves skill and power sufficient to bring to pass the works which belong
to their art, do first practice by the direction of others in smaller matters;
and by use and practice grow more skillful, and so proceed to greater and more
perfect works: and because the most cunning and exquisite workmen in the world
are limited in their power and skill to one thing at once, neither can their
minds intend, nor their understandings conceive, nor their hands perform all
things at once, which are required for the performance of a perfect work;
therefore in every such work they proceed by time, leisure, and degrees:
first, laying a foundation of matter; secondly, forming and framing of every
several part; thirdly, fitly composing of all parts together in one, and so
bringing the work to consummation and perfection. And so God must have done in
the creation, if he had not been infinite in power, and all-sufficient: If his
wisdom and power had been limited, he must have begun with smaller works, and
ascended by degrees; and in every work he must first have either borrowed
matter from others, or made it himself for to work upon. Secondly, he must
have fitted the matter, to receive a fit form. Thirdly, he must have
introduced the form into every part, and have composed all together into one
perfect creature: But we see all was contrary; he performed the greatest and
most perfect work at the first, even the most glorious heavens, and the
eternal Spirits, which are durable, and abide for ever; therein he set up his
glorious throne, and made an habitation for his blessed Saints and Angels. He
showed that he was all-sufficient in himself for the greatest work, because
he did perform it of himself, before there was any but himself, and no
creature made to help him. He did not by degrees get his skill, but at the
first showed the best work, and performed it in an instant: And therefore in
this first act of creation, we may see, as in a clear glass, the infinite
wisdom and omnipotency of God. This truth is also strongly confirmed by firm
proofs from other Scriptures, as Job 37. 23. Elihu, that wise unreproved
friend of God, full of the Spirit, does from this very ground, namely, the
wonderful creation of the heavens and other things, conclude the omnipotency
and infinite wisdom of God, that he is Shaddai, the Almighty, All-sufficient,
that he is excellent in power and judgment, and that we cannot find him out by
reason of his incomprehensible wisdom and power. So also Job 38. 1. and 40. 2.
God himself does from the creation of the heavens, and the Angels full of
glory, and shouting for joy, and from his making and ordering of all things
most wisely prove, that he himself the Creator is Almighty, one who cannot
be instructed nor reproved, and against whom none can contend. And Job
himself, Job 42. 2. upon the same ground and consideration is moved to
confess, that he knows God to be able to do every thing, and that he is
infinite in wisdom and knowledge; that no thought can be withholden from him,
and that the things of God are too wonderful for him to know. The Prophet
David also, Psalm. 8. 1, 2. from the consideration of Gods glory, which he has
set above the visible heavens, in the highest heavens; and from the excellent
nature of the Angels, weighed with himself, does break out into an admiration
of Gods excellent greatness, thereby made known; and wonders that he, so
mighty a one, should regard poor man at all; who, though the chief of visible
creatures, is but a worm, and as nothing before God: Lord, says he, how
excellent is thy Name in all the world, who have set thy glory above the
heavens! When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, I say, Lord,
what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou
visitest him? And Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens (says he) declare the glory of God,
that is, the glorious attributes of his omnipotency and infinite wisdom. And
most fully and plainly does the Apostle Paul speak to this purpose in a few
words, Romans 1. 20. saying, that the invisible things of God, even his eternal
power and Godhead from the creation are clearly seen, being understood by the
things which are made.

The consideration of which truth serves first to incite us, and also Use 1.
Look up to the omnipotency of the Creator.
direct us, to make a right and profitable use of Gods first act of creation,
by putting us in mind, that it is not enough for us in reading the history of
it, to think of it only as of some great work, and to content our selves with
the bare and naked understanding and remembrance of the glorious heavens and
Angels, thereby created and made; but that we all ought, by meditating upon the
excellency and absolute perfection of that first work above the rest which
followed, to be lifted up unto that further meditation of the omnipotency and
infinite wisdom of God, and of his power and ability to do all things, and to
bring into perfect being any most excellent work at his pleasure, whenever
he will; And hereby to be stirred up and encouraged to rejoice mo(...)
abundantly To rejoice and ^est in him.
in the Lord our Creator, to rest more confidently on him, when we have
committed our selves to his protection, and he has received us under the
shadow of his wings, and to hope for all blessings which he has promised; and
for the performance of all his promises in due time and season, without
hinderance or resistance of any power. As all created things were made for some
end, and whatsoever is not fit to serve for some special end is a mere vanity;
so the knowledge of things, without the knowledge of the end and use of them,
is a vain notion swimming in the brain: and therefore the maine thing which
we ought to drive at in seeking the profitable knowledge of things, is to know
and understand the special use of them. Now Gods creating of the highest
heavens, and the host of them in glorious perfection by himself alone, in the
first act of creation in the beginning, does serve most properly, naturally,
and necessarily to show the infinite wisdom and omnipotency of God the
Creator (as is before proved) that we seeing therein these divine attributes
of God as in a glass, may rejoice in him, and rest securely on his promises,
knowing that he will perform and fulfill his word, and none can resist him:
Wherefore let us study to make this right use, that our knowledge may be sound
and saving, and may bring us on to salvation.

Secondly, this may justly smite our hearts, and make us ashamed Use 2. Bewail
the contrary negligence.
of our own dullness and negligence in this point, in that we all, or the most
part of us have so often read, heard, remembered, and understood in reading and
hearing the Word of God, this great work of creating the heavens and heavenly
host, and have believed it, and spoken of it, and so have passed it over,
without seeing, beholding, and considering in it the wisdom, power, and glory
of God. Alas, there be few amongst us, who have taken care to look so far
into the end and use of these things of God; and that is the cause, that
science abounds without conscience, and much knowledge goes alone without any
sound or sincere practice. O let us be thoroughly ashamed of our negligence in
the times past, which is too much indeed; and let us labor to redeem the time
hereafter by double diligence, studying to see Gods glory in those great
works; and seeing, to admire his wisdom, and to adore his heavenly Majesty.

Thirdly, Gods truth in this doctrine believed and embraced, is Use 3. Checks
all Atheistical thoughts of Gods power.
a strong Antidote against all Atheistical thoughts, which possess the hearts
of diverse dull and carnal people, who cannot conceive thoroughly, nor fully
believe, but often doubt of Gods omnipotency and ability, to create in a
moment out of mere nothing most perfect and glorious creatures, such as are
Angels and blessed spirits, and the heaven of heavens. Such doubts are the
cause that they cannot believe in God, rest on his power, and be confident in
him in cases of extremity, when the whole world seems to be against them, and
all outward helps fail. If they did but discern the power of God, by the
first simple act of creation, they might know and believe, that he out of
nothing can raise more help then they can desire or stand in need of in their
greatest extremities.

Secondly, in that here in the first act of creation, performed in Doct. 2. The
three persons^ are equal
the first beginning of all things, and in the first moment of time, God the
Creator is described by the name Elohim, which signifies a plurality of
persons in the unity of essence (as I have before proved) and this act is
ascribed to all the three persons equally in one and the same word: Hence we
may gather a necessary doctrine concerning the consubstantiality, equality, and
eternity of all the three persons in the sacred Trinity, to wit, That the three
persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are all co-eternall, and
without beginning, all equal among themselves, and consubstantiall, of the
same undivided nature and substance, three persons distinct in one infinite
eternal Jehovah. For plain reason tells us, that whatsoever had no being
given to it, in or after the first beginning of creatures, but was, and had a
being already in the first beginning, and before any thing was made, yea, was
the author and maker of the first work of all; that must needs be of absolute
eternity, every way eternal, without any beginning or end at all. Now such are
all the three persons in the blessed Trinity, they all by this word (Elohim)
are showed to be equal in the first act of creation; and so to be before the
first beginning of all things, as the author and cause before the work and
effect, they all are declared to be one and the same singular God and undivided
essence: and therefore this Doctrine does hence truly arise. I need not here
again stand upon further proof of it; for that I have done abundantly
already, in expounding the Doctrine of the Trinity.

Only the consideration of this truth may serve first to convince Use 1.
Against Antitrinitaries.
all Heretics of horrible error and blasphemy, who deny either the Creator
of the world to be the true God; or the Son, and the Spirit to be equal,
co-eternall, and of the same substance with the Father; as the Arians and
others did. Behold here the blasphemous fictions of these men cut off before
they shoot forth, and rooted up before they were sown, by this first act of
creation, as it is here described by the Spirit of God: and therefore let us
hate and abhor all such dreams and fictions, as most monstrous and
unnatural, damned in Gods book, from the first words of the history of the
first creation.

Secondly, let us even from this furthest ground fetch the all-sufficiencie Use
2. Trust in Christ, and the holy Spirit.
of our Mediator and Redeemer Christ, and the efficacy and perfection of his
full satisfaction, that we may rest on him confidently without scruple, fear,
or doubting. As also the infinite power of the Spirit, that we may rest in his
strength for perseverance. If the Son Christ, or the Spirit were inferior
Gods, and of an inferior nature, not infinite nor co-eternall with the Father,
men might have some color of diffidence, and some cause to doubt of sufficient
satisfaction, redemption, and steadfast perseverance. But here we see the
contrary, that the Son if the Word, by whom all things were made; and the Son
and Spirit one, the John 1.
same God and Creator with the Father; and the Spirit as he is in the
regenerate, is greater every way then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.
therefore let us comfort our selves in the all-sufficiencie of Christ for full
redemption, and of the Spirit for sanctification and perseverance.

Thirdly, in that here the first act of creation, even the creation The time,
In the beginning.
of the highest heavens with the host of them, and of the common matter of the
visible world out of nothing, is said to be performed in the beginning, that
is, in the first part or moment of time. Hence some profitable Doctrines arise,
and here some questions offer themselves to be discussed.

First, we here are taught, That the whole world, and all things Doctr. The
world, and all in it, had a beginning.
therein, even the highest and most durable heavens, and the first matter of
the visible world had a beginning, and were not from all eternity, as some
Heathen Philosophers imagined. This Doctrine, as it is plainly affirmed in this
Text, which alone is proof sufficient; so other Scriptures do abundantly
prove and confirm it: John 17. 24. our Savior says, that God the Father
loved him before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1. 4. the Apostle says,
that God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world: And 1
Pet. 1. 20. it is said, that Christ was ordained before the foundation of the
world: And Prove. 8. 23. the Wisdom of God says, I was set up from
everlasting, before the earth was, or ever the heavens were prepared. These and
such other Scriptures, which mention things before the first beginning and
foundation of the world, do most evidently show, that neither the world, nor
any part thereof was from eternity; but with time, and in time began. And if
this be not sufficient to satisfy Atheists, who refuse to believe God or his
Word, natural reason it self is able to prove it against them, by their own
Principles which they grant.

First, they acknowledge, that whatsoever is corruptible or mutable Reas. 1.
by nature, must needs have a beginning, and cannot be eternal: Now it is
manifest, that the whole world, and all things therein, are by nature
corruptible, and changeable; and whatsoever therein is constant, unchangeable
and incorruptible, it is so, not by any natural power in it self, but of the
free grace of God in Christ. The Angels, the most glorious creatures, and the
spirits and souls of men, which are created of nothing, they are changeable by
nature, as appears by the fall of the Devil, and man's fall and corruption:
and therefore it is said, that he charged his Angels with folly, to wit, them
that did fall; and to the rest which stand he added light, even supernatural
light of his sanctifying Spirit, Job 5. And although the wisest of the Heathen
Philosophers did gather from the constant course of the visible heavens and the
stars, that the heavens were incorruptible and unchangeable; yet experience
has taught the contrary, and it is found by long observation of Astronomers,
that there are many fixed stars, and strange comets or blazing stars,
generated in the heavens far above the Moon, which appear for a time, and
after do vanish away, as the late blazing star, in Anno 1618. was found to
be by certain demonstration. But for the inferior Elements under heaven, and
the creatures therein; every eye sees them to be in daily change and
alteration, and to have no constancy in them: Therefore the world is not from
all eternity.

Secondly, that which is eternal, has no cause subsisting before Reas. 2.
it; nor any superior to overruled, order, and dispose it, but is absolute of
it self: And that which has such a preceding and superior cause, author,
and disposer, must needs have and receive a beginning from another. Now such is
the world, and all things therein; the world, and the whole course of it is
overruled and disposed by God, as every eye may see: For whereas it is the
nature of Summer to be hot, when the Sun, which is the fountain and cause of
light and heat, is most present with us; God, at his pleasure, for the sins of
men, does turn our Summers heats into cold Winter storms, and does drown our
Harvests with immoderate rain, in the midst of the dry scorching dog-daies, as
we have found of late years: So he makes fruitful lands barren, Psalm. 107.
when they are best tilled; and the barren wilderness he turns into a
fruitful field, and the desert into springs of water. Also daily experience
does teach us, that things which naturally serve for health, are sometimes
turned to poison; that which enricheth one, does impoverish another: and that
which hurts one, does help another. All which show, that God overrules the
world, and that all things are under his hand, and he is the supreme cause and
disposer of all: Yea, if we observe all parts of the world, we shall see, that
the earth and the sea are ruled much by the heavens, and the heavens are moved
by some superior power: Therefore the world is not eternal, without cause or
beginning.

These and such arguments and experiments convinced the Heathen Philosophers
and Poets, and forced them to confess, that the world was not eternal; but
made in the beginning of time, as appears in Hermes, Trismegistos, Pythagoras,
Plato, Orpheus, Sophocles, Homer, and others. And even Aristotle himself,
though he affirmed stiffely the worlds eternity, and did oppose the fictions of
Plato and others, concerning the making of the world of a matter which was
before existing, and without beginning; yet at length he was forced to
confess, and does in diverse of his books, that God is the author and
preserver of the whole universal world, as appears lib. de mundo, and lib. 2.
de gener. and corr.

This admonishes us, not to set our hearts on the world, nor Use 1. Love not
the world, being so movable.
content our souls with such things as are therein; but to look up higher to
a better portion, if we desire full satisfaction, and true contentment and
felicity indeed. He that builds on a foundation, which of it self may fail,
and needs a supporter it self, he can never dwell safely and securely, but in
continual fear, that his house will fall on his head; neither can he sleep in
peace, till he has laid a deeper and surer foundation under that. Now here we
see the world is a moveable foundation, it was not from eternity, but had a
beginning; and the being of it hangs on an higher cause, even God: And
therefore let us not set our hearts on the world, nor make it our portion; but
look up to God, and set our affections on him, and seek to him to be our
portion: for he only can fill our souls, and he is, and has been, and shall
be for ever the same; and in him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

Secondly, this truth serves to arm us against all temptations of Satan, and
all cunning sophistications of Atheists, which tend Use 2. Arm against
Atheism.
to shake our faith in this point of the worlds beginning; and to make us
think, that the world has been from all eternity, we have here a sure
foundation from Gods infallible Word, and strong reasons also to confirm our
hearts in this doctrine: and therefore let no cavills of opposers trouble our
hearts: Yea, that we may more clearly see, and more firmly believe this truth
without doubting, I will briefly show the weakness of the best As in some
Objections answered.
arguments, which are brought to the contrary; and so will remove those clouds
and mists out of the way, which seem to eclipse the truth.

The most weighty Objections are gathered from Scripture Object. 1.
terms and phrases: as for example, from the name which the Scripture gives
to the world, and the ages thereof, to wit, (...), which comes of (...) and
(...), and signifies a being always: for so the world is called, Heb. 11. 3.
Also 2 Timothy 1. 9. and Tit. 1. 2. the times of the world are called (...),
everlasting times, as the Greek words signify.

The word (...), everlasting, is two ways taken in Scripture, Answ.
and in humane writings also: First, it signifies an eternal being, without
beginning or end, even a being before and after all times; and so God only is
called (...), everlasting, 1 Timothy 6. 16. and the Spirit is called (...),
eternal, Heb. 9. 14.

Secondly, this word signifies a being in all times, from the first beginning
to the last end of time, but no more, not before nor after; and thus the world,
and the ages thereof are called everlasting, (...). The places objected prove
this sense; because in them the Apostle shows, that these everlasting times
had something going before them, and were but times which have a beginning and
end: And therefore these objected places make much for this doctrine, and not
against it.

The Objections of Aristotle are drawn, 1. from incorruptibility, Object. 2.
which he imagined to be in the heavens: 2. from this, that the world was not
generated nor made of any pre-existent matter, neither, could be brought into
being, by any natural generation: 3. from the eternity of motion, which he
thought to prove by this, That no motion can be found in nature, but has
another motion going before it.

All these may easily be answered: for first, the heavens are corruptible Answ.
by nature, and the visible heavens shall perish: and that the highest heavens
are incorruptible, it is not by power of their nature, but of the will of God,
preserving them.

Secondly, though the world was not made of matter pre-existent, nor by
natural generation; yet it may have a beginning supernatural, being created
miraculously of nothing by Gods omnipotent hand, as all miraculous things are
done, which nevertheless are not eternal, nor endure for ever.

Thirdly, though in natural things we find no motion, which has not another
motion going before it; yet it is not so in the creation, which was a work
far above the course of nature: so that these Objections are of no force to
disprove this doctrine. All that Aristotle with his subtle wit could devise,
was nothing but this, That the world was not made by the course of nature,
neither did come into being by natural generation, nor was framed out of an
eternal mass of matter, as Plato and other Philosophers dreamed. Also that
there was no time before the world, neither shall there be any time, wherein
the world shall not be; and that the world is as durable, and lasts as long
as all times; all which we grant without fear; and yet it does not follow that
the world is eternal: For that is properly eternal, which never had
beginning, neither in time, nor with time, nor before time; but as for time it
self, it has a beginning and an end, as I shall show in the next place:
Therefore let us hate and abhor all Atheistical dreams of the worlds
eternity.

The second thing which I observe from this word Bereshith, in the beginning
(which signifies in this place the first being or moment Doctr. 2. T(...) had
(...) b^ginning.
of time) is this, That time it self is but an adjunct, or circumstance of
things created, and had a beginning, and shall have an end with the mutable and
moveable world. For proof of this we need seek no further but to the fifth
Verse, where it is said, The evening and the morning were the first day, that
is, time was produced by the Word of God, even the first day together with the
things therein created; and so it follows of all the days of the first week,
they are said to be made with the works created in them.

And indeed in reason it must needs be so; because time is nothing else but the
continuance of things created and the measure of the motions which are in the
created world, a day is the measure of the Suns course from East to West, and
round about to the East again: An hour is the time in which the Sun runs the
four and twentieth part of his days motion: A week is the space of seven
days, and a year the time while the Sun goes his course through the twelve
Signs of the Zodiac; and the whole time of the world consists of years
months and days. Now all these had a beginning, and have an end; yea, there
was no day till light and darkness were made and distinguished; no month nor
year till the Sun and the Moon were set in their course: therefore time had
a beginning, and is not eternal. There were some things before all times and
ages of the world, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 1. 2.

First, this serves to admonish us, to cast off all vain thoughts Use 1.
and imaginations of time going before the creation of the world. It is the
folly of many, when they read of the worlds creation but so many thousand
years ago, to dream of time before creation, and to question what God did in
that time? A witty old man did once answer this question (as Saint Austin
says) rather tauntingly then solidly, viz. That God in those times was making
an hell for such curious inquisitors: But the true answer is, there was no time
nor any thing to be done in time; but God was only in himself most blessed by
contemplation of himself in absolute eternity, in which there is, neither
before nor after, no beginning nor end: For where there was no day nor night,
nor haven to move, nor any thing to be measured by time, there could be no time
at all.

Secondly, this truth serves to make us see our own vanity, and Use 2. See thy
own wea^nesse.
the weakness of our own reason and understanding. Let a man of the strongest
brain and wit, and the deepest reach in the world, do what he can, and strive
and strain to the utmost, he shall not by hum^ne reason and capacity conceive,
how any thing can be without time. How God could be before the world, when
there was no time; or what eternity should be, but a long time without
beginning or end. And yet this is Gods truth, as my Text says, which cannot
lie, that time was not till the creation: Let us therefore here learn to see
our own weakness, and the short reach of our reason. Let us acknowledge, that
while we have our souls imprisoned in our mortal bodies, looking only
through the narrow grates of our outward senses, we shall never be able to see,
or to comprehend things spiritual and eternal so as they are. And let this
put us in mind to be humble here, and to rest in hope, that the eternity, and
the eternal joys of heaven are such, as neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor man's heart conceived: 1 Cor. 2. 9.
And let us labor to walk by faith, and not by sight, as the Apostle says; 2
Cor. 5. 7. So much for the Doctrines.

There be also two questions which here offer themselves to be discussed: The
first is, What time of the year the world was created, and which day and
month were the first of the world; without the knowledge of this we cannot
exactly tell how long it is since the world was created. The second is, How
long it is since that first beginning, wherein God created the heavens and the
earth: For Moses does carefully set them down until his time; and so also do
the succeeding Prophets, which shows, that this knowledge is not to be
neglected.

For the first question: Some hold, that the world was created in September, in
the time of the Autumnall equinoctial. Others, Quest. 1.
that it was created in the Spring time, and in March, when the day and night
are equal, and of one length in all the world. Both these opinions are
maintained by reasons and arguments produced out of Gods Word; but the reasons
which are brought to prove the latter opinion, I conceive to be more strong and
solid: and therefore I do incline to believe, that the world was created in
the Spring time, and not in Autumn; and that others The world began in the
Spring
may be better confirmed in this truth, I will propound the reasons on both
sides, and will answer the one, and confirm the other.

The maine Arguments which tend to prove, that the world was created in
September, are four especially: The first, because Argum. 1.
September was from the beginning observed and accounted for the first month
of the year, both by the Israelites and Forefathers, and also by the Egyptians
and other Nations: For Exodus 12. 2. it appears, that March for a special
reason was made the first month to the Israelites; because in that month they
came out of Egypt. And that till then both they and the Egyptians accounted
September the first month.

I answer, that the Egyptians did erroneously begin their year in Autumn; and
the Israelites living with them, did for civil Answ.
respects follow their account: And therefore, when they were to depart out of
Egypt, God did both reach and command them the right observation in Abib, or
March, Exodus 12. 2. and called them to the true ancient and original form of
beginning the year in the Vernall equinoctial, which is in Abib, that is,
March: Yea, the Caldeans and Persians, who were of better credit then the
Egyptians, did always from the beginning account March the first month of the
year: therefore this Argument is of no force.

Secondly, they argue, that September was the month, wherein Argum. 2.
the year of Rest, and the year of Jubilee did begin by Gods appointment, as
appears, Levit. 25. 9. for on the tenth day of that month, God commanded the
Israelites to sound the Trumpet of Jubilee in all the land, and so to begin
their year of Jubilee and Release: Therefore that is the true beginning from
the creation.

I answer to this two ways: First, that as the year of Rest was Answ.
not the first, but the seventh, and the last of the seven; and the year of
Jubilee was the next year after seven Sabbaths of years: So the Lord did still
follow the number of seven, and would have it begin in September; because it
was the seventh month, and not the first by the order of creation. Secondly,
the month of September, when all the fruit is taken from the ground, and men
begin to sow and plant for the next year, is the fittest time for to begin the
year of Rest, and of Jubilee, wherein every man was to re-enter into his land
which he had sold, as appears, Verse. 10, 11. and this was the cause of
beginning in September; not because it was the first month of the world, and
of the year, reckoned from the creation: but because it was the fittest for
men to give up the land empty to the owners, when they had gathered in the
corn and fruit, and cleared the ground: and so this Argument is of no force.

Thirdly, they argue, That the time wherein all things naturally Argum. 3.
come to prefection, is most likely to be the time, wherein God created the
world, and all things therein perfect in their kind, and that is Autumn and
September, as experience teaches: Therefore it is most likely to be the first
month from the creation.

This Argument is diverse ways defective: First, the state of the Answ.
world in the creation, was far different from that state of things which now
is ever since man's fall and corruption: Then all times were both Spring and
Harvest, and trees did both blossom and bear perfect fruit at all times of
the year: Therefore no certain Argument can arise from this ground. Secondly,
if any time be more perfect then another, and retain perfection from the
creation, it is most likely to be the Spring time; for in the Spring all things
begin to revive, and shoot forth of the earth, as they did in the creation:
then are the fields most fresh and green, and full of beautiful flowers, as in
the state of innocence. And as for Summer and Harvest, they do but ripen
things which the Spring has quickened and nourished, and hasten them to
corruption, and not to perfection, causing them to die and wither: Yea verily,
if the earth had not been cursed for man's sin, it would now bring forth in the
Spring not only flowers, and blossoms, and Spring fruits; but also all other
kinds of fruit: Therefore this is a weak Argument.

As for their fourth Argument, which is Cabalisticall, drawn Argum. 4.
from the Hebrew word (...), which signifies, in September; agreeing with
(...), which signifies, in the beginning, in the same letters, I have answered
it before, and showed that they differ in one letter, to wit ((...),) and
therefore it is but a fallacy. Answ.


But now for the beginning of the year naturally in the month of March, which
is called by the Hebrews Abib and Nisan, as being the month in which the
world was created, and that the world was created in the Vernall equinoctial,
when day and night were equal in all the world, diverse of the Ancients affirm
and hold, as Athanasius, Ambrose, Theodoret, Cyril, Damascene, Beda, and
others; and with them many judicious and learned Divines of later times do
concur, as Junius, Polanus, and others: Their reasons are very strong,
forcible, and convincing, which cannot be gainsaid.

First, they prove it out of the Scriptures, Genesis 8. 13. where that month is
called the first of the year, by account from the creation, Argum. 1.
wherein the waters were dried up from the earth; and it began to bring forth
fruit for Noah, and the creatures with him: so that in the next month there
was food for him and the creatures, and birds and beasts began to breed and
multiply in the earth. Now that could not be in September and October, when the
fruits and herbs begin to decay and wither. Certainly, Noah turned not out the
creatures against Winter to seek food from the earth; that was no time to breed
abundantly. It is March, wherein the earth begins to bring forth; and April,
the second month, is that wherein the creatures, coming out of the Arc,
might find grass, herbs, and other food; and Noah might sow and plant against
Summer and Harvest: Therefore undoubtedly March is the first month from the
creation.

Secondly, they prove it from Exodus 12. 2. where God recalls the Argum. 2.
Israelites from the Egyptian observation, to the old beginning of the year
from the creation; and to account Abib, or March, the first month, as the Text
shows.

Thirdly, the Spring time is every way fittest for the beginning Argum. 3.
of the world, and of the natural year: then things begin to flourish in all
the earth, as they did in the creation; then is the air most temperate and
healthful for the bodies of men, as it was in the creation; then day and night
are equal in all the world, and the days begin to grow longer then the night
in the country of Eden and Babylonia, which was the place of Paradise, where
Adam was created. But in September, days begin to shorten, and all herbs to
wither, and fruits to fall from the trees: Therefore March is the fittest
month for the time of the creation.

Fourthly, the Caldeans, Persians, and all cunning Astronomers Argum. 4.
did by their art and skill discern, and by tradition from the first fathers
were taught, that March was the first month of the year, and that in the
Spring time the world was created.

To these let me add one Argument more, drawn from the incarnation Argum. 5.
and passion of Christ: For it is most likely, that the month, in which God
appointed Christ to be incarnate by conception in the womb of the Virgin, and
also to suffer for the worlds redemption, was the month and season of the
year, in which the world was created: For so the time, in which God sent forth
his Son, made of a woman, and made under the Law, and to redeem them that were
under the Law, comes to be the fullness of time, as the Apostle calls it,
Galat. 4. 4. Now this was the month of March: for Christ being borne on the
shortest day of the year (as Saint Austen and the Ancients, who lived within a
August. in sermon. de natal. Dom.
few ages after Christ, by tradition had learned, and did teach) must needs be
conceived in March, nine months before, in the Vernall equinoctial. And in
the same month he suffered for our redemption; and rising from death,
triumphed over death, the Devil, and all the powers of darkness; even at the
time of the Passover (as the Gospel testifies) which feast was kept in the
first month Abib, Exodus 12. 2. and 13. 4. that is, in March, as all confess.
And so we see Gods performing of his promise in the fullness of time, was his
keeping of his word to a day, giving Christ to be conceived in the very day of
the year, wherein he was promised to our first parents, and to suffer for
Adams sin in the same day of the week, and of the month, in which Adam was
made, and marred by sin (as some of the learned Fathers have observed.) Even as
he delivered Israel out of Egypt, at the end of 430. years, on the self same
day, when the term of years was accomplished, Exodus 12. 41. Therefore I
conceive that the time of the creation, and of the fall of our first Parents,
and of the first promise of Christ, was in the same first month, in which he
was conceived, and also perfected man's redemption, that is, in Abib, the month
of March; and so he was sent forth in fullness of time, as the Apostle says.

The second question which arises from the word Beginning, is about the number
of years, which have been since the creation: Quest. 2.
For if there was a beginning of things, in which the world was created, as the
Text here shows; then there must be a certain number of years since that
beginning which number if we can find out, and prove from Scripture, it will
much confirm us in the truth of the creation, and of the whole History of Gods
Word. Now about this number of years there is much difference among the
learned: but the best computation is that which is grounded on those
testimonies of Scripture, which do most excellently chain together the holy
Chronicle; and by that computation the world was created 3960. years before
the death of Christ; and the day of Adams fall being upon the sixth day of the
week, even toward the evening of the same day, wherein he was created, was
that day 3960. years before the day of Christ's death, which also was on the
sixth day of the week, in the same month of the year. To confirm us in this
truth, we have most excellent testimonies of Scripture: First, the age of
Adam, when he begat Seth, counted together with the ages of the succeeding
fathers, before the birth of their succeeding sons, make up in all unto the
birth of Noah from Adams creation, 1056. years, Genesis 5. and from Noah's birth to
the Flood, is 600. years, that is in all, 1656. years, from the Creation to
the Flood.

Arphaxad the son of Shem, borne two years after the Flood, Genesis 11. 10. his
birth (as the ages of the Fathers from him to Terah there reckoned do show)
was before Terah's death 425. years. Now the two years between his birth and
the Flood, together with the said number of 425. being added to the years
before the Flood, make up from the creation to the death of Terah, 2083.
years. Immediately after Terah's death God called Abraham, and removed him out
of Charan, into the land of Canaan; but gave him no inheritance therein, but
only promised to give it to him, and his seed for a possession, Act. 7. 4, 5.
and that in his seed all the families of the earth should be blessed, Genesis 12.
1, 2, 3. and this promise was 430. years before the Law was given by Moses,
Galat. 3. 17. which was immediately after the departure of Israel out of Egypt,
that is, the fiftieth day after; when they and their fathers, from Abraham's
first peregrination in Canaan, had sojourned 430. years, Exodus 12. 40. And from
Isreal's coming out of Egypt, to the building of the Temple, in the fourth year
of Solomon's reign, is 480. years, 1 Kin: 6. 1. from thence, to the death of
Solomon, is 36. years. Then Israel departed from Judah, and continued 390.
years in their iniquities, Ezech. 4. 1, 2. to the destruction of Jerusalem,
and burning of the Temple, 19. years after the beginning of the 70. years
captivity; from the end of which captivity, to Christ's death, is seventy sevens
of years, Daniel 9. that is, 490. years, all which make 3960. years, from
the creation. Now from Christ's death, which was in the 33. year of his age, or
33. after his birth, it is in this present year 1623. the full number of 1590.
years, which being added to 3960. before Christ's death, make from the creation
5550. years.

Now this computation of years, together with the clearing of the former
question, may serve

First, to discover unto us diverse ways the admirable providence Use 1. Gods
providence to be noted and admired.
of God, in that he does so order all things, that the time of the incarnation
of Christ, the second Adam, should fall in the same month with the creation of
the first Adam: and the day of redemption from sin and death, should be the
same day of the week, and of the month, with the day of Adams falling into
sin, and bringing all mankind into bondage to hell and death. And that in the
holy Scriptures, which were written by holy men of God in several ages, the
true computation of times and years should be put upon record, and reserved
and kept safe through all ages until this day, in the midst of so many
dangers, and among so many alterations and changes which have happened in the
world. Surely, he who is so provident in ordering the circumstance of times,
and preserving the records of them, even his holy Oracles, when the Nation of
Jews, to whom they were committed in trust, is cast off, and scattered over
all the earth, will much more keep his promises, and fulfill all prophecies and
predictions, every one in the set time and season which he has appointed.

Secondly, this exact record of times, and of the very month of Use 2. Truth
of creation and redemption hereby demonstrated.
the creation and of the redemption, serves to confirm us in the verity and
truth of those things which are written concerning the beginning and creation
of the world, and the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ, coming in the
exact fullness of time to redeem the world, according to Gods promises; when
several witnesses or writers, who never conferred nor consulted one with
another, do agree in their relations, not only in the maine matters, but in
the circumstances of time also; no man can have any least pretense or color of
doubting. And thus do the writers of the holy Scriptures, who lived in
several ages; they exactly agree in the histories of creation and redemption,
even to the circumstances of times, the very days and months wherein they
were performed. And therefore let us firmly believe them, and rest on the truth
of them: for we have sure grounds of believing, but not any pretense or color
of doubting.

Thirdly, hereby it is made manifest; that the world being created in time, and
only so long ago as is before showed, was made Use 3. All made for us, and to
be used for God.
only for us, and for our benefit, who live under time, and not for the
eternal God, to add any good, or any blessedness to him, who was
all-sufficient and most blessed in himself from all eternity; and both could,
and would have made the world millions of years before, if it might have been
profitable to himself: Wherefore let us hereby be stirred up to use the world
as a gift, and as talents given to us by God, to be well employed, and study to
honor him by all worldly things created.

Fourthly, hereby we may justly be moved to admire the eternity of God, when we
see the whole time of the world to be but Use 4. Note and admire Gods eternity.
Psalm. 102. 25, 26.
5550. years, which are before him but as 5. days and an half (For a
thousand years with him are but as one day, 2 Pet. 3. 8.) Wherefore, as holy
David, when he compared Gods eternity with the temporary being of the heavens
and the earth, and their inclining to decay and changes, like a vesture and
wearing garment, did admire Gods infinite and eternal Majesty: So let us all
be after the same manner affected with reverence of God, and admiration of his
eternity, when we compare the ages of the world, even the longest of them, the
thousands of years since the creation, to be but as so many days with the
Lord, who lives and abides the same for ever.

The fourth thing in this Text is the object and effect of Gods 4.
first work of creation, to wit, the heavens and the earth.

First, the Heavens come to be considered, together with the creatures here
comprehended under that name; and that these things may more plainly appear to
our understanding, we must first search and sift out the true sense and
signification of the word (Heaven) in this Text, and then come to the
instructions which do thence naturally arise.

The name; by which it has pleased the Spirit of God in this Derivation of the
word signifying Heavens. 1.
place to call the Heavens, is in the Original Hebrew (...), Shamajim;
concerning the signification and Etymology whereof, the learned much differ
among themselves. Some make it a compound of (...), which signifies there, and
(...), which signifies waters; because above in the air (which is the lowest
and nearest heaven) and in the clouds, water is engendered, and in showers
distills from thence. Some compound it of (...), which is fire, and 2.
(...), waters; because the heavens seem to be made of both: the Sun, Moon, and
Stars resemble fire, and the rest of the heavens resemble calm and still
waters.

Some derive this name of (...), which signifies astonishment; 3.
because if a man do steadfastly behold and consider either the glory or the
wonderful height and compass of the heavens, they are things which will dazzle
his eyes, and make his heart astonished.

But the best derivation of the word, which is grounded upon 4.
the best reasons, is that which some late Writers have observed, to wit, that
it is derived of the simple Hebrew word (...), which signifies there, and is
never used, but when we speak of being in a place which is remote and distant
from us: For as the Hebrew word (...), here, signifies the place present; so
this word (...), there, signifies a place remote and distant from us, and the
being of things there, in that place. Now the heavens are the utmost and most
remote place from the earth, which is set in the middle, and about the center
of the round world, and upon which men do live in this world: Therefore this
derivation does agree very aptly to the heavens.

Secondly, of a place which is most excellent, we are wont to say, There,
there is the best being, and in a kind of vehement and affectionate speech, we
use to double the word. And heaven is the most excellent place; and therefore
the word (...), which is of the duall number, and signifies as much as There,
there, or there double, is most fitly derived of (...), there.

Thirdly, the heavens are divided most properly into two heavens, the highest
heavens, which is invisible; and the visible or lower heaven, which also
consists of two parts; the starry and the airie heavens: And all these are
divided into two equal parts to all men living on earth. The one is that which
we see in our Hemisphere, and within our Horizon from East to West, and from
North to South, above the earth. The other half is that which is hid from us
by the earth, and is seen by the Antipodes, that is, them who dwell on the
other side of the earth, directly opposite to us; and both these parts of the
heavens are equally remote and distant from the earth. Moreover, the heavens
do move about two Poles, the North and South Pole: and therefore in many
respects the name of the heavens, (...), is most fitly derived of (...),
brought into the form of the duall number.

Fourthly, this derivation of the name, and the signification of it, does fitly
agree to all things which are called by the name Heaven; and is verified in
them all, even the highest heaven, the starry heaven, and the superior regions
of the air; for they are all remote and distant from the earth, and are
divided every one into two equal Hemispheres, equally distant from the earth:
But in the highest heaven there is neither fire, nor water, nor any mutable
Element: and therefore the name (...), derived of (...), or (...), cannot agree
to it at all. And as for the superior regions of the air, they are not so
glorious, nor so high as to astonish us: and therefore (...), derived of (...),
cannot agree to them: wherefore the last is the best derivation.

The next thing after the derivation of the word, is the diversity Diversity
of its significations. 1
of significations, which we are to note in the next place; and withal, to
show in what sense it is here used in the Text.

First, this word is used, in a large sense, for that whole space from the
upper face of the earth and the sea, to the utmost height of the highest
heavens, which comprehends in it the highest, the starry, and the airie
heavens; thus the word Heaven is to be understood, Genesis 2. 1. and in all other
places, where the Spirit of God comprehends the whole world under these two
words, The heavens and the earth.

Secondly, it is used to signify more specially either the highest 2.
heaven, as Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Look down from heaven, the habitation of thy
holiness, which Saint Paul calls the third heaven, 2 Corin. 12. 2. Or the
starry heaven, as Genesis 22. I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven:
and Psalm. 19. 6. Or the airie regions. wherein birds fly, as Genesis 1. 26. where
mention is made of the fowls of heaven.

Thirdly, the word Heavens, by a Metonymie of the cause for 3. Four things
signified by Heavens. 1
the effect, and of the subject, is used in Scripture to signify four things:
First, God the possessour of the heavens, whose glorious Majesty does dwell in
the highest heaven, as Dan. 4. 26. where the heavens are said to reign, that
is, the God of heaven: And Luke 15. 18. I have sinned against heaven: and
Matthew. 21. 25. Was the baptism of John from heaven, or of men? Secondly, the
Angels and 2
blessed Spirits, which dwell in the highest heaven, as Job 15. 15. The heavens
are not clean in his sight: and Psalm. 89. 6. and 69. 35. where the heavens are
said to praise God, that is, the Angels and Saints. Thirdly, the Church
militant, which is a congregation of 3.
people written in heaven, begotten from above of heavenly seed, and whose
hope, reward, and triumph is in heaven, as Dan. 8. 10. the armies of the
faithful are called the host of heaven: And so in the Prophets and the
Revelation, Heaven signifies the true holy Church; and the Earth signifies
earthly men of the world. Fourthly, the clouds in the air, and in the face of
heaven, as 4.
Levit. 26. 19. I will make your heaven as iron, that is, the clouds; insomuch
that they shall yield no rain.

Now here in this Text is meant (as I have before touched) the highest heaven,
as it is distinct from the rude mass, without form, which is here called
Earth, which was the common matter of the starry and airie heavens, and of all
the visible world, as appears in the next Verses. And under this name here the
Angels, who were the host and inhabitants of the highest heavens, are
comprehended: For as the word Jerusalem is often used in the Prophets, to
signify the people and inhabitants, together with the city and place; so here
the word Heaven, signifies not the bare place and body of the highest heaven,
but the place, with all the host and inhabitants of it, the Angels. As for the
visible starry heavens, which are the light of the inferior world and the
airie heaven called the firmament, they can in no case be here understood: for
they were made out of the rude mass, without form, called Earth, and opposed
to heaven in my Text.

From the word thus expounded, I come to the instructions: For whereas some
doubt, whether there be any heaven besides the visible starry heaven; where
those heavens are, and whether they were created, this Text does clear the
doubt; and shows, that there is an heaven which far exceeds the heavens
which are seen, in all glory and excellency: For here Moses speaks of an
heaven created in the beginning, with or before the common mass, out of which
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the vis^ble heavens and world were made:
Yea, in that this heaven was created out of nothing, and had not a being given
it out of the rude mass, without form, out of which God made all the visible
world (as the Text here says) this does imply, that they have a more excellent
being, of another kind, far better then all that is seen, and above and
without the compass of the visible heavens; so that hence these Doctrines
arise: 1. That there are such heavens: 2. That this heaven is not God, but a
place created by God: 3. That it is above the visible heavens: 4. That it is
most large and ample; and yet not infinite, nor every where, as God is: 5. That
it is a place most excellent and glorious, free from corruption, excelling and
exceeding the natural knowledge, reach, and apprehension of men.

First, we here learn, That, besides the visible starry heavens, which were
made out of the first rude deformed earth, there are Doctr. 1.
heavens created out of nothing, in the first beginning of the creation: And
this is confirmed by those Scriptures, which speak expressly of the Heaven of
heavens, that is, an heaven besides these visible heavens* as Deuteronomy. 10. 14. 1
Kings 8. 27. Psalm. 68. 33. and 115. 16. Also by those Scriptures, which mention
an heaven, in which Gods glorious Majesty is said to dwell; and the holy
Angels, which cannot be the starry visible heavens, as Deuteronomy. 26. 15. 1 Kings 8.
30. and Mat. 18. 10. Yea, the ho^y Apostle puts all out of doubt, 2 Cor. 12. 2.
where he calls this the third heaven.

That this highest heaven is not God, but a place created by Doctr. 2.
God; for here it is said, that God created this heaven: Some thought that
there was no place above the Spheres of heaven; but that there God is all in
all, and that there all things are in God, and subsist in him. Their ground is
that speech of the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 15. that God shall be all in all But
that shows the contrary, that God is in all, not that all things are or
shall be, and subsist in God, as in a place. Again this shows not the place,
but the state of the blessed, that they shall immediately enjoy God without a
Mediator. Now, that the highest heaven is not God, diverse reasons show: First,
it is Gods throne, Isa. 66. 1 Deuteronomy. 26. 15. therefore not God himself.
Secondly, it cannot contain God; but he is infinite, and far without the
compass of it, 1 Kings 8. 27. Thi^dly, God is every where; but this heaven is
not so, it is only above, not in the visible world. Fourthly, it is such a
bodily substance, as can contain glorified bodies, as the body of Christ,
Enoch, and Eliah. It comprehends the visible heavens within the compass of it:
But God is a spirit.

That it is not God, but his creature, and his workmanship; and that he has
the disposing of it, as his creature, appears, Genesis 2. 1. Heb. 11. 10. Psalm.
115. 16.

That this heaven is above the visible heavens, diverse Scriptures Doctr. 3.
testify: For it is called Heaven above, where Jehovah is, Deuteronomy. 4. 39. Jos.
2. 11. that is, above all the visible world. Into this heaven our Savior is
said to be taken up on high, when he ascended, Luke 24. 51. Yea, he is said to
ascend up far above all the visible heavens, Ephesians. 4. 10.

Fourthly, that this heaven is a most ample and large place, may Doctr. 4.
easily be gathered and proved from this, That it was made distinct from the
earth, which was the matter of the whole visible world; and does subsist above,
and without the compass both of the mass, and of all things which were made
of it; and so comprehends them within the large compass of it. And our Savior
intimates so much, where he affirms, that in it are many mansions, John 14. 2,
3. Also the Psalmist, Psalm. 68. 5. where he calls this heaven (...), which
signifies fair, and large spacious plains: And yet it is not infinite, nor
every where; for God fills it and the earth also, and it is not able to
contain him, 1 Kings 8. 27.

The fifth instruction is, That the highest heaven is a place most glorious and
excellent, free from all corruption, and full of glorious Doctr. 5.
light, far surpassing our frail imagination, and the reach of man's natural
understanding. The very signification of the name shows that it is far
remote from our sight, conceit, and apprehension. And that rule in Philosophy
proves, that it is free from alteration and corruption, to wit, That those
things only are changeable, and may be corrupted, and turned into their first
matter, which are made of a common matter, capable of diverse forms. But things
which have no part of any such matter in them, are incorruptible, and
unchangeable, free from alterations incident to inferior things. Now such are
these heavens discovered to be in my Text: For they were made absolutely of
nothing, with, or before the first common matter of the visible world: Yea, in
the next words the Spirit of God does distinguish the rude mass from these
heavens, by this, that it was full of darkness, and without form, and void;
which implies, that these heavens were far different, that is, full of
beauty, form, and Excellency of heaven.
light. And other Scriptures fully confirm this: First, by the names, by which
this heaven is called, and by the excellent things which are spoken of it; for
it is called the Heaven of heavens, that is, the heaven far above all heavens
in glory and excellency, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. and 1 Kings 8. 27. and Psalm. 68. 34. The
Heaven of heavens everlasting, so much the Hebrew word (...), does intimate.
And Saint Paul, who was rapt up into this heaven, was so astonished with the
glory of it, that he knew not whether he was in the body or out of the body:
there he heard words, which it was not lawful to utter; and the sight thereof
was such a cause of glorying, that he was afterward in danger thereby to be
too much exalted, and had need to be buffetted by the Angel of Satan for his
humiliation, to keep him from excessive boasting, 2 Cor. 12. And the same
Apostle calls the inheritance therein reserved for the elect, the inheritance
of the Saints in light, Colos. 1. 12. and he says of God, who dwells there by
his glory, that he dwells in light, which none can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
which testimonies, with many other which might be cited, fully prove the glory
and excellency of this heaven. Besides, we have many Arguments to this purpose.

The first is drawn from the proper efficient cause of this heaven: Reason 1.
For it is most certain, that the place and city which has God only for the
builder and maker of it; and in the building whereof God has showed such
admirable divine wisdom, that it more specially is called his work and
building, must needs be most excellent and glorious. Now such is the highest
heaven, it is called the city, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10.
that is, the city which God builded alone as his masterpiece, for his own
purpose, to show therein his glorious wisdom and art, as the word (...) there
used does signify. Yea, it is said to have foundations, that is, to be so
firmly built, that it can never fail, but stand steadfast for ever, world
without end: Therefore it is a most glorious place.

A second Argument is drawn from the proper inhabitants of Reason 2.
these heavens: For in all reason, and by the course of nature, that is the
best place which falls to the share, and is allotted to the best inhabitants,
by the will and appointment of him, who is the wisest of all, and does order
all things in wisdom and equity. Now the highest heavens are allotted by God
to the best inhabitants: First, he has chosen them to be his own habitation,
wherein he delights to dwell, not only by his essential presence and power,
as he is in all other places, but also by his visible glory, holiness, and
unspeakable majesty. So the Scriptures testify, Deuteronomy. 26. 15. where these
heavens are called, the habitation of his holiness. And Psalm. 113. 5. the high
dwelling, in which God is so high above all. And Isa. 57. 15. and 63. 15. the
high and holy place, the habitation of Gods holiness and glory; and even
eternity, which shall never decay. Secondly, God has appointed this place to
be the habitation of his holy Angels, which kept their standing, in which he
will have them to dwell, and to behold his glorious face continually, as our
Savior says, Matthew. 18. 10. and so much is intimated Luke 2. 13. where Angels
are called the heavenly host. The third sort of inhabitants, to whom God has
allotted these heavens, is the glorified company of his Saints, with Christ
their head, in whom they are chosen, and brought to salvation. Though Adam was
made after Gods image, yet, by creation, and in the state of natural
uprightness, he was not capable, nor worthy of heavenly glory; that is the
proper purchase of Christ for his elect, and it is the gift of God in Jesus
Christ, which he gives only to them who are made in Christ the first fruits of
his creatures, sons and heirs of God. Our Savior testifies so much, Joh. 14.
3. where he says, that he prepares a place for his faithful in that house of
God: And the holy Apostle, Heb. 9. where he says, that Christ only opened the
way into this Holy of holies; and that none can enter thereinto but by him the
way, and the door. And Ephesians. 1. 3. he says, that God blesses us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. And 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. we are
said to be begotten to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, to the inheritance incorruptable, and undesiled, that never fades,
reserved in heaven for us: wherefore it is manifest by the excellency of the
inhabitants, being none but God himself, and the elect Angels and Saints,
which are most near and dear to God, that this Heaven is a place most
glorious and excellent.

A third Argument may be drawn from the situation of it: For the highest place
is ever the best by the law and course of nature, Reason 3.
as our senses do teach, and we see manifestly in all known parts of the
world; and by faith we ought to believe, that it is so in places beyond our
sight, especially because the Spirit of God in the Scriptures extolls the
highest places, Psalm. 113. 5. and Isaiah 57. 15. Now the highest of all places
is the third heaven in situation: For Christ ascending up thither, there to
remain, and to make intercession for us, Act. 3. 21. and Heb. 9. 24. is said
to ascend far above all other heavens, and those heavens are called (...),
the high places, Psalm. 148. 1. and (...), the highest places, Ephesians. 4. 8. and
Heb. 1. 3. Therefore they are the most excellent and glorious places.

The fourth reason is drawn from the excellent things, which are there laid up
in store for the Saints: For the wisdom of God requires, Reason 4.
that he should store up the best treasures and things in the best place; and
undoubtedly that place is the best, where God lays up in store such treasures.
Now in the highest heaven are the best treasures, which neither rust nor moth
can corrupt, nor thieves touch with unjust hands, Matthew. 6. 20. there is the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Colos. 1. 12. and the incorruptible and
undefiled, 1 Pet. 13. There God has prepared for them that love him such
things as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor man's heart conceived, 1
Corin. 2. That is the place of Gods right hand, and of his presence, where is
fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 6. Therefore it is the best
place of all.

Fifthly, that place from whence every supernatural good and perfect Reason 5.
gift does come, must necessarily be the most excellent: and such a place is
the highest heaven. Christ, the second Adam, the fountain of all blessings, is
said to be from heaven, heavenly, 1 Corinthians. 15. and to be the bread of life,
which came down from heaven, to give life to the world, John 5. The calling of
men to the participation of all excellent graces, is called the heavenly
calling, Hebr. 3. 1. The gift of supernatural grace is called the heavenly
gift, Heb. 6. 4. The substantial things shadowed out under legal types, are
called heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5. and the new Jerusalem, the most glorious
Church, is called the heavenly Jerusalem, Hebr. 12. 22. and is said to come
down from heaven, Revel. 21. In a word, every good and perfect gift is said to
come down from above, from the father of lights, that is, from heaven, Jam. 1.
17. Therefore this heaven must needs be a most excellent place.

Sixthly, the Spirit of God in the Scriptures does describe and Reason 6.
set forth this Heaven, by all the things which are, or have been most
excellent in this world, and does make them but types and shadows of it: as
first, by the earthly Paradise, in which God put Adam in the state of
innocence, which was the sweetest and most excellent place that ever was known
in the world, 2 Cor. 12. 4. by the hill of Zion, which was most beautiful for
situation, and the joy of the whole earth, Heb. 12. 22. By Jerusalem, the most
glorious city of all the world, the place which God chose to put his Name
there, Gal. 4. 26. and by the Temple of Jerusalem, the most glorious Sanctuary
of God; and the Holy of holies, Psalm. 11. 4. and 18. 7. Habak. 2. 20. Heb. 9.
12. and 10. 9. Therefore this Heaven is most excellent.

Lastly, that this Heaven is a place of wonderful light and glory, and a work
of God, which shall never be changed or perish, but stand and endure for ever;
it appears by the light which has shined from thence, and by the eternity of
the things which God has annexed to it. The light which shined from thence on
Saint Paul at midday, did surpass the brightness of the Sun, Act. 26. 13.
And the house which the faithful have there prepared for them, is said to be
eternal in the heavens, 2 Corin. 5. 1. And the inheritance there reserved is
said to be immortal, 1 Pet. 1. 3. and the life which the elect shall live
there, is called life eternal: Therefore it is a most blessed place.

Now, though some Scriptures seem to speak to the contrary, that the heavens
shall perish, as Psalm. 102. 26. and that heaven, as Object.
well as earth, shall pass away, Matthew. 24. 35. and the heavens shall pass
away with a noise, 2 Pet. 3. 10. and be burnt with fire:

Yet the truth is, they speak not of the highest heaven, which Answ.
was with the Angels created immediately out of nothing; but of the visible
fiery and starry heavens, which were created out of the same rude mass, the
common matter of the air, water, and earth: They may be burnt, and set on
fire, and pass away; but the highest heaven, being not of the same common
matter, no fire can take hold of it.

Now these instructions concerning this first work of God, the Use 1. To
confute the otherwise minded.
highest heavens, serve for excellent use: First, to discover the madness and
folly of all them, who either deny the creation of these heavens, as Cajetan,
Augustinus, Steuchus, and other great Popish Writers have done; or do hold
this heaven to be nothing else but God, or his glorious Majesty, and light
shining forth to his creatures. These Doctrines prove the contrary, and declare
all such profane conceits to be doting dreams, ever to be abhorred.

Secondly, they show the admirable free bounty and love of God toward his
elect, and his eternal fatherly providence, in Use 2. Admire the bounty of God
to his chosen.
that he has not only provided such an excellent habitation for them, wherein
they may live most happy and blessed for ever; but also made it the first of
all his creatures and works. If the Lord had first made us, and tried our
obedience how we would serve him, before he had made and furnished the highest
heaven, the house of glory; men might have imagined, that by their own doings
they had procured it: But lo, God has cut off all such vain conceits, in that
he made this first, and by so doing, shows that it is his love and free
bounty, not our merit; it was his providence, not our purchase or care for our
selves: Let us therefore give him the glory and praise of a God wonderful in
goodness, free grace, and providence; even from the first foundation of the
world, creating a place of rest and glory for us.

Thirdly, in that the highest heaven is here discovered to be so Use 3. Be
ashamed of thy earthly mindedness.
high and excellent a place, so full of glory and light, and the proper country
of the Saints chosen in Christ; this ought, as to reprove us, and make us
ashamed of our immoderate love and affection to worldly things, and of our
grovelling on the ground, like brute beasts, and cleaving to the earth, like
moles and earth-wormes, and of our negligence in inquiring after heaven, and
meditating on this heavenly country: so also to stir us up to the contrary,
and to And prepare for heaven.
direct us how to prepare our selves for it, by looking and minding high
things, and casting off all earthly clogges, and works of darkness, and all
uncleanness and filthiness, and by putting on all holiness, and the armor
of light. If we were to go into another country, there to spend all our days,
we would be careful to enquire after, and learn the nature, qualities,
fashions, and language of the country: And so let us do concerning our
heavenly country and city, which is above. Let us enquire after heavenly
things, fashion our selves to it; and because there is our inheritance and our
treasures, let there our hearts be also.

Fourthly, seeing heaven is so high, and so excellent and glorious Use 4. Be
thankful for this good provision.
a place and habitation, that man in innocence was neither capable, nor worthy
of it, this serves to magnify in our eyes the infinite goodness and admirable
bounty of God, who has given Christ to purchase for us, being corrupted, and
become sinners by Adams fall, a more excellent place, state, and condition,
then did belong to us in our best natural being in the state of pure nature.
This also magnifies the virtue and power of the grace of Christ, which has
lifted us up from the valley of darkness, and of the shadow of death; and has
advanced us to be heirs of a better inheritance then the earthly Paradise,
even to live and reign with God in his heavenly Kingdom.

Fifthly, here is matter of singular comfort, and of patience, Use 5. Comfort
in all afflictions.
and hope in all the afflictions, which can befall us here on earth in this
vale of misery; when men labor, and strive, and fight for an earthly crown,
and in hope of a glorious victory and triumph, no danger of death does daunt or
dismay them, no pain and grief of wounds does discourage them; but the crown
of glory, which we wrestle for, it is incorruptible, and never fades: and the
Kingdom for which we suffer, is an heavenly Kingdom, and an inheritance
reserved in the highest heavens, which is a place more glorious and excellent
then any tongue can express, or heart of man conceive: And therefore let us be
steadfast and unmovable, never daunted with any danger, nor dismayed with any
fear, but comfort our selves, and possess our souls in patience, knowing and
counting, that all the sufferings of this life are not worthy of Romans 8. 18.
the glory which shall be revealed, and our momentany passions shall bring a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory in heaven, 2 Cor. 4, 17.
where a durable substance is stored up for us.

Let us hence learn to loath and hate also that erroneous opinion Use 6.
Against the Chiliasts.
which some hold, to wit, that the highest heaven is not ordained to be the
habitation of the Saints after the last judgment; but that Christ shall reign
with them here on earth in his bodily presence: a fond conceit, contrary to the
express Word of God, utterly razed by the former Doctrine.

CHAP. IV.
Of the creation of Angels. Their names. They had a beginning: Reasons and
Uses. They were all created by the one true God: with Uses. They were made in
the beginning of the world. They are Gods first and best creatures: with the
Use. They were made in heaven, and to inhabit heaven: Reasons and Uses. Seven
Corollaries or Conclusions concerning the Angels.

I Proceed in the next place to the inhabitants or host of the highest heavens,
the Angels, which were by the same Word of God in the beginning created
together with them; as appears, Chapt. 2. 1. And howbeit they are not here
expressly named by Moses; yet they are necessarily included in this word, (...)
Angels comprehended in the name, Heavens. 1.
(...), the heavens, as may easily be proved, and made manifest by three
reasons: First, the Article (...), is demonstrative, and shows that there is
an Emphasis in this word; and the particle (...), consisting of the first, and
last letter of the Alphabet, is of general comprehension, and shows, that by
these special and most glorious heavens, he means all whatsoever was created
with them, and whatsoever was in the creation contained in them, even all the
glorious Angels. Secondly, it is a common and usual 2.
thing in the Scriptures, for the Spirit of God, to signify by the name of the
place, both the place and the inhabitants: as for example, Psalm. 147. 12. and
Jerem. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart. And Matthew. 23. 37. Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets. In these places, by Jerusalem is meant
not the city only, but also the inhabitants. And so the name (...), the
heavens, is used to signify the Angels which were the created inhabitants of
heaven, Job 15. 15. where it is said, The heavens are not pure in his sight,
that is, the Angels, because many of them rebelled, and lost their habitation,
and were stained with sin. And Psalm. 89. 6. And the heavens shall declare thy
wonders, O Lord, that is, the heavenly host: Therefore by analogy of Scripture,
the Angels may here be understood. Thirdly, what is here meant by 3.
the heavens, Moses himself shows, Chapt. 2. 1. namely, the heavens and the
host of them, that is, the Angels, for they are the host of the highest heaven,
and so are called, Luke 2. 13. Therefore undoubtedly the Angels are included in
the word Heavens.

So then the creation of the Angels coming now the next in order to be handled,
I will seek no further for a Text (though there be some more plain and
express) but will ground all my Doctrines, concerning the creation and nature
of Angels, on this word, taken in that sense which I have here proved; which
offers to our consideration five maine and principal points of instruction,
unto which all other Doctrines may be reduced, which concern their nature and
creation, and may be as branches comprehended under them.

First, we here learn, that Angels had a beginning, and were not Points
concerning them.
from all eternity. Secondly, that God created them, and that they were made by
that one God and three persons, here called Elohim. Thirdly, that they were
created in the beginning, as the word Bereshith, taken in the most strict
sense, signifies, the first moment of time. Fourthly, that they were created
by the first simple act of absolute creation, that is, they were made out of
nothing, most perfect and glorious creatures, in an instant. Fifthly, that they
were made in and with the highest heavens, and by the law of creation made to
inhabit them, as the proper place of their natural habitation. These are the
maine and principal points of Doctrine, which immediately flow from the words.
And these, especially the last of them, does offer to our consideration diverse
other particular questions, and points of instruction to be handled. As first,
seeing they were created in and with the highest heavens, to be the proper
inhabitants of them; therefore they are of an heavenly nature, even pure,
excellent, and glorious spirits, such as the nature of the place requires, to
be suitable inhabitants. And here an occasion is offered to seek out a true
description of Angels, and to enquire after their wisdom, power, and such like
properties, wherein they excel, and are like unto God the Creator, bearing
his image. Secondly, hereby are offered to us these points to be handled, and
these questions to be discussed, viz. That the Angels are of a finite nature,
limited to their places: Also, whether they are circumscribed, and measured by
the place in which they are, or rather definitively in it. And whether, and how
they move from place to place, and such like.

Thirdly, the most high and large heavens, compassing about the whole visible
world, in and with which they were created, to be the host of them; do import,
that the Angels were created many in number, according to the largeness of the
place, and that they are innumerable, more then man's frail reason can
comprehend.

Fourthly, the highest heaven, being their natural place, in which they were
created, Hence a question arises, concerning a being in other places; How they
come to be out of heaven, their natural place, and some of them quite banished
out of heaven for ever. And here their mutability and fall comes to be handled;
and the distinction of them into good and evil Angels. Thus we see in brief
into what a broad field this short Text does lead us, and what large scope it
gives us to speak of the Angelical nature, and the heavenly spirits, the
first and chiefest of the creatures of God.

That we may better understand these Doctrines, I will first consider the name
of Angels, what it signifies, and how we are to take it in this place.

The name, Angel, comes of the Greek name (...), which Of their names.
signifies a messenger, sent forth from some superior person, or state, to
deliver a message, and to declare the mind of him or them that sent him. The
Hebrew name, (...), which is the name of an Angel in the Old Testament,
signifies also a messenger; but yet in a more full and large sense: For it
signifies such a messenger, as does not only deliver and declare a message by
word of mouth, but also does act and execute indeed the will of him that sent
him, and does perform his work enjoined, as a faithful minister and servant.
And hence it is, that the Hebrew word, (...), which is derived of it, and is
used for the office and work of an Angel, signifies in general any thing
which serves for the use and ministry of man. And as the signification,
according to the Etymology, is general and large; so the word is used in the
Scriptures, to signify any messenger or minister sent forth upon a message, or
some employment, either from God or men. Jacobs messengers which he sent unto
Esau, Genes. 32. 3. to work his peace are called by the name. (...), Angels.
And Number. 20. 14. the messengers which Moses sent from Kadesh unto the King of
Edom, are so called, and in Greek translated (...). But when Gods messengers
are thereby signified, it has the name Jehovah, or (...), most commonly added
to it.

As for the first signification, we let it pass, as a stranger in this place,
where we are to discourse of heavenly Angels; and do take it in the second
signification, for the Angels of the Lord. And being so taken, it is still
doubtful, till it be more particularly distinguished: For in this sense it
signifies three sorts of Angels, as the learned have well observed.

First of all it signifies, that chief and principal messenger and
ambassador of God, his Son Jesus Christ, who was sent forth as God, in the
form and shape of an Angel and Messenger to the fathers before his
incarnation: And as man, in ^u^nesse of time by incarnation, and assuming of
man's nature into his person: For, Genesis 48. 16. by the Angel which delivered
Jacob, and which he prays, may bless the sons of Joseph, is meant the Lord
Christ. And in all places, where the Angel which appeared, is called Jehovah,
or was worshipped, God the Son is meant, as Exodus 3. and Zach. 3. there by the
Angel Christ is meant, appearing either like an Angel, or in the shape of a
man, to fore-shew his incarnation. So likewise, where we read of the Angel of
Gods presence or face, as Isa. 63. 9. Or of the Angel of the Covenant, as
Malac. 3. 1. Or of the Archangell, as 1 These. 4. 16. Jud. 9. Christ is meant.

Secondly, this word is used to signify men, by divine inspiration called, and
sent from God upon some special message, especially the message of salvation,
as Job 33. 23. Judge. 2. 1. Malac. 2. 1. and 3. 1. and Revel. 2. and 3.

Thirdly, this word is most frequently and commonly used, to signify the
heavenly spirits created by God, to stand about his Throne in heaven, to behold
his face continually; because they are, as by nature fit, so by office ready to
be sent on his message, and to do his will, as Genesis 19. 1. Psalm. 103. 20.
Matthew. 18. 10. In this sense we are to take the word in this discourse of the
creation of Angels: For though Christ be the Angel of God, and the great
messenger of salvation; and Gods ministers, as they are Gods ambassadors, sent
by him, are Angels of the Lord: yet they are not Angelical spirits, created in
the first beginning; they are only Angels by office and calling, not by nature
in the creation. Only the heavenly spirits, whom God has made at the first
fit to minister, and has since in Christ appointed to be ministering spirits
for the good of them, who are chosen to be heirs of salvation in Christ; they
are Angels both by nature and office. And they are the proper subject of our
present discourse. I proceed to the Doctrines, which I will prosecute in order,
as they arise out of this Text.

First, seeing the Angels are included in this word, the heaven; Doctr. 1.
Angels had a beginning.
hence we may learn, that as the heavens, so the Angels, the host of heaven,
had their beginning with the highest heaven, and were not in being from all
eternity; which point is farther confirmed by all such Scriptures, as attribute
a beginning to all things, and tell us that they are, and subsist not of
themselves, but from God, as Romans 11. 36. where the Apostle says, that of God,
and through him, and to him are all things: and 1 Cor. 8. 6. But to us there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we for him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things. And Revel. 4. 11. and 10. 6. thou Lord
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. And
that God, who lives for ever, created heaven, and the things that therein are.
And that in this universality of things created, the Angels are comprehended,
the Apostle shows most plainly, Colos. 1. 16. where he affirms, that all
kinds of things visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions,
or principalities, or powers, all were created by him, and for him. But if any
shall cavil and say, that though they are of God, and he is the cause and
creator of them; yet it does not necessarily follow, that they were created in
the beginning with the heavens, but from eternity, and as co-eternall effects
have their being from God. The next words which follow will cut off this
objection, which affirm, that Christ is before all things, and by him all
things consist, Verse 17. and therefore they had a beginning after Christ, and
were not co-eternall with him.

Reason also confirms this, drawn from the fall of a great Reason 1.
multitude of the Angels: For things eternal, which were, and had their being
from eternity, without beginning, and before all times, they cannot fall in
time, nor be changed, but abide the same for ever: But a great multitude of the
Angels did fall. And the Devil was once one of the most glorious among them,
and he with many others, who left their habitation, are reserved in chains to
the last judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and Jud. 6. Therefore they are but creatures,
made in the beginning.

Secondly, though Angels are not circumscribed, and measured Reason 2.
by a bodily space or dimension; yet they are definitively in place: and where
there is no place, there can be no Angel, as I shall show hereafter. Now
before the creation of the heavens, there was no place at all wherein Angels
might be, abide and subsist: Therefore before the heavens they were not, but
were created with them.

But Angels are called Jehovah, as that Angel which spoke to Obj^ct. 1.
Agar, and promised to multiply her seed, Genes. 16. 13. and the Angel, which
appeared to Moses in the bush, Exodus 3. 4. and the Angel which rebuked Satan,
Zach. 3. 1. And Jehovah is without beginning.

The Angel mentioned in those places was Christ the Son of God, the Angel
of the Covenant, and so was Jehovah, indeed, the Ansir.
creator of Angels; the words of the several Texts show so much: For that
Angel says, I will multiply thy seed: and I am the God of Abraham: Therefore
this Objection is of no force.

Angels are called the sons of God Job 1. 6. and 38. 7. Therefore they are of
Gods nature and substance, begotten from all eternity; Object. 2.
not created with the heavens.

Every son of God is not a natural son, begotten from all eternity; for men
are also called sons of God by creation, regeneration, Answ.
and adoption; and yet are not natural, and co-eternall sons of God. And so
Angels are sons: First by creation, in respect of the special image of God, in
which they were made, and to which they are conformable. Also the good Angels
are sons by adoption unto God in Christ their head. But none of them all is the
Son of God by nature, as the Apostle testifies, Heb. 1. 4, 5. that is proper
to Christ alone; he only is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the
express image of his person: and he only is called the firstborn and the
only begotten Son of God, John 1. 14, 18. Therefore this Objection is of as
little force as the other.

This point serves to show, that absolute eternity, without beginning, Use 1.
is the proper attribute of God; and to communicate it to any other, by
holding, that any other besides the one only true God is eternal, is no less
then a sacrilegious robbery, and taking from God the honor due to him: For
seeing Angels are all created in the beginning, when the heavens were made, and
are not from all eternity; much less may eternity be attributed to any other,
besides the true God.

Secondly, here we see the gross error of Papists, who worship Angels, and
pray unto them. As also their foul mistaking Use 2. Angels not to be
worshipped.
and wresting of some Scriptures, and some examples of the Patriarchs, as
Abraham, Jacob, and Moses, who did worship the Angels which appeared to them,
and spoke unto them. For these were not diverse Angels, but the great Angel of
the Covenant, Christ the Son of God appearing in the form of an Angel, who,
as he is Jehovah, the true God; so he is called by them who prayed to him, and
is worthy to be worshipped and prayed to: but not any of the Angels, which are
but creatures, and not Jehovah, can be worthy of this honor which God requires
as proper to himself.

The second Doctrine hence flowing is, That all the Angels Doctr. 2. Angels all
created by God.
were created by that one God, and three persons, here called Elohim; and that
the Son, together with the Father and the Spirit, is the Lord the Creator of
them: which truth is confirmed also by diverse Scriptures, as John 1. 3. where
by the Word, the eternal Son, all things are said to be made, and nothing
without him. And Colos. 1. 16. all things in heaven and in earth, whether they
be thrones, or dominions, principalities, or powers, all are said to be created
by him. To which we may add those places, Psalm. 104. 4. Revelat. 4. 11. and
10. 6. where all things in heaven and earth, and by name, the Angels are said
to be made by God.

Which point may comfort us with assurance, that Christ is Use 1. Christ is
Lord of the Angels.
absolute Lord of the Angels: and as he has a love to us, and a will to help,
and assist us; so he has the Angels, which excel in strength, at his command,
always ready pressed to do his will, and to execute his word for our good. The
best ground of Lordship and Dominion, which any can have over any things, is
the creating and making of them: For it is good reason, that none should have
more power over a thing, then he who made and formed it by his own hand and
skill, and gave the whole being to it. And this the Scriptures show, where they
attribute great power and lordship to the potter over the clay, which he
forms, and the vessel which he makes of it, Isa. 45. 9. Jerem 18. 6. Romans 9.
Now this the Lord Christ our Savior has over the Angels, as he is their
Creator, in an high measure; for he made them out of nothing by his own
power: And therefore just it is, that all Angels, Principalities, and Powers
should ever be subject to him; and that they should not only worship him, Heb.
1. 6. but also should be his ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for the
good of them, who are heirs of salvation in Christ. In this assurance let us
solace our selves, and be of comfort, knowing that the Angels in heaven are
ministers for us, when we are Christ's little ones, Mat. 18.
and they behold the face of our heavenly Father. And let us in this hope
harden our faces, and stand with courage before all wicked violent enemies and
persecutours. And as we are here assured, that the Angels being created by the
Lord Christ, and having him for their head, adding light and holiness unto
them; must needs love us as fellow creatures and members under the same head,
and be ready and willing to help us when God sends them: so we are here
admonished to love them as our fellow servants, under one and the same Lord,
and as creatures made in the same image, but more excellent, and by one and the
same hand, rejoicing in heaven at our conversion, and turning unto God by
repentance.

Here also we are admonished, that we are not to dream or imagine, Use 2.
that Christ took the nature of Angels on him, though he be called the Angel
of the Covenant, and of Gods presence, and the Mal. 3. 1.
Archangell, that is, the Prince of Angels; for an Angel he is called in
respect of his office, but by nature he is no Angel, but as different from
Angels, as the Creator and Lord differs from the creature, who is by him
created of nothing, and the servant ministering to him.

The third point of instruction is, That the Angels were created Doctr. 3.
Angels made in the beginning of the creation.
in the beginning of the world, in the first moment of time, by Gods first act
of creation. This is confirmed, Job 38. 7. where Angels are called the sons of
God, to show, that he is their father by creation; and also the stars of the
morning, to show, that they were created in the first moment or morning of the
creation, with the first light, the highest heavens; and are said to sing
together, and to lift up their voice, when God laid the first cornerstone and
foundation of the earth; which necessarily implies, that then they were already
made, and had a being given before, even with the heavens. Also Psalm. 104. 4.
where God is first said to make his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flaming
fire; and then to lay the foundations of the earth, that is, of the inferior
visible world.

This serves to show, that Angels and their actions are not so Use.
properly measured by time, as the actions of men, and other inferior
creatures: but as they were created in the first beginning, with the first
moment of time; so they can remove their presence into places far distant in a
moment, without time, and do things quickly in an instant, and are swift
messengers.

Fourthly, in that the Angels are here included in the word Doctr. 4. Angels
are first and best creatures.
Heavens, and are said to be created with them in the beginning; Hence we may
learn, That the Angels are Gods first creatures, made perfect out of nothing,
by the first act of simple and absolute creation. For proof of this we need no
further argument but those Scriptures which affirm, that God made his Angels
Spirits, that is, spiritual substances, which are the most perfect of
creatures, and come nearest in nature to God, who is a spirit, as Psalm. 104. 4.
and Hebr. 1. 7. If they had been created out of any matter made before, then
they must have been made out of the rude mass, without form, called earth:
For all things which were created not by absolute and simple creation, but out
of some thing made before, were created out of the rude mass, the earth; but
Angels were not made out of it: for it is the common matter of the visible and
inferior world; but Angels are invisible, and were created to be inhabitants
of the highest invisible heavens: therefore they must needs be the first of
Gods creatures made perfect, as the invisible heavens were, of nothing, by the
first act of simple and absolute creation.

This discovers to us the excellency of the Angelical nature, that Use.
Excellency of the Angels.
the Angels are Gods masterpiece, his first and most perfect work in all the
creation. The rude mass, without form, called earth, was made out of nothing,
imperfect, void, and full of darkness, and was no perfect creature; but the
matter of the visible inferior mutable world, and all the creatures therein.
The highest heavens were also made perfect out of nothing, to be the place of
the Angels, the heavenly Spirits; but yet the Angels must be more excellent
then they by nature, because they were made to serve for the use of Angels,
even to be the place of their habitation. And yet the Angels, those excellent
and chiefest of all creatures, are in Christ become our brethren and
fellow servants; yea, they are after a sort made our servants and ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation:
Wherefore, as we are by this doctrine stirred up to contemplate with admiration
upon the excellency of the Angelical nature; and to wonder at Gods bounty to
us frail men, inferior earthly creatures, in honoring us so far, as give
his glorious Angels to minister for us: So also we are provoked to magnify,
and extol the infinite excellency of the merits and mediation of the Lord
Christ our Redeemer and Savior, who procured and purchased this honor and
dignity for us, that the blessed Angels should minister for our good, who of
our selves, and by our sins, deserved to be slaves of the Devil, and evil
Angels: Wherefore, as Angels grudge not to minister for us; so let not us
grudge, but rejoice to minister for the poorest of the Saints, and the little
ones of Christ's flock, our brethren.

The fifth point of Doctrine is, That the Angels were created in and with the
highest heavens; and by creation were made to inhabit Doctr. 5. Angels made in
heaven, and to inhabit heaven.
those heavens, as the natural and proper place of their being and habitation.
This Doctrine is confirmed, first by the express words of Moses himself, in
the first words of the next Chapter, viz. Genesis 2. 1. Thus the heavens and the
earth were finished, and all the host of them. In which words he plainly
affirms, That not only the heavens and the earth, but also all the host of
them were thus created and perfectly finished, that is, in that order and manner
as he has before related in my Text, and the rest of this first Chapter. Now
in this Chapter we have not one word which can be understood of the creation of
the host of the highest heaven, that is, the Angels, but only these words of
my Text, which affirm, that in the beginning, that is, in the first moment,
when God began to give being to his first creatures, he created the heavens;
that is, the highest heavens distinct from the earth, which was the common
matter of all the visible world; and with those heavens the host of them, that
is, the Angels, which are the host and inhabitants of them. For it is an usual
thing in the Scriptures, to signify by the name of a place the proper
inhabitants of the place, together with the place it self, as I have before
showed by diverse examples. Yea, the word heavens is used to signify the
Angels, as I have showed from Job 15. 15. Therefore it is a thing most clear and
manifest, that the Angels were created together with the highest heavens, as
the host and natural inhabitants of them; and those heavens, by the law of
creation, are the natural and proper place of their being and habitation.
Secondly, the Scriptures fully prove this point, which call the Angels, the
Angels of heaven; as Matthew 24. 36. and Galat. 1. 8. and the heavenly host, as
Luke 2. 13. and name the Angels among the hosts of the Lord, which from the
heavens, and in the heights sing Halleluiah and praise to him, as Psalm. 148. 1,
2. Thirdly, this doctrine is confirmed by diverse reasons, grounded on the Word
of God.

The first is builded upon the Doctrines before proved by plain Reason 1.
testimonies of holy Scripture, to wit, that the Angels were not from all
eternity, but were created by Elohim, that is, the true God, who is one God and
three persons, as is plainly restified. Psalm. 104. 4. and 148. 5. and Colos. 1.
16. upon this infallible ground I thus argue, That Angels being creatures,
created and made by God, must of necessity be created either before the
heavens, or in and with the highest heavens; or else together with the
Elements, and the creatures of the inferior visible world, which were all made
out of that rude mass called earth, which was without form, and void. But
they were not made before the heavens: For the heavens were made in the
beginning, that is, in the first moment, when God began first to make and to
give being to creatures, before which beginning there could be no creation of
Angels, or any other things. Neither indeed was there any place, wherein Angels
could subsist, before the heavens were made. Certainly, no finite creature can
subsist in it self, without a place in mere nothing; it is proper to God only
to subsist in and of himself. Neither were they created together with the
earth, and other elements and creatures of the visible world: For it is plainly
testified, Job 38. 7. that when God laid the foundations of the earth, and
stretched the lines upon it, and laid the cornerstone thereof, then the sons
of God shouted for joy, that is, the Angels; for they are called the sons of
God, Job 1. 7. and there were no other living creatures then made: Therefore
the Angels were undoubtedly created before the earth, or else they could not
have shouted and sung together, when the earth was made. David also testifies,
that the Angels were made spirits first, Psalm. 104. 4. and after them God laid
the foundation of the earth, Verse 5. Therefore it follows necessarily, that
the Angels were created in and with the highest heaven, and are the host and
proper inhabitants thereof.

Secondly, that place from which the evil Angels were cast Reason 1.
down, and did fall, when they sinned, and left their first estate and
habitation, is their natural proper place in which God created them; and they
by creation are the proper inhabitants thereof. Now that is the highest heaven:
for when some of the Angels, to wit, proud Lucifer, the Devil and his Angels
sinned, and left their habitation, as Saint Jude speaks, Jude 6. then they
were cast down to hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4. even from heaven, as the Prophet Isaiah
testifies, Isa. 14. 12. saying, How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer?
Therefore undoubtedly the Angels in their creation were made in and with the
highest heavens, and had them given for their proper and natural habitation.

The third reason is drawn from the order which God observed in the creation:
For as soon as God had fitted any part or Reason 3.
place of the world for the creatures which were to dwell, and to have their
being in it; he made those creatures, and replenished the place with them: So
soon as the airie heavens were made, and the waters separated from the earth,
and place made for the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and for their beams to be
stretched out from heaven to earth; then the host of the visible heavens, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars were created and placed in them: And so soon as the
sea was fitted for living and moving creatures, God created them out of it; and
so likewise when the earth was made to stand out of the waters, and furnished
with herbs, plants, and trees, for the use of living creatures, God created
birds and beasts; and when it was furnished with all creatures fit for man's
use, then he created man, and the woman also an help meet for him: Therefore
undoubtedly so soon as he created the highest heavens, the proper and natural
place of the Angels, then and together with those heavens he did create the
Angels, which are the heavenly host, and suffered them not to remain one hour
empty, without their furniture and inhabitants.

This Doctrine thus laid down and proved, besides some special use which we
may make of it for affection and practice, is a ground and foundation of many
other Doctrines concerning Angels, which flow as Conclusions and Corollaries
from it, and an occasion of questions to be discussed: First, let me make some
brief application of it, and then proceed to the Doctrines and Questions.

First, in that Angels were created in and with the highest heaven Use 1. Gods
infinite power hereby demonstrated.
by Gods powerful Word, and by his simple and absolute act of creation; this
shows the infinite power and omnipotency of God, that he can make the most
excellent, immortal, and glorious creatures, greatest in power and strength,
merely out of nothing by his own hand immediately. The wisest, and most able
and skillful Artificers and Master-workmen in all the world, and among all the
sons of men, do stand in need of diverse helps and instruments for the
effecting and perfecting of any good work, and without them he can do little
or nothing. He must have servants and inferior workmen under him; he must have
good tools and instruments fitted for his hand, and he must have also good
materials to work upon; for he can frame and make no good work out of course
stuff, and base metalls: But lo here an admirable Artificer and Work-master,
before whom all the art and skill of all creatures is as vanity and nothing.
The Lord God, the Creator and Former of all things, he alone has made all the
world; and he has not only made his own materials, out of which he framed
this great fabric of the visible world, and all this without any instruments
or working-tooles; but also he has made in a moment, in the first beginning,
together with the glorious highest heavens, the Palace and Throne of his
glorious and infinite Majesty, the most glorious and excellent of all his
creatures, the Angels, and that out of nothing, which are great in power,
wonderful in strength, and admirable in swiftness, immortal spirits, able to
destroy a whole army of men in a night, and to overturne kingdoms and cities
in one day; at whose sight and presence valiant Gideon, a mighty man of war,
and the great Captain of Israel, was so afraid and astonished, that he cried,
Aha, Lord God, I shall die. Zachary, an holy Priest, was stricken dumb for a
time: And the hardy Roman soldiers, which watched Christ's sepulcher, were
astonished, and became as dead men. Who therefore can sufficiently admire this
mighty Creator? What heart is able to conceive, or tongue to express his
wisdom, power, and omnipotency? Let us in silence adore him, and tremble and
fear before him; not with servile and slavish horror, but with holy fear and
reverence. Let us flee to him for all help, succor, and strength in all
distresses; for supply of all our wants, for guidance and direction in all our
ways. If we be assured of his favor, and that he is with us, and on our side,
and that we stand for his cause; let us not care who be against us, nor fear
what men and Devils can do unto us. If we want means and instruments, let us
not be dismayed; for he can work without them. If we want necessary matter, he
can make it, or work without it, and bring things most excellent out of
nothing. For this very end, the Lord has showed himself and his divine power
in the creation, and by the creatures, that we might know and acknowledge, love
and honor, serve and worship him, and upon all occasions give him the glory
due to his name, and tell the people what great and wonderful things he has
done, and how by his own arm and power he has brought great and strange
things to pass.

Secondly, this Doctrine serves to discover the error and falsehood Use 2.
Confutation of contrary errors.
of diverse opinions, published and maintained by men of learning: As first,
that of Origin, Basil, and other Greek fathers, who dreamed, that the Angels
were created many ages before the corporeal and visible world. 2. And that
held by some others, That they were created after the creation of Adam. 3. That
the creation of Angels is not mentioned by Moses in the history of the
creation; but the time thereof is altogether concealed, which is the opinion of
Pererius, and of some Fathers and Schoolmen. 4. That opinion of some Ancients,
who held, That God by the ministry of Angels created this visible world. This
Doctrine proves them all to be vain dreams and fictions, in that it shows
plainly, by plain testimonies and solid arguments out of Gods holy Word, that
the Angels were created in and with the highest heavens, neither before nor
after them; and are the inhabitants and host of those heavens mentioned, Genesis
2. 1. and that expressly by Moses. 5. Also for that opinion of the Popish
Schoolmen, and of their Master Aristotle, who hold, that Angels move the
spheres of the visible heavens, and guide the several motions of the Sun.
Moon, and Stars; it is in no case to be allowed. For as the Scriptures do
expressly ascribe the creation of all things to God alone, and to his eternal
Word and Spirit, and never mention Angels as creators working with God in the
creation; but as creatures first made in and with the highest heavens, and
rejoicing at Gods founding of the earth: So they affirm, that in God all
things move, and have their being; and he gives the law and rule of motion to
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, guides them Job 9. 7. and 37. 12.
by his hand, causes them to rise and set, and brings forth all their host by
number, Isa. 40. 26. and 45. 12. And this Doctrine, which teaches us, that the
Angels were made to dwell in the highest heavens, and there they have their
residence, not in the spheres of the visible heavens, it overthrowes all such
conceits, makes them vanish like smoke, and drives them away like chafe
before the wind: Wherefore let us all acknowledge, that as God created Angels
of nothing by himself alone, and did give motion to the heavens; so without
help of Angels he does continue the same motion, and did create all other
inferior things. Let us take heed that we give not Gods glory to any other;
but let us confess, that all thanks for all blessings are due to him; in him
things live, move, and have their being; and he turns about the spheres of
heaven by his counsels, that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon
the face of the world in the earth, Job 37. 12.

From the use of this Doctrine, I proceed to the Conclusions, which necessarily
flow from it.

1. Corollary, or Conclusion.
The first is, That Angels by creation, and in their nature and Angels the
chiefest of the creatures.
substance are the first and chiefest of all Gods creatures, far more excellent
then man in his best natural being in the state of innocence; this Doctrine
flows necessarily from the former: For first, God in wisdom has made all
things, the best and chiefest 1.
of creatures for the best places; and inferior creatures, for inferior
p^aces, as we see by experience in all things visible: And therefore
undoubtedly the Angels, which were created to be the natural inhabitants of
the highest and best place, must needs be the chiefest creatures, and the most
excellent in nature and substance. Secondly, those creatures, which God framed
in the creation, 2.
to dwell nearest to his glorious presence, even with his heavenly Majesty, and
to stand before his Throne in the heaven of heavens, must needs be in their
nature and substance most excellent, and far above man in innocence, whose
best dwelling was but an earthly Paradise, or Garden furnished with fruits,
which might be eaten up and consumed; and such were the Angels, as the former
Doctrine has plainly proved: Therefore this conclusion necessarily flows from
that Doctrine, and is proved and confirmed by it.

But we have for further confirmation both plain testimonies and arguments in
the holy Scriptures: The royal Prophet David, being ravished with the
contemplation of the supercelestiall glory appearing in the secondary beams
thereof, which shine in the visible heavens, and in the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
cries out in admiration and wonders that God, dwelling in such admirable glory,
and having such excellent and glorious company and attendants about him, should
vouchsafe to look upon man, or have any regard of him: What is man (says he)
that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou visitest him?
Psalm. 8. 4. But in the next words he goes further, and speaks fully to the
point, and shows, that Christ himself, according to his humanity, though
conceived and borne most pure and holy, was made lower then the Angels; thou
have made him (says he) a little, or for a little while lower then the Angels,
that is, Christ in the nature of man, which he took upon him; for so the
Apostle expounds these words of David, Hebr. 2. 6. And Psalm. 103. 20. Ye
Angels (says he) which excel in power. Our Savior also in the Gospel shows
plainly, that the Angels in heaven are so excellent in nature and substance, as
the elect Saints glorified shall be after the last resurrection; and their most
glorious and blessed condition, which far excels Adam in innocence, shall be
like unto the Ange's, Matthew. 22. 30. Saint Peter in plain words says, that
Angels are far greater then men in power and might, 2 Pet. 2. 11. Saint Paul
calls them Angels of light, 2 Corinthians. 11. 14, and the Angels of Gods power, 2
These. 1. 7. he numbers them with principalities and powers, which far excel
the nature of man, Romans 8. 38. Whenever he sets forth the greatest excellency
of things created, greater then in men, he does instance in Angels. as 1 Cor.
13. 1. though I speak with tongues of men and Angels. And Galat. 1. 8. If I, or
an Angel from heaven, and 4. 14. Ye received me as an Angel of God, yea as
Christ Jesus. In a word, whereas man is an earthly creature, framed out of
dust, in respect of his visible part his body; Angels are pure heavenly
spiritual substances, framed immediately out of nothing, by the simple and
absolute act of creation. And whereas man's better part, the soul, though it be
a spirit; yet was not created a perfect complete creature, but made to subsist
in the body, and cannot be in full perfection without it: Angels are spirits
complete and perfect in themselves, without subsistence in any other creature,
as shall appear hereafter. And therefore Angels are by creation, and in nature
and substance far above man in his best natural estate, even in the state of
innocence.

First, this shows most clearly, that all the love and favor Use 1. The love
of God to man hereby commended.
which God extends to man in Christ, and in giving Christ to be man's Savior
and Redeemer, by taking man's nature upon him, and making full satisfaction
therein to justice for him, and in saving man from hell and damnation, and
exalting him to heavenly glory, is on Gods part most free and voluntary,
arising merely and wholly from the good pleasure of his own will, and not from
any merit, worth, and excellency, which he at first created, or since found in
man's nature. If the natural excellency of any creature could procure Gods
special favor, or deserve his bounty, or move him to show mercy to any
creature which has sinned, and by sin is fallen into misery; surely, the
Angelical nature should have been more respected of God, then the nature of
man: and Angels, being fallen, should more easily have found mercy at his hand.
For (as this Doctrine has proved) Angels are by creation, and in nature and
substance the chiefest and most excellent of all Gods creatures, far excelling
man in power, might, purity, and being; And yet, when Angels and man were both
fallen, and found guilty, charged with folly, and involved in misery, God
passed by the Angels, and showed no mercy to them; neither gave his Son, to
take upon him the nature of Angels, and to be their Savior and Redeemer; but
so many of them as sinned, and kept not their first estate, but left their
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains of darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day, 2 Pet. 2. Jud. 6. But for man, who is of less
worth, and far inferior by nature, he has given his Son, to take man's
nature upon him, to be incarnate and made flesh, and has sent him forth in the
form of frail and sinful flesh, made of a woman, and made under the Law, and
has delivered him up to a cursed death, and to hellish agonies, pangs, and
sorrows, that he might redeem this frail worm of the earth, miserable and
sinful man, from hell and damnation, unto which the Angels which sinned are
reserved under darkness; and to exalt him far above the state of innocence, in
which he was created, and his best natural estate in Paradise, unto the high
estate of heavenly glory, with the elect holy, and blessed Angels, which is
far above that mutable state of glory, in which the Angels were first
created, and from which so many of them did fali: Wherefore let us admire this
free grace of God, and stand amazed at his wonderful and supertranscendent
bounty to mankind. And whatsoever mercy we receive from him in our deliverance
from any evil or whatsoever blessing and benefit of bounty and goodness in
advancing us to this state of grace or glory, let us wholly ascribe it to the
good pleasure of his own free will, and not to any merit in our selves, or any
excellency created in our nature. And let no man glory in his natural wit or
wisdom, and knowledge gotten by learning and study, nor boast in his own
strength; but, as it is written, Let him that glories, glory in the Lord, and
triumph in this, that he knows Gods free grace and abundant mercy in Jesus
Christ, and has the sweet taste and experience of it in his own soul.

Secondly, this serves to magnify in our eyes both the large Use 2. And the
love of Christ, not taking the nature of Angels, but man's.
measure of Gods bounty to his elect in Christ, and also the infinite power and
excellency of Christ his mediation, and the dignity and worth of his person, in
which he has so dignified our frail nature, by assuming it upon himself and
uniting it personally to his Godhead; that he has exalted it far above the
most glorious and excellent state of the Angels in heaven. That Angels are the
best and chiefest of all Gods creatures by creation, and in nature and
substance far more excellent then man in his best natural estate of
innocence, I have proved in this Doctrine. And yet Christ taking upon him our
nature, which was far inferior to the Angels, and uniting it personally to
himself, as he is the eternal Son of God, has dignified, and exalted, and
crowned it with glory and excellency far above all Angels, Principalities,
Thrones, and Dominions, Hebr. 2. 7. so that the holy, elect and blessed Angels
exalted above their best natural estate, to the immutable estate of
supernatural life, immortality and glory, do adore and worship him, as David
foretold, Psalm. 97. 7. and the Apostle affirms, Heb. 1. 6. He is the head of
all, and they all are made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3. 22. And so wonderful is
Gods bounty to man in Christ and so powerful and excellent is Christ's
mediation for the elect of mankind, that by Christ's mediation concurring and
working together with Gods bounty, according to wisdom, and for the
satisfaction of Gods justice, a ready way is made for them into the Holy of
holies, the Heaven of heavens: and they are not only exalted and elevated
far above their best natural being, unto the blessed state of the glorious
Angels; but also the holy Angels, with whom they shine in heavenly glory
hereafter in the life to come, are made of God ministering spirits, whom Christ
has procured to minister for their good here in this world in the state of
grace; so that upon him, as upon the Ladder in Jacobs dream, the Angels of God
descend from heaven to earth, and ascend from earth to heaven, and do encamp
round about them, to save and deliver them, as David says, Psalm. 34. 7. Yea,
and when the evil Angels shall be judged at the last day, they shall through
Gods infinite bounty, and for the merit and worthiness of Christ, be advanced
to sit upon Thrones with him, and to judge and give sentence against the
Devil, and all his Angels, as we read, 1 Corinthians. 6. 3. And therefore if we
had the tongues of men and Angels, we are never able to utter or express the
infinite excellency, worth, and dignity of the person and mediation of Christ,
nor sufficiently to extol, laud, and magnify the bounty of God to poor
mankind in Christ. And here we see that truly verified, which the Prophet
foretold, Isa. 64. 4. And the Apostle proclaimed, 1 Cor. 2. 9. that since the
beginning of the world, the eye of man has not seen, nor his ear heard,
neither has it ever entered into the heart of man, what good things God has
prepared for them that love him.

Thirdly, this Doctrine serves to work in us a true love, and reverent Use 3.
Love and reverence the Angels.
respect of the Angels of God, as being the chiefest of Gods creatures, and by
nature more excellent then man in his best natural estate, and great in power,
able to help us more then all other creatures, when God offers occasion and
opportunity, and gives them charge over us. Every man is bound to think
better, and more reverently of other men, who are in any gifts more excellent
then himself, though they be all of one nature and kind, and of the same flesh
and blood. And God has put upon the beasts of the field by nature a fear and
respect of man, because he is a more excellent creature. Now the Angels are by
nature and creation more excellent then man in his best natural estate; and
man in the supernatural estate of glory, shall be but equal to the elect and
holy Angels: And therefore, as we must ever labor to decline that servile
superstition, and base will worship of Angels, which is condemned, Colos. 2.
18. and must beware of giving divine and religious worship to them, which they
themselves reject and refuse, being our fellow servants, and have utterly
detested and forbidden, when it has been offered, as appears, Revel. 19. 10.
and 21. 9. so we must take heed, that we do not think meanly of them, as if
they were but our servants, because they minister for our good: For in guarding
us, and encamping about us, and in ministering for us, they are not our servants
which owe us service; neither have we power to command them, nor ability to
requite them for the least service: but they are the servants of God, and of
our Lord Christ, and fellow servants with all Kings, Prophets, and Holy men of
God; and as Gods Ambassadors, and Princely Courtiers and Ministers, we ought to
esteem and respect them, with all love and hearty affection. And, as in all
places where there are Ambassadors and noble Princes and Courtiers of great
Emperors and Monarchs, men will have a care to bear themselves orderly, and
to do all things decently, and will be afraid and ashamed to commit any
absurdity, or bear themselves immodestly: So let us in the public assemblies
of the Saints, and in holy congregations of Gods-Church, where Angels are
supposed sometimes to guard us, and to overlook us (as the words of the
Preacher seem to import, Eccles. 5. 6. and of the Apostle also, 1 Cor. 10. 11.)
bear our selves reverently, and beware of all vain words, filthy behavior,
and beastly drowzinesse and sleepiness, as if we came to the Church like
unclean dogs for company only, or to lie snorting and sleeping, which is the
evil custom and practice of many carnal people.

Fourthly, this Doctrine is matter of comfort to Gods poor despised servants,
in that it does assure them, that the Angels which Use 4. Comfort hereby to the
godly.
love them, and as friends rejoice in their conversion; and as guardians
protect and watch over them, are great, excellent, and glorious above all
earthly men: And therefore, though the great men of the world scorn and
despise them, and among such they can find no favor, help, or defense; yet let
them comfort themselves, and rejoice in this, that he, who is higher then the
highest, has a guard, to whose care and charge he has committed them; and
that not of mighty men, in whom there is no help, but of Angels, which in
power, strength, and glory far exceed the most excellent among the sons of men.

2. Corollary.
Secondly, in that Angels were created in and with the highest Angels are
heavenly spirits.
heaven, to be the natural inhabitants suitable to the place; hence we may
gather a definition of Angels, to wit, that Angels are heavenly Spirits, or
pure and entire spiritual substances, created in the beginning by God after
his own image, every one of which is distinct from another by a special
existence, or proper particular being of his own, which God has given to have
in himself for ever. First, in that Angels were not made and created out of
the rude mass, without form, and void, which is called earth, and the deep,
nor of any other matter before made by God; but in the first beginning of all
things were created perfect creatures in and with the highest heavens, the
lively and proper inhabitants of them: Hence it necessarily follows, that they
are pure heavenly spirits, and entire spiritual substances, not parts of any
body or person, not compounded of any matter first made, and of a form thereto
added afterward; and therefore have a proper existence and being, every one in
himself, which cannot be dissolved, but in respect of second causes remains
immortal: so that this definition, and every branch thereof flows from the
former Doctrine, as a natural Corollary, or necessary Conclusion. And it does
excellently set forth the nature, and natural being and properties of Angels,
by which they are distinguished from all other things.

First, in that they are called spirits, or pure spiritual substances, 1.
this shows their nature and being, wherein they resemble God, and bear his
image, who is the one only true Jehovah, who has his essence and being in and
of himself, and gives essence and being to all things, and by whom all things
subsist, as that name Jehovah signifies, which he assumes as proper to
himself, Exodus 3. 14, 15. and Isa. 42. 8. and who is a spirit, as our Savior
restifieth, John 4. 24. And by this name spirits, they are distinguished from
all bodily creatures.

Secondly, in that they are called pure, entire, spiritual substances, and
perfect creatures, which have every one a proper existence 2.
and particular being; hereby they are distinguished from the spirits, that is,
the souls of men, which are not entire, complete, and perfect creatures of
themselves by creation; but are made to be, and to subsist in an humane body,
and together with the body to make up a perfect man. Hereby also they are
distinguished from the breath of life, and the vital and animal spirits,
which are in living bodies of men, and other living creatures: for they are not
pure, perfect, entire creatures, which subsist by themselves, but frail
vanishing parts of creatures, which continually increase and decrease, fade and
perish.

Thirdly, in that they are called heavenly spirits, hereby they are 3.
distinguished not only from the spirits created here below on earth in this
inferior world, even souls of men, and all bodily spirits; but also from God,
who is a spirit, but not contained in any place, no not in the Heaven, of
heavens: but is essentially present in all places, as well in earth as in
heaven, as the Scriptures testify, 1 Kin. 8. 27. and Psalm. 139. 8.

Fourthly, in that they are said to be created in the beginning by God, hereby
they are distinguished from the absolute essence 4.
of God, and from every one of the three persons in one God: for they are not
created, but are absolutely eternal, without beginning of being.

Fifthly, in that they are said to be created in the image and similitude of
God, this shows the excellent natural properties of 5.
Angels, that they are living, spiritual, and immortal creatures, endued with
knowledge, wisdom, understanding liberty of will, power, strength, and
activity to do and perform great things wisely, justly, and freely, and so to
resemble God in his glorious attributes and works.

Sixthly, in that they are said to be distinguished one from another 6.
by a proper and particular subsistence and being, which every one has by
himself; this shows that Angels are not one common spirit, breathed into the
highest heavens, and every one a part of that one spirit; but they are every
one a whole substance or person by himself, as Augustine says, Enchirid. 18.
Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 18. 7.


Lastly, in that every one is said to have a proper existence and particular
being, which God has given him to have in himself, by which he differs from
the rest; this necessarily implies, that Angels are finite, and limited both in
their substance and number, and are mutable, not infinite and unchangeable, as
God is. This is the definition, which in the several parts and branches
thereof does fully set forth the nature and natural properties of Angels. I
proceed to the confirmation of the several parts in order.

First, that Angels are spirits, or spiritual substances, the holy 1. They are
spirits.
Scriptures affirm most clearly, Psalm. 104. 4. and Heb. 1. 7. where it is
said, that he makes his Angels spirits. And Hebr. 1. 14. where they are called
ministering spirits. And lest any should think or imagine, that Angels are not
spirits by nature and creation, but by grace and communion of the Holy Ghost,
which is given to the elect Angels in and by Christ, and by which they become
holy, and are settled in the immutable state of eternal blessedness, we have
most clear testimonies in those Scriptures, which call not only the good and
elect Angels spirits, as Act. 23. 9. and the places before cited; but also the
evil Angels of Satan, even the Devil himself and his Angels, which in
respect of their substance which they still retain, though they have lost
their goodness and uprightness, are still called spirits, as Levit. 20. 27. 1 Samuel 16. 1 Kin. 22. Matthew. 8. 16. Act. 5. 16. Ephesians. 2. 2. where the Devil
speaking in false Prophets, and his spirit of fury in Saul, and of lying in
Ahabs Prophets, and his evil Angels possessing diverse persons, and cast out by
Christ and his Apostles, are called evil and unclean spirits.

Secondly, that Angels are entire and complete spiritual substances, 2.
Entire, and complete spirits.
and perfect creatures, which have every one a proper existence and being in
himself, the holy Scriptures prove most clearly by diverse reasons: First, by
naming some of them by proper and distinct names, as the Angel which was sent
to Daniel, Dan. 8. 16. and to salute the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. is called
Gabriel. Secondly, by giving them such titles, and ascribing and assigning to
them such offices as belong to none but complete substances and persons, which
have a proper and personal existence: as for example, they are called the sons
of God, Job 1. 6. and 38. 7. They are called Gods messengers and ministers, as
appears by their Hebrew and Greek names, and by Scriptures, Matthew. 4. 11. and
Heb. 1. 14. They have the office of watchers and guardians, which have charge
given over the elect, and encamp about the righteous, to guard and defend them,
and observe and behold the face of God, ready to be at his beck for the defense
of his little ones, as appears, Number. 22. 22. Psalm. 34. 7. and 91. 10. Dan. 4.
13. and Matthew. 18. 20.

Thirdly, the Scriptures do plainly show, that Angels do willingly and
readily, and by themselves perform perfect and complete actions and works,
which none can do but perfect creatures, which have a proper subsistence by
themselves: as for example, that in the first creation as soon as they were
created, they did sing together, and lift up their voice, Job 38. 7. that they
praise God, hearken to the voice of his word, and keep his commandments, Psalm.
103. 20. and 149. 2. that they have appeared and spoken to men, as to Gideon,
Judge. 6. to the father of Sampson, Judge. 12. and to Eliah, 1 Kin. 19. that they
have comforted Christ in his agony, Luke 22. rolled the stone from his
sepulcher, Matthew. 28. opened the prison doors, and set the Apostles at
liberty, Act. 5. and 12. and have smitten and destroyed thousands of men in a
night, as 2 Kin. 19. and rejoice over sinners which repent.

Fourthly, the Scriptures reckon up Angels not among those inspirations,
motions, or affections, which proceed from Gods Spirit, or any other person or
substance; but among perfect creatures, and spiritual substances, which live,
and move, and subsist by themselves, and not in another substance; and so the
Spirit of God speaks of them, Psalm. 149. 5. and in all the places, where they
are said to come from heaven to earth, and to be sent from God unto men.

The third point in the definition is, That Angels are heavenly 3. Heavenly
spirits.
spirits, that is, neither made of any bodily substance, nor compounded of any
elements, or creatures of the visible world, but of a pure and heavenly nature,
made to dwell in the highest heaven, as in their proper and natural place of
habitation, and there have their continual residence. This is manifestly
proved by the former Doctrine, and also by those Scriptures which testify,
that they always, and continually in heaven behold the face of God, as Matthew.
18. 10. and that they are the heavenly host, Luke 2. 13. and Spirits of heaven,
Zach. 6. 5. And there they encamping, are in a moment as ready to defend the
righteous, and to guard the Church militant on earth, and avenge all wrongs
done to Gods little ones, as if they were here present on earth: for in the
twinkling of an eye, they can descend from heaven to earth, and deliver the
godly, and stay the hand of their enemies, and smite them with death, as we see
by the army of Angels coming from heaven, and guarding Elisha, so soon as he
called upon God, 2 Kin. 6. and by the Angel of God, which, at the prayer of
Hezekiah, destroyed all the army of the Assyrians in one night: and at our
Saviors prayer in his agony, appearing presently from heaven, and comforting
him. In a word, our Savior affirms, that spirits have not flesh and bones,
Luke 24. 39. They cannot be seen with bodily eyes, nor felt by bodily hands, as
corporal things may be: Therefore Angels, being spirits, are not corporal,
nor compounded of bodily elements, but are pure, and invisible, as the Apostle
calls them, Colos. 1. 16.

The fourth point to wit, That Angels were created by God in 4.
the beginning, and God has given to them their being, is abundantly proved
in diverse Doctrines before: I need not say any more of it.

The fifth point is, That Angels were created in the image of 5. They are like
to God. 1. 2.
God, and do in many respects resemble God more then any other creatures:
First, in their very substance and natural being; for as God is a spirit, so
they are spirits, yea pure spirits, and in that respect resemble God more then
any other creatures. Secondly, as God is absolutely pure and simple; so they
are more pure and simple then any other creatures, and have no corporal or
visible substance in them. Thirdly, as God is the living God, and even 3.
life it self; and as he is infinite in wisdom, knowledge, goodness, and
power, and does all things freely of himself, according to the good pleasure
of his own will; also is in and of himself most glorious and blessed for
ever, and with him is no variableness, or shadow of turning: so Angels are
most quick, active, and lively spirits, the most excellent of all Gods
creatures in wisdom, knowledge, and liberty of will, and in all goodness, and
good will toward men: they are also great in power, and excel in strength,
Psalm. 103. 20. and are called the blessed and glorious Angels of light; heaven,
the place of bliss, is their habitation: And as they are incorporeall spirits,
which cannot be dissolved and die, as men do, when their souls are separated
from their bodies, and the whole person is dissolved: so, and in that respect,
they are immortal, and do more resemble God, who only has immortality, then
any other creatures do by nature: All these things, to wit, the lively
strength, activity, knowledge, wisdom, free will, glory, power, and blessed
estate of Angels, wherein they were created, the Scriptures do most clearly
testify and declare, where they affirm, that the Angels do see Gods face,
who is all in all, and that they look into all the mysteries, know the manifold
wisdom of God concerning the salvation of the Church, 1 Pet. 1. 12. and Ephesians.
3. 10. and have great joy in heaven over sinners which repent; and do relate
great and mighty works done by Angels, most readily and speedily without delay.

The sixth point is, That Angels are distinct and different among themselves,
and one from another, by a proper and particular existence, 6.
and being: this I have fully proved in the second branch.

The last is, That Angels are finite in their nature and number, 7. They are
finite in nature.
and have their bounds and limits; and also are by nature mutable, such as
might fall from the first estate, wherein they were created. That Angels are in
nature finite, and cannot be in diverse places, or in all places at once, is
most plain, both by this, that they are said to be Gods heavenly host, and
Angels in heaven, that is, who are confined to heaven for the proper place of
their dwelling; and when they are here on earth, are said to be descended from
heaven, Matthew. 28. 2. and to be here, and not there. That though they are many,
and more then man can number, and in that respect are called innumerable; yet
that their number is limited, and that God knows the number of them, calls them
by their Heb. 12.
names, and brings them out by number, the Prophet testifies, Isa. 40. 26.
That Angels are mutable by nature, subject to fall from the state wherein they
were created, the Scriptures do testify, where they make this Gods property,
that he only changes not, Malach. 3. 6. And with him is no variableness,
Iam. 1. 17. And where it is testified that God has charged the Angels with
folly, Job 4 18. And many of the Angels did not keep their first estate, but
left their habitation, and by sinning did fall from Heaven and are cast down
to Hell, and delivered into chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and Jude 6. And
that only the elect Angels are made holy and immutably blessed by the light
which God has added to them, Job 4. 18. Thus much for the definition of Angels.

3. Corollary.
The third Corollary is, That the bodily shapes of men, and Of the assumed
bodies of Angels.
other creatures, in which Angels have appeared, were no parts of their nature
and substance, neither were essentially united unto them, but were only
assumed for the present time and occasion, that thereby they might make frail
men see more evidently, and acknowledge their presence and their actions. For
the heaven of heavens is not the place of gross earthly bodies; and therefore
Angels, being natural inhabitants of heaven, have no such bodies personally
united; they only did for a time assume the bodies in which they appeared and
performed some actions on earth. The words of our Savior, Luke 24. 39. show
that Spirits have not flesh and bones. Therefore Angels being spirits have no
such bodies united to them as those wherein they appeared.

4. Corollary.
That Angels are confined to the places in which they are, How Angels are in a
place.
and are in places definitively, though not circumscribed and measured by them
as bodily things are; Angels being pure spirits, do not consist of parts as
bodily things do; neither have they any bodily quantity or dimension, as
length, breadth, height, and thickness; and so they cannot be compassed
about, nor measured, nor limited by any bodily space; but yet they are
definitively in their places, that is, there and no where else; and their
substance together with bodily substances may be in the same place; as the
whole soul of man is in the whole body, and is wholly in every part of it and
no where else, so it is with Angels.

5. Corollary.
Seeing Angels are by creation the proper and natural inhabitants of the
highest heavens, which is a most spacious place, The number of them very great.
compassing about the whole visible World, and more large and capacious then
all other places; as Solomon does intimate, 1 Kin. 8. 27. Hence it follows
that the Angels are many in number, more then can be numbered by man, and so in
respect of man innumerable. For we must not think that God, who in the
creation replenished the Sea with fishes, the air with birds, and the visible
heavens with innumerable stars, and the earth with beasts and creeping
things; and commanded man to multiply and replenish the earth, wouldleave the
bestand most glorious place of all not fully replenished with inhabitants,
glorious Angels, who were created at the first in their full number:
undoubtedly therefore there must be many, far more then man can number. And
this the Prophet Daniel saw in a vision and testified, Dan. 7. 10. where he
says that a thousand thousand ministered to the Lord Christ, and ten thousand
thousand stood before him. Also in the Gospel we read that there was a
Legion; that is, six thousand devils in one man, Mark. 5. 9. And if there be so
many devils, that is, evil Angels in one man; then surely the whole company or
multitude of those evil Angels must be many. And the whole company of Angels,
in the first creation of which some only did fall and become Devils, must
needs much more be innumerable. And if that conjecture and opinion of learned
men be true, to wit, that the Angels which sinned and were cast down from
heaven, are as many in number as all the elect of mankind which have been,
are, or shall be to the end of the World; and that they shall fill up the
glorious mansions, and supply the rooms and places of the lost Angels; then
surely the multitude of all the Angels which God created must needs, be great
and innumerable, far exceeding our capacity.

6. Corollary.
Sixthly the highest heavens, being the place of rest, and not Their motion
wondrous quick.
of motion which is proper to visible and corporeal things, and being the
place where God has appointed that the eternal rest or Sabbath shall be kept;
Therefore the Angels, which were created to be the natural inhabitants of
those glorious heavens, were not made to move with bodily motion, as bodily
creatures do: their coming from heaven to earth is not a passage through the
whole space between heaven and earth. which would require a long time; but, as
it is with the minds and thoughts of men, they are now here exercised about
things present, and in a moment of time, in the twinkling of an eye, they are
in the remotest parts of the World, or in the highest heavens, and yet pass
not through the space between: so it may well be, and we may with good reason
conceive, that the Angels, which are of a purer and more heavenly substance
then our souls, and more nimble and active then the minds or thoughts of men
are by nature; can in a moment be present here on earth, and in the next
moment be again in heaven. But howsoever, or by what way soever, they descend
and ascend, it is most certain, that they are the swiftest of all things
created; and so much the Scriptures show clearly in many places, where they
describe Angels with wings, and call them Cherubins and Seraphins; yea some one
of them with many wings, which are instruments of flying and of swiftest
motion, as Genesis 3. 24. Ezech. 10. 1. 19. and 11. 22. and Isa. 6. 2. Also we
read that on a sudden, even in an instant, a whole multitude of the heavenly
host have descended from heaven and been present on earth, Luke 2. 13. And the
Angel of the Lord is said to encampe with an heavenly host round about them
that fear God, Psalm 34. 7. not by being here resident and abiding on earth,
out of their proper place of abode; but by standing before God in heaven, and
beholding his face; that they may be ready in a moment when he gives the
watch word to present themselves on earth, there to deliver his elect, and to
destroy their enemies, as our Savior does intimate, Matthew. 18. 20.

7. Corollary.
Seventhly, seeing the highest heaven is the proper place of Of the fal^ and
standing of Angels.
Angels, and this is the order which God did set in the creation, that all
creatures should keep their station, and not leave their dwelling; Hence it
follows, that it is against nature, and contrary to the order of creation,
that many Angels are excluded and shut out of heaven, even all the evil
Angels: And it is a thing above nature, even the supernatural grace and gift
of God, and a thing purchased and procured by the infinite power, excellency,
and dignity of Christ's merit and mediation, that the elect and holy Angels
should be made ministering spirits, and sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation, as the Apostle says, Hebr. 1. 14. And here now
occasion is offered to discourse about the sin and fall of the Devil and evil
Angels; how contrary it was to the law of nature, that they should forsake
their station, sin against God, and not stand in the truth, and to the order
which God set in the creation; that they should leave their dwelling, and
exclude themselves out of heaven, and be cast down into Hell. Also here is
occasion given to show, that the elect Angels come to minister for the elect
through the supernatural power and efficacy of Christ's mediation; and that
Christ, by supernatural grace and benefits given to the heavenly Angels, has
obliged and bound them to himself, to obey him as their head, and to minister
for the good of his little ones. But these things come more fittly to be
handled after the creation, when we come to discourse of the confusion of the
World by the Devils Apostasy and man's fall; and of the restoring of mankind,
and the renewing and perfecting of the World by Christ.

Now these Doctrines thus opened and proved, are of great Use 1. Comfort by the
ministry of Angels.
use for comfort and confidence to all the elect and faithful people of God,
in the midst of all troubles which befall them in this life; and when dangers
and worldly enemies beset them round about; also for confirmation and
strengthening of them against all the assaults, and temptations of the Devil.
For if the glorious Angels which are ministering spirits for their good, which
also love them, rejoice at their conversion, watch for their safety, and are
their fellow servants under one Lord Christ, be such heavenly, powerful, and
active spirits even by creation; so excellent in strength, so lively, quick,
and ready at hand to help in a moment when God gives the watchword; what need
we fear or faint so long as we cleave to God and stick to his truth? He is
a tender and loving father; and Christ our high Priest has a feeling of our
infirmities and does pity us; he will be ready to help; and he has mighty
instruments and ministers, even thousands and ten thousand thousands ready to
save and deliver us from all enemies, as he did Daniel from the Lions, and his
three fellows from the fiery furnace. Or, if he does not send them to deliver
us out of the troubles of this life; yet he will at our death send his Angels
to carry our souls with triumph to heaven, as Eliah was carried up in a fiery
Chariot, and the soul of Lazarus is said to be carried up by them into
Abraham's bosom. Wherefore let us not fear either multitude, malice, or might
of enemies; but carefully serve God, and confidently rest on the Lord Christ
our Redeemer and Savior.

Secondly, These Doctrines serve to discover diverse errors Use. 2. Confutation
of contrary errors.
concerning the nature and substance of Angels; as that gross opinion of Peter
Lombard, who held that the Angels are corporeal substances, because the Devil
and evil Angels shall suffer the torment, and feel the pains of hell fire,
which has no power but over bodily creatures: Also that opinion of the
Gentiles, and Cardanus who held that the Angels were mortal and corruptible
creatures; both these are here discovered to be erroneous. For the first is
builded on a gross conceit, that the fire of hell is elementall and
corporcall fire; which, as it burns and consumes bodily substances, over
which it has power; so it in time wastes it self, and goes out: but indeed
the fire of Hell is the fire of Gods wrath, which burns and tormenteth worse
then elementarie fire; but consumes not, neither shall ever be quenched, as
our Savior testifies. The second opinion is also confuted by these doctrines,
which have proved Angels to be spirits or spiritual substances; which, though
they may be stained with sin; yet they cannot be dissolved, as men are in
death by the separation of soul and body; not corrupted, as men's bodies are in
the grave; but the evil Angels shall live in eternal torment, and their
substance shall never be corrupted and consumed, and the holy and blessed
Angels are immortal and shall live in glory for ever, and there shall be no
end of their blessedness.

CHAP. V.
Of the Creation of the Earth. The names whereby it is called. Properties of
it. All creatures have being of God: with Uses. The World is all mutable, and
appointed so to be: Uses. The creation and redemption of the World, wherein
they resemble one another: Uses. The holy Ghost is of one and the same nature
with the Father and the Son.

THe Second thing created next after the highest heaven, with the inhabitants
thereof the Angels, is the Earth, as my text here faith in these words, and
the Earth. But we must Genesis 1. 2.
not here understand by Earth, this earth or dry land upon which men and
beasts do live, and move, and have their being; and What the earth here is.
which is beautified and adorned with trees, plants, green herbs and flowers;
and replenished with stones and metals of all sorts: For that was created
together with the waters of the Sea, and brought into form and replenished in
the third day, as appears in the, 9. 10. 11. verses of this Chapter. But here
by Earth, we are to understand a certain rude matter and mass without form
and void, out of which God made all the inferior visible World, and all things
therein contained; so the words following in the second verse plainly show:
The earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the
deep. Now that we may know what creature this Earth was, we are to consider
these 3 things; First, the several names by which it is called. Secondly, the
properties by which it is described. Thirdly, the means by which it was upheld
in being, and disposed to be the common matter of all othervisible things
created afterward.

First, the names by which it is called are three, 1 (...), the earth. 2 (...),
the deep. 3 (...), waters. First it is called the The names of it. 1.
earth because of the grossness, unmoveablenesse, and impurity of it. For the
earth is of all elements most gross, heavy, impure, and confused, not fit to
move out of the place wherein it is; most untractable and not ready to apply it
self to any other thing, and hard to be turned into the form of other things
without labor and working of it. This first rude and informed mass which God
created out of nothing, is here declared by this name, Earth, to have been,
like the earth, very impure and confused, dull and unfit for motion,
resembling, at the first, the earth rather then any purer element.

Secondly, it is called (...), the deep, here also in the text, which 2.
word signifies a great deep or devouring gulf, as it were of troubled waters,
also troubled and confounded with mixture of mud and mire; which, though in
respect of the troubled mixture and confusion it has a resemblance of earth,
yet it is bottomless, there is no solidity in it, no ground or stay to be
found at all: Thus much the Hebrew word signifies according to the notation and
common use of it.

Thirdly, it is called (...), waters, also in this text, because 3.
of the waterish fluxibility which was in it; by means of which it was
unstable and unsettled, and also because it was an huge deep like the great
waters of the Sea. Now it may seem strange, that this one and the same rude
mass should be like earth, and like a bottomless depth of mire or
quick-sand, and like waters, all at once; which are things different and unlike
one to another, especially the thin flowing element of water, and the gross,
dull, unmovable earth. And therefore the learned Expositors labor thus to
qualify the meaning of the words; they say it was a confused mass, even the
matter of all the elements mingled together; and because the earth and water
are the most gross and impure, and did most of all appear in it, therefore it
is called earth and water, and the deep, which is a mixture of both. But in
viewing, reviewing, and sifting the words thoroughly, I have observed something
over and above that which by reading I could observe in others; to wit, that
this rude mass was not suffered to lie idle one moment from the first
creation, and bringing of it into being out of nothing; but being a mere
unformed mass or Chaos, it had at the first a resemblance of earth, because
the gross matter of the earth was so mingled and confounded in it, that it
chiefly appeared in the upper face of it, and so it seemed gross and earthy,
and is first called Earth. Secondly, by the operation of the spirit of God
cherishing and moving it, the gross thick matter settling downward toward the
center, it became immediately in the upper face of it like a deep mire or
quick-sand, which more inclines to water then earth, and has no ground, stay
or bottom in it; and therefore in the second place it is called the deep.
Thirdly, God making the earthy matter to sink and settle downward still more
and more, all the upper face of it became more thin and fluid, like unto
impure water; and thereupon in the third place it is called the waters: though
indeed, there was neither perfect water, nor earth, but a confused matter
without form and void, out of which all visible things were formed. Thus much
the names show unto us concerning this mass, which I propounded as the first
thing.

The second thing is the consideration of the Properties by Properties of it.
which it is described; for it is said to be Tohu and Bohu, and that darkness
was upon the upper face of it.

First, it is said to be (...) Tohu, that is, without form, even a thing
imperfect, which had neither the nature, nor substance, 1.
nor natural shape or property of any perfect creature.

Secondly, it is called (...) Bohu, void; it had in it no formed 2.
creature of any kind to fill and replenish it; for this word is used to
signify the emptiness and utter desolation of a land wholly depopulated and
laid waste, and of a City brought to ruin having nothing left but heap^s of
ruined Walls, Isa. 34. 11. and Ier. 4. 23.

Thirdly, it is said to be all darkness in the upper face of it; darkness
was upon the face of the deep. By darkness we are not 3.
here to understand any dark body, as air or thick clouds of darkness
compassing it round, and over-spreading of it, as the dark air and thick mist
did the land of Egypt when God plagued it with darkness; but this is the
meaning, that in this rude matter there was no light, neither did any appear
in the outside or upper face of it.

Now these properties, by which it is described, do comprehend in them that
which in natural philosophy is called privation, and is held to be a principle
or beginning of natural things. For unto the making and generating of any
bodily, creature or natural body there are three things required as first
principles. 1. A matter capable of some form, that is expressed in the names
of earth, deep, and waters. 2. Privation, which is an absence or want of the
form which ought to be or might be in that matter, for to give it that
natural being of which it is capable, and unto which it is inclined. This
privation of form, and this emptiness of all natural powers and properties
which are required in creatures, and this darkness which is the privation of
light, they are the second principle. The third is the natural and
substantial form, which is that which distinguishes one creature from
another, and gives being to every creature; that is, makes it to be that which
it is in the kind of it. This form God by his word gave to the several parts
of this matter, when he said, Let it be, and it was so. But when a matter
rude, undigested and unformed is inclining to some form, and wants it, there
must be a disposing of the matter to receive the form which it ought to have
to make it a perfect creature in his kind, and which it yet wants and requires;
and that working, preparing and disposing of the matter, that it may be fit to
receive the form which must perfect it. And this disposing of the common and
rude matter of all the visible World is here expressed in these words of the
text; And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Some do here by
the spirit of God understand some Angelical What the Spirit moving is.
spirit, which God used and employed to fit and prepare this matter to his
hand: thus Cajetan a Romish Cardinal and Schooleman held. Tertullian. lib. 3.
contra Hermog. says, that this spirit of God was a wind, by which God
prepared and disposed it. Theoderet says it was the air, which moved on the
upper part of it, Quaest. 8. in Genes. But I conceive all these to be unsound
opinions First, they are confuted by the very words (...).
of the text, and by all other Scriptures which ascribe the whole work of the
creation, and the making of the World, and all things therein wholly and only
to God the Father, the Word; and the Spirit, three Persons in one undivided
essence. Secondly, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. 2.
it is against all reason, to think that God, who created the chiefest and
most excellent of all his works the highest heavens, and the Angels, the
heavenly spirits, immediately of nothing in a moment, and also the common
matter of all the visible World in an instant; would use, or did employ any
creature to dispose the matter and to fit it to his hand: Wherefore tho best
exposition of these words is that which is held generally by the best learned;
to wit, that this Spirit of God, here mentioned, is the eternal Spirit, one
and the same God with the Father and the Son, by whom all things were made; and
He is said here to move upon the face of the waters. The Hebrew word here used
does properly signify the Eagles gentle fluttering with her wings over her
young ones, thereby to cherish them; as appears, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. And here it
signifies the work of Gods Spirit extending his power upon this rude,
confused, unformed and empty mass, and gently shaking it, and causing the
grosser parts to settle downwards, and the more subtle parts to gather into
the upper place, and so to prepare and dispose every part for the substantial
form which God at length gave unto it. Thus you have the text opened.

From whence we learn, First, That man and all other creatures which live, and
move, and have any being in the whole visible 1. Doctr. all creatures have
being of God.
World, howsoever they are engendered and propagated one by another, yet they
have their whole substance and being from God, and he is the sole creator and
maker of them. That he made the first common matter out of which they were
framed, the text here shows plainly. Also that the spirit of God did prepare
and dispose that whole matter and every part of it, to receive that form which
God gave to the whole World, and every creature therein. And by his word he
gave a special form and being to every creature after his kind, as afterward
appears throughout the whole Chapter. And he gave the gift of generation and
propagation to every kind of creature which is propagated and begotten; and
power to multiply; and without his power assisting and working together, no
creature is formed at all: so that this Doctrine is most necessarily gathered
from hence: And other Scriptures fully confirm it, as Act. 17. 25, 28. where
it is said, that in him we live, move, and have our being; and he gives life,
breath, and being to all: He has not only made the heavens, and the earth,
and all the host of them, and every thing which has being, even all the
changable elements, and vanishing meteors, in the first Creation, as fire,
water, aite, earth, hail, snow, thunder, lightening, clouds, vapors, and the
like, as we read, Job 28. Psalm. 33. 6. and Psalm. 149. 5. and Isa. 66. 2. but
he also frames every man in the womb of his mother; as the Psalmist testifies,
Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15. and all children and the fruit of the womb are a gift,
and blessing which comes of the Lord, Psalm. 129. 3. And reason drawn from
the proper name of God, Jehovah, proves this, that he gives all being to every
thing; and that as he is absolute of himself, so the being of every creature
depends wholly on him; for so much that name signifies, as I have elsewhere
proved.

First, this serves to admonish us, that as we our selves are Use 1. He is
the^ Lord of all.
the creatures of God, and he is our Lord to whom we owe our whole substance,
being, power, strength, life, breath, and motion, and are bound to employ all
to his glory: so all other things in the World which serve for our use, or can
come within our reach and power, are Gods workmanship; he is the Lord and owner
of them, and no man ought to use or employ them, but by his permission, and in
his service, and to his glory. Therefore let us devote our selves to God, and
serve him by all his creatures, and for our life, breath, being, and all
things, render due thanks to his heavenly Majesty, confessing that the whole
World is his, and the fullness thereof.

Secondly, this Doctrine shows, that no man has right or Use 2. All our
right is from God.
interest before God in any creature, or in his own life, limbs, and members
of his body, but by the free gift of God: Yea, since man's fall and forfeiture
of his life and all things by sin, no man has right to any good thing in the
World, but in Christ who is heir of all things, and has by his merit and
mediation procured the preservation and continuance of being to man, and to all
other things made for man's use. Although wicked, carnal, unregenerate men,
have a common right and interest civilly before men in their lives, goods,
lands and possessions; yet before God (while they abuse their power, riches,
and all abilities, to sin and to pride, and oppression in the service of their
own lusts) they are no better then thieves and usurpers: And let all such
look to it, for certainly God will call them to account, judge and condemn
them, as for unjust possessing, so much more for their profane abuse of his
creatures, and all worldly blessings.

Secondly, in that God, who by his infinite power can make perfect in a moment,
and that immediately out of nothing, the 2. Doctr. The World is all mutable, and
appointed so to be.
most excellent creatures of all, even the highest heaven and the Angels; did
of his own will, and according to his counsel, make a rude, confused,
imperfect and unstable matter first without form, that out of it he might
frame, and indeed did frame this whole visible World, and all creatures
therein: Hence we may learn, That as all this World is mutable and
inconstant; so the mutability and inconstancy of all visible and natural
things in this World, is a thing which God purposed and foreshewed in the
creation of them; and all alterations and changes which are found in them, are
according to the counsel of his will, and he alone does overruled, order and
dispose them. Many Scriptures prove this fully in all parts. Wise Solomon
shows at large that all worldly things are subject to continual changes,
Eccles. 1. 4 5. 6. and David, Psalm 102. 26. testifies of the visible heavens,
which are the most durable parts of the inferior World, that they shall
perish, and shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture God shall change
them, and they shall be changed, and Isa. 40. 7. all Flesh is said to be as
grass which withers, and the glory thereof as the flower of the Field which
fades; and 2 Pet. 3. 10. 11. the Apostle affirms, that the heavens shall
pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the Earth
with all things therein shall be burnt: and that it is God who over-ruleth,
orders, and disposes all mutations, and changes in the World. David also
shows, Psalm 104. 29. 30. that when God hides his face, all living creatures
are troubled, when he takes away, their breath they dye, and are turned into
their dust: and Psalm 46. 6. He says, that, when God utters his voice, the
Earth melts, and Verse. 8. Come and behold the works of the Lord, how he
disposes desolutions in the Earth: and Isa. 24. 1. the Prophet says, Behold
the Lord will empty the Earth, and lay it waste; he will ov^rturne the face of
it, and disperse them that dwell therein. It is God who pulls down the
mighty, and exalts the humble and meek, 1. Sam. 2. He restraines the
waters, and rivers are dried up. He sends them out, and they overturne the
Earth; He breaks down, and it cannot be built again; he leads
counselors away spoiled, and makes judges fools; he removes away the
speech of the trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged; he
powers out contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty,
Job 12. 14. 15. 17. 20, 21.

This Doctrine serves to admonish us not to put trust or confidence Use 1.
Trust not in any earthly thing.
in any worldly thing; not in the earth, nor any creatures in it; not in the
face of the heavens, nor in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, because all are so
mutable and changable. A fair Sunshine morning may be turned into a
tempestuous day of hail and rain. When the Sun is risen up most gloriously in
the morning upon Sodom, and the countries of the plain; before noone they may
be destroyed by a shower of fire and brimstone, and fruitful lands may
quickly be turned into deserts, and barren wilderness. The Sun it self may
stand in the midst of ^^s course, and may be turned back when he is going
down. Wherefore let us not trust in deceiptfull vanities, but still remember
that of the holy Psalmist, O put not your trust in princes, nor in any child of
man, for there is no help in them, Psalm 146. 3. and that of the Prophet
Jeremy, Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
Ier. 17. 5.

Secondly, though there happen many changes and great confusion Use 2. Think
not changes in the World to come by chance.
in the World, yet let us here take notice, that they come not by chance; and
always acknowledge, that they are in the will and power of God, and are
ordered and disposed by his overruling wisdom. If to the wicked enemies and
persecutors of Gods Church changes come for worse, to their confusion, and
overturning of their power; let us see Gods hand therein, and let us give him
the praise for working our deliverance, and avenging our cause on our enemies.
If changes come to our selves, and our peace be turned into trouble and
danger; let us humble our selves, as under Gods hand. If our adversity be
turned into prosperity, let God have all the thanks. If we see just cause to
fear great changes in Church or State, let us fly to God for help, strength,
courage, and patience, and betake our selves to his protection, that we may
rest safely under the shadows of his wings.

The third point of doctrine, which we may observe from the Spirit of God
moving upon the waters, cherishing and fitting the unformed mass to receive a
perfect being and perfect Similitude of the Creation and Redemp tion.
forms of visible creatures, does show the concord and perfect similitude
which is between the work of creation, by which God formed all things by his
word and Spirit; and the work of restoration and redemption of mankind, by
which he reformes them by Christ and by his Spirit, and brings them to
supernatural perfection and blessedness. As in the creation, God by his
Spirit cherishing the rude mass did prepare, and fit every part thereof to
receive a perfect form and natural being: so in the restoring of man kind,
being deprived of his image and deformed, God does by his Word, and by his
Spirit shed on us through Christ, regenerate, renew, reform and prepare us for
the fruition of himself, and does fit, and prepare us for supernatural
perfection and blessedness. As in Ezechiels vision, the wind from God did move
and shake the dry bones scattered upon the face of the earth, and fitted them
by flesh and skin to receive life, and to stand up living men in perfect
strength and stature: So, by the word and Spirit of God, men dead and rotten in
sins and sinful corruption, are, by the Spirit of God breathed through
Christ, renewed after his image, and fitted by the life of grace, for the
eternal life of glory, Ezech. 37. The Spirit of God (as our Savior
testifies) is like the wind, which blows where it lists: it is he, which
does frame us after Gods image in our new birth, Ioh. 3. 5, 8. and fits us for
the Kingdom of glory. We are as far from God, and from Christ, and as void
of his image and of all Spiritual life, as the rude mass was of all form in
the first creation; until the Spirit of God be given to us in Christ to dwell
in us, and renew us, as the Apostle shows, Romans 8. 9. 13. Ephesians. 2. 18. 22.
and Tit. 3. 5. 6.

Wherefore, as we desire to be made like unto Christ in the image of glory,
and to see, and enjoy God in his heavenly Use 1.
Kingdom, where all fullness of perfection and blessedness is to be found; So
let us by the consideration of this Doctrine be stirred up to thirst after the
river of the water of life, even the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, and
never rest satisfied, till we feel within us the testimony of the Spirit of
Christ witnessing with our Spirits that we are the children of God, and till
we feel our selves sanctified throughout both in soul and body, and
holiness engraven upon our hearts without which none can see God.

Secondly, seeing the Spirit of God is he who prepares men Use 2.
for supernatural perfection, and there is no communion to be had with Christ,
nor participation of his merits and saving benefits to salvation, except men
have the Spirit of God dwelling in them, and of profane and carnal sons of
Adam, making them holy, and spiritual sons of God; Let us not count it any
shame or reproach to us, that profane mockers of these last times do, in
mockery and derision, call us spiritual men, who ascribe all good motions
which are in us to the Spirit of God dwelling in us, and directing us in all
our ways. We do not deny, but that all Enthusiasts, and other men of
fanaticall Spirit, do most profanely, and sacrilegiously Father their own
fancies, and lustful motions on the Spirit of God, and therein deserve
reproach and derision: but let men take heed, that they do not, by loathing
their hypocrisy and arrogance, run into Atheism and blasphemous impiety, by
rejecting and denying the Spirits dwelling in all Gods regenerate children,
working in them all saving graces, and moving them to walk in the holy ways
of God which lead unto supernatural perfection and eternal blessedness. For,
most certain it is that as the first rude matter of the visible World was
sustained and cherished by the Spirit of God moving upon the face of it, and
was not otherwise able to subsist, or to be formed into diverse creatures,
every one made perfect in their kind with natural perfection: so the perfect
stabilitie of man, in an happy unchangable estate; yea the perfection of the
visible World made for man's use, is the work of the holy Ghost uniting man to
to God in Christ, and gathering and reconciling all things unto God in him, who
is the head over all. Although man and all creatures (as appears in the last
verse of this Chapter) were created every one good and perfect in his kind,
with natural perfection: yet man the chief, and the Lord of them all, having
not as yet the holy Ghost shed on him through Christ, as all the regenerate and
faithful have, was mutable, and in that honorable estate of innocence he did
not stand and abide, but did full from it very quickly after that the Woman was
created and given to him, as we read Chap. 3. yea he did not lodge one night
therein, Psalm 49. 12. and by Man's sinful fall and corruption, the whole
frame of the visible World was made subject to vanity, and groaneth under it as
under an intolerable burden, and with earnest longing waits for deliverance
and restitution to an higher estate in the glorious liberty of the sons of
God, Romans 8. 19. 20. And although the eternal Word, the Son of God, All whom
Christ saves, renewed by the Spirit.
had undertaken for man in the eternal counsel of the blessed Trinity, and
did step in to mediate for man, and in the first promise made upon man's fall
was proclaimed to be the only and all-sufficient Redeemer, and was fully
exhibited in the flesh, and became a perfect Redeemer in his death and
resurrection; so that in him is plenteous redemption, and matter sufficient to
merit more then man lost by sin, even heavenly glory and immortality: yet all
this profits nothing without the work of the Spirit. Christ with all his
sufferings, and obedience unto death, and all his righteousness, and
fullfilling of the law; are as a Fountain sealed up, and treasures hid, and
locked up in darkness; so that none can partake of him or them for redemption
and salvation without communion of the holy Ghost; which God in our
regeneration does shed on us abundantly through Christ. This Spirit dwelling
in Christ and the faithful, makes them one mystical body with Christ, sons
and heirs of God; makes his satisfaction their ransom for actual redemption
and reconciliation, and his righteousness their righteousness for justification.
This Spirit also does renew them after the image of God, and transformes them
into the image of Christ in all holiness, that they may be fit to see and
enjoy God; and thus he brings them to the fruition of perfect blessedness,
and to the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, which never fades: And
Gods blessings are through Christ's mediation poured out upon all creatures for
their sakes: And hereupon it is, that all gifts and graces, which tend to make
men perfect and unchangably blessed, are ascribed to the Spirit, as wisdom,
knowledge, faith, hope, love, meekness, patience, courage, strength, prayer,
and in a word all holiness and perfection: and whenever God is said to give
any of these gifts to men in an effectual and saving manner and measure, he
is said to give them the Spirit of grace, wisdom, zeal and supplication, as
appears Isa. 11. 2. Zach. 12. 10. Yea common illumination and all
extraordinary supernatural gifts, which are given to unregenerate reprobates
for the revealing of Christ, as the gift of prophecy to Balaam and Saul, and
the change of heart in Saul from cowardly pusillanimity, to fortitude and
magnanimity; the gift of miracles to Judas; also illumination, taste of the
heavenly gift, joy in the holy Word of God, given to backsliders, Heb. 6. are
the work of the holy Ghost, assisting them and inspiring them from without,
for the Churches good; not inwardly dwelling and working in them for their own
salvation. Wherefore let us count it no reproach that we have no hope of being
in an happy and blessed estate, no assurance that we are in the way to
perfection, till we feel the Spirit of God dwelling and working in us, moving
our hearts, and conforming us to the image of Christ; and that we rejoice in
this, and this is our glorying that we are not carnal but spiritual. They,
who think it enough, for the obtaining of perfection and salvation, to know,
believe, and profess, that in Christ there is as sufficient matter of
satisfaction for the redeeming of all mankind; as there was in the rude mass
without form, matter enough for the whole visible World and all creatures
therein, do much deceive themselves: for many who know and believe all this
do perish; and none are saved or perfected by Christ, but only they who are
by the Spirit dwelling in them united to Christ, and regenerated and renewed
after his image. This Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, and witnesses
to us our adoption; he makes us new creatures and a free willing people, he
sanctifies us to be an holy Temple for himself to dwell in, purges out
sinful corruption, mortifieth the deeds of the flesh, so that sin cannot
reign in our mortal bodies.

There is one thing more, which I may not pass over here in 4. Doctr.
silence, to wit, that this text does prove plainly, that the Spirit of God,
the third person in the Trinity, is one and the same God with the Father and
the Son, of the same uncreated nature and substance, the almighty Creator, and
Preserver of all things in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible. To
sustain a rude matter without form and void, and to make it subsist, is a
work of power, far above the power of any thing created; and to compass and
comprehend the whole matter and mass of the visible World; and to assist and
cherish by present virtue every part thereof at once, is a strong argument and
plain proof of divine and infinite power and omnipotency, proper to Jehovah
the one only true God: and all this is here testified of the Spirit of God in
these words, and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, that is
(as the Hebrew word (...), Merachepheth, and here used in the original
signifies) did sit upon and cherish that mighty mass, as an Hen does sit
upon and cherish her eggs, that they may be formed into chickens. Therefore
the Spirit of God is here proved to be one and the same God with the Father
and the Son, and the almighty Creator, former and preserver of the whole
World, and all things therein. To which purpose the Scriptures also speak
fully in other places, where the heavens and the host of them are said to be
made by the Word and Spirit of God, as Psalm 33. 6. and that when God sends
out his Spirit, things are created, as Psalm 104. 30. and that God by his
Spirit garnished the heavens, Job 26. 13. and that he is present by his
preserving and sustaining power in all places, Psalm 139. 7. which places
prove the Spirit of God to be Jehovah the Creator and Former of all things,
and the true God, in whom we all live, move, and have our being.

This point, which I have proved and confirmed by many other strong arguments
already, in my discourse of the Trinity; Use.
as it discovers the desperate malice, impudency, and Atheism of the
Remonstrants, the Disciples of Socinus, and Arminius, who call into question
the Deity of the holy Ghost and his unity, with the Father and the Son, and
his right to be prayed unto and worshipped with Divine worship: so it is of
singular comfort to the faithful, whose bodies are Temples of the holy Ghost,
in that it assures them that God is their portion, and dwells in them, and they
are begotten of his seed in regeneration, and are partakers of the Divine
nature, and heaven is their inheritance.

CHAP. VI.
Of the first days work. What the light was. What it is, God said, Let there
be light. How be called the light, day, and the darkness night. Of a day
natural and civil. That the night was before the day. How a day was before
the Sun was. Prerogatives of the first day.

Verse. 3, 4, 5. And God said, Let there be light, and there was light; Genesis 1.
And God saw the light that it was good. And God divided the light from the
darkness. And God called the light day, and the darkness he called night,
and the evening and the morning were the first day.

After that darkness had continued upon the face of the deep, and the whole
matter of this inferior World had remained full of darkness for the space of
one night, God by his powerful Word created Light, the first perfect creature
and element of the visible World, and commanded it to shine out of darkness; 2
Cor. 4. 6.
and this was the morning of the first day. In the words we may observe these
four things: First, the creation of light in the 3. verse. Secondly, Gods
approbation of it in these words, God saw the light that it was good. Thirdly,
Gods separation of it from the darkness, verse. 4. Fourthly, Gods nomination or
naming of the light, day, and the darkness night, and so compounding these
two, light and darkness, into the first whole day of the World, verse. 5.

In the first thing, which is the creation of light, the first of all perfect
creatures in this visible World, two things come to be sifted and examined for
our right understanding thereof. First, the thing created, Light, what is
thereby here meant. Secondly, the manner of creating it, God said, Let light
be, and it was so.

Concerning the first, I find diverse and several opinions of What the Light was
the learned. Saint Augustine lib. 1. in Genes. ad literam cap. 3. and Rupertus
lib. 1. de Trinit. cap. 10. do by this light understand the highest heavens,
and the Angels, which are not a corporeal but a spiritual light; but this
cannot be the truth, for this light is said to be, that which is called the
day, and is opposed to the darkness of the night here in this mutable and
visible World; the shining whereof does distinguish day from the night, which
cannot be said of the Angels and the highest heavens, which were not made out
of darkness, nor out of the rude unformed mass as this light was, which God
commanded to shine out of darkness as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4. 6.

Secondly, others, as Beda, Lyra, and Lombard, do by this light understand a
bright cloud carried about, and making a difference of day and night.

Nazianzene and Theadoret do think, that it was the same light, which now is
in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, subsisting at the first in one body, and
afterward divided into several parts when God made the Sun, Moon, and
Stars out of it.

Basil thought that it was light without a subject. Aquinas, that it was the
light of the Sun made imperfect at the first; and of this opinion is Pererius
also.

Catharinus held, that it was the Sun it self, made first of all; which is
directly contrary to the express words of the 16. verse. which affirm, that
the Sun was made the fourth day.

Iunius, by light, here understands the element of fire.

In this variety of opinions, I hold it the best, and surest way of finding out
the truth, to seek it out of the word used in the original text. The
Hebrewword ((...), Or) which is here translated Light, (besides the tropicall
and spiritual senses, in which it is used in those Scriptures which call God
the light in whom is no darkness, and the light and salvation of his people;
and do call Gods regenerate people light in the Lord) does more properly
signify two things: First, that natural body or substance, which among all
the parts and creatures of the visible World is most bright and shining in it
self, and gives light to others; as for example, the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
are called Lights, Psalm 136. 7. and the element of fire, is called by this
name (...), Light, Ezech. 5. 2. Secondly, it signifies, and that most
frequently in the Scripture, the light, that is, the shining brightness of the
heavens, and of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and of the element of fire burning
in a lamp or torch, or other combustible matter. Here I do not take the word
in this latter sense, only for a shining brightness; for then God had created
an accident or quality without a subject, which is a thing against nature of
things created; for common reason and experience show, that never did any
quality subsist of it self without a substance; by course of nature no light
can be but in some created body, as in the heavens, fire, or air. But hereby
light we are to understand, of necessity, some notable part of this great
frame of the visible World, which God first framed out of the rude mass, which
was without form and void, before mentioned; yea that part, which is most
bright, shining and resplendent; and does by light and brightness, which is
natural in it, shine forth and enlighten other things. Now that cannot be any
of these lower elements, the water and the earth, for they have no such light
in them; and besides, it is manifest, that they were formed out of the grossest
and most dark part of the common mass, on the third day, verse. 9. Neither can
it be the spacious region of the air, which is extended and spread abroad
far and wide, over all the round globe of the earth and the waters, and
reaches up to the etheriall region of the visible heavens, even to the sphaere
of the Moon, and is called the lowest heaven, or (...), that is, the broad
expansion or firmament in the midst of the waters: For that was formed the
second day, as appears in 6. 7. 8. verse. It must needs therefore be the
firmament of the visible heavens, which is called (...), The large and far
stretched firmament of the middle heaven, even the fiery or etheriall region,
wherein God, on the fourth day, formed and set the great lights of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, verse. 14. 16. For, first those heavens were framed and made
of the most pure, and refined part of the mass, which is the common matter of
the visible World, and are most bright and shining, full of light and
brightness; and undoubtedly as in place and order, they are the next to the
highest heavens, so they were created next after them in the first day, and are
here called by the name of Light, because all the light of this visible World
is in them, and from them shines into the air and gives light upon the
earth. Secondly, there is no particular mention made by Moses in this Chapter
of the framing of these heavens, among all the works of the six days, except
it be in this word Light; and it is most incredible that he would omit the
creation of them which are the most excellent and glorious part of the visible
frame of the World, especially seeing he does exactly and particularly name,
and relate the creation of all other parts, and the day wherein they were
created.

I am not ignorant, that Aristotle, and the most learned natural Philosophers
of his sect, did hold, that the visible heavens are eternal and unchangable,
and of a matter and substance different from the four elements, fire, air,
water, and earth; and were not made of the same common matter. Also diverse
learned Christians and Schoolmen do think, that these heavens were created
together with the highest heavens immediately of nothing, in the beginning when
time first began to be, and are mentioned in the first verse; and that light,
which is here said to be made, is the element of fire; the natural place and
region whereof, the Philosophers held to be next under the visible heavens,
and above the air: their reasons are two especially; The first, because there
is no other mention of the creation of the fiery element in all this Chapter.
The second is, because the fire is the most pure element, and full of light:
But these things are not of strength to overthrow our exposition. First, for
the opinion of the Philosophers, that the visible heavens are immutable and
cannot be dissolved, it is contradicted by the express words of holy
Scripture, Psalm 102. 26. and 2 Pet. 3. 10. Also we find by experience many
changes in those heavens; as new Stars and Comets appearing for a time and
after vanishing. The Sun and Moon stood still for the space of a whole day,
Josh. 10. and the Sun went back ten degrees, 2 King. 20. Secondly, the virtue
and influence which is in the visible heavens, and is from them naturally
communicated to the lower elements, shows plainly that they all are of one
common matter. Thirdly, that they were not made at once of nothing with the
highest heavens, appears by this, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are
the chiefest parts and ornaments in them were created after the first rude
matter, and secondarily formed out of it on the fourth day.

Fourthly, that the visible heavens are indeed the pure element of fire, which
is here called Light, and that the creation of the light is the creation of
them, and of the fiery element all in one, may easily be proved by diverse
reasons. First, by the light and servent heat, which flows from them into
things below, by means whereof they do beget fiery meteors and lightenings in
the air, and scorching sumes, and burning flames in the earth, as daily
experience teaches. Secondly, by the burning and consuming fires, which
descended from those heavens in the destruction of Sodom, and when the Lord
came down on mount Sinah to give the Law, and when Eliah consumed the
captains and their fifties, 2 King. 1, and was answered by fire, which
consumed his sacrifice, 1 King. 18. Thirdly, that these heavens are of a fiery
substance, and indeed the pure element of fire, and that in the dissolution of
them, when the Lord by his mighty voice shall rend them and dissolve them at
the last day, and mingle them with the inferior elements; they shall be all
on fire, and in flames and flashes shall pass away with a noise, and melt the
elements with servent heat, and burn the earth with all the works that are
therein; the Apostle does affirm in plain words, 2 Pet. 3. 11. 12. If they
were not of a fiery substance made out of the rude mass, but of an higher and
super-elementary nature created immediately out of nothing, together with the
highest heavens, they could not be dissolved and set on fire. Thus you see the
first thing opened, viz. what is here meant by Light.

The next thing is the manner of creation; expressed in these Of Gods saying,
lee light be.
words, God said, Let there be light, and there was light. I will not here
trouble my discourse with needless questions, which are moved by diverse
ancient Writers, and not cleared concerning the manner of Gods speech when He
said, Let there be light; as whether it were a bodily and audible voice, or a
spiritual, and the like. Certainly it was no sound of voice, nor any form of
words or speech by which God formed the light: It was the act of his Almighty
power, by which he formed, and brought into actual being the light and every
other thing, even so as he had decreed from all eternity. Now the Spirit of
God does here express this powerful act by the name of saying or speaking,
for 3. reasons. First, because as the speech and word of a wise man shows his
mind and declares his will, so by this act of power, by which the light and
every other thing was formed, God did show and declare his eternal counsel,
purpose and decree concerning the nature and being of them. Secondly, because
God the Father by his eternal Word, the Son, who is one God with himself, did
form and make the light and all other things created, as appears, Ioh. 1. 3.
and Colos. 1. 16. and Hebr. 1. 2. Thirdly, to show, that the creation of the
World, and all things therein, was a work as easy to God, as it is for a man
to speak a word and to command a thing to be done; and that God by his power
omnipotent, and powerful and mighty word and command, can as quickly bring
into being the greatest things, and perform whatsoever he wills and
purposes with more case, then man can speak and say, Let this thing be. This
is the true sense of the words, wherein the manner of creation is expressed.

The second thing after the creation of light is Gods approbation (...).
of it, in these words, And God saw the light that it was good: That is, such
as God purposed to make the light, such it was when he had made it; there was
no defect in the making, or in the thing made; but God did see and know it
perfect in the kind thereof, and did approve it to be good, profitable and
useful, every way, for the purposes which he intended.

The third thing is Gods dividing between the light and the 3.
darkness which did overspread the face of the deep, and possessed all the
rude mass which yet remained without form and void. This dividing between
them, was nothing else but Gods setting and placing of the fiery and shining
visible heaven in the superior place above the confused matter which was full
of darkness, and settled down in the inferior place where now the inferior
elements are

The fourth thing is Gods nomination of the light and darkness, and composing
the first day of the evening, that is, the 4.
space wherein the darkness remained over all the deep before light was
created out of it; and of the morning, that is, the space wherein light
appeared before God set upon the second days work, and made the firmament.
This is expressed verse. 5. God called the Light Day, and the Darkness he
called Night, and the evening and morning were the first day. Here for our
right understanding of this point, diverse doubts and questions come to be
touched and briefly answered.

The first is, how and in what sense God is said to call the light 1. Quest.
Ans.
Day, and the darkness Night. The true and full answer is this, that God did
not only call the light Day, and darkness Night: but also did ordain and
appoint, that the time of light should be the day, and the time of darkness
should be the night, and that they should be so accounted and called.

The second is, why God called only the light day, and 2. Quest.
Moses calls both the evening and the morning, that is, the time of light and
darkness one day, or the first day.

I answer, that Gods day, which is most truly and properly so Ans.
called, is the time of light, and in it their is no night or darkness. For
God speaks of a natural day distinct from the night: but Moses speaks of a
civil day which comprehends in it the space of 24. hours, in which the Sun
runs round about the World with the heavens; which day includes in it a day
and a night: and here observe that Gods day is all light, and man's day is mixed
of light and darkness.

Thirdly, it may asked whether the night, or the day went before 3. Quest.
in the first day of the creation.

The Answer is, that the night or time of darkness was first; Ans.
and it is likely that darkness did overspread the face of the deep the space
of a night, that is 12. hours, before God formed the light, and settled the
visible heavens in their place; and that after the light was created, it did
shine forth for the space of 12. hours more before God went about to make the
firmament, which was the second days work; and so the first day of the World
was of the same length with all other civil or Astronomicall days, that is,
24 hours, divided equally between light and darkness. The words of the text
show that darkness overspread all the mass of the inferior World for a time,
before the light was formed. Also in naming the six days of the creation, the
evening, that is, the time of darkness, is rehearsed first before the morning,
which is the (...) of light. Also Gods people began their days of the week
and of the year with the night, and reckoned the Sabbath and other solemn
days from evening to evening, as appears, Levit. 23. 32.

Fourthly it may be asked, how the fiery or visible heavens 4. Quest.
could by their light make a day before the Sun was created, seeing the light
of the same heavens, together with the light of the Moon, and the Stars
added thereto, cannot make a day, but it is night where the Sun is absent, and
the light of it not seen, not withstanding the light of the heavens, and of
the Moon and Stars.

I answer, that the light of the heavens without Sun, Moon, and Stars is
sufficient to make a bright day in the place where Ans.
they are, and there it is always day, though by reason of the spacious
regions of the air, and the great distance between them and the earth, their
light does not shine to us to make a day of light without the beams of the
Sun, but it is dark night in that part of the earth where their light only
appears. Now in the first day before the firmament was made, that is the
region of the air purged and refined out of the mass by the sinking and
settling of the earthy and waterish matter toward the center, there was no
need of light further then the body of the heavens reached, that is to the
upper face of the rude mass, not yet formed, but remaining rude and full of
darkness; And therefore so far as the visible World was brought into form,
they did give most clear day light: and as all had before bin overspread with
darkness for the space of a night; so all was now overspread with light for a
days space, and so the first day of the creation was one half all night, and
another half all day in all the visible World, even in all parts thereof which
were then created and brought into perfect form and being. From this text thus
opened we may observe diverse points of instruction.

First we learn, that as there are three Persons in that one God which created
the World by his own infinite power; so 1. Doctr. Three Persons in the Godhead.
every Person is a creator; and God the Father by his eternal Word, the Son,
did extend and show forth his power to the framing of every creature, and by
his Spirit did give all form and perfection to them. As the word Elohim, used
in the first verse, notes more Persons; so here, and in the verse before, we
see the Persons distinguished, and all three working in the framing of the
World and all the creatures therein. First, God the Father is brought in
creating. Secondly, by his Word, that is, not by a sound of the voice, or a
word uttered; for there was then no air to receive such a sound; but by his
eternal Word bringing things into being according to his eternal Counsel and
decree. Thirdly, by his Spirit moving upon the face of the waters, and
cherishing the rude and common matter of the whole visible World, yet void and
unformed, and preparing it for the receiving of the several forms of all
creatures in the several parts of it.

Which point excellently confirms our faith in the true Use.
Doctrine of the blessed Trinity, and confutes Sabellius, Servetus, the
Socinians and Arminians, who denied the eternal Deity of the Son and the holy
Ghost, and overthrowes their several heresies and damnable errors.

Secondly we hence learn, that all things are possible to 2. Doctr. All
things possible to God.
God; he can as easily and quickly by his eternal Word and power bring
greatest things to pass, even bring light out of darkness, and the glorious,
pure, spacious, visible heavens out of the rude, impure and confused mass,
which was without form and void; as a man of nimble tongue and ready speech
can speak a word. Which Doctrine other Scriptures do abundantly confirm,
which ascribe to God omnipotency, and proclaim him to be wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working; and that nothing is too hard or wonderful
for him to do, as Genes. 18. 14. Isa 28. 29. Job 36. 5. and 42. 2.

Which serves to stir us up to fear, admire, and reverence Use.
God, to seek his favor and protection above all things, and to rest
confidently on him for defense against all enemies and dangers when we are
reconciled to him, and have him for our God and our portion.

Thirdly, we may here observe, that God is wonderful in wisdom 3. Doctr. God
wonderful in wisdom and providence.
and providence, in that the first thing created in this visible World was
light, even the bright and shining heavens; which, as above all visible
creatures they show the glory and super-celestial excellency of God in their
natural frame and substance, so also give bodily light to the eyes of all
bodily living creatures, which were to be made to see, and discern the
glorious beauty and admirable frame of his visible works: for hereby it came to
pass, that none of gods visible and perfect works of wisdom, were for an
hour smoothered in darkness; but were all manifest, and Gods glory was
clearly seen in them, so soon as there was a seeing creature able to discern
them.

This shows, that God has done his part to reveal himself; Use
and man who takes not notice of God in his works, to worship him aright, is
without all excuse. And this should stir us up to labor to see God, and to
discern him in his works, and to place all our perfection and happiness in
the sight and knowledge of him.

Fourthly, we may hence observe diverse singular prerogatives of the first day,
which is now, by the resurrection of Christ, the 4. Doctr. Prerogatives of the
first day.
Lords holy day, and the Sabbath of all true Christians. That by many special
prerogatives, God did in the creation foreshew his eternal counsel and
purpose to make this day his holy day in the days of Christ, and in the time
of the Gospel under the Kingdom of grace. 1. This is the first fruits of all
time. 2. In it was created the glorious frame of the heavens, and the 1. 2. 3.
first light of the visible World. 3. In this day God first showed by his
eternal Word, the Son, his eternal counsel and purpose, and by his Word and
Spirit, began to bring his purposes to pass, and produce things into being. 4.
In this day darkness and 4.
light were so separated and divided, that, while the night lasted, there was
no day in all the inferior World; and while it was day, there was no night
over all the face of the earth and the deep, but light in all the World, which
was then created and brought into form and perfect being. 5. In this day God
first showed his approbation and his pleasure, that he approved for good 5.
the things which by his eternal Word, the Son, he did form and bring into
being. Therefore without doubt most fit to be the day of the Lord Christ, and
sanctified and kept holy to the honor and glory of him, who is the first borne
of God, and the first fruits of them that sleep, and the light of the World,
and in whom God shows his counsel, and is in him well pleased, and by him
turns night into day, and brings light out of darkness, and brings us to
eternal rest in the highest heavens, which were created in the beginning of
the first day.

CHAP. VII.
The second days work. Of the sky and things now created. All made by the
power of God in Christ. The use of the firmament. How called heaven. All was
created wisely and orderly: Use.

ANd God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Verse 6, 7, 8.
waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. 7. And God made the
Firmament, and divided the waters which were under the Firmament, from the
waters which were above the Firmament; and it was so. 8. And God called the
Firmament heaven: and the evening and the morning were the second day.

In these words we have abriefe history of the second days work in the
creation of the World: wherein we are to consider these five things: 1. The
thing created. 2. The creation and bringing of it into being. 3. The use of it.
4. The name which God gave unto it. 5. How by this work there came in an
evening and a morning, which where the second day

First, for the thing created, it is in the original text called by Of the
things now created.
a general name (...), which may signify any thing which is spread abroad, or
stretched far and wide, according to the etymology of it. For the Hebrew
verb (...), of which it is derived, in all Scriptures wheresoever it is used,
does signify the act of spreading any thing abroad, and stretching it out, and
laying it wideopen to view, as Exodus 39. 3. Numb. 16 38. and Ier. 10. 9, it
signifies beating out of gold, silver, or brass into thin broad plates, that
is, spreading them broad by violent beating, Exodus 40. 19 It is used to
signify the spreading abroad of the tent over the Tabernacle, Psalm 139. 6.
and Isa. 42. 5. and 44. 24. It is used to signify the stretching out of the
earth above the waters far and wide, Job 37. 18. it signifies the spreading
out of the sky and of the thin clouds; and 2 Samuel 22. 43. it is used to
signify spreading abroad as a man spreads clay by stamping it with his feet;
and, by a Metonymic of the effect, it is used to signify stamping with the
feet as men stamp clay and spread it abroad, Ezech. 6. 11. and 25. 6.

These are the places of Scriptures, in which only that word is used. So then
this word (...), being derived of it, must needs signify a thing which is
stretched out like a tent or canopie, or spread abroad as plates of gold and
silver are by beating, and clay by stamping. The Greek Septuagints transiate
this Word every where (...), that is, a thing which though it be far
stretched out, yet it is so surely established, that it abides still in the
place which God has appointed for it. And the vulgar Latin, with diverse later
translaters, following the Greek Septuagints, translate it Firmamentum, the
firmament, that is, a thing firmly set and established in a place, which
cannot from thence be driven out, and leave the place empty. And although this
word may, according to the notation of it, signify any thing stretched out or
spread abroad, or laid wide open, and is once only used to signify broad
plates of brass beaten out for a covering, and that in the plural number,
Number. 16. 38. yet in all other places of Scripture it is used in the singular
number for the sky, which God has from the beginning stretched out over the
globe of the Earth and the Sea, as here in this Chapter, and Psalm 19. 1. and
150. 1. and Dan. 12. 3. and Ezech. 1. 22. and 10. 1. Now what this sky or
firmament is, that is a great question among the learned. Diverse of the
Ancients, as Basil, Ambrose, Beda, and others, do by this firmament understand
the starry heavens. First, because it is said in the 8. verse that God called
this firmament heaven. Secondly, because it is said that, when God made the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, he set them in the firmament of heaven, verse. 17.
Thirdly, because they do imagine that there is a watery heaven above the
starry heaven, which consists of water congealed like to Cristall, and does
temper the heat of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and out of this heaven they
conceive that God poured the waters which drowned the old World, because it is
said, Genesis 7. 11. that the windows of heaven were opened, and God rained on
the earth.

But others do hold, that by the firmament here is meant the whole heavens;
that is, both the first heavens, the spacious regions of the air; and also the
middle, that is, the fiery and starry heavens; and the third, that is, the
highest heavens. First, because it is said that God called the firmament (...),
Heaven; and this word is used in the Scriptures to signify all these three
heavens. And as the highest heaven is called by this name, Psalm 11. 4. the
Lords throne is in heaven, and Psalm 148. where it is said, Praise Him, O
heaven of heavens: So the middle and starry heavens, as Genesis 22. 17. where we
read of the Stars of heaven, and also the airy or lowest heaven is thus
called, Verse 20. and 26. where it is said, Let the fowls fly in the open
firmament of heaven, and Psalm 79. 2. and Hos. 2. 18. and many other places,
where we read of the fowls of heaven.

But the best learned of later times have for the most part The sky meant by
the firmament,
held, that by the firmament is here meant that vast and spacious element and
region of the air, which is extended and stretched out, not only round about
all the Earth and the Sea; but also reaches from this globe of the Earth and
the Sea, to the starry heavens even to the sphere of the Moon: and this is
without doubt the true sense and meaning of the word in this place, as appears
by diverse reasons. First, the Hebrew name (...), Reas. 1.
(by which God called this firmament or large region, being compounded of
(...), which signifies there, or in that place, and (...), which signifies
waters) notes out unto us, that this firmament is the place where waters are
engendered in the clouds, and which from thence descend and water the earth,
and that is the fluid and waterish element the air. Secondly, 2.
there is no other firmament besides the air stretched out between the waters
of the Sea, which are below and the undermost, and the waters above in the
clouds heavenward, and from thence distill and water the earth, and did
descend in great abundance, and drowned the old World, when God dissolved the
clouds, and so opened the floud-gates and windows of heaven: The air is the
only element which divides between these two waters of the clouds above, and
of the Sea and Rivers below, Thirdly, the airy region is that in which the Sun,
Moon, and Stars do shine and give Light to the 3.
Earth, and in which their beams and light appear to us on earth. The light
of the starry heavens, and of the Sun, which always shines in them, even at
midnight as well as at noone day, is not seen of us as it is in the heavens,
but as it is in the air; for, by multiplying their beams in the air, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars are seen of us, and give light upon the earth. And
therefore it is not said, that God made the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the
firmament, or set them to have their place and being in it; but gave them to
be lights in it, that is, set them above to shine through it, and, by
multiplying their beams in this firmament the air, to give light to the
earth, Verse 15.

Fourthly, the fowls which fly in the open face of the air, are said to fly
in the firmament, which God called heaven, 4.
Verse 20.

Fifthly, the highest heaven was created in the beginning in the first moment
of time together with the Angels. And the 5.
starry heaven is the light created in the first day; therefore this heaven
here called firmament is the airie region or lowest heaven.

Sixthly, in all places of Scripture wherein we find this 6.
word (...), which is here translated firmament, we may very well and with
good reason understand by firmament, the large extended region of the air; and
it cannot be proved by any one place that the word signifies any other then the
airie heaven enlightened with the beams of the Sun and the starry heavens.

Seventhly, they who here by firmament do understand the starry heavens, are
forced by the words of the text (which say, 7.
that the firmament is in the midst of the waters, and divides the waters above
from the waters below) to imagine that there are waters above the starry
heavens, there placed to mitigate the heat of the Sun, and the Stars, and
that these waters drowned the old World; which is a ridiculous conceit,
grounded on palpable mistaking of diverse Scriptures, and contrary to all
reason. For the places of Scripture which speak of waters above the heavens,
intend no other waters but such as are in the clouds in the middle region of
the air, and above the lowest region of the firmament or airy heaven. First,
the Hebrew phrase ((...) and (...),) that is, above the firmament, or above the
heavens; signifies no more but waters that are above, heavenward. Secondly, the
Scriptures do plainly expound this phrase, and in many places show, that by
waters above the heavens, they do not mean either the multitude of heavenly
Angels, as Origin dreamed; or any Crystal orb or natural waters above the
starry heavens, as Basil, Ambrose, Beda, and others imagined; or the matter of
spiritual and supercelestiall substances different from the matter of earthly
creatures, as Austen thought; but that these waters above, are the waters in
the clouds above in the middle region of the air, even rain, and hail, and
snow, and such waters as flow from thence in great abundance when it pleases
God to open the bottles, windows, fountains, and floodgates of heaven, that
is, the clouds; for the clouds are called the bottles of heaven, Job 38. 37.
and the fountains of the deep, Prove. 8. 28. and the watery roof of Gods
chambers, Psalm 104. 3. and God is said to bind up his waters in the thick
clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them, Job 26. 8. and when God opens
the clouds and sends down rain to water the earth, and to give to it the
blessing of fruitfulness, he is said to open the windows and floodgates of
heaven, Genesis 7. 11. and Mal. 3. 10. And the lowest region of the air, in which
the dew is engendered of vapors and mists dissolved into small drops, is
called heaven; and the dew from thence distilling is called the Dew of heaven,
Genesis 27. 28. Psalm 133. 3. and Zach. 12. 8.

So then we see that the firmament here called heaven, is the wide and broad
spread air reaching from earth to the starry heaven, and compassing the globe
of Sea and land round about; and by the waters above the firmament, the waters
in the clouds are meant, which are above the lowest region of the airy heaven
or firmament. And thus much for the opening of the first thing in my text, to
wit, the thing created.

The second thing is the creation of this firmament, and the manner of it. It
is said, God made the firmament, that is, framed it, as he had done the light
the starry heavens, out of the rude matter before named, which was without
form and void, Verse 2. and this he did by the same power and after the same
manner, as he did the light, saying, Let there be a Firmament, that is, by his
eternal Word the Son, by whom he does exercise all his power, and perform all
his works according to his eternal Counsel, and by whom he shows outwardly
his eternal purpose and will, as a man by his word does openly profess and
declare his mind and purpose. And thus we see the Son^ still works with the
Father and the Spirit in the creation of every thing in the World, and without
him nothing is made and created.

The third thing is a maine use for which this firmament was made to serve;
namely to divide the waters from the waters, that is, the waters which are
below in the Sea, and Rivers, and are mingled with the earth, from the waters
which are above in the clouds; for we find by experience, that there is no
other thing, which divides between those waters, but only the lowest heaven,
the airie firmament. There is also another use hereafter mentioned, Verse 20.
that is to convey the light from the Sun, Moon, and Starry heavens to the
earth.

The fourth thing is the name by which God called the firmament, that is,
(...), heaven. Indeed, according to the common etymology and notation approved
of all the learned, this name most properly expresses the nature of the air,
the place of waters and waterish clouds; and the starry and highest heavens are
so called by reason that they appear to us, in our fight, to be one, and the
same common body; or else by a metaphore, because there is a great similitude
between them and the air, in respect of their purity and brightness; or (as I
have formerly noted) this word (...), when it is the proper name of the highst
heaven, may have another derivation of (...), which signifies there doubled,
or made in the form of the duall number; and so it is as much as if one should
say there, there, that is, there is the place of all places, there is the best
being in the heaven of heavens: and here we may observe, what manifold and
wonderful wisdom there is in the names which God has given to creatures
which he himself named.

The fifth and last thing to be considered in this text, which How a day
without the Sun.
is a point of greatest difficulty, is, How by the framing and continuance of
this work, there came in an evening and a morning, which are the second day.
The Sun was not yet created to shine and to give clear day light, such as we
now have, and therefore how could there be a day or a morning? And the light,
that is, the bright frame of the fiery heavens being extended over all the
inferior mass of the inferior elements, not yet formed, how could there be
an evening or night, and so a whole civil day, as the text here speaks? All
that the learned have devised and written for the removing of these doubts, is
this: Some hold, that the light which God created subsisting without a subject,
did, for the space of 12. hours, shine and send forth beams, and make the
morning; and again, for the space of 12. hours, was contracted and withdrew
it self, and so made the night or evening. This is the opinion of Basil, and
Damascene. Others think that light created the first day, being a bright cloud
which moved about as the Sun does, did shine like fire one while, and so made
the day; and was like a thick cloud of darkness for another while, and so made
the night; as the pillar of cloud which lead Israel; so Beda holds. Others
think it was the light of the Sun created imperfect at the first, and moving
about with the heavens, did make a difference between day and night equally.
But certainly the light which God created being good, that is, a perfect
creature in his kind, and so approved of God, as the words of the text show;
cannot with any reason be held to be any imperfect thing, which afterward
was altered, or any such mutable and corruptible light as was kindled and
quenched; for God, seeing, and approving it for good, would not so quickly
alter it.

Wherefore I take the evening or night time of the second day, to be the time
wherein God by his word and power was separating the air and purging it, by
causing the thick waterish and earthy part to descend and settle downwards
toward the center. For all that time, the vast and spacious wide region of the
air, being not purified, remained dark and duskish, because the light of the
fiery heaven did not shine thorough it, and that was the evening or night of
the second day: but the air being made pure and perfect, and settled in his
natural place, received the light of the heavens into it for the space of 12.
hours, before God began to create the other elements, which were the first
works of the third day. And this was a day of light clear enough for the
creatures then made, though not so light as when the Sun was made; and this
evening and morning made the second day, as the text says. And thus we see the
true sense and meaning of the text, and what is the second day and the work
thereof: from whence we may observe some points of Doctrine.

First we hence learn, that God proceeds most wisely and Doctr. 1. All
created wisely and orderly.
orderly in the creation of the World, declaring manifestly that he does
nothing in vain, nor makes any thing before it is useful and necessarily for
the communicating of his goodness to his creatures; but does all for the
benefit of others, and adds nothing to himself, neither has need to receive
glory from any creature. If God had made the Sun and Stars before he made
the air or the earth, men might have imagined that he had made the Sun and
lights of heaven not for the use of men and other earthly creatures; but either
because he had need of them in the heavens to add glory to himself; or else
to remain for a time without use and in vain. But in that he made not the
glorious lights at the first before the air, through which they might shine
and give light to the earth, Hereby he shows that he created, all things
wisely and orderly; the most needful things in the first place; and nothing
before there was use of it; nothing which remained unprofitable for one hour;
and that in creating the World, he neither sought nor needed any addition of
glory to himself; but made the glorious Sun and lights for to show and to
impart his glory to men, and his goodness to other creatures.

Let us all see Gods wisdom and goodness, and labor to Use.
imitate him in them; and as he does all for our use, not his own profit, so
let us not seek any thing in the World for our own vain ends: but make the
setting forth of his glory, the end of all our labors; and strive to do his
will and pleasure, not our own; nor the will and commandment of any man, when
we perceive it to be contrary and not according to the will and word of God.

Secondly, in that the light of the second day which shined Doctr. 2.
only in the air, and through it to the earth and deep, was not a clear but
obscure light in comparison of the first day, and the days after the Sun,
Moon, and Stars were made, not much brighter then the night of the three
last days; Hereby God did foreshew, that the air and this lowest World is the
place of Satan's Kingdom, wherein he does rage and tyrannize with great power
after his fall, until he be cast into Hell at the last day; which also other
Scripture^ show, as Ephesians. 22. where Satan is called the Prince of the air, and
Revel. 16. 17. the Kingdom of Satan is called the air, and Ioh. 14. 30. our
Savior calls him the Prince of this World.

Wherefore let us not place our felicity here in the things Use.
of this World, nor hope for peace and rest in this lowest airy heaven where
Satan rules and rages. He who preaches for things here, he speaks into
the air, 1 Cor. 14. 9. He who wrastleth for a prize here, he beats the
air, and strives for uncertainties, 1 Cor. 9. 26. Let us look up higher to
the Heaven of heavens, to the Country and City, which is above, and where
Christ is, there let our heart be, Verse 9.

CHAP. VIII.
The third days work. Of Water and Earth, distinct elements. Of the names of
Earth and Sea. Of Herbs, Plants, and Trees. All earthly things, nothing to
God. We are Pilgrims on earth: Uses. God rules the most tumultuous
creatures: Use.

ANd God said, Let the waters under the Heaven be gathered Verse 9.
together unto one place, and let the dry land appear; and it was so, Verse
10. And God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the
Waters called he Seas, and God saw that it was good, Verse 11. And God said,
Let the Earth bring forth grass, herb yielding seed; and the fruit tree
yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self upon the Earth; and it
was so, Verse 12. And the Earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed
after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in it self after
his kind; and God saw that it was good, Verse 13. And the evening and the
morning, were the third day.

The third days work, is the creation of the Earth and the Seas, and the
separating of them one from another in place, and the calling of them by their
names; also the creation of the Herbs, Plants, and Trees out of the Earth, all
which made up a third days work.

In the 9. verse, we have the creation of the two grossest and lowest
elements, the Water and the Earth, laid down very briefly, and withal the
separation of the Water from the Earth into one place, and the appearance of
the earth above the waters.

The first words, (And God said,) show, that God by his eternal Word the Son,
created these inferior elements, and all thing in them; and still the Son
works with the Father in all the works of creation.

These next words, (Let the waters under the heaeen be gathered together unto
one place, and let the dry land appear) seem not to speak at all of the
creation of the waters or of the earth; but only of the separation of the
waters into one place, and causing the dry land to appear by it self. Some
Expositors gather from these words, that the earth, and the waters were created
before, and that the earth being made perfectly round in the lowest place, and
framed of the heaviest and grossest part of the rude matter, which settled
about the center, was all covered with the waters which were made of the purer
part of that rude mass, which remained after the creation of the spacious
firmament the airie heaven, and the natural place of the waters was above the
earth, between it and the air. I easily believe and acknowledge, that the
earth, being made of the heaviest part of the rude matter, does occupy and
possess the lowest place about the middle center of the round World; and that
the natural place of the water which is a purer and lighter element, in which
place God first created it, and gave it being, is the place next above the
earth compassing it round on every side; and if the element of water were in
quantity more then the hollow places of the earth could contain, it would
overflow all the upper face of the earth: or if God should bring the earth into
a perfect round globe without risings up of hills, or hollow valleys; the
waters of the Sea would stand in the upper place next above it, between the
air and the earth. For we see and find by daily experience, that as heavier
elements do descend downwards when they are in lighter elements, and do by
natural motion tend to the lower place; as for example drops of raine-water,
being ingendered in the air, descend downward, and the earth and every part of
it, whether a stone, or lump of clay or clod of earth, will sink down and
move toward the bottom in a lake of standing water, and in a vessel full of
water. So also the lighter and thinner elements do naturally ascend above the
heavier, and seek the higher place, and cannot but by violence be kept under
them, or in the same place with them; for we see, that sparks and flames of
fire being in the air, will continually ascend upward till they come to the
place above it; and if air be closed up in a bladder, and by some weight held
down in the bottom of a pond or some great vessel of water; if it be let
loose by opening or bursting the bladder, it will presently fly up and make
speedy way in bubbles to the top of the waters; and if waters be either
ingendered in the earth under the ground, or, by secret conveyances, be driven
from the Sea into the earth, it will continually spring up till it comes to
the top of the earth; and hence it is, that we have so many springs of water
rising out of the earth. But I cannot believe, that the earth and the waters of
the Sea were created distinct elements before the third day; because no words
in this History of the creation, do, before this day, mention any creation of
water and earth as they are elements perfectly formed and distinct one from
another. Indeed the rude mass, which was without form and void, is called
Earth, and the Deep, and the Waters, not because it had the form of these, or
was any one of them; but was only the matter, of which they were made; and
because it was like earth, for the grossnesse of it; and like water or a deep
quagge or muddy lake, for the instability of it. And although it is said,
before that God made the airie heaven, to divide between the waters above in
the clouds, and the waters below under the air in the Sea and the Rivers; yet
it does not follow that these waters were created before, or that then
immediately it did divide between them, but that it was made to divide between
them afterward when they were created. Yea itis plain, that therewas no rain
in the air, nor clouds, nor mists, nor vapors ascending up from the earth,
till after the earth was furnished with herbs, plants, and trees, Chap. 2.
Verse 5, 6.

Wherefore (omitting to mention diverse needless questions, and unprofitable
opinions raised and held by former writers Of Water and Earth, distinct
elements.
and expositors of this text) I will in brief show what I conceive, and what I
gather out of these words.

First, I conceive that these words, And God said, Let waters 1.
from under heaven be gathered together, (for so they run in the original)
do implie two things: First, that God by his creating word brought the waters
and the earth into being, and made them perfect and distinct elements one from
another; and the water being the lighter did at the first stand above the
earth, and compass it round, and that is the natural place of it.

Secondly, that God immediately after, when the waters had covered the earth
almost for the space of a night, and had kept 2.
it in darkness from the sight and light of heaven, then I say, God did bring
the earth into that form and shape which it now has: in the round globe of it
he made hollow valleys, deeper in one place then another; and he raised up
the hills and mountains so much in height above as those valleys are deep and
hollow below; and the earth being a firm and dry element and standing fast in
this fashion; and the waters being of a liquid and flowing substance, and more
heavy then the air, did (for the avoiding of vacuity, which nature abhors,
and to fill up those hollow places, which otherwise would have remained empty,
unless the air could have descended through the water) descend down from the
hills, and through the valleys of the earth, until they came into and filled
the great hollow valleys, where the waters of the Sea remain, and which is
the place of the Sea to this day; and so there is as much water in the Sea, as
there is dry land appearing above the waters; and the depth of the Sea is
equal to the rising of the Earth, and the mountains above the banks of it, as
some learned men have observed. And for proof hereof we have the plain word
of God. The word (...), used in the original text, signifies gathering
together into one hollow place, and Psalm 104. 5, 6, 7, 8. David speaking of
the first foundation of the earth, says, that God covered it with the deep as
with a garment, and the waters stood above the hills: at his rebuke they fled,
at his thundering voice they hasted away: the hills did rise up to their height,
and the waters went down the valleys, unto the place which God founded for
them; and there he set them a bound which they cannot pass, nor return to
cover the Earth. And the earth was first under the water; and after by Gods
making of the great hollow valleys, and raising up the earth and dry land,
caused it to stand out of the water, and so to appear above the water as if it
did stand in the water, and were founded upon the Sea, and established upon the
floods, the words of Saint Peter show, 2 Pet. 3. 5. compared with this text,
and the words of David, Psalm 24. 2. Thus much for the opening of the first
words, wherein the creation and situation of the earth and the waters are laid
down in the 9. Verse.

The next thing is the naming of the waters and the dry Of the name of the
Earth.
land. It is said, that God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering
together of the waters called he the Seas, and God saw that it was good, Verse
10. The names, which God gave to the things here created, are full of wisdom;
the dry land now appearing firm above the waters God called (...), Eretz, of
which our English name Earth is derived, and has the sound of it. In the
Hebrew, the word may be derived of the verb (...), which signifies running
speedily, or running a race; and (...), which is a negative particle and
signifies not; for the earth is made to stand firm and neither to move from
the natural place of it, nor to run about in the place. The common opinion of
the best learned is, that God called the earth (...), of (...), which
signifies where, being an adverb of place, and (...), which signifies
running, because the heaven and the air move and run round about it; and
because it stands firm and is a sure footing for men and other creatures to
run upon, and neither sink, as in waters; nor fall and stick fast, as in
waterish bogges, myres, and quicksands; to which I may add another and more
divine reason, to wit, because God made the earth and dry land, that man and
other creatures, which are made for man's use might live and move upon it, and
that it might be the place wherein man should run his race toward heaven and
happiness; in which he would not have us to settle our rest, as if we were
to live here for ever, but to run toward the better Country, which is above.

The gathering together of the waters, God called (...), the And of the Sea. 1.
Seas. First this name is of the plural number; because, though there is but
one maine ocean Sea, through which men may sail to all parts of the Earth; yet
there are many inlets, creeks, corners, gulfes, and breakings in, between
several Countries of the earth; as the mediterranean Sea, the red Sea, the
Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Venice, the black Sea, the south Sea, and diverse
others. Secondly, this word is derived either of 2.
(...), which signifies to rage and to make a noise and tumult, or of (...),
which signifies to shake, and to cast down and lay prostrate all things before
it. And indeed we find by experience, that the waters of the Sea, being
gathered together, and detained in the hollow place of the earth, do, partly
by a natural disposition and inclination to ascend to their natural place
above the earth, and partly by winds and tempests lying violently upon them,
rage, roar, swell, and make the mountains as it were to shake with their rage
and noise. And when they break through their banks into the drieland (as
sometimes it happens) they bear down all before them; as the flood in Noah's
days did overrun, and destroyed the earth, when God brake up the fountains
of the great deep.

But howsoever the earth is made to be a place of running, and of toil, and
travel, and the gathering together of the waters into the Seas makes a great
noise and tumult, and rages terribly: yet God saw that this his work was
good; and that both the Earth and the Sea should be of great use and profit to
man both for necessaries of life, and also for magnifying of Gods dreadful
power, wisdom and goodness in man's eyes, and therefore Moses here says, God
saw that it was good.

Another maine thing follows in this third days work, Of herbs, plants,
and trees.
that is, the creation of grass, herbs, plants, and trees: Where note only
these two things: First, what were these things created. Secondly, how they
were created and brought into being.

The first is grass, or green herb, (...), which is that which of it self
springs up without setting, or sowing. The second (...), herb, bearing seed,
that is, all herbs which are set or sown, and increase by man's industry. The
third (...), that is, trees and plants, which are of a woodie substance, which
bear fruit and have their seed, which turns to fruit in themselves; they are
not multiplied only by sowing of seed, but live all the year, and many years
without sowing, and multiply by roots, slips, graffes, and the like. These
were the things, which God is here said, by his creating Word and power, to
bring out of the earth, every one perfect in their kind.

Secondly, for the manner of creating them; they were not created immediately of
nothing, nor of any other element besides the earth, and then put into the
earth there to grow: But God by his powerful Word, without any help of man's
tillage, Rain, or Sun, did make them immediately out of the earth, and every
one perfect in their kind; grass and heroes with flowers and seeds; and trees
with large bodies, branches, leaves, and fruits, growing up suddenly, as it
were in a moment, by Gods Word and power. And thus much I gather not only from
the words of the text, which run thus, God said; Let the Earth bring forth
grass, herbs, and trees: but also from the words, Chap. 2. 5, 6. where it is
said, that God formed every plant when yet it was not in the Earth; and every
herb, when as yet it grew not up; that is, before they had any seed, or root
hidden or sown in the earth from whence they might spring and grow up; and
also without help of rain or dew, or any culture or tillage.

Now all these things being thus formed by the word of God, were approved by
God for good and perfect in their kind. And so the evening, that is, the time
of darkness over the earth (while the waters covered it, and before the dry
land appeared above the waters, which was about twelve hours, a nights space)
and the morning (that is, the time of light after the dry land appeared, and
the light of the fiery heavens shined upon it through the air, which as yet
was most pure and clear without clouds, mists or vapors, which time of light
was other twelve hours) made up a third day.

Thus we see, that in the three first days before the creation of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, the night was a time of darkness, and the day a time of light
in all that part of the World where night and day are said to have been, and in
respect of which part of the World they are called evening, and morning; as for
example, After that the light, the fiery heavens were created, and made out of
the rude mass, full of darkness, there was no more night or darkness but all
light in the heavens ever since (for they are a day and light to themselves)
and that which is night and day, with us, is all alike with them, even clear
day light. So likewise after the creation of the light, all was darkness in
the rest of the rude mass which was not yet formed; and the time that it lay
in darkness before the airy heaven was perfectly purified and made, is called
the evening or night: but after that the firmament, that is, the spacious
element of the air, was created and brought into perfect being and purity, it
received into it the light of the fiery heavens which shined through it, and
the time of that shining into the air is called the morning or day light; and
this day light shines still in the highest region of the air, above the ascent
of the clouds; and there is no more night of darkness in that region, but as
clear light as that of the second and third day; only in the rest of the rude
mass there did remain darkness, until God created out of it at once the two
lowest elements, the waters and the earth; and the time while the waters
covered the earth; and kept the light of heaven from it, is called the evening
or night of the third day; but when the dry land, and the hills and mountains
of the earth were raised up above the waters, and the great vast hollow valley,
which is the place of the Sea and receptacle of the waters, was made in it,
then the light of the heavens did shine through the air unto the upper face of
the earth and of the waters, and so continued until the herbs, plants, and
trees were made: no clouds, or mists, or vapors made the lower region of the
air dark; and this was the time of morning or day light on earth the third
day. Thus much for the opening of the third days work of creation, and how the
times of light and darkness, that is the evening and morning, did make up the
third day.

From this days work, and from the things created, and the manner of creation,
diverse things may be observed for our instruction.

First, we see that the two lowest elements, Earth and Sea, Doctr. 1.
though they appear to be great and huge vast things, yet to All earthly
things nothing to God.
God, working by his eternal Word, the making and separating of them was but a
piece of a days work, and all the grass, herbs, plants, and trees, which are
innumerable and full of all admirable variety, they were but another piece of a
days work; they were not only made and brought into being, but also to their
perfect growth, full of flowers, seed and fruit in a little time, as it were
in a moment: Hence we may learn, that all this World here below, wherein the
sons of men live together, with all creatures which se^ve for their use; it
is as nothing in the hand of God, and of small moment. All the herbs, plants,
and trees, which Solomon with all his wisdom could scarcely come to know,
were with the Earth, Sea, and all Waters, made perfect in one day. This is that
which the Lord proclaims by the Prophet, Isa. 40. 15, 17. where it is said,
that all nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust
of the balance before him; All nations are before him as nothing, and they are
counted to him less then nothing and vanity.

Which Doctrine serves to admonish us to despise all earthly Use.
riches and possessions in comparison of God, who is the portion of the godly
and faithful; also it serves to confound and put to shame all proud carnal
worldlings, who glory and boast in a little nothing; and to make glad, and fill
with joy Gods people, who have a true right and interest in God by their
spiritual union and communion, which they have with Christ by one Spirit, even
the holy Ghost, dwelling in him as the head, and in them as members of the same
mystical body.

Secondly, from the name of the earth, we learn, that this Doctr. 2. We
strangers here, and in a pilgrimage.
World is a race and pilgrimage, and a place of travel, and warfare, and here
is not the rest of man, neither is here his abiding place. This the Scriptures
proclaim every where. Jacob the Father of Israel, who had the land of Canaan
promised to him and his seed for an inheritance for ever; he counted his life
as a pilgrimage on earth, and says in his old age, Few and evil have my days
been, Genesis 47. 9. And David says, Psalm 119. 19. I am a stranger upon earth,
and Psalm 39. 12. I am a stranger and sojourner with thee, as all my Fathers
were. Job calls man's life a few days and full of trouble, which fleet as a
shadow, and continues not, Job 14. 1, 2. Saint Paul calls it a restelesse race,
like that of men who run for a prize, 1 Cor. 9. 24. 26. and Heb. 12. 1. We
are here like Noah's dove, which being sent out of the Arc found no rest for
the soale of her foot till she returned thither again. Here we have no
continuing City, Hebr. 13 14. neither is here our rest, Mich. 2. 10. till our
Souls return to God who gave them we shall always be in a pilgrimage and
never find quiet rest.

This Doctrine is of good use to keep and restrain us from Use 1.
dreaming of settled rest here on earth, and from seeking to build our nests
sure in the tops of earthly rocks for many generations, and to stir us up to
put on resolution and courage to labor, and travel, and strive, and run as
men do in a race, and for masteries, while we live on earth: For our life is
short and flees away as a shadow, and the art and divine skill of gaining
heaven, and getting the Crown of glory, does require much study, sweating,
toil, and industry; and we cannot attain to it, but by hearing, reading,
studying, and meditating in Gods Word day and night.

Secondly, it discovers worldlings to be dreaming and doting fools, who put
trust and confidence in things of this Use 2.
World, and build great houses, purchase lands, and large revenues, and think
that their houses shall continue for ever: The Prophet justly compares such
men to a dreamer, who being hungry does dream that he eats, but when he
awaketh his soul is empty; and in his thirst he dreameth that he is drinking,
but when he awaketh he is faint, and his soul has appetite, Isa. 29. 8. This
is the case of foolish and brutish worldings, who see how the form and fashion
of the World passes away, and yet seeing will not see; but still dream of
settled rest and dwelling on earth.

Thirdly, though the Seas are such as the name signifies which God gave to
them, that is, troubelous and tumultuous, and do Doctr. 3. God rules the most
tumultuous creatures.
dreadfully rage and roar; yet seeing, God is above them as their Lord and
Creator, and when he made them such saw that they were good and useful and
profitable for man, this teaches, that God rules over the most tumultuous
creatures of the World, and makes the most outrageous roarers work for the
good of his people. First, he makes them serve to show the 1.
power, dread and terror of him their creator, that all may fear and stand
in awe of him: for if the creatures be so dreadful and terrible, much more God
the Creator, who gave them their being. And as God makes them work fear, so
also admiration in men; so David shows, Psalm 46. and Psalm 107. 24.
Secondly, he makes them work for the good of his people, and 2.
for the safety of his Church; by destroying and devouring their wicked
enemies, persecutors, and oppressors; as we see in the red Sea drowning
Pharaoh and his host; and as we have seen in the year 88. when the Sea, wind
and stromes scattered and devoured the Armado of our bloody enemies, who came
enraged with fury, and furnished with all weapons of cruelty, and instruments
of death, to destroy our Land and the Church of God in it.

The consideration whereof serves to make us east our selves Use.
upon God in all times of trouble, and to comfort our selves in him, knowing
that as he is the Lord mighty above all, and a terror to the most terrible,
and has in his hand power to save us from all troubles: so he is gracious and
willing to save us; And though he sometimes suffers the swelling waves to
rise, and the tempestuous storms and Seas to threaten, and put us in fear and
danger, yet it is not in wrath but in wisdom, because for the present he
sees them to be good for us.

CHAP. IX.
The fourth days work. Of the lights, substantial bodies: The place of them:
Their Use; For signs, seasons, days, and years. Of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. No instruments used in the creation. Note the great wisdom of God in
the order of creation. This World not made to be the place of our immutable
perfection. Uses of each of these.

ANd God said, Let there be Lights in the firmament of the Verse 14.
heaven, to divide the day from the night: and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and for years. 15. And lot them be for lights in the
firmament of heaven, to give light upon the Earth; and it was so. 16. And God
made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the less light
to rule the night; he made also the Stars. 17. And God set them in the
firmament of heaven, to give light upon the Earth. 18. And to rule over the day
and the night, and to divide the light from the darkness; and God saw that it
was good. 19. And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

These words contain a brief History of the fourth days work in the
creation: in which we may observe; First, Gods powerful commanding the work
to be done by his eternal Word, in the 14. and 15. Verses. Secondly, his
bringing of the work to pass by that eternal Word, in the 16, 17, 18.
Verses. Thirdly, Gods approbation of the work, and so perfecting that day.

First, we see God still proceeds in the work of creation by his powerful
Word, and says, Let there be Lights. The things which he commands to be done
are two.

First, that there shall be lights in the firmament of heaven, that is, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are the lights created out of the first element,
even that light which was made the first day, that is, the body of the visible
fiery heavens.

The second, that they shall be for special use: 1. To divide the day from
the night. 2. To be for signs, seasons, days, and years. 3. To be for
lights in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the Earth.

That these lights are not bare lights without a subject, but Of these lights,
that they are substantial bodies.
bright shining substantial bodies, which have light in themselves, and send
forth beams of light into other pure elements and clear transparent bodies,
no man can deny; for the Hebrew word here in my text is, (...), which signifies
lamps, torches, or other things which shine forth and give light; and the words
following, Verse 16. show plainly, that these lights are the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, which rule the day and the night by the light which they give to the
earth.

The greatest doubt here is about the place where God commanded them to be, to
wit, the firmament of heaven. For if Quest.
we take the word firmament of heaven for the spacious region of the air, as
we have expounded it before, Verse 6, 7, 8. then men will conceive that the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, have The place of them.
their place in the airie region, and not in the fiery region of the visible
heavens; which is a thing contrary to reason and experience, and to the common
judgment of all the learned, and to the holy Scriptures.

For clearing of this doubt we have two answers ready at Answ. 1.
hand, either of which may satisfy. The first, that as the word (...), heaven,
signifies not only the airy region, wherein the fowls do fly, Verse 20. and
above which there are waters in the clouds, as appears Verse 7. but also the
highest heaven, Verse 1. and the fiery heavens, which are called the starry
heaven. Genesis 15. 5. and the garnished heaven, Job 26. 13. and which are the
heavens next unto the highest, and in comparison of which the highest is called
the heaven of heavens, 1 Kings 8. 27. and the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 2. So
also the Hebrew word (...), which is here translated firmament, and signifies a
broad spreading, or a thing which is broad spread and stretched out far and
wide may very well here in this place be used to signify the fiery region of
the starry heaven, spread abroad far more large and wide, then the airy
region, and then this is the meaning, that God commanded lights to be, and
made lights, and set them in the fiery region or firmament which is above the
airy firmament; in which sense the word firmament is used, Psalm 19. 1. and
Dan. 12. 3.

Secondly, if any should not be satisfied with this first answer, Arsw. 2.
which is clear and sufficient, but should still hold, that the word firmament
is here used to signify the airy heaven, as in the 7. and 20. Verses: Then
this may serve for a second answer, that God commanded lights to be, that is,
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to have a being, and created them out of the fiery
heavens, in which they have their place of being: but he gave them bright
light for this end and purpose, that they might shine through the region of the
air, and might multiply their beams in it, and so be therein for lights to
the earth. The words of the text in the original do not expressly affirm,
that God made them of the matter of the airy region the firmament, or that he
there placed them: but only that he gave them to be lights, and to shine
through the air upon the earth: and though the body and substance of Sun,
Moon, and Stars be set and placed in the starry heaven or firmament; yet they
are lights in the airy firmament, and through it give light to the earth. And
this I prove by a demonstration gathered from the text it self: For where the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, are given to divide between day and night, and to
be for seasons, days and years, and to rule over the day and over the night;
there God gave them to be for lights. This is most certain and manifest; for
the Sun does no other way rule the day, nor the Moon the night, but only by
their light and by appearing one while and not another in the several
hemisphaeres of heaven to the earth below: Now they divide the day from the
night, and make difference of seasons, days and years only in the lowest
heavens and in the earth: for above, in the starry heaven, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars do shine all alike continually: there is one perpetual day of light
and no night or darkness from the beginning to the end of the World: It is
the suns appearing to one side of the earth for a time, once in 24. hours,
which makes the day; and the absence and not appearing of it for the rest of
the 24. hours to that side of the earth, which makes the night there; and both
day and night make a civil day, and seven such days a Week, and four weeks a
Month, had 12 months a Year, and the seasons of Summer, Winter, Spring, and
Autumn, have place only on earth, and in the lowest airie heaven, not in the
starry heaven. Therefore God gave them; and set them to be lights, that is, to
give light in the air and to the earth.

And thus the doubt is fully cleared; and the first thing opened, to wit, Gods
commanding lights to be in the firmament of heaven.

The second thing commanded is the use of those Lights. The use of them.


The first use is, to divide the day from the night, that is, the time of light
from the time of darkness. For clearing or which point we are to consider,
First, what is here properly meant by day and night, and how the lights divide
them one from another. Secondly, how there could be a division between day and
night, before these Lights, the Sun, Moon, and Stars were made. First by day
we are here to understand not the space of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
compassing the earth, which is the space of 24. hours; for that day consists
of an evening and a morning, and comprehends in it one night; and some call it
a natural, and some a civil, and some an astronomicall day: but here by day
we are to understand the time while the Sun, the greatest light, shines and
gives light upon the face of the earth: And by night the time while the Moon
and Stars do only appear and give their dim light upon the earth, which
some call an artificial and civil day and night, but others do more proper^^
call it a natural day, and a natural night. The day in this sense has no
night in it, and the night in this sense is no part of the day; but these two,
being the one the time of darkness or dim light, and the other the time of
clear light, are so opposite, that they cannot both be at once in one and the
same part of the World. Now as the visible World consists of diverse maine parts
or elements; and the motions of the Sun, Moon, and Stars are most variable
among themselves; so the day and night taken in this proper sense are most
variable.

First, the day, as it is a time of light, does in respect of some parts of the
World comprehend in it the whole time from the first creation of the Sun and of
the starry heavens, the making of which brought in the first morning or
daylight; as for example, Ever since the fiery heavens were made and created a
bright shining substance, they have retained their light continually, and so
there has been a continual day in them, and no night nor darkness; although
the light of them, by reason of the vast distance, does not make day here on
earth. Also ever since the Sun was created, it shines most clear in the fiery
or starry heaven from East to West, and from the North to the South-Pole; when
the Sun sets in the West from our sight, it shines bright in the face of the
full Moon, which is then rising in the East part of heaven, or else the Moon
would be dark and enclypsed: All the shadow which the earth makes in the
heavens, by coming between the Sun and that part of the heaven which is most
opposite, is very little, near about the compass of the body of the Moon, as
in every great eclypse of the Moon may easily be seen and discerned.
Likewise that light which was the day light of the second day, continues still
in the superior region of the air, and in the lowest regions also when there
are no clouds, mists, or vapors: And the light of the Sun also appears
continually in the most part of the highest regions of the air, even under our
Hemisphare, and in our Horizon, when the Sun is furthest from our sight. And as
there is always day light in the middle heavens, so there is always night and
darkness in the midst of the earth, and through all the body of it from the
upper face to the center, which is the very middle and heart of it.

Secondly, in those places of the World which are directly under the North and
South poles, the day, that is, the time of the Sons being in theirsight, is
just half a year; and the night also, that is, the time of the Suns absence
from their sight, is another half year.

Thirdly, under the equinoctial line, which cuts the heavens equally in the
middle between the North and South poles, the day and night are always equal
each one 12. hours, because the Sun, and Moon, and Stars do appear so
long, and are hid just so long again. And thus days and nights vary
according to the several parts of the World, and diverse climats of the earth.
And ever since that God did make the lights in heaven, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; they have made the division between the darkness which we call
night, and the light which we call day, as God here appointed. For the time
while the Sun shines and rules, by giving greatest light in any part of the
World, that is called the day light; and the time while the Sun is out of
sight, and the Moon and Stars only shine and rule, that is called the
night, because it is a time of dim light, which is darkness in comparison of
the Sun light, as appears in the words of the 16. Verse.

The second thing, which comes to be considered in the first 2.
use of these lights, is the division and distinction between day and night
before this fourth days work, when these lights were made for this use.

For clearing of this point, we are to call to mind somethings which I have
opened before, and withal add some few things more, which will make the truth
manifest. First we are to know and persuade our selves, that there is no
difference or division between day and night, but only in this inferior
visible World, which we see with bodily eyes: For in the heaven of heavens,
which is above the visible World, there is no darkness, neither can be at any
time; but there is the inheritance of the Saints in light, and the light
thereof is spiritual and to us supernatural. And in Hell, wheresoever that
is, there is nothing but blackness of darkness for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 17. Jude
13. Secondly, the time of daylight, which is called the morning, and the time
of night and of darkness, which is called the evening, in the three first
days did much differ from the evening and morning, that is, the time of
darkness and light, in the rest of the days after that the Sun, Moon, and
Stars were made. For the evening, that is, the time of darkness or night, in
the first day was only the time while all this inferior World remained in
that rude informed mass, without form and void, which was all overspread
with darkness, and had no light in it: And the morning, that is, the time of
light and of day, was the time after that God formed the light, that is the
fiery or starry heavens; for they were in themselves full of light, and had
clear day in them without the Sun, before the light of them was united in the
Sun, Moon, and Stars: I say from the forming of them, until God began to
create the spacious airie firmament, it was clear day in so much of the
visible World as was perfectly formed, that is, in the fiery heavens, which are
called light; and that was twelve hours at the least. But when God began to
create out of the rude mass full of darkness the lowest heavens, the air,
which is a spacious region, while the earthy and waterish parts were settling
downward, and the air was a purging and growing into purity; until it became
pure and clear, there was a time of darkness and dimnesse in it; which I
conceive to be the space of a night about twelve hours: And the time after
that it was made pure and received into it the light of the heavens shining
clearly in it, was the morning or time of daylight sufficient for so much of
the World as was then created, which was twelve hours more, and made up the
second day.

Then God began to create the water, and the dry land, and while the earth was
settling downward to the center, and the waters, being made of the thinner and
lighter part of the mass which remained, did cover the face of the earth which
was created round in the middle of them, this was the space of twelve hours,
and it was a time of darkness upon the earth which lay hid and covered with
all the waters which are now in the Seas and Rivers, and this was the night of
the third day upon earth. But after that God made the great and hollow valleys,
which are now the receptacles of the waters, and made the hills and dry land
stand up and appear above the waters, being gathered into that hollow place;
there was a time of daylight for the light of the heavens, which then had in
them all that light which is now gathered and united in the bodies of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, did shine upon the face of the earth for the space of
twelve hours; in which God made the grass, and the herbs bearing seced, and
the trees of all kinds bearing fruits; and this was the third day.

Now after this day ended, God created clouds, and mists, and vapors; which,
ascending up into the middle region of the air, did make a time of darkness,
and a night upon the face of the Earth and the Sea; and this was the evening or
night of the fourth day. But when after twelve hours God had made the lights
in the firmament, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, then came in the morning, that
is, the time of light; in which the Sun shining bright upon the earth made the
fourth day; and ever since that fourth day, the division between the day and
night is by means of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. For all the while that the
Sun appears and shines upon the upper face of the earth, that is the daytime
in that place; and while the Sun is absent, and the light thereof is not seen,
and there is no light except of the Moon and the Stars, that is the time of
darkness and of the night.

This is the first use of these lights expressed in my text, even to divide
between the day and between the night.

The second use for which God made these lights and appointed them, is to be
for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years.

First, they are for signs to men, both of things supernatural, that is, to
show the glory, the wisdom and the power of God and his admirable love to
man, in making such great, and glorious shining lights for his use; and also
they are signs of things natural, as of fair, foul, and seasonable weather,
and such like; for the Pleindes arising, are signs of sweet showers, which
make the earth to spring, Job 38. 31. The dogge-Starre arising, is a sign of
scorching heat; the Moon also by her change, and full, and middle quarters, is
a sign of high and low tides, and flowings of the Sea; and the diverse colors
of it, show diverse changes of weather.

Secondly, they are for seasons. For the Suns declining to the 2.
South line, makes the shortest days to them who live Northward from the
equinoctial, and the Autumn and Winter season; but when it comes back to the
equinoctial, it makes the spring season; and when it comes to the northern
Tropic, it brings in the hot Summer, and declining again to the equinoctial,
it brings in Autumn and the harvest season.

Thirdly, they serve for days and years. For the motion of the 3.
Sun, Moon, and Stars, round about the heavens in 24. hours, makes a day
in the large sense, that is, a civil day; And the appearance and shining of
the Sun upon the face of the earth, makes a day of light, that is, a natural
day; and the setting and absence of the Sun make the night.

The motion of the Moon in her proper course thorough the twelve signs of the
Zodiak, from change to change, and from full to full, makes a month of four
weeks; And the proper motion of the Sun thorough the same twelve signs, makes
a year of twelve distinct solary months; And the Moon by her four quarters,
makes four weeks every one of seven days: And the concurrence of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, returning to their several places, make set times for
civil and Ecclesiastical use, as for feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the
like, which are appointed by God and his Church to be observed yearly for Gods
honor and for remembrances of some great works of mercy performed by God and
by Christ, for man's deliverance and salvation.

The last and maine use of all is, to give light upon Earth; for, by giving of
light and shining in, and thorough the air, they cause heat, and moisture, and
drienesse; and by their several degrees, aspects, and reflections of beams and
light, they yield their influence and cherish and work upon things below; they
also make all things visible to men and other creatures, and by their light we
come to see and discern all things here visible; without which sight and
visibility, no man can perform the works for which God created and placed him
on earth.

And so much for opening the first maine thing in my text, to wit, Gods
commanding lights to be in the firmament of heaven for the special uses here
named, laid down in the 14. and 15. Verses.

The second maine thing, is his bringing of the work to ^^^se by his powerful
Word, and making it to be in all respects according to his counsel, will and
word. This is laid down, first summarily, in the last clause of the 15. Verse,
in these words, audit was so; that is, as God said and commanded, so it was
done presently. Secondly, it is more largely described in the next words, Verse
16, 17, 18. And God made two great lights, the greater to rule the day, the
less to rule the night; he made also the Stars. And God set them in the
firmament to give light upon the Earth, and to divide light and darkness.

First, of whatsoever God sad, Let it be, it was made, and for the same use as
here we read: For as he said, Let there be lights, and let them be to divide
the day from the night; so he made lights, and gave them in the firmament of
heaven to divide day from night and to serve for the uses which he appointed.

Secondly, it is here said, that God himself made those lights; no Angels, or
others besides himself were commanded to make them, nor had any hand in
creating them.

Thirdly, the lights, which were before generally mentioned, are here more
specially and particularly rehearsed and expressed, and the several offices of
them all. Two of them are said to be great lights, one greater, that is, the
Sun to rule the day; the other lesser, that is, the Moon to have dominion in
the night; the rest of the lights are said to be the Stars:

First, for the Sun, that is called the greatest light, and that most Of the
Sun.
truly and properly; both for the body and substance of it; and also for the
brightness and abundance of the light which is in it: For the most skillful
Mathematicians have observed and demonstrated, that the very body of the Sun
does exceed the whole earth in bigness 166. times; and our own eyes are
witnesses of the greatness of the light in it, far exceeding all bodily
lights, and dazzling our weak sight.

Secondly, the Moon is also called a great light (though lesser Of the Moon.
then the Sun;) not for the bigness of the body of it, but because it is the
lowest of all the Planets, and nearest unto the earth, and therefore appears
biggest of all next unto the Sun, and gives to the earth a greater light then
any of the Stars, which are far greater in substance, and brighter in
light. For the most skillful Mathematicians have found by their art, that it is
39. times lesser then the earth, and the least of all the Stars except
Mercury, which is the Planet next above it: And those Stars which are said to
be of the first Magnitude, are some of them observed to be 18. times bigger
then the earth. And although the Moon, being the lowest and nearest of all the
heavenly lights unto the earth, and therefore more dim in it self, and of a
more impure body and substance, as appears by the cloudy specks in it,
shining very little of it self, may in that respect be called one of the
least lights: yet because it borrowes light from the Sun, shining in the face
of it as in a looking glass, and because it is 18. times lower then the Sun,
and nearer to us then the earth is; lower then it, as Mathematicians have
observed, and so it is nearer to the earth then the Sun almost 18. hundred
thousand miles; therefore in our eyes it appears the greatest of all the
lights next to the Sun: And Moses here speaking according to the capacity of
the vulgar, and our outward senses, and the sensible effects of light which the
Moon gives to the earth, calls it one of the two great lights. And as he gives
to the Sun the office and prerogative of ruling the day, because the sight and
presence of the Sun makes the day light, and smoothers and obscures all other
lights in the day time: so he gives to the Moon the office of ruling the
night; because when it appears in the night, it gives more light to us here
on earth then all the other Stars.

Thus we see, that as God said, so every thing which was made in the fourth
day came to pass; God himself made every thing by his eternal Word,
according to his own eternal Counsel, mind, and will. And therefore no
marvel though he gives approbation to this days work also, which is the
third maine thing in the text, expressed in these words, And God saw that it
was good. And so the Sun, having shined for the space of twelve hours, till it
had passed through one Hemisphaere or half of heaven; that time or morning of
light, together with the evening or time of darkness going before it, and
caused by clouds, mists and vapors over-shadowing the Earth, is called the
fourth day.

Now this History of the fourth days work, as I have expounded it, affords us
some points of instruction.

First, in that herbs, grass, plants, and trees, were made perfect in their
kind before any Rain, or Dew, or Sun, Moon, Doctr. (...). No instruments
used in the creation.
and Stars were created; Hence we may learn, that God used no instruments,
nor help of any creatures in the creation of any thing; but made and formed
every creature himself by his eternal Word and Spirit, who are with him one
and the same Jehovah, infinite, almighty and omnipotent. For further proof
whereof, there are many testimonies in the holy Scriptures, as Isa. 40. 21. 22.
and 66. 2. where the Lord appropriateth to himself, and to his own hand, the
creating and making of heaven and earth, and Ioh. 1. 3. and Colos. 1. 16. where
all things are said to be created by the eternal Word the Son; and also by
the Spirit, Psalm 33. 6.

This Doctrine admonishes us to give all the glory of the wisdom, power, and
goodness, showed in the creation, to Use
God alone; and to acknowledge that all things created, even the whole World
and all things therein, are the Lords; also to make us admire his rich bounty,
and to render all thanks to his holy Majesty for all the profit, benefit, and
comforts, which we receive from any of Gods creatures.

Secondly, we may hence learn and observe, the wisdom and wise providence
of God, in making every thing in due season, Doctr. 2. Great wisdom of God in
the Creation.
and nothing before there was need of it for the creatures, which were next in
order to be made; for he did not create the lights of Sun, Moon, and
Stars, together with the starry heavens, which is the place of them, until
he was about to create living things which could not well be, nor move
according to their kind, without such lights shining in the earth and in the
waters.

Which wise providence of God, is a pattern and direction Use.
to us to do all things in order: in the first place, things necessary and
useful for the well-being, and bringing to pass of things which are
afterward to be done; and nothing which may be and remain without use and
profit. As God would not make the Sun, Moon, and Stars, together with the
first light, the fiery heavens, on the first day, because then there was no use
nor necessity of them; but deferred the creation of them until the fourth
day, when there was use and necessity to make a clear daylight; and living
creatures endued with life, sense, and sight were to be made in the two next
days following, whose life without such clear day light would have been but
like the shadow of death; So let us be careful then to provide things
necessary and useful, when we see and perceive that we shall have present
use of them, and not be like foolish prodigal and fantastical builders, who
build stately houses like palaces with large barnes, stables, and stals, when
neither they nor theirs are in any way or possibility to furnish them with
corn, horses or cattle, or to make use of them for fit and necessary
habitation.

Thirdly, though the glory of God does more appear in Doctr. 3.
light of day then, in darkness of night; and it was and is in Gods power, to
make more great lights and diverse Suns in several places of the heaven, to
shine in all the World at once, and to make a perpetual day on earth: yet he
made them so, that on the earth, in this lower and inferior World, there
should be as much night as day, and darkness as light; whereby he teaches
us even from the creation, that this earthly World was not made to be the
place of man's immutable perfection and blessedness; but a place of changes and
alterations; wherein, by reason of darkness, the Prince of darkness may rule,
rage and tyrannise by himself and his wicked instruments; and drive us to
seek a better rest, and an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance reserved in
1 Pet. 1. 4.
heaven, in the place of perpetual light. The whole book of the wise Preacher
is an ample testimony of this truth, and a large commentary upon this Doctrine;
for it wholly tends to make men loath this inferior World under the Sun,
wherein there is nothing but changes, and vanity of vanities, and all is
vanity.

Wherefore let us not seek for immutability nor unchangable peace and
prosperity here on earth, lest we be found as foolish Use.
as those builders who build and set up goodly houses on a sandy foundation,
which may easily be beaten down, and ruined with every wind, wave, and
tempest. They who settle their rest on earth, and here seek perfect felicity
and immutable blessedness; they trust under the shadow and shelter of a gourd,
Jon. 4.
which may grow up in one night, and in the next night wither away, and perish,
and bring much grief and sorrow to them, which will vex them, and drive them
like Jonah to impatiency and anger against God their Creator. Let us look up
to heaven where is light without darkness, and an everlasting day without any
night; and bend all our course to that country above, and long for everlasting
light and glory, which the blessed Saints and Angels there enjoy in the
presence of God, and at his right hand, where are pleasures for evermore.

CHAP. X.
The fifth days work. Of fishes and fowls. All made in perfect wisdom:
Uses. Two notable properties of fishes: their sensitive soul, and matter. The
matter of birds. Of other flying things. Of whales. Of the fruitfulness of
fishes. Gods infinite power jioyned with infinite wisdom: Uses. All is made
by Christ, and likewise bestowed on us: Use. Gods great providence for
mankind: Use.

ANd God said, Let the Waters bring for abundantly the moving Verse 20.
creature which has life: And let the foul fly above the earth in the open
firmament of heaven. 21. And God created great whales, and every living
creature that moves, which the waters brought forth abundantly after their
kind, and every winged foul after his kinds, and God saw that it was good.
22. And Godblessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the
waters in the Sea, and let foul multiply in the Earth. 23. And the evening
and the morning were the fifth day.

In these words we have the History of the fifth days work, which was the
creation of all living creatures which live and move in the two moist elements,
the water and the air, to wit, fishes and moving creatures which live and move
in the waters; and all kinds of fowls which fly in the open region of the
air, which is here called the open firmament of heaven. First, we have Gods
powerful Word and commandment given for the bringing of them into being, in
the 20. Verse. Secondly, we have Gods creation of them and bringing them into
being by his mighty Word; together with his approbation of them in the 21.
Verse. Thirdly, Gods blessing of them with the blessing of fruitfulness and
increase, Verse 22. Lastly, the time wherein all things were done, to wit, in
the space and compass of the fifth day, Verse 23.

First, as in all other works God said, Let them be; so here he God do(...)
all on good advice.
still proceeds to create every thing by his eternal Word: So much this phrase
signifies, as I have before showed. It also intimates thus much unto us, that
God did not suddenly and unadvisedly create any of these things, but according
to his eternal Counsel, as he in his infinite wisdom had purposed and
determined in himself from all eternity. For we find by experience among
men, that when any workman does say before hand of the work which he goes
about; Thus I will make it, and Thus let it be, it is a clear evidence that
he does it with advice, as he has framed it in his mind, and determined it
by his will; and therefore Moses here used this form of speech, that God said
first, Let things be, and then he created them; to teach us, that God had
from all eternity framed them in his decree, and determined them in his
Counsel and Will to be such as he made them in the creation.

Whence we may gather this Doctrine: That God has created all Doctr.
things in wisdom, and never does any work rashly, without counsel or
consideration; but orders and brings to pass every thing, so as he has
purposed, with perfect knowledge and understanding. This is that which the
Prophet David does preach and proclaim with admiration, Psalm 104. 24.
saying, O how manifold are thy works! in wisdom and have thou made them all.
And his wise Son Solomon, Proverb. 3. 19, 20. says, the Lord by wisdom has
founded the earth, by understanding has he established the heavens, by his
knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down dew. And Ier. 10.
12. and 51. 15. The Prophet affirms, that God has made the earth by his
power, and has established the World by his wisdom, and stretched out the
heavens by this discretion. Yea the actions of revenge upon enemies, which men
do for the most part rashly, and run in to them headlong without discretion,
God does in wisdom, and understanding, and according to his wise Counsel, as
holy Job testifies, Job 26. 12. saying, He divides the Sea with his power,
and by his understanding smites through the proud. And, in a Word, that God
has made all things wisely and wi^h good understanding, so that in every
creature his wisdom and counsel appears, we may plainly see by daily
experience, and by that which Job says, chap. 12. 7, 8, 9. to wit, that if we
ask the beasts, they will teach; and the fowls of the air, they shall tell
us: or if we speak to the earth, it shall instruct us; or to the fishes of
the Sea, they shall declare unto us; who knows not in all these things that
the hand of the Lord has wrought this? that is, we may see, and read Gods
wisdom in all his works; for, as it follows, Verse 13. With him is wisdom
and strength, he has counsel and understanding: and these he shows
manifestly in all his works and doings.

First, this Doctrine serves for direction to all men in all their works and
doings, how to do all things according to the perfect Use 1. Be followers of
God as dear children.
pattern and true rule of all well-doing. The rule of all man's actions ought to
be the will of God, who created him and gave him his whole being; and the
perfect pattern whom the Sons of God ought to follow in all their works, is,
God who formed them after his own image; so that the perfection of man
consists in his conformity to God; and the more or less he resembles God in
all his ways, the more or less perfect he is, and the nearer or further from
perfection and true happiness. Now here this Doctrine teaches, that God has
created all things in wisdom, and does all his works according to his
determinate counsel, and with perfect understanding, and nothing rashly
without consideration. Wherefore, as we desire to order our ways aright, and
wallie in the right and ready paths which lead unto perfection; and as we
have a mind to do all our works so as that they may be profitable and
comfortable to our selves and others: so let us imitate God in all our ways
and works, and never do any thing rashly without consulting with his word;
want of this marres all: when men follow their own lusts and headstrong will
and affections, and consult not with Gods Word; then they follow their own
ways, and forsake the ways of God; then they do their own works, not the
works of God; and those ways and works of their own will, procure all evils
and mischiefs unto them, according to that of the Prophet, Ier. 4 18. thy
ways and doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness
because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart. Whereas, on the
contrary, they that walk after Gods ways, and take his counsel along with
them in all their doings, and do nothing rashly, but so as God by his Word
puts into their heart; they shall be holy and wise in their degree, as God is
wise and holy; and by holiness shall come to see God, and the reward and end
of their doings shall be glory, honor, immortality, and eternal life, Romans
2. 7.

Secondly, seeing God has made all things in wisdom, and Use (...). How to
view the crea^ (...).
according to his eternal Counsel; this serves to stir us up so to behold
and consider all things created by God, as that we may see and discern his
wisdom in their very frame; and if we do not see and discern the image of
Gods wisdom and goodness in them all, and a good use of them all; let us
blame our own blindness and ignorance, and not vilify, or dis-esteeme any
work or any creature of God: But if we find any creature which seems
unprofitable, or hurtful altogether, and serving for no good use; let us know,
that it is man's sin which has made the creatures subject to vanity, and
hateful and hurtful to men; And yet Rom (...). 12.
in the mean time Gods wisdom appears in ordering and disposing to a good
use, even by the enmity, hurtfulnesse, loathsome poison and filthiness which
is in them, to chastise and correct his own people, and to put them in
remembrance of their sinfulness and corruption, that they may forsake and
mortify it by repentance, or to punish the impenitent, and execute just
vengance on the wicked in the day and time of his visitation. And upon these
considerations, let us all, so often as we see or remember the
unprofitablenesse, loathsomeness and poison which is in some creatures, be
stirred up to repent of our sins which have brought them under this
corruption for a scourge of our dis-obedience; and let us firmly believe, that
God in wisdom uses them to punish the wicked and to correct his people, and
he will make us see in all his wisdom shining clearly at the last.

But now, from the Word of God, I proceed to that which he set himself to do
by his eternal Word, according to his will and purpose; this is in these
words, Let the waters bring forth abundantly every moving creature that has
life, and let the foul she above the Earth. The things which here God sets
himself to create are of two sorts: First, all creatures which live and have
their being in the element of water, all fishes and other creatures, which live
in the Sea, Rivers, Lakes, and all other waters. Secondly, all fowls, birds,
and flying things which fly above the Earth in the open region of the air.

The first sort are all called by this general name (...), which is here
translated, the moving creature, and in the Hebrew signifies Of fishes. Their
two notable properties. 1.
a creature which is most notable for these two properties: First, that it is a
living creature, which moves, not by going upon feet only, or by flying with
wings; but by creeping or sliding, and moving forwards, as we see fishes do
in the water, and creeping things do in and upon the earth. Secondly, that it
breeds and brings forth young in great abundance, more then any other 2.
creatures do; as we see the fishes, which by the multitude of spawne would
increase beyond all measure and number, if by one means or other the spawne
were not devoured and consumed. For the Hebrew verb (...), of which the word
(...), which is here translated the moving creature, is derived; is used as in
my text, so in other Scriptures frequently, first to signify creeping, or
moving forward without feet, as Genesis 7. 21. and Levit. 11. 19. and secondly
also to bring forth abundantly as here, and also, (...) of the creation which
God wrought, and by which he made the whole frame of the World perfect and
complete, and every way fully furnished. This last work is described by Moses,
first generally, briefly and summarily, in the 26. Verse, and from thence to
the end of this first Chapter: And secondly, the creation of the Woman is more
particularly related, Chap. 2. from the 18. Verse to the end of that Chapter.

Verse 26. And God said, Let us make man in our own image, Creation of mankind
male and female.
and after our likeness, etc. 27. So God created man in his own image, etc.
28. And God blessed them and said, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish
the earth, etc.

In this History of the creation of mankind, we may observe these special
things, which are most notable and worthy to be opened.

First, Gods consultation about the creation of mankind in 1.
the 26. Verse; And God said, Let us make man in our image.

Secondly, Gods creating of mankind according to his own 2.
eternal Counsel; which is laid down summarily and more generally, that God
made them, 1 in his own image, 2 male and female, Verse 27.

This creation of mankind is more plainly and particularly laid down in the
next Chapter; where Moses relates, First, how God made the man of the dust of
the ground, and breathed into his nosthrils the breath of life, and Man became
a living soul, Verse 7.

Secondly, how God made the female, the Woman, to be an help meet for man,
and that of a Rib taken out of the man's side in a deep sleep, Verse 21. 22.
etc. Thirdly that they were both naked, and were not ashamed, Verse 25. These
things are to be noted in the creation of mankind.

The third thing is the blessing, wherewith God blessed them 3.
jointly together, the Man and the Woman; and it comprehends in it two things:
First, the blessing of fruitfulness, that they should multiply and replenish
the earth with mankind. Secondly, the honor, dominion and prerogative which
God gave to them to subdue the earth, and to have dominion over all other
living creatures; this is expressed, Chap. 1. 28.

The fourth is the meat and bodily food which God assigned 4.
to man in the creation, Verse 29. but with limitation and restraint from the
fruit of one tree, Chap. 2. 16, 17. As for other creatures, which live on the
earth, he assigned the green herb or grass to them for food, Verse 30.

The fifth thing, is the place of man's habitation, the garden of Eden, the
earthly paradise, which is described, Chap. 2. 8, 9, etc. 5.


The last thing is Gods viewing of all things, which he had 6.
made, after the creation of the Man and the Woman, and his placing of them in
paradise, which was the accomplishment of the creation and the last work; and
his approbation of every creature for very good and perfect in his kind; this
is expressed in the 31. Verse.

The first thing is Gods consultation concerning the creation Of the
consultation in making man.
of mankind, wherein we are to consider these particulars; 1. Who it is that
says, Let us make. 2. With whom he does thus consult and confer. 3. What is
the thing consulted about, even the making of man in their owns image, and
after their likeness, to be Lord over all other creatures, the fishes of the
Sea, the fowls of the air, and all living things on earth.

In the creation of all other things God said only, Let them be, and so they
were made: but in the creation of mankind he calls a council as being now
about a greater work, and says, Let us make Man; which is a special point
not lightly to be passed over without due consideration: First, he who thus
enters into consultation is said to be Elohim, that is, God the Who consults.
Creator, who is more persons then one or two, even three Persons in one
essence (as the Hebrew word, being plural does imply). And he who here says,
Let us make man, and in the next verse is said to create man in his own image,
he is the same God which created the heavens, and the earth, Verse 1. and the
light, and the firmament, and all other things mentioned before in this Chapter.

They with whom he conferres, are not the Angels as some have vainly
imagined; nor the four elements which God With whom.
here calls together, that he may frame Man's body of them being compounded and
tempered together, as others have dreamed. For the text shows plainly diverse
strong reasons to the contrary: First, it is said, that God created man not by
the ministry of Angels or the elements, but by his own self, as it follows
in the next Verse, and Chap. 2. 7. Secondly, God created man in his own image,
not in the image of Angels or elements; and therefore it is most ridiculous to
imagine that God spoke to them, or of making man in their image. Thirdly, it is
showed that man was made to rule over the earth, and the fowls of the air,
and the fishes of the Sea; and therefore it is absurd to thinkethat the earth,
or any elements were fellow-makers of man together with God. And lastly, it is
both foolish and impious to think that God who made heaven, earth, and the
heavenly host, the Angels, of nothing, should call upon others to help him,
and to share with him in the honor of man's creation, seeing he does so often
in Scripture challenge this honor of creating all things to himself, and
professes that he will not give this glory to another: Here therefore God the
Creator is brought in by Moses, as it were consulting within himself, even
the eternal Father with the eternal Word the Son (who is called the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his Person, by whom he
made the World, of which, man is a part, Hebr. 1. 2.) and with the eternal
Spirit. And here he brings in God consulting about man's creation to be Lord
over other creatures, for 3. special reasons, and to teach us three things,
which are reasons of consultations among men, when they are about a work.

The first is to show, not that God needed any advice or help, It was for 3.
reasons. 1.
but that the work which he was about was a special work, even the making
of man, the chiefest of all visible creatures; one that should be Lord over
all the rest, being made in Gods own image, endued with reason, understanding,
wisdom, and liberty of will.

The second, to show that man was to be made a creature in 2.
whom God should have occasion given to show himself a mighty and wise
Creator and Governor, a just Judge and revenger of wickedness and sin, which
do provoke him to wrath and revenge; a merciful Redeemer and Savior of
sinners seduced; and an holy sanctifier of them by his Spirit. If we consider
man as a creature which might fall, and have Gods image defaced in him, and by
his many provoking sins might give God cause to repent that he had made him,
as is said, Genesis 6. then there appears some reason why God should as it were
consult whether he should make him, or no. Also, if we consider that man
being fallen, and brought under the bondage and slavery of death and the
Devil, and under eternal condemnation, could not possibly be redeemed but by
the Son of God undertaking to become man, and to suffer and satisfy in man's
nature; and that man cannot be made partaker of Christ's benefits for
redemption, without the holy Ghost, the eternal spirit of God infused into
man, and descending to dwell in man as in an earthly tabernacle: There will
appear to us great cause of consultation, that God the Father should consult
with the Son, and the Spirit; and this consulting about man's creation does
intimate all these things: But in that this consultation is with a resolution
(all things considered) to make man with a joint consent; this shows that God
foresaw how man's fall and corruption, and all the evils which by it were to
come into the World (howsoever, to our understanding and in our reason, they
may seem just impediments to hinder God from creating mankind) yet might by
his wisdom be turned to the greater advancement of his glory, and might give
him occasion to show all his goodness, wisdom, power, perfect purity and
holiness in hating sin; his infinite justice in the destruction and damnation
of wicked reprobates, and in exacting a full satisfaction for the sins of them
that are saved; his infinite mercy, love, and free grace in giving his Son to
redeem and save his elect from sin, death, and hell; and his unspeakeable
bounty in giving his Spirit to sanctify them, to unite them to Christ, and to
conform them to his image, and so to bring them to the full fruition of
himself in glory. God in consulting within himself, and thereupon resolving
to create mankind, and saying, Let us make man, and then immediately creating
him (as the text shows) did in the creation of man show beforehand, that in
mankind he would manifest and make known all his goodness, more then in all
other creatures.

The third reason of Gods consultation, is, to manifest more plainly in man's
creation then in any other creature, the mystery 3.
of the blessed Trinity, that in the one infinite eternal God the Creator
there are more, even three Persons of one and the same undivided nature and
substance. For such consultations and resolutions, as are expressed in this
form of words, Let us make man in our image, and after our likeness, do
necessarily imply that there are more Persons then one consenting, and
concurring in the work. And that these three Persons are all but one and the
same God, it is^manifest by the words following, which speak of these Persons
as of one God; for it is said, that God created man in his own image, and not
they created man in their image.

Thus much for the intent and meaning of the Spirit of God in these words, Let
us make man in our image, and after our liknesse. From which words thus
expounded, we learn,

First, that the creation of mankind was a special work of Doctr. 1. Man the
chiefest of creatures.
God, and that man is by nature the chiefest and most excellent of all
creatures, which God made in all the visible World; which point the holy
Psalmist openly proclaimed; saying, I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
mavelous are they works, Psalm 139. 14.

Secondly, Gods consultation shows, that in the creation Doctr. 2.
he considered man's fall, and did foresee not only that man in his nature and
kind is a creature subject to such evils as might make it a matter
questionable, whether it were fit for God to create him or not: but also the
great good which comes by his creation and fall, and that man is a fit object,
wherein God may make manifest his wisdom, power, and all his goodness more
then in any other creature, and in that respect most worthy to be made by the
counsel, joint consent, and concurrence of all the three Persons in the
Trinity.

Thirdly, here we may observe, that in one God the almighty Doctr. 3.
Creator, there are more Persons then one manifested by Moses in the History
of the creation. And therefore the Doctrine of the Trinity is no new and lately
devised opinion since Christ, but a most ancient truth revealed from the first
foundation of the World.

These Doctrines I here only name, which will come to be handled more fitly in
the next thing which follows, to wit, Gods creating of mankind according to
this his counsel and resolution: which act of creation is laid down first
more generally and confusedly in the 27. Verse. And more distinctly and
particularly by way of recapitulation in the next Chapter.

First, it is here said, that as God upon consultation resolved, so he created
man in his own image, and male and female created he them: wherein we may
observe two things generally laid down; First, that God created man in his
own image. Secondly, that he created them male and female.

I will not here enter into a discourse concerning the imag^ of God, and the
special things wherein it does consist; that shall have a more fit place
hereafter, when I shall come to describe the excellent state of man in his
innocence before his fall.

The thing which here comes specially to be considered is the true meaning of
the Hebrew word Adam, which is translated Of the name Adam, used two ways.
(...)
man in this present text. This word is in the Scriptures used two ways:
First, as a proper name of the first man, even our first Father Adam; thus we
must understand the word Chap. 21. where it is said, that God did cast Adam
into a deep sleep, and Verse 22. brought the Woman to Adam when he had made
her of his Rib; and chap. 4. 1. and many other places, where Adam is
distinguished from Evah his wife, and is called the man.

Secondly, it is used as a common name of mankind, and includes (...).
in it both male and female, Man and Woman, as Psalm^ 144. 4. Man is like to
vanity, and Genesis 5. 2. where it is said, that God called the Man and Woman, and
all mankind in them, both male and female by this name Adam.

Here in this text, this word Adam is used in this latter sense as the common
name of mankind, comprehending in it both male and female; as appears by the
words following, Male and female created he them; that is, this Adam whom God
created in his own image was male and female, of both sexes, Man and Woman,
who are both but one kind of creature. Whereby it is manifest, that here is
laid down in general the creation of all mankind in our first Parents Adam
and his wife Evah; and that they both were created in the image of God; and
that the difference of their sexes, and the creation of the Woman after the
Man, of a Rib taken out of man's side, do not make any difference of their
nature, and kind; but both are of one kind, and both made in the image of God
and after his likeness: And Women as well as Men are capable of the same
grace, and fit to be heirs of the same glory in Heaven, where there is no
difference of male and female, but all shall be like to the Angels, not
marrying nor given in marriage: as all members of the same Christ, and
partakers of the same spiritual grace here; so all fellow-citizens of the
heavenly City there, reigning with Christ in glory, as our Savior himself
affirms in the Gospel.

Hence then we learn, That the Woman as well as the Man Doctr. Woman as
capable of grace and glory (...) man.
was made in the image of God, and is by nature as fit a subject, and as
capable as man of grace and glory. Which point is confirmed by diverse
Scriptures; as by the words of our Savior, Matthew 22. 30. where he says, that
Women and Men in the Resurrection are as the Angels of God in the last
Resurrection, not marrying nor given in m^rriage; And 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be
a Father unto you, and the shall ye my Sons and Daughters says the Lord
almighty; and Gal. 3. 28. Male and female are all one in Christ; and 1 Timothy 2.
15. the Apostle affirms, that Woman may be, and shall be saved by continuing
in faith, charity, and holiness with sobriety; and 1 Pet. 3. 7. mention is
made of holy Women, and Wives are said to be heirs together with their
Husbands of the grace of life. To which testimonies the examples of many holy,
godly and faithful Women, mentioned in the Scriptures, may be added; as our
first Mother Evah, who, through faith in the promise, obtained the title of the
Mother of life, Genesis 3. and the virgin Marie the Mother of the blessed seed is
called blessed in all nations: Sarah, Rebecca, Hannah, Deborah, Ruth, Dorcas,
Marie Magdalene, and many others.

But, 1 Cor. 11. 7. Man is called the image and glory of God, Object.
the Woman the glory of the Man.

The Apostle does not here speak of the image of God as Answ.
it consists in perfect uprightness and indowments of nature; or in holiness
and supernatural gifts of grace; for so the image of God is one and the same
in both, and common to the Woman with the Man, and they both have equal
dominion and Lordship over the creatures given in the creation: But here he
speaks of Man as he was first created before the Woman, and the Woman as she
was made to be a meet help for Man, and as it were his second self here on
earth, and of a Rib, which is a part of man's substance, and in all things like
man of the same nature and kind; and in these respects man has a priority,
and a kind of power and authority over the Woman in outward things, which
concern Ecclesiastical and Civil order; and man's glory even the image of his
authority appears in the Woman's subjection to him ever since the fall, upon
which God made her desire subject to man; and took from her power over man,
and the exercise of public offices in the Church and common wealth: And this
subjection does not exclude her from faith, charity, and holiness with
sobriety, or any other part of Gods image needful to salvation, as the Apostle
testifies, 1 Timothy 2. 15. In a word, common sense and reason teach us, that, if
the Woman be made in the image of the Man, and the Man is made in Gods image,
then Women must needs bear Gods image and likeness: But the truth is, God
being still the same, both in the creation of the Man and of the Woman, and
creating both by the same wisdom and power; he needed not to take Adam for
his pattern whereby to make the Woman, but made her in his own image as he
did man, and so in all things like to man, the different sex only excepted.

This serves to admonish and stir up women to be careful, diligent and
industrious so to bear themselves as they that are Use 1.
made after Gods image, and so to order their lives and conversation as they
who expect the glory of heaven, and must, by passing through the state of grace
here, and by conforming themselves to Christ both in his death by
mortification, and in his life by sanctification, come to the fullness of glory
in Heaven, and be made conformable and like to Christ in his glorious body,
and coheires of God with him.

Secondly, it serves to reprove the wicked and profane men of the World, whose
wickedness is transcendent, and their Use 2.
profaneness most horrible and impious, in that base esteem which they have
of the female sex, and the vile account which they make of womankind, who
think and speak of women that they have no souls, nor any part in Gods
image, and are utterly incapable either of grace in this World, or glory in the
World to come. Like and equal unto which, in their profane impiety, are common
strumpets and whorish women, the shame and stain of womankind, who prostitute
themselves to all filthiness, and so live as if they were made only to serve
the lusts of unreasonable men of brutish lust.

I proceed to the more special things, which are more distinctly laid down
concerning the creation of mankind; where I will first insist upon the creation
of the male and female, and the matter of which they were made, and of the
manner and order in which God formed them: Which that we may distinctly
understand, we must look forward to the 7. Verse of the 2. Chapter, where the
creation of mankind is more particularly rehearsed in these words, and the Lord
God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nosthrils the
breath of life, and man became a living soul. In the Hebrew text, the man is
here called Adam, not as by his proper name, but as it is the common name of
all mankind; for, so much the article which is prefixed before it does show;
and therefore as the Greek, so also our English Translators, do translate
this word not Adam, but Man; God formed man of the dust; For in the first
creation, the man comprehended in him all mankind, even the Woman who then was
a Rib in his side, and afterward was taken out and formed into a Woman.

The matter of which God formed Adam is said to be the dust of the ground; and
here he uses another word not used before in the creation of other things,
that is, the word formed; for he does not say, that God made or created, but
formed man; and true it is, that whole man was not made of dust, but only the
substance of his body; and therefore it is said, that God formed man (to wit,
in respect of his body,) of the dust of the ground, that is, he framed and
fashioned it of dust, as a potter forms a pot of clay, and brought it into
that form and shape which all perfect bodies of mankind do bear until this
day: And this is the first beginning of the being both of the Man and also of
the Woman, who was created here a Rib at the first in Man's side, and afterward
taken out, and made into a Woman.

First, in that Jehovah Elohim, the Lord God, is here said to form man, that
is, to frame his body of dust, and to bring it into the form and shape which
it bears in all mankind: Hereby Doctor. Man was made by God alone.
we are taught, that God did neither consult with Angels about man's creation,
nor assume them, or any other creatures into the fellowship of this work; but
God himself alone who is Jehovah, one God in essence and substance, and yet
Elohim, that is more Persons, even three Persons, in that one undivided
essence, did form the very body of man, and brought it into that form and
temper, that it might be a fit subject of the soul, which is a spiritual
substance. And this all other Scriptures confirm, which attribute the creation
of mankind to God alone; as Deuteronomy. 4. 32. and Isa. 45. 12. with many other
places, where the creation of man upon earth is ascribed unto God only, and
where holy and faithful men, speaking as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
confess themselves the work of Gods hands, as Job 10. 3. and God their maker
and former, Job 36. 3. and Malac. 2. 10. and God the potter and themselves his
formed work, Isa. 64. 8.

This Doctrine well weighed is of excellent use: First to make us ascribe all
our excellency and all our well being to God, Use 1.
that we may give him the glory of them, and that we may bear our selves
before God as before our creator, and may ever remember, that whatsoever
service we are able to perform either with our souls or bodies, it is wholly
due to God, and none other but only in him and by commandment and warrant
from his holy and infallible Word. Seeing God alone has created us and given
us all our being, even the form and shape of our bodies, we must not think
it enough to keep our selves to God, and to serve him in spirit only, but we
must serve and worship him with our bodies also, and with all parts and members
of our bodies. Although God many times makes men instruments and means to
convey health, life, being, and well being to us; as natural Parents, to bring
us into being and life, and to nourish and bring us up; and as Kings, and
Rulers, and wise Magistrates to be Saviors of our bodily lives from death and
other dangers, and to procure safety, peace and well being to us; and in this
respect and for these causes we do owe love, honor, and service to them in,
and under God: yet in no case may we in things which tend not to the honor,
but dishonor of God, and are contrary to his Word and Will, and offensive to
his Majesty, obey, serve and honor them. In such cases, let us say as the
Apostles did to the Highpriests and Rulers of the Jews, We ought to obey God
rather then men; and whether it be right and lawful to obey you more then God
judge ye, Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29. All Potentates, Kings and Rulers, because
they are men and have no power but from God, must not look that any should
serve and obey them rather then God, or in things which they command contrary
to Gods commandments; Yea they must remember that they are Gods creatures and
handi-worke, and ought to employ all their power and authority to the honor of
God. If otherwise they abuse the talents, which God has lent them; let them
know, that God will one day call them to a reckoning, and give them the reward
of evil, unfaithful, and unprofitable servants, even eternal destruction and
torment in Hell, where shall be howling, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth.

Secondly, this serves to show, that whosoever offers wrong Use 2. Danger of
them that wrong man.
and injury to any of mankind by cutting, mangling, or any way defacing their
(...)age, and deforming their bodies; by afflicting or some way corrupting
their souls; or by taking away their lives and natural being, without
special warrant and co^mmandement from God; they are notoriously injurious to
God himself; they scorn, despise, mis-use and deface Gods Workmanship; they
provoke God to wrath and jealousy, and he surely will be avenged on such
doings. And here we have matter, as of dread and terror to all cruel Tyrants
and unmercifull men; so of hope and comfort to all who suffer injury and wrong
at their hands: As the first sort have just cause to fear and tremble so often
as they think on God the avenger of such wrong; so the other have cause to
hope that God will not wholly forsake them, being the work of his own hands,
nor leave them to the will and lust of the wicked, his enemies; but will in his
good time save them, and send them deliverance.

Thirdly, this discovers the abomination and filthiness of all Use 3. The sin
of idolaters.
Idolaters, who being the workmanship of God, the Lord and wise creator of all
things, do most basely bow down to images, and altars; and debase themselves
to worship humane inventions, and the work of men's hands, which are dumb
Idols of wood, and stone, and lying vanities. It is just with God to cast out
and expose all such people to ignominy, shame, and confusion in this world,
and, in the world to come, into that place of darkness, where the Devil and
all such as forsake God, and rebel against the light which from the creation
shines to them, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the face
and presence of God, and from the glory of his power.

Secondly, in that God is here said to form man of the dust of the ground, not
of clay well tempered and wrought, but of dust, which of it self is most unfit
to be compacted and made into a steadfast shape; and which is counted so base,
and so light, that every blast of wind drives it away; and in Scripture the
basest things are resembled to it: Hence we may learn two things:

First, that God in the creation, even of man's body, showed his infinite power
and wisdom in bringing dust of the earth, Doctr. 1. Man's body being of dust,
was wondrously made.
which is the basest thing of all, into the form and shape of man's body, which
is the most excellent of all visible bodies, and a fit house and temple not
only of a reasonable living soul, but also of Gods holy spirit; (as other
Scriptures plainly affirm.) This point appears so plainly in the Text, that I
need not spend time in further confirmation of it; the word (...), formed, here
first used, implies an excellent form, and the upright face of man: Here
therefore I will add, for illustration sake, the words of David, which are
very pertinent to this purpose, Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16. where, speaking of Gods
forming and fashioning him in the womb of the living substance, even the seed,
blood, and flesh of his parents, says he, I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made. Marvelous are thy works, and that my soul
knows right well: My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth: Thine eyes did
see my substance, yet being imperfect, and in thy book were all my members
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them. Here we see with what fear, admiration and astonishment David considers
man's frame, and the curious workmanship of his body, when God forms it in the
mothers womb by lively instruments, and of a lively matter and substance: How
much more may we conclude, that Gods creating of Adams body, which was the most
curious natural body that ever was made, is most admirable, and deserves more
reverence, fear, and astonishment at our hands, being made without instruments
out of the basest matter and substance even dust of the earth! Surely in this
God showed wisdom and power beyond all admiration.

The Use of this doctrine is to stir us up, so often as we Use 1.
think of our creation in Adam, to laud and praise Gods wisdom and power, to
fear and reverence God, and to admire his curious workmanship. And although
the matter of which God framed man's body was the basest of all, even dust of
the ground; yet let us not think ever a whit more meanly of our creation; but
so much more admire Gods workmanship in our bodies. For, to make a curious
work in gold, silver, or of some beautiful, precious, and pliable metal, is
not rare, nor so excellent: but to frame of the basest matter, the dust of the
ground; the chiefest work, and even the Masterpiece of all works in the
visible world, that is, the body of Adam in the state of innocence; this is
worthy of all admiration, and is a just motive and provocation to stir us up
to praise, and to extol with admiration the wisdom and power of God;
especially, if we consider the most excellent form of man's body and upright
stature, together with the head, comely face, hands, and other members every
way fitted and composed to be instruments of a reasonable soul, and to rule
and keep in order and subjection all living creatures.

Secondly, in that the dust of the ground, the basest part of the Doctr. 2. Man
at best a dusty substance.
earth, is the matter out of which man's body, the beautiful Palace and Temple
of his Soul, was formed in the excellent state of innocence; Hence we learn,
that man is by nature, and in his best natural being given to him in the
creation, but a dusty, earthy substance in respect of his body; and, in respect
of his Soul, an inhabitant of an house of clay, the foundation whereof is in
the dust.

But some perhaps, will object against the collection of Object.
this Doctrine, from the base and frail matter of which man's body was formed;
and will thus argue, That the state and condition of creatures is not to be
esteemed by the matter of which they were made, but by the form and being
which God gave to them; as for example, the Angels, together with the highest
heaven, were created immediately of nothing, as well as the rude unformed mass
which is called earth, and yet they are most glorious spirits, and the rude
mass is not to be compared to them; Yea man was created according to his
inferior part the body, of dust, which is a created substance better then
nothing, of which the Angels were made; and yet the Angels in nature far excel
man: Therefore man's creation of dust does not prove him to be so frail a
creature, seeing God gave him such an excellent form.

To this I answer, that to be created immediately of nothing is in it self a
more excellent work, and shows greater power, Answ. 1.
then to be made of a mean inferior matter: For when things are said to be
created of nothing, the meaning is not, that they are made of nothing as of a
matter; but that they are made of no matter at all, but have their whole being
from God, and his infinite power, and so may be, if God will, most excellent:
But when man is said to be formed of dust, the meaning is, that dust is a part
of his substance even the matter of which he consists, and that his body
according to the matter is a dusty, earthy substance; and his Soul, though a
spiritual substance created of nothing, yet, dwelling in that body, is an
inhabitant of an earthly Tabernacle and house of clay founded in the dust.
Secondly, 2.
though the frame of man's body is in it self most excellent, and surpasses
all bodily forms, and his Soul is a spiritual substance endowed with reason;
yet all these were of mutable excellency in the best natural estate of
innocence, and could not continue in that excellency but by dependence upon
God, and cleaving fast to him; and by his hand and power sustaining them
continually, which by promise he was not bound to do in that estate. And
therefore we may truly gather from the matter of which God formed man's body,
that he was in his best natural being, in respect of his body, but a dusty
substance, such as might return to dust, by falling off from God by sin, and
disobedience; yea undoubtedly as God in framing man his chiefest visible
creature of dust, intended to show his wisdom and power, and to glorify his
goodness: so also he teaches man thereby his own natural frailty and
mutability, how unable he is of himself to abide in honor and excellency.
And this he shows most plainly, Genesis 3. 19. where he says to man, alluding
to his creation, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return: We have also
an excellent argument to this purpose, Job 14. 18, 19. and 15. 15. where the
Lord is said to charge his Angels with folly, and to lay no trust in his
servants, and the heavens are not clear in his sight; how much less can he
find steadfastnesse in men, who dwell in houses of clay, which have their
foundation in the dust? that is, seeing the heavenly spirits are not immutably
pure in Gods sight, but some of the Angels has God charged with folly, to wit,
such as did fall, and to the rest he has added supernatural light of his
Spirit, and so has made them Saints immutably holy, much less is man
immutably pure and steadfast by nature, whose better part the Soul is by
creation made to dwell in an house of clay, a body made of dust. To this
purpose serve those Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, which compare man
in his first creation to clay in the hand of the potter, Ier. 18. 9. and Romans
9. 21 and which affirm that the first Adam was of the Earth earthy; 1 Cor. 15,
47. that is, in his first creation he was of an earthy and dusty substance.
Use (...). For humility and thankfulness.


First, this serves by discovering unto man his frailty and mutability in his
best natural being, to humble every man in his own eyes, and to make him
lowly, and to withdraw his heart from pride and all high conceits of any worth
in himself, and to teach us all to ascribe all the unchangable purity which
we find in ourselves, and all our steadfastnesse to the free grace of God in
Christ, and not to any power of our own free will, or to the excellency of our
natural frame and being. If man in his first creation and best natural being
was but of earth and dust, an earthy and dusty creature; and, before that death
entered into the World, while he had yet power of free will to obey God, and
to depend on him, was mutable and might fall into sin, and disobedience, and by
sin might bring and did bring death upon himself and all his posterity: how
much more now in the state of nature corrupted is every Son of man, a very
mass of corruption and frailty, yea vanity and abominable filthiness, who
drinks iniquity like water as it is written, Job 15. 16. Wherefore, Let no
man glory in any natural power or prerogative, nor hope to stand by his own
strength, much less to merit or purchase by any works of nature or power of
free will, the least grace supernatural, which tends to bring him to heavenly
happiness and glory unchangeable: For man, as he is flesh and blood, that is,
an earthly creature, cannot possibly come to inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 15. 50.

Secondly, this discovers the madness and desperate blindness Use 2. Against
Pelagians and Papists.
of Pelagians and Papists, who teach, that a man by the right use of his
natural power and free will may procure spiritual grace from God, and even
the Spirit of regeneration, and faith working by love, by which he may merit
and purchase to himself eternal life, and heavenly glory and felicity, as a
just and condign reward of his works. If Angels cannot be made steadfast and
trusty without supernatural light added to them; much less can earthy man,
who by sin is become filthy and abominable, work out his own salvation by
meriting and purchasing the heavenly reward. Oh let us all hate and abhor all
such conceits, which wholly tend to the frustrating and evacuating of Christ's
merits and satisfaction, and to make them seem vain and needless. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked; they who sow such tares, and feed like swine on
the husks of their own works, and on things which nature teaches, they are
enemies to the grace of God, which is given only in Jesus Christ, and together
with him by communion of his Spirit.

After the creation of man's Body of dust, immediately follows The creation of
man's soul.
the creation of his Soul; which is to be understood in these words: And
breathed into his nosthrils the breath of life, and man was a living Soul; For
no sooner was man's body brought into frame, but God breathed into him the
breath of life; that is, caused him to breathe with the breath of life, even
those vital spirits which are the band of union by which the Soul is united
to the body; and in the first instant wherein he created the vital spirits, he
also created the spiritual substance of his Soul in his body immediately of
nothing by his omnipotent hand.

Some are opinion, that man's Soul was first created a Spirit, Opinions. 1.
subsisting by it self before his body was formed; and when the body was
formed a fit subject for it, then instantly God infused it into the body, and
by it did give life and breath to the body.

Some think, that the body was formed, and the Soul 2.
in the same instant created together with it, as Damascene lib. 2. de fide,
cap. 12. Aquinas, and others: And Cyrill thinks, that Gods breathing into man's
face the breath of life, was the infusion of the holy Ghost into man; and that
man in the creation had the holy Spirit given to dwell in him, and was
sanctified and endowed with supernatural grace and holiness.

Some think, that Gods breathing into man's nosthrils was 3.
his inspiring into man a reasonable Soul, as a part of himself: so Rabby
Moses Maymonides.

But by breathing into man's face, I do not understand any 4.
material breathing or blast, but that God, in causing breath of life to
breathe through man's nosthrils, did withal create the Soul in the body, and
by means of this reasonable Soul created in the body, and united to the body
by vital spirits and breath, man became a living Soul, that is, a living
reasonable creature, living only a perfect natural, not an holy spiritual
life. The Apostle expounds these words in this Sense, 1 Cor. 15. and does make
this a maine difference between the first man Adam, and Christ the second
Adam, that the first Adam was only a natural Man endowed with a natural
living Soul; but to be a quickening Spirit, that is, to be sanctified by the
holy Ghost, and endowed with spiritual life, is proper to Christ in his
creation, for in him the Spirit dwelt from his first conception.

Hence we learn, That the image of God in which man's Doctrine. No
supernatural gifts in the soul of Adam.
was created, was only natural and did consist in natural gifts, which
naturally flow from his reasonable Soul, and not in any supernatural gifts of
the holy Ghost; as true holiness, and the like: The words of Saint Paul last
before named do fully prove this. I will here only add one strong Reason and
invincible argument to prove it fully.

And that is drawn from the mutability of man in the creation, Reason.
and from his fall, by which Gods image was defaced in him. For it is most
certain, that he who has in him that image of God which consists in true
holiness, and in spiritual and supernatural gifts, he is not mutable nor
subject to fall away, because he has the holy Ghost dwelling in him, who is
greater then he that dwells in the World, 1 Ioh. 4. that is, then the Devil who
works powerfully in the children of disobedience. For all true holiness, and
all spiritual graces are the proper work of the holy Ghost dwelling in man,
as all the Scriptures testify. But Adam in innocence and honor lodged not
therein one night, Psalm 49. 12. The Devil at the first onset gave him the
foil in his greatest strength of nature and best estate; which Devil with all
his temptations and all the powers of darkness and spiritual wickednesses,
the little ones of Christ's flock do overcome by the power of the holy Ghost
and his graces, which they have in their frail earthen vessels. Therefore the
image of God in which man was created, was natural only.

This discovers Gods goodness, free grace, and bounty beyond all measure, and
all conceit and comprehension of humane Use 1. Our estate better by
regeneration, then by creation.
reason, in that it shows how God, by man's fall, malice and corruption which
made him a slave of Hell and Death, did take occasion to be more kind and
bountiful to man, and to show more love and goodness to him, by repairing the
ruins of his fall, and renewing him after a better image then that which he
gave him in the creation, and making him better after his sin and fall, then
he was before in the state of innocence, when he had of himself no
inclination to any sin or evil, and bringing him to grace spiritual in
Christ, and to an image which cannot be defaced and to a state firm and
unchangable: when we rightly consider these things, we have no cause to
murmur at Gods voluntary suffering of man to fall from his estate, which was
perfect and pure natural; but rather to rejoice in God, and to bless his
name, and to magnify his goodness, for turning his fall to our higher rising
and exaltation, and lifting us up by Christ from hell and misery, to heavenly
glory which never fades, and to a state spiritual and supernatural not
subject to change and alteration.

Secondly, this Doctrine overthrowes the foundation and Use 2. No Apostasy of
Saints.
false ground, upon which Papists and Pelagians do build, and seek to
establish their false and erroneous opinion concerning the apostasy of the
Saints regenerate, and their falling from supernatural grace and Iosing the
Spirit of regeneration; which error they seek to establish by this argument,
Because Adam in innocence had the holy Ghost shed on him, and was endued with
spiritual and supernatural gifts of holiness, from which he did fall by sin
and transgression. But here we see there is no such matter; Adams image was
only natural uprightness; not spiritual, supernatural, and true holiness.
He was but a perfect natural Man, and a living Soul; Christ, the second
Adam, only is called the quickening Spirit, because through him only God sheds
the holy Ghost on men; and hence it is, that though Adam did fall away from his
estate, which was only natural; yet the Saints regenerate and called to the
state of grace in Christ, can never fall away totally nor finally into
apostasy, because they have the seed of God, even the holy Ghost dwelling and
abiding in them.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the woman's creation in particular. How without her all was not good. Woman
not made to be a servant. Of giving names to the creatures. No creature but
woman a meet companion for man, Uses. Of the rib whereof woman was made. Of
Adams deep sleep: Five Points thence collected. Of Gods bringing Eve to Adam;
and two Points thence. Of Adams accepting Eve for his wife; and calling her
bone, etc. w(...)h diverse points thence. Of their nakedness: demonstrating the
perfection of the creation.

Genesis 2. 18, 19, 20, 21. And the Lord said, It is not good that the man should
be alone, I will make an help meet for him. And every beast, and every foul
God brought to Adam, to see what he would call them, etc. And Adam gave names
to them all: but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him. And the
Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept; and he took one
of his ribs and made it a Woman, and brought her to the Man, etc.

These words, and the rest which follow in this Chapter, contain a particular
description of the creation of the Woman, which before was touched generally
and summarily, Chap. 1. 27. in these words, Male and female created he them.
In this History of the Woman's creation, we may observe three special things:
First, the preparation to it, or the antecedents immediately going before it.
Secondly, the creation it self. Thirdly, the consequents which followed upon
it.

In the preparation, we may observe three distinct things: First, Gods
counsel and resolution for man's well being, Verse 18: Secondly, Gods setting
of the Man a work to view the creatures, and to exercise his reason and
natural wisdom in naming them, Verse 19. Thirdly, the inequality which Adam
found in the creatures and the unfitness of them for his conversation, Verse
20.

First, Moses brings in the Lord God consulting with himself, and according to
his eternal Counsel concluding that it was not good for Man to be alone, and
resolving that he will make an help meet for him: For these words, And God
said, are not to be understood of any sound of words uttered by God; but of
Gods eternal Counsel, purpose, and foreknowledge now beginning to manifest
it self by outward action and execution, as a man's mind is manifested by his
speech. The things, which God foreknew in his counsel, and purposed, are two:
First, that it was not good for man to be alone. Secondly, that he would make
an help meet for him. Hence it may seem strange All good, and Adam good, yet
not to be alone: how.
which God says, that any thing which he had made should not be good: For did
not he make man alone and single at the first? And did not he make every
thing good, especially man created in his own image? Was not the image of God,
in which he created man, fully and perfectly good?

To this doubt I answer, that the Man was created good and perfect after the
likeness of God, and there was no defect in his being and substance: But yet,
as all other creatures, though they were made good, and there was no evil in
them; yet they were not so good as man; so man, though as he was created in
the image of God, was good, yea in goodness far excelled other earthly
creatures; yet he was not so good, but that he might be made more good, and
created in an image of God more excellent then that wherein he was first made,
even in the holy image of the heavenly Adam Christ, which far excels and is
immutable: Yea, we find by experience that many things which are good in
themselves, are not good for all purposes; fire is good in it self, and for
many uses; but not to be eaten; and so many other creatures are good, as the
flesh of beasts for man's meat, but not without bread and salt, nor raw: So man
was created good and fit to rule all other living creatures, even considered
alone in himself; but it was not good for the bringing of all Gods purposes to
pass that man should be alone; it was far better that a Woman should be
created meet for him, for the procreation of mankind, for the increase of Gods
Church, and for the incarnation of Christ, and the bringing forth of him the
blessed seed of the Woman, in whom God reveals all his goodness and good
pleasure. Here then we may learn two points of instruction.

First, that as God from all eternity in his eternal council Doctr. 1 In
Christ a better thing intended then the creation.
immutably purposed, so in the first creation of man he showed, that he
intended all things which he has brought to pass in and by the incarnation
of Christ, and in the gathering together of his elect Church by Christ, and
that he had in his purpose the exaltation of man to an higher and better
estate then that in which he first created him. For it is most clear and
manifest, that Adam, being created in the image of God, in all uprightness and
perfection of nature; and having all the visible World to view, and to
contemplate upon Gods wisdom and workmanship therein, and all the creatures
to rule over, and all things necessary for worldly delight, needed no more for
natural and earthly felicity: But yet for all this God said, it was not good
that man should be alone; that is, it was not good for that which God
intended, that is, for the obtaining of eternal felicity in and by Christ, and
for the full manifestation of Gods goodness and glory in and upon mankind.
This is that truth, which is so often testified by our Savior and his
Apostles, where they tell us, that God prepared a Kingdom for his elect from
the beginning of the World; and that as an elect number was chosen in Christ
before the foundation of the World; so Christ's incarnation' death, satisfaction
and mediation were ordained before all worlds, as Matthew. 25. 34. and Ephesians. 1. 4.

First, this shows against all Atheists, Pagans, and Heretics Use 1.
that nothing comes to pass by chance, nothing without the foresight and
foreknowledge of God: but he saw before he created the World what should
befall every creature, and without his will permitting, no evil comes to
pass, and without his will ordaining, and his hand working, no good can come to
any creature; all things are according to his foreknowledge, and there is no
place for idle suppositions of vainemen.

Secondly, as the wicked may here for their terror take notice, that all their
evil deeds are foreseen and foreknowne of God, Use 2.
and he has just vengance laid up in store for them: So the godly may comfort
themselves against all Calumnies, Slanders, and false witnesses; all are known
to God, and he will in the end make the truth known, and bring their cause to
light.

Thirdly, we are hereby stirred up to all diligence in Gods service, and that
betimes, seeing God has so long before hand Use 3.
ordained and prepared all good things for us: All our time spent in praise and
thanks before him, is nothing to the time wherein he has showed love to us,
in preparing good for us before and from the beginning of the World.

Secondly, in that it is said, of man created in Gods image Doctr. 2.
in full perfection of nature, that it was not good, that he should be alone:
Hence we learn, that the image of God, and the state wherein man was first
created, is not absolutely the best which man can have; but that in Christ
there is a better image, and a more excellent state and condition provided for
him, which is best of all. This is fully proved, 1 Cor. 15. where the Apostle
shows, that the image of the heavenly Adam is far above the image of the
earthly, and that the Kingdom which is prepared in Christ for the elect, is
such as flesh and blood, that is, natural man cannot inherit.

This shows, that we gain more by Christ, then we lost Use.
in Adam; and God by man's fall, is become more bountiful to mankind: And we
who in Christ have our hope, have no More gained in Christ, then lost in Adam.
cause to repine at Gods decreeing, willing and suffering of man's fall, nor to
be impatient under the afflictions which thereby come upon us; seeing the end
of all is glory and bliss, and a crown too high and precious for Adam in the
state of innocence.

The second thing in Gods council and purpose is, that he will make an help
meet for man. Here again it may seem strange, that Adam should need an help
in the state of innocence; for help is required when a man is in need, and
wants necessaries for avoiding evil or gaining some good; which Adam, being
created in Gods image and having all the World at will, seemed not to want. But
to this I answer, that by an help here, we are to understand not an help to
resist any evil, or to gain some natural good which he wanted; but an help
for obtaining an higher and more blessed estate, even the supernatural and
heavenly estate of grace and glory in Christ, the seed of the Women: Whence we
may learn,

That the Woman was created not to be a servant to man, Doctrine. Woman not
made to be a servant.
to serve his natural necessity; for he needed no such help or service in
that estate, being made good and perfect with natural perfection: but to be
an help and furtherance to heavenly happiness, and in things which tend
thereunto. And albeit the Woman by being first in the transgression, and a
means of man's fall is made in her desire subject to man, and to his rule and
dominion over her; yet by Christ the promised seed of the Woman, she is
restored to her first honorable estate, to be an help to man in heavenly
things, and a means to win man, and to bring him to God in Christ by her
chaste and holy conversation, and by showing a lively example of piety, and of
the true fear of God, and giving due reverence to her husband, as Saint Peter
testifies, 1 Pet. 1. 23.

This Doctrine is of good use: First, to teach men how to use Use 1.
and esteeeme their Wives, and wherein especially to seek their help even in
heavenly things, and in earthly and temporal, so far as they serve to
further them in spiritual. If men could be brought to understand and believe
this, they would be careful to marry in the Lord, and to match themselves
with Wives of the true religion, godly and virtuous, well approved for piety,
faith and knowledge, and truly fearing God.

Secondly, to direct Women, how they ought to frame, bear, Use 2.
and behave themselves toward their husbands; and wherein they ought to
strive, study, and endeavor to be helps to them, even in the way to heaven;
Let the daughters of the cursed Idolatrous Canaanites bear this just brand,
that, like Iezabel, they are snares, and stir up their husbands to
wickedness, and to Idolatry and cruelty.

To reprove Men and Women, who only or chiefly seek fleshly, carnal and
worldly help, content, profit, and pleasure Use 3.
one from another, and in their mutual society and conjugall communion; and so
quite swerve and stray from the rule of this Doctrine: where we have much
matter of reproof ministered to us, both of men who take Wives according to
their lust, and greedy desire of wealth and riches, not for religion and the
fear of God; or who make drudges and slaves of their Wives whom God made to
be helps meet for them; and also of Women who give themselves to be no helps
to their husbands except it be for the World, no furtherers at all but rather
pul-backs and hinderers in the way to heaven, and in heavenly and spiritual
things.

The second thing, in the preparation to the Woman's creation, Of giving names
to the creatures.
is, Gods setting of Adam a work to view all living creatures, and to employ
his reason and wisdom in giving names to them. Where we are to note and
observe, First, that here is no mention made of the living creatures in the
Sea, but only of those which God formed out of the ground, that is, beasts,
and cattle, and fowls of the air all which were ready at hand, and God might
quickly present, and make to pass before Adam all kinds of them, that he
might view and name them. Secondly, we here may observe the intent and purpose
of God in bringing them to Adam; to wit, the exercise and trial of Adams
natural reason, wisdom, and knowledge; which were made manifest by his
giving to every kind fit names, which God approved and confirmed. Thirdly, the
manifestation of Adams wisdom, and Gods confirming of his judgment, which
he showed in naming every kind of earthly creature with a name agreeable to
the nature of it. For whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was
the name of it, that is, that name was ratified by God. Yea also, because there
was no use of names, whereby the creatures might be known to any other or
revealed, (there being as yet no man besides Adam himself, nor the Woman yet
made to whom he might show them by their names) I am induced to think, that
Adam gave such a fit and proper name agreeable to the nature and qualities of
every creature, that the creature, being called by that name, would come to
Adam whenever he called upon it; such was the obedience of the creatures to
Man, and such was man's wisdom to rule them, and so excellent was his
knowledge of their several natures and qualities. From which observations thus
opened we may learn:

That, in the state of innocence in the first creation, man had Doctrine. Adam
perfect in natural knowledge.
perfect natural knowledge of all natural things, arising and springing
immediately from his natural soul, and the powers and faculties thereof, which
were natural principles created in him; he had no need to be taught by any
instructor, in any art or knowledge fit for his state and condition, nor to
learn by experience as now we do since the fall.

Now, seeing Adam was thus perfect in natural knowledge of Use. The best
natural knowledge cannot uphold.
all things which concerned his natural state and condition, and yet was
seduced by the woman, and the serpent: This serves to teach us, that no
natural knowledge, gifts, and abilities can uphold and sustain a man against
spiritual enemies, and temptations; that power is proper to supernatural
grace, neither can natural reason dive into the depth of heavenly and
supernatural things. If natural wit and reason could have conceived the
spiritual meaning of the tree of life, and of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil; surely Adam would first have eaten of the tree of life, and not by
any means have been tempted and drawn to eat of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil: For he who was created good, could in no case wittingly have
neglected the tree of life, and desired the other upon any false suggestion.
Wherefore let us not build upon nature, but wholly upon grace, in things which
concern eternal life and heavenly happiness. He that follows natural
reason for his guide in the way to heaven, may easily be carried aside, and
fall into the crooked ways of error, which lead unto hell, and speedily fall
into the pit of destruction.

The third thing to be noted in the preparation to the woman's creation is, the
inequality which Adam found in all the creatures to be his mates and
companions, and their unfitness for his conversation to be an help meet for
him: this is in these words, but for Adam there was not found an help meet for
him. The words seem to sound, as if God had brought the creatures before Adam,
to see if either he himself, or Adam could find one among them all fit to be
a consort for Adam and a meet help. But the purpose and intent of God was to
employ Adams wit, and to take an experiment of it, as is before noted: And as
for God, he knew well enough what was to be found among all the creatures,
he needed not either to seek for Adam, or to set Adam to seek a meet help
among them: Yea, he had said before, I will make an help meet for him. The
meaning is, that when Adam had viewed and named all kinds of earthly creatures,
he found them all so far inferior to himself, and so unlike in nature,
that they could not all yield him an help meet for him. The word (...), which
is here translated, meet for him, some would have it to signify against him,
which is most absurd; For the Woman was not made a perverse creature to thwart
Man; then she had been a Cross and an Hell, not an help. Tostatus would have
this word to signify contrary to him, because the Woman in her natural
members or parts is contrary to Man; which is also absurd. Neither does this
word signify as one before him, that is, as Kimchi expounds it, as one to
stand before him, and to attend him as a servant; for then God would not have
made her of his own substance; but of a meaner and inferior matter: But the
word signifies, as one which is his second self, made in the same form like
him, as a picture is drawn in a table set just before a man's face, and over
against him, that it may in all parts answer to his shape and feature. Such an
help Adam could not find among all earthly creatures; but such a one God
purposed, and resolved to make for him, even one who should be his second
self, made of his own substance, and in the same image of God, and consisting
of a living reasonable Soul (as he did) and of a body in all parts and
members, and in form and shape fully like to his body, (only the difference
of sex excepted.) This common sense and experience does show and teach, and
therefore, this is the true sense and meaning of this phrase, I will make an
help meet for him. And hence we learn:

That man created in the image of God does so far in nature, Doctr. None but
Woman a meet companion for. Man.
former and substance excel all living creatures, birds, beasts and living
things on earth, that none of them all is a meet consort or companion for him
to converse with. Some delight he may take in ruling over them, and in their
service and obedience; but no true or solid content in their society and
conversation. As Adam found this in the state of innocence, and in his pure
incorrupt nature; so all Adams sons of the best temper ever abhorred to be
excluded from humane society, and to converse with birds and beasts. David
counted it worse then death to live among wild beasts in the deserts, and
complained bitterly of it; Psalm 42. and could not be satisfied till he had
drawn to him all discontented persons, and them who durst not show their heads
for debt, 1 Samuel 22. 2. So did austere Eliah, when Iezabel made him flee for
his life into the wilderness, 1 King. 19. And never any of Gods Saints
delighted to live in the wilderness only, among beasts and birds without
humane society, except in times of cruel persecution, as appears, Hebr. 11.
or for some special trial and temptation, as our Savior, Mark. 1. 13. and
his forerunner John the Baptist, Luke 1. last verse, to harden him and make him
austere, and a second Eliah.

This admonishes us to esteem the society of men as a Use 1.
great blessing of God; and not to set our delight on dogs, horses, hawks, and
hounds, more then in the company of men, as many do, which is an argument that
they are degenerate from the nature of men.

Secondly, this discovers the beastly dotage of many Romish Use 2.
Saints, and of the Monks, and Anachorites of the Church of Rome, who count it
an high point of perfection to live in caves, and dens, and cottages in the
wilderness remote from all humane society, and to converse only whith beasts,
yea and to preach unto them, as their Saint Francis is by them recorded to have
done, and have called ravenous Wolves his brethren. God made man a sociable
creature, to delight in humane society, and has given him a mouth and tongue
to speak his mind to others, who can with reason hear and understand him. He
who will follow Christ must not look on his own things, but on the things of
others; and must impart all his holy meditations to as many as he can, if he
has any in him: Otherwise he hides his talent, and covers his candle under a
bushel, which favors of Satanicall envy, has no relish of Christian
kindness and charity.

I might here observe the conformity of Woman in her nature Of the rib, where
of Woman was made.
and frame unto man, and the sweet harmony and concord which, by the law of
nature and creation, ought to between Man and Woman; but I have in part
touched it before, and shall have more occasion hereafter.

I proceed to the creation it self, laid down in the 21. and 22. Verses:
wherein I observe, First, the matter of which the Woman was made, to wit, a Rib
of the Man, Verse 21. Secondly, the manner, Verse 22: In the matter; First, it
is showed, that God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, such as makes a man
senseless of any thing which is done to him; so the Hebrew word (...)
signifies. This sleep was not natural, but an extraordinary sleep which God
made to fall on him; a sleep which came not from any violence done to nature
but by the powerful hand of God making man to sleep quietly, so that he did
not feel what God did to him. Secondly, it is said, that in this deep sleep
God did take one of Adams Ribs, and closed up the flesh in stead of it. Here
diverse questions are moved by diverse interpreters: 1. Whether it was one Rib,
or a pair of ribs. 2. Whether it was one of Adams necessary Ribs, one of the
twelve, which every man has naturally in his side; or whether an extraordinary
Rib, made in Adam for the purpose. 3. Whether Adam was cast into stupidity to
take away pain and fear, or whether for some other cause.

Some think, that if it was a Rib created in Adam above the ordinary number,
then Adam was made a monster. Others say, that if it was an ordinary Rib; then
Adam was afterward a maimed man, and wanted a necessary natural part. But I
conceive this to be the truth:

First, that it was but one Rib, or at least one pair of Ribs; so the text
affirms.

Secondly, it was not one of Adams necessary Ribs, required to make him a
perfect man; but a Rib above the ordinary number, which God created in Adam of
purpose, and yet Adam was no monster, neither was it a superfluous part: for as
Adam was created the common stock and root of all mankind; so it was requisite
that he should have one Rib extraordinary created in him above other Men,
whereof the Woman was to be made, and he nevertheless remain perfect and
complete as any other man afterward.

Thirdly, Adams deep sleep was not to take away sense of Of Adams deep sleep.
pain; but a mystery of building the Church out of Christ's death, under which
he slept to the third day. And it is said, that God closed up the flesh in
stead thereof, or in the place thereof; not that God left a scarre or hollow
place, or that God created flesh to fill up the place of the Rib; but only
closed up the flesh in the place where he took out the Rib, so that no scar
or print did there appear, but man appeared most perfect, and without mayme or
sign of any wound.

In the second place, for the manner of the Woman's creation, it is said, that
God made this Rib a Woman or builded it up to be a Woman, as the words run in
the Hebrew; which word implies, that as children are derived of their parents
to build up their family; so the Woman was derived from Adam to build up his
great family, mankind, of his own nature and substance; and that his posterity
might spring wholly from him, both in respect of himself, and of his wife
their common Mother, which was taken out of him. I omit needless questions,
and ridiculous collections which some have here made: as, that the Woman being
made of a bone is hard hearted, and such like. The profitable points which I
observe from hence, are these following:

First, we are here taught by man's falling into a deep sleep, Doctr. 1.
senseless like death, that the Woman might be taken and formed out of him,
That God in the creation foreshewed, that the spouse of the second Adam Christ,
even the true Church should be purchased Out of Christ dying the Church is
raised.
by the death of Christ, and the blood drawn out of his side; and Christ, by
his sleep in death, should make way to raise and build up his Church. That the
first Adam and his Wife in her creation were the types and figures of Christ
and his spouse the Church, I need not stand to prove; the Apostle has done it
sufficiently, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 32.

This serves for much heavenly instruction; as first, to put us in mind of the
unity which is between Christ and his Church; Use 1.
and to make us, as we desire, to be a true and chaste spouse of Christ; also
to labor to be spiritually united to him, and never rest till we feel and
perceive that we are borne of Gods immortal seed, even of his Spirit.

Secondly, to make us ascribe our being wholly to Christ, as we are the true,
holy, and regenerate Church and people of Use 2.
God, and of the heavenly family. Thirdly, to make us love Christ, and to
meditate on his death with all holy reverence 3.
and tender affection, as the thing by which we are purchased; yea to make us
ready to conform our selves to Christ in his death, by suffering for the good
of his Church. Fourthly, to make us see, that the creation was as it were a
shadow of Gods 4.
restoration of the World by Christ, and that the restoration is the
substance by which the creation is perfected.

Secondly, God made the Woman of a Rib, which was a part of the man's body;
which teaches us, that Woman must by the Doctr. 2.
course of nature yield to man the pre-eminence, as being made out of him; this
the Apostle also teaches 1 Cor. 11. 7, 8. And this admonishes Women to give
due respect to their husbands, Use.
as is meet, in the Lord, and not to usurp rule and authority over men.

Thirdly, God made Woman of Man's substance; which teaches, that Woman is near
and ought to be dear to Man, as Doctr. 3.
a part of himself; which the Apostle confirms, Ephesians. 5. And here all harsh
and tyrannical husbands are justly noted; and their doings reproved.

Fourthly, the making of the Woman of a bone, a solid part, Doctr. 4.
teaches us, that she is made to be a solid help and stay to man, and ought
so to be in his family. And hereby husbands are directed to esteem their
wives, as the stay of their family. And wives to strive to be helps.

Fifthly, in that God made the Woman not out of man's head Doctr. 5. Wives are
continual companions of our lives.
nor feet; but out of his side, hereby he has taught us, that women must not
be too high and proud as the head, nor too low vassals as the feet, but
consorts and companions of their husbands in the whole course of their life,
partakers of the same grace, and of the same honors and dignities;
yoke-fellowes in the same labors and cares in this World, and coheires of the
same glory in the World to come. The Wiseman confirms this fully by the
description of a virtuous Woman, which is reformed after the true image, in
which she was created, Prove. 31. For he describes her to be one who consorts
with her husband in labor and provident care, and draws equally with him in
the same yoke, and partakes of the same honor, and respect both in public and
private. The holy Prophets also and Apostles show, that the Woman is made to
be Man's inseparable companion, Mal. 2. 14. even the desire of his eye, and the
joy of his glory, on whom especially he sets his mind, Ezech. 24 16. and that
man's delight must be to have her continually at his side, and her delight must
be to present her self to his eyes as a looking-glass, in which he may
behold his own glory, even the image of God, in which he was formed first,
and she after him, 1 Cor. 7. 10, 11. where the Apostle forbids the Wife to
depart from her Husband, and the Husband to put away his Wife, and their
defrauding one another of mutual comfort by separating and living apart. For
as man is the image and glory of God; so the Woman is the glory of the Man, 1
Cor. 11. 7. in whom man may behold, as in a glass, the image of God in which
he was created. And therefore the holy Apostles who were married, as Peter,
and the brethren of the Lord, in their traveling to preach the Gospel, did
lead about their wives, as Saint Paul testifies, 1 Cor. 9. 5. Also Saint Peter
speaks plainly to this purpose, 1 Pet. 3. 7. where he injoynes husbands to
dwell with their Wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the Wife as to
the weaker vessel, and as being coheires of the grace of life; that is, as a
man is endued with more knowledge, so it is his duty to dwell and converse with
his Wife wisely as a man of knowledge: and as we tender those necessary
vessels which are useful for us, and the more weak and brittle they are, the
more we take care for them, and have a continual eye over them; so men ought
to be more careful over their Wives, because they are the weaker sex; and to
give them more respect, honor and shield, and more to esteem of them by
having a constant eye toward them, and keeping them in their sight and
presence, as much as may be; and so much more, because they are coheires of
the grace of life, and must draw jointly together as under the same yoke in the
way to heavenly happiness.

This Doctrine of truth, written in our hearts in the creation, should be a
guide and direction unto us all in the whole course Use. 1.
of our lives: It directs Men how to esteem their Wives, and to bear
themselves toward them; and Women how to behave themselves before their
Husbands, that the one ought not cast the other behind as an unfit and unworthy
mate and companion: the Man must not run too far before, and leave his Wife
behind, either in worldly estate, or in grace and in the way to heaven; nor the
Wife draw back and lagge behind, either through careleseness, or mean conceit
of her own frame, nature and sex; but both must draw cheek by cheek, and
side by side, and by joint strength and endeavor draw on, and pull, and put
forward one another, as a couple that are by the yoke which God imposed on them
in the creation fast tied together. This is the will and law of God, and they
that walk by this true rule, Gal. 6. 16.
peace, prosperity and blessing shall be on them all their days, and the end
of their labor shall be an eternal Sabbath in heaven.

Secondly, it serves to reprove the great corruption which is daily seen among
Men and Women in this miserable World, Use 2.
by means of which the World appears to be very much out of frame. Some men,
like Turks and Italians, make no account of their wives, but as of slaves to
serve their lust, and as footestooles to tread upon, and trample at their
pleasure. Some, like savage Indians, make them drudges to toil and labor for
them as Oxen and Horses, and to serve them as servants and slaves. Some account
them weak creatures, not capable of any great knowledge or wisdom, and
thereupon neglect the care and pains of instructing them, and teaching them,
and imparting their knowledge to them, and drawing and pulling them on in the
same way, and causing them to go on with themselves in an equal pace. And so
again, some women esteem their husbands as men that are bound to serve,
please, humor and flatter them in all things which they desire; and that the
maine care of the man should be to deck, adorn, and set forth his wife as his
Idol in all costly apparel, and toyish painting, and vanities, as if she
were made to feed his eyes with her ornaments, and vanishing beauty. And on the
other side, some out of a base mind and slothfulness think it belongs not to
them to be fellow builders of the family, equal to their husband in honest
care, labor and industry for the common good of the family, or in grace and
spiritual gifts; in all which they must be partakers in their measure and
proportion. Let such transgressors of the law of nature be assured, that as
they come short of common humanity, so much more of the grace and glory of God.

The third thing in the history of woman's creation, is the consequents of it.
3. Consequents. 1. 2.


The first, that God brought her to the man, verse. 22.

The Second, that Adam accepted her, as an help meet for him, that is, as his
second self, a most pleasing and delightsome companion of his life, and most
helpful to build up mankind, ver. 23. upon which Moses by inspiration of Gods
spirit, inferres by way of necessary conclusion an excellent doctrine, which
has both a moral and prophetical meaning.

First a natural moral sense, to wit, First, that a man's wife is nearer to
him, and ought to be esteemed dearer than his natural parents, and to her he
must cleave, though it be with leaving them. Secondly that in creating the
woman, and joining her to man in marriage, God did prefigure and fore-shew the
infinite love of Christ to his Church, and the love of the Church to Christ,
and the spiritual and mystical union which is between them; as is noted Ephesians.
5. 32.

The third consequent is, the nakedness of the man and woman, 3.
which was without shame or any inconvenience in their first creation before
their fall, ver. 25.

First, it is said that God brought her to the man, that is, so soon as God
had made and formed her of man's rib, he presented 1. Of Gods bringing Eve to
Adam.
her to him to be his wife, and so an help meet for him; we must not think
that this bringing of her to him was only a setting of her before his eyes,
and showing her to his sight; but that God withal declared to the man how, and
whereof he had made her, even of a rib taken out of him, and did offer her to
him for a wife and equal consort; so much the phrase of bringing her to him
does import. From whence we learn,

That the marriage of man and wife is the ordinance of God in the state of
innocence, and God is the first Author of it, and the Doctr. 1. Marriage the
ordinance of God.
first match-maker between man and woman in the first creation. Our Savior
also testifies this in the gospel, Mat. 19. 6. saying that by virtue of Gods
first ordaining of marriage, man and woman married together are no more twain,
but one flesh. And whatsoever God has thus joined together, no man ought to
put asunder.

And there is good reason why God should be the first author of marriage;
Because it is the only lawful means of Reas. 1.
bringing forth people to God, and of propagation of mankind; and it is such a
ground and foundation of the Church, that without it God cannot have an holy
seed, as the Prophet intimates Mal. 2. 15. which point serves.

First, to show that marriage is honorable in it self, in the nature of it,
among all men and women of all sorts, orders and degrees, Use 1.
as the Apostle teaches, Heb. 13. 4. And the Popes and Church of Rome, in
counting marriage a kind of fleshly uncleanenesse, and defilement, discover
themselves to be opposers of Gods ordinance, and violaters of the law of nature.

Secondly, to show that the best celebration of marriage is, when it is
solemnly celebrated, and man and woman joined together Use 2.
by Gods public Ministers, who stand in the place of God, as Ambassadors, and
are his mouth to bless his people: For then God is after a secondarie manner
the author and match-maker; And his ordinance being thus observed, and the
marriage blessed by his ministers, there may be more hope of blessing upon it,
and upon the parties joined together.

Thirdly this, In going about marriage men and women ought Use 3.
chiefly and first of all to consult with God, to look up to him, and to seek
his direction and assistance by humble, fervent and faithful prayers and
supplication. It is only he who knows fittest matches and consorts for every
one, and can give to man an help meet for him.

Fourthly it discovers to us the abomination, and unnatural Use 4.
filthiness of whoredom and fornication, wherein men and women do join and
mingle themselves together without God, the Devil and fleshly lust leading
them. No marvel that Adulterers, whoremongers, and fornicators, are so often
in the Scriptures excluded out of the kingdom of God.

Secondly, we hence learn. That pure marriage, which is Doctr. 2. Marriage is
of one Man with one Woman. Mal. 2. 15.
Gods ordinance, is of one man with one woman, For God had an excellency and
overplus of spirit in the creation; and yet he made but one Woman for Adam
who was but one man; and why? but that he might seek a godly seed, as the
Prophet says, Mal. 2. 15. Our Savior also teaches in the Gospel that a man
ought to have but one wife while he and she lives; and God from the
beginning, even from the creation, showed that he did not allow Polygamie. And
in old time God tolerated it in some of the Patriarchs and Prophets, not as a
thing naturally good and allowable; but as a type and figure of Christ and his
several Churches, which, as several spouses, he gathers to himself out of
Jews and Gentiles, Cant. 6. 8.

This, being so, teaches every man to be careful, circumspect Use.
and inquisitive in choosing to himself a Wife who is to be his perpetual
consort and companion of his life. It is good council of a Wiseman, which he
gives to all; that There ought much deliberation to be used in doing a thing
which is to be done once for all, and if it be done amiss, can never be
amended; And such is a man's taking of a woman to be his Wife, she is once
taken for all, and during her life, he may not seek a better, nor can be
eased of his burden if she proves froward, perverse and contentious: he who
finds a good wife, gets a meet help and continual comfort to himself; but
he who takes a brawling wife, pulls upon himself a perpetual cross and
clogge.

The second consequent, is Adams free and willing acceptance 2.
of the woman to be his wife, and so an help meet for him, in these words,
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; she shall
be called Woman, because she was taken out of man, Verse 23. wherein we may
note three things worthy to be considered.

First, that God having made a wife fit for Adam, does not by (...).
c^active or commanding power and authority put her upon him; but having showed
her to him, what one, and whence she was, suffers him to accept and choose her
freely of his own accord, and makes not up the marriage till Adam does
cheerfully, upon certain knowledge of her nature and disposition, accept her
for his wife and second self. Whence we learn,

That Marriage, according to Gods ordinance, is a free voluntary Doctrine.
Marriage must be free and voluntary.
contract made between a Man and his Wife, made with the well liking and
mutual consent of both parties. Though Fathers are said to take Wives to their
Sons, and to give their Daughters to be wives, Exodus 34. 16. And some Sons are
said to desire their Fathers to give them such, or such wives, as Genesis 34. 4.
and Iud. 14. 2. Yet they ought not to impose wives on their Sons without good
liking and free consent, nor give their Daughters in marriage against their
wills, as appears in the example of Rebecca, whose consent was first asked
before she was promised to Isaac, Genesis 24. 58. And there is good reason of
this: Because, where minds, hearts, and affections are not united in two
parties, Reas.
they cannot delight to draw cheerfully under the same yoke, nor be an help
or stay one to another. Now a wife is ordained of God to be an help to her
husband, and the desire of his eyes, and to draw with him in the same yoke; and
he is to be a shelter to cover, and a stay to uphold her all his life.
Therefore reason requires that marriage should be a free and voluntary
contract made with the well liking and mutual consent of both parties.

This Doctrine serves to reprove diverse sorts of people, and Use. A reproof to
many.
to condemn diverse marriages. First, marriages of Persons under age, before
the parties have knowledge and discretion either to make a fit choice, or to
order their affections. Secondly, marriages of wards, who have wives imposed on
them under great penalties. Thirdly, forced marriages, unto which children are
compelled by violent and tyrannical Parents, or cruel unjust guardians,
against their mind and liking; on such marriages there can be no blessing
hoped for nor expected, but much mischief and many inconveniences,
adulteries, and whoredoms, and many discontentments of life, as experience
teaches.

The second thing here to be noted is Adams speech; This 2.
is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; etc. by which it is manifest,
that God, in presenting the Woman to him, did declare whereof he had made her,
and of what nature and kind she was. Some ancient and modern Writers do
gather from hence, that Adam was divinely inspired with the Spirit of
Prophecy, and had understanding of hidden mysteries, which he had never
seen, heard, nor learned from any; because so soon as God brought the Woman,
he could presently tell whence she was, and whereof she was made, without
any information. But this is a vain and false surmise; for no Prophet could at
any time know and declare secret things beyond sense and reason, without
revelation either in a dream, or vision, or word speaken to him by God. To
know men's secret thoughts or doings without revelation or word from God, is
proper to God, and to Christ, and to the Spirit, which searches all things;
undoubtedly therefore, when God brought the Woman to Adam and presented and
offered her to him, he did withal declare how and whereof he had made her,
of the same nature, and framed her in the same image, as I have before touched:
For, in marriage-making, there are such declarations going before to draw
affection and free consent, and external informations by outward means; and
this was a true platform of marriage.

Hence we learn, That men and women must not be lead Doctrine. What guides
must lead to marriage.
unto marriage by secret inspirations, and divine revelations: But by knowledge
gotten by experience, inquiry and information. Lust and fleshly desire are
blind guides to marriage; as we see in the Sons of God, the seed of Seth, who
by beauty were drawn to take to wives the Daughters of men, who were of Cain's
carnal and profane posterity, Genesis 6. 1. and in Esau, Genesis 27. A wife was
chosen for Isaac upon knowledge and experience of her virtue, modesty, and
hospitality, and therefore God blessed the match. And Boaz took Ruth to wife,
not for riches or kindred, but because she was known a virtuous Woman, Ruth 3.
11.

As this Doctrine serves for direction and exhortation to Use.
men and women, to ground their conjugall affections aright upon knowledge,
experience, and good information; which is a course most commendable and
agreeing to Gods ordinance: So also for reproof and conviction of Anabaptists,
Enthusiasts, and Antinomians; such as John of Leiden, and they of his sect; the
Anabaptists of the family of love, who challenged women to be their wives upon
pretense of inspiration and divine revelation; and, when they had satisfied
their lust on them, and were ^^^aged with lust of others, did upon the same
pretense either murder, or cast them off, and take others; Gods wrath for this
horrible sin and disorder pursuing them, and giving them up to monstrous and
unnatural lusts, and at length to miserable destruction. There are some who
too much resemble these miscreants, and hereby also are reproved; I mean them
who, like lustful Shechem, upon the first sight are set on fire of lust, and
are so strongly carried by it with violence, that they must have one another,
or else they will dye or be distracted. Such matches and marriages for the
most part prove unhappy and uncomfortable; if any do not, it is a great mercy
of God, and a favor which ought to be acknowledged with all thankfulness.

The third thing here to be noted is the manifest sense of Adams words, which
is, that the Woman was not only bone 3.
of his bones, but also flesh of his flesh; that is, she had both of his flesh
and of his bones in her concurring to her substance. Whence we may probably
gather,

That the Rib of which the Woman was made, was not one bone, that is, an half
Rib taken out of one side; but bones, that is, Doctr. 1.
a pair of Ribs, or whole Rib taken out of both sides. The Hebrew word (...),
that is, my bones, intimates so much; and that this Rib was not a bare naked
bone, but had some flesh cleaving to it, because he calls her flesh of his
flesh, as being made of his flesh as well as of his bones. This is a matter of
no great moment; but, being a truth necessarily implied in the words of the
text, it may serve for special use.

First, to put us in mind, that Adam, the first man, was the Use 1.
common stock and root of all mankind; and not only all Adams posterity were
wholly contained in Adam alone; but also the first woman, the Mother of us all,
had her first vital life in Adam, and was a part of his living flesh and
bones. And, as in the first Adam all mankind had their natural being: so in
Christ all the elect and faithful have their spiritual being and whole life,
and even the Church, Christ's spouse, the Mother of all true believers, has her
being wholly from Christ; and therefore to Christ we must ascribe our whole
spiritual being and new birth. The Father, by his Spirit shed on us through
Christ, begets us to himself of his immortal seed, his Spirit, to the lively
hope, to the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved for us in heaven.

Secondly, it serves to work constant love between man Use 2.
and his wife, and to stir up man to love his wife as his own flesh; and
every woman to love her husband as every part of the body loves the body
whereof it is a part; and also to provoke men to love one another, as being a
most natural affection of one member to another in the same body. As for them
who are envious, and men-haters, and cruel persecuters; they are here
discovered to be children of the great man-murtherer the Devil, and with him
they shall have their portion.

Secondly, in that Adam gives this as a reason of his free Doctr. 2. Similitude
of manners the best ground of love.
accepting of his wife, because she is of the same nature and substance, bone
of his bones, and fit to be named (...), Woman, or as one would say a she-man:
Hence we learn, that the best ground of marriage and band of love is
similitude of natures and dispositions, and unity of heart and spirit, by which
they are both alike affected. This is that which the Apostle teaches, were he
says, Be not unequally yoked; for what concord can there be between light
and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness? that is, contrary natures
and dispositions? 2 Cor. 6. 14. This rule Abraham's faithful servant followed
in choosing a wife for Isaae: as he knew Isaac to be charitable and kind to
strangers and given to hospitality, so he made his prayer to God to direct him
to find a wife for him of the same disposition; and when he found Rebecca to
be such a one by the entertainment which she gave to him being a stranger,
he would not rest till he had gotten the consent of her, and her parents, and
friends; Genesis 24. The neglect of this rule God forbids in his law, and
threatens with a curse, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. It was that which made wise Solomon, prove
a doting fool in his old age, because wives of a contrary religion turned
away his heart, and made him build high places for Idols, 1 Kings 11. Ahabs
matching with Iezabel an Idolatrous worshipper of Baal, made him an Idolater
and a slave, who sold himself to all wickedness when his wife Iezabel stirred
him up, 1 King. 21. 25. And Iehoram the Son of Iehosaphat King of Judah by
taking to wife the daughter of Ahab of a contrary religion, brought miserable
destruction upon himself and his whole family, 2 Cron. 21. 6.

This Doctrine serves for admonition to all Men, to be wary and circumspect in
the choice of their wives; and if they be Use 1. A rule for ^husing.
virtuously and piously affected, and have a desire to live in the fear of
God, and to build up a godly family, to have a special eye and respect of true
religion, as well as of a good natural disposition, and good education and
behavior. A godly Man must seek a godly Wife, a kind and liberal Man a free
hearted Wife; and a courageous Man a Woman of courage, that they may both draw
one way. It is true, that sometimes in case of notable infirmities bearing sway
in Men, Women of contrary disposition may be useful and fit Wives to correct,
amend, or moderate their corruptions; a Woman of a meek and patient
disposition may assuage the heat of her Husband being hasty and choleric, and
so be an help meet for him. A wise Abigail may prove a necessary and helpful
wife to a foolish Nabal, and by her wisdom may overcome his folly, and by her
liberal hand may make amends and prevent the mischief of his churlishness
But it is no wisdom either in Man or Woman to run such a desperate hazard,
in confidence of their own wisdom, virtue or abilities. For we find by
experience, and it is a thing commonly seen, that Men and Women, by reason of
humane frailty and natural corruption which remain in the best, are more
subject of the froward to learn perverseness, then by the wife, meek and
liberal consorts to be drawn from their folly, fury and churlishness: and
therefore though in case when an hard lot befalls Men or Women, they must make
the best they can of that which is too bad, in hope that God will bless their
virtuous and godly endeavors; yet the best rule which godly Christians can
observe in the choice of wives i^, to choose such as are like affected and
virtuously disposed as they themselves are, to regard chiefly the unity of
Spirit, and the similitude of nature and disposition; which is a thing here
taught by God in the creation and first marriage between Adam and Evah, the
first Father and Mother of all mankind.

Secondly, we may gather from this doctrine, that there can Use 2.
be no hope or expectation of good from unequal marriages. And when men for
carnal, worldly and politic respects, yoke themselves with wives of a
contrary disposition and religion, daughters of a strange God, and vassals of
Antichrist, there seldom or never follows a blessing. For just it is with
God, that when men and women wall* contrary to God, and reject his right rule
in their marriages, and in laying the foundation of their families; God should
walk contrary to them in their whole course of life, and should cross them in
their endeavors, and bring their families to confusion.

The third and last consequent of the woman's creation, 3. Consequent.
is, that they were both naked, ^he man and his wife, and they were not
ashamed, ver. 25. In which words, we are not in any case to understand by
nakedness, either want of necessary apparel, (for in the state of innocence
there was no need thereof, and therefore no want of any) nor any want of
natural abilities or virtues, need full for beauty, Of the nakadnesse of Adam
and Eve.
comeliness, and ornament, or for natural perfection; All such nakedness, and
want came in by sin, and after their fall: But here they are said to be naked,
because they neither had nor needed any clothes, or covering of their bodies,
which were in all parts most comely and beautiful: Their skin was not rough,
over-growne with hair like beasts, nor with feathers like birds, nor with hard
scales like fishes; but their skin, fair, white, and ruddie, was comely in it
self, and beautiful to their own eyes, more then all ornaments of silk,
fine linen, and all jewels of gold and silver, set with the most glorious and
precious stones, of most resplendent color and brightness. And their bodies
were of that excellent temper and constitution, that they neither felt nor
feared any distemper of heat or cold. The air and all the elements were
tempered according to the temper of their bodies; and all things were pleasing,
wholesome, and delightsome unto them; and to all living creatures they appeared
lovely, and full of beauty, and majesty. It was the creatures delight to see
them, and to look on them; and it was their joy to see the creatures admiring
them, and rejoicing in their sight and presence. And therefore there was no
cause or occasion of any shame, or of any fear to show their simple naked
bodies, and to have every part and member openly seen; no uncomlinesse which
needed a covering, but all parts and members were beautiful in themselves, and
composed together in a comely order and frame. This is the true sense and
meaning of the words; Wherein we have this plain doctrine,

That the work of God in the creation of our first parents was perfect without
error; the image of God appeared in their Doctr. 3. The creation perfect.
bodies, and bodily for me and shape; they were full of all natural grace,
beauty, and comeliness, in all parts and members from the crown of their heads
to the sole of their feet; the glory and wisdom of Gods workmanship shined
in them most clearly to their own eyes, and the eyes of all creatures. The
truth of this appears most manifestly in the words; for, certainly, if there
had been any least blemish or unseemely member in their naked bodies, they
would have been ashamed to go and appear openly bare and naked without
covering; therefore I need not stand to prove it with many arguments: this one
is sufficient, That all the form, beauty and comeliness of the most goodly
Men and fairest Women that ever were, or are in the World, gathered together,
and composed in the body of one Man or Woman; the goodly personage of Joseph or
Adonijah, the beauty of Absalom and Abishag, and the glory and comeliness of
Solomon, and all other forms and beauties named in histories, are but the
ruins, relics, di(...) shadows and defaced scraps of that beauty and
comeliness which was in the naked bodies of our first parents, and in every
part of them in the creation. And therefore our reason and senses may judge
what comeliness was in them.

This point considered is of great force to provoke and stir Use 1.
Acknowledge Gods bounty.
up men to acknowledge with all thankfulness Gods bounty to mankind in the
first creation; and how exceedingly they are bound to love, and honor, and
serve God for the natural gifts and abilities with which God at the first did
fully furnish man; not only for necessity and welbeing, but also for glory,
beauty, ornament and comeliness in the eyes of all creatures. And although our
first parents forfeited these blessings by their disobedience, and have defaced
by sin this excellent beauty: yet we see Gods goodness abounding to us in
this, that he imprints in many of us some stamps and footsteps of the image,
in which we were created, that we may by the ruins which remain, judge of
the building of man's body, and of the beautiful frame wherein God at the first
created us.

Secondly, we may hence gather comfortable assurance, Use 2. In Christ the
glory of out bodies shall be restored.
that as God did create man in admirable beauty at the first in the creation,
and made him comely in the eyes of all creatures, in all parts of his body, so
that it was no shame but a glory to walk naked without clothes or covering:
So, much more, in the work of redemption and restoration by Christ, God both
can and will repair our vile bodies, and restore unto them their first beauty
and glory with great advantage, and make them like the glorious body of Christ,
and reform them after his heavenly image of holiness, which so far exceeds
the first image, as heavenly excels earthly, spiritual and supernatural
excels natural, and incorruptible and immutable surpasses that which is
fading and vanishing. For, the work of redemption and restoration is a work
of greater goodness to men, then the work of creation; and as it excels, so
the effect of it must be more excellent. In this work God stretches forth
his omnipotent hand, and all his goodness further then in the creation; there
he created all things by his eternal Word the Son, and by his Spirit working
with him; but here he gave his Son to be incarnate, and the eternal Word to
be made flesh, and to suffer and dye, and be made the price and ransom of
our redemption; and, for the perfecting of this work, he does in, and by, and
through his Son give and communicate his holy and eternal Spirit to dwell in
their earthly tabernacles, to unite them to Christ in one body, to bring them
to communion of all his benefits, and to renew them after his glorious image of
true holiness. Here therefore is ground of hope, and matter of rejoicing to
all the elect and faithful, and great encouragement against all fear and
shame of wounds, stripes, and all deformities which cruel persecutors, and
mangling tyrants can inflict on their bodies. For the future beauty and glory
which is purchased for them by Christ and prepared for them at last, shall
cover, wash away, and utterly abolish all, when he shall appear in glory.

Thirdly, we are hereby admonished, that the distempers, deformities, and all
defects and infirmities, which appear in Use 3.
our bodies, whereof we may be ashamed, are not of God the Creator, but
proceed wholly from our sin and fall in Adam, and from our own surfeting and
intemperance. For God made mankind most perfect in Soul and Body, even with
full perfection of beauty in the first creation, as this Doctrine teaches. And
therefore so often as we are ashamed of our deformities and our nakedness;
let us with grief remember our fall, and be much more ashamed of our sins,
and lay the blame on our selves and not on the Lord God our Creator.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the estate and condition of our first parents: In five things. 1. The
blessing of fruitfulness; A special blessing: Uses. Marriage free for all
men. Colonies. 2. Dominion over all living creatures. Four Requisites thereto.
Degrees of it: Absolute, and Dependent: Unlimited, and Limited. Restored in
Christ. 3. Food for man. Not the living creatures: in innocence. 4. Man's
habitation. Eden: What. Of the rivers. Twelve opinions about Paradise. Of the
two trees in Paradise: Why the tree of life. How of the knowledge of good and
evil. 5. Of Gods image.

ANd God blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, Genesis 1.
28.
and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the
sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over every living thing that moves
upon the earth. Verse. 29. And God said Behold, I have given you every herb
bearing seed which is upon all the face of the earth; and every tree in which
is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat. Verse. 30.
And to every beast and foul and creeping thing wherein there is life, I have
given green herb for meat; and it was so.

After the History of the particular creation of the Woman with the immediate
Antecedents and Consequents thereof; The The condition of our first Parents;
next thing in order is the historical description of the state and condition
of our first parents in the creation, in their integrity and innocence before
their fall and corruption, while Gods image imprinted on them remained perfect,
both in their Souls and Bodies; so that they had no least blemish or infirmity
in their naked bodies, whereof they might be ashamed. In five particulars.


In this their first state of innocence there are diverse things mentioned by
Moses, and historically laid down in this History of the Creation, which are
to be unfolded in order.

The first is the blessing of fruitfulness, wherewith God 1.
blessed them so soon, as he had created them male and female: This is laid
down in these words, And God blessed them and said unto them, Be fruitful
and multiply, and replenish the Earth, Verse 28.

The second is the power and dominion which God gave them 2.
over the earth, and over all living creatures in the water, air, and earth:
this is in the last words of the Verse; and subdue it, and have dominion over
the fishes, fowls, and beasts.

The third thing is the bountiful gift of all herbs bearing seed, and of all
fruits growing upon Trees; which God gave to 3.
mankind for bodily food, Verse 29. And his free gift of green herb or grass
for meat to the birds, beasts, and creeping things, Verse 30.

The fourth thing is the place of their habitation, the garden 4.
which God planted in Eden; this is described, Chap. 2. 7. and so a-long to the
16. Verse.

The fifth thing, which is the chiefest of all, and which is first of all
mentioned in the creation of Man and Woman, is the image 5.
of God in which they were both created: This requires a more large discourse
for the understanding of it; and for that cause I have deferred the handling of
it to the last place next before the conclusion of the whole creation, even his
viewing and approbation of every thing which he had made for very good, laid
down, Verse 31.

The first is the blessing of fruitfulness for the multiplication Of the
blessing of fruitfulness.
and increase of mankind, even to the filling and replenishing of the Earth,
and the subduing of it. In describing this blessing Moses does her first lay
down the blessing in a general word, saying, God blessed them.

Secondly, he shows more particularly wherein this blessing does consist, to
wit, in bodily fruitfulness for the increase of mankind, in these words, Be
fruitful and multiply.

Thirdly, the abundance of the blessing and large extent of fruitfulness,
even to the replenishing of the Earth, and subduing of it.

First, whereas God is said to bless them, the meaning is, that God gave them
the gift of fruitfulness, so soon as he had made them in his own image male
and female: For the Hebrew word which is here used, signifies first and
primarily to bow the knee, or to kneel down, as appears, Genesis 24. 11. 2.
Chron. 6. 13. Psalm 95. 6. Dan. 6. 10. And because bowing What the word
signifies,
of the knee is a kind of submitting and applying of the body in kindness to
some person, to do him some kind and pleasing service, hereupon this word is
translated and used in the Scriptures to signify, First Gods applying of
himself to men, and 1.
as it were bowing down from the high throne of his Majesty to show himself
kind unto them, by giving them many both earthly and spiritual blessings in
this life; yea, and himself with all his goodness to be their portion, and
to make them fully blessed in glory. Secondly, it is used to signify man's
applying 2.
of himself to God, by bending his knees and his speech to praise God, and to
laud and extol his name, and to render pleasing thanks to his Majesty, and
also one man's applying of his speech to another; and with bowed knees to salute
him, as Genesis 24. 60. and 2 King. 4. 29. Also the action of Parents, public
Ministers, and superior Persons whom God has set over others bowing down
toward them, and applying themselves to them to wish all blessings unto them,
and to pronounce them blessed of God, as Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, Genesis 14.
and Isaac blessed Jacob, Genesis 27. and Jacob blessed his Sons, Genesis 49. and
Moses blessed Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. In this place God is said to bless them: that
is, to apply himself to them, and as it were bowing down kindly to give them
a blessing. But because there are many blessings which God bestows on men;
Some are natural, earthly and bodily blessings; Some heavenly and spiritual;
And God Bodily blessings of two so^^s. 1.
blesses men with bodily blessings two ways, and in a twofold respect;
either by giving them gifts and abilities, as natural wisdom and knowledge
in their minds; and strength and ability of body to do some natural and
moral work; or else by assisting them in the exercise of those gifts and
abilities, and 2.
giving good issue and success unto them; as for example, making their
wisdom and knowledge effectual, and giving good success to the actions of
them; and making the strength of their bodies, and their appetite, and actions
of generation successful to the bringing forth and increase of children. Now
here we are not to understand any heavenly or spiritual grace or gifts, but
only a natural, bodily, even ability and strength of body and of nature for
procreation of children and posterity without any defect or infirmity, or any
failing of their endeavors, or frustrating of the action of generation: thus
much is here meant in these words. And this appears plainly in the next
words, which show in particular what this blessing is even the blessing of
fruitfulness in procreation of children: And God said u^^o them, Be fruitful
and multiply; which in effect, and in true sense and meaning is all one as if
Moses had said. And God almighty by the eternal Word, his Son did give unto
them the blessing of fruitfulness, even mutual affection for procreation, and
strength and ability of body to procreate and bring forth the fruit of the
body, that is, children in that image of God, in which they themselves were
made, and that according to their own will and desire without failing, defect,
or infirmity. Here then we see this blessing was a perfect natural blessing,
even the perfect gift of procreation, for the multiplication and increase of
mankind. And thirdly, that it was a blessing of great measure and abundance,
even fruitfulness and ability to multiply mankind to the replenishing of the
earth, and subduing of it, the next words show: And replenish the Earth, and
subdue it. The first words, replenish the Earth, do plainly show, that God
gave them the blessing of fruitfulness, and ability to multiply mankind until
the earth were filled with inhabitants of the children of men. And the other
word, subdue it, signifies not taking of The earth, how subdued by Adam. 1.
the Earth into possession by violence and strong hand; as the word is used,
Number. 32. 22. Ios. 18. 1. 2 Samuel 8. 11. where countries are said to be subdued
by force of arms. Neither does it signify subduing of the Earth by forcing it
to bring forth corn, herbs, and fruit trees by hard labor, manuring, 2.
and tillage: For, in the creation, the Earth was made fruitful of it self,
and brought forth abundance of all herbs, plants, and trees, freely, without
culture or labor of man forcing it; and there was no creature to resist
mankind, and to keep them out of possession; but the whole Earth was free for
all men, and sufficient to satisfy them with all things needful. But here it
signifies men's inhabiting, occupying, and possessing of the 3.
Earth, and that in such numbers and multitudes, as were then able to eat up
the fruit of it, if man had stood in innocence; and now are able since man's
fall, to till it, and bring it into subjection being cursed and made barren; so
that no region or country may lie desolate and barren without tillage and
habitation of men. This is the true sense and meaning of the words.

From whence we learn 4. points of Doctrine: The first, Doctr. (...).
Procreation of children a special blessing.
That procreation of children in lawful marriage, is a special blessing and
gift of God, given in the creation for the multiplication and increase of
mankind. My text here declares it to be a blessing, and other Scriptures
confirm the same. Psalm 137. the Prophet David proclaims children to be an
heritage which comes of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb to be his
reward, and the Man to be happy who has his quiver full of such arrows,
which are like arrows in the hand of the mighty Man. And Psalm 128. 3. he
says, that this is a blessing and happiness of the Man which fears God, and
walks in his ways, that his Wife is as a fruitful vine by the sides of his
house, and his children like olive plants round about his table. And as Abraham
the Father of the faithful counted it a great defect, and want of a special
and principal outward blessing, that he did go childlesse, and God had given
him no seed, Genesis 15. so all Gods faithful servants did pray to God for issue
to themselves; and did wish it as a great blessing to others whom they loved;
as we see in the example of Isaac, Genesis 25. 21. who prayed to God for his Wife
that she might be fruitful: Of Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 11. who prayed that Israel
might be multiplied a thousand times more: Of the Elders and People of
Bethlehem, who prayed that God would give issue to Boaz of Ruth, and increase
his family like the family of Pharez; Ruth 4. 11. Of Hanah the Mother of Samuel
1 Samuel 1. Of Zachary and Elizabeth Luk 1. And all the godly Matrones, the
Wives of the Patriarchs, counted it their reproach among Women to be barren,
and a great blessing to have children as we see in Jacobs wives, Genesis 36. 23.
and by Hannah's tears, 1 Samuel 1.

This serves first to teach and admonish all Men and Women Use 1.
to seek it as a blessing from God, and so to esteem it, and to render unto
God thanks accordingly, as Hannah and Zachary, and the blessed virgins, as in
their holy songs most evidently appears. If Men and Women could have grace
thus to do, it would be a special means to make them respect their
children, as great blessings, and pledges of Gods favor; and to make them
strive to devote and consecrate their children to God and his worship, and to
train them up to be fit instruments of Gods glory, and pledges of their
thankfulness to God.

Secondly, it serves to discover the gross error and heresy Use 2.
of the Manichaeans; who held that marriage and procreation of children was a
work of the Devil, as also of some Popes of Rome, who held marriage which is
honorable among all, and the Syri(...)s.
bed undefiled, as the Apostle affirms, Heb. 13. 4. to be a work of the
flesh, which makes men unpleasing to God. The Lord despises not his own
ordinance; and marriage is ordained by him for increase of mankind, as this
Doctrine teaches; and therefore the opinion of these Heretics and Popes is
erroneous and abominable.

Secondly we hence learn, that as the blessing of fruitfulness Doctr. 2.
Marriage free for all men.
was given to all mankind in the creation: so marriage, which God appointed for
the increase of men on earth, is by the law of God, which is written in man's
heart, and engraven in man's nature, free for all Men and Women, to whom God
has given ability and strength of body for procreation and fruitfulness, for
increase of mankind. As the text here openly expresses so much, so in all the
Scriptures we have examples of holy men of all sorts, even of Priests and
Prophets, not only allowed, but also commanded by God to take Wives and beget
children, as Isaiah cap. 8. 3. Ezechiel chap. 24. Hosea chap. 1. And the
Apostle commends it as honorable in all, Hebr. 13. 4. And the Apostles who
were most devoted to Christ, and to his work, did lead about Wives with them,
1 Cor. 9. 5. And although in times of great trouble and persecution raised up
against Christianity, Wives are a great burden, and breed much care and grief
to preachers of the Gospel, especially who must be ready to run and flee
whithersoever God calls them; and therefore in such cases the Apostle, by reason
of the urgent and pressing necessity, holds it better for continent and
chaste Men and Women to remain unmarried, 1 Cor. 7. 26. And our Savior does
approve, and well like it, in case when a man's heart and affection is so
extraordinarily taken up with the love of the Kingdom of heaven, that he is
like an Eunuch without any desire of affection of marriage, Matthew. 19. 12. Yet,
we have no word or precept in all the Scripture to restrain any Persons of
any order or calling from liberty of marriage. Saint Paul affirms that he and
Barnabas had power and liberty in this kind, though they used it not, 1 Cor. 9.
5.

The consideration whereof serves: First, to teach Men and V^^ 1.
Women of all sorts to maintain and retain that liberty which God had given
them from their first creation, and to admonish them to beware, that neither
Satan by his suggestions, nor any of his wicked instruments by their cunningly
devised fables, nor any misconceipt of their own hearts, do lay a needless
snare upon their consciences, and possess them with a false opinion,
concerning that liberty which God has written in man's heart in the state of
innocence, which cannot be taken away without violence offered to nature. They
who are thus instructed and fully persuaded, if they do marry, they may have
comfort in this assurance, that they are not out of Gods highway, neither in
this have swerved from his perfect law, and rule of liberty. If they find many
crosses in the married life, yet let them know, that they are not curses laid
on marriage for an unlawfulness of it. If they do live single to avoid
worldly cares, and to devote themselves wholly to heavenly thoughts and
spiritual cares for the Kingdom of heaven, they have more cause to rejoice
and glory in the abundance of Gods special grace to them, in that he has
given them an heart to forsake lesser blessings for the gaining of greater, and
bringing of more glory to God.

Secondly, this shows, that the Popes prohibitions of Priests Use 2. Against
Popish virginity and vows.
marriage, and the absolute vows of virginity and single life, taught and
imposed by the Church of Rome, are cursed and corrupt inventions of men, and
diabolical devices, yea damnable haeresies, as the Apostle calls them, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and 2 Pet. 2. 1. For, though diverse holy Men of God, to whom God
gave power over their own wills, and the gift of continency to stand steadfast
in their own hearts have strongly resolved to keep their virginity and to
live single, that they might apply themselves to the service of God and his
Church with greater freedom from worldly ears, and have steadfastly held
their resolution, proving themselves such as our Savior and his Apostle do
commend, Matthew. 19. 12. and 1 Cor. 7. yet we never read in Scripture, that
they were commanded by God, or that they did bind themselves voluntarily by an
unchangable vow, or under any execration to abstain from marriage, and from
procreation of children therein: but always, without any absolute necessity
imposed on them, remained at liberty to marry if just occasion were offered. If
our adversaries object, that the law Ob.
of nature must give place to the Evangelicall law, which has greater
promises, and tends to lead men to supernatural and heavenly happiness; and
that for Christ's sake and his Churches good we must renounce liberty of
nature: I answer, that the Evangelicall law does not offer violence to the law
of nature; Answ.
neither does it abolish any part thereof; but rather does perfect it, by
giving men grace willingly to neglect natural liberty for the gaining of a
better estate: As for example, the law of nature requires that men love
Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Children, and their own lives; and gives them liberty
to hold lands and houses: but yet when the case so stands, by reason of
tyranny and presecution raging, that a man must either forsake all these, or
deny Christ and renounce Christian religion; here a man ought to forgo all for
Christ, as the Gospel teaches: And yet the Gospel never commands us to
renounce Father, or Mother, or Houses, or Land, and the like, and to expose our
selves to death, when we may, together with Parents, Wives, Children, and Life,
still cleave to Christ and enjoy him for salvation; yea it were frenzy and
fury for any Church to impose laws on men for the hating of Parents, Wives,
and Children, forsaking houses and lands, and giving themselves to death
voluntarily when there is no inevitable necessity laid on them, but they may
live good and faithful Christians, and yet love Parents, Wives, and Children,
possess lands and houses, and live in safety. Wherefore, though we highly
commend them who more zealously follow Christ, and forsake the World, and make
small account of natural blessings in comparison of spiritual, but do as
Saint Paul did who made the Gospel free, and did not use lawful liberty, and
power: yet we cannot but count them execrable who tyrannize and lay cruel
snares upon men's consciences, and impose laws, and vows upon themselves, or
others, to forsake, and renounce utterly their lawful liberty, and to bind
them by that law and vow which either they must break, or else fall into many
woeful inconveniences and abominable evils and mischiefs, as we see in the
Popes laws and vows; which have proved causes and occasions of secret
Whoredoms, public Stews, many Rapes and Murders of innocents, to the
staining and defiling of the whole Land.

Thirdly, we hence learn, that our first parents, in the state of 3. Doct.
innocence, had in them both the affection and natural desire to bring forth
children, and to increase mankind with all convenient speed, God so commanding
them; also they had all strength and ability of body to beget and bring forth,
and there was in them no defect to hinder procreation for a moment.

The words of the text do plainly show this: And reason Reas. 1.
grounded on other Scriptures proves it fully. First our first parents were
created perfect in their kind, and God gave them the blessing of fruitfulness.
Now where there are all natural perfections and abilities accompanied with
Gods blessing, there can be no hinderance of procreation, or any failing in any
natural action; therefore this Doctrine is manifest.

Secondly, all barrenesse and all multiplying and frustrating Reas. 2.
of conceptions came in as a curse for sin, and upon the fall of our first
parents, as the Lord himself shows, Genesis 3. 16. Therefore there was no place
for it in the state of innocence.

This serves to admonish us all so often as we see barrenness Use. 1.
in men and women, and miscarrying wombes, and dry breasts; to remember our sin
and fall in our first parents, and to grieve for our corruptions derived from
them, and to humble our selves under Gods hand.

Secondly, to persuade us, and to make us see and believe, Use. 2.
that our first parents did not stand long in their integrity and state of pure
nature; yea, that they did not lodge therein one night as the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 49. 12. For reason and common experience do teach us, that man does
readily and without any delay follow his will, and the affections which are
most natural in him; so soon as reason permits; now the affection and desire
of procreation is most natural, as all people of understanding do know, and
the learned do grant; and his will must needs be acknowledged strongly bent and
inclined to it, because God had commanded them to multiply and replenish the
earth; and there was no reason moving man to restrain his will and affection,
but only till he had viewed the garden wherein God had placed him, considered
the trees and fruits of it, and received Gods commandment of abstaining from
the forbidden tree, all which must needs be done before the end of the sixth
day. And if man in the state of innocence had known his Wife, sheehad without
fail conceived a seed pure without sin, and had brought forth children in Gods
image perfect and upright; wherefore they did without doubt fall in the end of
the sixth day, as I shall more fully prove hereafter.

Fourthly, we hence learn: That it is Gods will revealed from the beginning,
and his ordinance and law given in the Doctr. 4. The whole earth given to Man.
creation, that the Earth and every part of it should be free for any man to
possess and inhabit it, until it be fully replenished with so many men as
are able to subdue it by eating up the fruit thereof. This text teaches
plainly this point, by showing that one end for which God blessed Man and
Woman with fruitfulness, was, that they might replenish the Earth. And to the
same purpose, the Psalmist speaks fully Psalm 115. 10. The heaven and heaven
of heavens is the Lords, but the Earth has he given to the children of men:
and Deuteronomy. 32. 8. it is said, that God has divided the Earth to be the
inheritance of the Sons of Adam. This truth the cursed Canaanites acknowledged
by the light of nature, and therefore they suffered Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
to sojourne in their Land, and there to live with all their families, to feed
their cattle, to dig wels, and to sow corn, and were so far from driving
them out, while there was room enough, and they lived peaceably among them,
that they entered into league with them, Genesis 14. 13. and 21. 27. and 26. 28.

First, this serves to clear that doubt, and to decide that question and case
of conscience which is much controverted among Use 1.
godly and learned divines, and agitated in these days, to wit, whether it be
lawful, to send people, and to plant colonies Of leading Colonies into other
parts.
in the vast countries of the West Indies, which are not replenished with men
able to subdue the Earth, and to till it: If we be Sons of Adam the whole
Earth is free for us, so long as it is not replenished with men and subdued.
The ancient straggling inhabitants or any other, who have taken possession
before, they have right to so much as they are able to replenish and subdue,
and bring under culture and tillage; and no other people have right to
dispossess and expel them, or to disquiet them in their possession, or any
way to do injury and offer violence to them, except they have such a
commission and warrant as God gave to the Israelites to expel the Canaanites;
but it is lawful for any Sons of Adam by the law, which God gave in the
creation (as this Doctrine shows) to possess and inhabit the vast places,
and to subdue the barren untilled parts. And much more may true Christians, who
bring the Gospel of salvation and word of life among them, by a second right
in Christ, settle themselves there, and maintain their possession of these
lands which they have replenished and subdued by culture and tillage; and so
long as they do their endeavor to convert them to Christ by the preaching of
the Gospel, and to make them partakers of the blessing in him the promised
seed; they deserve to be received with all honor of those savages who come by
this means to owe themselves to them. Wherefore, Let no man be scrupulous in
this kind; but proceed with courage in such plantations, and with confidence of
good success, and blessing from God.

Secondly, it discovers great iniquity and injustice in diverse Use 2. Against
three sorts of men. 1.
sorts of men. First, in them who having gotten the first possession in some
corner of some great continent and large region, do challenge the whole to,
themselves as their proper right being no way able to replenish and subdue it;
and by force seek to keep out all other people who come to live as neighbors
peaceably in places near unto them, for whom there is room enough, and more
land then they can subdue and replenish. Secondly, in them who think it lawful
for themselves to 2.
invade countries replenished with men and subdued, and by force to expel or
bring in subjection the old inhabitants without express warrant from God; as
the Spaniards did depopulate many great countries in America, and root out and
destroy the natural inhabitants. Thirdly, in them who take possession of lands
to the straitning of the natives; which the natural inhabitants without their
help can sufficiently replenish, and subdue, and bring under tillage. In these
cases there is great injustice, and wrong offered to Gods law, which requires
that as we would, that men should do to us, so we should do to them, and use
no other dealing: and they who thus transgress the bounds which God has set
in dividing the earth to all Nations and People, cannot justly hope for Gods
blessing upon them.

The next thing after the blessing of fruitfulness, is the Lordship, rule, and
Dominion, which God gave to man over all living II. Dominion over all living
creatures.
creatures; and that is in these words, Verse 28. And have Dominion over the
fish of the Sea, and the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the Earth, etc.
For our full understanding whereof we are to inquire, and search out: First,
what things are necessarily required in perfect Dominion and Lordship over the
creatures. Secondly, the diverse degrees of it. Thirdly, in what degree Dominion
over the creatures was given to man. Concerning the first, There are four
things required to perfect Dominion Requisites to it.
and Lordship over the creatures; two in the Lord and Ruler, and two in the
creature ruled and made subject. In the Lord and Ruler there is required,
First, Power and ability to order, 1.
rule, and dispose according to his own mind, will and pleasure, in all
things, the creatures ruled by him. Secondly, a true 2.
right to use and dispose them according to his own will and pleasure.

In the creature there is also required: First, a disposition fitness, and
inclination to serve his Lord and Ruler, and to yield 3.
to him in all things whatsoever he shall think fit.

Secondly, a bond of duty, by which he is bound to obey his Lord, and serve
for his use, and necessarily to yield to him in all 4.
things. All these things are necessarily required in perfect Lordship and
Dominion: And wheresoever all these are found to concur in the highest
degree, there is most perfect Dominion; and where they are in a lesser degree,
there is a lesser an inferior Dominion; and where any of these fails or is
wanting, there the Lordship and Dominion fails and is imperfect: As for
example; The Lord God, as he is almighty and omnipotent, so he has absolute
power in and of himself, and all ability to order, and dispose, and rule every
creature as he himself will: And as he is Jehovah, the author of all being,
who has his being, and is that which he is absolutely of himself without
beginning, and does create and give being to all other things; so he has
absolute right to use and dispose all creatures according to his own mind and
will; and in these respects he is absolutely called the Lord; and is absolute
Lord even in this confusion of the World and all things therein; as over all
other creatures, so over the rebellious Devil and all his wicked instruments;
and has absolute power to destroy them, or to make of them, even contrary to
their disposition, what use he will. And because in the creation God made all
things good and perfect in their kind and nature, according to his own will
and wisdom, and every creature as it was good in the nature and kind of it;
so was it most fit and inclinable to serve for the use unto which the Lord
appointed it in the creation: and as it was the work of the Lords own hand by
him brought into being out of nothing; so there was a bond of duty laid upon it
to obey the Lords word, and to yield to his will without any resistance or
reluctation. And in these respects Gods Dominion and Lordship was not only
most absolute over all creatures, but also most sweet and lovely unto them;
even a most loving and fatherly rule of God over them, and a most free and
voluntary subjection and obedience of them to him, and to his will in all
things.

But now, ever since the fall and rebellion of the Devil against the light,
and the fall and corruption of man, and the confusion which thereby came into
the World; Though Gods power and right stand most absolute and unchangeable
like himself, and he both can and does most justly overruled the Devil and
all creatures which are most corrupt and malicious, and makes even their enmity
serve for his glory, and for the communion of his goodness more fully to his
elect: yet this power and right he exercises not in that loving and fatherly
manner over the rebellious and disobedient creatures; but by just violence and
coaction; by necessity and strong hand forcing and compelling them to do and
work, and to suffer and yield unto, and serve for that use, which they would
not and from which they are most averse.

And because no other Lords have any such power or right over any creature, but
all their power, and right is given them by God, and is but an image and shadow
of his right and power; therefore their Dominion is not absolute and most
perfect; but secondary and inferior, depending upon Gods will, power, and
pleasure. These things proposed as grounds and foundations, Degrees of it.
we may from them easily observe diverse degrees of Lordship and Dominion.

The first and highest Lordship and Dominion, which is most 1.
absolute over all creatures is that of God, which, in respect of Gods power
and right cannot be increased or diminished at all: For, as he has right, to
do with all creatures what he will, because they are his own, and he gives
them all their being; so he has power as he is omnipotent, either to incline
or to enforce them to do his pleasure and to serve for what use he will. The
Angels in heaven and Saints glorified and made perfect, and all creatures in
the state of innocence, as in duty they are bound to serve and obey God; so
they have in them a fitness and inclination to serve and obey his will in all
things to the utmost of their power; and therefore this Dominion over them is
lovely and amiable, and is paternum imperium, a fatherly rulo and Dominion over
them. But the Devils, and wicked men, and all creatures corrupted are froward
and rebellious; and his rule and Dominion over them is, in respect of them,
violent and compulsive; and as a King he forces them to do what he will, and
compels them to serve for what use he will, and justice requires it should be
so.

The second Degree of Dominion is, when a Lord has both 2.
power and right to rule over creatures, and they have an inclination and
fitness to serve and obey; but all these are from a superior Lord, giving
this power and right to the one to rule, and disposing and binding the other to
serve and obey.

This delegated Lordship and Dominion, is either unlimited, Dominion unlimited.
or limited. Unlimited is that which is not confined to some creatures, but is
extended over all things in heaven and in earth; and it is a power and right to
make them all serve and obey him in all things, whatsoever he will. This
unlimited Dominion is given only to Christ as Mediator; who as he is man
personally united to God, and in his humane nature has perfectly fulfilled the
will of God, overcome all powers of darkness, satisfied Gods justice, and
redeemed the World, is exalted to Gods right hand, as David foretold, Psalm
110. 1. and has all power in Heaven and in Earth given unto him, Matthew. 28.
18. and has a name given him above all names, even the name and title of the
Lord Christ, so that in and at his name all knees must bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth and things under the earth, that is all must either
voluntarily as they are bound in duty, give all obedience and honor to him,
and pray humbly in his name to God; or by his power be forced and compelled to
bow under him as a Judge and yield to his will, Philip. 2. 10. 11.

Limited Dominion is not over all creatures, but only over And limited.
creatures of the inferior World fish, fowls, and beasts; neither is it a
right and power given to that Lord and Ruler to do with the creatures what he
will, and to use them as he lists; but only to make them obey and serve him
so far as the superior Lord does think them fit and convenient for his use,
and for his present state and condition. This limited Lordship and delegated
Dominion does vary and alter together with the state and condition of him to
whom it is given; and it is sometimes, and in some Persons greater, and in some
lesser; according to their several states and conditions, and their several
dispositions and behavior toward the supreme Lord, to whom all power and
Dominion does absolutely belong over all creatures. This Here meant.
indeed is the Dominion which God in this text gave to our first, and in them
to their posterity. This Dominion is limited to fishes, fowls, beasts,
creatures living on earth, as the words of the text plainly show. Secondly,
while man continued in his innocence and integrity, as he had power and ability
given, and continued to him to rule, order and dispose all those creatures
aright in all things: so he had a true right and interest in them given and
continued by God. Thirdly, as there was a bond of duty laid by God on these
creatures to obey man and to yield to his upright will: so there was a
disposition, inclination and fitness in them to obey man in all things which
he in his wisdom thought fit: And therefore this Rule and Dominion it may
be called dominium paternum, a fatherly, loving and sweet Dominion and Rule of
man over them. But this Rule and Dominion being forfeited by man, and lost by
man's sin and fall, together with his own life and welbeing, is no more to be
challenged or usurped by man, or by any of his posterity, but only so far as
it is restored by Christ who is the hair of all things, and the only begotten
Son, by whom the Father made all things, and by whom, as by the Lord creator
with himself, he gave this Dominion to man created in his image. Now this
Dominion, Christ has restored to men in Restored in Christ
diverse and several degrees, as they differ in state and condition.

First, to the elect and faithful Christ has purchased and 1.
procured, that they, as they are his members united to him, and adopted to be
children of God in him, should have a right and interest in all things, not
only on earth but also in heaven; so that they may make use of all things so
far as they serve to help and further them in the way to heaven, and to the
fruition of God; so much is testified, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. where the Apostle
says, all things are yours: whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Over the creatures on earth they have that Rule and Dominion given which is
mentioned in my text; but with some difference, as may appear in diverse
particulars.

First, Adam had rule over them only to order them, and make use of them for
contemplation and delight.

Secondly, Adam had Rule and Dominion over them all in his own Person; but the
elect have now a general right to all, but not a special right, every man in
his own Person, to every living creature: They may make use of all living
creatures which come within their sight and knowledge, to contemplate on them;
but they may not take into their possession, nor kill, eat, and take spoil of
any but such as are wholly loose from other men, and which God by lawful
means gives and puts into their hands.

Thirdly, as Adam had power and ability to call and command all living
creatures; so they had an inclination and disposition to obey him. But the
elect have not that natural power and ability, nor the creatures that
inclination; because of the vanity and corruption, which still remains until
the full redemption come, and all things be restored, and all creatures
delivered from bondage of corruption, and restored to the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God, Romans 8. 21. So much as God in his wisdom finds fit for man
in this estate of grace, so much power over the creatures he gives to him; and
so much inclination and fitness to the creatures.

Secondly, to men unregenerate, Christ has purchased and 2.
procured a kind of common and secondary Right and Dominion over the creatures;
that is, both power and liberty to use them, so far as they serve for the
common weal and order of the World, and the benefit of the elect. Some have
possession given them, and power over the creatures, that they may live, and
grow, and continue in being till the time of their conversion and regeneration,
when they shall have a true interest in Christ, and to all things in and
through him. Some wicked men, not elect, have them lent of God; and Christ has
procured that they should have the use and possession of them, either for the
good of the elect who live among them, or the benefit of their elect successors
and chosen posterity which naturally shall come of them, and to whom they shall
be instruments of natural being. So long as unregenerate men have possession
of creatures either given by men, or gotten by industry, labor and other
means which are not civilly and naturally unlawful, so long they have
Dominion over them, and power to use them joined with civil right, which Gods
law allows by the procurement of Christ and for his sake. I have a little
digressed, and gone beyond my bounds in speaking of this Rule and Dominion as
it is restored by Christ, for that is proper to the state of grace, and not to
be handled under the creation. It is dominium regium, regal Dominion, or
rather in part tyrannical and violent, in respect of the creatures which are
naturally so averse from it, and their native inclination is quite against it,
in some measure and degree.

The third thing next in order after Dominion, is the food which God allotted
both to man and to other living creatures III. The food of man in the creation.
on earth in the state of innocence, expressed Verse 29. 30. I have given you
every herb, bearing seed, which is upon Earth, and every tree in which is the
fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat. 30. And to every
beast, foul, and creature living on earth, I have given green herb for meat,
and it was so. Now here we cannot understand the creating of herbs, trees,
and grass, fit for the use of man and other living things; that is rehearsed,
Verse 25. Nor Gods bare direction of men and beasts to eat of these; nor a
natural appetite and inclination given to Man, and other creatures to affect
and desire these things: but the words do express thus much, that God the
Creator is the only Lord, and all power and right is in him to dispose and
give them, and the use of them; and man and beasts had no right to the herbs,
trees, fruits, and grass, but of the free gift of God. The (...), I give, or
have given, does fully express a free gift. In that he says, that herbs,
bearing seed, and trees yielding fruit, shall be to mankind for meat, and
green herb or grass shall be meat to the beasts, and fowls, and creeping
things which live on earth; This shows, that man in innocence was to feed
only on such things, and as yet he had no other meat allowed, and other
living creatures did all feed on grass. Hereby also it is manifest, that all
herbs, bearing seed, and all fruits of trees were wholesome food for man, and
all green grass for all other living creatures which move on the face of the
earth: Otherwise God would not have given them to man and other creatures for
meat. From the words thus opened, we may observe some profitable instructions.

From all the words jointly together, which show the Dominion Doctr. 1. God the
only absolute Lord of all.
which God gave to man, and the food which he allowed both to man and other
creatures; We may learn, that God is the only absolute and supreme Lord of
all creatures, and no creature has right to rule over others, or to meddle one
with another; but, by Gods free gift, our meat, our drink, and whatsoever we
have in this World, God gives it freely to us; and we have no right to any
thing but from him. If man's wisdom, power, knowledge, and ability to rule the
creatures, and their fitness and inclination to obey him, had entitled him
sufficiently, and given him a true right, there had been no need of Gods
giving this Dominion; and so if his appetite to herbs and fruits, and their
fitness to feed and delight him, and the concord. between the appetite of
living creatures, and the green grass had given them a true right to it, what
need had there been of this gift, and that God should say, Behold I give to
you every herb and fruit for meat? etc. In that therefore these two are here
recorded as free gifts of God, this doctrine flows naturally from hence. And
this is abundantly confirmed by other Scriptures, as Genesis 14. 19. where
Melchisedeck, Gods high and royal Priest, in blessing Abraham, calls God the
possessour of Heaven and Earth; that is, such a Lord as holds in his hand and
possession by an absolute right, Heaven and Earth, and all that is in them, so
that none has any right to any thing in them, but of his free gift; And Deuteronomy.
10. 14. it is said, that the Heaven, and the heaven of heavens is the Lords,
the Earth also with all that therein is. Also Psalm 24. 1. the Earth is said
to be the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the round World and they that dwell
therein; and Psalm 50. 12. the beasts of the fi^ld, yea, and the whole World
is mine says the Lord, the same also is testified Psalm 89. 11. and Job 41.
11. And Job confesses that all that he had was Gods to give and take away at
his pleasure, Job 1. 21. We have also a strong argument to prove this from the
quit-rent which God requires, and men are bound to pay to God, and to whom he
assigns it in testimony of their homage, and that they possess nothing, but
of his gift as tenants at will, that is, the tithes of the fruit of the Land,
and of the Cattle, and of all increase, all are the Lords quit-rent, and were
paid to God by all the faithful, even to his Priests and Ministers who
Minister before him, and have him for their portion, Levit. 27. 30. Genesis 14.
20. and 28. 22. and Number. 18. 20.

This shows, that God may lawfully take away from wicked men, and appoint
others to take from them whatsoever they have, if he be so pleased at any time;
and it is no injustice, neither have they cause to complain, because they do
not acknowledge him their Lord, nor pay due rent, nor do homage to him by
honoring him with their wealth and substance. It is held to be no wrong, but
just and lawful for earthly Landlords to seize into their own hands, and
take away from their tenants the houses, lands and farms for which they
wilfully refuse to pay the due rent, and wilfully deteine it; much more is it
justice in God, the chief and absolute Lord of all the earth and the creatures
therein, to cast men out of those houses and lands, and to deprive them of all
their increase and revenues, for which they refuse to pay their due homage
tithe and quit-rent to him, and to his Ministers and Servants, whom he has
assigned to receive them for his use and service.

Secondly, this admonishes us to acknowledge, that all we have is Gods, and
all our houses, lands, goods, and riches, are Use 2.
but his talents lent to us to be employed, as for our own benefit; so for
his glory chiefly, and the good of his Church. Also it justly serves to incite
and stir us up to render thanks, praise, and due service to him for all, and
to pray to him daily for a blessing on our meat, drink and all necessaries,
and to beg at his hand the free use of his creatures, and a true right unto
them.

Thirdly, it serves to show Gods great mercy, bounty and fatherly indulgence to
us, in suffering us to have and enjoy so many Use 3.
blessings and good creatures, which we have forfeited by our sins and do
daily forfeit by not using them aright, but abusing them, and neglecting to pay
a tenth at least for our quitrent to God; yea, and all or the most part, if he
requires it at our hands for the necessity of his Church and the maintenance
of his truth. I fear, and justly suspect, that if we examine our selves, few
will be found among us not deeply guilty in this kind; as many other ways, so
especially for sacrilegious detaining of tithes and due maintenance, which God
has separated to himself for the upholding of his public worship, and the
preaching of his word, and continuing of a learned and faithful laborious
ministry in his Church.

Secondly, we hence learn, that in the state of innocence man had no power
over living creatures to kill, and eat them; Doctr. 2.
Neither did one beast devour another and feed on his flesh; but the food of
man was only herbs and fruits of trees; and the food of beasts and birds was
the green herb and grass of the field, the words of the text show this
plainly. And other Scriptures intimate so much, that in the state of innocence
lions and other ravenous beasts did live on grass, and no creatures did hurt
one another, as Isa. 11. 6, 7. and 65. 21. where the Prophet describing the
abundance of peace which shall be in the Church in the most flourishing and
happy times of the Gospel, and setting it forth by the state of innocence
faith, that the Wolf and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the young Lion,
Calfe and Fatling, and the Cow and the Rear shall dwell and feed, and lie
down together; and the Lion shall eat grass or str^w like an Ox or Bullock,
and they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all Gods holy mountain; that is, men
shall not kill and eat up beasts, nor beasts one another. And indeed it is most
manifest, that death eutered into the World by sin and man's fall, Genesis 2. 17.
and death came upon all by man's sin, Romans 5. 12. and that the corruption,
vanity and confusion, which is among the creatures, did proceed and issue from
the same root, Romans 8. 20. And they had never groaned under the killing knife
and slaughter, if man had not sinned and brought them into that subjection to
vanity.

This shows, that man's estate, wherein God created him Use 1.
was a most sweet and happy estate, full of joy, peace, delight and
contentment; and man had no want, nor any thing which he could dislike; but
all means to make him thankful to God, and joyful before him. The meat and
food of man, and of all living creatures was such as the earth brought forth in
abundance by Gods blessing without labor; they needed not to seek it by
toil and travel; it was plentiful every where, and they had variety of all
things which might give them content; there was no death, not so much as of a
creeping thing; no hurt, nor killing, no crying nor groaning under vexation; no
coveting, snatching and ravening, every creature had enough. And yet man by
Satan's temptation aspired higher, and so did fall into want misery and bondage
to death. His fall was of the Devil and his own self, God gave no just
occasion. And therefore we cannot now under this corruption expect any
steadfast satisfaction and contentment in this World, now overrunne with
confusion, nor in any worldly thing. Let us abhor our own unsatiable
desires, and watch over our wandering lusts, and strive to keep them under,
lest they make us further stray from the right ways of God, and plunge us
deep into perdition.

Secondly, this serves to show, that with Gods favor and Use 2.
blessing, and to man sober, temperate, and of a good constitution, the herbs,
corn, and fruits of the Earth, and trees, are a satisfying nourishment for
this present life. It is not fish nor flesh, nor all the dainties and forced
dishes of the World, which can so nourish and strengthen a man, as herbs and
fruit could have nourished our first parents in innocence. It is not therefore
by bread or any strong meat, that any man can live or does live, but by the
word which comes from the mouth of God, by that man's meat is blessed to him
and made a refreshing nourishing and living food unto him.

Thirdly, in that all herbs, bearing seed, and all trees yielding Doctr. 3.
fruit, are here said to be given by God as fit meat to nourish man, and all
green herb or grass to other creatures; Hence we learn, that all fruits of
all trees, and all herbs bearing seed, were wholesome meat for man, and all
green grass to beasts in the state of innocence. All poison and unwholesome
quality, taste and smell in herbs, plants, trees, and grass, which hurt man,
or beast; came into the World by sin, and are bitter fruits of man's fall and
transgression, and of the curse which his disobedience brought upon the earth.
For all whatsoever God made, was good in it self and evil and hurtful to
none; And if all herbs, trees, and grass had not been good, wholesome and
pleasant, God would not have given them for meat to man, or any living creature.

The consideration of this point is of good use to keep us Use.
from murmuring and grudging against God, as if he had created the poison of
herbs, and unwholesomnesse of fruits, upon which men and other creatures
surfeit even unto death and destruction. So osten as we see any such thing
happen and come to pass, or discern any ill quality, taste and smell in
herbs, and unsufficiency in fruits and herbs to nourish, and see living
creatures killed, and their flesh eaten for necessity of man's nourishment, let
it put us in mind and remembrance of our sin and fall in our first Parents,
from that integrity wherein we and all other things were created. Let us be
ashamed of our disobedience which makes the ground cursed unto us. Let the
groans of beasts slain for us, and their blood shed and poured out with
struggling, and with cries and sighs: Let the sowrenesse of wild grapes, the
loathsome smell and bitterness of some herbs, and fruits, and the poison of
some plants, all and every one smite us with the sight of our natural
corruption, and make us loath our sins, and sigh and groan under the burden
of them, and labor to subdue corruptions, and put away our sins by
repentance.

The fourth thing, which I have propounded to be considered IV. Man's
habitation in the state of innocence. Genesis 2. 8.
after the creation of man, is the place of his habitation in the state of
integrity, that is described by Moses in the second Chapter from the seventh
verse to the sixteenth.

And the Lord, God planted a garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the
mankind which he had formed. 9. And out of the ground the Lord God made to
grow every tree pleasant to sight and good for food, the tree of life in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. 10. And a
river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was parted, and
became into four heads, etc.

In the description, as it is here laid down by Moses, we may observe two
maine things.

The first, that God beforehand provided a place of pleasant habitation, and of
exercise for mankind; and so soon as the male and female were formed, he
placed them therein. This is plainly affirmed, Verse 8. where it is said, God
planted a garden; and Verse 15. God put man into it to dress and keepit.

The second is a plain description of the place in the 8. Verse, and so along
to the 15. Verse.

In the description it self, we may observe diverse notable things.

First, that the place of man's habitation was most pleasant; (...).
a garden, that is a plot of ground chosen out for pleasure and fruitfulness,
planted and beautified with all both goodly and fruitful trees and plants.

Secondly, that it was chosen and planted by God himself, and 2.
prepared and made ready for man, that so soon as they were formed, he and
the Woman might be put into it.

Thirdly, that this garden was situate in Eden, that is, a region 3. Eden,
what.
and country most pleasant; for in the Hebrew text the name (...), signifies
pleasure and delight.

Fourthly, it is said to be Eastward in Eden, and that in a twofold 4.
respect: First, because being in Eden it was Eastward from Canaan the Land of
the Israelites, for whom Moses wrote this History, and gave it to them, when
they were come into the borders of the Land, and had taken possession of Bashan
and Gilead. Secondly, because it was planted in the East Side of Eden toward
the Sunrising, which is commonly the most pleasant place for situation. That
Eden was Eastward from Cannan in the land of Mesopotamin toward Babylon, it is
manifest by this, because Euphrates was the river which went out of Eden, and
watered the garden: and Euphrates r^^s through the country of Mesopotamia close
by Babylon, which country when Jacob journed unto from Canaan, he is said to
come into the hand of the people of the East, Genesis 29. 1. That the garden was
on the East Side of Eden; it appears evidently by this, that the river which
watered the garden, did run through Eden Eastward toward Assyriah and Babylon
in one stream or great river, and when it came to the garden it was parted and
became four streams or channels; one of which, to wit, that which runs by
Babylon retains the name of the maine river, and is called Euphrates, as
appears Verse 14.

Fifthly, this garden is described by the commodities of it^ First, it had in
it overy kind of tree both pleasant to the sight; (...).
both the goodly Cedar which is said to have been in the garden of the Lord,
Ezech. 34. ^8 and also good for food, that is, all trees yielding fruit.
Secondly, it had in it two special fruittrees, which were of singular use; the
tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Thirdly, it was
watered with a river which went out of Edon, that is, proceeded out of the West
part of Eden, and (...) it by dividing it self into four several streams
which did run through several parts of the garden, to moisten the ground, and
to cherish the roots of the trees; after which parting of the streams and
running through several parts of the garden, not by any labor or art of man,
but by Gods appointment so ordering and disposing them, they did not meet
again nor gather themselves into one channel; but ran apart from thence, and
were parted, and became four heads or streams running in four channels into
several parts of the country, and into several lands called by several names.

The first here mentioned is Pishon, which takes a compass The rivers in it. 1.
to the land of Havilah, which is a country bordering upon the upper part of
the Persian Gulf: it was first inhabited by Havilah the Son of Cush, and by
his posterity; it borders on that part of Arabia which Ishmaels posterity
inhabited, which we call Arabia deserta. For we read, Genesis 25. 18. that they
dwelt from Havilah to Shur, that is, in Arabia deserta; and when Saul was sent
to slay the Amalekites, he smote them from Havilah as thou go to Shur, 1 Samuel 15. 7. that is, along the coasts of the Ishmaelites. In this land of
Havilah, the text says there is good gold, and Bdelium, that is, a tree which
yields a whitish gum, and also there is Onyx-stone.

The second river, in Moses days, was called Gihon; and it 2.
takes a compass toward the land of Cush, that is, not Ethiopia which is also
called Cush, but that part of Arabia which borders upon Chaldaea. For all
Arabia and Ethiopia are in Hebrew called by the name of Cush, because all these
lands were inhabited at the first by Seba, Sabtah, Raamah, Sabtecha, Sheba, and
Dedam, which were the Sons of Cush, as appears, Genesis 10. 7. And that part of
Arabia which the Midianites inhabited, is (...).
called Cush; For Moses his wife, being a Midianitish-woman as we read, Exodus
2. is called a woman of Cush, Number. 12. that is of Arabia, not of Ethiopia as
our translaters do render the word.

Third river is called Hiddekell, and it is the stream which goes 3.
Eastward toward Assyriah, and runs into the great river Tigris, which parts
Assyriah from Mesopotamia.

And the fourth river is that which retains the name of 4.
the maine river Euphrates, which in Hebrew is called Perah, because it makes
the land watered by it fruitful above others. This is the description of man's
habitation in the state of innocence as it is here laid down, and expounded by
the help of other Scriptures, and not according to the vain conceits of men
which have no certainty nor truth in them.

Before I come to observe from hence any special point of instruction, I hold
it necessary, First, to show the variety and multiplicity of vain, uncertain,
and erroneous opinions of diverse ancient Fathers and other later Writers
concerning this garden, and the particulars thereof before mentioned; all which
are by certain ground laid down in this exposition, and by clear evidence of
Scripture and strong reasons easily confuted.

First, Saint Hierome, being missed by the translation of Aquila, Opinion 1.
which runs thus, God had planted a garden from the beginning, does hereupon
conclude, that Paradise was planted before the Heaven and Earth were created:
which Opinion is most ridiculous, Comment. in Genes. cap. 2.
and contrary to common sense and reason: For where there are trees growing out
of the ground, and rivers and streams watering them, there must needs be
ground and earth. It was impossible for trees to be planted and to grow out of
the ground before any earth was created. We here may see, how wise men may
sometimes build castles in the air, and that the most learned of the ancients
have their errors; and he who was counted the most learned of all the Fathers
in the Hebrew tongue, does here miserably mistake the Hebrew phrase: For though
the Hebrew word (...) Mikedem, which is here translated Eastward, or on the
East Side, when it is spoken of God or of Christ, does signify in the Prophets
from everlasting, or from eternity, as Mich. 5. 12. Hab. 1. 12. and Psalm 74.
12. And when other things are said to be Mikedem, the word signifies either
from old time, or from the days of old, as Psalm 77. 6. and 143. 5. where
David says, I will remember the days of old; and Nehem. 12. 46. from the
days of old, even from David and Asaph they were chief of singers: Yet
sometimes it signifies Eastward, or on the East Side, or from the East, as
appears most plainly, Genesis 3. 24. where it is used to signify the East Side
of the garden where God placed the Cherubins; and Genesis 12. 8. where it is said,
that Abraham came to a mountain which was Eastward of Bethel, and had Ai on
the East Side, and so undoubtedly it is used in this text for Eastward, as our
translators truly render it.

Origin and Phile Iudaeus lib. de mund. opific. did conceive Paradise Opinion 2.
to be no earthly or bodily place, but to be spiritually understood, which
opinion Epiphanius proves to be against reason: because trees growing out of
the ground, and rivers, show that it was a garden planted on the earth, and
earthly not spiritual.

Some have held, that the whole World was Paradise, and that Opinion 3.
this garden did extend it self over all the earth, which then was wholly a
place of pleasure and delight; which is also very absurd, for then Adam had
been cast out of the whole earth when God cast him out of the garden, and the
land of Cush, and of Havilah, and Assyria, toward which the rivers did run
after they were gone out of the garden, had been out of the World. Besides,
we read in the Scriptures, that Eden, in which the garden was planted, was a
special country in Mesopotamia, near Haran and Goz^n, and the people thereof
did trade with Tirus, 2 King. 19. 12. and Ezech. 27. 23.

Ephrem held it to be a remote place beyond the vast Ocean Sea, Opinion 4.
and unknown tous.

Damascene in his book 2 de fide, chap. 14. held it to be a place Opinion 5.
higher then all the earth.

Beda and Rupertus held it to be a place next unto heaven, Opinion 6.
reaching up to the Sphaere of the Moon.

Alexander Hales and Tostatus thought it to be a place in the Opinion 7.
air far below the Moon.

Others who held it to be a special place in the earth do Opinion 8.
much vary and differ among themselves. Luther conceived, that it contained in
it all Mesopotamia, Syria, and Egypt.

Others thought, that it comprehended all Asia and Africa. Opinion 9.


Others, that it was that part of Syria, which is called the Opinion 10.
region of Damaseus, because there was the Kings forest of goodly Cedars,
which is called Paradise, Nehem. 2. 8. and there is a town called by the name
of Eden and Paradise, which is mentioned as some think, Amos 1. 5.

The Opinion of Bonaventure is, that the place of it is under the
Aequinoctiall. Opinion 11.


Bellarmine in his book de gratia primi hominis, chap. 10. confesses, that it
must needs be an earthly and bodily place planted Opinion 12.
with trees; but far remote from knowledge of men, and that no man can define
where it is; that it was not destroyed in the general deluge and flood of
Noah, but remains to this day; And that Enoch and Eliah were translated
thither, and there are kept to fight with Antichrist in the end of the World.
This Opinion is contrary to truth, and contradicts it self. First, the
Scriptures testify, that Eliah was not translated into an unknown place on
earth, but went up to heaven in a fiery chariot. Secondly, that the waters of
Noah's flood did prevail 15. cubits above the highest mountains. And
therefore if Paradise was an earthly place as Bellarmine holds, it must needs
be destroyed in the general deluge, Genesis 7. 20. Yea, if Paradise had been
preserved safe from the flood, it had been needless and vain labor for Noah
to build such an huge arc. God might have saved him and all the creatures with
him in the garden of Paradise. Thirdly, Moses does here plainly define where
this garden was, and whosoever with understanding reads this History, may
easily define where it was. But where it is now, none can define; for it is
destroyed, and only the place of it remains still.

But, not to trouble my discourse with particular confutations of these
several opinions; the very text it self, and that exposition which I have
made of it by the help of other Scriptures, does as it were with one blast
blow them all away like chafe, and with one stroke dash them all in pieces.
For this text tells us, that this garden was planted in the earth; and God made
the trees in it to grow out of the ground; that the special place of the
earth, in which God planted it was Eden, that is, a place in Mesopotamia and
Babylonia, known by that name, and mentioned by Rabshekeh among the countries
which the Assyrian Kings had conquered, situate between Judea and Assyria,
and near unto Assyriah, 2 King. 19. 12. and by Ezekiel, cap. 27. 23. mentioned
among the countries and cities, which from Mesopotamia did trade with Tyrus.
The text also tells us, that it was in Eden Eastward, or on the Eastside,
watered with a river which came out of Eden from the other part thereof; which
river having divided it self into four streams, that it might run through
several parts of the garden and water it, did no more meet in one, but from
thence, that is, from the garden was parted, and became four special rivers,
taking their course and compass toward several lands; to wit, Pishon to the
land of Havilah, Gihon to the land of Cush, Hiddekel, to the land of Assyriah,
and Euphrates through Babylonia and Chaldaea: all which are to Jews and
natural Israelites (who ever since the captivity of Israel to Assyriah, and of
Judah to Babylon do live a dispersed and scattered people in those countries)
known by those old names to these days, as appears in the Itinerarie of
Benjamin Tudalensis the Jew, and diverse other histories. Now these things being
plainly laid down in the text, explained by other Scriptures; the places and
rivers being often mentioned in histories, and known to the Jews who dwell in
those parts until this day; there is now no least color or show of reason
left for the diverse opinions before rehearsed; they all appear to be vain and
erroneous; the manifest truth of this text overthrowes them all at once. And
now from hence we may learn a profitable point of instruction, viz.

That nothing is more vain and uncertain then the opinion of Doctrine. Best
men's opinion is uncertain.
witty and learned Men, both ancient Fathers and later Writers and Schoolmen,
while they follow their own reason, and their own witty conceits without
warrant from the Word of God. There is no sure or certain ground which a man
may safely rest upon for the right understanding of the Scriptures, but only
the word of God it self, either speaking plainly in the very text it self,
or by other places and testimonies which are more full and plain, compared
with the obscurer texts. By this means only the Spirit of God does enlighten
our hearts and understanding to know infallibly the true sense and meaning of
them. Besides, many other proofs which serve to confirm this, which I omit as
not necessary at this present; we have a firm argument from our Saviors own
words, John 16. ver. 13, 14. where he says, that now under the Gospel the
Spirit speaks not of himself (by simple and immediate inspiration without any
word, as in the Prophets of old) but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak, and he shall take of mine and shall show it unto you; that is, he
shall inspire and enlighten men, only by my word which I have spoken with mine
own mouth, and by the Prophets and holy Men of God who have preached and
written. Also our Savior and his Apostles, by their constant practice did
show, that the sure ground of expounding and understanding the Scriptures in
any obscure places, is the plainer text and word of Scripture in other places.
For they proved the truth which they preached and wrote in the Gospel by the
Scriptures of the Law and the Prophets.

Wherefore let us not build upon the wisdom of men, nor Use.
upon the smooth words of man's reason; but on the word of God proved by it
self, and made plain one place by another; Let us hearken to such preachers,
and follow them as the surest guides, who make the Scriptures by themselves
plain and manifest to our understanding. As for them who can give no better
reason for doctrines of faith, but testimonies of Fathers and Schoolmen, nor
follow any surer guide for expounding of Scripture but expositions of Fathers
framed by their own conceits, not proved by plain texts; let us not build
too much upon them. And, above all, Let us hate and abhor the pestilent
Doctrine of the Romish Doctors, and all the Popish faction, who make the Canons
of Councels, the opinions of Fathers, and the Popes determination, the only
sure grounds whereon men ought to build their understanding of the Scriptures
and their belief of the word of God.

Another, and a second thing which comes here to be more Of the tree of life,
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
fully opened over and besides the diversity of opinions, is the tree of life,
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which are said to be in the midst
of the garden. These two trees are here in the history marked out and
distinguished from the rest of the trees, as being set apart by God for another
use more then mere natural. Concerning these trees, there are diverse and
several opinions of ancient and modern Divines.

First, concerning the tree of life, Some think it had a natural Why the tree
of life. 1.
power and virtue in it to make man's body lively, and to keep it from all
weakness, decay and mortality, till he should be removed to heaven: this is
the opinion of Scotus and Aquinas, with others.

Some think, it had power and virtue in it to make man immortal, 2.
and to preserve him from death for ever, as Tostatus: and that, if a man had
once eaten of it, he would not have dyed, but should have enjoyed such
immortality, as we have by Christ after the last resurrection.

Bonaventures opinion is, that it had such virtue and power 3.
in it not natural, but supernatural. But these opinions are mere humane
conceits contrary to reason. For first, the fruit of a tree, which is pulled
off, eaten, digested, and so changed from that which it was in a bodily
nutriment by the operation of man's fleshly stomach, cannot in any reason be
conceived to have natural power in it to give that to man which it self had
not, to wit, immortality and immurability. It is a true rule, that no natural
thing can work beyond the natural strength of it, neither can it give to
another that which it self has not at all; and this tree had no immortality,
for it was destroyed with the garden in which God planted it. Secondly,
supernatural power and virtue to give life is the proper virtue and power of
Christ and of his Spirit which works in men, and derives life from Christ to
them: but there was no such communion of the Spirit, not any such operation of
the Spirit in any earthly creature before Christ was promised; such assistance
and operation of the Spirit is proper to the elect of mankind, and came only
into the World by Christ, as the Scriptures testify.

There are diverse learned men of better judgment, and they 4.
hold that this tree of life is so called, not for any virtue in it, either
natural or supernatural; but because it was given of God a Sacrament and
seal of life to man, and man was to eat of it, not for bodily food only, but
that by eating of it he might be, as by a pledge from God, assured that he
should by God be upheld in life; and also might be admonished, that his life
is upheld not by any power in himself, but by covenant from God confirmed by
this seal.

But these differ among themselves, concerning the life Of what life.
whereof it was a seal and pledge.

Some think, it was a seal of that present life which Adam 1.
had, which in it self was mutable.

Some think, it was a seal of a better life, even of immortality 2.
and life immutable, which Adam should have obtained by continuing in obedience
for a certain time.

Others think, that it was a Sacrament, that is, an holy sign and seal of
Christ who is our life, and of that spiritual life 3.
which we have in him: thus Junius, and others of our late Writers.

Now, to declare in few words what I conceive to be the truth: First, I cannot
conceive, that there were any Sacraments given to man before the promise of
Christ, and the revealing of Gods purpose and counsel in him: For a Sacrament
is an outward element or visible thing consecrated by God, to signify and
seal heavenly and supernatural things, and grace spiritual and invisible:
But heavenly and supernatural things, which belong to eternal life in Christ,
and spiritual grace, were not revealed to man in the state of innocence,
before the promise of Christ, which was made upon man's fall; Therefore there
was then no use of any holy sign, or pledge of supernatural grace, or of any
thing which we obtain from above in, and by Christ. The tree of life could
not be any Sacrament, sign or symbol of Christ, or supernatural life in
him. All that I can conceive or affirm with any warrant from the Scriptures is
this, that the tree of life had greater and more excellent natural virtue and
strength in it then other trees, and the fruit thereof was more sweet, lively
and nourishing; and by this means it was more fit then other trees to be not
only a sign, symbol, and pledge to man, whereby he was to be admonished
that his life was to be upheld by his obedience to God, and dependence upon
him; and also to be assured and confirmed, that God would uphold him in life:
but also a seal of the covenant of works, whereby he was to be settled in
that state of life, wherein he was created. I confess, that the wisdom of
God (that is Christ as he is made unto us of God wisdom) is called a tree of
life to such as lay hold on him, Prove. 3. 18. and the fruit of the righteous,
(that is eternal life, and all saving blessings, which are the fruit which
the righteous, justified and sanctified in Christ, do enjoy) is called also
the tree of life, Prove. 11. 30. Revel. 2. 7. and a wholesome tongue, that is,
the healing and saving word of the Gospel, and other powerful means of
salvation are called a tree of life, Prove. 15. 4. and Revel. 22. 2, 14. But all
this is by way of allusion, and tends to teach us; not that the tree of life in
Paradise was a Sacrament of Christ, and of saving grace and eternal life in
him; but, that as that tree was a pledge and means to confirm man in his
natural life: so Christ and his graces, and his holy and healing word, are the
pledges and means of heavenly and supernatural life. And this is all that I
can learn out of the Scriptures, concerning this tree of life.

The other special tree is called the tree of knowledge of good and evil;
which I conceive to be so called, not because How of the knowledge of good and
evil.
it did beget reason and understanding in man, or did sharpen his wit by any
virtue or power in it, as Josephus and diverse Hebrews imagined; for then it
had been good for man to eat of it, and he should have gained thereby: Nor
because Satan by the lying Serpent persuaded the woman that being eaten of, it
would make them as God, in knowing good and evil; for it was so called of God
before, when he forbad them to eat of it: But the true reason why it is so
called is, because God having forbidden man to eat of it, man could not eat of
it but by disobeying God and transgressing his commandment, and so bring sin,
and the bitter knowledge, and the woeful experience and sense of evil upon
himself, which taste and knowledge of evil makes the sweetness of good
better relished, and the profit thereof better known and acknowledged. Again,
because the eating of this tree was man's sin and full; and gave occasion to God
to promise Christ; and to the Son of God to undertake as man's surety to make
satisfaction for him, and to redeem him; and out of his evil to raise up a
new kind of good, greater and better then that which man knew before, even to
bring him to the knowledge of spiritual and supernatural good: In this respect,
God might well call it the tree of knowledge of good and evil, upon his own
foreknowledge of that event, which he in himself purposed to bring about upon
that occasion.

As for searching and inquiring what kind of tree it was; whether a vine, as
some hold; or a fig tree, as Theodoret thought; or an aple tree, as others; I
hold it vain curiosity, because the text calls it by another name, by which
none of those trees were ever called. Certainly the fruit of it in it self
was naturally good, and had no evil quality in it, which could corrupt or
stain man's nature, or infuse malice into him; as I shall hereafter show, when
I come to Gods commandment by which he forbad man to eat of it.

And thus much for the opening and expounding of this part of the history,
concerning Paradise, the place of man's habitation in the state of innocence.
The doctrines which hence arise, I will but as it were point at and name unto
you.

First, we here are taught, that Gods bounty to man, in the Doctr. 1. Gods
great bounty to man.
creation was great and wonderful, in that he made him not only a reasonable
creature endowed with wisdom, knowledge, and ability, to choose out and make
an habitation for himself above all other living creatures on earth: but also
did provide and prepare for him before hand, and did plant for him a garden to
his hand, a place of singular pleasure and delight, stored with all delicacy
for his dwelling and habitation. We count it a great bounty, that God gives us
large places wherein to dwell, and gives us wisdom and art to build Houses
and Cities; and materials necessary for building. And if God bless us with
Sheep, Oxen, and other profitable cattle, we rejoice to build stals, and
folds, and enclosures for them; and Houses and Cities for our selves, and
acknowledge our selves bound to be thankful. But God in the creation was so
kind to man, that though he left other living creatures to the wide World, yet
he provided a Paradise of pleasure for man to dwell in, and to delight
himself; so that this point is manifest.

Whence we may gather steadfast hope, and comfortable persuasion, that seeing
God was of himself so kind to man, Use.
being then but a mere natural creature, as to prepare for him so pleasant an
habitation; now when we are made spiritual, and by one Spirit united to him
in Christ, and made Sons by regeneration and adoption, he will much more
provide an excellent habitation for us, even an heavenly, which shall so far
exceed the earthly Paradise, as the state of a Son exceeds the state of a
servant, and spiritual exceeds natural.

Secondly, here we see, how unnatural and monstrous man's Use 2.
ingratitude was, and is declared to be, in that he would be drawn by the
subtility of the Devil, persuading him by the Woman, and the Woman by the
Serpent, to yield upon any promise or hope of an higher estate, to transgress
any commandment of God, and disobey his word and revealed will, who had so
highly magnified his kindness, and made his singular care and providence for
him most clear and manifest. But most of all may we all be ashamed and
confounded for this, that our first Parents, and we in them, would believe
Satan's lies in the mouth of a Serpent, and would give more credit to them, then
to the word of the Lord our Creator; as if all his goodness and bounty were
nothing in our eyes, which he showed in our creation, and in providing so
pleasant and well furnished an habitation for us.

Secondly, Gods putting of Adam, into the garden that he Doctr. 2. No
idleness allowed.
might dress it and keep it, does teach us, That man in the creation was made,
and is by pure nature, most averse and abhorring from idleness; and his true
content and pleasure in this World is to be in exercise of his wit, reason,
and bodily activity. The earth before man's fall was all fruitful, and brought
forth for man's use all necessary and delightful things without art, toil or
labor; so that man might have spent all his time in contemplating upon his
creation, and all things created: but yet God would not, that man should live,
neither did he see or think fit for man to live idle, and therefore put him
to dress and keep the garden, in which he had occasion to exercise his mind
and body without toil or labor, only for pleasure and contentment. And
therefore this doctrine is naturally gathered from hence, and all those
Scriptures confirm it, which condemn sloth and idleness, and send the
sluggard, as a creature degenerate from his kind, to learn of the Ant and
meanest creatures, as Prove. 6. 6. And tell us, that idleness and slothfulness
bring hunger, and want, and ruin, and decay to the houses of the idle and
sluggish, Prove. 19. 15. Eccles. 10. 18. and abundance of idleness was the
root of all the evils, which came upon Sodom, Ezech. 16. 49. But the diligent
hand makes rich, and brings plenty of all blessings, Prove. 10. 4. and brings
men to promotion, rule and honor, Prove. 12. 24. and makes their substance
precious, Verse 27. and their souls fat, Prove. 13. 4. and causes even women
to be praised in the gates, Prove. 31. And that man is by nature, active and
cannot brook idleness, it appears plainly by the stirring nature of
children, who are never quiet nor content, unless they be busied one way or
other; and by the restlessenesse which is in wicked men, who devise mischief
on their beds, and have working heads, and cannot cease from doing something,
rather evil exercises then be idle.

Now this being a manifest truth, may justly provoke and Use. Detest it
therefore.
stir us up to loath and abhor idleness, sloth, and laziness, as special
marks and igominious brands of naughty persons, miserably degenerated from
humane nature, and from the frame and disposition, wherein they were at the
first created by God. It was not good for Adam in innocence to live idly, and
without exercise, but he must be busied as in mind by contemplation on Gods
works; so in body by ruling the creatures, dressing and keeping the garden,
when abundance of all things flowed to him without toil or labor; much more
will it be hurtful dangerous and pernicious to us, who are a people corrupted,
and in our whole frame out of order, perverse, and froward. If we give way to
sloth and idleness, for if we labor not, we cannot have what to eat: but
poverty will come upon us, like an armed man; If we be idle and negligent in
honest and good labor, our perverse, rebellious and restless nature will lead
us into evil exercises and wicked works. As standing lakes of water grow
corrupt, stinking and unwholesome; and ground not labored, stirred up and
tilled, will bring forth corrupt, stinking weeds, briars, thorns, and
thistles: So our corrupt, nature if it be not exercised and busied about
virtuous actions, and profitable labors, will grow more corrupt, noisome and
filthy; and will carry us away into frowardness, vanity and sinful practices,
which will make us loathsome to God and men, and will speedily plunge us into
misery and eternal perdition.

Thirdly, we here see and are plainly taught, that man in Doctr. 3. A
contentfull estate in innocence.
innocence had abundance of all good things, needful for profit, pleasure,
and full contentment; and wanted nothing which could be required for earthly
happiness, to make him blessed in this World, and fully content with his
estate and condition.

First, his reason and understanding could not conceive, neither 1.
did he know any good, which he wanted and did not possess, whereof he was
by nature capable: all wordly goods he had at will; and of heavenly and
spiritual good which was supernatural, he had no knowledge nor understanding.

Secondly, he had all provocations to move him to serve 2.
God, and all bonds to tie, and knit his heart in love to God, and to make him
wholly obedient to God, and dutiful and serviceable to him in his whole heart
and soul, body, mind, and strength. He had food at will, most sweet,
wholesome and delicate, in all variety and abundance, without any care toil
or labor; the Earth brought it forth of her own accord; the wholesome and
pure air did cherish it, and the Sun and Heavens by their warm influence did
ripen, perfect, and prepare it to his hand. He had a most pleasant dwelling, a
garden beautified with all earthly ornaments, and a Paradise of pleasure and
delight. He was high in honor, dignity and promotion above all living
creatures both by Sea and Land, and had rule and Dominion over them all. His
exercise was without toil, labor or pain, sweet and pleasant. He had for
the exercise of his mind all Gods works, the contemplation whereof might, fill
his soul with delight and joy in God his Creator; and for the exercise of his
bodily strength and activity, he had the dressing and keeping of the garden
which was a work of pleasure and delight, not of pains and labor, for it
needed no digging, planting, culture or tillage: his business also was without
care and fear; for there were no thieves to annoy him, no evil beasts to hurt
and spoil his garden, and to trouble and waste his habitation; so that without
further proof, this Doctrine is most clear in, and from the text.

The consideration whereof is of excellent use to confirm us in this
assurance, persuasion and belief, that God in no respect Use. God no way the
cause of man's sin.
any cause or Author of man's sin and fall, neither did give him the least
occasion of discontent with his present estate, that by seeking to soar up
higher, he should catch a fearful downfall into sin, and bring himself in
bondage to death, Hell, and the Devil. For we see, God gave him all occasions
and abundance of blessings as strong provocations to provoke him to love his
heavenly Majesty, and as firm bands to bind, and tie him to obedience. It was
the Devil who first breathed pride into man, to aspire and soar above his
estate, and suggested into his heart evil surmises and thoughts of God, that
God did seek to keep him from a better estate by restraining him from the
tree of knowledge, which by eating of the fruit thereof he might obtain, and
become like to God. Wherefore let no man charge God with giving the least
occasion of discontent to man to provoke him to sin; but let us be humbled
with the sight of our own mutability, frailty and vanity, who in our first
Parents and best estate were so fragile and mutable, and much more now, being
corrupted and made subject to vanity, and slaves of corruption.

CHAP. XV.
Of the image of God on man in innocence. Sundry opinions of it. What the word
signifies: Zelem and Demuth. Image of God natural, and supernatural.
Differences between the image of the first and second Adam. Images essential,
and accidental. Particulars of Gods image on Adam: in soul and body. Uses of
all.

ANd God said, Let us make man in our image after our likeness. Genesis 1, 26.
Verse 27. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created
he him; Male and female created he them.

The general Doctrine of the creation of our first Parents in the image of
God, I have heretofore laid open out of these words. It now remains, that I
proceed to the Doctrine and Description of that image of God in the special
and particular points, thereof; which I reserved to the last place, because it
is the maine thing which discovers to us the excellent state of man in
innocence. As for the blessing of fruitefulnesse for the increase of mankind,
and man's Dominion over the creatures, plenty and variety of bodily food, and a
pleasant habitation, the earthly Paradise, they are but externabona, outward
benefits: but the image of God contains in it internal blessings of the
soul, and of the whole man, as well as external and outward benefits; and
therefore I have first dispatched them, and now come to that image of God, in
which did consist the highest pitch of man's natural perfection and felicity.

In the handling of this point, if I should rehearse the several opinions of
the ancients; how they make a difference between Opinion of the image and
likeness of God.
the image and likeness of God; how some make the image of God to be only in
the soul; some in the whole man; some holdthe reasonable soul, as it is
endowed with understanding, will and memory, to be the image, and holiness and
righteousness to be the likeness of God; others hold that Gods image consists
in man's Dominion, and Lordship over the creatures; others, that Gods image
consists in man's immortality; others in this, that man is a spiritual
substance in respect of his soul, others that the image of God, after which
God formed man, is God the Son as he is the image and character of the Fathers
Person, and the similitude is the holy Ghost; others that the image of God is
the humane nature, which the Son was ordained to assume, and did in fullness of
time take upon him: If I should rehearse all these, and lay them open, and
confute so much in them as in unsound, I should spend time and weary my self
to small purpose. Likewise, it would take up exercises of many hours, if I
should rehearse the diverse opinions, questions, and disputations of the
Schoolmen; all which would trouble men's brains, and leave them in a maze or
labyrinth, uncertain what to hold or believe; as also the many disputations,
absurdities, and contradictions of the Jesuits, by which they contradict one
another; and some of them themselves, in many things which they teach and
affirm concerning the image of God. As for the gross opinions of old
Heretics, as of the Manichaans, who utterly denied the image of God in man;
and of the Audians and Anthropomorphites, who held that the outward form and
shape of man's body was Gods imagc; and of the Pelagians, who held that the
image of God, in which man was created, was no other but that in which every
man is now borne; they are not worthy to be named, it were loss of time to
confute them, and to discover the absurdities of them.

The maine ground which I will wholly build upon, shall be the word of God,
written in the sacred Scriptures; and what I find in the Fathers and best
modern Writers agreeable to the Scriptures, that I will commend unto you; and
where I find them differing from Gods word, I will be bold to profess open
dissert, and show my dislike; that none may be mislead by them, or by any who
build upon humane authority.

But, that we may understand this point plainly and fully, I will first of
all sift the words of the text, and show what is the image and likeness of
God, and how we are to understand the phrase of making man in his own image,
and after his likeness. And secondly, I will show the particulars wherein man
was made like unto God, and what is that image in which he was made.

First, the image of a person or thing is that, which though it What the word
mage signifies.
differs in nature and substance, yet is formed by that person and according to
that thing, and in all things made like unto that whereof it is the image; in
so much that he who knows the person or thing it self, when he sees the
image, can discern that it is the image of such a thing or person, and that it
is very like him; and by seeing the true image he knows and discernes what a
one the person or thing is, whereofit is the image: this is the first and the
most proper sense of the word image, (...).
and thus it is used where statues of gold, silver, wood, stone, or other
metal, made in the shape of a man to represent him, or in some other shape to
represent a feined God, are called images, as Number. 33. 52. where God commands
the Israelites to destroy the Idols of the Canaanites, and calls them molten
images; and a King. 11. 19. the Idols or statues made to represent Baal the God
of the Zidonians, are called the images of Baal. And man being made a fit
creature to represent God, and to show his glory, is in this sense called the
image and glory of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7.

Secondly, the word (...), Zelem, image, is used (...), 2. Zelem.
that is, abusively, to signify a vain shadow or bare form and shape of a
thing without a substance; such as is the shadow of a man or other creature; or
a shape formed in the fancy, having no being but in man's imagination, as
Psalm 39. 6. where every man is said, to walk in a vain shadow, the word is
(...), Zelem, image, and Psalm 37. 20. the vain fancy and dream of the
wicked, that is, the vain felicity, which they frame to themselves, is called
by the same name Zelem, image.

Here in this text the word is used in the first sense, for such a thing, or
such a creature as differing in nature and substance from God, yet in that
nature and substance is so like unto God, and does show forth the glory,
wisdom, power and other attributes of God; that they may be seen and
represented in some good measure in the things, and by the things which are
proper to that creature.

And an image according to this sense has in it two things Two things in an
image. 1.
to be considered, to wit the matter and the form.

The matter is the nature and substance of the creature, differing from the
substance of the thing, whereof that creature is the image, and yet a very fit
subject to receive such a form, and such qualities as may make it very like
the thing whereof it is the image; as for example gold, silver, wood, and
stone, differ in nature and substance from man; and yet they are fit to receive
the whole outward shape of a man's body, and to be like unto it in all parts.
If things be both of one kind and nature, though the similitude be never so
great, yet the one is not called the image of the other, except it be made by,
and according to it: as for example, One egg is not the image of another, nor
one apple, nut, or fig another image; nor water, nor wine of the same kind
in several cups, though they be very like, because they are both of one
nature and of the same kind, and one is not made and formed by another.

Secondly, the form of the image is the likeness and similitude, 2.
which is in all the parts and properties of a thing, by means whereof it
resembles that whereof it is the image, and is like unto it, and so becomes the
image of it; as for example, the form, and shape, and resemblance, which is in
the image of gold, silver, or stone, by which it resembles and expresses all
parts of a man's body, and the color of it, by which it resembles a man's hair,
face, hands, and clothes, that is the likeness by which it becomes the image
of a man, even of this or that particular man, and is known and discerned to
be his image, and in it his shape is plainly seen. Both these are here to
be understood in this word image, and Gods image contains in it both the
similitude or resemblance, by which man is said to be like unto God in all his
natural properties, gifts, and endowments; and also his nature, and substance,
which though it differs from Gods nature and substance: Yet is a fit subject of
such properties, gifts, and endowments, which resemble Gods attributes and
properties.

Secondly, the Hebrew word (...) Demuth, which is here translated likeness, is
used in a twofold sense: First, it signifies Demuth. 1.
the similitude and likeness, by which one thing resembles another in all the
special properties of it; thus it is used Psalm 58. 4. where the poison,
rancour, and malice of the wicked is said to have the likeness of the poison
of aspes; and Ezech. 1. 10. the likeness of the faces of the four living
creatures, in Ezechiels vision is said to be like the face of a man, and of a
Lion, and of an Ox, and of an Eagle; and Dan. 10. 16. one is said to touch
Daniel, who had the likeness of the Sons of men. Secondly, it signifies the
same that the word image does, that is a thing 2.
which is made like to another, and is the very pattern which resembles it in
all parts, and properties, as 2 King. 16. 10. where the pattern of the Altar
of Damascus which Ahaz sent to Vriah the Priest, is called the image of it. And
2 Chronicles. 4. 3. the images of Oxen which Solomon made under the brazen Sea, are
called (...) Demuth, the likeness of Oxen, and Isa. 40. 18. an image made to
represent God, according to that conceit of him, which men frame in their
minds, is thus called.

Here in this text the word is used in the latter sense, and signifies the
same, that the word image does in effect, but in a diver and manner. For the
word (...) Image, signifies first a creature, and then the likeness by which
that creature so resembles God the Creator, in all the special properties of
it, that it becomes his image. And the word (...), likeness, signifies first
the similitude, and then the creature; that is, such a similitude and
resemblance of God stamped upon the nature and being of a creature, as makes it
the very image of God, and so these two words, Zelem, Image, and Demuth,
Likeness, are (as the best learned and most judicious expositors of this text
do affirm) the one the exposition of the other; The word Image shows, that
the creature barely considered is not Gods image; but by the natural
properties, and gifts by which it resembles God. And the word likeness
shows, that the similitude alone is not the image, but as it subsists in a
fit subject, and flows from the nature and properties, which God gave it in
the creation.

Upon these grounds we may easily understand, that the phrase of creating man
in Gods own image and likeness, signifies Gods creating man of such a nature,
and endowed with such natural properties, gifts, and endowments; that he does
in them all resemble himself, and is his lively image very like to him;
showing forth his divine properties and attributes of goodness, wisdom,
power, knowledge, and in all things conformable to his just will. Thus much for
the opening of the words.

The next thing to be considered, is the Image it self, and Image of God
natural, and supernatural.
the special things wherein it does consist. And here I hold it necessary,
first to distinguish the image of God, and his likeness into two kinds. The
first is natural, formed in the creation. The second is supernatural and
spiritual, formed in man by the holy Ghost dwelling in him. This distinction,
though diverse people (lead by custom and humane authority more then the word
of God) do reject as a mere device of mine own: yet I find it plainly laid
down in the word of God. For the holy Apostle Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 49. does
in express words affirm, that as there is both a first Adam made of the
Earth, earthy, who by Gods breathing into him the breath of life became a
living soul in the first creation; and also a second Adam made a quickening
Spirit, even the Lord Christ from Heaven heavenly. So there is a twofold image
of God in man; the first: The image of the earthy Adam, in which he was
created; which though he forfeited, and lost by the law of justice: yet by
Gods common and general indulgence in Christ, he did so far retain and
communicate it though, grievously mangled and defaced, that we are said to have
borne it, who are Adams natural progeny, and were created upright in his
loins. The other is the image of the heavenly Adam, the Lord Christ, who being
in the form of God, equal with God, did humble himself to descend from
Heaven Phil. 2.
by taking our nature upon him, and framing to himself out of the seed of the
woman by the operation of the holy Ghost a most pure and holy manhood, which
did bear (over and above the image of the first Adam deformed with many
frailties and all our infirmities, sin only excepted, Romans 8. 3. Philip. 2.
7.) an holy and heavenly image created and framed in his humane nature by the
working of the holy Ghost, which is given to him not by measure, Ioh. 3. 34.
even from his first conception, Luke 1. 35. And this image as the elect,
regenerate and faithful do bear in part, in the state of grace, while they
are by the inward work of the Spirit conformed to the image of Christ, Romans 8.
29. and Christ is formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. So they shall fully and perfectly
bear it in heaven after the last resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 49.

And as the holy Apostle does distinguish these two images, and does oppose the
one to the other, making the one the image of the first Adam, who was of the
Earth earthy; the other proper to Christ the second Adam, who is the Lord from
Heaven heavenly; so he does show diverse differences between them in his
divine Epistles, which are confirmed also by other Scriptures.

First, the image of God in the first Adam was natural, it Differences
between the image of the first and second Adam. 1.
was that which was given him in the creation; so my text here says, God
created man in his own image: But the image of God in the second Adam was
supernatural and spiritual; for he was conceived, and formed in the womb by
the holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. and his image is communicated to men, and they are
changed into it by the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

Secondly, the image of God in the first Adam was mutable, 2.
and Adam did forfeit it, together with his life and natural being, by his sin
and disobedience: And although God, out of his common favor and indulgence in
Christ, does still continue it in some degree to Adams posterity; yet it is
much defaced and deformed in all parts, and in some parts quite abolished, and
is now styled the likeness of corruptible man, Romans 1. 23. and the likeness
of sinful flesh, Rom 8. 3. and the form of a servant, and likeness of frail
men even as it was in Christ, Phil. 2. 7. But the image of God in Christ is
immutable; neither our sins which he bare, nor all our infirmities, nor the
Devil, nor the World, nor all the powers of darkness, nor the curse of the
law, which he was made in his death, nor the wrath of God and the agonies with
which he wrastled in his agony, both in the time of his bloody sweat, and on
the cross when he cried out, My God why have thou forsaken me? could deface
or impair that spiritual and supernatural image of true righteousness and
holiness, which was stamped on his humanity, and in which it was framed by the
holy Ghost; but over all those enemies and powers he triumphed, even upon the
Cross, Colos. 2. 15. and in his cursed death he offered up himself a
sacrifice most pure, holy and without spot, Heb. 9. 14. so that his holiness
was no whit stained, nor Gods spiritual image in him defaced, or diminished.
And as this spiritual image could not be diminished in Christ the second
Adam, our head: so it Romans 8. 35. Ioh. 4. 14. and 14. 16.
is indeleble and cannot be defaced in any of his members truly regenerate
and united to him by the same spirit; but it daily increases in them, and they
are transformed into it, from glory 2 Cor. 3. 18.
to glory, by his Spirit in them, which is stronger and greater then the
Devil, the Spirit of malice which is in the World, and Ioh. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 22.
rules in the children of disobedience; For the Spirit seals them up, unto the
day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. And they cannot sin by apo^acy, and fall into
infidelity and impenitency, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. because the seed of God abides in
them.

Thirdly, the image of God in the first Adam was most perfect 3.
at the first, for he was created perfect with natural perfection; and the
natural image of God was never so perfect in any of his natural sons, as it
was in him at the first. And as it decayed and was defaced in him by his fall:
so in all of his posterity who are Gods elect, it gives place to the better
image of Christ; And in his Sons who are reprobates, it shall be utterly
abolished at last, and changed into the image of the Devil, when they shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of God, and from
the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. But the image of God in the second Adam,
is at the first in the least measure like a grain of mustard seed, and still
it increases, till at last it comes to fullness and perfection in glory. In
Christ our head it was not so clear, nor so full at the first, being ecclipsed
with our infirmities; but that he, did grow up in wisdom, and stature, and
favor with God and men, Luk 2. 52. and so this image increased in him, and he
was more and more full of the holy Ghost, till at length he was perfected with
glory. And so likewise in the state of grace, it daily increases in all the
true members of Christ, till they come to glory, and bear the heavenly image
of Christ, and attain to the fullness of him, as appears Romans 12. 2. 2 Cor.
3. 18. and 4. 16, Ephesians. 4. 13, 16. Coloss. 3. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 18. (...)

Fourthly, the image of God in Adam consisted only in such gifts and
endowments as made him a perfect natural man, 4.
capable of an earthly felicity: It did not enable him to search into the
heavenly things of God, nor make him partaker of heavenly glory: But the image
of God in Christ consists of spiritual gifts and supernatural graces, which
do enable a man to search into the deep things of God, which never entered
into the heart of Adam in innocence, 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10. or of any mere natural
man; and which do make him fit to see God and to inherit the Kingdom of
heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 50. and Hebr. 12. 14.

The image of God in which Adam was created, did consist chiefly of original
righteousness, which was but a perfect natural 5.
uprightness, and conformity of his reason, understanding, will and affections
to the will and law of God, made known to him in the creation, and also in the
perfect frame and disposition of his body, and of all parts thereof, by which
they were most apt and ready to follow his upright reason, will and affections
in all things, and to move and work accordingly; and the Scriptures attribute
no more to man, while he bare that image in the creation, but only that God
made man upright, Eccles. 7. verse last, this was the height and perfection of
that image. But the image of God in Christ, the second Adam contains in it the
righteousness and holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4. 24. that is, a righteousness
wrought in us, by the holy Ghost, and a true holiness and holy conformity to
God, which cannot fail and deceive, and which does elevate and lift us up to
heavenly felicity, and the eternal fruition of God.

The image of God in which Adam was made, was but the 6.
uprightness of servants, and conformity to the will of God; commanding as
Lord and Creator under pain of death, Genesis 2. 17. But the image of God in
Christ is the image of Sons and Children, not only adopted to God in Christ;
but also begotten and borne of Gods immortal seed, even his Spirit, and made
partakers of the divine nature, Ioh. 3. 5. Gal. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 23. and 2 Pet.
1. 4. 1 Ioh. 3. 9.

Lastly, the image of God in which Adam was made, did 7.
not in the greatest perfection of it give that fullness and sufficiency of
contentment, which might settle his resolution never to desire more; for he,
out of a desire to know more, and to be like God in knowing good and evil,
was easily tempted and drawn by the Serpent to eat of the forbidden fruit:
But the image of God in Christ, the second Adam gives such solid content to
Gods people, even here in this frail life in the state of grace, where they
have it but in part, that neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor anguish, persecution, peril or sword, can make
them willing to forgo it for any other hope: and in the full perfection of it
after the last resurrection, it brings fullness of joy, contentment and
satisfaction, and fills men up with the fullness of God, Psalm 16. 11. and 17.
15. Rom 8. 35. Ephesians. 3. 19.

Now these things which I have here laid down by way of plain Doctrine,
concerning the true meaning of the words image and likeness, and the
difference between the image of God, in which the first Adam was created, and
the image of God in the second Adam Christ, in which he was formed by the holy
Ghost, and into which all the elect are changed and renewed, when they are
regenerate and made new creatures in him may serve for excellent use: as I
shall show, when I have described the image of God, wherein our first Parents
were created, and have laid down, by way of Doctrine, the particulars wherein
it does consist.

But before I can distinctly describe the Image of which my text here speaks,
I must yet a little more distinctly show the several sorts of images which,
are images of God, and of other things.

There are images which are essential and perfect, to wit, every Images
essential, and accidental.
person begotten by another of his own nature; and images which are
accidental and imperfect.

An essential image, is either absolute and most perfect; or less perfect.

The essential image which is most perfect and absolute, is one person
begotten by another of the same undivided substance 1.
and being, in all essential properties equal and alike, distinct only by
personal properties and subsistence. Thus the eternal Son of God is the image
of the Father of whom he is begotten from all eternity, of the same nature and
individual substance. For the second person the Son, considered according to
his divinity simply as God, before his assuming of our frail nature; is said
to be in the form of God, that is, his person is of the same essence, glory,
and majesty with the Father, and he thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, that is to have all essential properties of God equal which the Father,
as the Apostle testifies, Philip. 2. 6. and in this respect, he is called the
image of the invisible God, Coloss. 1. 15. and the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person, Hebr. 1. 3. which words though they have
respect to Christ, as he is the Word made flesh, and God incarnate, revealing
God in his goodness, wisdom, justice, mercy, power, and the like: yet they
must not be limited to his incarnation; but are extended to his deity as he
is the eternal Word the Son the second Person, by whom the Father created all
things, and who with the Father does uphold and sustain all things as the
words immediately following do show. For indeed the eternal Word the Son, is
in the form of God, one and the same God, of the same substance, glory, and
majesty with the Father, and only distinguished in personal properties,
relatiom, and subsistence: And therefore he alone can truly be called the
image of God in this sense, which is most perfect and absolute.

The essential or substantial image which is less perfect then 2.
the other, is either natural or supernatural.

A natural essential image is one person begotten by another Natural.
of the same nature and kind of substance, and equal and alike in the same
kind of natural properties, but not of the same singular substance and
individual properties; thus every Son of man is the image of the Father which
begets him; for though he has a several soul and body, and several
properties which are of the same kind, but not the same singular with those of
his Father: yet because his body and soul, and all the faculties of it, are of
the same kind, and in the outward form resembles his Father, and his Father
may be seen as it were in him, therefore he is his Fathers image and made in
his likeness.

A supernatural essential image is a nature or person, who And supernatural.
is so begotten of God by the holy Ghost, given to be and abide in him, as the
immortal seed of God, that he is made partaker of the divine nature; that is,
has not only supernatural, and spiritual gifts wrought in him, by which he
is made fit to see and enjoy God: but also is united to God, and God becomes
his portion for ever.

This image is either primary or secondary. The primary image (...).
of this kind is only Christ as he is man, or the humane nature of Christ,
which God formed and made in the womb of the virgin so pure and holy by the
holy Ghost from the first conception, in which the holy Ghost came upon her,
and the power of the Almighty over-shadowed her, Luke 1. that it was not only
most pure and holy, and full of the holy Ghost from the first being of it; but
also was personally assumed and united to the eternal Son of God, the second
Person in the blessed Trinity, and so became the first borne of every creature,
Coloss. 1. 15. and the first fruits which do sanctify the whole mass of the
elect, 1 Cor. 15. 23. and he head from whom the Spirit is derived unto all the
elect, Ephesians. 4. 15, so that they become a kind of first fruits of Gods
creatures, Iam. 1. 18.

The secondary supernatural image is every elect, regenerate child of God,
begotten and borne of his Spirit, shed on them through Christ, Tit. 3. 6. and
so created a new man after God, in righteousness and holiness of truth, and
made partakers of the divine nature, one with God in Christ and by Christ, Ioh.
17. 23. I call this a secondary image, because the elect become this image not
immediately, but after a secondary manner, by deriving the Spirit from Christ,
and by union with God in him. I call it a supernatural image, because it is
above man's nature, and belongs not to him in the creation, nor consists in any
natural properties or resemblance. And I call it an essential image, because
every regenerate man, has in him the holy Ghost dwelling as the soul of his
soul, quickening the whole man; which Spirit is of the same essence with the
Father and the Son. And in respect of this Spirit, and his gifts dwelling in
his tabernacles their bodies, and furnishing them throughout; they are truly
called, and are indeed, a new image of God, and new creatures.

All these sorts of images are to be excluded out of this text, for our first
parents are not here said to be created after God essentially or
supernaturally, but only in the accidental and natural image of God; as I
have in part showed before, and shall also hereafter more fully show in all the
particulars.

The accidental or imperfect image of a thing or of a person, is a thing or
person so framed and made by another, as by a pattern, and after the likeness
of that pattern, that it does very much resemble it in likeness and
similitude, but yet is not every way equal, nor in all things fully alike, nor
of the same nature and substance with it.

In an image of this kind, there are required two things necessarily:

First, that the thing which is the image be very like, that whereof it is the
image; yea so like, that it must resemble and 1.
represent either the nature and essential form of it, or the outward form
and figure, or some special properties and proper qualities of it; or all
these together, and yet in a different substance.

Secondly, that it be formed and made by that whereof it is the image, and
according to the pattern of it: Where any of these two is wanting, there can
be no image at all; as for example, One egg is like another in nature,
substance, and all natural properties; yet that egg is not the image of the
other, because the one is not made by the other, as the pattern of it: so we
may say of an apple, or a fig, and of many other things; but the form of an
egg or apple made in chalk, or paste, or wax, is the image of an egg or
apple, though not so like it as another egg or apple, and far different in
nature and substance, because it is formed by it as by a pattern. And again,
though an egg be formed in the body, and of the natural substance of a bird,
and sometimes worms are bred in the bodies of men and beasts; and the egg
resembles the bird in whiteness or in variety of other colors, and the worms
seem like man's flesh, in whom they are bred, both in color and substance, and
in life, sense, and motion: yet they cannot be called images, because they are
not like in shape nor outward form, nor in any property, but only in some
qualities, and small resemblance. But the picture or statue, made after a man,
and in many things like him, though more like another man then him, yet it is
his image, and not the image and picture of another: so the figure of a man
appearing in a glass when he stands before it; though it differs in nature
and substance, and is but a vanishing shadow: yet because in outward shape,
form and color it is very like, and is expressed in the glass by him looking
in it, therefore is his image. And the impression of a stamp or seal made in
wax or well tempered clay is the image of that stamp or seal, though it be
not perfectly like, by reason of some small defects in the wax, clay or
stamping; and the impression of another seal engraven with the same figure or
letters may be in all points more like, and yet not the image of it, because
it was not made after it, but by another seal engraven with the same figure.

Now then, that we may plainly see that man was created, Man made after Gods
image, how.
and how he was created in the image of God, and made after his likeness, and
that he is a true accidental image of God his Creator, We are to observe
and take notice of these two things:

First, that God did frame man's nature, even his whole soul and body after
himself, with intent that both his substance, 1.
and natural properties and endowments might take their pattern from him his
Creator; that is, in a word, God himself was the original and chief
pattern by which alone man was made and formed.

Secondly, that though diverse other creatures had in diverse 2.
things more resemblance of God, then man had; as the heavens in large
comprehension of the visible World; the Sun in glorious brightness, beauty and
Majesty; the highest heaven in glory and immutability; And all creatures, as
they have essence and being, and were made good and perfect in their kind,
have, some more, some fewer impressions and resemblance of God in his essence
and attributes: yet none can be called the image of God among all visible
creatures but only man; because, though God formed all things after his own
will, wisdom, and goodness; yet he made no visible creature living or
without life, so far resembling himself in his nature and essential
properties, that it might justly or with good reason be called his image, but
only man. As man alone of all creatures under heaven was made in the image of
God; so man alone does so plainly resemble God, is so stamped with the
impression of Gods properties, and in his whole nature and frame is made so fit
a subject for God to dwell in, and to be conformed to God; and wherein God may
show his wisdom, power, goodness, liberty of will, justice, mercy and other
attributes, that he only of all visible creatures can truly be called the
image of God.

Let us now therefore, in the next place, come to the things Particulars
wherein the image of God stood. Conformity of Adam to God.
wherein this image of God did consist, and in respect of which things man is
said to be created in the image of God, and to be the image of God his
creator.

First, it is a most certain truth that the image of God, in which man was
created, is nothing else but the conformity of man unto God; and man is truly
called the image of God in respect of all those things wherein he does, more
then any other visible creatures, resemble God in his divine essence and
properties. Now this conformity of man unto God is twofold, primary, or
secondary.

Primarie conformity, is seated in the Soul of man, or in man In soul.
according to his soul the chief part of his substance.

Secondary conformity is that which is in man according to his body, and
consists in the body and in things which belong to his body.

Conformity of Man to God in his Soul, is either in the Nature of substance
of his Soul, or in the natural Faculties, Properties, and Endowments of it.

First, conformity to God in the Substance of his Soul, is the 1. In the
substan^e o(...)t.
similitude which man's Soul has unto the nature and substance of God, in that
man's Soul is not a Corporeal substance, as all visible Creatures are, nor a
Material body created of any former matter, but it is a pure Spirit, even a
spiritual, incorporeall, invisible and living substance, and so it is called.
1 Cor. 2, 11. and Heb. 12. 23. and both here in my text; and 1 Cor 15. 45. a
Living Soul which lives and gives life to the body; and in these things it is
like unto God who in his nature and being is a Spirit, or a spiritual
substance, as our Savior affirms, Joh. 4. 24. and is called the Invisible God
Coloss. 1. 15. and Tim. 1. 17. and the Living God Psalm. 42. 2. and Ier. 10. 10.
and Ioh. 6. 96. and his Eternal power and Godhead are called Invisible things,
Rom 1. 20. yea as God says of himself, Isa 40. 18. So we may truly say of
man's Soul, that it cannot truly be likened to any visible thing, neither can
any bodily substance resemble it.

Conformity to God in the natural faculties, properties and indowments 2. In
the natural faculties of it.
of his Soul is the likeness, and similitude which man in respect of his
reason, understanding, liberty of will desires and affections, all upright and
perfect, had unto Gods wisdom, knowledge, goodness, liberty, justice,
mercy, and the like.

First, man in his perfect understanding, natural light, wisdom 1.
and knowledge, did resemble Gods wisdom, and knowledge of all things. For
man in his creation, and natural integrity did rightly know God and himself,
and did perfectly understand all the works, and the nature of all the
creatures of God, and what was good both for himself and them, so far as was
needful in his kind, and in that natural estate, and what was just for him to
do: and how to bear himself uprightly toward God and all his creatures. That
he had the knowledge and understanding of all these things sufficiently to make
him perfect and happy in that estate; and that there was no error or
ignorance in him of any thing which was meet for him to know, appears most
plainly by diverse things.

First, by Gods giving to man dominion and rule over all living creatures, and
putting him in the garden to dress it, and putting all the earth in Subjection
to him; which God would never have done, being infinitely wise and just, except
he had known man to be one who understood and knew the nature of the earth,
and all Herbs, Plants, and Trees in it; and by his reason, wisdom and
knowledge was able to rule all Creatures with discretion, and to order them
according to their several natures, and to dress the garden, and subdue the
earth.

Secondly, by Adams naming of all the Creatures, every one by such a name as
did show the nature of it; so that God did approve and confirm the names, Genesis
2. 19 and every Creature did in all likelihood come to Adam being called by
that name.

Thirdly, by the understanding which he had of the nature of the woman (when
God showed her to be formed of his Rib) and presently giving her the name
(...), Woman, or she Man, Genesis 2. 23.

Fourthly, by Adams free conversing with God, and hearing of his voice without
fear or dread; which was a strong evidence of an upright heart and pure
conscience, and that he knew God, and his goodness; and that though God was
greater then he could comprehend, yet God would not hurt him, but uphold him so
long as he did obey Gods will revealed to him.

Secondly, man did resemble God in the perfect liberty and freedom of his
will, and in the perfect conformity of it to the revealed (...).
and known will of God, and in the readiness and natural forwardness of it
to will whatsoever good was within his power, and of himself to will nothing
which was unjust and evil: by these things he resembled the free will and
liberty of God, and his justice and equity in all his doings. That man's will
was most free to good, and that he had power of will to obey God appears,

First by this, that the Law of God was written in his heart as the rule of his
life and actions; and that so deeply, that it remains Romans 2.
in the heart of his corrupt seed in some measure, and cannot be quite blotted
out. As he knew by his understanding and in his mind, so he was willing in his
heart, to will and to do all accordingly; and of himself would never have
fallen, if the Devil, that Spiritual wickedness, had not by the Serpent
seduced and deceived him.

Secondly, by the power and Dominion which God gave to him over all Creatures
visible; which he would not have done, if man had not been as ready in will, as
perfect in knowledge to rule them aright. It is not knowledge alone, but
uprightness of heart, and will, and power, and freedom to will just things
justly, which God requires to make an able and sufficient Ruler, as David 2 Samuel 23. (...).
testifies in his last words.

Thirdly, it is manifest by the commandment which God gave to man to be
obeyed under pain of death, which he being a good God would never have imposed
on man, if man's will had not been free and upright; for then he had laid a
snare which man could not have avoided; and had required more of man, then man
by his natural power was able to perform.

Thirdly, man was also conformable to God, and to his just (...).
will, goodness, purity and happiness, in all the desires and affections of
his heart and soul. He of himself desired no more but that which God gave him
and allowed him; he loved God as his Creator, and the author of all his good;
He did rejoice in Gods favor, love, and bounty; He delighted himself in all
the natural gifts which God had given him, and in the good creatures of God;
there was perfect Harmony and sweet consent between his reason, understanding,
will, and his desires and affections: whatsoever he knew to be good and just,
that he freely willed, desired and affected: there was no disorder, discord or
repugnancy and dissension in any power or faculty of Soul, or Body; no least
cause of grief, but all joy and content. And of himself he never would have
desired more then God had given, nor coveted an higher estate, if Satan had not
suggested such desire, and seduced him.

This, and indeed all the whole perfect uprightness of man in all the powers
and faculties of his Soul, in his understanding, will, desires and affections
is most clearly confirmed by plain testimonies of holy Scripture.

First, by the last verse of this Chapter, where it is said that when God had
created man Male and Female, and finished the Creation, he saw every thing
which he had made, and behold it was very good. If man was very good; then was
he upright in all the faculties of the Soul, in his understanding, will,
desires and affections, and there could be no discord among them; for that is
evil and miserable.

Secondly, we have the testimony of the wise Preacher Eccles. 7. 30. that God
made man upright, that is, in Original righteousness, conformable in his
upright reason, understanding, will and affections to the just revealed will of
God.

Thirdly, experience teaches that the things which make man ashamed, are
ignorance and error in mind and understanding, perverseness of will,
disorderly lusts and affections, and deformity and distemper either in Soul or
Body. Now Man and Woman had no cause of shame in them, neither were they
ashamed when they were naked and went uncovered in all parts, as we read
Chap. 2. 25. and therefore in the state of innocence all these causes of shame
were far from him, and he most free from them.

The Secondary conformity of man to God, which is in man In body. 1.
according to his Body, consists in things which belong to the body and to the
outward visible man.

First, we must not conceive, that God is any kind of body or bodily substance
(as blasphemous Vorstius and other Arminians have written) neither that God
has a form and shape like a man's body, as the Anthromorphites of old dreamed:
For it is manifest, that in him, who is infinite, and so present in all places,
that he is in his whole essence in every place; should have any difference, or
limitation or dimension, or measure of several parts, which is necessarily
required in the form, shape and substance of man's body and every bodily thing.

But yet, because in the most wise, and artificial frame, and 2.
natural temper of man's body; and the most fit disposition, and order of all
parts, by which it is a fit subject for a reasonable Soul, and the principal
parts of it fit instruments for the several faculties of the Soul, whereby to
perform their many and several works and operations the wisdom, power, and
goodness of God did shine forth of man's body, more then in all visible
creatures; and the Image of God appeared in it. Man's eyes, sight, and all
outward senses did represent Gods omniscience and knowledge of all things; his
hands did show and represent Gods power to do and work whatsoever he will; his
arms did represent Gods strength and power to save his People, and to destroy
his enemies; The beauty, comeliness, and natural majesty which appeared in
man's body and upright stature, by which he did overlooke all creatures, as one
most fit to rule them, did show forth and represent the glory and majesty of
God and his Lordship, dominion, providence and power, by which he governs all
things. In a word, though man's body was mutable in the Creation and state of
innocence, and might fall from that state: yet so long as man did continue in
that state, and did not sin, he had that lively vigor, and perfect temper of
body, which did free him from death, and all evils which tend to hurt and
destruction; which also was able to uphold him in life and strength for ever,
if sin had not entered, and so in some sort he was immortal and impassible, not
subject to death or any passion and suffering of hurt and evil in his body,
and so there was in his body some likeness of Gods immortality.

For proof of this we have good arguments in Scripture: First, God himself
shows that murder, and shedding of man's blood is a defacing of his Image in
which he created man; and for that cause he threatens revenge of murder, and
of violence offered to Man's blood, Genesis 9. 5, 6. Now murder and shedding of
man's blood ^s a defacing of man's body; therefore the body also is a secondarie
Image of God.

Secondly, the Scriptures which set forth Gods attributes and workings by
several parts of man's body; as his omniscience and providence by Eyes, Psalm.
33. 18. 2. Cron. 16. 9. his activity and working by Hands, as Exodus 15. 16.
Psalm. 44. 3. Isa. 51. 9. his love, and mercy by Bowels, as Isa. 63. 15. Jer.
31. 20. his punishing and revenging Justice by breath of mouth and nostrills
Psalm. 38. 15. and Isa. 11. 4. his secret thoughts, counsels and purposes by
Heart, Psalm. 33. 11. his utterance of his mind and will by Mouth, Jer. 9. 12.
these Metaphors do show that the body of man and chief parts of it have some
similitude of Gods attributes and works, and so man's body is secondarily the
Image and likeness of God.

Thirdly, the Scriptures show that death is the wages of Sin, and all mortality
and subjection to evils and passions, which tend to hurt and corruption came
in by man's disobedience and fall, as appears, Romans 5. 12. and 6. 23. and by
Gods, commination, Genesis 2. 19. But in the Creation and state of innocence man
had in him no Sin, nor any inclination of himself to any evil or Sin;
therefore he was after a sort ^mmortall and incorruptible in his body, and had
even in it a similitude of Gods immortality.

Fourthly, the body was in all things conformable to the Soul, fit and ready
in all things to follow the motions of the Soul, to be directed and moved by
the upright reason will and affections, and to do all works unto which they
move it; and therefore as the Soul was made in the primary Image and
likeness; so the body in the secondary Image and likeness of God.

Lastly, to conclude this doctrine of Gods Image in which man was created, we
may not unfitly affirm, and with good reason hold; that though man in the
state of innocence, before the promise of Christ, had no Supernatural gifts,
nor any part of the Spiritual Image of the second Adam; but was only a
perfect natural man, and not immediately, and proxima potentia capable of
supernatural grace, nor of the Divine nature: yet because his nature and whole
frame was such as had a possibility, or remote power, to be made partaker of
the Holy Ghost; united to God in Christ, and made pattaker of the Divine
nature, and a new creature, or new man framed after God; therefore he in this
respect may be said to be Created in the Image of God; that is in such a form,
and of such a nature, as had a possibility to become like unto Christ, and a
new creature made in the Spiritual Image of God.

Now this Doctrine of Gods Image briefly and compendiously Use
proved in all parts, is of excellent use.

First this discovers the infinite riches of the bounty of God passing 1.
Riches of Gods bounty to man.
all bounds; and declares his goodness to be like a great deep which can never
be sounded, in that he has overcome all our evil and malice toward him with
his great goodness to us, and and when we had forfeited our being, and his
Image in which he created us good and perfect with all natural perfections,
and did justly deserve to degenerate and be turned into the Image of the
Devil, and to become in the likeness of his malice, and and misery; he out of
his own mere mercy and free grace and bounty, did give his Son, and the
Son did freely undertake to humble himself, to become a second Adam, made in
a better Image, even an heavenly and spiritual, that he might not only
suspend the execution of Gods just sentence upon mankind, and procure to the
first Adam and all his posterity the continuance of their natural being for a
time, and of some relics of the Image which they had wholly forfeited: but
also might renew a great number chosen out of mankind, and restore them to a
better, even an heavenly Image; by transforming and changing them into his
spiritual and supernatural Image, and making them conformable to it, and
partakers of the Divine nature, by the mysticail dwelling and powerful
operation of his spirit in them. Here is that which may dazzle the eyes of men,
and the sight of Angels, when they look into it; and which may astonish all
hearts of men, and confound all humane reason, when they think of it, and
hear it preached; That God infinitely just and holy, to hate and punish Sin,
should, by our evil, and Sin committed against him and his just will and Law,
take occasion to be more good, and to show greater goodness to us; and when
we deserved, to have no being but in Hell and eternal misery; has raised us
up to the spiritual state of grace, from which we cannot be hurled and cast
down by all the powers of darkness, and by which we shall ascend to the
blessed state of Heavenly and Eternal glory. Here is love surpassing all
knowledge, the depth whereof we may admire, and adore in silence; but neither
can our hearts conceive, nor our tongues express the fullness thereof.

Secondly, this former discourse shows, what a vain and foolish 2. Use Not to
stick in received opinions, as unerring.
thing it is for Christian people, to be so wedded to the opinions of godly
learned men in all points, which have been formerly received and commonly
believed; or to be so strongly conceipted and persuaded of their full
understanding and perfect knowledge of all the Scriptures, and of all truth
taught in the written word of GOD; that whatsoever they have taught, and
commonly held, they will cleave too till death; and they will receive and
embrace no truth, nor any exposition of any Scripture, which has not been
before observed, taught and published in the Sermons and writings of the godly
learned Ancient Fathers, and the soundest Orthodox modern Divines. I confess
the Scriptures alone, daily read and heard by men of ordinary capacity and
learning, are able to make them wise to Salvation; For the way to life may
easily be discerned by their guidance, and direction. But there are degrees of
knowledge, and diverse measures of gifts; and when a man knows enough to bring
him on in an ordinary way to life, yet there is still more knowledge to be
learned, and a greater depth of knowledge to be found in the Scriptures which
are doubtful, obscure, and more hard to be understood; and many new
expositions of diverse places, which more plainly and fully confirm solid
truths formerly believed; which he that searches out and discovers, does
thereby get more strength in faith, and growth in grace, and more spiritual
joy and comfort, and runs on faster and more speedily and steadfastly in the
way to Salvation. We see here for example, the common opinion of Ancient and
modern writers to go current; that there is but one kind of Image of God in
man; and that the Image unto which Christ restores us, is the very same in
which Adam was created; that Adam had power by that Image to obtain Heavenly
glory, and to grow up to that estate, which the elect Saints come to in Christ;
that Christ restores no more but that which Adam lost, and unto which he should
have attained after some time of continuance in innocence; that he was created
in holiness as well as Christ, and true Christians are, and so partaker of the
Holy Ghost. And when any thing is taught out of the Scriptures to the contrary,
many mouths, even of more learned men, are opened to gainsay and oppose: And
yet you see the Scriptures more narrowly sifted do teach most plainly to the
contrary, and have not any plain speech tending to prove these common
opinions: yea the Scriptures which are alleged for them, and are so applied
and expounded, do prove the contrary, if they be well weighed and considered
with a clear judgment, not forestalled with prejudice and partiality:
wherefore let us wholly depend on Gods word, and not on men's reason or
jugdement to subject either the Scriptures or the sense of them thereunto; and
let us still more and more thirst after increase of knowledge and understanding
of Divine truths hid in the harder places of Gods written word, knowing that
these are the last times wherein knowledge shall be increased, as we read,
Dan. 12. 4. Let us not consider the Person which preaches and teaches, but
what is by him taught. If new expositions and Doctrines, not formerly taught,
yea crossing the common opinions, be proved by better grounds and clearer
evidence of Scripture, and tend more to advance other saving truths, to beat
down errors, and to increase Piety, and godly affection in men; let men take
heed, and beware of rash opposition and gainesaying, lest they be found to
fight against God, while they stand Act. 5.
too much for the authority of men, though such as have been holy and godly
servants of Christ, and famous in their generations.

Thirdly, this doctrine of Gods Image in Adam does both discover Use 3. Of
confutation of erroneous opinions.
and also minister strong arguments whereby to confute diverse erroneous
opinions much dissenting, and dissonant from the solid truth and word of God,
to wit, not only those mentioned before, but others also; as, that Gods Image
was only original righteousness or justice, and that the natural faculties
of Soul and Body did not concur to it; that the whole Image of God in Adam
was utterly lost by his fall, and is quite abolished till it be repaired and
restored by Christ, with diverse others of the same stamp; concerning which I
find many hot disputations among the learned; all which appear superfluous,
if this doctrine were well weighed, and made a rule whereby to measure them;
for it will, like a just measure, show which of them come short, and which go
too far beyond the truth and true line of holy Scriptures.

Lastly, in this we see as in a clear glass the dignity and Use 4.
Excellency of man to be hence noted.
excellency of humane nature, above the nature of all other visible creatures;
in that he was made completely in Gods Image, and conformable to God, and like
to him in his whole frame, and in all faculties of Soul, and parts and members
of body: And let this stir us up to walk worthy, and beseeming such a nature
and frame, and labor to keep both our whole Soul and Spirit, and all members
of our bodies unspotted and unstained with sin, which is the defacing of Gods
Image: and let us reverence Gods Image in other men, especially seeing it is
repaired and made of a better kind by Christ, and above all take heed of
cruelty and of defacing Gods Image in any part, by cuting of members and
mangling the bodies of men, especially of Gods Saints whose bodies are Temples
and Tabernacles of God by his Spirit.

Thus much concerning the first external work of God, the creation and the
state wherein God created man, and wherein the state of Innocence did consist.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the actual providence of God. The Object of it. What the word signifies:
in 3. things. Proof that there is a providence: by Texts, and Arguments.
Description, showing what it is: demonstrated in the parts, and branches of it.
Providence general and special: Acts of it. Special providence in saving the
elect by Christ, what: and in what parts. Uses.

THe next great external work of God after the creation, is his actual
providence, by which he does rule and dispose all things created, and does
order all actions which are done, and all events which come to pass in the
World, to the manifestation of his glorious goodness.

This great work of God does reach through all other external Object of
providence.
works, which are done either by God himself or any other; and does comprehend
with in the compass of it all Gods works which he does in the World, whether
they be works of wisdom and power in ruling and preserving his creatures, or
works of justice in punishing and destroying, or works of mercy and grace in
redeeming repairing and saving the World; and in bringing his chosen to
eternal blessedness. Yea there is no work done, nor any event which comes to
pass at any time, or in any age of the World; which God does not overrule and
order by his providence. For, as he is infinite in wisdom and power, able to
decree and ordain from all eternity all things most wisely, and to create and
bring to pass all things according to the counsel of his will by a mighty
hand of power, which cannot be resisted. So also he is wonderful in
goodness and bounty, to provide, most carefully all things needful in
abundance, for the being and welbeing of his creatures, and to order govern
and dispose all things good and evil, most wisely to the good of his elect,
the just punishment and destruction of the wicked, and to his own glory.

Wherefore that we may better understand this point, and proceed profitably in
the handling of it. We are first to consider the signification of the name, and
the true sense of the word; And after to insist upon the thing it self, and to
define and describe this actual providence of God.

The word providence is sometimes taken in a large sense, and What the word
signifies.
signifies Gods care and respect of all creatures; both in decreeing, and
ordaining their being and all things which befall them, and in executing his
eternal decree according to the counsel of his own will; for in all these
things God did show a provident care and respect.

Sometimes the word is used more strictly and that three 1.
ways.

First, for the provident care and respect of God in decreeing things for the
best, that they should so come to pass as they have done, or shall do at any
time hereafter, of this providence the Apostle speaks Hebr. 11. 40. where he
says, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect, this may be called Gods providence in willing and
decreeing.

Secondly, it signifies Gods provident care, which he showed 2.
in the creation of the World, and all things therein. For he first created
things above which could subsist, and be perfect by themselves without the
inferior elements and the creatures in them, as the highest heavens, and their
inhabitants the Angels; then he created the visible heavens, which might be
ready by their light to be of use for other things below in such measure as
was needful; then he created the spacious regions of the air, through which
that light might shine to other elements, and all creatures which he was about
to create in them; and before he created any living creatures, which could not
well subsist nor move themselves without greater light then that of the naked
heavens, he created the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which might both give light
sufficient to those creatures, and also might cherish and comfort them and all
other things, which were made to serve for their use. And before he created
mankind male and female in his own image, fit to rule under him in the
inferior World, he prepared and made ready for them all creatures, which they
might rule over; all kinds of delicate food in great variety and abundance,
and a Lordly palace and place of pleasure wherein to dwell, in which he put
them so soon as they were created. As God in all this showed his provident
care for man and all creatures, to make them every one perfect in their kind
with natural perfection in the creation: so I have noted this his actual
providence in the several passages of the creation and have unfolded it so
far as for the present was necessary.

Thirdly, this word is frequently used to signify Gods provident care in
ordering and governing the whole created World, 3.
and preserving all creatures therein, and in disposing every thing which does
befall them and come to pass in the World, to some good end, according to the
counsel of his own will. This is the actual providence which now comes to
be distinctly handled, and unfolded in the next place after the creation.

But before I come to describe this providence of God, and to Proof that
providence is.
lay open the nature, object, several parts and kinds of it, I hold it
necessary to prove clearly out of the holy Scriptures, that there is in God
such a providence and provident care, which he does show and exercise in the
ruling and governing of the whole World, and ordering, and disposing all things
to their several ends; And that God is not a careless, sleepie and slumbering
one, who does neglect, and not see, regard, and care for any things here below,
as some blind fools, desperate Atheists, and wicked Men have imagined and
spoken, as the Psalmist shows, Psalm 10. 11. 13. and 94. 7. who say, that
the Lord does not see, God has forgotten, ^ee hides his face, he will never
see, nor regard, nor require what is done among men in the World.

For the manifest proof of Gods providence, I will first rehearse some notable
testimonies, even plain texts of holy Scripture, which being laid together may
minister to us sufficient matter, and occasion, to describe and set forth the
actual providence of God, and all things wherein it does consist, and which
thereto belong.

Psalm 14. 2. The Lord looks down from heaven upon Texts of Scripture which
set forth Gods actual providence.
the Children of men to see if there be any that do understand and seek
after God.

Psalm 33. 13, 14, 15. The Lord loooketh from heaven, he beholds all the
Sons of men, from the place of his habitation, he looks upon all the
inhabitants of the Earth. He fashioneth all their hearts alike, he
considers all their works.

Psalm 34. 15, 16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears
are open unto their cry. The face of the Lord is against them, that do evil
to cut off the remembrance of them from the Earth.

Psalm 36. 6. Thy judgments O Lord are a great deep* thou preservest man and
beasts.

Psalm 104. 27, 28, 29, 30. All living things wait upon the Lord, that he may
give them their meat in due season. He gives to them, and they gather it; he
opens his hand, and they are filled with good, when he hides his face they
are troubled, when he takes away their breath they dye and return to their
dust; when he sends forth his Spirit they are created, and he renueth the
face of the Earth.

Psalm 113. 5. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high. 6. Who
humbles himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and in Earth. 7. He
raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill,
that he may set him with Princes.

Psalm 138. 6. Though the Lord b^ high: yet he has respect to the lowly.

Job 13. 7. But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach; and the fowls of
the Air, and they shall tell thee. 8. Or speak to the Earth, and it shall
teach thee; and the fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. 9. Who knows
not in all these, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this. 10 In whose hand
is the soul of every living thing and the breath of all mankind.

2 Chronicles, 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the Earth, to
show himself strong for them whose Heart is perfect.

Isa. 41. 22. and 4^. 8, 9. The Lord proves himself to be the only true God
by his provident care over all things, and his foresight and prediction of
things which afterward he brings to pass; and that Idols are no Gods,
because they cannot do any such things.

Matthew. 6. 26. Behold the fowls of the Air, they sow not, neither do they
reap, nor gather into barnes; yet your heavenly Father feeds them.

Matthew. 10. 29, 30. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and not one of
them shall fall on the ground without your Father; But the very hairs of your
head are all numbered.

Hebr. 4. 13. All things are naked, and opened to his eyes, neither is there
any creature, which is not manifest in his sight.

1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast your care upon him for he cares for you.

These texts laid together do abundantly show Gods actual providence, and
the extent of it to all things created, and do Minister to us every Doctrine
which concerns the object, parts, and kinds of it.

And besides these Scriptures, we have strong Arguments to prove the actual
providence of God.

First, he who is the Omnipotent Creator, Lord, and Possessor of Heaven and
Earth, and all things therein, infinite in Arg. 1.
wisdom, knowledge, goodness, mercy, justice, must needs have a provident
care to order, rule, dispose, and preserve all things which belong to him: Now
such a one is God, as I have abundantly proved before in unfolding his
attributes; he is infinite in power, wisdom, knowledge, goodness, and the
like; the Creator and supreme Lord of all things. The whole World is his, and
all things therein belong to him; Psalm 50. 12. Therefore, undoubtedly, he
has a provident care of all, and an eye and hand in ordering all things.

Secondly, the works which God does, and the things Arg. 2.
which he brings to pass in the World, do show his wi^e care and providence.
He gives rain in due season for a blessing to his obedient people; and he
withholdeth it from the wicked for a just punishment, and makes their heaven as
brass, and their Earth as iron; he blesses men in their basket and store, and
in the increase of their cattle and the fruit of their ground; and he again
for sin makes fruitful lands barren, and destroys their cattle with
murraine and with thunderbolts, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Job 12. 12. Psalm, 107.
34. By him Kings are set up to rule, and Princes and Judges to execute justice,
and to judge, not for themselves but for him, Prove. 8. 15. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. He
breaks down and shuts up, and none can resist him, he leads
counselors away spoiled, and makes Judges fools; He loses the band of
Kings, and pours contempt upon Princes; He increases he nations and
destroys them, he enlarges the nations and straiteneth them, Job 12. 14,
and all Kingdoms are disposed by him, Dan. 2. 37.

Thirdly, the miracles which God works by them who Arg. 3.
call upon his name, and the extraordinary things which come to pass, whereof
there is no natural cause, nor any cause at all but his own will, and
pleasure, and provident hand do prove the same. The miracles and wonders which
he showed in Egypt and the wilderness, so often as Moses called and prayed
unto him: His staying of the Sun for a whole day at Iosh^ah's prayer, Josh. 10.
His thundering on the Philistines at the prayer of Samuel, 1 Samuel 7. 10. His
raising of the dead at the prayer of his Prophets and Apostles, 1 King. 17. 2
King. 4. and Act. 9. His giving of heroical gifts, strength, and courage
beyond all humane reason to some men for the deliverance of his oppressed
People, as to Samson, David, and his worthies, and diverse others. All these
show Gods watchful care over the World, and his actual providence, ordering
and disposing all things.

This point thus, proved, as it serves to discover the impiety, Use Of
confutation and ^eproofe.
profaneness and desperate blindness of Epicures, who utterly reject and deny
the whole providence of God; and those desperate Atheists, such as Caligula,
Nere, and others, who scoffed and derided all them who taught and believed it;
and those heathen Philosophers, who held that God had no care or respect of
things under heaven, but blind fortune ruled here below; and all things here
are casual and come by chance: So it admonishes us and all men to beware of
giving way to such doubts and fears of infirmity which their own corrupt
flesh, or Satan by mears thereof does suggest into their hearts to weaken and
destroy their faith in Gods Providence: Let no man admit such a thought into
his heart, That God has forgotten to be gracious, and that it is in vain to
serve God: there is no profit in walking humbly before him, in keeping his
ordinance, in men's purging their hearts, and washing their hands in innocence;
because they that work wickedness and tempt God do prosper, and they who
deal trecherously are set up, and exalted. But above all, let us abhor all
presuming conceits, that all things come to pass by blind chance, and God
does not see nor regard our wicked thoughts, purposes, and practices; neither
will he call us to account for them. For what is this, but to deny the Lord to
be God? It is even the way to pull speedy wrath, and vengeance on our own
heads.

Gods providence being proved, that it is: I proceed to show by way of plain
description what it is; and wherein it does consist. The sum of which
description is this.

The actual providence of God is Gods exercise of his wisdom, power,
goodness, justice, and mercy in ruling, ordering, and governing Description of
Gods actual providence.
the whole World, in watching over all his creatures with a careful eye, in
doing all good, and permitting all evil which are done in the World; and in
disposing all things, good and evil, to the manifestation of his glory, and
the eternal salvation of his elect in Christ, according to his own eternal
purpose and the counsel of his will.

This description consists of two maine and principal parts. The first
shows, what Gods actual providence is in general, in these words, Gods
exercise of his wisdom, power, goodness, justice and mercy. The second
shows the special nature of it, and the special things wherein it does
consist, and whereby it is distinguished from all Gods other outward actions,
and exercises of his wisdom, power, and goodness. This is comprised in the
rest of the words.

First, it is Gods exercise of his wisdom, power, goodness, mercy and
justice and in this it agrees with the creation, and all other Parts 1.
outward actions of God, for every such action is either an exercise of his
wisdom, or of his power, or of his goodness, or of his mercy, or of his
justice, or of all, or the most part of them all together. And indeed Gods
actual providence bears sway in all his outward actions, which he does
either immediately by himself, or mediatly by the ministry of his subordinate
instruments; and it also over-ruleth and disposes things which are evil,
which are not done by God himself moving the doers of them; but come to pass
by the permission and sufferance of him, wittingly, and willingly suffering his
creatures to abuse the power which they have from him. This point is manifest
by the Lords own words, Isa. 45. 7. where he says, I form the light and
create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these
things: And by that speech of the Prophet Amos. Chap. 3. 6. Shall there be
evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it.

The true sense and meaning of which words Saint Augustine Enchirid. ad Laur.
c. 95.
does notably express; where he says, nothing is done, unless God omnipotent
does will that it be done, either by doing it himself, or suffering it to be
done; for it could not be done if he did not suffer it; neither verily does he
unwillingly without or against his will: but willingly and with his will suffer
every thing to be. To which purpose he has diverse other speeches; as that God
being good would not suffer any evil to be done, unless as he is omnipotent
he could bring good out of them; neither is that done without Gods will which
is done against his will, that is, his word and approbation.

In the second maine part there are diverse special branches 2. Branches in
particular.
showing the special things whereby Gods actual providence is distinguished
from his other outward actions. The first is, that it consists in Gods ruling
ordering and governing the whole World, and watching over his creatures with a
careful eye. The second, that it comprehends in it Gods doing of all good, and
his permission, and suffering of all evil. The third, that by it God disposes
all things, which are done in the World to the manifestation of his glory, and
the eternal salvation of his elect in Christ. The fourth and last is, that it
is no other exercise of wisdom, power, goodness, mercy, and justice, but in
executing things which he has decreed from all eternity, even ruling,
ordering, and disposing all things wisely after the counsel of his own will.

For the first point to wit, that God exercises his actual 1.
providence in ruling, ordering, and disposing, the whole World and all therein
as supreme Lord, King. Judge, and Ruler thereof; the Scriptures abundantly
testify, as Genesis 18. 25. and Psalm. 50. 6. Psalm. 82. 1. and 2. Chron. 19. 6.
where God is said to be the Judge of all the Earth; yea the Judge both in
Heaven and Earth, who sits chief among all Judges and is with them in the
judgment. Also in those places where the Kingdom, Dominion, and Rule over all
is said to belong to God, and he is said to be the King which reigns and
rules all to the utmost ends of the Earth, yea to be a great King above all
Gods; and the only potentate King of Kings and Lord of Lords, as I Chron. 29.
10. 11. Psalm. 10. 16. and 29. 10. and 4. 27. and 95. 3. and his Kingdom is
said to rule over all, Psalm. 103, 19, and that not for a time, but from
generation to generation, Psalm, 145. 13. It is he who sets bounds to the
tumultuous Seas beyond which they cannot pass, Job 38. 8. Psalm. 104. 9. and
rules over the raging waves, Psalm. 89. 9. and stilleth th^^ when they arise.
And that he has a watchful eye over all creatures, even to preserve man and
beast, it appears Psalm. 36. 6. and that as his eyes are upon them that fear
him, and hope in his mercy to deliver their soul from death, and to keep^ them
alive in famine, Psalm. 33. 18. 19 So his face is against them that do evil,
to cut off the remembrance of them, Psalm. 34. 16.

The second point is, that Gods providence is exercised both in the doing of
all good, and in permitting, and suffering wittingly 2.
and willingly all evil, which comes to pass in the World, and so it
consists of two parts, action, and permission. This also is fully proved and
confirmed, Isa. 41. 23. and 45. 7. where the Lord proves himself to be the
only true God by disposing all things, both forming the light, and making
peace by his active hand and power; and also creating evil and darkness, by
permitting and giving up the Devil and his wicked instruments to abuse his
power, which he has given them to do evil and to work wickedness as we
see in Pharaoh whose heart he is said to harden, yea and to raise him up, by
giving him up to his own lusts, and into the hand of Satan who hardened him
and made his heart obdurate; so that the more God plagued him with great
plagues, which naturally tend to break a stout heart, and to pull down pride;
the more did his corruption rise up and rebel, and the more did Satan stir
him up against God, and his people; and made him run desperately into the
devouring gulf of destruction. We see this also in Gods permitting Satan to
afflict Job, and to tempt him to blasphemy by stripping him naked of all that
he had; tormenting his body, and battering his soul with sore temptations of
his wife and friends, and with skaring dreams and terrible visions as we
read, Job 1. and 2. and 7. 14. Also the Apostle in express words affirms,
that God being provoked by men's wilful sins, does in just wrath give them to
uncleanesse through the lusts of their own hearts, and to vile affections and
a reprobate mind to work all iniquity with greediness, Romans 1. 24, 26, 28.
and does give them the Spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see and
ears that they should not hear. Romans 11. 8. not by putting such a Spirit into
them, so as he sheddeth his Spirit on men through Christ, but by suffering
Satan, the Spirit of lying, and of all blindness and wickedness to enter into
them (which he would do into all men, if God did not restrain him); and by
casting them out of his protection; as we see in the evil Spirit which vexed
Saul, and in the lying Spirit which deceived Ahab by entering into his Prophets
and speaking lies by their mouths, 1 Samuel 16. 14. and 2 King. 22. 22. And thus
we see, that in all evils of sin Gods providence is exercised by way of
voluntary permission. But as for all good things which come to pass, God has
in them an approving will, and a working hand, and works in men both to will
and to do; yea every thought and purpose of good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Philip. 2. 13.
and without him we can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. So that in all moral duties,
and in all good and godly works, God works in men by his Spirit immediately,
and gives them, hearts will and power to do them, and they are but his
instruments to perform these good things, as Joseph professes ascribing all
his piety and charity which he showed in nourishing his brethren and their
families to God. And all natural good things, God works either immediately by
his own hand alone, as in the creation, wherein he gave being to all things
without any means at all: or by instruments and means which he himself has
first created, he gives light by the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and by them,
and the whole Heavens which are turned about by his counsels, and by their
influ^nce he refreshes and nourishes all creatures on Earth; and also does
by them both use correction and show mercy, Job 37. 12, 13. and Matthew. 5. 45.

There are besides these other things, which are good and profitable, not
simply in their own nature, but by accident and in some respect, as for
example, for men to abstain from marriage and from begetting children for the
increase of mankind is not a thing naturally or morally good in it self, being
a refraining from the use of Gods ordinance; but yet in case of urgent
necessity, when Gods Ministers and Servants do live in times and places of
persecution, and are driven to flee and wander from place to place naked, and
destitute of means, whereby to maintain Wives, and Children; Saint Paul tells
us, it is good for a Man to live single, and not to touch a Woman, 1 Cor. 7. 1,
35. for by this means he shall avoid much distraction, and more freely attend
the service of God. Also for men to fast, and afflict their bodies by
abstaining from comfortable nourishment, and necessary food for a time is not
simply good in it self: but yet it is profitable for taming the proud and
rebellious flesh, and for furthering of our humiliation in times of private and
public calamities, when Gods hand is heavy upon us, or upon our Land, and the
fear of his threatening judgments which hang over our heads do terrify us,
these and such like are called good things, that is, profitable, expedient, and
by accident, and in some respect and condition good.

Other things there be which in their own nature are evil and hurtful, and
evils of affliction and punishment, as crosses of Gods people, and plagues
which though they hurt and destroy the outward man and the flesh, yet by God
grace they work to the saving of their souls, and the amendment of their
lives as we read Psalm 119. 67, 71. and 1 Cor. 5. 5. and 11. 32. and in that
respect are called good. And the plagues and destructions which befall the
wicked, which to them are dreadful and woeful evils and curses; but as they
tend to the deliverance of Gods Church from their (...)rsecutions and
oppressions; to the purging of his land; and the magnifying of Gods justice and
power; so they are good in the issue and event, and in respect of Gods purpose
intending good by them.

Now in all these, God has an active and working band, as well as a permitting
will; and his actual providence rules in them. He gives men the gift of
continency, and power over their own wills to live single, and to make
themselves Eunuchs for his Kingdoms sake as our Saviors words show, Matthew.
19. 11, 12. and the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 37. He calls upon men in
his word, and by his grace stirs them up to fasting, weeping, mourning, and
afflicting of their bodies for the greater humiliation of their souls. Joel.
1. 14. and 2. 12. and Zach. 12. 10. He does sometimes by his own hand afflict
his people when he sends among them sore diseases which are the stroke of his
hand. Job 36. 18. and Psalm 39. 10. and by his own immediate hand he strikes
and consumes the wicked. Job 34. 25, 26. as we see in the drowning of the old
World, in the destruction of Pharaoh, Ananias, and Saphyra, and diverse others.
Sometimes he does by good instruments afflict and punish his people, and
plague and consume the wicked; as by his Angel he punished Isreal's sin and
David's pride. 2 Samuel 24. 17. and destroyed the host of Senacherib, 2 King. 19.
and smotte Herod, Act. 12. And by Joshua, Moses, David, destroyed the
Canaanites and the Philistines, and other enemies of his Church. Sometimes by
evil instruments he afflicts and punishes his own people, and plagueth
and destroys the wicked; by Absalom and Shimei he punished David, and by
wicked Jehu he destroyed the wicked family of Ahab; by Satan and the wicked
Sabaeans and Chald^ans he afflicted and tried Job; and by the proud King of
Ashur he punished Israel and Judah, and destroyed the Idolatrous nations as
appears Isa. 10. where he is called the rod of Gods wrath, and proud
Nebuchadnezar is called his servant in punishing his people the Jews, and
destroying the obstinate among them, and in crushing the wicked nations, Ier.
25. 9. For he in whom all do live, move, and have all being, Act. 17. 28. gave
to those wicked Kings power and might; and though their own lusts, and
unsatiable desire and ambition stirred them up, and so ^he act was in the
wicked themselves, yet he overruled and disposed their malice to perform his
purpose, and to execute his most just judgments.

And thus we see, that Gods actions are most wise and just in those evils
which he executes by wicked instruments, and that which they do with a
wicked mind and for an evil end; God does justly give them power to do, and
permits them to abuse his power, to their own ends, when he purposes to
direct all to a good end, and so does. And therefore though no evil is done in
the World, but by his providence; yet is he no author or efficient cause of
sin: the sinfulness of the action is of the evil instruments and the power of
it, and the disposing of it to good, that only is Gods. And although men who
are limited Romans 3. 8.
by Gods law, may do no least sin or evil for a good end, that greatest good
may come thereof, and if they do, it is sin in them; yet God, who is supreme
Lord of all, and whose will is the rule of all righteousness, and who by his
omnipotency can raise out of the greatest evil a far greater good, and can
make the Devils malice and man's fall, the occasion of bringing Christ into the
World, and a way to show his infinite goodness and mercy in saving and
redeeming his elect, and to magnify his glorious power and justice in their
eyes, by destroying the wicked with eternal destruction, the sight whereof
brings them to a more full fruition of his glory, and makes them far more
sensible of his goodness to them, and of their own eternal blessedness; he
may do what seems good to his heavenly wisdom: and evil so far as he
wills it, and has an hand in the ordering of it, is no sin, but does more
show his goodness, and unspotted purity, and holiness.

The third thing is, that God by his actual providence disposes all things
which are done in the World, to the manifestation of 3.
his glory, and the eternal salvation of his elect in Christ. The glory of God
is two ways made manifest by his actual providence.

First, in a more general way, by a more general providence. Gods actual
providence is general or special. 1.
Secondly, by a more special way, which is called his special providence.

First, by the general, the whole World is ruled by an universal motion, and
all things in the World, every one according to the proper nature and natural
disposition and inclination of it. For, as the Apostle says, He gives to all
life, and breath, and all things; and in him we all live, move and have our
being, Act. 17. 25, 28. He by his mighty word sustaineth all things, Hebr. 1.
3. His name is excellent in all the World, in which he shows his glory,
Psalm 8. 1. The Heavens declare his glory, and the firmament shows his
handy-worke: day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge; and that by the Suns going round about the World, and discovering by
his light all things from one end of Heaven and Earth to another, Psalm 19. 1,
2.

This general providence appears, First, by his consecration of things.
Secondly, by his destruction of so many as he in his just will and judgment
thinks fit. Thirdly, by his governing of all things according to his eternal
counsel, and just will.

First, he does universally conserve and uphold all things Gods conservation
of his creatures.
in the World, by the light, motion and influence which he has given to the
heavens in the creation; which are continually turned about by his counsels,
that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the face of the World in
the Earth, Job 37. 12. He makes his Sun to shine on the evil and on the
good, and sends rain on the just and unjust, Matthew. 5. 45. He gives food
to all flesh, Psalm 136. 27. H^^ gives meat to the beasts, and feeds the
young ravens which cry, Psalm 147. 9. He provideth for the fowls of the air
their food, though they neither sow, nor reap; and cloatheth the grass of the
field, Matthew. 6. 26, 30.

This conservation is, first, by succession. For when any creatures 1. By
Succession.
pass away, he makes others of their race and kind to succeed by a
continual generation and propagation, as it were by a continued creation. The
forming and fashioning of men in the womb is ascribed to him, Job 10. 8. 9,
10. and 31. 15. and Psalm 139. 13. So that as men and other living creatures
dye; their off spring and progeny succeed in their place, and by this means,
he does renew the face of the Earth, Psalm 104. 30. and not only one
generation of living creatures passes away, and another comes in the place,
so that the earth is always replenished; but day and night succeed continually
by the going and returning of the Sun; and the wind whorleth about continually
going and returning according to his circuits; The waters do all run into the
Sea, and yet the Rivers are supplied by springs which come from the Sea, by
secret passages under the Earth, as the Wiseman shows, Eccles. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.

Secondly, he preserves all things universally by changing 2. By mutation.
mutable things from an evil to a good, and from a less good to a better
condition. He girdeth the weak with strength, Job 12. 18. 1 Samuel 2. 4. He
makes the barren womb fruitful, Psalm 113. 9. He turns the wilderness
into standing pooles of water, and dry ground into water springs, and makes
the barren desert a fruitful field, Psalm 107. 35. Isa. 41. 18. and 51. 3.
He raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, 1 Samuel 2. 8. and Psalm 113. 7. And because the universality of
creatures cannot be preserved without Gods careful keeping and preserving
every particular; therefore God has an eye to every singular thing, and his
provident hand is reached forth to every one of them, in so much that our
hairs are numbered; and not one small sparrow can fall on the ground without
him, Matthew. 10. 29, 30. He clothed the grass of the field, even every
Lilly, Matthew. 6. 30. He reckons up our tears, Psalm 56. 9. and is with
every one in his going out and coming in; in his down sitting and uprising,
Psalm 139. 1. 2. Isa. 27. 28.

Secondly, his general providence appears, and is exercised in the
destruction which he himself according to 2. Gods destroying of creatures.
his just will brings upon the whole Earth, or upon whole Nations and Cities,
or upon some notable persons. The destruction of the whole World in the days
of Noah came by his hand and providence, for he said, Behold I will bring a
flood of waters and will destroy all flesh, Genesis 6. 13. and he foretold his
purpose so to do an hundred years before. And the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrha was by fire which he rained upon them, Genesis 19. He smotte Egypt with
plagues and destroyed the first borne, and also Pharaoh and his host, Exodus 12.
and 14. Psalm 135. 10. And the Cana^nites by Joshua and Israel, Josh. 10. and
11. and Senacheribs host. 2 King. 19. And the murmuring Israelites together
with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Number. 16. Vzzah, 2. Sam. 6. 6. Herod. Act. 12.
and many others. By this destroying, and abolishing of men and other creatures,
and by his consuming and wasting of them; by smitting the earth with
barrenness, and sending pestilence, and war, he makes men know, that he is
Jehovah the righteous Judge, and the Nations to see and feel that they are,
but mortal men as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm 9 21. and 46. 11.

Thirdly this general providence is seen in his government Gods governing of
his creatures.
of all things, according to his own just will and good pleasure; He does
after a general manner rule inferior things by the light and influence of the
Heavens, and of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; By the Sun he rules the day, and
by the Moon and Stars he governes the night, Psalm 136. 8. 9. And as his
eyes are upon all things, and upon all the ways and works of men; so he
fashioneth their hearts, Psalm 33. 15. He keeps the waters of the Sea
within their bounds beyond which they do not pass, Psalm 104. 9. He has a
set time and season for every thing, and for every purpose under Heaven,
Eccles. 3. 1. And this government he exercises by motion and direction of
motions; and by cohibition.

First, by motion, for he moves all things, not only the minds 1. By motion.
and wills of men by turning their hearts at his pleasure, Ier. 12. 24. Act. 17.
28. Psalm 105. 25. and Prove. 21. 1. but also things without life by a natural
inclination, which he gives to every thing in his kind as the Psalmist
shows in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the winds and the waters, Psalm 104.
19. 25.

And as he moves every creature, so he directs all their And by direction
of all motions.
motions as appears, Psalm 37. 23. Prove. 20. 24. Ier. 10. 23. In so much,
that what men do with a wicked mind, and for an evil end, God turns it to the
contrary, and brings good out of it. Joseph's brethren intended his hurt and
destruction in selling him for a slave; God turned it to his honor, and to the
saving of them and much people alive, Genesis 50. 20. Pharoh rose to magnify
himself against God, and his people: God so ruled and directed his rage and
fury, that he showed his power in him, and magnified his name in all the
Earth; by turning Pharaoh's fierceness to his own praise and glory, and to
Pharaoh's destruction, Exodus 9. 16. The Jews out of malice and envy crucified
and murdered Christ: God out of his death raised life, and made his death,
which they devised for his shame and ignominy, a glorious triumph over the
Devil and all the powers of darkness, and a way to exaltation, Act. 2. 23.
They hardened their hearts to persecute the Apostles, and to drive the
Preachers of the Gospel out of their land, and to quench the light thereof:
God turned this their hardness and fall to the salvation of the Gentiles; for
by this means the Gospel came to be preached in all nations, Romans 11. 11.
Wicked heretics raise up heresies to corrupt Gods Church, and God so orders
their doings, that they who are approved, are thereby made manifest, and come
to shine as lights in the midst of a perverse generation, 1 Cor. 11. 19. Paul's
troubles and persecutions were intended for the overthrow of the Gospel: God
made them fall out to the furtherance of it, Phil. 1. 12. The Philistines
invaded the land of Israel, with purpose to do mischief to Israel, and to
wast their land: but God directed this motion of their hearts, and by his
providence appointed it as a means to recall Saul from pursuing David, when
he had enclosed him on every side; and so saved him to be a Savior of
Israel, and a destroyer of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 23. 27, 28.

Secondly, God governs the World and all things therein by cohibition, that is,
restraining, and hindering the actions and motions 2 By cohibition.
of creatures, in his wisdom and by his power, when he thinks it fit He
withheld Abimelech from touching Sarah Abraham's wife, that he might not sin,
and stain himself ignorantly, Genesis 20. 6. He suffered not the destroyer of
the first borne in Egypt to enter into the house of any of the Israelites,
Exodus 12. 23. He kept back the waters of Jordan from running downward, so that
it was dried for Israel to pass over on foot, Josh. 3. He restrains the
influences of Heaven, and the clouds from rain, and makes the Heavens as
brass, and the Earth as iron, for the punishment of wicked transgressors, and
rebellious people, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. Job 26. 8. and 38. 31. He brings the
counsel of the heathen to naught, and makes the devices of the people of none
effect, Psalm 33. 10. He withheld Laban from his evil purpose of hurting
Jacob, Genesis 31. 42. And his terror restrained the Cities round about, so that
they pursued not after Iacobi Sons to take revenge on them, for the slaying of
the Shechemites, Genesis 35. 5. And by his Spirit he forbad Paul and his
companions to preach the Gospel in Asia, Act. 16. 6. In a word, as he does by
a general governing order all things universally and all events, even the
heavens, the Earth, the Seas, Winter, Summer, and all seasons of the year, men
and beasts, and makes an harmony and concord among things which are contrary,
tempering, moderating and keeping them in their proper places, and does set up
and pull down Kingdoms and states. Dan. 2. 37. and 4. 25. So he rules every
singular creature and every singular event, turning harvest days into a
tempestuous time of thunder and rain; as when he terrified Israel to show
them their sin in asking a King, 1 Samuel 12. 16. So that we need no further
proof of this point. Let that which is before said and proved, suffice to show
how God by a general way of providence actually disposes all things to the
manifestation of his glory.

The special way by which God manifests his glory is by Gods special
providence.
working things, and by ordering, ruling and disposing them to the revealing of
his glory, more specially in the salvation of his elect in Christ, which
divines do call his special providence.

This providence God exercises by his Son Christ, as he is the Mediator,
Redeemer, Savior, King, and Head of the Church universal; and by his Spirit
sent forth in the name of Christ, and shed on the elect abundantly through him
in their regeneration. This consists and shows it self in all the gracious
benefits and blessings which God bestows upon men for salvation; and in the
judgments which he executes on his enemies, the wicked, by which he
delivers his Church out of their cruel, bloody persecuting and oppressing
hands; and does magnify and declare his justice and power, and more fully
reveal and communicate himself to them for their greater blessedness.

The brief Description of this special providence which I conceive to be
most plain is. That it is Gods exercise of his wisdom, Described.
power, justice, mercy, and all his goodness in executing his special decree
of predestination, by which he ordained all the elect both Angels and men to
eternal blessedness; and all the rest to eternal destruction, and withal
did decree all the means which serve and tend to bring every one of them to
their sevreall ends; and by which in the time appointed they are all brought to
their decreed end according to his eternal purpose, and the counsel of his
will.

In the large prosecution of this point of Gods special providence, we have
just occasion offered to lay open all the rest of the great works of God, which
fall within the compass of the Divine art of sacred Divinity. For they all are
contained under these two maine heads, to wit: 1 The means which serve for the
effecting, and obtaining of the utmost end of reasonable creatures unto which
God has ordained them. 2. The end it self the manifestation of his glory more
specially in the eternal blessedness of his elect, which blessedness does
consist in the eternal fruition of God in all his glory; and the sense thereof
is exceedingly increased by their beholding of the eternal misery and
destruction of the ungodly, their escape and deliverance, from which whole they
consider and remember their joy and rejoicing shallbee doubled.

For in all wise providence there is a good end purposed, intended and decreed,
and a provident ordaining, ordering and actual disposing of the means which
are necessary for the obtaining and effecting of that end, and therefore the
special providence of God who is most wise and provident, infinite in
goodness and power, must needs be exercised in doing the most excellent
works, and in ordering and disposing them according to his eternal counsel
and decree, to the best, and most excellent end of all, which is the fourth and
last point in the Description of Gods actual providence.

Now the means which God has ordained for the manifestation of the glory of
his grace and goodness in the eternal blessedness of his elect they go
before in execution; though the end is first in Gods intention. And therefore
they come to be handled in the first place. And they all may be reduced to two
maine heads. The first is man's fall; The second is man's restoration.

In the fall of man, sive things come to be considered^ First, the
Commandment of God at which man stumbled and which the Devil made the
occasion of man's fall. The second is the fall it self, what it was, and
wherein it did consist. The third is the state of rebellion, into which man did
fall. The fourth is the multitude of evils, which did accompany and follow man's
sin and fall. The fifth is the small relics of good, which remained in man's
nature after his fall.

The Commandment of God is plainly laid down, Genesis 2. 16, 17. And therefore
I will first insist upon that portion of Scripture, and after will proceed to
the description of the fall, as it is laid down in the third Chapter.

But before I proceed further, let me conclude this Doctrine of Gods actual
providence with some use and application.

First, it is matter of admirable comfort to all true Christians Use 1. Comfo^
to the faithful.
and faithful people of God, in that the Lord whom they have chosen for their
God, their rock and confidence, is so wise and provident above all; ordering
and disposing all things which come to pass in the World in wonderful
wisdom and by an omnipotent hand to his own glory and the salvation of his
elect in Christ. Whatsoever good comes at any time, it is the gift of God;
and all good blessings and benefits which they receive and enjoy from any hand
or by any means, they are so many tokens and pledges of his love and fatherly
care, and of his eye of providence watching over them for good. And whatsoever
evils of any kind break into the World by the malice of the Devil, and the
outrage of wicked men; they are no other, nor no more, but such as God in his
wisdom and goodness is pleased willingly to permit and suffer for a far
greater good to his own people; and as he overrules them all: and has set
them their bounds beyond which they cannot pass; so he disposes and turns
them all to his own glory, and the manifestation of his justice and power in
saving of his Church and people, and in confounding and destroying all his and
their enemies, wherefore in times of peace, plenty and prosperity, when all
good things and blessings of all sorts abound; Let us rejoice and glory in the
Lord and give him the praise of all, and offer up daily and continual
sacrifices of thankfulness with cheerful hearts and willing Who learn also
to be thankful.
minds; studying and striving with all our might, and to the utmost of our
power; to use and employ all his blessings to the best advantage for his glory,
the good of his Church, and the profit of our own souls; being well assured,
that these are his talents committed to our trust, which if we by our
faithfulness do increase, we shall in the day of account and reckoning,
receive the reward of good stewards and faithful servants, and be received
into the joy of our Lord.

But on the contrary, in evil and perilous time; when iniquity abounds
sins of all sorts are increased; piety and charity are waxen cold, religion
is skorned, the godly persecuted and oppressed, justice judgment and truth
trodden down and trampled: Let us not faint nor fear nor be dejected as men
without hope; For the Lord our God, and our keeper is a provident God, his eyes
neither slumber nor sleep; he sees and observes all these things, and
without his will and knowledge no evil can come to pass. As the Scripture
says of Pharaoh, to may we say in this case; that even for this same purpose
God has raised up these wicked persecutors and outrageous sinners; that is in
his just wrath has given them up to Satan and their own lusts to multiply sin
and oppression, that he may show his power in them, and make his justice
glorious, and name famous throughout all the earth: When the nations rage, and
the Kingdoms are moved, God can give his voice, and the earth shall melt and
all the works of the wicked shall be dissolved.

Secondly, here is matter of terror to the wicked, both them who commit sins
in secret, and presume to go on in their lewd Use 2. Terror to the wicked.
courses with a conceit, that none sees nor takes notice of their
abominations; and also them who multiply their sins openly, and without fear
increase their persecutions and oppressions, and vex and afflict the meek of
the Earth, and break Gods people in pieces; thinking that they shall never be
called to account, and putting far from them the day of reckoning: Behold
here, the Lord who is the judge all the earth, is a most provident God; all
their doings are naked and opened to his eyes, and he observes all their ways
and wicked works; their power strength and greatness is from him, and he
wittingly and willingly suffers them to abuse them to sin, and to oppression
and wrong, and only so long as he pleases, that when they have filled up
their measure, he may bring them to judgment, and may make them a skorne,
derision, and footestole to the righteous whom they have skorned, hated and
oppressed.

Thus much for the actual providence of God.

FINIS.

