C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn
on the other

AN exact and true Definition of the most Stupendous Watercommanding Engine,
invented by the Right Honorable (and deservedly to be praised and admired)
Edward Somerset, Lord Marquess of Worcester, and by his Lordship himself
presented to his most Excellent Majesty Charles the Second, our most gracious
Sovereign.
An Act of Parliament thereupon granted, with great applause of both Houses,
being through his Majesty's particular favor passed, by special Commission to
the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarenden, Lord High Chancellor of England;
the Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer; the Lord Roberts, Lord Privy
Seal, third Officer of the Crown, preceding all Dukes, not of the Blood Royal;
the Duke of Albemarle his Grace, most deservedly by his transcendent merits
never to be forgotten, Lord General of his Majesty's Landforces; the Lord
Marquess of Dorchester, and the Earl Lynsey, Lord High Chamberlain, by his
place preceding all Earls, both likewise of the Privy Council: They passed the
said Act upon the third of June, 1663. For the more expedition, and in
Testimony of the great consequence thereof to the King and Kingdom.

His most Excellent Majesty having the tenth part, without deducting of
Charges, freely given him by the said Lord Marquess, and there evidently
accruing a considerable Profit and Benefit to every individual Subject of the
whole Nation, if he either have surrounded Marish-ground to drein, or dry Land
to improve; Commodities to sell portable from Town to Town, and through the
Countries to the Towns by Cuts thus fed by water; or if he have (I further say)
Mines wherewith to enrich himself withal, Houses to be served, or Gardens to
be beautified by plentiful Fountains with little charge, yet certain in ever so
dry a Summer: and there being indeed no place but either wants water, or is
overburdened therewith, and by this Engine either defect is remediable, that is
to say, water necessary to mankind, furnished with the pleasantness thereof,
procured, and the water unnecessary, as easily rejected.

Thus whole Cities may be kept Clean, Delightful and Wholesome, needing no
other Scavengery then by means thereof to void their dirt, and avoid
noisomness, the Cause of Infection, Sicknesses and Contagion it self, by
Stenches commonly ingendring and fomenting the same.

After the Act of Parliament, there is here set down a Latin Elogium, and an
English Panegirick, both of them composed through duty and gratitude by an
Ancient Servant of his Lordships, presuming to begin the way to the greatest
Wits and Poets to dilate upon so plentiful and admirable a Theme, and so
deserving a person of King and Kingdom, and indeed of all that ever knew him.

This Ancient Servant of his Lordships, has for forty years been an eye
witness of his great ingenuity, indefatigable pains, and vaste expenses in
perfecting for public service, not only this most Stupendous
Water-commanding Engine, but likewise several other rare, useful, and never
formerly heard of Mathematical Conclusions, of which he has owned a Century,
and thereunto I refer you: though this alone were enough to eternalize his Name
to all Ages and future times.

I think it not amiss to give further notice in his Lordships behalf, that he
intends within a month or two to erect an Office, and to entrust some very
responsible and honorable persons with power to Treat and Conclude with such
as desire at a reasonable rate to reap the benefit of the same Water-commanding
Engine, in any of the aforesaid useful and beneficial operations, whereof his
Majesty is to reap the first fruit; and then the whole Kingdom in general,
before his Lordship is re-imbursed, and his reward begins; whose laudable
inventions Almighty God prosper with blessings on earth, and reward in heaven.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe same individual Definition of my Water-work, which I formerly presumed to
put into Your Royal Hands, I again adventure to present to Your Majesty;
praying Your Belief of it, as Your Majesty shall find it true by comparing it
with the real Effect; which if found punctually agreeing, Vouchsafe then not to
be apt hereafter to lend a believing Ear to such persons, as Malice causes to
detract from, or Ignorance to slight what shall (though never so seemingly
strange) be averred by me, who will never be convinced of a Falsehood in Word or
Deed toward Your Sacred Majesty; before whom I shall ever speak as in the
presence of Almighty God, whose Vicegerent on Earth I deem You: And to Your
Majesty's transcendent Judgment I submit all, and will presume to subscribe my
self,

SIR, Your Sacred Majesty's Faithfully-Devoted, and passionately-Affected,
Useful, if cherished, Subject and Servant, WORCESTER.

A Stupendous or a Water-Commanding Engine, boundless for Height, or Quantity,
requiring no External, nor even Additional help, or force to be set, or
continued in motion, but what intrinsecally is afforded from its own Operation,
nor yet the twentieth part thereof: And the Engine consists of the following
Particulars;
1. A perfect Counterpoize for what Quantity soever of Water.

2. A perfect Countervail for what Height soever it is to be brought unto.

3. A Primum Mobile commanding both Height and Quantity Regulator-wise.

4. A Vicegerent or Countervail supplying the place, and performing the full
force of a Man, Wind, Beast, or Mill.

5. A Helm or Stern, with Bitt and Reins, wherewith any Child may guide, order,
and control the whole Operation.

6. A particular Magazine for Water, according to the intended Quantity or
Height of Water.

7. An Aquaduct capable of any intended Quantity or Height of Water.

8. A place for the Original Fountain or even River to run into, and naturally
of its own accord incorporate it self with the rising Water, and at the very
bottom of the same Aquaduct, though never so big or high.

By Divine Providence, and Heavenly Inspiration, this is my Stupendous
Water-Commanding Engine, boundless for Height and Quantity.

Whosoever is Master of Weight,
Is Master of Force;
Whosoever is Master of Water,
Is Master of both:
And consequently, to him all Forceable Actions and Atchievments are easy,
which are in any wise beneficial to or for Mankind.

Exegi Monumentum aere perennius,
Regalique situ Pyramidum altius;
Quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens,
Possit diruere, aut innumer abilis
Annorum series, and fuga temporum:
Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam,
dum stabit Anglia. Capitolium.
Horace. Reader observe, This tells us how to keep
Our morning-Thoughts awake, while others sleep:
It Is Art and Nature's product, scanned by some:
Judge of it by The Effects; then give your doom.
To God alone be all Praise, Honor Amen. WORCESTER.

An Act to Enable Edward Marquess of Worcester to Receive the Benefit and
Profit of a Water-Commanding Engine by him Invented; One Tenth part whereof is
appropriated for the Benefit of the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors.
WHEREAS The Right Honorable Edward Marquess of Worcester has affirmed to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, That he has by long and indefatigable pains and
study, and with great and vast expenses, invented and found out a Secret in
Nature, never heretofore discovered, being a Water-Commanding Engine, of
greater force and advantage then hitherto has been known; and being no Pump or
Force now in use, nor working by any Suckers, Barrels, or Bellows heretofore
used for the raising and conveying of Water; which said Engine will yield very
great benefit and advantage to the Commonwealth, by draining of all sorts of
Mines, Marish, Oazie, or Overflown Grounds; by furnishing of Rivers and Cutts
with water to make them Navigable and Portable from Town to Town; by improving
of Lands wanting water; by the supplying and bringing in of water into the City
of London, or into any other places; and by diverse other ways and means whereby
great Encouragement will be given to the People of this Nation to undertake to
work rich Mines, to drain, and gain in many Marish, Oazie, and surrounded
Grounds, which hitherto they have been deterred to endeavor the improvement
of, by reason of the vast sums of money which must be necessarily expended by
the draining and conveying away the water out of the same. And whereas the said
Edward Marquess of Worcester is willing and contented to setle a tenth part of
the accruing benefit thereof upon His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for
the term of years after in this Act mentioned; To the end therefore that the
said Edward Marquess of Worcester may have and enjoy the full and particular
benefit and profit of this his new Invention, with a Prohibition to all others
to make use thereof for ninety and nine years: May it therefore please the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted, And Be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority thereof, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said Edward Marquess of Worcester, His Executors and Assigns, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, during the said ninety and nine years, to
have, receive, take, and enjoy, to his and their own proper use and uses, the
Profit, Benefit, and Advantage which shall any ways arise, happen, or accrue by
means or reason of the aforesaid Engine and new Invention. And be it also
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one full tenth part of the accruing
Benefit thereof (without deduction or abatement for or by reason of any Charges
or Expenses whatsoever) shall be paid and answered, and accounted for by the
said Edward Marquess of Worcester, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
for His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, into His Majesty's public receipt
of Exchequer yearly, and every year at the Feasts of Saint Michael the
Archangel, and the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, during the said
Term of Ninety nine years, the first payment to be made at the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred sixty and three; And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that if any Person or Persons whatsoever within his
Majesty's Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, do, or shall at
any time hereafter, during the said term, Counterfeit, Imitate, put in
practice, or erect the said Water-commanding Engine (without the consent and
License first had and obtained in writing from the said Edward Marquess of
Worcester, or his Assigns) That it shall, and may be lawful to and for the
said Edward Marquess of Worcester, or his Assigns, with his, or their Agents
or Workmen by a Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice, or from any two Justices
of Peace within the respective County or Liberty, where such search shall be
made, and assisted by the Constable or Constables near adjacent, to enter into,
or upon the said place or places where the said Work or Engine shall be made or
erected; And upon discovery of any such Engine, to proceed against the said
Person or Persons by Action, Information or Indictment; and after Conviction
thereof in due course of Law in any Assizes, or public Sessions of the Peace,
or any of the Courts at Westminster, or any other His Majesty's Courts of
Record in any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, or in any Stanary, Court, or
Jurisdiction of Lead-mines; Then such Engines to be forfeited, and seized to
and for the use of the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns respectively: And further, that the said Actor or
Actors, Contriver or Contrivers thereof, and every of them, shall lose, and
forfeit Five (...) ^^fore the Nine and twentieth day of September, One thousand
six hundred sixty three; And be by him or them then put into the Exchequer, and
kept there.

Copia vera.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliament.



In admirandam magis quam imitandam, aut ullis Encomiis satis praedicandam,
Illustrissimi Domini Marchionis Vigorniae Machinam Hydraulicam, Elogium.
Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis,
Assiduus jactet nec Babylona labor.
Horat. SIste viator, depone sarcinam, and dumreficis membra
Labor languida, pasce mentem novitatis avidam;
Perpende gyganteam hanc mole, aeterni motus aemulam,
Naturae and Artis compaginem, Coeli Solique stuporem.
Pondera ponderibus librata hic Aethera scandunt,
Et redeunt proprias mox subitura vices.
Men's praegnans agitata Deo, nunc praestat in Orb,
Quae nec stellifero sunt tribuenda Polo.
Taceat Rhodus, facessat Ephesus, et quicquid fabulosa
Praedicat antiquitas; illic laudanda Artificis industria,
Hic admiranda mentis sublimitas celebranda venit.
Cui impares fuere tot seculis retroactis omnes Graeci,
Et Romani, humano conatu, id praestitit nostra
Aetate unus Cambrobritannus, Divino afflatu:
Martis and Imperii Palmam fert Roma perennem;
Artis and Ingenii Cambria culmen habet.
-- pauci, quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus,
Hoc potuere. --
Jacobus Rollocus, Scoto-Belga-Britannus.

A Panegyric to the Right Honorable EDWARD, Lord Marquess of Worcester, Upon
his stupendous and never-sufficientlycommended Water-work.
I know mean subjects need a skilful Pen
To stretch their worth on tenter-hooks, but when
A Theme falls out so pregnant, who can choose
But strain his vulgar Wit to prove a Muse?
COme, fainting Pilgrim, lay here down thy Pack,
And, while thou rests thy wearied limbs, look back
Upon this Pageant, th'Emblem of his mind,
Whose Art and Skill has this our Age refined.
Here little David curbs the Gyant's brood,
Small drops of Rain contend with Noah's Flood;
One weighs a thousand coming down apace,
Weighs but himself when he has run his race.
The Heavens admire, the Center stands amazed,
To see such Streams by so small Forces raised.
Great is the Work, but greater is the Fame
Of that great Peer who did invent the same.
What Force or Strength can do is in his reach,
His long Experience, Cost and Charges, teach;
What Greeks, nor Romans e're could do, this day,
Our Noble Britain here has found the way.
If Ages past had bred you, we had seen
Your Glories current run a bigger stream;
But Art and Envy meeting face to face,
Like France and Spain, dispute who shall take place.
None but ignoble Minds love to detract
From The Honor due to such a noble Act:
On then, that after-ages may relate
Your Service done to Country, King and State.
And though that envious Spirits spit their gall,
Your noble Deeds are so well known to all,
As if their malice should take from your praise,
Your own deserts will crown your head with Bays.
By your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant, James Rollock.


