A Disswasive from Worldly-mindedness, in order to the due Exercise of
Christian Charity. A SERMON Preached in the Chapel of Popler, On the 8th of
September School. Before the Trustees for the Charity of Captain William Curtis,
deceased.

A Disswasive from worldly-mindedness, in order to the due Exercise of
Christian Charity. A SERMON Preached in the Chapel of Popler, On the 8th of
Sept. School. Before the Trustees for the Charity of Captain William Curtis,
deceased. WHO, In the Year 1669, bequeathed a Rentcharge of Sixty Pounds per
Annum, for the Release of Poor Prisoners, The Relief of Aged People, A Weekly
Distribution of Bread, and the Placing out of Poor Children to Trades: For the
Benefit of the Poor in the Hamlets of Popler, Mile-end, Limus, and Ratcliff,
for ever. Published at the Request of the Trustees. By Josiah Woodward,
Minister of Popler.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, School.

TO Sir Henry Johnson, Knight. Hugh Squier, Esquire; Capt. Joseph Stevens, Trustees for
the Charity of Captain William Curtis.
Gentlemen,
AS it is generally agreed, that you have one of the most prudent and
well-advised Charities under your hands, so it must be granted, that you have
managed it with great Honor. For, as the Worthy Founder took all imaginable
Care to have his Charity as lasting as the World it self, so have you, for many
Tears past, put your Accounts into such an exact Method, as will not only
justify your own Faithfulness, but make it difficult for any that succeed you
to be Unfaithful.

And perhaps it is in some Measure a Fruit of this Noble Charity, that a most
Commodious School At South-Molton in Devon, for 30 poor Children, erected at
the Cost of 700 l. and endowed with 50 l. per Ann. for ever, by Mr. H. S.
, for the Education of Youth, has been Erected and Endowed by one of you, for
the perpetual Benefit of Posterity: With many other very To the value of above
3000 l the whole.
considerable Deeds of Charity.

Had Plato seen such Pious Improvements of Wealth, he might have struck out
that uncharitable Reflection of his, That it is impossible for any one to be
very Rich, and very Good. Nor would Celsus (had he well considered it) have
been so fond of that false Sentence of Plato's, as to commend it even to
Blasphemy.

May it please God therefore to stop the Mouths of the Adversaries of our Holy
Religion, by the exemplary Lives of all its Votaries. May all Persons who are
eminently Great, be conspicuously Good; and give such Demonstrations of the
Mistake of that Philosopher, as Abraham, David, and many others have done, who
though vastly Rich in Worldly Possessions, were yet more so in Good Works.

And may it please Him, who sometimes delights to choose Mean things, to
confound things that are Mighty, to assist this Sermon with his Grace, that it
may somewhat retrieve us from that Selfish narrowness of Spirit, which has
been our great Reproach, and almost our utter Ruin: And may it excite a public
and generous, that is, a truly Christian Spirit amongst us, to the Glory of
Almighty God, the just Honor of our Divine Religion, and to the Peace, Safety,
and Renown of our Native Country: Which is the earnest Desire of,

Gentlemen, Your very respectful Servant, Josiah Woodward.

Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not? For, Riches
certainly make themselves Wings; they flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven.
THE occasion of my speaking to you this day, is to recommend the noble Virtues
of Charity and Almsgiving; of which the Founder of that great Charity which is
yearly distributed in these Maritime Hamlets, is a noble Precedent. And
therefore, since the inordinate Love of earthly things is the general
Hinderance of suchlike Pious Gifts, I have fixed my Thoughts (and now come to
fix yours) on the words now read in your Ears, to remove that Obstacle out of
the way. For, I cannot but promise my self (by the Blessing of God) some degree
of Success in persuading Men to Charitable Distributions, when it shall be made
appear unto them, That this is the most advantageous Use that can be made of
earthly Goods: Much more, of those Superfluities of them which are otherwise
Useless, and many times Pernicious to the Owners.

My Text therefore comes to be your kind Monitor this day: For, as sure as the
Oracles of God are true, your Riches will soon fall into the hands of other
Masters, either by their Departure or yours. And if your Faith does not assure
you of this, the Examples of others may, and your own Experience soon will. And
why then should we not make a Virtue of Necessity? And commit our Goods to such
hands as will restore them with infinite increase (in Value, though not in
Kind) in that other World, upon which we shall so soon enter, and where we must
for ever abide? This is to extract Pearls out of Bubbles; and to gain infinite
Advantages from things which are just slipping out of our Hands. For, Riches
certainly make themselves Wings, and slay away.

Solomon, who made this Remark on the unstable State of Humane things in the
Text, was the greatest and wisest Prince of his Times; He enjoyed all the
Delights that his Heart could suggest, or the World supply him withal. And
after he had long swam in the most deep and calm Current of Prosperity that can
be imagined upon Earth, and had tasted Sensual Pleasures rather like a Critic
than an Epicure; (to see, as he tells us, what Good there was for Man under the
Sun, Eccl. 2. 3.) and after that he had tried them all by the Touchstone of his
inspired Wisdom; He comes at last to such a Sense of the Emptiness of all
Sublunary things, that, though a Prince, he becomes a Preacher, and gives the
World a warm Sermon against Sensuality and Worldly-mindedness, as we read in
his whole Book of Ecclesiastes. And the Thesis he chose, and on which he
largely descants, was this grand Maxim, All is Vanity: Whereupon he proceeds to
show, that the whole Globe of earthly things, upon which Men dote so much, is
but a glittering Bubble. It is Vanity it self, says he; yea, the Vanity of
Vanity, as if he Eccl. 1. 2.
would term it, the Air of Froth, or the Shadow of a Vapor.

It is upon this Subject that this Royal Preacher expostulates with Worldly
Minds in the Text. He found that a bare Admonition would not bring Men off from
those things to which their Hearts were glew'd. And therefore he proceeds to
reason the Case with them in an elegant Expostulation in the Text.

Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not? Is it becoming the Wisdom of
Man, to spend his Strength and Time in chasing a Shadow? Or in endeavoring to
catch the pleasing Colors of the Rainbow? Are not earthly Riches of an
unsatisfactory Nature, and a very uncertain Tenure? Do they not often flee away
(like the shy Bird) from those who passionately pursue them? So that they get
as far out of their reach, as the soaring Eagle who flies aloft, and despises
the Horse and his Rider, (Job 39. 18.) mocking such as are so vain as to pursue
her. Or if these worldly things seem to yield to the violent Courtship of some
of their Admirers, and come in a Golden Shower into their Laps. Yet then, alas!
the Possessor does but grasp a handful of Air, or rather a little heap of
slippery Sand, which the faster you endeavor to hold it, the more speedily it
runs betwixt your Fingers. They are winged Creatures, says my Text, and often
spring out of the hand of such as thought they had taken fast hold of them:
For, Riches certainly make themselves wings, they flee away, etc.

So then the Force of this Argument in the Text, may be thus sum'd up in a
Practical Observation.

That since Worldly Riches are so empty in their Obser.
Nature, and so short and uncertain in their Duration; it is a great piece of
Folly in Men to place their Affections upon them, or put their Trust in them.
Will thou set thine Eyes on that which is not? Will thou look with an admiring
Eye on such a Phantom? Or will thou look with a greedy and covetous Eye on such
a Fairy Treasure? How can your Reason brook such a piece of Deceit? Or your
Self-love bear such a Disappointment? You will find this to end bitterly, for
the pursuit of Vanity can have no other Issue but Vexation.

So that our inspired VVise-man here is dissuading Men from a piece of Vanity
which is almost as natural to them as their Animal Life, viz. The inordinate
seeking of temporary Things; and making little Conscience by what means they
compass them. As if Gain were Godliness (i. e. the Whole of Man) and Mammon
such a God as could never be loved and served too much. And this the mistaken
World calls Wisdom; which gave occasion to that sage Advise in the Verse before
the Text, Labor not to be rich, Cease from thine own Wisdom, (ver. 4.) As if
he had said, Do not make Riches your chief Aim; neither be you over-greedy of
them, as your carnal Mind will be apt to be, and think it self mighty wise in
so doing. But seek you the blessed Kingdom of God, and the beatifick
Righteousness thereof in the first place; and (using an honest Industry) leave
it to God to give you that measure of earthly things which he sees convenient
for you. And thus your outward wants will be easier and better supplied, than
by your own unhallowed Desires, and independent Labors.

Wherefore see that you contemn that worldly Wisdom which prompts Men to make
their Nest of such things as they can scrape together upon Earth: And when they
have raised it as high, and made it as warm as they can, fondly think that they
have acquired the chief Happiness of Man. But this their way is their Folly:
For, they only lift up themselves upon waxen Wings; and the higher they soar in
this their carnal Presumption, the more speedy and the more dismal will their
Fall be. For, Riches certainly make themselves wings and flee away as an Eagle
toward Heaven, i. e. out of our reach.

Now, That we may take a full view of this Disswasive from Wordly-mindedness,
we must allow these few Particulars a due Consideration.

We must consider the Emptiness of worldly 1.
things in their Nature, They are in the Text called Things which are not, i.
e. which have not any real Happiness in them for Man.

The uncertainty of them in their Possession. 2.
They certainly make themselves wings and flee away; even with an Eagle's
flight; that is, swiftly and irreparably through the upper Air.

And from these two Premises this Conclusion naturally follows, viz.

That Men are very Indiscreet in sixing their 3.
admiring or coveting Eyes upon such empty and uncertain things. It is a Folly
for which they deserve to be chidden, as in the Text, Why will thou set thine
Eyes on that which is not? On a Fantastic thing which has only a fair
Appearance to amuze your Fancy, but no substantial Goodness to satisfy your
Desires, or make you Happy.

And from all these Sober Considerations together, it must follow (according to
the occasion of our present meeting,)

That it is the most profitable and most noble 4.
use of Riches, to expend a suitable part of them in the prudent and pious
Distributions of Charity. For indeed this is so worthy, so honorable and
divine a Thing, that a wise Person would chiefly wish to be rich for this very
end, namely, to glorify God with his Substance, by doing good to Men. Which,
how far better it is in it self, and how much more glorious in its end, than
only to serve the base Lusts of a perishing Body (which will quickly be
devoured by Worms, and turned into Corruption) let every one that has the least
glympse of Reason, or the least grain of Faith, judge.

I begin with the Consideration of the empty I.
Nature of earthly Possessions. Possessions, did I say? that is too solid a
name for these Shadows, to which the Wisdom of God in the Text, will not allow
a place amongst the Rank of Beings. And how can we be said to possess that
which is not? Who ever got possession of a Shadow? Or could ever set his Seal
upon a Bubble? And in like manner, Who ever placed his Happiness in worldly
Riches, and did not find himself sadly mistaken in the end? Even as much as if
he had endeavored to support himself with a Reed or a Rush.

Riches are indeed the Gift of God when honestly gotten: And so long as they
are enjoyed with Thankfulness and Moderation, and employed according to the
Rules of Piety and Charity, they are God's Blessing: As the wise Penman of my
Text confesses in another place ( Prove. 10. 22.) The Blessing of the Lord
makes Rich, and he adds no Sorrow with it, Such as are Rich, may without
scruple enjoy a proportionable share of God's allowance themselves. And, being
freed by a comfortable Providence, from the Cares and Toiles of their poorer
Brethren, they have better Leisure than others, (and greater Engagements too)
to serve God with gladness of Heart in the enjoyment Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Job 31. 24.
of all things. But, if once they make Gold their Hope, and trust in uncertain
Riches; or sacrifice the Innocence and Peace of their Consciences to the Mammon
of Unrighteousness: This is the Folly condemned in the Text. For, they that do
thus, may be truly said, in many Respects, to set their Hearts on that which is
not; because they seek that in Riches which they can never find in them. I
shall only instance in three things which many think to enjoy in outward
Wealth, whereas they are not to be found in it, and that is, The Advancement,
the Happiness, and the Satisfaction of Man; which are rare Jewels, that are not
to be found in this Soil; and therefore to aim at these things in the
Possession of Riches, is to set their Hearts on that which is not; as will
appear in a more particular Consideration of these three things now mentioned.

The greatest Accumulation of worldly Wealth 1.
is no real Advancement to the Man. It gives no degree of Wisdom to his Mind,
nor of Goodness to his Will; no Moderation to his Desires, nor Regularity to
his Passions. But rather, they are many times the unhappy occasion of the
contrary to all these Advancements of Humane Nature. For, there are many
worldly Minds who dote on deceitful Riches to that degree, as to think them an
Universal Accomplishment. And being thus vainly puffed up, they despise
Instruction, and are impatient of Reproof; and so they grow incorrigible in all
their Errors, and precipitate their eternal Ruin. For, their Carnal Hearts
being bent toward Sensual Enjoyments, and their Wealth making it easy for
them to provide Baits for their Lusts; and as easy to bear down all Opposition
from Friends or Enemies, which would stop them in their Course. In this
deplorable Case, their Wealth smooths their way to Destruction, and proves a
Fatal Snare which is too seldom broken. Insomuch that our Blessed Lord assures
us, That it is as easy for a Camel (that great and gibbose Matt. 19. 24. Mark
10. 25. Luke 18. 25.
Creature) to go through the Eye of a Needle, as for such as trust in Riches to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Hence it also follows,
That the Riches of this World are not our Happiness; 2.
and that when Men look on them as felicitating things, they set their Eyes on
that which is not. They are not the Happiness of our Bodies, much less of our
Souls. If we were Masters of both the Indies, we could not buy off one Stab of
the Gout, or one twitch of the Colic, or the least Pang of any acute
Distemper. If an Eye be perished, or a Foot Gangrened, the most massy Treasure
cannot restore the decayed Part to Perfection; or purchase a healthy
Constitution to a crazy and languishing Body.

Much less can we by Riches bribe Death, or purchase one Hours Respit from its
Arrest, when it has Commission to break in upon us, and is shaking the very
Foundations of our Earthly Tabernacle by its last Agonies.

And yet these are low and mean things, if compared with the great Essentials
of our Happipiness, viz. The Sense of God's Favor, the Rectitude of our
Natures; a Serene State of Mind; the rational Quietude of Conscience; and the
comfortable Expectation of a blissful Eternity. And these are things which can
no more be purchased by such base and corruptible things as Silver and Gold,
than the richest Diadem can be bought with a few Pibbles.

Those who fancy that there is Satisfaction in 3.
earthly things, and desire them for that end, do really set their Eyes on that
which is not: They feed on Wind, which may create trouble to an empty Stomach,
but cannot give it Contentment.

Have Men forgotten that this Earth lies under the Curse of God? ( Genesis 3. 17.)
Cursed is the Ground for thy sake. And can we think our selves perfectly
blessed in an Enjoyment which God has accursed? No, no: You shall feel its
Briars and Thorns in your Breast, if you give it place there; even acute Cares
and pungent Sorrows, by which (says the Apostle) many pierce themselves through,
(1 Timothy 6. 10.) Thorns are weak and feeble things; and they are barren too, and
bear no Sustenance: So that they can only scratch and tear us, but can never
sustain or nourish us. And thus, He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied
with Silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase, (Eccl. 5. 10.) The
Dropsy of Covetousness increases by Indulgence. And indeed, the Heart of Man
is too big to be filled with such puny Treasures. It was made for an Infinite
God, and therefore no Measure of Finite Beings can give it Satisfaction.

That Wealthy Man (in the Parable of our Lord, Luke 12. 18.) who having his
Barns and Chests full, began to lull his Soul to sleep upon that Supposition,
saying, Soul take thine Ease, thou have Goods laid up for many Years. In this
he spoke very foolishly, for the Goods of the Soul cannot be laid up in Barns:
And if they could, a Provision for many Years signifies very little to a Soul
that must live for ever. So that the Bed was too short for him to stretch
himself upon; and therefore it is no wonder that we find him taking such a
short sleep upon it; for at midnight he is awakened by the Terrors of the
Lord, and receives a Summons to appear before God, where he is arraigned by the
Name of Fool, and is condemned as such by God and his own Conscience; for then
he finds that his Idol of Gold is really nothing (as the Apostle says 1 Cor. 8.
4.) And that in admiring his abundant Wealth, he had set his Eyes on that which
is not, viz. upon that which can neither improve his Intellectuals, nor refine
his Morals; nor present him with any competent Happiness, nor any tolerable
Satisfaction, which were the three things to be spoken to, in which we see the
Emptiness of earthly things.

We proceed now in the next place, to consider II.
the Uncertainty of these Sublunary things, which the Text describes in these
words, For Riches certainly make themselves Wings and flee away as an Eagle
toward Heaven. In which every word is emphatical.

First, They have Eagles Wings, i. e. so strong and lofty that we can never
clip them. The Eagle's Flight is above our reach; they fly toward Heaven, i.
e. with such a towering loftiness, that our Eye can scarce reach them, much
less our Hand, Even so, nothing can ensure our earthly Possessions; the most
fertile Lands may, by the Judgment of God, be turned into Barrenness, as the
Land of Palestine (once the Land flowing with Milk Deuteronomy. 6. 3.
and Honey) is said to be at this day. The most pleasant and desirable
Situation, may be rendered uninhabitable and intolerable; as the Land about
Sodom, which once for its beauty was compared Genesis 13. 10.
to the Garden of the Lord, is now a sulphurous and noisome Lake. The most
stately Palace may by some sudden Hurricane be laid flat in a moment, and buty
its Inhabitants in the Rubbish of it; as in the Case of Job's Children, who in
the height Job 1. 19.
of their Feasting and Merriment came to this deplorable End. A Storm at Sea,
or an Enemy there, may soon sink the richest Cargo, and thereby turn many
Wealthy Families into Melancholy Societies of distressed Widows and Orphans.
England is accounted a Wealthy Nation, but our Riches chiefly come to us by
those winged Carravans, our Ships, which I beseech God to preserve and prosper:
For he has shown us by many dreadful Storms within these seven Years, wherein
some Hundreds of Ships and Thousands of Men were lost, how easily he can clip
these Wings which bear up our Nation, and thereby sink our Renown, and Wealth,
and Safety in one common Grave. Or perhaps some lighter matter may deprive a
particular Person or Family of the Wealth of this World: It being a known Case,
that a Gentleman lost an Estate of many Thousand Pounds a Year, for want of
inserting three words in a Deed of Settlement. Thus we see that the Foundation
of Temporal things is Sandy, and the Tenure uncertain; and let Men do what they
can, they can never pinion the Wings of these fleeting Enjoyments, nor prevent
their Flight from us.

Secondly, They make their Wings themselves, Riches make themselves Wings, i.
e. It is their Nature to be on the Wing, and to flee away. They every day
become more fledged than other, and are more likely to be gone from us. Like
some sorts of Ants, which at certain Periods of time have Wings naturally
shooting forth; and when these little Creatures, being fond of their Wings,
mount upwards with them, they soon become a Prey to the Swallows and other
Birds. A creeping lowliness of Life has more Safety (though less Splendour) than
a towering Ambition. And we are told from the best of Authors, That they that
will be rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and pierce themselves through
with many Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

Thirdly, We must note the Asseveration of this, They Certainly make themselves
Wings. You will do well to expect it, for you are very like to find it so,
either in part or in the whole. Nothing in earthly things is more affured than
their Inconstancy: And therefore they are usually called Goods of Fortune: Not
that they come or go by chance, but that they are subject to such an
Instability and Uncertainty, that their coming and going may, as to any
foresight of ours, be termed a sort of Fortuity.

Fourthly, When Riches are gone, they are many times utterly irreparable, They
fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven, i. e. above our reach, and beyond our
recovery. By Heaven here, is not meant, The State of the Blessed; as if Riches
went up thither. No, the very Heathen had other Notions of the Tendency of
Wealth; who thought their Pluto to be both the God of Riches and of Hell. And
it is no wonder, that the Devil persuaded those prosess'd Votaries of his, that
earthly Greatness was his Gift, since he attempted to persuade Christ himself
to this, though absolutely in vain, viz. That all the Power and Glory of
earthly Kingdoms were at his disposal, (Luke 4. 6.)

Thus have I (as briefly as I well could) considered the empty Nature and
uncertain Tenure of earthly things: The other two Propositions which I proposed
to speak to, are the Practical Conclusions which we ought to make from the
Premises, and therefore will be the proper Application of what has been said.
So then,

Since the Riches of this World are manifestly III.
such empty and uncertain things; it will be great Indiscretion to set our Eyes
upon them, i. e. either to admire them, covet them, or trust in them. For all
these are implied in this Expression, of setting our Eyes on Riches. For,

(1.) What we admire we gaze at, and fix our Eyes upon, and can scarcely take
our Eyes off it, it being the Desire of our Eyes. Thus does Gold dazzle the Eyes
of the Worldly-minded, and engross their Affections.

(2.) What we greatly Covet, we look wishfully and passionately upon. And
therefore Horace Qui oculo in torto Nummo rum prospicit acervos. Hor
describes a contented Man, as one that can pass by great Treasures, without
looking back upon them.

(3.) What we put our Trust in, we often cast our Eyes upon. And this is the
Reason, why a Good Man so often looks upward, and the Worldly Man downward: And
this is the reason, why the Covetous Person is marked out in the Scripture as
Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5.
an Idolater, viz. because He makes Gold his Hope; and says to fine Gold, Thou
art my Confidence, (Job 31. 24.)

But in all these three Casts of the worldly Man's Eye, he does but mis-guide
and deceive himself: And how pertinently does the wise Man reprove him in the
Text, Why will thou set thine Eyes on that which is not? Why will you admire,
covet or confide in a Vapor or Shadow?

Let this quicken us to set our Affections on things above, where every thing
is infinitely worthy and permanent; and not on these finite and fading things
below. How can we be thought to believe the Promises of God, concerning the
glorious State of blessed Souls in the eternal Kingdom above; if we set so
light by it, as to think oftener, and desire and pursue more the Dunghill
things of this Earth, than the Divine Bliss of that Future State.

This Spiritual Elevation of Mind is so Essential to a Christian Life, that we
find two of the ancient is it. Mart. pol. 2. p. 8. lem. Alex. Tom. 6.
Fathers numbering Socrates in the Rank of Christians before Christ, because he
dyed for asserting the only true God; and because it was part of his
Accusation, That he was one, that did set himself to (...) Plut. pol. Socr. 31.
seek better things than this Earth afforded, even things in Heaven. Which made
him take his last Farewell of his Adversaries, and of this World, in these
words: It is time for me to go and dye; and for you to learn to live; which is
best, is known to God. Alas! What a Shame will it be for Christians that live
in the State of the Gospel, which for its Divine Glory is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mark 1. 15. Luke 17. 21.
to be outdone by Moral Heathens in Heavenlymindedness. O Christians! ascend
in your Affections to that State, to which Christ (the Desire of your Souls) is
ascended. Let us prepossess that happy Place by our Heavenly Minds and Hearts,
which we hope to possess ever long in Soul and Body. May we all, with Divine
Moses, esteem the reproached Religion and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
greater Riches than all the tinsel Treasures of this vain World. And since we
say, we hope for Heaven, let us make due Returns of our Temporal things
thither; which is certainly the best Improvement of earthly things that can be
made. And this is the last thing I proposed to speak to, viz.

That to bestow a suitable part of our Wealth IV.
in Pious and Charitable Distributions (as the Glory of God and the Necessities
of our Brethren give us Occasion) will be the most Prudent and Profitable
Disposal of these fleeting things. For, this is to make the last words of my
Text true in a literal Sense; namely, to make your Riohes fly toward Heaven
indeed. And so you will send your Provisions before you thither, and be Rich in
both Worlds, even rich toward God here, and rich in God for ever. Now, since
Riches certainly have Wings, and will be gone: How much better is it to direct
their Flight upwards, by Charity, Hospitality, and Piety, to our eternal
Ornament and Entertainment; than to send them downwards by Luxury, Pride, or
any Abuse of them, there to eat our Flesh like Fire, as St. James assures us
they will, ( James 5. 3.) Rev. 14. 13.


The Good Works of Charitable People, follow them into the unseen World, and
attend them even before the Tribunal of God, like so many Carriages of
Furniture and Provisions. And though they Merit nothing there at the Hand of
God, (who gave us both the Alms we bestow, and a Will to do it) yet they are
such a Fruit of our Faith, as God has promised to reward with infinite Returns.
Of this our Judge himself assures us Matt. 25, 34, etc.) Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World:
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
Drink: I was a Stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: Sick,
and ye visited me: I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. This was not done
indeed to the Person of Christ, but to Christians, who when they are indeed
what their Name speaks them to be, they are the Members of Christ's Mystical
Body: And whatever Kindness or Unkindness is done to them, is vertually done to
Christ himself, and is so construed by him (Ver. 40.) In as much as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. As
if our Blessed Lord should say at the last day, I know thy Works, O my Faithful
Servant! I saw thee giving such and such an Alms in secret, which the World
never knew. I beheld thee making thy Charitable Doles to the Hungry, Thirsty,
Naked, and Destitute. Mine Eye went with thee to such and such a Poor Family,
to such an Hospital, and such a Prison, whither thy Charity led thee, to
consider and relieve their Wants. Thou have done these things in secret, and I
will reward thee openly: Enter thou into the Joy of thy Matt. 25. 23.
Lord. Thou Sowedst plentifully, and shall Reap 2 Cor. 9. 6.
plentifully: Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come Acts 10. 4.
up before me, and as thou have Sowed to the Spirit, (employing thy self and
Goods for Spiritual Ends) thou shall of the Spirit reap eternal Life. I am Gal.
6. 8. Heb. 2. 11.
not ashamed to call thee Brother, since thou partakest of my Charitable and
Divine Temper: Come my dear Brother, my welcome Coheir of that Romans 8. 17.
Kingdom which is prepared for such Faithful Stewards as thou have been.

O! Who would not make such a Friend with the Mammon of Unrighteousness! What a
glorious End is here, of our Ministering to the Servants of Christ upon Earth! O
Sirs! We do not circumvent you, when we exhort you to Almsdeeds and Good Works.
We do not come to rob you of your Treasures, when we earnestly press your
Charity: But we give you the Opportunities of doing good to your selves, and to
become Rich in Good Works; which is the 1 Timothy 6. 18.
noblest and most valuable Riches in the whole World.

Wherefore, withold not Good from such to whom (by the Law of Charity) it is
due, whilst it is in the Power of thine Hand to do it, (Prove. 3. 27.) Deferr
not all your Charity to your last Will and Testament: Your Wealth may slip out
of your Hand before that hour; or however, methinks it is not then so properly
in your Possession, when within a Minute or two it will be another's. But
better late than never; though the sooner we do it, the surer will the
Distribution be, the more Heroic the Virtue, the more Eminent our Faith, and
the more Weighty our Reward.

Do we indeed believe, that an Omniscient Righteous God governs the World? And
do we own the Holy Scriptures as his Word? And does God say, Blessed are the
Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, (Matt. 5. 7.) If so, we cannot but be
ready to distribute, and glad to communicate Glad 1. Tim. 6. 18.
of the happy Opportunity of exchanging Temporals for Eternals. We know who
says, That he that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord; and what he gives
shall be repaid him again, (Prove. 19. 17.) And it will be repaid with ample yea
infinite Increase. The Judge himself tells you in what manner ( Luke 6. 38.)
Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over, into your Bosom.

Let me then freely speak to you whose Cup of Plenty overflows; who perhaps
scarce know how to bestow your Goods, the Hand of God having Luke 12. 17.
been very liberal to you. Why? Here are safe Repositories for your Grain; the
best Bags for your Money; Bags that wax not old: Here is a Luke 12. 33.
Royal Bank which will never fail, ( Luke 12. 33.)

Let your Faith then freely cast your Bread upon Eccl. 11. 1.
the Waters, and it will be securely transported to the other World, and will
there be safely laid up for your Use; and if your Sins do not obstruct it, you
will reap the Comfort of it ten thousand Years hence.

See then, here are Bills of Exchange ready: God has subscribed it with his
own Hand, that he will repay in the other World, what you piously and
charitably bestow in this, if the rest of our Life be agreeable herewith. Dare
you Credit him upon whom the Bills are drawn? Yea, dare you scruple his
Sufficiency or Integrity?

Leontius who lived at Cyrene, and was a most Faithful and Religious Person,
has Recorded it for a certain Truth Dying and dead Men's Say ings. p. 118.
says an Author of our own, That Evagrius a Philosopher turning Christian, and
bestowing 300 l. on the Poor, by the Persuasion of the Pious Bishop Synesius;
for the Repayment of which by Christ, in the things of another World, the said
Bishop had given him a Note under his Hand. It Is said that the same Evagrius
appeared to Synesius a little after his Death, and bad him open his Coffin, and
there he should find a Receipt written by his own Hand, in token that he had
received in the World above, the Rewards promised to Charity in this. And this
Receipt (says Leontius) was carefully kept in the Church at Cyrene in his
time, and was shown to any one that desired it. This passage is quoted by many
Divines as an authentic Relation; but if any think there may be Falsehood in
it, I am sure there is none in that sure word of Prophecy ( Mark 10. 21.) Give
to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. And though the Pharisees
who were covetous derided Luke 16. 14.
these Doctrines of Christ; Far be it, Far be it from all that have the Honor
to bear the Name of Christ, thus to contradict and Blaspheme. For, true
Religion and undefiled before God, is to visit the Fatherless and the Widows in
their Affliction, and to keep our selves unspotted by the World, (James 1. 27.)

This, this is that which renders the Name of Captain William Curtis venerable
to this day. He has left us such an abiding Charity, as is not like to sink or
be diminished to the end of the World. So that by the Hands of his deputed
Trustees, the Prison-doors are opened every other Year, and a little Jubilee
celebrated. The hungry Bowels are refreshed every Week; the mournful Widows
Heart is made to sing; and (what is no less a Charity) the youthful Hands are
taught to work, and put in a way to be useful to their Country. And that his
Trustees might not be mere Conduitpipes of his Bounty, to transmit all to
others without tasting a Drop themselves; there is a prudent Allotment of a
suitable Portion for a Frugal Collation at their Annual Meeting to make the
appointed Distributions. These were the Effects of a charitable, bountiful, and
friendly Soul: The Advantages of which to the truly charitable Donors, are as
certain, and more great, than the Benefits done to those who partake of such
Bounty here upon Earth.

Let us then, according to our Ability, follow so good a Precedent in a Point
of such unquestionable Advantage. A part of our Estate blessed by God, is much
better than the whole unblessed by Him. And a Greek Poet wittily calls this, A
way to make a Part greater than the Whole. (...)


Let us then offer up the First Fruits to God, that the whole Crop may be
blessed by him, and Sanctified to us. When Manna it self was hoarded up, from a
Principle of Covetousness and Distrust, it bred Worms and stank; but when the
same was laid Exodus 16. 20
up from a Principle of Piety, it was preserved, to the Comfort of the Owners (
Exodus 16. 24.)

To close up all then: You see how greatly it concerns us, to fix our Minds on
the permanent Substance of good things above, and not on the fading Shadows of
them beneath. In order to which, let us beg of God, that he would vouchsafe to
breathe a Spiritual Warmth toward Divine things in all our Breasts by his Holy
Spirit; that so when earthly Riches take their wing, our Comfort and Peace may
not flee away with them. That we may not say with Micah, They have taken away
my Gold and Judges 18. 24.
Silver, and what have I more? But with St. Paul, we know that we have in
Heaven a far better and more Heb. 10. 34.
enduring Substance. Which I pray God grant unto us all, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

