A WORD TO THE Fifth-Kingdom-Men.

IN A LETTER To one of them Written from the Light within him.

By One whom the World calls a QVAKER.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

Thou that c^ll^st thy self one of the Fifth-Kingdom.
THou have slanderously reported of me, because I made an Address to the King,
in the ^^half of those that live up to the l^ght within them, that therefore I
am grown a Courtier; My Hats being still plu^kt off my Head when I went into
the Kings presence shows how ^ittle Adoration I am willing to pay to King or
Kesar* Yet know that I will never deny Subjection, and Civil obed^ence to the
chief Magistrate and especially our present one, whom though I do not look on
as a God, yet I do as a good natu^'d man, and I wish thou did love any one
so wel^, as he does all Mankind; His person thou woul^^st abuse and have by
thy practices endeavou^ed as much as in thee lies to poison his very Soul, and
that with the hatred of those of us whom ^he World calls Quakers; But I hope we
shall be as far from being joined wi^h thee in Punishment, as we are from being
u^ed in Opinions and P^actic^s. Though our O^inions in the esteem of men that
will not trouble themselves to understand them, seem very like to thine, yet
are they far from being the same. And pity it is that the Inhibitants near
Bedlam, should be whipped for the madness of others in Bedlam; Into which place,
I shall on thy Repentance, improve my Interest in the ^ing, that thou may ^e
removed from thy p^esent Prison. And further to let thee see how little I have
learned to daub and flatter by going to the Court, I will deliver my Opinion
(which I am told thou desire) about the Declaration of the men of the Fi^th
Ki^gdome, without complementing; And I say of it, It is the wo^st thing that
ever was Printed since P^in^ing was found out. Thou call for Fire from
Heaven to destroy thy Neighbors, and because thou can not have it from
thence, would fetch it from Hell. Thou ^hinkest that thou understandest Gods
Cipher in the Revelation, and falsely imagining that thou have found out its
sense, do undergo the curse of that Book for adding to it, and know that
thou sinnest more in adding things to it, then if thou had only added words.
I perceive thou art of the testy humor of the Prophet Jonah, to Have thousands
of Men, Women, and innocent Children destroyed to make good thy Prophecyes. Or
rather to compare thee according to thy deserts, thou art like that
Almanack-Maker, who foretold a Fire in a City and made it himself.

But alas thy notions of the Revelation, and of the thousand years reign, are
not agreeable to the words of the obscure Text. For Revelat. 20. 4. God will
raise up the Saints which are dead, when that Reign is to begin, which now is
not done.

How art thou sure that thou have calculated things in Daniel, and the
Revelation right? I doubt as Sir Francis Drake in going round the world lost a
day, so thou in thy Prophecyes which concern the revolutions of the world
may have lost a day, as it is in the Scripture account a year, or as in Gods
a thousand years. And indeed the thousand years reign is held by a thousand men
so many several ways. The Trumpets then in the Revelation giving an uncertain
sound, how shall men prepare themselves to Battle? But a little to answer some
of thy objections; It Is said, Daniel ^he 7th. and the 18th. The Saints of the
most High shall take the Kingdom and possess it. I answer, that the 27th.
verse does tell thee how they shall take it, The Kingdom shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most High. Here then by taking it, is not meant by
force but receiving it when given. I therefore conclude that neither God nor
Man did give thee this Kingdom, because thou have not took it, If thou say
that the man of Sin is to be destroyed, consider those words that it is by the
brightness of his coming; Thou rash man would be an incarnate Devil even
whilst thou art destroying the man of Sin. If thou accountest the Parson of
Rome the wicked one, as I also do, why do thou not go thither to convert him,
as one of my opinion did, spending above thirty pounds in that Journey? But
thou instead of sending one to convert him, would send a thousand if thou
could to cut his throat, though he never did harm to thee, or any of thy
Kindred; But thou will say, thou would have a hand in settling this
fifth-Kingdom; I answer, that is to be the Stone cut out without hands. The
clearest Prophecy of this Kingdom is in Revelation the 19th. and the 11th.
which tells thee how this fifth-Kingdom shall be brought in, and the Saints
engaged in order to it. Heaven shall be opened and a man upon a white Horse
appear, and the Armies which are in Heaven shall follow him upon white Horses
etc. So that thou art not to go ^orth till the King appear in Heaven upon the
white Horse. If thou say the Kings appearing on a white Horse is allegorical,
so say I is this Kingdom too, and neither thou, nor I, nor any of our
Neighbors, know what it is. Now by all thy mistakes about this, thou show
that thou do not follow the light, but the hear within thee. Thou and thy
company have only fulfilled that one Pro^hecy, Revelation the 13th. and the
10th. He that kills wi^h the Sword, shall be killed with the Sword, which
has happened to the mutinous foolhardy men of thy persuasion, though they in
their Declaration said that not a hair of their heads should be touched. It
has been observed that Saul when he went to seek his Fathers Asses, found the
Kingdom; but any that among you sought their Fathers Kingdom, found but Asses.
I wonder how it came into thy head to think that this Island must be the Seat
of the fifth King; If he has signified it to thee by any Letter that he will
land here, show it to us who know his hand as well as thou; If it be writ with
that Juice which is ordinarily used for Secrecy, will thou fire a Town to read
it by? We know his Seal likewise as well as thou, namely a Miracle, which thou
can not perfectly Counterfeit; Christ's Miracles were to make the Lame to
walk, the B^ind to see, the Sick to be healed; but the Miracles thou pretendest
to, work the quite contrary Effects* Christ did raise the dead, but thou only
can kill the Living; Christ wrought a Miracle to pay Tribute, but thou
would work one if thou could to pay none. Think what thou will, the Kingdom
of God comes not by Observation, neither shall they say, Lo here and Lo there,
but the Kingdom of God is within thee. Live but up to the Light within thee,
and thou will need no other g^ory to adorn that Kingdom. Thou poor Creature
whilst thou avoidest Popish Principles, runnest upon Turkish, and art for a
word and Inspiration and a sensual Paradise, Christ bids his Disciples that if
any take their Cloaks, they should give them their Coats also, but thou take
both. Thou blamest Priests for taking away the Tenth part of men's Estates, and
would thy self take away the other Nine. I shall only t^ke notice of one
thing more in thy Declaration, namely thy ambitious Design of extending thy
Conquests to France Spain, Germany and Rome, when thou have settled the Fifth
Kingdom here. For some Reasons best known to thy ^elf, thou omittest the
Kingdoms of Sweden, Poland, Denmark, and those of Muscovy, Persia, and China,
and the whole Turkish Empire. It may be thou art willing that these places
should be preserved for the next nine and Twenty of thy Per^wasion to Subdue,
and think it fair for Swan-Ally to be able to confo^nd the Houses of France
and Spain, the Princes of the Empire, and Conclave of Cardinals. But me thinks
any 29 of thy Opinion, should be afraid to appear in Germany, where forty
Thousand were defeated. However let me advise thee to begin thy bloody work of
Destruction rather abroad than in England, as young Physicians travel to
practice their Arts of killing in other Countries. But to speak more seriously,
my Counsel is that thou should stay at home, and mortify that Principle from
whence Wars and Fightings come, so shall thou increase the Peace of thine own
Conscience, and the quiet of the World, and not need a Fifth Kingdom to make
thee happy.

FINIS.

