THE MANIFOLD WISDOM OF GOD. In the diverse dispensation of Grace by Jesus
Christ. In the Old Testament. In the New Testament. In the Covenant of Faith.
In the Covenant of Works.
Their Agreement and Difference.

By G. Walker, B. D. Pastor of Saint John the Evangelist in Watlingstreet.

LONDON. Printed by R. H. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Gilt Cup, near S. Anstins Gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

To all that love the Lord JESUS CHRIST, especially, the godly and religious
professors of the true faith in and about the City of London, grace and peace
be multiplied.
BEloved in the Lord, as your Christian love and charity has abounded toward
me in my bonds: So Christian affection binds me to return to you some tokens
and testimonies of thankfulness. When I was sick and shut up so fast in close
prison, that no liberty to visit me, nor any access unto me for my comforts
could by any importunity, prayers, or petitions be obtained: then, next under
God (whose holy Word the sacred Scriptures in the Original tongues were
allowed me for my solace and sole companions day and night) your faithful and
fervent prayers which you powered out to God in my behalf, were my chiefest
outward help: and the virtue and power of them piercing through the double
doors, locks and bolts, through which no keys of gold or silver could make
way or entrance, did most sensibly reach unto me, and I had a lively feeling,
and sweet fruition of the benefit and comfort of them. Also after the loosening
of my strait bands, and imprisonment; when, for the preserving of my life and
recovery of health, I had obtained the favor to be only confined to the house
of my brother, where my friends might visit me; diverse of you did most
charitably minister unto my necessities, and did ease me of the clog of cares
for necessaries of this life, which otherwise would have pressed me down, as
an unsupportable burden, and consumed me, being stripped of my maintenance and
means of liveli hood, and the profits of my benefice, which were sequestered
and given to others. This your Christian charity* I do acknowledge with all
thankfulness, and do mention in my daily prayers and thanksgiving to God;
firmly believing and persuading my self, that he will abundantly reward your
work of love, and charity, who has promised that whosoever shall give to
drink unto one of his little ones which belong to Christ a cup of cold water
only, verily he shall in no wise lose his reward, Mat. 10. 42. Neither have I
in this time of my restraint neglected to use all diligence, and to do my best
endeavor (you also helping together by prayer for me) that your charity
bestowed on me might bring forth some manifest fruits to your selves and
others; and that by means thereof thanks and praise may be given by many to
God on 2 Cor. 1. 11
our behalf.

For being freed by your bounty from worldly cares, I gave my self wholly to
care for the things of God, and to spend my whole study and pains in some
things which might be profitable to the people of God, especially in revising
papers, and making fit for the press, and for public use, diverse of my
labors and works which they whose judgment I do much reverence, have
persuaded me to be more profitable; and many of my most judicious hearers have
importuned me to publish for the common benefit of many. The first, (in the
communicating whereof I have yielded to their desire) is this small treatise
which is as a praeface to the rest, and indeed it was first delivered in some
few sermons, as a praeface to the exposition of the Gospel of Saint John in the
year 1616. It justly challenges the first place, because the first receiving
of men into the Church of God to be visible members of Christ, is by their
baptism, which is the Sacrament of initiation, and their entering into covenant
with God in Christ; which Covenant is here in this treatise plainly described,
and the agreement and difference showed between it, and the old Covenant of
works, as also between the old and new Testament, and between the Law and the
Gospel.

The next in order is, the instruction of Christians in the Doctrine of Christ,
which in another treatise is described, and set forth by the matter, form,
fruit, affect, end, use, and ground of it. First delivered in diverse sermons
upon Heb. 6. v. 11, 12, 13, 14. and now made and formed into a Treatise fit to
be published for the benefit of Gods Church, at the importunity, and request of
diverse well affected hearers.

The third is a treatise of God, who is the proper subject of the divine art of
Theology, or sacred Divinity, in which the eternal and only true God is
described, and set forth at large, out of the words of Moses, Deu. 6. 4. in the
unity of his essence, and all his attributes, and essential properties, and in
the sacred Trinity of persons; all fully and clearly proved by plain
Testimonies and demonstrations out of the sacred canonical Scriptures. The
fourth is the doctrine of Gods internal operations, and eternal works, to wet
his eternal counsels, purposes, and decrees, concerning the last and utmost
end of all reasonable creatures Men and Angels, and concerning the way and
means by which they are brought to their last end, some to eternal life and
blessedness, and some to eternal damnation, woe and misery.

The fifth is the doctrine of Gods external works, and outward operations;
which are first generally laid open and proved out of several texts of holy
Scriptures* and afterward divided into several heads. The first is the great
work of creation, fully and plainly described out of the first and second
Chap. of the book of Genesis. To which is joined a treatise of Gods actual
providence by which he does order and dispose all things created, and the
actions and motions of them to his own glory, and the eternal salvation and
blessedness of his elect.

The sixth is the fall and corruption of mankind, with all the evils which
thereby entered into the world; fully and plainly described out of Genesis cap. 3.

The seventh is the institution of the Sabbath on the seventh day of the world,
on which day Christ was promised: and by the promise of Christ which was the
greatest blessing given and revealed to the fathers in the old testament, that
day came to be the most blessed day of the week, and was sanctified by God to
be the weekly Sabbath, until by the full exhibition of Christ a perfect
redeemer in his resurrection on the first day of the week, that first day
became a more blessed day, and by Christ the Lord of the Sabbath* was
sanctified, and had the honor of the weekly Sabbath transferred unto it, and
is to be observed of Christians for their holy day of rest, until they come to
the eternal rest in heaven.

These several Treatises I have in this time of my restraint made fit for the
press, and the public view of the world, and here I offer them up to God, as
a sacrifice of thanksgiving for his bounty extended to me, by you his
instruments, by whose charity my necessities have been supplied, the burden
of worldly care removed from my shoulders, and I have been enabled and
encouraged to perform these works with cheerfulness. If with you, (to whom I
tender them as testimonies of my love, and tokens of my thankful heart) they
find acceptance, and prove profitable to the Church and people of God, I shall
think my vows performed, my desires in some good measure obtained, and the
best recompense of my pains which I expect and seek in this world, received;
And with strength, courage, alacrity, and cheerfulness shall proceed in the
opening, and unfolding of the rest of Gods great works of wisdom, power,
goodness and mercy, which concern the restoration of mankind corrupted; by
which the elect are gathered unto God in Christ, lifted up out of their woeful
wretched and miserable condition to the state of grace in this life, and in the
end exalted to the blessed state of glory. As namely the works which belong to
redemption, which God has wrought only by Jesus Christ; And the works which
belong to the application of redemption, which God works in his elect by the
holy Ghost shed on them abundantly through Jesus Christ in their new birth,
and spiritual regeneration; as their effectual vocation, adoption,
justification, sanctification, and glorification, Diverse of which I have in my
course of preaching, opened and unfolded out of several texts of holy
Scripture, as occasion has heretofore been offered; and if God be pleased to
continue life, health, and liberty, they may be continued into several
treatises in that order and method which I have in the first beginning, and
entrance into the body of sacred divinity propounded, in the treatise of God,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4,

For the accomplishing of these works by the good will and pleasure of God, I
do in the words of the Apostle exhort and beseech you, Ephesians. 6 18 Col. 4. 2.
to continue in prayer, and to watch in the same with thanksgiving, praying
always with all prayer and Act. 20. 32
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and
supplication for all Saints, withal praying for us his Ministers, that God
would open unto us a door of utterance, that we may open our mouths boldly to
speak as we ought, and to make known the mystery of the Gospel. And now,
Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among all them which are
sanctified.

George Walker.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
Chap. 1. THe great profit and benefit which does arise from the knowledge of
the true difference between the Old and New Testament; the Covenant of Works,
and the Covenant of Grace; the Law and the Gospel. page 1. Chap. 2. What the
Word Testament signifies, and what is the nature of a Testament. That the
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament are called Testaments only in
respect of Christ, who by his death ratified them, and not in respect of God
the Father, who could not die to make them offorce. The agreement and
difference between the Old and New Testament is plainly showed. 11 Chap. 3.
The doctrine of the former Chapter is applied by way of use, to confute five
differences which the Schoolmen have made, and three differences which the
Jesuits have added to them, between the Old and New Testament, and the vanity
of them is thereby discovered, and a twofold use is moreover showed* 21 Chap.
4. What the Word Covenant signifies, what is the Nature of a Covenant in
general. 38 Chap. 5: The several kinds of Covenants between God and men.
The Covenant of Nature is described. The Covenant of Grace is unfolded, and the
blessings therein promised are rehearsed; That this Covenant is a Covenant of
free grace is plainly proved. The division of it into the Old and New
Covenant. 49 Chap. 6. The Covenant of Grace first made with Adam after his
fall. The liberty thereby given to man, proves that we gain more by Christ
then we lost in Adam. Of the renewing of it with Noah. The form of renewing it
with Abraham, and revealing it more plainly by 7 things. Of the renewing of it
with Israel at mount Sinah and by Moses. That it is called the Old Covenant in
respect of the New Covenant in the Gospel. That it is mixed of the Covenant of
Works, and of the Covenant of Grace. The reasons why God in making it did
renew the Covenant of Works, and mingle it with the Covenant of Grace made
with man in Christ after his fall. 58 Chap. 7. Of the New Covenant of Grace, as
it is made most plainly in the Gospel, and in the New Testament. The reasons
why it is called the New Covenant. 72 Chap. 8. The Method and Order propounded,
which is to be followed in showing how the New and Old Covenants of Grace do
agree and differ. 86 Chap. 9. The threefold agreement between the Covenant of
Nature, which is called the first Covenant, and the Covenant of Grace, which is
called the second Covenant. 87 Chap. 10. The six notable things in which the
Covenant of Nature does differ from the Covenant of Grace. 90 Chap. 11. The
profitable and holy use which may be made of the doctrine concerning those
differences between the Covenant of Nature and the Covenant of Grace. 100
Chap. 12. The sixfold agreement between the Covenant of Grace, as it was
revealed to the Fathers of the Old Testament, and the same renewed and more
fully explained in the Gospel. 103 Chap. 13. The sevenfold difference between
the Covenant of Grace, as it was made with the Fathers, and the Covenant as it
was made in the Gospel. 112 Chap. 14. A twofold use is made of the doctrine in
the two former Chapters. 122 Chap. 15. The agreement between the pure and
plain Covenant of Grace in the Gospel, and the mixed Covenant which God made
with Israel on mount Horeh, by the ministry of Moses, which consisted partly
of the Covenant of Works, and partly of the Covenant of Grce. 127 Chap. 16.
The several differences between the pure and mixed Covenant. 132 Chap. 17. The
Use of the Doctrine is showed for the discovering of Gods singular providence
in preparing means of grace fit for the several Ages of the World. 154 Chap.
18. The signification of the words, Law and Gospel. How they agree and differ,
being taken in their several senses. The Use of the Doctrine. 159
July 30. 1640.
Imprimatur,

The. Wykes.

Faults escaped.
Page 1. line 4. for the, read their, p. 7. l. 2. for repentance, read
regeneration. page 12. l. 6. read 9. for 19. and line 22. for New, read Old,
page 13. line 13. read a for the, page 37, line 14 blot out, ye, page 39, last
line. blot out of it, page 47. line 2. for order read frame, and line 14. after
the word Greek, put in word (...), and line 16. after the word New put in, and
the Septuagints in the Old. page 51 line 8. read tree of Knowledge page 56 line
4. read, in his own person, page 77. line 19. put out, all. page 90. l. 19.
put in, the. page 103. l. 7. read unprofitable servants, for unprofitablenesse.
page 142. line 22. for Christ's, read Christ's blood.

CHAP. I. A brief Treatise concerning the agreement and difference between
the Old and New Testament; the first Covenant between God and Man, in
Innocence, which is the old Covenant of Works: and the New Covenant made with
Mankind, in Christ, which is called the Covenant of free Grace; also between
the Law and the Gospel.
IT is an Ancient custom which has been for many Ages in use among the
learned before the entrance into the large Exposition of the Gospel of Christ
in the New Testament, to premise and lay down by way of preparation, the
nature, difference, and agreement between the Old and New Testament, the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, the Law and the Gospel, the
Prophets and the Evangelists. And surely if we do rightly consider the end
and use of this practice, and the profit and benefit which may arise from the
knowledge of the nature of these beforehand, and of the true difference and
agreement between them, we cannot but judge those learned men worthy of
imitation; and that it will be profitable for us to walk in the same steps
when like occasion is offered. For the knowledge of the true difference of the
Old and New Testament, the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, the
Law and the Gospel, will not only give us great light, for the right
understanding of diverse particular speeches used in the New Testament by the
Evangelists and Apostles, but also may keep us from many dangerous errors,
and enable us to answer the Objections of the Adversaries which they make out
of the words of the Apostles and Prophets, wrongfully wrested and misconstrued
according to their own foolish imaginations. As for example, sometimes the
Apostles exhort us to observe the things which by Tradition have been
delivered unto us, and command to observe the good orders and Ordinances
established in the Churches. Now a man not knowing the difference between the
Old and New Testament, the Law and the Gospel, when he hears such speeches,
may imagine that in those words he is enjoined to observe the Traditions and
Ordinances of Moses, and so may with the seduced Galatians fall into a great
error. So in some places of the Apostles we read, That they who are borne of
God sin not, That they who sin are of the Devil, That they who sin wilfully
after that they have received the knowledge of the truth, can have no sacrifice
for their sin, And that he who believes not is condemned already.

These things when a man hears or reads, who is igno rant of the difference
between the Law and the Gospel; he may imagine with our new up* start
Heretics, That every sin which a man willingly commits, does prove him to
be a child of the Devil, destitute of all grace: And that when men are once
called and justified, they cannot willingly sin any more. And many such
errors he may run into: but if he understands that sin in those places
signifies sin against the Evangelicall Law, the two Commandments of the
Gospel, which commands us to believe and repent, and not every sin against
any Commandment of the Law* he cannot be deceived. For sin against the
Gospel, is when a man being before called to believe and profess the Gospel,
and having received the Commandments thereof, which injoyne repentance of all
sin, and belief in this Jesus Christ whom the Gospel preaches, does
afterward rebel against these two Precepts, that is, falls into infidelity
and impenitency, which is wilful Apostasy. Now these sins none can commit
who is borne of God, or has any true saving grace in him; and if we thus
understand sin, we shall not be deceived. So likewise the Evangelists and
Apostles do tell us, that if we do such and such good works we are righteous,
if we call on the Name of the Lord we shall be saved; and our Savior says,
that he will pronounce them the blessed of his Father, and will say to them,
Come, inherit the Kingdom: for ye fed me when I was hungry, and visited
me in prison: In that ye did these things to my little ones. And again, Many
sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. If we know not the difference
between the Law and the Gospel, we may by these speeches be moved to think
that men are justified and saved by their works, and may merit heaven by good
deeds, as the Jews and Papists do believe. But if we know, that by good
deeds and righteous works, the Evangelists and Apostles do commonly mean not
simple works of obedience to the Law, but works done by a true saving and
justifying faith, he cannot be deceived. For such works have these two
prerogatives above all others. First, in that they are fruits of a justifying
faith, which can never fail, and do proceed from the spirit of repentance,
which makes us one with Christ, sons of God in him, and abides in us, as an
immortal seed, they are infallible tokens of our justification, and do assure
unto us the Crown of glory which Christ has purchased for us, and the
kingdom of heaven which is the inheritance of sons. And therefore we may
truly say, that he which does such works is righteous, and shall be saved,
and enjoy all blessedness, not meaning that they make him righteous or merit
Heaven; but that they are the evidences of his right to heaven. And the more
they are, and the greater and more excellent, the more they testify a man's
union and communion with Christ by a lively faith, and give more assurance of a
greater reward. Secondly, being the works of a man that is justified by faith,
and has perfect communion of Christ's righteousness, they have all their spots
and stains cleansed and covered with the robe of Christ's righteousness, and
all their defects thereby supplied to the full, and so they are perfect
righteous works, as well as the doer of them is a perfect righteous man, not
in themselves, but by virtue of Christ his obedience, which is communicated and
imputed to the worker of them, and in him to them also. They are righteous, and
are so called, not actually or effectually, but passively; that is, not for
making the doer of them righteous, but by the doers receiving of Christ's
righteousness by that faith whereof they are fruits; which righteousness does
supply all their defects, and makes them righteous, not by reason of a natural
change in themselves, or alteration of their nature, but by spiritual
communion which they have of it, together with the doers of them. Thus if we
understand these words in the Evangelicall sense, we cannot be deceived, but
may know the truth, and how to answer all gainesayers. I could bring many
Instances of this nature, but these are sufficient to show, that before we can
sufficiently expound and rightly understand the Gospel, it is meet that we
should know, and be able to show the nature, and also the agreement and
difference between the Law and the Gospel, and between the Old and New
Testament. Wherefore before I come to the particular expounding of the Gospel
of Saint John, which I have undertaken, I will follow the steps of the learned
of former times, and will endeavor to show briefly the agreement and
difference between the Old and New Testament, between the Old Covenant of
Works, and the New Covenant of Grace, and betweeen the Law and the Gospel in
the first place. And in so doing I will labor to reform some things which they
have done before me, and to handle this point a little more distinctly. For
whereas the most part of them do confusedly compare the Law and the Gospel
together without distinction of the words: and while they labor to make the
Gospel more glorious by all means, they do put too great a difference
between it and the Law, which has been a cause of much error to many, and
even of vilifying and contemning the Old Testament and the Law; My desire and
purpose is, first to show the several acceptations and the true sense and
meaning of the words; and then to declare the true agreement and difference,
and to make those differences which are observed by others to agree together so
far as truth will suffer, and to cut off all vain and needless differences.
This doing, I hope I shall reserve to each their due reverence and respect; God
shall have his glory by both the Law and Gospel; Your hearts shall be enabled
with love of both, and you better enabled to understand the true meaning of the
Gospel, and to feel the power thereof in your souls.

CHAP. II.
FIrst for the word Testament, it does signify the last Will of a man which he
makes before his death, and leaves behind him either in word or writing,
testified by seals and* witnesses; By virtue of which Will he does dispose
his lands and possessions which he has purchased, and all his goods which he
has gathered in his life time, and does bequeath them as he himself will,
and to whom he thinks fit, either freely or with condition, to have and hold
them after his death, and not before; This is the true and proper meaning of
the Word, and thus it is used by the Apostle, Hebr. 19. 16. And because the
Apostle there calls the Covenant Christ's Testament, and also elsewhere in his
Epistles wheresoever he does speak of the Old and New Covenant, that is, of
the Covenant of the Law and of the Gospel, does use the Greek word (...),
even the same which there he uses for the last Will and Testament of a
Testator, whereupon it comes to pass, that the Books of the Law and the
Prophets, before Christ, and the Covenant in them are called the New Testament,
and that very fitly in some respect, I mean in respect of Christ the Mediator.
For the truth is, that the Covenant of Grace more obscurely revealed to the
Fathers in the writings of the Law and Prophets, and more plainly in the
Gospel and writings of the Apostles, was never in force, neither could be
ratified but by the death of Christ. It was before his coming sealed by his
Blood in Types and Figures; and at his Death in his Flesh it was fully sealed
and ratified by his very Blood it self actually, and indeed shed for our
sins, and in this respect it may be fitly called the Testament. Because as a
Testament is not enforce till the Testator be dead, and where a Testament is,
there the death of the Testator must come between to ratify it; So it is with
the Covenant of Grace, and the promises therein made unto us. Christ has
performed and purchased all things necessary for us, and does freely give to us
himself, his righteousness, and all his treasures, as a man gives his Lands and
Goods in his last Will, but they cannot be of force to bring us to heaven, till
his death come between as a satisfaction for sin also; It is as necessary that
Justice should be satisfied for sin by his Death, as righteousness of life
performed, and salvation purchased by him for us. Secondly, as a man does seal
his Testament when he sees or imagines that his death is at hand; So Christ
at his last Supper, by instituting the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, and by
the outward Signs and Seals therein contained, did seal to his Church the
Covenant of Grace. Thus in respect of CHRIST the Mediator, God and Man, the
Covenant of Grace, and the writings, Old and New, wherein it is contained, are
called Testaments. But in respect of God the Father, and in respect of God,
considered simply, or as the Maker of the Covenant with man, and the party
between whom and man the Covenant is made; the Covenant and the Writing, Old
and New, wherein it is comprehended, can in no case be called a Testament,
because a Testament is of no force without the Testators death. But God the
Father never dyed, nor can die, neither God simply considered, nor God the
Maker of the Covenant with Man, and the other party in it which is opposed to
Man. Only Christ dyed as he was Mediator, God and Man, and as he was made a
partner with Man, and stood on his side in the Covenant, and as he is the
Testator, and free giver of his Word in the Old and New Testament, and of his
graces and gifts therein promised; so they are called Testaments, and in no
other respect at all.

From the word Testament thus expounded, we may easily collect and gather what
is the nature of a Testament, and both the agreement, and the true and maine
difference between the Old and New Testament, and the Writings contained in
both.

First, we see that they both agree in this, that they are the Writings and
Instruments of one and the same Christ, and his last Will, in which, and by
which he does give himself to his Church withal his righteousness and
obedience, and all the blessings which thereupon depend, and they are both
sealed by his Blood, and ratified by his death. This is manifest by the
exposition of the word before laid down, wherein is showed, that both the Old
and New Writings of the Covenant are called by the name of Testaments, only in
respect of Christ the Mediator, and as they are sealed by his Blood, and
ratified by his Death, and he is the Testator in them as he is Mediator. If
either of them be not sealed, ratified and proceed from him as Mediator, it is
no Testament at all; to call it a Testament, is to say that Christ is the
Testatour, and his Death comes between to make it of force; And to say that he
is not the Testatour, or that it is not ratified by his Death, is to say, it is
no Testament. But all Christians grant that both the Old and New Writings of
the Covenant are Testaments. Therefore it is manifest even by their names that
Christ is Testator in both, that the Legacies given are his gifts, even
himself and all his treasures, and inheritance, that his Blood heals, and
his Death ratifieth both, and thus in substance they agree; being of one
Christ, of the same things, both confirmed by one Death, they must needs be
one, and confirm one another, and run one way; if they go diverse ways, they
must needs destroy one another; if they destroy not one another, it is plain
they go both one way, and do confirm and illustrate each the other, which we
see evidently. The difference then between them, is only in circumstance, and
in quality, not in substance.

First, the Old Testament did bequeath unto the Fathers, righteousness of
life, expiation of sin, adoption of sons, and eternal salvation, and
happiness in, and through Christ the Mediator promised, being not yet come in
the flesh, but only seen a far off, and apprehended by faith, as the Apostle
shows, Hebr. 11. But the New Testament gives and bequeathes all these unto
us, in, and through Christ, being already come in the flesh, and having
actually performed all things for us.

Secondly, The Old Testament was more dark and obscure, not opened but to few,
till the Testators death, and did not beget ordinarily so much knowledge and
faith as the New does, and therefore it was a weaker means of Grace, and did
convert but few unto Christ. But the New is so plain, that it may beget
knowledge in children, and therefore by it the Spirit works more powerfully.

Thirdly, The Old Testament was sealed and ratified typically by the Blood and
Death of Christ, and by types of them to come. The New is ratified by his Death
in very deed, and in it self, and to us it is sealed in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper by tokens and remembrances of his death already past and fulfilled.

Fourthly, the Old Testament, Christ the Eternal Word in his Godhead spoke to
the Fathers, and published by Moses and the Prophets: But the New Testament he
publishd by himself, immediately as he was Godincarnate, and appeared in our
Nature, and by his Apostles and Evangelists, taught by his own mouth, as
appears, Hebr. 1 2.

Fifthly, the Old Testament, in respect of the outward form and manner of
sealing and signifying was temporary, and changeable, and therefore the types
are ceased, and only the substance remains firm: But the New is
unchangeable, and the seals thereof are commemorative, and shall show the
Lords Death until his coming again.

CHAP. III.
THese and such like differences, the former Exposition of the word Testament
may easily admit. For both the Old and the New may be Testaments of Christ,
that is, conveyances, and bequeathings of all his graces and blessings, and may
both be ratified by his Death, and yet differ in these and such like respects.
But as for diverse other differences which many learned men have set down, they
are utterly overthrown by the exposition of the word Testament, and by the
true agreement which from thence I have before gathered.

This therefore shall be the Use 1.
first use which I will make of these instructions, even to overthrow some
other differences which the Schoolmen have devised between the Old and New
Testament. One is, that the Old Testament is temporary and mutable; The New
eternal and unchangeable. This cannot stand, for if the Old Testament be a
Testament, it must needs be the Testament of Christ the Mediator, and if it
was ever in force, it was ratified by the Death of him the Testator (as is
proved before.) But if it was made of force by the Death of Christ, how can it
be changeable, surely in no case, except Christ's Death be made void and of no
force, wherefore the truth is, that though the Old Testament be in quality and
circumstance changeable, and be changed in respect of the outward form and
manner of sealing it unto men; and whereas before it was dark and obscure, it
is now become bright and clear by the coming of Christ, and the rising up of
the Sun of Righteousness, and by the fulfilling of the Promises, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel in the New Testament. Yet it is not changed in
substance, it loses not the essence and being of a Testament, but is still
Christ's Instrument by which he does give and bequeath all his treasures and
benefits unto us, as well as by the New; Yea, it is all one with the New in
substance; it is the New folded up; and the New is the Old opened and unfolded.
Those Legacies which Christ gave to the Fathers by the Old, are not made void,
but are rather perfected by the New. And that which the Old gave by promise,
the New gives by actual performance. The Types which are in themselves
abolished, do stand firm for ever in the things by them signified, which are
the substance of them; and therefore the Ceremonies of the Old Testament, are
truly called Ordinances of Eternity, Exodus 12. 14. and in diverse other places.

Thus we see the vanity of this first difference. Another difference which they
make, is, That the New Testament was sealed with the Blood of Christ; the Old
with the Blood of Bullocks, Goats, and other sacrifices. This also cannot stand
with the former Doctrine; for if the Old Testament be Christ's Testament, and
has been of force at any time; it was of force by virtue of Christ's Death
coming between (for otherwise no Testament is in force, but by the death of
the Testator.) And so it is sealed by Christ's Blood. Now it is manifest by the
former Doctrine, that it is the Testament of Christ, and has been in force to
the Fathers (as all true Christians confess), and therefore it was sealed, not
by the blood of Bullocks only, but also by Christ's Blood, and so this
difference is not true. But because the words of the Apostle seem to justify
it, Hebr. 9. let me show how far it may be admitted, and wherein it is
faulty. First, it is certain that the Old Testament was outwardly sealed at
the first, and so long as it stood alone in force by the blood of Bullocks and
other Sacrifices only: But inwardly by the Blood of Christ only, which was
signified and represented in the blood of Sacrifices. And at length when Christ
came, and by the plain Doctrine of the Gospel had explained it, then it was
together with the New, sealed outwardly by Christ's Blood shed unto death on the
cross. But the New was at the first outwardly sealed by the Blood of Christ,
and is now ever since daily to us outwardly sealed by the Sacraments, and
inwardly by Christ's Blood therein signified: But to say that the Old Testament
was not at all, nor at any time sealed with Christ's Blood, but only by the
blood of Bullocks and Sacrifices, and that the New Testament only was sealed
with Christ's Blood, is to make a false difference. For verily the Old Testament
being nothing else but the New folded up, and the New the Old opened to all;
the sealing of the New by Christ's Blood, was the sealing of the Old also: yea,
as our Sacraments, and the outward Signs of Bread and Wine are true outward
Signs consecrated to signify Christ's Death past; so were the Sacrifices of
the Law and the Old Testament true Signs, consecrated to signify Christ's
Death to come; and as ours Seal the New Testament, so did they Seal the Old.
As with our right outward Sealing, there goes the inward Sealing of Christ's
Blood; so also with those outward Seals rightly understood, and used. And
therefore as it is absurd to say that the New Testament is sealed only by
Bread and Wine, and Water, when we administer and receive the Sacraments,
because we use no other outward Signs; so it is absurd to say of their
Sacrifices, that in them there is no Sealing, but by blood of Beasts
sacrificed; and thus we see the vanity of this difference also.

The third difference which the Schoolmen make, and which only the Papists
do hold, is, that the Old Testament did only promise eternal blessings, and
the eternal inheritance, and did foreshew them in Types, as in the blood of
Sacrifices, Christ's Blood, in the promised Land, the inheritance of Heaven, and
such like: but it did not give them till CHRIST the Testator was dead. But the
New Testament does promise, and also give and exhibit the things promised. This
difference is very false and impious, and is easily confuted by the former
Doctrine, and by the whole Scriptures. For that which only promises, and
gives not, is not a Testament, it is never in force, neither ratified at all;
for being in force by the Testators Death, it must needs give as well as
promise. If the Testators Death never come between, then it is no Testament.
But the Old is a Testament, and was in force, and did give, and does give
Grace, as well as promise it.

This the whole Scriptures show; for the Legacies promised and given in Christ's
Will, are Himself, with all his benefits which do accompany him.

First, his Conception and Birth, most holy without spot, to sanctify our
conception in sin, and our unclean birth.

Secondly, His perfect righteousness of life, to make believers righteous.

Thirdly, His Death and Sufferings, to ransom them from eternal death, and
Hell, by satisfying for their sins.

Fourthly, His Spirit, with all saving Graces, as Faith, and such like, by
which they come to have Communion with him of his Sonship, inheritance,
righteousness, and right to all blessings, Temporal, and Spiritual.

Now though Christ was only promised in the Old Testament, that he should
come, and obey, and suffer for man's redemption; but was not actually exhibited,
nor did obey and suffer till the days of the New Testament: yet his Manhood,
Birth, Obedience, and Death, were then as effectual to save the faithful, as
now they are; And in that respect he is called the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world. Also by the Words of promise in the Old Testament,
Christ communicated and gave his Spirit to Adam, Noah, Abraham, David, and all
the faithful in the Old Testament, which Spirit wrought in them Faith and
perfect Communion with Christ, of his person so far, as to make them sons
and heirs of God, of his Death for remission of their sins; of his
righteousness for their justification, and of all saving Graces needful to
Salvation. This appears by Enoches translation into glory, that he might not
see death, and by Eliahs taking up into Heaven, by virtue of Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, who is the first fruits from the beginning: Also
by that which is said of Abraham, that he by believing came to be counted
righteous: And by that which David says to himself, That God is his portion,
Psalm. 16. and with him he had all things to make him blessed. Therefore this
difference is a blasphemous and wicked fiction, excluding the Church of the Old
Testament from Heaven, and all fruition of Christ's benefits, and from all
saving graces, as Regeneration, Remission of sins, Justification, and
Redemption, which are the blessings promised and given in the Old Testament.

The fourth difference is, that the New Testament is the end of the Old, and
the Old is but a means to obtain the New. This is confuted, first by the
Doctrine before; for they which are both in substance, one, and the same
Testament, cannot the one be the end of the other. But so are these two, as I
have before showed: and it is most manifest by the agreement between them,
that as the Old confirms the New, and serves to move men to receive it; So the
New being embraced, serves to give light to the Old, that men may see into the
true meaning of it, and rightly understand it; and so here is no difference, in
this respect they are both alike.

Secondly, the Scripture is plain, (even in the places which they cite to
prove this difference, to wit, Romans 10. 4. and Gal. 3. 24. and teaches plainly
that Christ is the end of both, and both serve jointly for this one and common
end, to bring men to Christ, and to perfect communion with him: and therefore
the New is no otherwise the end of the Old, than the Old is the end of the New,
and so this difference is false and erroneous.

The fifth difference is, that the Old Testament was given only to the natural
Israelites; the New to all the world: which is here by the former Doctrine
proved false. For if the Old Testament is the Will of Christ, as Mediator, who
gave himself for all the Nations of the world, and is one in substance with
the New, and gives the same Legacies, as is before showed, surely they were
both given to all Nations, even the Old as well as the New, else what shall we
say of Job, and the godly and the faithful of his Country and Age, mentioned
in his Book, who had the promises sealed with bloody sacrifices, and yet were
not of the Nation of Israel? Only here is the difference; the natural
Israelites had the keeping of the Old Testament, and the Oracles of God
committed to them for a time, to wit, from Moses until Christ: And yet even
then it was lawful for them to teach the Word, and make known the promises to
strangers of all Nations, and to convert them, and to receive them into the
Church; And many were converted, and joined themselves to to the God of Israel:
As Rahab of Jericho, a Canaan itesse, Ruth of Moab, Ebedmelech of Ethiopia, and
diverse others. But the New Testament is committed to no special people, but
published to all the world and among all Nations: So now is the Old also, and
serves ever since Christ, for the instruction of all Nations of the Gentiles.
Therefore this difference is false. To these the Jesuits have added three
differences more, which are so gross, and abominable, that they need no
confutation. One is, that the New Testament went before the Old, because the
promises of Christ went before the giving of the Law, 430 years. Here they
show much ignorance; for the Old Testament consists of the promises, as well as
of the Law, and the promises are the chief things in it; so that the promises
and it go together, and they are no more before it, then it is before it self.
If they will perversely by the Old Testament understand only the Law of Moses,
having no respect to the promise of Christ, they are in a gross error. For
that can in no wise be called the Testament of Christ, it has nothing to do
with the Mediator, he does not by it bequeath any thing to his Church.

Another difference is, that the Old Testament, did not quicken any, nor give
Spiritual blessings, but only Temporal; but the New Testament does give Life
and Spiritual blessings, even the Kingdom of Heaven. The Old gave but the
shadow, the New gives the substance, the Old the shell, the New the Kernel.
This is also a mistaking of the Old Testament, for the bare Letter of the Law,
without respect to Christ. Otherwise their speech is most abominable. For God
by the promises in the Old Testament did quicken many, and bring them to
Christ, and to all grace and blessedness in him, as we see in Abraham, David,
and the holy Prophets. So that if they do by the Old Testament understand
aright all the writings of Moses and the Prophets before Christ, they are in a
blasphemous error. If only they mean by the Old Testament, the Law without
any promises of Christ, then it is no Testament, and so they err grossly to
call it so.

The last difference is, that the New Testament makes men sons, and brings
them also to the state of sons: but the Old does make none sons, except by
virtue of the New, neither does it bring any to the state of sons, but all
under it lived as children under bondage, as the Apostle speaks, Galat. 4.
This is also proved to be false by the former Doctrine; for whosoever are in
Christ are sons, and whosoever have the spirit of Adoption, are sons of
God, and in the state of sons. Now the Old Testament did bring all the
faithful Fathers to Christ, and to true fellowship Acts 4. 12.
and communion with him, otherwise none of them could have been saved, neither
could it have been a Testament, one in substance with the New. Yea, the
Scripture testifies plainly, that the faithful under the Old Testament were
sons of God, for Isa. 63. v. 16. they are brought in thus speaking to God;
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not. Thou, O Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer, thy Name is
from everlasting, And Isa. 64. 8. and Ierem. 31. 9. I am a Father to Israel
(says God) and Ephraim is my first borne: and yet all these had no other
means to bring them thus near to God, but the Old Testament wherefore we see
there is (...) such difference between the Old and New Testament, as many
would have us to believe, only they differ in some circumstances, and in
quality, as in plainness of revelation, and such like beforenamed; and yet
now the difference is not so great, when the Old is laid open and expounded by
the New, and daily more and more explained to us. And so much for the first Use.

Secondly, this truth well considered, Use 2.
is of special use to make us esteem and reverence the Old Testament as well
as the New, and so to respect and honor the New, that in the mean time we do
not neglect or lightly esteem the Old Testament. Let blasphemous Heretics
say what they will, let some of them call it a killing letter, and the ministry
of death, and make the Prince of darkness the Author of it, and others
blaspheme it, as a covenant only of carnal and earthly promises: Yet let all
true Christians honor and embrace it as the Word of the most High, holy, and
only true God, and the Testament of Christ sealed with his Blood, and ratified
by his Death, in which the Fathers found salvation, and eternal life, as our
Savior shows, Ioh. 5. 39.

Thirdly, this Doctrine serves to Use 3.
teach and direct us in the right way both of understanding and expounding the
obscure prophesies of the Old Testament, and confirming, by the Old, the most
doubtful things rehearsed in the New; for the Prophets of old spoke of Christ,
and of all things which are recorded in the Gospel concerning his Death, and
sufferings for our Redemption: and if any should doubt of the things written in
the Gospel, concerning the ignominious death and sufferings of Christ, as
being too base for the Son of God to suffer; the Old Testament will confirm
all, and will show ye that God himself from the beginning foretold Christ's
death, when he said, that the Serpent should bruise his heel; and by the
slaughter and bloody sacrifices of Beasts, in Types foreshewed the same.

The Prophets also from Moses, in all the Scriptures, foretold whatsoever
Christ did or suffered in the flesh for man's Redemption; as our Savior showed
to the two Disciples in the way to Emaus. And as the Luke 24.
New Testament is confirmed by the Old; so the Old receives clear light from
the New, and that which in it was more obscurely foretold, is by the fulfilling
thereof in the New, made most clear and evident: wherefore let us receive them
both as one and the same Testament in substance, and that of one and the same
Christ. If we make them both look one way, and in expounding them make Christ
the matter and subject of both, we shall not err, nor be deceived, but in both
together we shall see Christ most fully revealed, so far as is needful for us
to know him, and the true way to salvation, in him our Savior and Redeemer.

CHAP. IIII. Of the word Covenant, and of the nature of a Covenant, and the
agreement and difference between the old and new Covenant.
THe second thing which comes to be considered, is the Covenant between God
and Man; where we are to show what the word Covenant signifies, what is the
nature of a Covenant, and the agreement and difference between the Old and New
Covenant. The word Covenant, in our English tongue, signifies, as we all know,
a mutual promise, bargain and Obligation between two parties, and so
likewise does the Hebrew word (...), and the Greek word (...), signify most
commonly: But the derivation of the Hebrew word, and of the Greek, is of
special use, to show the nature of the Covenant which they principally
signify, and what special things are therein required. I will therefore first
insist upon it a little. Secondly, I will show the several sorts of Covenants
which the words signify, and will briefly describe all the Covenants between
God and Men. Thirdly, out of the several descriptions I will gather the
agreement and difference between the Old and the New Covenant. And lastly, I
will make some use and application of these considerations to our selves.

First the derivation of the words of it, if it be rightly considered, may give
us great light. The Hebrew word Berith, is of some derived from (...), Barar,
to purify, and to purge out Dross, Chafe, and all uncleanness, and to
choose out, and separate the pure from the impure, the gold and silver from the
dross, and the pure Wheat from the Chafe. The reasons of this derivation,
are two. One, because God, in making the Covenant of natural life, did choose
out man especially with whom he would make the Covenant. And in the Covenant of
Grace he does choose out the multitude of the Elect, even his Church and
faithful people, whom he did separate by Predestination, and Election, from
all eternity, to be an holy people to himself in Christ. The other reason is,
because in a true, and lawful Covenant, both parties must be of pure hearts,
free from all deceit and Sophistry, and must deal faithfully, and mean
plainly and sincerely in every point and article.

Others derive the word Berith of (...) Bera, which signifies both to Elect or
choose, and also to divide or cut asunder. The reasons which they give, are two.
The first, because Covenants are not made but between choice persons, chosen
out one by another, and about choice matters, and upon choice conditions,
chosen out and agreed upon by both parties. The second, because God made the
first Covenant of Grace, and sealed it by sacrifices of Beasts, slain, divided,
and cut asunder, and the choice fat and other parts offered upon the Altar; and
in making of great and solemn Covenants, men in Old time were wont to kill and
cut asunder sacrificed Beasts, and to pass between the parts divided, for a
solemn testimony, Genesis 15. 17. and Ier. 34. 18* Others derive the word (...)
of (...) which signifies to eat and refresh ones self with meat, whereof
there is some reason, to wit, Because the Old Covenant of God, made with Man in
the Creation, was a Covenant wherein the Condition or Law was about eating;
That Man should eat of all Trees and Fruits, except of the Tree of Knowledge
of good and evil. And in the solemn making and scaling of the Covenant of
Grace in Christ the blessed Seed, the public Ceremony was slaying and
sacrificing of Beasts, and eating some part of them, after the fat and choice
parts were offered up and burnt on the Altar. For God by virtue of that
Covenant gave Man leave to eat the flesh of Beasts, which he might not do in
the state of innocence, being limited to Fruits of Trees, and Herbs bearing
Seed, for his meat, Genesis 1. 29. So also in solemn Covenants between men, the
parties were wont to eat together; as appears, Genesis 31. 46.

To these, two other derivations may be added; one, that Berith may be derived
of (...) which signifies to create, whereof there is good reason; to wit,
because the first state of creation was confirmed by the Covenant which God
made with Man, and all creatures were to be upheld by means of observing of the
Law and Condition of that Covenant. And that Covenant being broken by Man, the
world made subject to ruin, is upheld, yea, and as it were created anew by the
Covenant of Grace in Christ.

The other derivation is of the Hebrew word (...) which signifies fat: because
in the Covenant of Grace, God promises to Man the fat of Heaven, and of the
Earth, that is, the most excellent blessings which Heaven and Earth can afford:
and Man offers up to God the fat of his soul, and of all his goods, that is,
the most precious things which he has, besides the sweet and most excellent
and precious sacrifice which Christ offers up for him to God.

These are the diverse derivations of the word Berith, which I have observed out
of the writings of the learned, to which I have added these two last.

And because this word does well agree with the sound and signification of all
the words of which it is derived by several learned men, so that if we should
make choice of any one derivation, we might seem to reject and despise others
which stand with as good reason; I hold it the safest and surest way to account
of this word, as of a special word invented and given by the Spirit of God
himself, who sees and knows all circumstances of every thing at once, and that
it is purposely framed out of all the words before named, and includes in it
the sum of them all, being, as it were, the quintessence of them all distilled
together into one perfect sense. And howsoever it may seem strange to some, at
the first blush, that one word should be derived of many, and receive a mixed
signification from them all; yet if they better consider it, they shall see
good reason for it, and shall find that it is no rare thing in holy*
Scripture, for one word to signify in one place diverse things, and one word to
be derived of many, and to borrow the several significations of them all.

The proper name of the Prophet Samuel, is derived of four Hebrew words, the
first Shaal, which signifies to Ask; the second Hu, which signifies Him; the
third Min, which signifies Of; the fourth El, which signifies God, And it is
said, 1 Samuel 1. 20. that his Mother called him Shemuel, that is, one asked of
God, because she said, I asked him of the Lord. So the Prophet Isaiah called
his son by Gods appointment Sheariashub, which is derived of several words
which signify, A remnant shall return. And the Prophet Jeremy, by inspiration
of Gods Spirit, told Pashur the persecuting Priest, that his name should be
Magormissabib, terror round about, or on every side, because the Lord would
make him a terror to himself, Ier. 20. 3. Now if one name may by the
testimony of Gods Spirt be derived of diverse words, and borrow a mixed sense
from them all, as the word Samuel, which is derived or compounded of four
words, and does hold the signification of them all, though it includes but one
letter of some of them; much more may we think that the word Berith is
derived of all the words before named, and includes in it the sense and
signification of them all, as well as it includes a syllable at least of every
one of them; this is one strong and invincible reason. Secondly, we have good
reasons of every derivation, as I have already showed. Thirdly, the deriving of
the word, from all, and not from one only, does reconcile in one, all the
several opinions of the Learned, and justifies their several derivations,
without rejecting, or offering any wrong, or disgrace to any. Fourthly, the
Greek word (...), by which the Septuagint in their Greek translation do
express the Hebrew word Berith, and which the Evangelists and Apostles in the
New Testament do use to signify a Covenant, is derived of the Greek word
(...), which has diverse of the significations of the Hebrew words, of which
Berith is derived; for it signifies, to set things in order and frame, to
appoint orders, and make Laws, to pacify and make satisfaction, and to
dispose things by ones last Will and Testament. Now to compose and set things
in order, is to uphold the Creation; to walk by Orders and Laws made and
appointed, is to walk by rule, and to live and to deal plainly, and
faithfully, without deceit. To pacify and make satisfaction includes
sacrifices and sinne-offerings. To dispose by Will and Testament, implies
choice of persons and gifts; for men do by Will give their best and most
choice goods to their most dear and most choice friends. Thus the Greek which
the Apostles use in the New Testament to signify a Covenant, to express the
Hebrew word Berith, which is used in the Law and the Prophets, does confirm our
derivation of it from all the words before named. And this derivation of the
Hebrew and Greek names of a Covenant being thus laid down and confirmed by
these reasons, is of great use:

First, to show unto us the full signification of the word Covenant, and what
the nature of a Covenant is in general.

Secondly, to justify the diverse acceptations of the Word, and to show the
nature of every word in particular; and so to make way for the knowledge of the
agreement, and difference between the Old and New Covenant.

First, there we see that this Word signifies all Covenants in general, both
Gods Covenant with men, and also the covenants which men make among themselves.
For there is nothing in any true Covenant, which is not comprised in the
signification of this Word* being expounded according to the former derivations.

Here also we see what is the nature of a Covenant in general, and what
things are thereunto required.

First, every true Covenant presupposes a division, or separation.

Secondly, it comprehends in it a mutual promising, and binding between two
distinct parties.

Thirdly, there must be faithful dealing, without fraud, or dissembling, on
both sides.

Fourthly, this must be betweeene choice persons.

Fifthly, it must be about choice matters, and upon choice conditions, agreed
upon by both.

Sixthly, it must tend to the well-ordering and composing of things between
them. All these are manifest by the significations of the words from which
Berith is derived. But I hold it not so needful to stand upon the nature of a
Covenant in general. I therefore come with speed to the diverse acceptations of
the Word, and to the description of every special, and particular Covenant,
which is needful to be known of us.

CHAP. V.
FIrst, the Hebrew word Berith, (as also the names of Covenant, in the Greek,
and English tongue) signifies a Covenant between God and Men.

Secondly, it signifies the Covenants of men among themselves, as Genesis 21. 27.
It signifies the Covenant between Abraham, and Abimelech, and Genesis 31. 44. the
Covenant between Jacob and Laban. But here I have little to do with Covenants
between men. The Covenant which I am to insist upon, is between God and Men.

First, the Covenant of natural life and blessings, which God made with Man in
the creation.

Secondly, the Covenant of Grace, which God made with Man in Christ, after Man's
fall. In the Covenant of Nature, the parties were, God the Creator, and Man the
Creature, made after Gods Image and likeness, and so not contrary to God, nor
at enmity with him, but like unto God, though far different, and inferior to
God, in Nature and substance. The promises on Gods part were these, That Heaven
and Earth, and all creatures should continue in their natural course and
order, wherein God had created and placed them, serving always for man's use,
and that man should have the benefit, and lordship of them all, and should live
happily, and never see death. The condition on Man's part, was obedience to Gods
Law, and subjection to God his Creator in all things; and this he was to
express by obeying Gods voice in every thing which he had already, or should
at any time command, more especially in abstaining from the Tree of good and
evil. The Sign and Seal which God gave to Man, for the confirmation of this
Covenant, was the Tree of Life, which was to man a Sacrament, and pledge of
eternal Life on earth, and of all blessings needful to keep man in life. The
receiving of this Seal, was man's eating of the Tree of Life. The end of this
Covenant, was the upholding of the Creation, and of all the creatures in their
pure natural estate, for the comfort of man continually.

This was the first Covenant which God made with man, and this is called by the
name Berith, Iere. 33. 20. where God says, If you can break my Covenant of
the day and night, and that there shall not be day and night in their season,
then may also my Covenant with David be broken.

In these words he speaks plainly of the promise in the creation, That day and
night should keep their course, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all
creatures should serve for man's use. This though man did break on his part,
yet God, being immutable, could not break it, neither did he suffer his
promise to fail; but, by virtue of Christ promised to man in the New Covenant,
does in some good measure continue it, so long as Mankind has a being on
earth.

The Covenant of Grace, is that which God made with man after his fall, wherein
of his own free Grace and Mercy, he does promise unto Mankind a blessed Seed
of the Woman, which by bruising the Serpents head, that is, destroying the
power and works of the Devil, should redeem Mankind, and restore all that
believe in that blessed Seed Christ, to a more happy and blessed estate, then
that which was lost. In this Covenant the parties were God Almighty offended by
Man's sin, and provoked to just wrath; and man by his wilful transgression
now become a Rebel and enemy against God, and deserving eternal death; so
that here is great contrariety, separation, opposition, and cause of enmity
between the two parties, and between them there was no possibility of peace
and reconciliation, without a fit and all sufficient Mediator necessarily
coming between.

The things which God promises in this Covenant, and for his part performs,
are admirable, far surpassing man's reason.

The first, is the All-sufficient Mediator Christ, his own eternal Son,
whom God promised immediately after man's fall, and who did then begin,
actually, to mediate for man, and did undertake to become Man, and by a full
satisfaction made in Man's nature, to Gods* infinite Justice, and just Law, and
a perfect and full ransom paid for man's Redemption to purchase pardon of all
man's sins; to justify, and make him righteous, and to reconcile him to God.

The second, is the Spirit to be given to man, and shed on him through Christ
the Mediator, Gal. 3. 14. and Tit. 3. 6.

The third, is spiritual* Life, derived from Christ, and wrought in man by his
quicking spirit, together with all graces and blessings thereto belonging.

The fourth, is union, and communion with Christ of all his benefits, as of his
Sonship, to make all regenerate men sons of God, and heirs of eternal
life, glory, and all blessings, of his satisfaction and sufferings for
remission of all their sins; of his righteousness for justification.

The fifth, is a true right to the natural life which Adam lost, to the
Creatures made for man's use, and to all earthly blessings which are given him
to possess and enjoy in this life.

The sixth, is sanctification and holiness, whereby man is fitted to see and
enjoy God, Matthew. 5. 8. and Hebr. 12. 14.

The last, which is the end of all, is the eternal life of glory, in the
fruition of God in Heaven.

In this Covenant there is not any condition or Law to be performed on man's
part by man himself, as in the first old Covenant, of Nature; and therefore it
is called the free Covenant of Grace, and not of Works. The perfect obedience,
righteousness, and satisfaction of Christ, which he performed to the whole
Law, for man, in Man's nature, though it stands in the place of every man's
perfect obedience to Gods Law in his own person, and his subjection to the
whole revealed will of God, which was the condition of the Old Covenant of
Works, and when man is partaker of it by communion with Christ, he is more
perfectly justified, and made worthy of life eternal, than man in the state of
nature could have been by his own perfect obedience, and personal
righteousness performed in his own person; Yet it cannot so properly be
called, A condition of the New Covenant of Grace which God has made with
Mankind (because God imposes it not as a condition to be performed by every
man in his person) but is one of the blessings promised in the New Covenant. So
likewise, the Gifts, Graces, and Works, and Fruits of the Spirit, which are
required to be in man, to make him an actual partaker of Christ, and of life
and salvation in him, whether they be outward, as the word preached and heard,
the Sacraments given and received, and the like; or inward, as Faith, by which
Christ is received, and applied; Repentance, Love, Hope, and other saving
Graces; they are all free gifts of God, he gives them to us, and by his Spirit
works in us both to will and to do; and without his Grace continually
assisting us according to his promise, we cannot perform any thing which is
mentioned in the Gospel, as a conditional means of life and Salvation in
Christ. And therefore this Covenant is foedus gratuitum, a most free Covenant
of Grace, wherein no condition is propounded to man, to be performed by any
power of his own, for the obtaining of life: but God of his own free Grace
promises all blessings, and for his own sake gives them; and also all power
to receive and enjoy them. And the end and use of this Covenant, is not any
gain which God seeks to himself, nor any good which he can receive from
man, or any creature, but only the making of man perfectly blessed in the
fruition of himself and all his goodness, and so gathering to himself all
things in Christ. This Covenant is that which is called, the Covenant of Peace,
and is most highly extolled, and commended in all the Scriptures, both of the
Old and New Testament. And howsoever the substance of this Covenant has been
always one and the same from the beginning, even from the seventh day of the
world, wherein God first promised Christ the blessed Seed, and so shall be for
ever; yet because the circumstances are diverse, and the manner of revealing the
promise, and of sealing it, is far different in the Old, and New Testament;
hereupon it comes to pass, that the Spirit of God does distinguish it into the
Old and New Covenant; and as it was revealed, and sealed to the Fathers under
the Law, calls it the Old Covenant; and as it is now revealed and sealed under
the Gospel, calls it the new Covenant, Ier. 31. 31. and 2 Cor. 3. 6. And both
these are called by the name (...) in the Hebrew, and by the name of (...) in
the Greek Text.

CHAP. VI.
IN the Old Testament, the Lord first made this Covenant with Adam, but in very
dark, obscure, and general terms, and in Types and figures, even sacrifices
which were seals of it unto him and his posterity. The words of the Covenant
were these, That the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, and the
Serpent should bruise his heel, that is, Christ made man of the Seed of a
Woman; and being by the Old Serpent, the Devil, and by the generation of
Vipers persecuted, and put to an ignominious death, should dissolve the Works
of the Devil, and destroy sin, by satisfying for it to the full. The
sacrifices which God added to this promise, further to illustrate and confirm
it, were clean and fat-fed Beasts, which the Lord commanded them to consecrate,
slay, and to offer up to him by burning and consuming part thereof; and the
rest, they themselves who were his Priests and Sacrificers, did eat. That the
Lord taught Adam to sacrifice, appears by the practice of Cain and Abel, and
by their offerings which they brought to God, being undoubtedly taught by their
father, Genesis 4. Yea, it may be gathered from the Coats of Skins which God
made, and therewith clothed our first Parents, Genesis 3. 21. Those skins could
be no other, but of Beasts slain and offered in sacrifice. For, before Adams
fall, beasts were not subject to mortality, nor slain; the slaughter, and
killing of Beasts, and man's eating of their flesh, came in by sin, and after
man's fall. In innocence man's meat was fruit of Trees, and Herbs bearing seed,
Genesis 1.

The first right which God gave to man to eat flesh, was after the promise, and
after that Beasts were consecrated to be sacrificed as Types of Christ, and of
his Death. Now these sacrifices of Beasts did show the nature of the Covenant,
and the manner of man's reconciliation; choosing of clean and harmless Beasts,
showed that Christ should be pure and holy in himself, like a Lamb without
spot; The consecration of them showed that Christ should in his conception be
sanctified, and take our nature, and our sins upon him, that he might be our
Redeemer, and our Sacrifice. The killing of the Beasts, and the burning of the
fat, and some parts of them, signified the manner of Christ's reconciling of us,
and working our peace, even by his Death, and passing through the fire of Gods
wrath. Gods clothing of Adam and his wife with their skins, signified that
Man's sin and shame is covered with Christ's satisfaction, and the faithful are
to be clothed with the robe of his Righteousness.

The liberty which God gave man to eat flesh of Beasts, which he might not
before sacrifices were ordained, shows that we gain more by Christ, than we
lost in Adam. This was the first making and revealing of the Covenant.

Afterward the Lord renewed this Covenant with Noah, Genesis 6* 10. and did
further reveal it in another Type, namely, the saving of Noah and his family
in the Arc, which was borne up by the flood of Waters; Which Arc signified
the Church: The saving of them only who were in the Arc, showed that
salvation is found only in the Church of Christ, and none can be saved but
they who by faith cleave to Christ, and are members of his body in the true
Church: The water bearing up the Arc, and so saving it and them that were in
it, signified that the and faithful are saved by the washing of Regeneration,
Tit. 3. 5. The Baptism of the Spirit, and that Laver of Christ's Blood, which
outward Baptism signifies, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

Thirdly, the Lord renewed this Covenant with Abraham, and did somewhat more
plainly reveal it unto him.

First, by promise, that in him all the Families of the Earth should be
blessed, and the promised seed and Savior should come of him, Genesis 12. 3. and
22. 18.

Secondly, by showing the way to life and happiness, even justification by
Faith, apprehending Christ, and seeking righteousness for a shield, and for
reward in him alone. Genesis 15. 1, 6.

Thirdly, by Oath, Genesis 22. 16.

Fourthly, by the promise of the Land of Canaan to him, and to his Seed, which
was a Type of the heavenly Canaan, and did praefigure the Country which is
above, Genesis 15. 18.

Fifthly, by the seal of the Covenant of Grace, to wit, circumcision, which
signified that Gods faithful people must be circumcised in their hearts, and
have the fore-skinne of fleshly lusts cut away by mortification of the Spirit,
Genesis 17.

Sixthly, the offering up of Isaac, the son of promise, on Mount Moriah, by
Gods appointment, did praefigure and foreshew, that by the offering up of
Christ, the promised Seed, in the same place, all Nations should be saved, Gods
wrath pacified, and perfect obedience fulfilled.

Lastly, by the outward form, and ceremony of a solemn oath and covenant
which passed between God and Abraham, Genesis 15. 17. For there we read, that
the Lord commanded Abraham to take an heifer of three years old, a she goat
of three years, and a ram of three years, and a turtle Dove, and young
Pigeon, and he divided them in the midst, and laid each piece, one against
another. And it came to pass, that when the Sun went down, and it was dark,
behold a smoking Furnace, and a burning Lamp, that passed between those
pieces. Now this was the form of taking a solemn oath among the Chaldeans and
the Hebrews, instituted by God himself, as appears, Ierem. 34. 18. where it
is said, That when the children of Israel made a Covenant to let their servants
go free, they cut a Calfe in twain, and passed between the parts of it: this
was the ceremony of an oath and covenant; and this God ordained, for he calls
it there, His Covenant. And hereupon it is, that in the Old Testament, the
Hebrew word which is used for making of a Covenant, is (...) (which signifies,
to cut asunder) as appears, Deuteronomy. 5. 2. and diverse other places, which shows
that Covenants were solemnly made by sacrifices of beasts divided.

Now this dividing of the Beasts in two parts, did signify and teach two
things.

First, that there was a division made between God and men, by sin.

Secondly, the division of the Covenant of Grace, into two parts, the Old and
New Testament. The coming, and passing between signified,

First, that God and men must be reconciled, and the Covenant sealed and
confirmed between them by a Mediator.

Secondly, that Christ the Mediator was to come in the midst of years,
between the time of the Old, and the time of the New Testament, to knit and
link both in one, and to confirm both. But in that God came between the
parts, like a smoking Furnace, and a burning Lamp, to confirm the Covenant,
and to ^^ale it to Abraham at that time* this signified,

First, that Christ the Mediator, coming between God and men, should be God
clouded in our frail nature, which is but like a vapor and smoke; that he
should pass through the Furnace of afflictions, and yet in his life should be
a burning and shining Lamp, pure and perfect in righteousness and holiness,

Secondly, that the Lord in those times did reveal himself and his Son more
obscurely, like a smoking Furnace in smoke and clouds, and like a burning
Lamp, which is but dim in comparison of the light of Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, risen up in the Gospel, and the brightness of Gods glory
shining in the face of Jesus Christ.

Besides these we read of diverse other renuings, and explanations of this
Covenant; as that with David, recorded, Psalm. 89. 3, 28, 34 verses; where the
Lord promised that Christ should come of the seed of David, and should be a
King for ever. And many promises of special ^lessings which God of old
promised, are called Covenants. But the special and principal Covenant which
is especially called the Old, and is distinguished from the New Covenant of the
Gospel, is Gods making and renewing of the Covenant with Israel, partly by his
own mouth, and partly by the ministry of Moses on Mount Horeb, which is
mentioned Exodus 19. 20. For that Covenant is a mixed Covenant, partly of the
Covenant of Works, which is the Old Covenant, partly of the Covenant of Grace,
which was made after the fall.

First, God sent Moses to the people to ask whether they would obey the Lords
voice, and keep all his Commandments, that they might thereby live and be
blessed. They answered all together, and said, All that the Lord has spoken we
will do. Thereupon the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, in fire and smoke
and with terrible Thunders and Lightnings, and the sound of a Trumpet, and
spoke unto them the words of the Law immediately with his own mouth, promising
life to them that kept it, and threatening death to the breakers thereof,

Now this was but a repeating, and renewing of the first Covenant of Works, to
be performed by every man in his own person, for the obtaining of life. In
this therefore there was no Mediator between God and the people.

The Reasons why the Lord thus began with Israel, and first renewed the Old
Covenant, were diverse.

The first, was their pride, presumption, Reas. 1.
and hardness of heart; they presumed that they could do all that the Lord
would command them, and therefore he gave them his Law to show them their duty;
that they assaying to fulfill it, and finding their own insufficiency, might
be humbled and brought down from vain confidence in their own Works.

Here the Lord did deal with them, as wise fathers deal with their foolish
and vain boasting sons, who do promise largely that they will do any thing
which their fathers will command them, and that by their merits they will bind
their fathers to love them, and to give them the inheritance. In such a case, a
wise father will put such a boasting son to the trial, and will put him to a
task which he knows that he is unable to go through; not because he
believes, or hopes that his son can perform it (being through his own
intemperance disabled) but for this end, to make him see his own folly and
insufficiency. And so the Lord did deal with Israel.

Secondly, the Lord gave the Law, Reas 2.
which is the rule of righteousness, and withal showed the punishment due to
the transgressors of it; that it might be as the rod of a Schoolmaster, to
drive them to Christ, to learn the saving knowledge, and way of life in him,
as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3. and to make them out of fear renounce
themselves, and seek mercy in him.

Thirdly, to teach them and us, that Reas. 3.
howsoever it is impossible for us to be saved by the Law, by reason of our
sinful flesh, and our corruption which has utterly disabled us, that we
cannot obey it; yet the Law is still in force, and requires perfect
righteousness; and without the righteousness of the Law fulfilled by Christ
for us, we cannot be justified nor saved, according to that saying of the
Apostle, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10. 4. For these and such like reasons God gave the Law.

But when the people of Israel heard the Law, which was the Covenant of Works
to be performed in their own persons, and that immediately from God himself,
it is said that they were sore afraid, and being not able to abide the sight of
Gods glory, nor the sound of his voice, they cried out, Why should we die? and
hereupon they began to desire a Mediator, even Moses, saying, Go thou and hear
the Lord, and speak thou to us, Exodus 20. 19. and Deuteronomy. 5. 25, 26, 27. This was
some good beginning; the Law began to take effect, and to drive them toward a
Mediator. And therefore the Lord said, They have well spoken all that they have
said, to wit, in desiring a Mediator; and added withal, O that there were in
them such an heart, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments
always: that it might be well with them and their children! Which words show
the Will and Mind of God, wishing after a sort their increase and continuance
in this good mind and fear of him, and seeking to keep his Commandments,
in, and by a Mediator. Whereupon he proceeds to deal with them by a
Mediator, and to renew the Covenant with them, by appointing diverse figures of
Christ, as Sacrifices, Rites, Ceremonies, the Tabernacle, the Arc of the
Covenant, and the Mercy Seat; in all which, as in Types, he did reveal Christ,
though obscurely, unto them, and showed that sin was to be expiated and
purged away by his Death.

Afterward, also when they came into the land of Moab, he did renew the
Covenant of Grace in more plain terms, than he did on Mount Horeb; insomuch
that by reason of the greater plainness, it is called another Covenant, Deuteronomy.
29. 2. There he told them, that Christ should be their Rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and
that the Word, his Gospel, was among them.

Now because of the first part of this Covenant, to wit, the ten Commandments
which God spoke first, and after gave them written in two Tables, which are
called by the name of Covenant, Deu. 4. 13. and 9. 9. and indeed are the sum
of the Old Covenant which God made with men in the Creation;

This Covenant, which God made with Israel, is called the Old Covenant, and the
Covenant of the Law, and is opposed to the Covenant of the Gospel, that is, to
the Covenant, as it is now revealed in the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles, and plainly preached and published over all the world.

Thus much for the Old Covenant.

CHAP. VII.
THe New Covenant which was foretold by the Prophets, Isa. 42. 6. Ier, 31. 31.
Zach. 9. 11. it is the Covenant which God has now made by the preaching of the
Gospel in this New Testament. It is the Covenant of all happiness, all
blessings, and all salvation in Christ, plainly preached and revealed, sealed
also and confirmed, not by Blood of Christ in Types and Figures; but by the
very Blood it self bodily shed on the Cross for our sins; and by the two
plain Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, this is called (...) the
New Covenant, Ierem. 31. 31. and (...), Luke 22. 20. and 2 Cor. 3. 6. (...), a
better Covenant, Hebr. 7. 22. For in it the Lord reveals his promises so
plainley and clearly, that all men may see and know the way to life. And
howbeit in this Covenant there is nothing expressed which was not employed and
included in the general obscure promises made unto Adam, and unto Abraham and
David, and the rest of the Fathers in old time; And although Jesus Christ the
perfect Savior, and Eternal Redeemer, God and Man, with all his
righteousness, obedience, and full satisfaction, and all his benefits,
blessings, gifts and graces, which serve to bring men to perfect blessedness
and salvation; and which are fully expressed in the Covenant of the Gospel,
were darkely and obscurely offered unto the Fathers, and were apprehended by
their faith, in that Covenant which God made with them: Yet certainly this
Covenant, as it is now renewed by the coming of Christ, and by the preaching
of the Apostles and Evangelists, may justly be called a New Covenant, and is
truly so called, both by the Prophets and Apostles, for diverse good reasons
and considerations.

First, because there is as great difference Reas. 1.
between this Covenant thus revealed, and the Covenant as it was revealed
before Christ's incarnation, as there is between an old dark house builded up
strong, but yet without any whiting or painting, having very few doors or
windows in it, and those either very narrow, or else shut up with boords, or
stopped with Bricks and Mortar, that few can enter in, save such as are already
within it; and when they are there, they have but small light, and some none at
all: there is (I say) as great a difference between the Covenant, as it was
revealed to the Fathers, and the same Covenant being now renewed with us, as
there is between such an old dark house, and the same house when it is
repaired from the very foundation, and is all whited over within and without,
all painted and beautified, and trimmed from the roof to the foundation, and
is made full of fair and wide doors on every side, for all sorts of people to
enter into it; and has many large windows made in every room, whereof none
is stopped up; but all are glazed with pure Crystal Glass, through which the
light of the day, and the bright beams of the Sun do shine most
comfortably. This difference will appear most evidently to us, if we compare
the Old and New Testament together, and observe the diversity of Revelation.

The Covenant which God made with the Fathers before Christ, was a sure house
builded on Christ, and founded on Gods eternal Truth. It was a safe shelter
against all rain and soul weather of affliction, and all storms of
temptations, and did shroud the Fathers from the scorching heat of an evil
conscience, and the fiery flames of Hell and the Devils fury: but it had few
doors, and those narrow ones, such as few could enter through, to wit, only
the natural Israelites, who were all included in it by the promise made to
Abraham, and those who were circumcised Proselytes. The windows of it were few
also, and those were the dark promises of Christ, which yielded but little
light, shadowed over with Types and Figures, as with a veil of obscurity. It
had no glorious ornaments to allure men a far off; It was not whited, nor
painted, nor set forth with variety of pleasant pictures which might delight
people: but it rather appeared all bloody with the blood of Bulls, Goats,
Rams and Lambs, like a slaughter house, and all black and smoaky with the
continual offering of burnt offerings and sacrifices, and the smoaky fumes of
Incense: Yea, so many were the ceremonies to be observed, and so heavy and
intolerable was the burden of them, that it appeared unto all that passed by,
to be rather a Shop to work and labor in, a Mill to grind in, and an house
of correction, then any place of rest, or pleasant and comfortable habitation.
But this Covenant, as it is now renewed with us under the Gospel, is much
altered, and made like an house repaired and renewed throughout from the top to
the foundation. The Rock Christ upon which it is built, is now set forth in
all his glorious colors; all all the Moss of ceremonies which did over-grow
and cover him, is taken away; he now shines like Ivory, Crystal and Adamant,
most finely polished. The Truth of God in his promises, which is the ground of
our Faith, is now made manifest and clear by the coming of CHRIST and by the
fulfilling of his Word which he spoke from the beginning; and now we dare
boldly rely and rest on Gods Word, in sure hope and confidence that his Truth
will never fail. The Ministerial foundations, to wit, the writings of Moses
and the Prophets, are now by the light of the Gospel changed as it were from
rough and unhewen stones, and made like smooth polished Marble. The four
Gospels are, as it were, four doors made in the four sides of this square
house, looking toward the four winds of Heaven, ready to receive all men from
all the four corners of the earth. The many Sermons of Christ and his Apostles
in the New Testament, are as so many Windows, through which, as through
Crystal Glass, much heavenly Light is conveyed and derived unto us, even from
heaven, from the throne of God; the sweet promises, and many and diverse gifts
of the Spirit, as Knowledge, Faith, Tongues, gifts of Healing, Prophesying,
Miracles, and the like, are as pleasant and delightsome Pictures and Ornaments,
able to draw, allure, and delight the hearts of all men. And the many outward
blessings of peace and plenty which follow the preaching and profession of the
Gospel where it is received, are as it were a glorious painting and whiting,
which does make this house glorious a far off, and fills and enflames all that
pass by with admiration and love of it. Now there is none so obstinate, nor so
strict in speech, but he will grant, that an house so altered and renewed
throughout, (as I have before showed) may truly be called, though not another,
yet a new house; because it is repaired, renewed and beautified in all parts,
though the foundation and substance of the walls, and the Timber be the same.
And therefore none can deny but that the Covenant of Grace now under the
Gospel, though it be the same in substance and matter with that made to the
Fathers, and has the same foundation; yet being thus altered, renewed, and
beautified, may justly be called, though not another, yet a new Covenant at
least, and a better Covenant.

Secondly, the Covenant of Grace Reas. 2.
which before GOD made with Abraham and his seed, and which was enforce only
among the Israelites before the coming of Christ, is now by the preaching of
the Apostles made with all Nations, and all the people of the world are
received into it, or at least have it offered unto them; and there is free
access made unto all through the new doors which are now made in every side
of the Covenant (as is before noted.) This is manifest by the very mission of
the Apostles, and the Commission which our Savior Christ gave unto them*
Matthew. 28. in these words, Go teach all Nations.

Now experience teaches us, that when an house is not only repaired, but also
enlarged every way, and the foundation of it is stretched out an hundred times
more then before, it may truly even in respect of it self be called a new
house. And when new inhabitants come to dwell in an house wherein they never
dwelt before, though the house has been long built, and is old in it self;
yet to them it is a new habitation, and men in such cases call their houses new
houses. Therefore by the same reason it follows necessarily, that the Covenant
of Grace which was made with the Fathers, being now by the coming of Christ,
the light of the Gospel, and more plentiful gifts of the Spirit, much
enlarged, and made capable of all Nations, and Christ the foundation of it
being stretched out to all the world; it may even in it self be called a new
and better Covenant. Also in respect of the new people which are received into
it, it may be called a new Covenant, though in it self it were no whit altered
or enlarged at all.

Thirdly, where the seals of a Covenant Reas. 3.
are made new, and the old are taken away, and where the manner of sealing is
altered and quite inverted, there we may call it a new Covenant, though the
substance be the same. Experience teaches this; For when a man that has a I
ease of twenty years in an house, gives it up, and takes another of the same
term in more full and plain words, or when upon some defect which he finds
in his deed of sale, either in the form of conveyance, or in the sealing and
the witnesses, he gives up his former deed, and takes another of the same land
sealed with other seals, and testified by other witnesses; this we call a new
deed, though the land be the same, and the purchase all one in substance and
true meaning. Now thus it is between the Covenant of Grace now under the
Gospel, and the same Covenant before the coming of Christ. Though this is the
same in substance, and the salvation promised is the same, even that which is
only in Christ: yet the manner of sealing is much altered and inverted, and
the outward seals also. The Covenant had before many seals, as Circumcision,
the Passover, and all the Sacrifices, Ceremonies, Types and Figures of the
Law: now it has only two, Baptism and the Lords Supper. The old Seals were
dark and obscure, and had Christ's image but dimly imprinted into them: The new
have a more lively resemblance of Christ. In Baptism there is the print of the
whole Trinity, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And the signs in the
Lords Supper are so like unto the Body and Blood of Christ, that they are
called by the same name. Before the Gospel the Covenant was first sealed
typically by Christ's Blood; and at last by the Blood it self. Now the Covenant
is first sealed by the Blood of Christ it self, and afterward, to the end of
the world, it is sealed to us by evident signs and remembrances of Christ's
death, given by himself as pledges to us.

The old seals were mutable; the new are unchangeable. The old sealing was
much in outward show, and very little inwardly by the spirit; The new is little
in outward show, but more by the inward work of the spirit. The word of the
covenant is now more abundantly written in men's hearts, according to the word
of the Lord Ier. 31. 33. This is the new Covenant, I will put my law in their
inward parts, and will write it in their hearts. Which words are to be
understood thus; not that the fathers had not the word written in their hearts,
but that it was not so deeply written, nor in the hearts of so many, as now it
is. Wherefore the seals and the manner of sealing being so much renewed, and
inverted, we may truly call this a new Covenant. Thus you see the description
of the new Covenant now under the Gospel, and the true reasons why it is called
the new Covenant, even when it is compared with the Covenant made with the
Fathers, which was the same in substance with it.

But if we compare it with the Covenant of Nature, which is the Covenant of
Works, and of the Law made with Man in the Creation; then it must of necessity
be called new, because that went before it, and was in the time of man's
innocence; this came in after the fall; that promised natural life, this
promises spiritual also; that tended to hold up the Old Adam, this to build
up the New.

So likewise, if this new Covenant of the Gospel be compared with the Covenant
which God made with Israel in the Wilderness, it may truly and must
necessarily be called new. For that was a mixed Covenant, mixed of the Covenant
of Nature and of Grace, and contained in the Law, which is the Covenant of
Works; and the faith of the promise which is of the Gospel and of Grace (as
is before showed.) And therefore in respect of the first part of that Covenant
which promised life to the doers of the Law, this is truly a new Covenant,
differing in substance from it; and indeed the Apostles do call this Covenant
of the Gospel a new Covenant, especially and chiefly in comparison of these
two Covenants, even that of pure nature, and that mixed Covenant of the Law.

CHAP. VIII.
NOw having largely described the Covenant of the Gospel, I proceed, for our
better satisfaction, to show more fully, plainly and distinctly, the true
agreement and difference which is between the first Covenant of Nature, and
the second Covenant which is the Covenant of Grace, and between the old and
new publishing of the Covenant of Grace.

And first for orders sake I will show how the Covenant of Nature and Grace do
agree, and differ.

Secondly, because the Covenant of Grace has been solemnly published three
diverse ways.

First, more darkly and obscurely to the Fathers, from Adam until the giving
of the Law.

Secondly, after a mixed manner to the Israelites, by the Ministry of Moses.

Thirdly, now at last most plainly and purely since the coming of Christ in
the flesh, by the Gospel preached and published to all Nations. I will show
how this last publishing of the Covenant, which is so glorious, that it is
called the New Covenant by a special prerogative, does agree with, and differ
from the two former publications made, the one with the Fathers, Adam, Noah,
Abraham, and the rest; the other with the Israelites in the Wilderness. The
clear knowledge of which things may yield much fruit, profit and comfort, to
the hearts and souls of true Christians.

CHAP. IX. The agreement of the Covenant of Nature, which is called the first,
with the Covenant of Grace, which is called the second Covenant.
FIrst, these two Covenants do 1
agree between themselves, and that in three respects; First, the parties are
in substance the same in both Covenants. In the the first Covenant of Works
God was the one party, and Adam the other; And in the second, the parties are
still the same in Nature and substance, to wit, God and Adam, with all mankind
his posterity.

Secondly, they do agree in diverse 2
of the promises and conditions. In the first God promised unto man life and
happiness, Lordship over all the creatures, liberty to use them, and all other
blessings which his heart could desire to keep him in that happy estate
wherein he was created: And man was bound to God to walk in perfect
righteousness, to observe and keep Gods commandments, and to obey his will
in all things which were within the reach of his nature, and so far as was
revealed to him. In the second also the promise on Gods part is life and
happiness, with all blessings thereto requisite, Lordship over the creatures,
liberty to use them, and a true right and title to them all, and in lieu of
these he requires of man perfect righteousness and obedience to his will and
law, in every point and title, as our Savior Christ says, Mat. 5. 18.

Thirdly, as the one had seals annexed 3
unto it for confirmation, so also has the other. The seal of the first
Covenant was the Tree of Life, which if Adam had received by taking and eating
of it, while he stood in the state of innocence, before his fall, he had
certainly been established in that estate for ever; and the Covenant being
sealed and confirmed between God and him on both parts, he could not have
been seduced and supplanted by Satan, as some learned men do think, and as
Gods own words seem to imply, Genesis 3. 22. The seals of the second Covenant are
the Sacraments, as Circumcision, and such like in the Old Testament, and the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper in these days of the Gospel; which
whosoever hathonce truly received, and is inwardly circumcised as well as
outwardly, and washed with the Laver of Regeneration, and baptized into Christ,
and has true communion with him of his Body and Blood, that man can never
fall, for the seed of God abides in him, 1* John 3. 9.

CHAP. X. The difference between the Covenant of Nature and of Grace.
But as they agree in these things, so they differ diverse ways. First, though
the parties are in substance the same, yet in other respects they differ.

First, in the Covenant of Nature, 1
the parties God and man were friends. God was the Creator, man was his
Creature made after Gods image. God was man's good Lord, and man was Gods good
servant. God loved man, and man loved God with all his heart; there was not any
least occasion of hatred or enmity between them, but all causes of love. But
at the making of the Covenant of Grace, God and Man were fallen out and become
enemies. God was provoked to just wrath, and his unchangeable justice required,
that man should die, and be consumed by the fire of Gods just wrath: And man
was become a rebel, and an enemy, and traitor to God, and had conspired with
the Devil against his Lord and King. God was to man a consuming fire, and man
was as straw and stubble before him, by means of his sinful corruption.

Secondly, in the Covenant of Nature, 2
God revealed himself to man, as one God, Creator and Governor of all things,
infinite in Power, Wisdom, Nature and substance. But in the Covenant of Grace
God revealed himself one infinite God, and three persons distinguished, not
only a Lord and Creator, but also a merciful Redeemer, not only in unity of
essence, but also in trinity of persons.

Thirdly, in the Covenant of Nature 3
God was one party, and man alone was another: But in the Covenant of Grace,
God is on both sides. God simply considered in his essence, is the party
opposite to Man. And God the second person, having taken upon him to be
incarnate, and to work man's redemption, was on man's side, and takes part with
man, that he may reconcile him to God, by bearing man's sins, and satisfying
Gods justice for them. Thus they differ in respect of the parties.

Secondly they differ in respect of mediation; for in the Covenant of nature
man needed no mediator to come between God and him; he was pure, upright and
good, created after Gods image, the nearer he came to God, the greater was his
joy and comfort, Gods presence was a delight unto him. But in the Covenant of
grace, because man by sin, rebellion, corruption and enmity, was separated
and alieuated in his mind, nature and disposition from God, therefore man could
not come unto God to enter into Covenant with him, but by a perfect, pure and
holy Mediator, infinite in power and favor with God, that he might prevail
with him, and pacify his wrath, and yet of man's nature and substance; that in
and by the nature which had sinned, satisfaction might be made for sin.
Without such a Mediator, there could be no Covenant made between God and
man. If man, being ever since the fall filthy and corrupt, should in his own
person come near to God, who is to him a devouring and consuming fire, he as
stubble and straw should presently be consumed, and perish at the presence of
God. And therefore in making this Covenant, a perfect Mediator is necessarily
required, both to come between God and man, and to make perfect satisfaction
to Gods just Law in the behalf of miserable and sinful man, and to work his
reconciliation and atonement.

Thirdly, they differ exceedingly 3
in the promises and conditions. First, the promises of God in the Covenant of
nature, were only natural life, and earthly happiness, with all blessings
necessary thereunto. But in the Covenant of grace God does promise, over and
above natural life and felicity on earth, spiritual life and blessings by the
communion of his holy and eternal spirit; not only the spiritual life of
grace in this world, but also of everlasting glory in the world to come, in the
presence of his glorious Majesty. Secondly, in the first Covenant God did not
promise to give life, but to continue life being before already given: But in
the second Covenant be promises to raiseman from the dust of death and
eternal damnation in hell (into which he was fallen headlong by
transgression) unto the light of life, and that blessedness in heaven, of
which his nature was never capable before, no not in the state of innocence.
Thirdly, in the first Covenant the promised portion and possession, was of the
earth and of all visible creatures which were fit to serve for man's use. But in
the second Covenant God promises heaven, and himself who made the heaven, to
be the God, the shield and reward of the faithful, and their portion and
inheritance. Genesis 15. 1. Psalm. 16. Fourthly, in the first Covenant God
promised and gave to man power over all living creatures, to have them as a
Lord at his command, and to use them for his delight, and to rule, not to kill
and eat them. But in the second Covenant God gave them to him for sacrifice,
yea and also to serve for his food and nourishment.

The fourth difference arises from 4
the conditions which God requires at the hands of man and on man's behalf, for
all these great and wonderful blessings. In the first Covenant God required of
man perfect righteousness and obedience to his whole law and will, so far as
it was in man's power by nature, and revealed unto him, and this he would have
man to perform by himself in his own person. But in the second Covenant he
requires, on man's behalf, a more excellent obedience and righteousness
performed to the whole Law more plainly and fully revealed, and greatly
enlarged, and that not by man himself or any mere creature; but by man's
Mediator Jesus Christ, God and man in one person, who is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes. Romans 10. 4.

Now there is wonderful difference between these two. The righteousness
required in the first Covenant, was only the righteousness of a pure natural
man, and able to save him only who performed it; but the righteousness of the
second Covenant, is the righteousness of a perfect, pure and holy man filled
with the holy Ghost, which Adam had not in innocence; yea the righteousness of
that man, who is one person with God, and so it is the righteousness of God,
as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and is of value to justify not only
those who have communion of it, but also a whole world of men besides, if they
were made partakers of it. Secondly, the righteousness of the first Covenant
was only simple actual obedience to the Law, flowing from natural
uprightness; But the righteousness of the second, consists of habitual
holiness, and of obedience both active and passive to the precepts and
penalties, commands and threatenings of the Law; it has in it both the
sacrifice of righteousness, and also perfect satisfaction for sin by
voluntary submission to sufferings and death.

Thirdly, the righteousness of the first Covenant consisted only in obedience
to the moral Law: But the righteousness of the second is obedience both to
the moral and ceremonial Law. For our Savior Christ was circumcised,
presented in the Temple, did eat the Passover, and observed all the
ceremonial ordinances of God, yea and was baptized by John (as the Gospel
testifies), and that not for himself (for he was free borne, without sin,
and needed not to offer sacrifice, or to be circumcised or washed) but only to
fulfill all righteousness, and to supply the defects of the Fathers in their
obedience to Gods ceremonial ordinances of old, and also our defects in our
baptism and other Evangelicall ordinances: so much he himself testifies,
Math. 3. 15. Romans 15. 8.

Fourthly, in the first Covenant God did not promise unto man a righteousness
performed to his hand by a surety and intercessour; but only gave man natural
strength and power to perform the righteousness which he required of him; but
yet such mutable strength, that the devil by sudden tempration might prevent
him before he was confirmed, and so pervert and supplant him: But in the second
Covenant God gives both the righteousness performed to our hands, and also his
holy spirit which works in us faith and strength of grace to receive and enjoy
it; yea, by dwelling in us as Gods immortal seed, does unite us to Christ, and
bring us to communion of all his benefits, as his sonship, righteousness,
satisfaction and the rest, and all this God does both promise and give freely,
so that this is foedus gratuitum, a most free Covenant.

The fifth difference is in the seals; 5
for though in this, both covenants agree, that seals were annexed to them,
yet they differ in the seals and manner of sealing, both inward and outward.
The seal of the first Covenant was the tree of life: But the seals of the
second Covenant were the Sabbath of the seventh day, sacrifices circumcision,
and the passover in old time; and now the sacraments of Baptism, and the
Lords supper. The seal of the first Covenant was but a pledge to confirm man
in natural life, and in natural belief and assurance. But the seals of the
second have the holy Spirit of God inwardly working with them, and by them.

Lastly, they differ in success, effect, 6
strength, and perpetuity. The first Covenant had no good success, it never
took effect to save any one of Adams sons; yea it is abolished, only the law
and condition of it stands firm in the matter and substance of it (being Gods
immutable will, and eternal rule of righteousness) to wit, that without
perfect obedience to Gods revealed will, man shall never come to eternal life,
but is under the jaws of death. But the second Covenant, being made in such a
perfect Mediator, and sealed with the blood of Jesus Christ, God and man, which
is of infinite and eternal value, has had good success from the beginning,
has taken effect in all ages, and is of force and virtue for ever world
without end.

CHAP. XI.
NOw the consideration of these Use.
differences serves to show Gods infinite mercy and wonderful bounty to
miserable man; In that by Adams fall he took occasion to be more good unto us,
and when we were become his enemies, did more exercise and show his goodness,
and give greater grace unto us. If God had renewed again after man's fall the
first Covenant of natural life, it had been a great favor: but as if that
were but a little in his eyes, he makes a better Covenant, even an eternal,
and that of better promises, even promises of spiritual life and eternal
blessedness in heaven, Also if God and man being by man's fault become utter
enemies extremely contrary one to another, God had yielded so far as to
accept of a Mediator hired by man to speak for him; surely it had been great
mercy and clemency: for we see that earthly Kings will admit no intercessors
for rebels and traitors, except fear and necessity drive them unto it. But
God in this point showed mercy beyond all that reason could imagine or expect;
when man fled from God, and had no mind, will or inclination to sue for mercy,
God sought after him, and offered freely to him a Mediator not of the ordinary
rank of creatures, but his own Son out of his bosom, and that not to
speak, plead, or entreat only for man; but also to be incarnate and made man
under the law, and subject to the curse thereof in man's stead, and by yielding
himself voluntarily to a cursed death, to make a full satisfaction for man's
sin. O heavens blush, and O earth be a stonished at this, to see the son of
God thus abased for Gods enemies; well might the sun hide his face when this
Mediator suffered, as the Gospel testifies. And yet the Lords bounty stays
not here; he goes further, and when man neglects and despises this his
bounty, and neither will nor can desire or seek to be partaker of it, he
sends his word to call him, and his spirit to convert him and change his
heart, and not only to make him hunger, and thirst after Christ and his
righteousness; but also to unite him to Christ, and to bring him to communion
of all his benefits and heavenly treasures. Thus the more that we have
multiplied our rebellion and trangression against God to provoke him to wrath,
the more has he magnified his mercy, and enlarged his bounty toward us; and
the more that sin has abounded in men, the more has his grace abounded
toward them. O let us now at length, when he has done all these things for
us, remember our selves, and turn unto him with sorrow and repentance for our
sins past, let us labor to redeem the time formerly misspent in vanity, by
double thankfulness and obedience; and yet when we have done all we can, let
us to his glory profess, that we are unprofitablenesse, we have not done half
our duty, and if we have any mind to glory and rejoice, let us glory and
triumph in the Lord, and give him all laud and praise for ever and ever.

CHAP. XII. The agreement between the Covenant of grace, as it was revealed to
the Fathers of the old Testament; and the same renewed and more fully explained
in the Gospel.
AFter the agreement and difference between the Covenant of nature and the
Covenant of grace plainly laid open, I proceed to show how the second Covenant,
to wit, the Covenant of grace does agree and differ in respect of the diverse
publishings and promulgations of it in the old and new testament. The
Revelation of it in the old Testament, I have reduced to two heads: The one is
that by which it was revealed to the Fathers before the Law, and renewed in
diverse ages; as first, to Adam, secondly, to Noah, thirdly, to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; The other is the revealing and renewing of it with Israel in the
wilderness, in the giving the law by the Ministry of Moses, after which it
continued in one stay until the coming of Christ: With these two my purpose is
now to compare the Covenant as it is now fully revealed in the Gospel; And
first with the Covenant as it was revealed to the Fathers before the Law: That
old, and this new do agree diverse ways.

First the parties in general are the 1
same in both Covenants. In the Covenant with the Fathers, the one party was
God offended by man's sin, and provoked unto wrath and displeasure by his
rebellion, and so made a consuming and devouring fire unto him. And the other
party was man by means of his fall and corruption now made a rebel and enemy
unto God, and as stubble and dross before his presence. And in the Covenant,
as it is revealed in the Gospel, the parties are still the same, even God
offended, and man the sinner and offender.

Secondly, they agree in this, that a Mediator is required in both between
the parties God and man so 2
far separated, and standing at so great a distance, for to make up the
breach and the league between them, being at so great odds. And both have one
Mediator, Jesus Christ the promised seed, who alone in heaven and earth is
able to stand before the devouring fire, and to make atonement between God and
man. For that seed of the woman which in the first making of the covenant was
promised to Adam to break the serpents head, Genesis 3. that seed which was
promised to Abraham and Isaac, in whom all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed, Genesis 12. and 22. that Shiloh which Jacob spoke of in his blessing of
Judah, Genesis 49. He was the Mediator in the Covenant between God and the
Fathers before the law; And he is no other but Jesus Christ, who came in the
fullness of time; who by having his heel bruised in his sufferings, has broken
the serpents head, that is, destroyed the works of the devil; who by his
Apostles, Gal. 3. 9. has called all nations to the participation of Abraham's
blessing, and to justification by faith in him, and who was made and born of a
woman a pure virgin by the power of the holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. and is now and
ever has been, yesterday and to day and the same for ever* a perfect redeemer
and eternal Mediator of the Covenant now under the Gospel, as appears, Ioh.
8. 56. and 14. 6. Ephesians. 4. 16. Heb. 13. 8.

Thirdly, in both these Covenants 3
the substance of the promises is one and the same. As we have the promise of
spiritual Life by the Communion of the holy Ghost, both of the life of grace
in this world, and of the eternal life of glory in the world to come; so had
all the Fathers from the beginning. As we have the promise of a true right and
title to all earthly blessings also in Christ; so also had they. As God is
given to us in Christ to be our portion; So he by Covenant gave himself to
them to be their God. As we have Christ God and man given unto us to be our
Savior, and his righteousness and obedience, with all the merits of his
death, to be apprehended by faith for our justification; so had they from the
first time of the promise. All this the Apostle shows most plainly, Heb. 11.
where he shows that the forefathers did by faith receive not only earthly
blessings, as the Land of Canaan, deliverance from enemies and oppressors,
safety from the flood; but also they embraced the promises of a better life,
and of a better country, even an heavenly, and God is not ashamed to be called
their God, for he has prepared for them a city* ver. 16. They received Jesus
Christ by says, and did so firmly believe in him, that they esteemed reproach
for his sake greater riches then all earthly treasures, verse. 26. they by faith
became heirs of his righteousness, verse. 7. and Act. 15. 11. we (says the
Apostle) believe to be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as
they.

Fourthly, the Covenant made 4.
with the Fathers agrees with the Covenant now under the Gospel, in one and
the same condition on man's behalf, to wit, the perfect righteousness of the
Law, and perfect obedience to the whole revealed will of God, performed not by
every believer himself, but by his Mediator Jesus Christ, God and man, in
man's nature. This righteousness was made theirs, and is made ours by one and
the same means, even by communion of the Spirit, and by true faith laying hold
upon it, applying it, and offering it up to God. Both the righteousness and
the means by which it is made ours, are free gifts and graces of God both to
the Fathers and us. Neither they were, nor we are sufficient of our selves, or
fit to perform any thing for salvation, or to receive salvation when it is
offered freely; all our will, all our sufficiency, and all our fitness is of
God, and ever has been. And therefore howsoever Christ his righteousness and
satisfaction made unto God in the nature of man, may in respect of Christ our
head be called a condition of salvation which God required on man's behalf: yet
in respect of us and the Fathers also, it is rather a part of the blessing, and
one of the free promises in the Covenant, and at our hands God requires no
condition at all, but such as he himself does freely of his grace perform and
work in us and for us. And therefore as the Covenant which God has now made
with us, so also that Covenant with the Fathers before the Law was foedus
gratuitum, a free Covenant of Grace.

Fifthly, the Covenants both Old 5
and New agree in the Seals diverse ways.

First, as in that Old, so in this New, outward Seals and Signs are required
for to seal and confirm them.

Secondly, as their seals did signify 2
the shedding of Christ's Blood, and his cursed death for man's sin, also
mortification and sanctification; so do the seals of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, which are annexed to our Covenant. As their Seals did both teach the
manner of man's redemption, and also did serve to confirm their faith in it; so
do ours both set before us Christ's death and obedience, and our communion with
him, and also confirm our faith and confidence in him. As their Sacraments
were parts of their profession, and were testimonies of their love to God, and
were accounted Gods worship; so are ours. As their Sacraments did distinguish
them from Pagans, Infidels and all strange Sects; so do ours. As their
Sacraments had God their Author; so ours. Ours and theirs are both Seals of
the righteousness of Faith, both are effectual to believers only, both have
the same effects, increase of faith, hope, confidence, love, charity among men,
and the like. Thus far the^e two Covenants agree in the Seals.

Lastly, they agree in the general 6
success, effect and sufficiency; for both of them have had good success, and
taken effect, and bin sufficient to beget grace in the Elect, and to bring all
true believers to eternal salvation and blessedness; As the Covenant plainly
revealed in the Gospel, brings all true Christians to believe in Christ, and
to find comfort and salvation in his Mediation, Intercession, Righteousness,
Resurrection, and victory over death* So by the Covenant made of Old with the
Fathers: Hebr. 11.
Adam, Abel, Enoch and Noah, were brought to believe in Christ, and were saved
Enoch by faith in Christ was translated; Noah by faith made the Arc to the
saving of himself and his household; Abraham Ioh. 8. 56.
saw by faith the day of Christ, and by believing in him was justified; Job
rejoiced that Christ God would plead for man with God, and the Son of man for
his friend and neighbor, Job 16. 21. and professed his faith and confidence in
the Resurrection of Christ his Redeemer, Job 19. 25.

CHAP. XIII. The difference between the Covenant made with the Fathers, and
the Covenant with us.
THey differ diverse ways. The 1. Differ.
first, which is indeed the greatest difference of all, is in respect of the
darkness and obscurity of the one, and the plainness and perspicuity of the
other. The Covenant with the Fathers was every way, and in every point more
dark and obscure, involved in types and shadows of Christ. The Covenant in
the Gospel is plain and perspicuous, it removes the veil, and shows Christ
the substance with open face. In the Old Covenant the severity of Gods justice,
and his just wrath and enmity against sin did not so plainly appear,
because the effect of them was not made manifest upon his own dear Son our
Mediator, until he came to suffer actually such ignominy, reproach, agonies,
and a most ignominious and cursed death for our sins which he took upon him
to bear, and which were imputed to him, and punished in him our surety: Gods
not sparing him, but afflicting him with all his storms, and delivering him up
to hellish pains and agonies, and to a cursed death, do wonderfully show his
infinite wrath against sin, which was but slenderly and darkely revealed to
the Fathers in Types and Figures in the slaughter of Beasts, and burning of
sinne-offerings. So likewise, though in the Old Testament we read of God, and
some mention of his Son, Psalm. 2. 12. Prove. 30. 4. and of the Spirit of God,
and do find many phrases which signify more persons then one or two in one
Jehovah: yet the Mystery of the Trinity was not so fully revealed, as now it is
in the Gospel, wherein we have plain affirmation of three distinct persons,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in the unity of Gods essence, and all
the three are said to be one, though by distinct properties and diverse works
they are described unto us severally, and distinguished one from another. And
hereby we see that the new Covenant of the Gospel is more plain, and the old
more dark, in respect of the parties God and man between whom the Covenants
are made.

Secondly, in the old, Christ the Mediator was darkly shadowed out to the
Fathers; they had only this knowledge of Christ, that they should be saved by
a Mediator, that this Mediator should be the seed of the woman, that he should
be the Archangell or Prince of Angels, and Emanuel, God with us, yea, and Isay
7. and 9
should be called the mighty God, and should make atonement for sin, and
bring in eternal righteousness: But how God and man should in him become Dan.
9.
one person, how God in him should be incarnate and humbled, and stand in our
place, and bear our sins, how he should fulfill the law in every particular
point, how he should satisfy Justice, and suffer the wrath of God; these
things were not distinctly, nor fully revealed unto them, only the
extraordinary Prophets had some foresight of them, and did more plainly at
sometimes describe some of them. But now in the Gospel we see the person of
our Savior, and his two Natures most plainly set forth before us, the manner
of his Birth and Incarnation, the personal union of his Natures, the manner of
his obedience, death, and satisfaction, and the particular uses of them, as
also the virtue of his resurrection and ascension. And therefore the new
Covenant is more plain in respect of the Mediator. Thirdly all the promises
of eternal life and Salvation, and the condition on man's behalf, how and
after what manner it should be performed; also the things signified and
confirmed by the seals, were far more dark and obscure in the old Covenant.
But in the new Covenant of the Gospel, all these things are so plain, that
even children may learn and understand them. And thus in all respects, and in
all parts the Old was more obscure, and the New is more plain. And this is the
first, and the maine difference. Out of this there do arise two other, even a
second and third difference between these Covenants.

The one which is the second in Differ. 2.
order, is a difference in the parties received into the Covenants. The old
Covenant, because of dimnesse and obscurity, did shine forth but a little, and
gave light only to them who were near at hand; and hereupon it came to pass
that it reached to a very few; sometimes but to one or two families, and when
it was in greatest force, but to one Nation and people of the world. But the
new Covenant in brightness of knowledge, and plainness of revelation does
shine like the Sun, and gives light far and near to all Nations, even to
them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death. And hereupon it comes
to pass, that people of all Nations are received into this Covenant, and the
parties which now enter league with God, are not some few men, or some one
Nation, but all Nations and people of the world, God is one party, and all
Nations of the earth are the other party.

A third difference consists in the Differ. 3.
power, efficacy, success, and effect which is diverse in these two Covenants;
For howbeit they agree in these generally, because both of them have had
success, taken effect, and been of power to bring many to salvation (as is
before noted:) Yet by reason of the obscurity of the old, it has taken less
effect, and been of less power. And the new by means of plainness and
light, has brought with it more excellent gifts, and more abundance of grace
to many, and has been of greater force, power and efficacy, and the Spirit
has wrought more powerfully by it. For (as the Apostle says) faith, which is,
as it were, the root of other graces, comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word: where the Word is more plainly preached and heard with understanding,
there must needs be greater knowledge and faith, and there the Spirit must
needs work more powerfully and effectually, and show all graces more
abundantly in the hearers. Hereupon it comes to pass, that the Old Covenant
did work but weakly in all, except those that were ex^^aordinarily called and
enlightened, because of the obscurity of it, and unfitness to beget knowledge
and faith. But by virtue of the N^w the Lord writes his Law in our hearts, and
makes us all know him more fully, Ier. 31. 33. and does pour out his Spirit
with abundance of Grace upon all flesh, Joel 2. 28

A fourth difference is in the circumstance Differ. 4.
of the promises and gifts, The old Covenant did promise life and salvation in
Christ, who then was to come. And Christ who is the foundation of all the
promises, though he had then taken upon him to work man's redemption, and his
future death and obedience were actually in force from the beginning, able to
save all believers; yet he was not actually come in the flesh, neither had
actually performed these things for man. But the new Cove nant does promise
salvation and all blessings in Christ being already come in the flesh. And
Christ has actually performed all things which were needful for our
redemption, and we are by the new Covenant made partakers of his sacrifice
already offered, and his righteousness already performed for us.

A fifth difference arises from the Differ. 5.
order and mixture of the promises. The old Covenant did first and chiefly
promise earthly and temporal blessings, as deliverance from bodily enemies and
dangers, and plenty of worldly goods, as houses, lands, wealth, riches,
increase of children, length of days and such like, and in and under these it
did signify and promise all spiritual blessings and salvation But the new
Covenant promises Christ and his blessings spiritual in the first place, and
after them earthly blessings. First it brings us to the Kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof, and then it ministers other things unto us. Again
the old Covenant abounded in earthly promises of worldly blessings, but had few
promises of spiritual and heavenly blessedness intermingled; But the new
insists almost altogether on heavenly rewards, and promises of spiritual
blessings, and has but few promises of temporal and worldly good things. And
thus both the order of the promises, and the unequal mixture of earthly and
heavenly blessings, do make another difference between the old and new
Covenant.

Sixthly, they differ in the outward Differ. 6.
matter of the seals, the outward rites, and in the order of Sealing. The
seals of the old Covenant were many, and those laborious, costly, heavy and
burdensome; circumcision was painful, sacrifices were costly, and the many
oblations, offerings, and purifications, were a burden too heavy for the
fathers to bear. But the seals of Act. 15.
the new are few, and but two, the least number that can be, and those very
easy without toil or cost, or pain of body or mind. The matter of the old
seals were oxen, sheep, goats, birds, incense, odours, calves, lambs,
cutting of the flesh, shedding of the blood, burning, and killing of diverse
creatures. The matter of the new seals is only water sprinkled, and Bread and
Wine broken, powered out, distributed, eaten, and drunken, and this is all that
the seals differ much in outward matter; also in the order of sealing: for the
old was first typically sealed with shadows, and after with the substance,
Christ's Body and Blood: The new was scaled first with Christ's blood and death,
and is now sealed by the outward signs daily in the Sacraments.

Lastly, they differ in perpetuity. Differ. 7.
For though the substance of both is one and the same, eternal and
unchangable; yet the form and manner of making and sealing is changable in the
old, but is in the new perpetual. The old Covenant has new words added to it,
even the new Testament; and the outward seals are abolished, and new put in
their place: But to the words of the new Covenant no more or plainer words
shall be added, neither shall the outward seals thereof be altered, but shall
remain till the coming of the Lord. And therefore the old is but in substance
only; but the new is in all respects perpetual and unchangeable. Thus much
both of the agreement and the difference between the old and new Covenant of
grace.

CHAP. XIIII.
FIrst, the agreement which is between Use.
these two Covenants of grace, does serve to assure us, that all the faithful
forefathers, from the beginning, did partake of the same graces with us, and
had fellowship and communion of the same spirit, with one and the same Jesus
Christ, and were justified by his righteousness, and saved eternally by faith
in him, even as we are at this day. If sin in them could have hindered the
work of Gods grace, so it might do in us; for we are sinners as well as they,
and God has as just a quarrel against us. If our Mediator be of power to save
eternally, then must they also needs be saved as well as we; for they had the
same Christ. He was yesterday, is to day, and shall be the same for ever. If
Gods promises be true, and if they cannot fail; surely they had the same in
substance which we have. If salvation does rest upon the condition of
righteousness, they had the same which we have, even the righteousness of God
in Christ, and by the same faith they did partake of it. If seals can help
any thing at all, they had them also as well as we. And if we may judge of the
power of the Covenant, by the success and effect in some persons, we shall
find, that Enoch and Eliah were by the grace of the Old Covenant saved even
from bodily death, and taken up into heaven and happiness. And therefore let
this consideration of the unity and agreement which is between the new and old
Covenant of grace, admonish us not to be puffed up with pride, and a false
conceit; as if we only under the Gospel were respected of God, and saved by
faith in Jesus Christ. Let this teach us to think reverently of the Fathers in
the Old time, and love and reverence the name and remembrance of them as Saints
glorified in heaven, spiritual members of the same Christ, and partakers of
the same grace with us. But above all let this inflame our hearts with a deadly
hatred and detestation of all those heretics, and their doctrine, as the
Manicheans, Anabaptists, Antinomians, blasphemous Servetus, and the rest who
have not been ashamed to teach boldly; that the fathers did never partake of
saving grace in Christ, neither were under the same Covenant of life with us;
but only were fed with temporal promises, and earthly blessings, as hoggs and
calves for the slaughter. And let us count the Popish fiction of Limbus patrum
a doting dream, justly to be abhorred of all true Christians as a loathsome
abomination.

Secondly, the differences noted between Use 2.
the old, and new Covenant of grace, serve to magnify in our eyes Gods
extraordinary love and bounty toward us who now live in the light of the
Gospel. Though the Fathers were fed with the true Bread of life, yet in a small
measure, and more coarse manner prepared; and though the light of life shined
to them, yet it was dimly through clouds and mists. The taste and sight which
they had of Christ, did in this life more increase their hunger, then satisfy
their appetite, and more increase their thirst after him. They had few
examples, and present patterns of holy men to follow; the number of believers
was small, and so there were but few helps and encouragements in true
Religion. The gifts of the spirit were rare, scarce to be found in two or three
among a great multitude; and those gifts of knowledge, faith, and heavenly
wisdom, which those few had, were small, and not so eminent. But the Lord
has opened to us the windows and floodgates of heaven, and rained down more
abundantly all blessings upon our heads; he has made the river of life, which
glads the city of God, flow among us in full streams; he has fed us to the
full with the bread of life; so that Hypocrites begin like Israel to loath his
heavenly Manna: we live in the glorious light, and see Christ clearly; we have
many examples of godly men on every side round about us to provoke us, many
patterns to work by; much encouragement, plenty of all gifts of learning,
knowledge, wisdom, Faith, love and the like. Now how comes this to pass? Is
it because we are better then our forefathers, or because we have better
deserved? Surely in no case; for they were by many degrees more excellent in
natural gifts then we, less rebellious, and more ready to make good use of
small means, then we are of greatest. Which of us dares compare with Ezoch,
Noah, Abraham, or David? As the world grows old, and we grow weak in bodily
strength, and low in stature; so we still grow more and more strong in
corruption and in frowardness of heart; And the Lords mercy and bounty is so
much greater to us then to them, because we are further from deserving any
mercy then they were, and do deserve more misery. The only thing wherein we
are better then they, is this; that the Lord has showed more goodness to us
then them: wherefore let us all confess and say to the glory of God, that it
is his mercy not our merit, to him belongs all the praise. It is not of him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. To him be
glory and honor for ever world without end.

CHAP. XV.
NOw having laid down the agreement, and difference between the new and old
Covenant of grace, that is, the Covenant as it was made with the Fathers before
the law, and the Covenant as it is now plainly published in the Gospel, It
follows now that I should show the agreement and difference between the same
pure and plain Covenant of grace in the Gospel, and the mixed Covenant which God
made with Israel on mount Horeb by the Ministry of Moses which consisted
partly of the Covenant of works, and partly of the Covenant of grace (as is
before noted.) If I should insist upon all the Differences and Agreements which
are between these two Covenants, I should repeat all the agreements and
differences which I have before declared to be between the Covenant of nature
and of grace, and also between the old Covenant of grace and the new. For the
first part of the Covenant which God made with Israel at Horeb, was nothing
else but a renewing of the old Covenant of works which God made with Adam in
Paradise. And the second part which God made with them, first obscurely when he
gave them by Moses the Leviticall Laws, and ordained the tabernacle, the Ark,
and the mercy seat, which were types of Christ; and secondly more plainly in
the plains of Moab which is set down in the book of Deuteronomie; this was
nothing else but a renewing of the Covenant of grace which he had before made
with their Fathers, Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And therefore the same
agreements which I have before showed to be between the Covenant of nature and
of grace, the same are between the first part of the Covenant which God made
at mount Sinai, and the Covenant under which we now live in the Gospel.
Likewise there are the same differences, one only excepted; for whereas in the
first Covenant of nature God and man were friends, both just and righteous,
both lovers, and neither of them offended; now in renewing the same Covenant
with Israel, the parties were at variance, for God was provoked to wrath, and
man by sin was become an enemy, even as they were at the making of the
Covenant of grace.

In like manner, if we consider the second part of the Covenant made with
Israel, it being the same with the old Covenant of grace, we shall find
between it and the new Covenant of the Gospel, the same agreements and
differences which I have last before showed to be between the old and new
Covenant of grace. Wherefore I will now take the whole Covenant which God made
with all Israel by the ministry of Moses, as it consists of both these parts
jointly together, and so I will compare it with the Covenant of the Gospel, and
show the agreement and difference between them.

And first for the things wherein they agree, besides those before named,
wherein the parts of the Covenant made with Israel, do agree with the covenant
of the Gospel, I find but two only. First, they agree in the Agree. 1.
maine and principal end, namely the revelation of the glory of the goodness,
justice, and mercy of God in man's salvation; at this they both aim, and in
this they both agree. Secondly, they both agree in this, that Agree. 2.
both of them do promise unto us justification and salvation in Christ, and
both require in us a continual endeavor to fulfill the whole law, as near as
we can every man in his own person. For although Christ is the end and
fulfilling of the law for righteousness to all true believers; yet after that
we are justified by his righteousness, it is required in every one of us, that
we should labor to avoid every sin against the Law, and do all holy duties
which the law requires, so far as we are able: this we promise in Baptism;
and whosoever does wilfully live, and continue in any sin, and purposely
abstain from good when occasion is offered, and omits holy duties which the
law requires, as observing of the Sabbath, hearing of the word, and such like,
we count him a carnal man, and he has no part as yet in the Covenant of
grace. For he that is justified, is also mortified, and sanctified, and cannot
purposely continue in any sin of omission or commission.

CHAP. XVI. The Differences.
But the differences between them 1
are many and great. First, they differ in the manner of requiring obedience to
the law, and exacting good works. The Covenant of Moses requires, that a man
should first endeavor to fulfill the whole law, that thereby he may be
justified, and live; and if he cannot do so, that then he should fly to
sacrifices for sin, and free will offerings, and in them, as in types, to
Christ and his righteousness and obedience, that there he may find that which
by the law he cannot obtain. But the Covenant of the Gospel requires that a
man should first renounce himself, and all his own righteousness, and seek
salvation and righteousness in Christ by faith, and that being justified by
grace in Christ, he should by way of thankfulness labor to the utmost, to
bring forth all fruits of holiness, righteousness, and obedience to all Gods
commandments, and that for this end, that he may glorify God, adorn his
profession, and be more and more assured of his communion with Christ, and
sincere love to God.

Secondly, these Covenants differ 2
in matter and substance. The matter and substance of the Covenant made by the
Ministry of Moses, it was mixed, it was partly conditional, and partly
absolute; partly legal, and partly Evangelicall; it required to justification
both works and faith, but after a diverse manner, and it was a mixed Covenant of
two diverse Covenants, both the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace.

First, it required works, that men should do the works of the Law and live,
and this it did by way of the first Covenant. For the moral Law written in two
Tables of stone, and consisting of the ten Commandments which God spoke from
mount Sinai, is called by the name of a Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. He declared to
you (says Moses there) his Covenant which he commanded you to perform, even
ten Commandments, and he wrote them upon two Tables of Stone, and Deuter. 9.
verse. 9. These two Tables are called the tables of the Covenant: by these
testimonies it is plain that the law was given to Israel as a Covenant which
required obedience for justification and life.

Secondly, this Covenant given by Moses, promised Christ, and required that
whe^soever they failed in their obedience to the Law, they should flee to
sacrifices and sinne-offerings, which were Types of Christ, and did prefigure,
signify and seal his satisfaction and atonement for sin, and that by faith
they should seek righteousness and satisfaction in him, and shoul rest upon
those promises which God made with their Fathers, that in Christ the blessed
seed all Nations of the earth should be blessed. And this is the second, even
the Evangelicall part of the Covenant, and is called by the name of another
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 2. For indeed this is the Covenant of Grace, as the other
part is the Covenant of Works. This GOD propounds absolutely, the other is
conditional, that a man shall do it if he can, and if he can do it he
shall live; if he cannot, that he should flee by faith to Christ, foreshadowed
in types, and promised to the Fathers. Thus the Covenant which God made with
Israel, was not a simple, but a mixed Covenant, and the matter of it was mixed.
But the Covenant of Grace in the Gospel is simple without mixture, and
propounds no other way to salvation, but only in and through Jesus Christ; no
justification but that which is by faith in Christ's obedience, without our own
works. This is a second difference.

The rest of the maine differences Differ. 3.
are plainly laid down by the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 3. One is, that the
Covenant which God made with Israel, was an old Covenant. For it is called by
the Apostle (...), verse. 14. But the Covenant made with all Nations by the
Gospel, is called (...), the New Covenant, verse. 6. Now the Covenant with
Israel may truly be called Old, and is so indeed in respect of the Covenant
under the Gospel, for two reasons.

First, because the legal part of it, which was the Covenant of Works laid
down in the ten Commandments of the Law written in Tables of Stone, is in
substance all one with the first Covenant which God made with Man in the state
of Innocence; the sum of both is that one thing, Do this and live.

Secondly, because the Evangelical part of it, which promised life and
righteousness in Christ the promised seed, was given after the old manner, as
it was to the Fathers before the Law, that is, in general, dark and obscure
promises, and did show Christ only afar off, to come in the latter ages of
the world. But the Covenant of the Gospel is every way new. It is made with us
after a new manner; It shows Christ already come, and that most plainly, and
it has no relics of the Old Covenant of works in it, but teaches
justificatio^ by faith without works, even by communion of Christ and of his
righteousness alone, without any concurrence of our own righteousness and
works of the Law concurring for justification.

Another difference which the Apostle Differ. 4.
makes between these Covenants, is, that the one is the Letter, the other the
Spirit. For so he affirms* ver. 6 Now the reasons of this are two especially:
The first reason why the Covenant with Israel is called the letter and the
Covenant of the Gospel the Spirit, is because Moses who was the mediator of the
Covenant with Israel, did give only the Letter of the Covenant, that is, the
Law and the Covenant written in Tables and in Letters, but he could not give
the Spirit to make them understand the Covenant, nor any inward grace and
ability to make them keep it. But Christ the Mediator, by whose Ministry the
Covenant of the Gospel is given, has also the Holy Ghost in himself without
measure, which Spirit he by his Word, and together with the word of the
Covenant, sends into our hearts, and enables us to believe and to keep the
Covenant. And as John the Baptist, comparing himself and his ministry with
the ministry of Christ, says, I baptize you with water, but he shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire; that is, I give only the outward sign,
but he gives the inward grace: So it may be said of Moses and Christ, that
Moses gave only the letter or writing of the Covenant; but Christ gives the
word, and with it the Spirit of Grace also, which makes it effectual to
salvation. And therefore the Covenant, as it proceeds from Moses, and comes by
his Ministry, is but a letter; but that which Christ gave as Mediator, is the
Spirit.

Another Reason may be drawn from the manner of giving. Moses gave the
Covenant written in Letters which many could see, but could not read; and many
could read, and could not understand; and many could understand literally,
after a natural and carnal manner according to the proper literal sense, but
they could not understand the words spiritually according to the spiritual
sense, they could not see nor discern the true scope, end, and use of the
Words. But Christ did preach the Covenant of the Gospel, by a lively voice, in
words easy to be understood, which did not only sound in the ears, but also
pierce into the hearts and spirits of the hearers, and did show not only the
matter, but also the manner, end, and use of every thing, and how the Law and
Commandments do not only bind the outward man, and require the outward act;
but also do bind the inward man, even the soul and spirit, and do require
all holy thoughts, motions and dispositions of the heart and soul: and thus the
words of the New Covenant are fit Instruments of the Spirit, and the Spirit
does work powerfully by them.

Another difference laid down by Differ. 5.
the Apostle, verse 13, 14, 18. is, that there was a veil before the Covenant
with Israel, which hindered their sight, so that the people could not look into
the end, nor see the right use of the Law and the ceremonies thereof. But the
Covenant of the Gospel is given with much evidence of speech, and therein we
all with open face behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. Now this
veil consisted of two parts: The first was the darkness and blindness of
their hearts, and the weakness of their sight: The second was the obscurity
and darkness of the Covenant it self, which both in respect of the words, and
also of the Seals, the Types and Figures, was very dark, and hard to be
understood: First, the people themselves were naturally by reason of original
corruption blind and ignorant, and not able to see the right end and use of
the Law and Covenant; yea, their sight was so weak, that they could no more
look upon Gods glory, then the weak eye of a man can look upon the bright
Sun when it shines in full strength; and therefore being not able to look
upon the glory of God shining in the Covenant, they could in no case see into
the end and use of it, and so their own weakness and blindness was a veil
unto them, and is this day to all the Jews, till their hearts be converted to
the Lord, verse. 16. and till he powers out his Spirit on them. Secondly, the
words of the Covenant were spoken, and the Seals and Ceremonies ordained after
such an obscure manner, that a veil of darkness did hang over them, till
Christ by his actual fulfilling of them, and by the words of the New Covenant
in the Gospel, did make all plain, and pull away the veil of darkness. This
obscurity of the Covenant proceeded from three special causes; the first was
Gods hiding and concealing of his purpose in the giving of the Law. For his
purpose in giving the Moral Law, was not that Israel should do it and be
justified thereby, which after man's fall and corruption is impossible; but
only to teach them and us what is true and perfect righteousness which
leads unto life, and to make all men examine themselves by it as by a rule;
that by it finding themselves destitute of righteousness, and utterly unable
to perform righteousness, they might be driven out of themselves, and so
prepared to receive Christ, and embrace his righteousness. Also Gods purpose
and counsel in giving the Ceremonial law, was not that men should perform
them as any part of righteousness to justification; neither did he ordain
them to be of themselves purgations from sin, and expiations of iniquity, but
only to be Types foreshadowing Christ, and his all-sufficient sacrifice, and
seals of the Covenant which did seal it, not by any virtue in them, but by
virtue of Christ's which they signified. Now though this was Gods counsel and
purpose in giving the law moral and Ceremonial. yet he did conceal, and not
in plain words express it; he told them not that he meant by putting them
upon the performance of the law, to make them find out their own weakness and
insufficiency, and thereupon flee to Christ the end of the law, and the
substance of the Ceremonies and sacrifices:

But contrarily he required their performance of the Law for the obtaining of
life, and did so speak as though it had been possible for them to fulfill it,
and to be justified thereby; and so they commonly did understand his words
erroniously, even as the Papists do at this day, thinking that God would never
have commanded them to do the Law, if he had not known that it was in their
power to do it, as he commanded; and this was the first cause of the obscurity
of that Covenant.

The second cause, was the mixture of the legal part of the Covenant with the
Evangelicall, and the joining of them both as it were in one continued speech.
For first God required by the moral law, that they should do it for the
obtaining of life; then immediately he adds unto it the ceremonial law, and
ordained sacrifices for sin (which did declare them to be sinners, and so
destitute of righteousness) and gave them diverse types and shadows of Christ,
and by that law he required obedience and doing, upon pains of death and
cutting off, so that the people of Israel did still imagine themselves to be in
the Covenant of works; and from that manner of speech used by God, and from
the title of laws and statutes which God gave to the Ceremonies, and from the
words before going, they gathered that the sacrifices, oblations, and other
rites were rather laws to be observed for righteousness, then seals of the
Covenant of grace, and signs of Christ and his righteousness; they thought
the use of them to consist in doing, not in signifying, and stirring up of
faith to lay hold on Christ: and this was a second cause of the darkness of
that Covenant.

The third cause was the great penury, and scarcity of Evangelicall promises
in that Covenant, and the great inequality and disproportion which was between
them and the legal Commandments of Works. For in that Covenant we find few
promises of life and salvation, but only upon condition of Works. Christ is
very seldom pointed at in plain words. The Evangelicall promises as they are
rare and very few in all the Books of the Law which God gave them by Moses; so
they are either very general, or else very obscure, more then those which were
given to the Fathers long before: But the Legal Commandments and Promises are
many, and those very plain in every place.

And this was a special cause which made the people of Israel to misconstrue
the meaning of that Covenant, and to think that all salvation was to be
obtained by Works; and thus the Covenant was obscure, and the end thereof was
hid from their sight, they could not understand the true use of the Types and
Ceremonies. But the Covenant of the Gospel is made in such plain words, and
does after such a lively manner set forth Christ and his perfect Ransom,
satisfaction and righteousness unto us, and the true way to justification and
salvation by faith in him, that the most simple may understand it; and with
that plain Doctrine and multitude of Promises the Spirit of God works
powerfully, and is given by Christ in such measure to all sorts of people, that
the darkness of their hearts is abolished also, and so there is no veil,
neither over their hearts, nor over the Covenant it self; but as Christ is
plainly offered in the Word, so their hearts are enlightened and enabled to
look on his glory, and they are transformed into the same image; and hereupon
there comes to be great difference in this respect between the Covenant of the
Gospel, and the Covenant of the Law which God gave by Moses.

From these two last Differences, there do arise others which are there laid
down by the Apostle also; to wit, That the Old Covenant of the Law is the
ministry of death, but the Covenant of the Gospel is the ministry of the
Spirit and of Life, 2 Cor. 3. 7. The Old is the occasion of sin, and so the
ministry of condemnation; the New, of righteousness to justification. The Old
brings bondage, the New liberty. The Old is less glorious, and yet dazzled the
eyes of the Israelites, that they could not look on it steadfastly; The New is
full of glory, and yet we can behold in it with open face the glory of God,
verse 18. These particular Differences are all named and noted by the Apostle,
and they do arise from the two last going before. For Reason tells us, that
because the Old Covenant was given by the Ministry of Moses a frail man, and
was dark and obscure, subject to be misconstrued, and was not plainly
preached by lively voice, but only written in dead Letters in Tables of Stone;
therefore it was no fit instrument for the Spirit to work by; the Spirit did
not work by it such plenty of Knowledge, Faith, and other Graces. It did only
show them what they should do, but enabled them not to do any thing, rather
made them: more sinful, in provoking their corrupt naturewch more lusts after
evils forbidden; and it made their sins more wilful, which before were done in
ignorance; and thus it became the Ministry of Sin, Death, and Condemnation
unto them. It also brought them into bondage, by showing them their slavish
condition, and giving them no grace to flee from that miserable estate. It
dazzled their eyes, because it showed them the glorious Majesty and Justice of
God; but gave them not the Grace of the Spirit, to strengthen their sight, to
look with boldness and comfort upon Gods majesticall justice. But because the
Covenant of the Gospel is made in plain words, and given by a Mediator who
has also the disposing of the Spirit, and dispensing of Spiritual Grace;
therefore it is a fit instrument for the Spirit to work by, and the Spirit
goes forth in great power, by, and with the publication of it, which
regenerates men, and renues their hearts, knits the^ into one Body with Christ,
gives them the Communion of all his Righteousness and Obedience to
justification of Life, frees them from all fear and bondage, makes them run
freely and willingly in the way to life, and in the paths of Gods
Commandments; enables them to stand boldly before the glorious Tribunal of
Gods Justice, and gives them an heavenly eye salve to their sight, that they
may steadfastly behold GODS glory in the face of Jesus Christ. And thus in those
respects those two Covenants do much differ between themselves.

The last difference is named by the Apostle in the 11 verse, and it is this,
That the Covenant of the Law given by Moses, and the glory thereof vanishes,
and is done away: but the Covenant of the Gospel, and the glory thereof
abides for ever. Which Difference is thus to be understood, not that the
substance of the Law, or the righteousness thereof cease at any time,
neither that the Evangelical promises which were intermingled in that Covenant,
are abolished together with the Types and Ceremonies. These things are in no
case to be granted: for the Law of God is an eternal rule of Truth and
Justice, and by the righteousness, obedience and fulfilling thereof all the
Elect shall be justified, and saved for ever. This our Savior testifies,
saying, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; for
verily, till heaven and earth pass, not one jot or title of the Law shall
pass, Mat. 5. 17. Also his blessed Apostle, Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void
the Law through faith? God forbid; yea, we estabish the Law, and Romans 10. 4
Christ is the end or fulfilling of the Law for righteousness to every believer.
And if we rightly consider the Ceremonies and the promises given to Israel, we
shall perceive that Christ was the Body and substance of them all; and
therefore so long as he abides, the substance of them abides firm and sure,
and does not vanish. Wherefore the Law and Covenant which God gave by Moses does
vanish and is abolished only in three respects.

First, in respect of the extreme rigor thereof; for as it was given to Israel
it required obedience of every man in his own person to justification and
life; but now it only requires that a man have that righteousness which is a
perfect conformity to it, though performed by his surety and mediator, and
that shall sufficiently save him. Before it did require perfect righteousness,
upon pain of damnation, performed by every man himself, and threatened a curse
to every breach of it. Now it binds a man himself to perform no more then he
is able; if he does his best, and brings a willing mind, God accepts the will
for the deed; because now we are not to obey the Law for justification; Christ
has done that for us. Now we are to obey it in thankfulness and in imitation
of Christ, that we may be conformable to his Image, and by holiness made fit
to see God, and to enjoy the inheritance which Christ has purchased for us.

Secondly, the Law and Covenant give^ by Moses is abolished in respect of the
outward administration. Their obedience to the moral Law was first preached;
and afterward the sacrifice of Christ was promised in types and figures. But
now Christ is first preached, and then after justification in him, the Law is
set as a rule to walk by in the ways of sanctification; and also to show how
it is impossible to find perfect righteousness, and to be justified and saved,
but only in Christ. There the promises were set forth and sealed darkly in
types and figures, but now these figures and ceremonies are ceased, and Christ
the substance of them is set forth naked in his own colors before our eyes.

Thirdly, the Covenant given by Moses may be said to vanish and be abolished in
respect of the light and glory of it. For the light and glory of it, which it
then had, is swallowed up of the great light of the Gospel. The glory of it
was but like a dim light or candle, but the glory of the Gospel is like the
light of the Sun at noone day, so that before it the light of the Law is put
out, and appears no more then the light of a Candle in the bright Sunshine.
Now the Apostle tells us, that, When that which is perfect is 1 Cor. 13.
come, then that which is in part is abolished. And in our common speech we
say, that the brightness of the Sun destroys and puts out the light of a
Candle, that it is as good as nothing; and so we may in the same sense say,
that the Covenant of the Law is abolished in respect of the light and glory of
it; For the glory of it which was but in part is swallowed up by the great
light of the glorious Gospel. But the Covenant of the Gospel abides in all
respects firm and sure for ever, and we must never expect a plainer renewing
of it to the end of the world. And thus I have out of the holy Scriptures, and
especially from the words of the Apostle discovered plainly the agreement and
difference between the mixed Covenant which God made with Israel by Moses, and
the pure and simple Covenant of Grace made with all Nations in the Gospel, and
published by Christ and his holy Apostles and Evangelists.

CHAP. XVII.
THe consideration whereof discovers Use.
to us the singular providence of God in ordering the world, and his wonderful
wisdom, goodness and mercy in preparing and giving means of grace and
salvation fitted for the people of every Age according to their several
dispositions, and the necessity of every Age and generation. In the first ages
next unto the state of Innocence, when men lived diverse hundreds of years, and
had the helps of long observation and great experience, besides the
instructions and historical relations of long-lived Progenitors; who, as eye
and eare-witnesses, could from Adam, Methushelah and Noah, rehearse Gods great
works from the Creation, and teach them the knowledge of God; then the Lord
dealt more sparingly, and afforded but small and rare means, even a few
visions, revelations, and general and obscure promises to turn men from their
own ways, and draw them to seek salvation in him. But when men's ages and
lives were shortened by the increase of corruption, and by men's multiplying of
iniquity, and growing more hard, stubborn, and rebellious; The Lord, to the
former promises made to the Fathers, added a fiery Law which he gave from mount
Sinai, in thunder and lightening, and with a terrible voice to the stubborn
and stiffenecked Israelites; whereby to break and tame them, and to make them
sigh and long for the promised Redeemer, when they were pressed with the
bondage of the Law, and with the intolerable burden of Rites and Ceremonies.
And when after many ages they were grown so desperately rebellious, that they
scorned Gods Messengers, rejected his Laws and Commandments; misused and
persecuted his extraordinary Prophets, who wrought wonders in their sight, and
slew his servants which he sent unto them; Then at last he sent his son in
whom he fulfilled all the promises made to the Fathers, who also fulfilled the
Law both Moral and Ceremonial, and made reconciliation for sin and
iniquity, and brought in eternal righteousness, and has made with all the
world the New Covenant of the eternal Gospel of peace, by which we receive
the promise of the Spirit, who works in us all grace to the mortifying of the
Old man, subduing the rebellious flesh, casting down of the strong holds of
sin and Satan, and bringing all thoughts in captivity to the obedience of
Christ.

Thus as the world has had more need of stronger helps and powerful means,
God in his wise providence has increased and supplied them in several Ages;
and as sin has more abounded, and stubburnnesse and hardness increased; so
God has more showed his goodness, magnified his mercy, and enlarged his
bounty, by giving more powerful means, by renewing and explaining the Covenant
of life and salvation, and making his Grace more to abound toward the sons
of men. And therefore let us hereby be stirred up to take notice of Gods
special providence, how he respects the sons of sinful men, and is
mindful of them to visit them, and take care for them in all Ages: Let us
admire his wisdom, extol his goodness and mercy, and labor to bring forth
abundance of fruit, according to the culture and tillage, and the powerful
means of Grace which God has bestowed upon us under the Gospel.

Let us be ashamed and confounded in our selves, for our barrenness after so
many plentiful showers powered down upon us; and acknowledge and confess that
we had long agone been over-growne with all wickedness, and swallowed up of
our sins and iniquities, if the Lord had not by the strong hand of his
glorious Gospel, and his mighty and powerful Spirit shed forth plentifully
through Jesus Christ in these last days, stopped the current of our sinful
corruption, and staid us from running headlong into destruction. As for them
who in this great light of the Gospel, multiply their works of darkness, and
make their sins and transgressions ascend up in great multitudes like thick
clouds toward heaven, and do hate and persecute the truth which shines unto
them, and love the darkness of errors more then the light of sound doctrine;
Let them know that their rebellion against the light deserves the reward of the
mist and blackness of darkness for ever; Let them fear and justly suspect
that they are the ground which the Apostle speaks of, Hebr. 6. 8. which when
it has drunken in the rain which often comes upon it, does bring forth no
good fruit, but thorns, briers, and poysonfull stinking weeds, and therefore
is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. And just it
is with God, that he should send such persons strong delusions, that they
should believe the lies of the man of sin, and dote after errors and
heresies, that they all may be damned who have not received the love of the
truth that they might be saved; but have taken pleasure in unrighteousness, as
the Apostle has foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Law and the Gospel, and the agreement and difference
between them.
NOw the last thing only remains, to wit, the description of the Law and the
Gospel, and their agreement and difference. This may quickly be dispatched in
few words, for their agreement and difference may easily be discerned by those
things which have been already delivered; the only thing which is now
necessarily to be touched, is the meaning of the words, and the diverse
significations of them. These being made plain, it will appear that all the
agreements and differences between them have been before fully laid open and
expounded.

First, for the Law, it is in the Original Hebrew Scriptures called ((...)
Torah) a word derived of (...) Horah, which signifies to teach, to instruct,
to admonish, and also to shoot forth Arrows and Darts; and so if we consider
it according to the true notation of the name, by Law in Scripture may be
understood any Doctrine, Word, or Writing which does teach, instruct and
admonish men how they ought to live, and how to walk before God, or among men,
and any Precept which as a Dart or Arrow is fastened in our hearts by our
Teachers.

But in the New Testament the Law is called (...), and is derived of the verb
(...), which signifies to distribute, because the Law injoyneth to distribute
and give to God and men their due, and the revelation of the Word and Law is
Gods distribution or dividing of his promises and his will amongst men. So then
the word Law, considered according to the natural sense of it in the Original
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, may signify any Doctrine,
Instruction, Law, Ordinance, Custom, and Statute humane or Divine, which does
teach, direct, command or bind men to any duty which they owe to God, or any
of his creatures. And indeed thus far the signification of it does extend. For
in Scripture it signifies, sometimes the special Laws of Heathen Nations, as
of the Medes and Persians, and the statutes and customs of men according to
which they live among themselves, and their doctrines and instructions; but I
omit the humane significations of it, as not necessary for our present purpose;
and I come to the divine which are diverse in Scripture.

1 First, this word ((...) Torah) signifies, in a most large sense, any godly
or profitable Counsel, Doctrine, Instruction, or Precept which Parents give to
their children, or one man to another, either by word or writing, which is not
contrary, but according to the will of God and the rule of godliness, and
serves to direct a man how to live or how to walk, either in his general or
particular calling. Thus the word is often used in the Book of the Proverbes,
as Chap. 3. 1 and 4. 2. and 7. 2. In which places the wise man exhorts his
son to keep his Law, that is, all his Precepts, Counsels, and Doctrines, and
not to forget or forsake them.

2 Sometimes it signifies in a large sense, the whole Doctrine of the Word of
God, which he has at any time revealed, or does reveal in the whole
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament; and so it includes the Law of
Moses, the writings of the Prophets, and all the Evangelicall promises made
unto us in Christ from the beginning; thus it is used, Psalm. 1. 2. in these
words, But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, that is, Gods Word, for the Law
alone without the Gospel cannot convert souls, and Psalm. 1 19. in diverse
places where the Law is said to quicken, and to be the godly man's delight, and
to comfort him in trouble.

3 Sometimes this word signifies only the Scriptures of the Old Testament, as
John 15. 25. where our Savior citing a speech out of the 35 Psalm 19 verse,
says it is written in the Law, that is, the Old Testament. And the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14. 21. repeating the words of Isaiah, Chap. 28. 11. says it is written
in the Law.

4 Sometimes it signifies the whole Doctrine of the five Books of Moses, as
Josh. 1. 7, 8. Let not the Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, and Luke
24. 44. where our Savior distinguishes the Law, that is, the writings of
Moses from the Psalms and the Prophets. Also Mat* 12. 5. Ioh. 7. 23. and Ioh.
8. 17. things written in the Book of Genesis as well as things written in the
other 4. books are said to be written in the law.

5 Sometimes the word Law signifies in a more strict sense, The Doctrine of the
Law, as it is different from the doctrine of Grace, and is opposed to the
plain Doctrine of the Gospel; that is, the whole sum of Precepts, Moral,
Ceremonial, and Judicial, set down in the Writings of Moses; thus the word
is used by the Apostle in the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, where he
opposes the Law and Doctrine of Works to the Gospel and Doctrine of Faith.

6 Sometimes by law in a most strict sense is meant, either the moral Law
contained in the ten Commandments, as Exodus 24. 12. or any of the Ceremonial
Laws, as the Law of the burnt-offering, Levit. 6. 9. the Law of Sacrifice,
verse. 14. the Law of the sinne-offering, verse. 24. or the Judicial Law, and
any precept thereof, as Exodus 18. 16. Deuteronomy. 17. 11.

7 Sometimes the word Law signifies the Doctrine of the Gospel, which as a new
Law commands us to repent of all our sins, and to believe in Jesus Christ. Thus
the word (...) is used, Isa. 2. 3. where the Prophet says, That in the last
days the Law shall go forth out of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; meaning the publishing of the Gospel from thence into all Nations
of the world; and the Gospel as it injoyneth us to believe, is called the Law
of Faith, Romans 3. 27.

8 Sometimes the word Law signifies the power, authority, and dominion, either
of the flesh and the Old man of sin dwelling in our members; or of the Spirit
and the New man ruling in the mind, where the Apostle Romans 27.
says, I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind;
that is, I see the power of sinful corruption, and of the Old man striving
against the Spirit, or part renewed, and Romans 8. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of sin and death.

These are the diverse significations of the word Law, which is called Torah in
the Old, and (...) in the New Testament.

The word Gospel is in the Hebrew text in the old Testament called (...)
Bessorah, and in the new Testament (...) they both signify good news, glad
tidings, and a joyful message; the one is derived of the Hebrew verb ((...)
Bissar) and the other of the Greek word (...), which both signify one thing,
namely to tell good news, or bring glad tidings. For the Greek word (...), it
is diversely used in Scripture, and in other Greek Authors.

Sometimes for the reward which is given to one for bringing good news, as 2 Samuel 4. 10. where thereward which the man expected from David for the tidings
of Saul's death is by the 70 called (...), and in the Hebrew Bessorah. Sometime
in heathen writers, the sacrifices which men offered up in thankfulness for
good news, as in Xenophon lib. 1. (...), in Isocrates Areopag.

Sometimes it signifies good news in general of what matter soever, as 2 Samuel
18.27. David said of Ahimaaz, he is a good man, he brings good tidings, the
word is in the Hebrew Bessorah, and in the Greek (...). But in the New
Testament the word (...), does always signify the good tidings and joyful
message of Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, and of Redemption by him, and
so we always use the word Gospel in our English tongue; And when the word
Gospel is thus restrained unto the message, and tidings of Christ, I find it
three ways used in Scripture and in our common speech.

Sometimes it is opposed to the Doctrine of the Law which teaches to seek
life and salvation by our own works, and then it signifies the whole Doctrine
of salvation by Jesus Christ, written in the Old and New Testament, and
preached by all the ministers of Christ, unto the end of the world, as Romans
1.9. God is my witness whom I serve with my Spirit, in the Gospel of his son.
and Gal. 3. 8. where the promise of Christ to Abraham is called the Gospel, and
Ephesians. 1. 13. where the doctrine of believing and trusting in Christ is called
the Gospel of salvation. In this large sense it includes all the promises of
Christ in it which were made from the beginning to the fathers, before the Law,
and by the prophets under the Law,

Sometimes it is opposed to all the promises of the old Testament made to the
fathers before the Law, and by the prophets before the coming of Christ, and
then it signifies that joyful message, and word which is comprehended in the
new Testament, which declares that Christ is already come in the flesh, and
what he has done for our redemption, and how we must be brought to communion
of life, and salvation in him. Thus it is used, Mark. 1. 14. where it is said,
that Jesus Christ preached in Galilee the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and
Mark. 16. 15. Go preach the Gospel to every creature. When the Word is thus
taken, it differs, and is distinguished from the promises of Christ to come
which are called (...). It signifies Christ already come.

Sometimes this Word is restrained to the written History of Christ, from his
Conception and Birth, to his Ascension, as it is recorded by the Evangelists in
the New Testament; thus the word is used, Mark 1. 1. Where the Evangelist
beginning his holy History, says; The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; and thus we use the word, when we speak of the Gospel of Saint
Matthew, or of Luke, or of John; meaning the History of Christ written by them.

Now having laid down the true signification of these two words, Law and
Gospel, and showed the diverse acceptions of them; It is easy* to gather the
agreement and differences which are between them. If we take the word Law in
the most large sense, for the whole word of God, then it includes all the
Gospel in it, and then they differ and agree as the whole body differs from,
and agrees with a part of it self. The Law is the whole Word of God, and the
Gospel a part of it. If we take the Law for the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, or for the writings of Moses, then it includes in it a part of the
Gospel; namely, the promises of the Messiah, and the doctrine of salvation in
him to come. And from the other part of the Gospel, to wit, the glad tidings
of Christ already come, it differs as the Old Testament from the New, and the
mixed Covenant from the pure Covenant of Grace.

If we take the word Law, for the new Law the Gospel of Grace, then the new
Law and the Gospel are all one and the same. But if we take the Law for the
doctrine of Commandments, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, it differs from
the Gospel so far as the first part of the Covenant of God given by Moses
differs from the pure Covenant of Grace. And lastly, if we by Law understand
the Moral, then it differs from the Gospel, so far as the first Covenant of
Works differs from the second Covenant of Grace.

But if we take the Gospel in the most common and usual sense for the glad
tidings of Christ already exhibited, and for the whole Doctrine of the New
Testament, and by Law do understand (as the word commonly signifies) the
Covenant which God made with Israel by Moses, and the pure Covenant of Grace
made with all Nations, do agree and differ between themselves.

Now the use of these Doctrines is manifold,

First, they serve to set us in a more Use.
sure way to salvation, and also to guide and keep us therein to the end, in
that they show us every turning, and every by-way, both on the right hand and
on the left, and how we may avoid them all. Many are the errors which have
been raised up in the Church of God from the first time of the publishing of
the Gospel until this day. In the time of the apostles, some taught that the
law was to be observed, together with the Gospel and the Ministry of Moses,
with the Ministry of Christ, and that none could be justified or saved without
circumcision and observation of the Laws of Moses. Against them the Apostle
disputes in the whole Epistle to the Galatians.

Some did utterly destroy the Law and all use of good works, and taught faith
alone without works of sanctification at all. Against them the Apostle S. James
disputes. Some utterly rejected the Old Testament, as the Manichaeans in Old
time, and now the Anabaptists. Some did set up their own righteousness, as
the Jews, Romans 10. 3. and the Papists at this day.

Now if we rightly understand the doctrines before laid down between the Old
and New Covenant, the Law and the Gospel, we shall easily discern the
wickedness of these errors, and shall see the right way to justification and
Salvation. We shall so understand the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
that we shall out of them be able to answer all Heretics and adversaries of
the truth.

And therefore whatsoever some think of this Discourse of the Old and New
Testament; the first and the second Covenant, the Old and the New, mixed and
pure Covenant of Grace; and concerning the Law and the Gospel: Yet I am sure
that others of better judgment, who receive with due respect and reverence all
holy doctrine, shall find infinite profit, benefit, and comfort, if they lay
these things to heart, and keep them in continual remembrance. Which grace
the Lord grant unto us all for his own mercies sake in Jesus Christ, and to
this small Work of a weak Instrument give a blessing. To whose holy Name be
all praise and glory now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

