GOD MADE VISIBLE IN HIS WORKS, OR, A TREATISE OF THE EXTERNAL Works of GOD.

First, in General, out of the words of the Psalmist,

Psalm. 135.6. Secondly, in Particular of the Creation, out of the words of
MOSES, GENESIS,

Chap. 1. and 2. Thirdly, of GODS actual Providence.

By George Walker B. of Divinity, and Pastor of St. John Evangelists Church in
LONDON.

ROMANS 1.20. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse.

London, Printed by G.M. for John Bartlet at the sign of the gilt Cup, near
S. Austins-gate in Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MY MVCH HONORED friends Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir
Gilbert Gerard, Sir William Massam, and Sir Martin Lumley, Knights and
Baronets, now honorable Knights of the house of Commons in the high Court of
Parliament, Grace and peace with increase of all bl^ssings temporal and
etern^ll.
Right Worshipful,
THat undeserved favor and respect which I have found at your hands, and the
due respect which I owe to your religious families, do oblige me to show some
testimony of my thankfulness, And because I have no better present at this time,
but this Treatise of Gods external Works, composed out of Sermons heretofore
preached to mine own little flock, and in the troublesome time of my late bonds
brought into this form. I must crave pardon for my boldness in presuming to
offer it to your hands; seeing persons of higher place have defamed, and
branded these and the rest of my Sermons preached for diverse years last past,
with the reproachful name of factious and seditious doctrines; and by their
grievous accusations have caused me to be shut up as the great troubler of the
City wherein I live, and kept in sure hold least this my manner of preaching
might prove dangerous, and a cause of much hurt, and many troubles in these
changeable and doubtful times. From these and such crimes and unjust
accusations as I have in part purged and cleared my self already in a legal
way; so by your help and favor I hope ere long to be openly acquitted and
justified before the world. If you shall be pleased to cast a favorable eye
upon these my poor labors, and to take a view of them. I doubt not but the
precious matter being Gods pure word, will abundantly recompense the failing of
the composer, and the defects of his skill and workman-Wherfore humbly craving
your kind acceptance of this small token of love, and slender acknowledgement
of duty and service; and desiring to become more indebted to you, by your
favorable respect showed thereunto; I commend your worthy persons and
religious families to the grace and blessing of the Almighty whose invisible
majesty, even his divine power and Godhead is clearly seen from the Creation
of the world (which is in this Treatise plainly described) and understood by
the things created.

Yours in all Christian duty and service GEORGE WALKER.

OF The external Works of GOD in general.
PSALM. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in Heaven and in Earth,
in the sea and all deep places.


THE external outward works of God which follow in the next place after his
internal works, are indeed nothing but his actual execution of his eternal
counsel, purpose and decree. For the unfolding of which works in general,
and laying open of the nature, use and several kinds of them, I have made
choice of this Text. From the words and circumstances whereof, we may easily
gather all points of instruction necessary to be known concerning the general
nature, use and kinds of them.

First, here the words of the Psalmist show that he speaks of Gods outward
works, because he limits them to places and times, to Heaven, Earth, Sea and
all deep places.

Secondly, he speaks of them all in general none excepted, so the Hebrew word
((...)) which signifies all in general whatsoever, does plainly show, and also
the perfect enumeration of all places which are in the world, and wherein any
outward sensible and visible work can be done, to wit: the Heaven, the Earth,
the Seas and all deep places.

Thirdly, he shows that God is the author of these works, as he is Jehovah,
that one eternal God in whom there are three persons, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, for he says (...) Jehovah the Lord does or has done.

Fourthly, he shows that the Lord does ^ll these works of himself according
to his own will and pleasure, and none of them all by com^ulsion, unwittingly
and unwillingly, but even as he pleased, and after the counsel of his will
and pleasure (...) whatsoever the Lord pleased.

Fifthly, he intimates that all these works of God come necessarily,
infallibly, inevitably and irresistably to pass, and that none of them all can
fail which God has been pleased to do, but so come to pass as he pleases
in every respect, even in the same time and place. This he intimates in that
he says every thing whatsoever the Lord pleased, he has done.

Sixthly, he shows that these outward works tend to make God known, and are
of use to bring us to the knowledge of the true God, and in and by them God is
known aright and his greatness also. This is manifest by the dependence of
this ver. on the former. For having said, I know that the Lord is great and
that our Lord is above all gods, he brings in this text as an argument and
proof saying, whatsoever the Lord pleased that he h^th done, which is in
eff^^t all one as if he had said, I know this by his doing of all his outward
works, for whatsoever the Lord pleased that he has done.

Seventhly and lastly, he shows the several kinds of Gods outward works that
they are not only creation but also actual providence which concludes in it
the government of the world, the fall of man, and the restoration of mankind
by the redemption of the world.

Works of creation he expresses, verse. 7. and works of his actual
providence, as ordering, governing and saving of his people by Christ, which
was signified in the deliverance from Egypt, he reckons up in the rest of the
Psalm both before and after my text, So then it is manifest that this text
considered with the circumstances thereof, serves abundantly for the opening of
the nature, use and kind of Gods outward works.

In the unfolding whereof, First let us note the order, coherence and scope of
it. Secondly, let us take a view of the words and sift out the true sense of
them. Thirdly let us observe out of them by way of doctrine, a perfect
description of Gods outward works in general, and lastly apply for some use
the doctrine to our s^lves.

The order and coherence is this, First the Prophet in the 3. first verses,
exhorts all to praise the Lord and to laud his name, more specially the Lords
servants who are continual professors in his Church. Secondly in the 3, 4, 5.
verses he gives some reasons drawn from the Attributes of God and the
consideration of his nature, to wit, because the Lord is good and his name
pleasant, and because of his own free grace he has chosen Israel, that is,
his elect and faithful Church to be his own peculiar people, and because the
Lord is great and is a God above all gods. In testifying and affirming the
Lords goodness and being above all gods, he brings for proof his own
knowledge and experience. I know (says he) that the Lord is great, verse. 5.
Thirdly he does prove God to be such a one, even so good, gracious and great
by his outward works, and shows that by them he knows God to be so, for he
says here in this text, whatsoever the Lord pleased that he has done, in
Heaven and in earth, in the Sea and all deep places. So that it is plain by
the order, dependence and scope of the text, That here David extolls Gods
outward works in general, as things proceeding from his own good pleasure,
and serving to prove him to be good and gracious, and to make us know him so
great and glorious a God as he is.

In the second place, for the words themselves, they are plain and easy to
be understood at the first hearing without any laborious interpretation. They
run thus in the Hebrew, All which the Lord pleases he has done, in Heaven,
Earth, Sea and all deep places. This word (all) ^hewes that he speaks not of
some particular works, but of all in that kind. The word Jehovah is the proper
name of God considered in the unity of his essence with all his ess^ntiall
Attributes, and every one of the 3. Persons is called by this name, as they are
of the same essence and all one God. The enumeration of all the notable places
in the world wherein these works are done discovers the works which he here
speaks off, to be outward works which do not abide in Gods essence and there
only subsist as his eternal counsel, decrees and inward operations do, but
are done in time and place and have their subsistence in and among the
creatures, such as are creating, ruling, ordering, upholding of all things, and
also redeeming and restoring of all mankind. The word [ pleaseth] limits the
general note or particle ( all) unto all works which in themselves are good,
or else serve for good use, and so are pleasing to the Lord for the use sake.
He does not say that the Lord does all things which are done, but all things
which he pleases, that is, he does not make men sinful and wicked, neither
does he work rebellion in men, which is displeasing unto him, but he does
whatsoever is pleasing, that is, all things which are agreeable to his nature.
And whatsoever is according to his will and good pleasure, that he does, none
can hinder it. This is the true sense and meaning of the words. Now from the
text thus opened and the circumstances observed, we may gather a perfect
description of them in general showing the nature and use of them.

The description of Gods outward Works.
The outward works of God in general, are all things whatsoever the Lord God
Jehovah, that one infinite and eternal God, 3. Persons, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost does according to his eternal purpose, and after the counsel and good
pleasure of his will, work, and bring to pass, not within, but without
himself in all the world and upon all creatures therein, and that certainly
and irresistably in due time and place to the communicating and making of
himself known to men and Angels in his infinite and eternal nature and in his
goodness, grace, glory, power and all other essential properties, for the
salvation and eternal blessedness of his elect in Christ.

This description truly gathered from this Text, and the scope and order of it
and discovering plainly the nature and use of Gods outwa^d works in general,
I will prove in every part and branch orderly and will conclude with some
application.

The first thing in it is the general matter of Gods external works, they
are things done; that is, not only actions working and operations, such as
Creation, Redemption and the like; but also things or works made, ^ff^cted and
done by those actions, as Heaven, Earth, Angels and other things created. ^or
all these are things done and wrought by God. This Branch is plainly expressed
in this word of my Text, (...) (has done) or does or has made, for the Hebrew
word signifies all these. And that Gods outward works consist in doing and are
things not spoken or promised but done and wrought, Diverse testimonies of
Scripture do show, Psalm. 44.1. David calls them works which he has done: And
Isa. 28.21. The Prophet says, that the Lord does his work, his s^range work.
And not to stand in repeating many Scriptures in a point so plain; This in one
word is sufficient that the two Hebrew words, (...) and (...) which are used in
the Scriptures to signify Gods outward works are both derived of verbs which
signify doing.

The second branch in this description comprehends in it the Author of these
works, to wit, the Lord ^od Jehovah, that one infinite, eternal God and three
Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost: This Branch does distinguish these
works. First, from the works of creatur^s which are proper to them. Secondly,
from the personal operations of God as the eternal begetting of the Son
which is proper to the Father and is his work only. That God considered in
the unity of his essence as he comprehends all the three Persons, is the
Author of these works, and that they are common to the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and every one of them has an hand in every work of this kind; though
one more immediately than another: The word Jehovah here used in the Text does
plainly show, where it is said, Whatsoever Jehovah pleased or was willing to
do, that he has done: which word is so proper to God, and signifies One God,
that it also agrees to every person in that one God. And this is also confirmed
by diverse other testimonies of Gods word, which show that in diverse of these
outward actions or works, the Father works by the Son and the Son by the
Father with and by the Spirit. The first great work of this kind, even the work
of Creation, which sometimes is attributed to the Father as more peculiar to
him, because terminatur in Patre, as the Schoolmen speak, that is, it is
bounded and termined in the Father, and he is principium and summus terminus
creationis, the first beginning and utmost bound of creation, from whom it
first proceeded, even this is attributed to the Son and Spirit also, as being
common to all the Persons, as Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord (that is the
Son) were the Heavens made and all the host of them by the Spirit of his
mouth. To which add, Job 33.4. The Spirit of God made me, and John 1.2, 10.
and Colos. 1.16. where it is said, that by the eternal word the Son all
things were made both in Heaven and Earth, visible and invisible, and without
him was made nothing of all that was made. So likewise in that outward work of
Judgment executed on Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24. Jehovah is said to rain
down from Jehovah out of Heaven fire and brimstone, that is Jehovah the Son
from Jehovah the Father, who are both one and the same God Jehovah; yea that
these external works of God are not divided some to one Person and some to
another in the Trinity, but are common to all the Persons and proceed from that
one common essence, according to that saying of the Schoolmen, opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. Our Savior shows most plainly, Ioh. 5.19,
22. where he says, that as the Son cannot work of himself alone without
the Father, but he must have and see the Father working with him, so the Father
does not judge any, that is by his own proper act of judgment, but has
committed all judgment to the Son, that he may have a hand in all judgments
together with himself, and John 16.13, 14. speaking of that special
illumination of men's hearts and inward teaching which seems most proper to the
Spirit, he says it is not of himself alone, but it is what he has heard and
received from the Father and the Son. And therefore the second Branch is
manifest that the doer of the outward works of God is Jehovah our God, and all
the three Persons in God.

The third Branch comprehends in it the outward moving cause of all these
outward works: namely, Gods own will and pleasure, for he is said to do them
according to his eternal purpose, and after the counsel of his own will.
This is expressed in the description and in the words of the Text (...)
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that is, whatsoever is according to the Lords will
and pleasure that he has done, and this is testified in other Scriptures, as
Psalm. 115.3. where it is said, that the Lord does whatsoever pleases him, and
Isa. 46.10. where the Lord says I will do all my pleasure, and Jonah 1.14. All
which places show that first the Lord has a mind and pleasure to do such
things, and thereupon he does them. Also, Ephesians. 1.11. It is said he does work
all things after the counsel of his will. And Acts 2.23. and 4.28. the work
of our Redemption by Christ, and all that he did and suffered is said to be
done by the determinate counsel of God. Therefore this Branch is manifest,
namely, That Gods will and pleasure is the only inward mooving cause of all his
outward works, and that they are nothing but the execution of his eternal will
and decree.

The fourth Branch by which these outward works are specially distinguished
from his inward operation, comprehends in it the subject wherein these works
do subsist and the circumstance of time and place wherein they are done. For
these works are not done within God himself, neither do they subsist in his
Essence, as his inward operations do, but they are, Extra Dei essentiam,
without Gods essence, they are done in all the world, and upon the creatures,
some in Heaven and some in Earth, others in the Sea and all deep places (as my
Text says) and they have their circumstances of time and place, as God has
appointed from all eternity. The Creation was in the first beginning of time in
the first six days of the world, Genesis 1. The Redemption wrought by Christ in
the midst of years between the Law and the Gospel, Hab. 3.2. and upon the
mountain where Jerusalem stood, Isa. 25.6, 7. The great execution shall be at
the end of the world in the last day of Judgment, and the works of Gods
government and actual providence as they are diverse, so they are done at
diverse times, and in diverse places of the world, as experience teaches, on the
very day which the Lord appointed did the flood come upon the old world, Genesis
7.11. In the same day which God had foretold was Israel delivered out of
Egypt, Exodus 21.41. And howsoever the words of the Apostle, Act. 17.18.
intimate that in God (and not without him) We live, moove and have our being,
yet we are not thus to understand that these things are, and that we subsist in
Gods Essence, and that we are so in God as his inward operations and eternal
decrees are: But that we all are compassed about with Gods presence and
essential power, which are every where, and by him as by the chief efficient
cause and author of life, motion and being are sustained and upheld in life,
being and motion continually. For to be in God, that is, to subsist in his
essence, does necessarily imply coeternity and consubstantiality with God.
Quicquid est in Deo Deus est, nothing can be within his Essence, but it must be
coeternall with God and of the same Substance with him. He who denies this
must needs deny God to be immutable and most simple, free from all
composition. Therefore this Branch also is most manifest and does contain in it
nothing but solid Truth.

The fifth Branch contains in it the manner of Gods outward works, to wit;
that in respect of God himself, they are done with such power as cannot be
resisted, and in respect of the event, they are certain, infallible and cannot
fail. This is truly collected from the Text: For it is said that all
Whatsoever the Lord pleases he does, or has done, which shows that not one
jot of his will and pleasure fails but comes to pass. If his will or pleasure
could be resisted or any thing prevented which he wills to work, surely the
Devil who is so cunning, watchful and malicious would in some things have
defeated God, or this either by himself or some of his instruments: But this
Text affirms the contrary, that whatsoever the Lord pleased he has done in
all the world. Therefore in r^s^ect of ^od they are all unresistable, and in
respect of the event infallible. And this David testifies, Psalm. 1^5.3.
saying, The Lord does whatsoever pleases him. And Isa. 46.10. my counsel
shall stand, and I will perform all my pleasure, yea because these are
voluntary works of God and are willed and decreed in his secret counsel from
all eternity (as I have noted before) therefore they must needs be
unresistable, for Who can resist his will, Romans 9.19.

The sixth Branch contains the principal use and effects of Gods outward
works: namely, the making of himself known in his nature and essential
attributes and so communicating himself to his elect. That Gods external
works do all serve for this use and do work this effect we may gather from
the dependence and inference of this Text. For the Psalmist having professed
that he knows the Lord to be great and that he is the only true God above all
gods, that is, who has all the essential properties of the true God, he
proves it by and from his works, and shows that by means of them he knows
it. And other Scriptures and experience confirm the same, Psalm. 19.1. It is
said, that the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy work, day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge, and Romans 1.20. The visible things of God are seen from the creation
of the world, clearly being understood by the things which were made: Even his
divine Power and Godhead. So the works of Gods actual providence in governing
and upholding the world, and in mooving the Heavens and the stars in order,
do show his infinite wisdom and supercelestia^l glory, Psalm. 8.1. His
overthrowing of his enemies and the persecutors of his Church, as in the flood
of Noah, and in the drowning of Pharaoh and his host do show his power. His
giving of Christ his Son for a Redeemer abundantly testifies his infinite
goodness and bounty; his punishing our sins in Christ to the ^ull, shows his
infinite Justice, and his pardoning of believers by Christ's satisfaction,
freely given and communicated to them, shows his infinite mercy and free
grace, as the Scriptures often testify, and our own consciences within us do
witness and our daily sense and experience do prove. And in our Redemption
and application of it we see discovered the Trinity of Persons in one God. And
while we in these things, as in a glass behold the glory of God with open
face (the veil of ignorance being remooved) we are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory, and so come to have communion with God, and the fruition
of him, 2 Cor. 3.18.

The seventh and last Branch sets before us the utmost end of all Gods outward
works, to wit the eternal blessedness of the elect, by the communion, vision
and fruition of God in all his glorious attributes, as wisdom, power,
goodness, mercy, justice, and the rest. The Text it self intimates this Truth
to us; saying, that all these works of God proceed from his good will and
pleasure. For the good pleasure and will of God consists chiefly and
principally in willing that his elect shall be brought to perfect communion of
himself and of his glory for their eternal happiness. And what God wills
according to his own good pleasure, and does because he is pleased so to do,
it must needs aim at the blessedness of his elect by the sight and fruition
of him and his glory. Now therefore all Gods outward works proceeding from Gods
pleasure must needs tend to this end, and this is confirmed, Romans 8.28. and 1
Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. where we read that all things work together for good to
them that love God and are the called according to his purpose, and that all
things are the elects, the world, life and death, things present, and things to
come, and they are Christ's and Christ is Gods, also Col. 1.16. all things
visible and invisible were created as by Christ so for him, that they might
serve him for the salvation of his elect, and for this end and purpose Angels,
principalities and powers are said to be made subject to Christ, 1 Pet. 3.22.
And their office and ministry and the great wonders which God does by them are
said to be for them, who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. To these
testimonies many reasons might be added, I will only call to mind that which I
have else where abundantly declared and prooved, to wit, that for this end the
world is upheld by Christ, and for his sake and through his mediation ever
since man's fall, and for this end the wicked live, even the barbarous and
savage nations, either that they may serve for some use to Gods people, or for
the elects sake whom God will raise up out of them, or that God may show his
justice and power on them being fitted for destruction, to the greater glory of
his elect, even the judgments of God on the wicked, and their damnation serve
for this end, to increase the blessedness of the Saints.

The doctrine of this description serves for to stir us up in imitation of
God our Creator, Use 1.
not to content our selves with saying, purposing and promising, or with making
a show of doing good works, but to be real, true, constant and faithful in
performance of them. For so does God, whatsoever he promises or purposes or
is pleased to do, that he does in Heaven and Earth. Sluggards who delight in
idleness doing nothing, and Hypocrites who say and promise and make great show
of doing, but are barren of the fruits of good works, as they are most unlike
to God and contrary to him, so they are hateful and abominable in the sight
of God, and they only are accepted of God who are active Christians, always
doing good and abounding in the work of the Lord, their labor shall not be in
vain, but every one shall receive reward according to his works which are
evidences of his communion with Christ, and of his faith, justification and
sanctification; wherefore seeing God is always reaching forth his mighty hand
to work in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea and all deep places for our profit:
let us be always doing and studying to do good for his glory.

Secondly it serves to move and direct us in and through the outward works of
God to see and behold the infinite, Use 2.
eternal and omnipotent God, and his divine power and Godhead, and in the
unity of Gods essence, the sacred Trinity of persons, because all the persons
have a hand in every work, and that one God who is three persons is the author
and worker of every divine outward work, as this doctrine teaches. It is a
common custom among men when they see and behold the handy work of any
person, to remember the person, to be put in mind of him by the work,
especially if he have known the person before, and bear the love and
affection to him of a friend and a beloved one. So let it be with us, so often
as we see and behold the visible outward works of God, let us in them behold
the face of God, and remember his glorious attributes. Let us in the great
works of Creation behold the wisdom and power of God the Creator, in the
work of Redemption the mercy, bounty and love of God, in our Sanctification,
the love and the holiness of God, and in them all let us behold the three
glorious Persons in that one God who works all things after the counsel of
his own will. The Father by his eternal Word and Spirit creating all things.
The Son sent forth by the Father in our nature, and sanctified by the Spirit,
redeeming us and paying our ransom. The Holy Ghost shed on us by God the
Father through the Son Christ in our regeneration. And all three conspiring
together to purge, sanctify and justify us, and to make us eternally blessed
in our communion with them, and in our fruition of God in grace and glory. And
let us take heed and beware of idle and vain speculation of Gods great works
which show his glory and proclaim his glorious Attributes, Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, lest by such idle negligence we become guilty of taking the name of
the Lord our God in vain.

Thirdly from this description we may easily gather and conclude, Use 3.
that sinful actions as they are evil and sinful are not Gods works;
for God is pleased with those things which he does, and his works are
according to his pleasure, but God is not pleased with sinful actions and
evil works, he has no pleasure in iniquity, Psalm. 5.4. If any ask, How then
can it be done if he will not and be not pleased? I answer, That in them there
is to be considered, 1. A natural motion or action proceeding from some
created power, and so from God the Creator, and this is good and of God and
according to his will as it wills things properly. 2. There is a corruption,
perverseness and crookedness of the action, this is of the Devil and man's
corruption: this God hates; but because actions thus corrupted and stained
make way for God and give him occasion to show his wisdom and power in
ouer-ruling them and disposing them by his hand to a good end and his justice
in punishing them; therefore God is pleased to continue that natural power to
the wicked which they pervert and abuse, and to overruled such wicked works
and to raise light out of that darkness. And therefore let us not impute any
evil and sinful works to God, as they are evil and sinful, nor wickedly
imagine that he is the author of sin. His hand is never in any sinful work,
otherwise then to overruled, order and dispose the sinfulness and evil
thereof to some good end and purpose.

Fourthly we are hereby admonished not to impute any work done in the world to
fortune or chance, Use 4.
as worldly Epicures do, but to ascribe all works and every thing which comes
to pass to the certain will, purpose and determinate counsel of ^od. It is
true that in respect of second causes and purposes of men, many things come to
pass accidentally and by chance, no man purposing or intending any such thing,
but in respect of God they are certain and infallible, they all happen
according to his will, and without it not an hair can fall from our heads nor
a Sparrow fall to the earth, all power and motion is of him, and the abuse of
the power and motion which is from the Devil and man's corruption he willingly
permitted, and does overruled and dispose by his wisdom and providence to a
good end. And therefore in all casualties and accidents let us comfort our
selves and rest content and be patient knowing that they come not but by his
will and pleasure.

Use 5.
Lastly let us rejoice in all the great works which we see done in the world,
and honor them as means tending to our salvation, if we be Gods faithful
people, and with care and conscience walk before him according to his word,
and let the sight of them put us in mind for our comfort, that our God in whom
we trust does not lie idle, nor slumber or sleep, but by a mighty hand and
stretched out arm has done all these great things, and is continually doing
and working for us, to bring us at length out of all troubles and dangers, and
to set us and establish us for ever in eternal rest, glory and blessedness.

The next thing which in order follows after the description of Gods outward
works in general, is the unfolding and distinct handling of the several
sorts and kinds of them. And because the right dividing of them into heads,
and the reducing of all the particulars unto their proper and natural heads,
is a maine ground of light, and a sure way to the distinct handling and
understanding of them, I will therefore (before I proceed any further) labor
to divide them aright into their natural heads according to the ru^es of
reason and truth, and so will proceed to that which is the first in time, and
by the course and order of nature, namely the creation of the world and all
things in it. The learned though they all acknowledge every kind of Gods
outward works, and do not differ in the kinds and numbers of them: yet they
are at variance about the true division of them into their first and principal
heads.

Some divide the works of God into the works of Creation and the works of
Redemption. But this is no perfect division, the two members of it do not
contain all the outward works of God, for over and besides them there are
works of preservation and of judgment and revenge.

Others divide all Gods outward works into the works of nature and the works
of grace. The works of nature they divide into two sorts, 1. The works which
concern the first beginning of nature, that is, the works of creation, 2. The
works, which concern the preservation, which they call the works of Gods
providence. The works of grace they hold to be the works of Redemption and
restoration of mankind, by which God brings supernatural blessings to men:
But this division fails in diverse respects. First, It makes a difference
between works of nature and works of grace, whereas indeed creation and
preservation, which they account works of nature, are in some sense, works of
grace. For God of his own free grace created man in his own Image: And now and
ever since the first sin of Adam, which brought death and destruction into the
world, all works of preservation by which God preserves men in being and life,
are works of free grace, and the preserving of his Elect unto his heavenly
Kingdom is a work of supernatural grace in Christ. Second^^, they err in
distinguishing between the works of Gods providence, and the works of
Redemption and rest^uration, whereas Redemption and restoration are principal
works of Gods providence, by which God provides for his elect in Christ, such
things as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, 1 Cor. 2.9.

A third sort there are who divide all Gods outward works into these two heads
only; namely, the works of Creation, and the works of actual providence. This
I take to be the best and most perfect division. First, because under these
heads are all Gods outward works contained, and there is not any one which may
not be reduced under one of these two. For whatsoever God does, or has done,
or can do for the giving of the first being to all things may be reduced to
Creation. And whatsoever God does, or can do for the ordering, preserving and
disposing of things created, and of their being and wel-being, may be brought
under the works of his actual providence. Secondly, there is a perfect
distinction and difference between the works of creation and the works of
actual providence: So far as man's substance differs from man's misery and man's
felicity, so far does every proper work of Creation differ from the works of
Gods actual providence in their objects. And although God in the creating of
things in order did show his providence for man, in that he first made a place
of habitation for him, and all things which may serve for his use, as plants,
trees, fruits, light and other necessaries before he created him, yet this
breeds no confusion between the works of creation and the works of
preservation, for two things may go together in time and place, and may be in
the same subject (as we see, sense and understanding, hearing and seeing in one
man at the same time, and heat and light in fire) and yet they may be different
in themselves.

This order therefore I do purpose to follow hereafter by Gods assistance in
prosecuting the body of Divinity. First, I will begin with the Creation, and
will labor to unfold the nature of it in general. And then I will proceed to
the handling of all the special works thereof, every one distinctly by it self
in particular.

Secondly, I will pass from thence to the works of Gods actual providence,
under which comes the government and preservation of the world, and of al
things created, and the ordering and disposing of every thing to the proper end
of it. More especially, the fall of man into sin, misery, and guilt of
damnation. And the Redemption of man from misery and his Restoration to grace
and glory by the application and fruition of Redemption, and by true spiritual
union and communion with Christ the Redeemer, and with God the Father in him by
the inhabitation of the Holy Ghost.

Thus much for the general Doctrine of Gods outward works laid down in this
Text, and for the division of them in their several heads and kinds, unto
which all the particular outward works may be reduced.

FINIS.

