THE KEY OF SAVING KNOWLEDGE, Opening out of the holy Scriptures, the right
way, and straight passage to Eternal life. OR A Dialogue wherein the chief
principles of Christian Religion are unfolded for the enabling of Christian
people, to understand the Word of God and to atteine to the true sense and
mean^ng thereof.

Composed by GEO. WALKER B. of Div. and Pastor of S John the Evangelists Church
in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by THO. BADGER. M.DC.XLI.

To his little flock, the Inhabitants of the Parish of S. John the Evangelist
in Watlingstreet in London, Georg^ Walker their weak, but wellwishing ^astor,
commends this small token of his unfeined lvoe, and hearty desire of their
eternal happiness in the fruition of God; by their fellowship and communion
with him in the Lord Jesus Christ.
BEloved in the Lord Christ, seeing now I have spent one half of my days in
Preaching to you and your predecessors the Gospel of Christ, in expounding the
sacred Scriptures, and in watching and laboring for the good of your souls,
to wit, for the space of 29 years, until there is not one left alive of all
those inhabitants, who were masters of families at my first coming to this
place, and did all with one consent and voice make choice of me to be their
Pastor: I hold it high time for me, to think of my departure from hence by
putting off this earthly tabernacle, and of leaving you as your predecessors
who were my first flock, have left me their Pastor behind them to feed you a
succeeding generation. And least my labor and pains, which I spent among them
for the good of their souls should seem to die with them, and to be buried
in their graves: I have thought good to renew the memory of them; and to leave
to the World some Monuments of that Doctrine I have Preached to them heretofore,
as also to you of latter times, by Gods gracious assistance, though in great
weakness of body, yet with a willing mind, and with a courage never daunted
with any menacings and threatenings of potent adversaries, and malicious
persecutors. The principal heads and true platform of which doctrine I have
briefly comprised, and compendiously set forth in this short Dialogue, which
contains in it the principles and foundations of Christian Religion and which
I do here commend to you, as a testimony of that unfeigned love which I bear
to you, and of my fervent desire of the salvation of your souls. I have
already published, and have ready for the Press diverse larger Treatises,
wherein are contained many particular doctrines which may be reduced to these
principal heads; and are there largely handled, plainly opened, and fully
proved by Scriptures; and the true use of them showed in such manner as they
have been by my mouth publikly preached among you. But this golden Key, which
is the quintessence of them all, will open Heaven unto you, if you can learn to
use it aright. It is made of divine metal, even the Word of God revealed from
Heaven, which is more pure than the most refined gold. It will teach you by a
short and compendious way to know God, not only in the unity of Essence in his
essential attributes; In the Trinity of persons, and in his Works of Creation,
and actual Providence overruling man's fall, and disposing it and all the evils
which entered in by it, to his own glory, and the good of his Elect: but also
in Jesus Christ, in whom to know him the only true God is eternal life, as our
Savior testifies, John 12. 3. Here Gods eternal Counsel and Decree of
Predestination is discovered: Here you may learn the saving works of God, in
and by Christ, God and man humbled in our nature. What love God has showed in
giving his Son for us; and what Christ has done and suffered for our
Redemption. Here you may see what saving works God works by his Spirit, shed on
his Elect through Christ, as Regeneration, Renovation, effectual calling,
Union with Christ, Adoption, Communion of his ransom for Redemption, of his
Righteousness for Justification, of his satisfaction for Remission of sins,
and Reconciliation. And what Gods Spirit works in us and by us, as
Mortification, Sanctification, Faith, Repentance and all holy graces; and how
and by what means he enables us to apply Christ and his benefits unto us, and
to enjoy him and them for Salvation; and also does beget and increase grace in
his Elect, to wit, by the Word preached and heard, the Sacraments rightly
administered and received, faithful and fervent Prayer, and the like. And how
these work in the Elect to eternal life and blessedness, and are abused by
wicked reprobates, to their own everlasting damnation and destruction. These
things have I written to you Fathers and Masters, that you may read them your
selves, and commend them to your children and families; I commend them to you
Young men, that you may grow strong, and may overcome the wicked one. And I
commend them to you little children; that you may learn to know his name, and
that your sins may be forgiven you for his names sake. If after so much
preaching and teaching you be found ignorant and unprofitable, it is because
the God of this World has blinded your minds, least the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto you. This word
will be to you the savor of death unto death, and this book shall witness
for me against you, that you are wilfully ignorant and a lost people. But if,
as I hope, and pray fervently and wish from my heart; You do chearefully
receive the love of this Truth: then shall my Doctrine be to you the savor of
life unto life, and we shall both together, I of my work and labor in
preaching, and you of your reverence in hearing, and faithfulness in obeying
the Word Preached, receive the reward of righteousness, which Christ has
purchased for them that believe and obey the Gospel, even the Crown of glory,
which never fades. This brief sum of Christian Religion, with other more
large Treatises I have written in my bonds, for the common benefit of you and
others, to testify unto you, that the many waters of troubles and
persecutions, which I suffer for the Truth sake, which I have preached unto
you, cannot quench my love to you, nor my desire of your salvation, nor hinder
me from laboring for your good. In all which I seek not yours, but you. And
as I have preached the Gospel freely to you, never seeking any of your
temporal goods, for my ministering of spiritual things plentifully unto you;
but spending besides my spirits, much substance over and above the revenues of
my small Benefice, which from you I have received; so I commend to you freely
this and all other works and labors of my love, which if you do lovinglie
accept and use, and employ to your own advantage, I shall think my work in
some good measure rewarded, and shall ever remain a faithful labourer for the
good of your souls, according to the utmost of my power, and

Your welwilling, though weak Pastor, GEO. WALKER.

A brief Dialogue, wherein the Father examineth his Son, concerning the
principles of Religion, in which he has formerly instructed him.
Quest. MY dear Child, why do thou complain because of thy sickness, and
many pains and infirmities which often do befall thee, seeing thou by thy
sins pullest them upon thee, and causest God thus to punish and correct thee?


Answer. Indeed in my book of the of the Psalms of David, I am taught to
confess, that I was shapen in iniquity, and that in sin has my mother
conceived me, but this is the fault of you that are my parents, from whom I
received in my birth and with my first being this sinful corruption.


Quest. It is true, that we brought thee into this world a poor sinful
wretch. But do thou not know, that this corruption comes not from our
selves, as the first causes of it, but from our first parents in whom thou and
we and all mankind have sinned against God, and lost that image and likeness
of God, in which we were created, and are so infected with the poison and
malice of the Devil, which he breathed into our first parents, that we have
no power, or will to do the good which God requires of us in his Law; but are
forward to run into all sins which God forbids.


Answ. I remember now when you put me in mind of it, that you have taught me
oftentimes, that God created all things good at the first, and in Adam he
created all mankind in his own image and likeness; and that the Devil by
the Serpent did tempt the woman, and breathed into her his poison and drew her
into sin, and by her infected Adam, who was the root and stock of all mankind;
and by drawing him into transgression, did corrupt him and all mankind,
defaced Gods image in us al, and stained and defiled our nature, so that
eversince we are by nature children of wrath and disobedience, who of our
selves have no power to will or do any good, but do run into sin and actual
transgression continually.


Quest. I see and perceive by this, that you are ready to forget those
instructions of godliness which you have often learned, and have need to have
your memory often rubbed up. And therefore I will stir you up to remember the
things which I have often taught you, by asking you questions concerning the
chief points of Christian Religion which you have learned, that they may be
more deeply printed in your mind, and that you may have them more ready to put
them in practice when occasion shall be offered.


Answ. I acknowledge my self bound in a double bond of thankfulness unto
you, both for your godly pains in t^aching me saving Knowledge, and for your
fatherly care, to ma^e me remember the things which you have taught me, that I
may both believe and practice the things which God requires of me, for the
obteining of eternal life, and blessedness.


Quest. My pains of teaching you, are a pleasure to me, when I see you willing
to be instructed. And if you answer readily the questions which I shall ask
you concerning the grounds of Religion, which I have heretofore taught you, I
shall rejoice in hope and confidence that God has chosen you to be a vessel
of honor* called you to the state of Grace, and prepared you for the state of
glory in Heaven.


Answ. I acknowledge with all thankfulness Gods infinite love, mercy and
bounty to me, in that he has ordained me to be borne of Godly and Christian
parents, who as they were means to bring me into the world, a corrupt sinful
child of Adam, so are Gods special instruments to beget me to God a new
creature in Jesus Christ, by instructing me in his holy Word, by which his holy
Spirit does take possession of my soul, works in me Faith, and renueth me
after the image of Christ; wherefore I am ready according to my best
understanding and memory to answer every question which you shall ask,
concerning the things which I have before heard and learned from your mouth,
humbly beseeching God to print in my heart, and to enable me by his grace to
practice in my life the things, which by your often urging and pressing are
printed in my memory.


Quest. My first Question therefore shall be about that which is the first work
of God, by which he gave to mankind their first being, I mean the creation of
Adam and all mankind in him, tell me what you have been taught concerning it?


Answ. First, I have learned that God created the whole world and all things
therein, Genesis 1. and 2.


Quest. What God is he who did perform and perfect so great a work?


Answ* He who is the one only true God, and besides whom there is no other God,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and Isay 45. 5.


Quest. What a one do you conceive this God to be?


Answ. I conceive him to be such a one as his most proper name Jehovah does
signify.


Quest. What does that name signify?


Answ. It signifies that he is and has his being of himself from all
eternity, without beginning and without end, and that be gives being, motion,
breath, life, and all other things, to all creatures which live, move, and
breath, and to all other things which have been, are, or shall be in the
world, and without him nothing can ^e or come to pass, Exodus 3. 14.


Quest. What do you learn from thence?


Answ. I learn, First, that God is most absolute of himself, and depends upon
none other, neither needs, either for his being, glory, or blessedness any
help, or for the increase of them. Secondly, that he is before all things, and
is the first cause of them. Thirdly, that he is eternal, even one who was
before all times, and is and shall be the same for ever, without beginning, and
without end. Fourthly, that he is immutable and unchangeable in his nature,
essence and being, and in his counsels, will and all other his attributes and
properties. Fifthly, that he is most perfect, one who wants nothing, but has
in him all excellencies to the full, so that nothing can be added to him to
increase his goodness or blessedness. Sixthly, that he is infinite and
incomprehensible, no tongue can utter, no eye can see, nor ear hear, nor
heart conceive, nor reason and understanding comprehend him or his excellencies.


Quest. Wherein does his infiniteness consist?


Answ. It consists in this, that he has no bounds, nor limits, but is above
all degrees of comparison, his whole essence is at all times pr^sent in all
places; 1 Kin. 8. 27
and neither Heaven, nor the Heaven of Heavens, nor all places in the World can
contain him, or measure his Substance. He is infinite in Wisdom, Knowledge,
Power, Goodness, Mercy, Justice, Will, Counsel, and all other Attributes and
Properties, able to do whatsoever he will. Psa. 147* 5
He sees and knows all things, which are, have been, shall be, Isa. 46. 10.
or can be, and his Will is the rule of all things, and is limited to no rule
or law, but is it self the rule and law of all things.


Quest. If God be infinite in Essence and Will, and all Attributes, and wholly
present in all places by his whole Essence, and all his Attributes: How comes
it to pass that he shows his glory above the Heavens more than in the World
which is below, and in one place he does show more power, and justice, and in
another place, and to other persons he shows more goodness, gra^e and mercy?


Answ. There is great difference between God, as he is in himself, and as he
is seen, felt, and apprehended by his creatures in his Word, and Works:
Though he is Omnipotent and can do all things, yet he does not work all things
in all to the full, according to his infinite power, but only so much as he
pleases, when, and where and in whom he will, as in his Wisdom he thinks fit
for every one Neither can we see and conceive Gods Essence, and properties in
themselves, but in the effects and works of them, which are limited by his
Will and Wisdom. And though he works by degrees and by measure: Yet his
Essence and essential properties are without measure and degree, and his Word
is fitted to our capacy.


Quest. What other properties do you conceive to be in God?


Answ. There is no shadow of excellency, Virtue, Goodness, or Grace in any
creature, but it is in God Essentially, and Substancially, one and the same
thing with his very Essence and Substance. He is Essentially, Good, Wise, Just,
Merciful, Gracious and Loving, and even Goodness, Wisdom, Justice and Mercy
it self: 1 Ioh. 4. 8.
And as the Apostle says, that God is Love, so we may truly and most properly
say of him, that he is Goodness, Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy; and yet he is in
himself a most pure and simple Essence, free from all mixture, composition and
division.


Quest. Wherein does this purity, and simplicity of God consist?


Answ. It consists, First in this, that though God fills Heaven and Earth,
and is in and withal creatures: Yet his substance is not mingled with any of
them. Secondly, that he is not compounded of things different, neither of act
and power as other Spiriturall substances are, nor of matter and form,
Substance and Accidents, such as quantity, quality and the like, as bodily
creatures are. Thirdly, that he cannot be divided into several parts, as men's
bodies are. He is not of the same kind and nature with any other thing
whatsoever: But is a most pure simple Spirit, or Spiritual substance, in
comparison of whom the most pure Spirits and Angels are but gross substances
and impure: In a word his Substance and properties are all one and the same
thing; and wheresoever he is present, there his whole Essence, and all and
every one of his essential properties are actually present, even in all places
at once.


Quest. If God be only one most pure and simple: Why do the Scriptures speak of
three persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and do call every
one of them JEHOVAH and God?

Though there is but one God, and one Jehovah, even one most pure and simple
Nature and Essence: Yet in this one pure simple, undivided Essence, there are
three distinct persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all which three are
but one Jehovah, and one God, and every one of them is called Jehovah and God;
because they are all of one and the same simple and Divine Essence.


Quest. How are they then three persons distinguished one from another?


Answ. They are distinguished, not by their Essence, and Nature, which in all
three is one singular and undivided: but by their personal subsistence and
properties.


Quest. Which are they?


Answ. First, the Father subsists of himself and is not begotten of any, but
begets the Son: The Son is begotten of the Father from all eternity, and
receives his personal subsistence, from the person of the Father alone: The
Father and the Son together breath out the Spirit, and the Spirit has his
subsistence by proceeding from them from all eternity. Secondly, in order the
Father is the first, the Son the second, and the Holy Ghost the third; though
in time and dignity, none of them is before or after other; but all are
coeternall, consubstantiall and coequall of the same dignity, glory and
Majesty. Phil. 2. 6.



Quest. How can he who is Jehovah and God eternal, proceed and receive his
personal subsistence from another? Seeing Jehovah the true God, is of himself
and can receive nothing from any?


Answ. It is true that the persons considered according to their nature and
substance, which is common to all three, and is one and the same in them all,
cannot beget nor be begotten, nor proceed one from another. For if God
absolutely considered, could beget, as he is an absolut essence, or be
begotten, or proceed; then there might be more Gods than one. But a person or
personal subsistence in that one simple essence of God may beget another
person, but not another God, and may be begotten and proceed, not from the
simple essence of God, but from another person in that one Essence* Wherefore
the Son is begotten not as he is one and the same Essence with the Father, but
as he is another person in that Essence: and so the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son, as he is another person in the same Essence: And so
Jehovah the true God does proceed from none, nor receives any thing from any:
but a person which subsists in the Essence of God, and is Jehovah the true God,
receives subsistence from another person in the same Essence.


Quest. I see you do rightly conceive of God the Creator, both in the unity of
his Essence, and in the Trinity of persons. Now tell me which of the three
persons created the world?


Answ. Though the Father is called the Creator of whom are all things: Yet he
alone did not create the world, nor any thing in it, but the Son and the Spirit
also did work with the Father, and had an equal hand in the Creation of every
thing: For in all the outward works of God, that is the joint operation of all
the three persons.


Quest. How does it appear that the creation is the work of all the three
persons?


Answ. By plain testimonies of holy Scripture, for in the description of the
Creation, we have express mention of the Word, that is the Son, and of the
Spirit, Genesis 1. 1, 2, 3. and David, Psalm. 33. 6. says, by the Word of the Lord
were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the breath of his mouth,
that is, b^ the son and the Spirit. For the Son is called the eternal Word,
one God with the Father, by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing
was made that was made, John 1* 1, 2, 3. And the Apostle, Colos. 1. 16. says
that by Christ the Son all things were created that are in Heaven and Earth,
visible and invisible, and by him all things consist.


Quest. You have well declared the Truth concerning the Creator, now tell me
whereof the World was made?


Answ. God made all things of nothing at the first, to wit, the highest heavens
with the Angels and all the Host of them; and also the Earth that is the rude
mass without form and void, which was the common matter of all the visible
world, and this is called simple and primary creation. Afterward God created
out of that rude matter the Li^ht, that is, the Fiery and Starry Heavens and
the large Element of the Air, which is called the Firmament, and the Sea, and
the dry Land, and then out of those four Elements he formed and made all
other things, as the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Herbs, Plants, and Trees; the
Stones and Metals, the Fishes, Birds and all other living creatures; and this
is called, secondary creation, because all those things were not made first and
immediately of nothing: but secondarily were formed out of a matter, which God
had before created of nothing; and so al creatures had their first beginning,
and being out of nothing* so mighty and omnipotent is Gods hand far above the
reach of man's reason.


Quest. After what manner did God create the World and all things therein?


Answ. The Scriptures teach us that he created all things: First, most freely
by the liberty of his Will, not by necessity of Nature* Secondly, not rashly,
but according to his most wise Counsel and eternal purpose. Thirdly, with
great ease, and facility, without pains, toil or labor.


Quest. How does that appear?


Answ. By the words of Moses in the History of the Creation, where it is
recorded, that God in the creation did but say let things be, and so they were
made; so he is said to creat the Light, the Firmament, the Waters, the dry
Land, the Lights in Heaven, the Herbs and Trees, and all things living and
moving on the Earth and in the Sea. He said let them be, and they were made and
brought into being, Genesis 1* 2* 6, 9, etc.


Quest. How does this speech show that God created all things in such manner as
you have said, to wit, freely, wisely, and with ease and facility?


Answ. Very plainly, for these words are not to be understood properly that
God uttered a sound of words: but the phrase is Metaphorical borrowed from the
doings of men. For works done by necessity of Nature, men do without
consulting or speaking, or any pr^scription or direction given by word of
mouth. The things which men first speak of, and then do, are done by liberty
of will; and therefore this phrase teaches us, that the Creation was a work
done, not by necessity of Nature, but by liberty of will, that is a work which
God, if he had so been pleased, might have left undone, and did therefore do,
because it was his free will to do it. Secondly, wise men do not command, or
prescribe things to be done unless they have consulted, purposed, and
determined, that they shall be so done. Their words by which they command, and
prescribe the doing of great works, are the open manifestation of their mind,
will purpose, and decree; and the first thing which belongs to the actual
performing and effecting of the work. And therefore this phrase teaches us,
that as God in his eternal Counsel had wisely purposed and decreed; so now
God the Father by his Word the Son, and by his Spirit, began to put his wise
counsel in execution, and actually to create and make all things, and to bring
them outwardly into being according to his wise counsel, and as he had
inwardly purposed in himself, so the creation was a work not rashly done, but
wisely according to counsel.

Thirdly this phrase shows, that as among men, nothing can be done with
greater ease and facility, and with less toil or labor, then when they only
say the word let it be done, and presently it is done, without any more pains:
So it was with God in the creation, he did as easily and without pains create
all things as a man does a thing by saying let it be, which of al things is
most easy as experience teaches.


Quest. What special things have you learned concerning the creation of
mankind?


Answ. Four things especially.

First, that God consulted about it saying, Let us make man.

Secondly, that he made man after his own Image and likeness, male and
female.

Thirdly, that he gave them domination over all other creatures in the
inferior world.

Fourthly, that he created a place of pleasure for them to dwell in, and there
placed them.


Quest. How do you understand these words? And God said, Let us make man in
our image and after our likeness?


Answ. They are thus to be understood, not that God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost did then first enter into consultation about man's creation: But that
as God in the common counsel of the blessed Trinity, had from all eternity
purposed and decreed; so now he began to put his decree into execution and
actually to create man, after such a manner and such a creature as he had
decreed, even stamped with his Image, fit to rule over other Creatures.


Quest. Show me more particularly how God created man in his own image male and
female?


Answ. First, he made Adam of the dust of the earth, and with breath of life,
created a soul in him, and he made him one only, that he might be the common
stock and root of all mankind, from whom the woman also might have her
beginning, and be made of his flesh and bone, even of a fleshy rib taken out
of him.

Secondly, he made them both in his own image, the man first, and when man
appeared so excellent above all living creatures, that among them all there
could not be found a mate, or help meet for him; then he took a rib of the
man and made a female, the woman meet for him in the same Image, and after the
same likeness.


Quest. Wherein did the Image ^f God consist, and how was man like unto God?


Answ. This Image did consist, first and principally in his Soul, s^condarily
in his body, and thirdly in his whole person.

First, in the substance of his soul, he was like to God; For as God is a
Spirit, so man's soul was created a Spirit or spiritual living substance.

Secondly, in the powers and faculties of his soul, to wit, his reason, will,
desires, and affections, in all which created perfect and upright in him, he
was like unto God; For as God knows and understands all things: so man by
his reason was able to know and understand all things, meet for him. As God
has liberty of will, so man had liberty of will to do all things, which by his
upright reason, he knew to be good and in his power. As God loves goodness
and delights in it, so man loved and desired all good things, which his
upright reason and will did lead him unto. In all this did the Image of God
primarily consist.


Quest. How did he bear Gods Image, and was like to him in his body?


Answ. First, in the upright stature, beauty, glory, and Majesty of his body;
Secondly, in the abilities, actuity and fitness of all members of his body, to
move, work and perform all things, unto which his upright reason, will, and
affections did move him and direct him.


Quest. How was man like to God in his whole person?


Answ. First, as he was perfectly upright, both in soul, and body, and in his
whole person conformable to Gods Will, and fit and able to serve and obey him.

Secondly, as he was in his whole person, soul and body, endowed with all
ability and fitness, to rule over all other visible living creatures, and to
be the Lord of them; so he bare the Image of God, and was like to him the
supreme Lord of all.


Quest. Did not Gods Image in Adam consist in holiness also, as some do teach
from the Apostles words, Ephesians. 4. 24.


Answ. The Image of the first Adam consisted only in natural uprightness, as
wise Solomon teaches, Eccles. 7. 29. and his perfections, gifts, and
endowments were only natural. But holiness is a property of the 2 Adam
Christ, and is a supernatural work and gift of the Spirit, which in our new
birth is shed on us only through Jesus Christ, and is the image of the new man
made a new creature in Christ, as the Apostles words plainly show in the
forenamed place, Ephesians. 4. ^4. and 1 Cor. 15. 49. and Tit. 3. 6. If man had
been holy, he could not have fallen as he did.


Quest. Wherein did man's dominion over the creatures consist?


Answ. It consisted in this, that as man was in nature above them all, and had
reason and wisdom to order and rule them: So God made them all obedient to
man, and put in them a reverence and love of man, insomuch that they delighted,
and rejoiced to look on man and to come to him at his call and to show their
nature and several qualities, that man might admire Gods manifold wisdom
showed in their creation, and in the workmanship of them.


Quest. Had not man power to sacrifice, kill, and eat them* as men have had
since the fall?


Answ. No verily, For all death, groaning and vanity of the creatures came in
by man's sin: Man's meat in the state of innocence was only fruits of trees, and
herbs bearing seed, Genesis 1 29. But after man's fall, and the promise of Christ,
God through Christ enlarged man's dominion over the creatures, and appointed the
killing and sacrificing of birds, and beasts to foreshew Christ's death for man's
redemption from sin, and withal gave the flesh of them to man for meat, and
their skins to cloth him; and hereby we see that we gain more by Christ,
than we lost in Adam.


Quest. What place of pleasure was that which God made for man's dwelling and
habitation?


Answ. It was the Garden which God planted in Eden, the most fruitful place of
Mesopotamia, in which he made to grow out of the ground, all trees pleasant to
the sight, and good for food; and in that Paradise of pleasure, all delights
did abound which the world could afford to a natural man. A river divided into
four streams watered it, and there was no want of any thing, which man's
upright heart could conceive or desire.


Quest. What service did God require of man for all this bounty and goodness,
and all the delights and honor bestowed on him?


Answ. He required no more service of man over and above that which his own
reason, will, natural appetite and affection did lead him to do of himself;
but only to abstain from the fruit of one tree, even the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, Genesis 2. 16. 17.


Quest. Was the fruit of that Tree by nature evil, and hurtful?


Answ* Surely no, for all things which God made were very good, Genesis 1. 31 and
the fruit was pleasant to the eye, and good for food, Genesis 3. 6.


Quest* Why then did God forbid man to eat of it?


Answ* For good reasons.

First, to exercise and prove man's obedience.

Secondly, to show that all other trees were of free gift given to man, and
that God might as well have kept back all other trees, as this, if he had
would, which consideration might justly have moved man to acknowledge Gods
large bounty in giving him dominion over the whole Earth, the Sea, and all the
creatures in them.


Quest. When God had made the world and al things therein very good, did he not
by his wisdom and providence, rule, order and govern them?


Answ. Yes verily, he did and does still by his Wisdom so order, govern, and
dispose all things, that without his Will nothing can come to pass in all the
world.


Quest. Wherein does that Providence of God consist?


Answ. First, in doing and working all the good which comes to pass in the
World. Heb. 1. 3. ^ Colo. 1. 17
For as he gave being to all things; so he susteineth and keeps them in their
being by the word of his power, and by him all things consist. There is no good
done in the world, but he brings it to pass, either immediately by his own
hand, or else by the power which he has given and continues to his creatures,
and by his inclining and moving them to it. For he works in them both to
will and to do, Philip. 2. 13.

Secondly, his Providence consists in permitting and suffering his creatures to
abuse his power and strength which he gives them, and to employ it to sin and
transgression. And if God had not wittingly and willingly suffered the Devil
and the evil Angels to sin and fall, and to tempt and draw man into sin, no
evil nor sin could have entered into the world.


Quest. How could God who is infinite in goodness willingly suffer sin to
enter into the World, which is a thing so hateful to him?


Answ. He suffered it in his Wisdom and Goodness, not out of any pleasure,
which he takes in sin, or any evil, or in the destruction of his creatures,
but because by his Omnipotency he can out of evil bring greater good, than
any, which is lost and forfeited by sin. For by hating sin he shows his
holiness, by punishing it his justice, by redeeming his elect from it, his
mercy, free grace, and goodness, by the evils which his elect do undergo for
their trial and correction, and the misery and torment which they see
inflicted on reprobates, they are made more sensible of their own happiness,
and more blessed in the fruition of God and of his glory at last. And as a man
who was never pinched with hunger, and pain of sickness, cannot so fully know
the goodness of health, nor so sweetly taste and relish his meat; so without
sight and sense of evil we cannot so fully know, nor so sweetly enjoy our own
happiness, nor so perfectly rejoice and glory in the fruition of God and all
his goodness.


Quest. If sin comes to pass by the will and providence of God, how is God
excused from being the author of sin?


Answ. Very well, For the bare willing and permitting of a thing, makes not him
who willingly permits it the author and cause thereof. To make God the author
of sin, or any way guilty of it; there are three things required. First, that
God do command, counsel, or persuade men to commit sin: Or secondly, that he
move, incline, or stir them up to it. Or thirdly, that when he willingly
permits and suffers it, and is able to hinde^ it, he be bound by some Law and
bond of duty (as men are) to hinder it to the utmost of his power, and in no
case to will it. But Gods Will has no Law besides it self; as he is supreme
Lord of all, so he may will or not will where he pleases. He is bound by no
Law to restrain men from sin: He may have mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will, he may leave to be hardened. Neither does God command, Romans 9. 18
counsel or persuade any man to sin by his Word; but has given a Law to the
contrary, by which he forbids sin under pain of death. And never did he
tempt, move, incline, or stir up any to sin: Therefore he can neither be the
cause or author of sin, Iam. 1. 13.
nor any way partaker in the stain and guilt of it.


Quest. But does not Gods Providence meddle any more with sin, but only to
permit it willingly and wittingly?


Answ. Yes certainly, God by his providence does hinder and limit sin, that it
does not break forth in all wicked men, nor prevail to the utmost extremity.
He does also order and dispose the sins of the wicked to his own glory, and the
good of his elect: He made the fierceness of Pharaoh and Senacherib turn to
his honor, fame, and praise; and the treachery of Judas in betraying, and the
cruelty and malice of the Jews, in murdering Christ, he turned to the
redemption of the world, and the salvation of his elect in Christ, by his
overruling power and goodness.


Quest. You have fully justified God from being the Author of sin. Now tell me
how man being made in Gods image perfectly upright and good could be drawn to
disobey his Commandment, which was so just, equal and easy to be observed?


Answ. By the power, malice and subtlety of the Devil. For every creature is
in it self mutable, and may decline and be corrupted, unless it be brought
by Covenant into Communion with God, who only has immortality, and is of
himself unchangeable. Man though made perfect with all natural perfection,
was Mutable in innocence, and therefore God made a Covenant of life with him,
upon condition of his obedience, he gave him the Tree of life to be a seal
of this Covenant, and to confirm it, and to settle man so steadfastly in that
natural estate, that he could not have been seduced by any power or subtlety
of the Devil, if he had received the seal by eating of the Tree of life. But
the Devil prevented our first parents, before they had time to eat of that
Tree, and subtlety by the Serpent insinuated himself into the woman, and by
her, into the man before they were settled and established by the sealing of the
covenant, breathed into them infidelity and ambition, and by his lies brought
them into an evil opinion of God, and so drew them into disobedience and
transgression of Gods Commandment, and made both Adam and all mankind, who
were then in his loins guilty before God, worthy of death, and subject to all
the evils and curses which follow sin and disobedience. For Adam the root and
stock being corrupted, and stained with sin; all the branches which spring from
him, must needs be partakers of the same corruption, and of the malice and
enmity against God, which the Devil breathed into him. Thus the Devil was the
first author of man's sin and fall, and the Serpent was his instrument.


Quest. If this be so, why do not the Devil the author, and the Serpent his
instrument bear the punishment, but man and his posterity suffer for it?


Answ* The Devil and the Serpent are cursed for this sin with an eternal
curse, from which there is no redemption. And Adam because by infidelity,
pride, ambition, and an ill and false opinion of God, which Satan suggested
into his heart, did willingly yield to the temptation, and transgressed Gods
Commandment, and as a voluntary agent did work with the Devil in that act of
disobedience, therefore he is guilty: yet so as that his sin is pardonable,
and both he himself and all his Elect and Faithful posterity are redeemed
from it by Christ.


Quest. How comes it to pass, that so small a thing as that wherein Adam
transgressed, to wit, eating of a forbidden fruit is counted so great a sin
before God, and brings on all mankind so many evils and curses?


Answ. The smaller the thing was in which God required obedience of Adam, the
greater was his sin, and the more blame he deserved; in that having received so
many gifts from God, and such large dominion over all earthly creatures by the
free gift of God; he would not upon Gods just Command which was so easy to be
observed, obey his Creator in absteining but only from one Tree* Besides he
disobeyed God out of infidelity, pride, ambition, a false opinion of God, and
enmity against his Majesty. For he believed the Devils words, who said he
should not dye, and not Gods Word, who had said that in the day he did eat
he should surely dye. He in pride and ambition sought by eating to become as
God; and imagined wickedly, that God out of envy did forbid him to eat, of
purpose that he might not become wise as himself: So that this disobedience
in so small a matter did include in it all kinds of sins, whereby the whole
Law of God is transgressed.


Quest. You have well showed that this act of disobedience was an heinous sin.
Now tell me what evils it brought upon mankind?


Answ. First, it stripped man naked of all those perfections of Nature, and all
that uprightness and image of God, Gen 3. 10
in which he was created; so that his person, which before for the beauty,
majesty, and comeliness of it was reverenced, loved, and served of all
creatures, came to be feared and abhorred of them, as an enemy, his nakedness
made him ashamed, and his pains and sorrows made his life a burden to him.

Secondly, man's nature and frame, was so stained and corrupted by this sin,
that neither he nor any of his posterity can understand things aright, nor
will, Psa. 49. 12
nor do any good; but are altogether perverse and froward, prone to all
wickedness, very slaves of sin and Satan, and by Nature children of wrath.

Thirdly, Genesis 3. 17.
it brought a curse upon the ground for man's sake, so that without his hard
labor and sweet it yields no good fruit, but only thorns, thistles and other
noysom weeds and plants. verse. 19.


Lastly, it brought all mankind in bondage to death, both temporal (which is such
a corruption of the body, as does separat the soul from it and make it utterly
unfit for the soul to lodge in) and also eternal, which is the punishment of
him with eternal destruction from the presence of God, and from the glory of
his power. 2 These. 1. 9.



Quest. Is there any hope of deliverance, from this foul stain, and guilt of
sins, and from death, and all evil of wrath, which are the fruits and effects
of it?


Answ. There is no hope of deliverance in any thing which man's wit and reason
can devise, or man by his art, skill, and power can perform. All creatures in
the world can yield him no help. God only of his infinite mercy, free grace,
love and kindness to mankind has from all eternity, ordained an
all-sufficient Savior, and Redeemer, even his only begotten son, who
immediately after man's sin and fall, did undertake for man, staid the execution
of the sentence and punishment of death, and was promised to become the seed of
the woman, and by suffering death and all the punishments due to sin in our
nature, Heb. 2. 14.
to redeem mankind from sin, 1 Ioh. 4. 8.
and death, and to destroy the Devil, who had the power of death, and to
dissolve all his works.


Quest. Who is this Son of God, which did undertake to redeem man?


Answ. It is the Lord Jesus Christ, who was first promised under the name of
the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. which should break the serpents head, and
afterward was promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, under the name of the
blessed seed, Genesis 12 8. 22.
in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed. And to David, and by
the Prophets, by the name of Messiah, that is the anointed Savior of the seed
of David. And at last in the fullness of the time, when he was made flesh,
took our nature upon him, and was borne of a Virgin, did bear the name of
Jesus; and is now preached and made known to the world, under the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ.


Quest. Why did not Christ come in the flesh in the beginning or first age of
the world, and work man's redemption, that the Fathers who lived under the old
Testament* might be redeemed and saved by him, as we now are under the Gospel?


Answ. The Incarnation of Christ, and all things which he did and suffered for
our redemption in the days of his flesh, were present with God from all
eternity, (as all times, and all things which come to pass in all times past,
present and to come, are continually present with him) and were as effectual
to satisfy his justice, appease his wrath, and to purchase and procure perfect
salvation to men at his hands; as they are now ever since they were actually
performed. And through Christ promised, God did shed his Spirit on the Fathers
of old, as he now does on us through Christ given and exhibited, and by the
Spirit united them to him in one spiritual body, and wrought in them Faith, by
which they did (as it said of Abraham) see the day of Christ believe in him,
John 8. 5^.
were partakers of all his benefits, and were made conformable to him both in
his death and life by mortification and sanctification.


Quest. Why did Christ come and satisfy for sinful men, in the mids of years
between the times of the Old and New Testament?


Answ. Because that was the most fit and seasonable of all times for mankind
for diverse reasons.

First, if he had appeared in the first ages of the world, the memory of him
would have been worn out. For as the people of the Gentiles within a few ages
forgot the promises of Christ made to Adam, Noah and Sem, and lost the
knowledge of them: so men would have forgotten Christ, and all his doings, and
sufferings long ago; for the world loves changes, and loathing old things,
seeks after novelties.

Secondly, the deferring of Christ's coming held the world in suspense and
expectation with promises from age to age, still more plainly renewed; that
after much longing his coming might be so much more welcome, and men might
with greater joy receive him.

Thirdly, the world increasing in sin and corruption, and being grown so hard,
that weaker means and obscurer revelation could work little upon men; it was
Gods Wisdom to reserve the appearance of Christ, and the publishing of the
powerful Gospel for these latter evil days, as being the fittest means for
these harder times.

Fourthly, if Christ in our nature had made satisfaction in the first ages of
the world, and had paid our ransom so many ages before we were borne or had
our being; it had not been so equal and proportionable to justice, as now it
is, by reason of his coming in the midst of years, between the Old and the
New Testament. For by this means Gods forbearance of the ransom and
satisfaction for the sins of the Fathers before Christ's death, is recompensed
with payment of our debt, and making a full satisfaction for our sins as much
before hand, even many ages before our committing of sin, or running in debt
to his Majesty in our own persons.

Lastly, it was necessary that many of the members of his elect and faithful
Church should by the Spirit be united to him, and by Faith have Communion with
him before and at his coming and appearing in the flesh, that being the head
of the Church actually through them, He might by Communion and imputation of
the sins of so great a body and multitude, justly suffer the punishments due to
the sins of his people even of them who were in after ages to grow up into the
same mystical body by the same Spirit. If he had been borne in the beginning
of the world, before the Church of the Old Testament had any actual being, he
could not have been the actual head of the body, nor united to the Church,
which as yet was not in being, and so could not have borne the sins of his
Church, nor justly suffered the punishment of them. Therefore the Apostle very
fitly calls the time of Christ's coming in the flesh the fullness of time, that
is, the time most seasonable, Gal. 4* 4.


Quest. What have you learned concerning Christ's person needful to be known
and believed?


Answ. I have learned, That as he was the eternal Son of God, one and the same
God, and of the same nature and substance with the Father, and the Spirit, he
did undertake, according to Gods eternal Counsel to be the Mediator between
God and man, and to mediate for man from the day of his fall; and as he was
promised to be the Seed of the woman, so he did in fullness of time assume
and take into personal union with himself, the whole nature, and substance of
a man, and was made of the seed of Abraham and David in the womb of a Virgin,
of their seed, a man like unto us in all things, but without sin, even the holy
one of God, and so was God and man in one person.


Quest. How could he be borne a pure holy man without sin, of a woman, a
daughter of Evah, and of the same nature with the rest of mankind, who are all
corrupted in Adam?


Answ. God Almighty, who alone is able to bring a clean thing out of an
unclean, did by his power over-shadow the Virgin his mother, and the holy
Ghost came upon her, Luk 1. 35.
and framed out of her seed and substance an holy seed, and so he was
conceived and borne without sin, perfectly holy both in soul and body, and
filled with the holy Ghost.


Quest. How could he being so perfectly holy, be subject to infirmities, and to
death, and other punishments due to sin?


Answ* Though he knew no sin, yet he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and
being most holy and righteous in himself, he took all our sins upon him, and
bare all our sorrows and infirmities, that he might thereby satisfy Gods
infinite justice, pay our ransom, and redeem and reconcile us unto God, Isa.
53. 4, 6.


Quest. How and by what means has Christ redeemed us from wrath, and wrought
our salvation?


Answ. By executing and performing the office of a Mediator between God and men.


Quest. How is he a Mediator?


Answ. As he is God the Son, equal with the Father, so he is a person of
infinite value, and worthy to be accepted, and able to make a full satisfaction
for all sin to Gods Justice, and to pay a ransom of infinite value. And as he
is man of the same nature and substance with all mankind, and the first fruits
of the whole lump; so he is fit to make satisfaction in the same nature which
sinned, and is our brother and friend, and one who is touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, Job 16. 21.
and is compassionate toward us, Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 11.
and deals faithfully for us. As he is God, so he is too high to be a Mediator
for man, and as he is man, so he is too low to mediate and plead to God for us
sinners: But as he is God and man in one person, so he is most fit to come as a
Mediator between God and men.


Quest. Wherein does Christ's Mediation consist?


Answ. In the faithful execution of a threefold office: The first, of a
Prophet. The second, of a Priest. The third, of a King.



Quest. How did he execute the office of a Prophet?


Answ. By Prophesying, Preaching, and Revealing the Will of God from the
beginning, both in his own person, and also by his Prophets, Apostles and
Ministers of the Word and Gospel. In the old world he went forth in the
Spirit, and soake to the godly Fathers, Enoch, Methushelah, Noah and others,
and by them preached to the wicked, especially while the Arc was a preparing,
as the Apostle testifies* 1 Pet. 3. 19. He in the form of man, and sometimes
of an Angel spoke to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Genesis 18. 26. and 32* 24. He
was the Angel of the Covenant, which appeared to Moses in the bush, and said,
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3. He
spoke also at sundry times, and in diverse manners, as apparitions, dreams and
visions to the Fathers in times past, and by his Spirit inspiring and moving
the Prophets, Heb. 1. 1. And in the days of his flesh he preached the Gospel
with his own mouth. And as after his Ascension, he sent down the Holy Ghost
upon his Apostles, and gave them the gifts of Tongues, and of Knowledge to
Prophecy and Preach the Gospel to all Nations, Act. 2. So he is with them in
their true successors the Ministers of the Gospel to the end of the world,
Mat. 28. 20. And by his Spirit gives them knowledge and utterance, to teach and
expound the Scriptures, and to bring men to the saving knowledge of the truth.
And in a word he is the great Prophet whom God promised to raise up to his
people, like unto Moses, whom all ought to hear and obey in all things, Deuteronomy.
18. 15. And no other Prophets or Preachers, are to be heard, but those which
Preach in his Name, truly according to his Word contained in the holy
Scriptures.


Quest. Wherein does the office of his Priesthood consist?


Answ. In making atonement between God and men, both by offering up himself,
and all sufficient Sacrifice for all our sins, in his obedience unto death, and
in suffering all punishments due to sin, and by bringing in eternal
righteousness, which is his perfect fulfilling of the Law in the obedience of
his whole life, Dan. 9. 24. Romans 8. 3, 4. and 1 Cor. 5. 21. For in these two
consists the whole work of man's redemption, and the full ransom and sacrifice
of atonement which is needful to reconcile men unto God.


Quest. How can the sufferings of one man satisfy for all men, and the
righteousness of one be able to justify all that are to be justified?


Answ. The man Christ as he fulfilled the Law, and suffered in our nature, so
his righteousness and satisfaction is humane, and is proper only to mankind,
for as man sinned, so man satisfied* But as this man Christ, is also God in the
same person: So his righteousness and satisfaction is Divine of infinite value
and worth, even the righteousness and suffering of God; and that is more than
if all men had suffered eternal death, and fulfilled in their own persons
every jot and title of the Law, and all the righteousness thereof.


Quest. If Christ's infinite Godhead does add so much to his obedience
performed in our Nature, and makes his sufferings of infinite worth and value:
What need was there of shedding his blood unto death, and of suffering all the
storms of Gods wrath, was not (as some say) one drop of his blood sufficient
to redeem the world?


Answ. Though Christ is a person of infinite value, because he is God; yet as
he could not be a complete and perfect Mediator, if he had taken into his
person the body only of a man, and not a complete Manhood consisting both of
soul and body: So suffering in part, and obeying the Law in part, could not
be made a complete satisfaction, for justice requires a full suffering of all
kinds of punishment due to man for sin, even of death it self, and a perfect
fulfilling of the whole Law; otherwise there is no righteousness: If one drop
of Christ's blood shed for sin had been a sufficient price of redemption: than
it had been injustice in God to exact more, and undiscreet, and vain
prodigality in Christ to pour out all his blood, and his soul to death, when
one drop was enough.


Quest. Is this all that Christ does as a Priest?


Answ. This is all that Christ did in paying man's ransom and price of
atonement, but to make men partakers of it, and of the benefit thereof, he
does make intercession to God for them, as appears, Romans 8. 34. and Heb. 7. 25.


Quest. How does Christ make intercession?


Answ. First, by praying for his Elect and Faithful, John 17.
whom the Father had given him out of the world, this he did in the days of
his humiliation.

Secondly, by sitting at Gods right hand, he presents continually before God
his perfect satisfaction and righteousness in the behalf of all his Faithful
members, Rev. 8. 3.
and with his Sacrifice and Intercession, does as it were perfume all their
Prayers, and make them acceptable in the sight of God.


Quest. Does not Christ as well make Intercession for all, as he dyed for all
mankind?


Answ. Though Christ dyed and fulfilled the Law for a common benefit to all
mankind and his ransom is sufficient to save all; yet he never purposed to
redeem all men by his death. For he knew that many were already damned, and
past all hope of redemption before he dyed, and that Judas was a son of
perdition, and therefore he did not purpose to give himself a ransom for
them. Besides he himself testifies that he did not pray for the world, but
only for his Elect given to him by his father out of the world, Ioh. 17* 9.
Therefore he did much less dye with an intent purpose and desire to redeem
and save them.


Quest. How does Christ execute his Kingly office?


Answ. By ruling spiritually in his Church, and giving his Spirit and all
spiritual gifts to men, by which they are fitted and furnished with several
gifts, for several offices, and functions, in that his mystical body. The
distribution of all honors, offices, and dignities, as of some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, others Pastors and Teachers, is in his hand.
No man is capable of such honors, and dignities, nor fit for such offices, but
by his gifts and qualifications. Whosoever thrusts himself into the office of
a Bishop, Elder, Pastor, or public Preacher without such gifts, and calling,
as he has in his Word prescribed, he is a thief, and an usurper, as our
Savior himself testifies, who is the only door by which men must enter
into his sheepfold, John 10. He rules also in the hearts of all Faithful
people by his Word and Spirit, as by a Law, and that Law is the rule of their
life, and of all their actions. He also by his power defends his Church from
all enemies, and takes just revenge on their persecutors and oppressors for all
power is given him in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. and he has all
judgment committed to him, John 5. 27. All the Saints fight under his Royal
Standard against the Devil, the World, the Flesh, Sin and Antichrist, being
armed by him with the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6 11. He will tread down Satan
under their feet, Romans 16. 20. and by the spirit of his lips will destroy the
wicked one, 2 These. 2. And by his iron rod break in pieces all his enemies,
like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2. So that whatsoever can be required in a King,
for the well ordering and ruling of his Kingdom, by judgment and
righteousness; for the merciful relieving and he ping of them in their need.
For the powerful defending of them from all dangers, and for the execution of
just revenge on their enemies; all this is abundantly found in Christ as he is
the Lord and King of his Church.


Quest. You have well showed that Christ both in respect of his Person and
Offices, is an all-sufficient Redeemer and Savior, and is able by the infinite
worth of his Mediation to save all men: Now then tell me why all men are not
saved?


Answ. Though Christ his ransom and satisfaction is able to save and redeem
all that are partakers thereof, even all mankind, if they had grace to receive
and apply him and all his merits by Faith, Yet because none have spiritual
communion with him, but only they whom God has chosen to eternal life in him,
and predestined to be effectually called, according to his purpose, to the
state of grace, and to be made conformable to his image: Therefore many who are
not elect, follow their own evil ways, and have no will nor care to repent of
their sins, and believe in Christ, but run wilfully into destruction and perish.


Quest. Has God then chosen from all eternity a certain number only of
mankind to salvation in Christ?


Answ. Yea verily. For the Scriptures plainly testify*

First, that God has a certain number of particular persons, whom he has
from all eternity predestined both to eternal life in Christ, and also to
the means which lead unto life, to wit, redemption, effectual calling,
adoption, faith and the like, Ephesians. 1. 4. 5, 11. and Romans 11. 5* 7. and Act.
13. 48.

Secondly, that the persons elected are they only who are called in time,
according to his purpose, justified* made conformable to the image of his Son,
and at length glorified, Romans 8* 28, 29, 30.

Thirdly, that they are chosen not for any work which God foresaw in them, but
merely according to the good pleasure of his own Will, Romans 9. 11. 15. Ephesians. 1.
5.

And fourthly, that all they who continue in obstinacy and impenitency unto the
end, and are damned, were of old ordained to that damnation, and destruction. 1
These. 5. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Jud. 4.


Quest. If God has not ordained men to Faith in Christ repentance, and good
works, but has willingly rejected them, as he did Esau before he had done any
evil; and given them up to hardness, and impenitency, as he did Pharaoh: Why
is he angry with them, for none can resist his Will?


Answ. It is too much presumption in men to dispute against God, and to judge
of his actions by their own shallow reason. For he is not to give account of
any of his matters, nor to answer for his doings, Job 33. 13. Romans 9. 19. And
yet it is reason that every absolute Lord should do what he list with his own,
and that as the potter has power over the clay to make of the same lump one
vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor; so God much more should have
power over his creatures, to ordain and make some vessels of honor, and leave
others to follow their own evil ways which they have found out to themselves,
and are not lead into by him, and so to perish; seeing their evil and
destruction by his overruling wisdom and power does turn to the greater good
of his Elect, and makes the glory of his holiness, Justice, Power and Mercy
shine forth more clearly to them.


Quest. Does the benefit of Christ the Mediator, and Redeemer reach only to the
Elect?


Answ. Though the saving virtue of Christ belongs only to the elect; yet
there is a common benefit of Christ, whereof reprobates are partakers, which
reaches also to all the world. For he is said to preserve man and beasts,
that is, to keep them in life and being, Psalm. 36 6. and to be the Savior of
all, especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. and to give himself a
ransom for all, 1 Timothy 26. and by him all things are said to consist, Coloss.
1. 17.


Quest. How can Christ's virtue reach to them who are a far off Aliens and
Strangers from him, and enemies to his Cross and sufferings?


Answ. It reaches to them not immediately by virtue of union with him, as it
does to the Faithful, but after a secondary manner for his Elects sake. For
Christ by his mediation has obtained of God, that all the World which was made
for man's use, should be upheld by his general providence, that the Heavens,
and the Sun, Moon and Stars, should keep their course, and continue in their
natural being, and give light and influence to the good and the bad, the just
and unjust, and that the Air, the Earth, and the Sea, should breed and nourish
living creatures, and herbs, plants, fruit trees and all other things useful
for men, yea the wicked prosper and flourish in wealth and strength, either
that they may be a wall of defense to the Elect which live among them, or that
they may build houses, plant vineyards, and subdue the Earth for them, as the
cursed Canaanites did for Israel; or that they may be progenitors, and
instruments, to bring forth an elect seed, as our forefathers the Heathen
Gentiles were to us their Christian progeny; or for the punishing and
correcting of the sins of the elect, as the Canaanites were kept alive to
punish the Israelites when they sinned; and for the trial and exercise of
their Faith and patience by unjust persecution. Christ by his Mediation has
procured all these things for his elects sake, to all creatures, which
otherwise should have perished with man being all stained and corrupted by his
sin. And hence it is that he is said to bear up the pillars of the world, when
the earth and the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, Psalm. 75 3. And thus far
we may grant and acknowledge an universal grace, which Christ by his Mediation
has procured to all the world, even to the wicked reprobates which perish.


Quest* Has not Christ procured to all mankind grace and ability, to believe,
repent and be saved, if they will do as much as they are able for the obteining
of regeneration, and other saving graces of the Spirit?


Answ. No certeinely, For Regeneration, Effectual calling, Faith, and all
saving Graces are purchased and given by Christ, only to the Elect, for whom
alone he prayed, and does still make intercession: And they also while they
remain in the common state of Nature, have no power in themselves, either to
will or to do any work truly good, but are dead in trespasses and sins, 2 Cor.
3. 5.
Ephesians. 2. 1. They are aliens and enemies in their minds, and all their
thoughts incline to evil, Colos. 1. 21. If all men, even they who perish, had
power and liberty of will, to believe and be saved, certeinely some of them who
are not elect, would believe and be regenerate, and use their liberty to the
saving of their souls. For it is given for that end, that it might be brought
into act, and take effect; if it never does, it is given by God in vain. But
Nature, as the Philosophers observed, never gives power in vain, and much more
does the God of Nature, abhor to give men a vain power which never comes
into act.


Quest. If it be not in their power to do any work tending to life, nor to
believe and repent: why are they condemned for infidelity, impenitency, and
omission of good works?


Answ. Though they cannot believe nor repent to salvation, yet they have a
power left by common grace, to use the means which lead to Faith, and
Repentance, as hearing of the Word, reading the Scriptures, harkening to
Reproves and to good admonitions and exhortations, and this natural power
they refuse to exercise, and wickedly and wilfully neglect and reject those
outward means. Also by their sin in Adam* they have disabled themselves, are
become froward and averse from all actions truly good, and are a cursed
generation justly condemned.


Quest. How come the Elect to be redeemed, and saved by the Mediation of
Christ; seeing they by nature have no more interest in Christ than others?


Answ. They are redeemed and saved by the most gracious supernatural working
of God in them, according to his eternal Counsel, Purpose and Decree. For as
he has ordained them to eternal life in Christ, before the foundation of the
world, so it does in the time appointed, gather them to himself, in and by the
Lord Jesus Christ.


Quest. By what means does God work saving grace in them?


Answ. By the Ministry and Preaching of his holy Word, which is a work of the
Prophetical office of Christ. For by that Word spoken to the Elect Fathers of
old, in Dremes, Visions, and Apparitions; and after spoken and written by
Moses, the Prophets and Holy men of God, who spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost; and since by the mouth of Christ and his Apostles, Evangelists and
their successors; he has revealed and does continually reveal himself to
them in Christ, teaches them the only right way to salvation, calls upon them,
and invites them by gracious promises to come unto him; and by the threatenings
of the Law, he drives them out of themselves, discovers their sins, and the
dangerous estate in which they are by reason of sin, and suffers them to find
no place wherein to rest, until like Noah's dove, they flee unto his Arc the
true Church.


Quest. Can the Word Preached bring men to Christ, and to salvation in him?


Answ. It is the only outward ordinary means which God uses for that purpose,
and we never read of any, who without the word believed, were called
effectually to Christ and saved. All Heathen, Infidels, Turks and Pagans, who
either never heard the Word Preached, or hearing do refuse and reject it, do
undoubtedly perish in their unbelief. For he that believes not is condemned
already. John 3. 18. and without the Word heard none can believe, Romans 10. 14.


Quest. What then shall we think of infants borne of believing parents, which
dye before they hear, or are able to believe the Word?


Answ: God teaches and inclines them inwardly by his Spirit to long after
Christ and to grope after him, as they do after their mothers breasts for milk
and bodily nourishment: but yet not without the Word. For by the Word preached
to their Fathers, he works Faith in them, and makes his covenant of life in
Christ with them and their seed; and so by the Ministry of the Word, their
infants come to be in the Covenant. And God does often times sanctify them by
his Spirit from the womb (as we read of Jeremy and John the Baptist) or in
their baptism at the Prayers of his Church. And therefore we ought charitably
to believe and judge, that children of believing parents, as they are from the
womb holy by dedication, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and capable of baptism, so are
inwardly baptized by the Spirit into Christ; and if they dye in their infancy,
are saved by the free Grace of God, who works all things after the counsel
of his own will.


Quest. How does the Word preached work saving grace in men?


Answ. Not barely by it self, nor by any divine virtue inherent in it; but by
the free grace of God, and the inward operation of the Spirit working with it,
when and where, and in whom he will. For the Word preached does not profit,
when its notmingled with Faith in them that hear it, Heb. 4. 2. as we see in
the Jews, to whom Christ himself preached, and yet they were not turned to
God; but the Word by him spoken, through their infidelity turned to their hurt,
wrought to the hardening of them in their sins, and left them without all
excuse or any cloak for their wickedness, John 15. 22.


Quest. What are those necessary works and saving graces, which God by his Word
and Spirit works in men to bring them to salvation in Christ?


Answ. They are works and graces, which flow from Gods eternal election and
are only wrought in the elect. They are necessary, because without them none
can be saved, and they are called saving works and graces, because the persons
in whom they are once wrought, can never fall away and perish, but shall
certeinely persevere in them and be saved: And they all may be brought under
two heads.

The first are the works, which God alone by his Word and Spirit works in his
Elect.

The second sort, are the works which God so works, that they also do
cooperat with him, and work together with his Spirit.


Quest. Which are the works which God alone by his Spirit works in the Elect?


Answ. The first is regeneration, from which all the rest do flow, to wit,
renovation, which is called renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Effectual
calling, union with Christ, adoption and Communion of all Christ's benefits, as
of his ransom, satisfaction, righteousness and intercession for redemption,
remission of sins, justification, and perfect reconciliation.


Quest. Which is the first saving grace?


Answ. The first, which is the ground of all the rest, is Regeneration.


Quest. What is Regeneration?


Answ. It is that work of God by which he sheds the Holy Ghost on his Elect,
through Jesus Christ, Tit. 3. 5, 6.
of which Spirit given to dwell in them as his immortal seed, they are borne
again and become new creatures, and spiritual members of Christ, and children
of God by a new birth and Generation.


Quest. What is Renovation?


Answ. It is the work of God, which he by his Spirit shed on them, and dwelling
in them, does work in them, renewing them after the image of Christ, and making
them conformable to him, both in his death, by mortification, and in his life,
by vivification.


Quest. What is Mortification?


Answ. It is that work of Gods Spirit wherein he deriveth the virtue of
Christ's death unto them, and works in them such a sense of their misery, sin,
and corruption, and such a godly grief, sorrow, contrition of heart, loathing
and abhorring of themselves, as does tame their rebellious lusts, and gives a
deadly blow to the old man of sinful corruption in them; so that sin can no
more reign in their mortal bodies, but by grace they prevail more and more
over their corruption and do mortify it continually.


Quest. What is Vivification?


Answ. It is that work of the Spirit by which he derives the virtue of Christ's
holy life unto them to quicken them, and sanctify them by inherit holiness, and
to make them in the whole course of their life conformable to the holy and
upright life of Christ.


Quest. What gifts and graces are wrought in the Elect by Renovation?


Answ. The first which is, as it were, the root of the rest is Faith. For as
the Devil did first breath into Adam an unbeleefe, and distrust of God and his
truth, so that he believed not the Word and threatening of God, but gave credit
to Satan's lies, and relied on them, and by his false belief, Satan drew him on
to a false opinion of God, and a conceit that God envyed his greater good,
whereupon he began proudly to imagine that he might by eating of the forbidden
tree become wise as God, and did conceive enmity in his mind against God,
ambitious lusts, and evil affections: So God in renewing man does first work
Faith in him, which is the gift of believing in God, and relying on his Word
and Promises. And by his Word believed, he gives light of unde^standing, and
knowledge, which drives out errors, and false opinions, and enables man to see
his own vileness, and Gods goodness toward him, whence arises the grace of
humility and repentance; also a sincere holy love of God, fear and reverence
of his Majesty, joy, rejoicing, hope, and delight in God, and a will and desire
to obey him in all things, and in a word, all Christian virtues, by which a man
becomes conformable to Christ.


Quest. What is Effectual Calling!


Answ. It is the work of the Spirit of Regeneration, who by giving to the elect
a new heart and spirit, does incline and enable them to follow the outward
calling of the Word, and to turn from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18.


Quest. What is the Union of the Elect with Christ?


Answ. It is not a making of their several persons one undivided Essence and
Substance with the person of Christ. For that unity is only in God, and in the
three persons of the blessed Trinity: Neither is it a making of them one person
with Christ, by such a personal union as is between his Godhead, and Manhood,
and between the soul and body of every man: Neither is it a bodily uniting of
them with Christ, by a bodily mixture and composition of the substance of their
souls, and bodies, with the substance of the soul and body of Christ, as wine
and water are mingled together: For such an union makes the things united
inseparable in place one from another; so that wheresoever Christ's body is,
there they must needs be, and can be in no other proper place who are thus
united: Neither is this union only in heart and affection. But this is a
spiritual, mystical and substantial union, in which Christ sitting at Gods
right hand above the Heavens, and they dispersed over all the Earth, are made
one spiritual, and mystical body, whereof Christ is the head and they
members, by means of the same Spirit dwelling and working in them, after the
same manner as he dwells and works in the humane nature of Christ from his
first conception and framing in the womb. For by one Spirit they are all
Baptized into one body, whereof Christ is the head, and being many members,
they make up one body, even as all members in natural body, though they be
many, make up but one body, because they all have but one soul and life, the
holy Spirit of which they are regenerate, borne again, and made new creatures
is the sure spiritual band of union between Christ the head, and them the
members of the same mystical body.


Quest. What is Adoption?


Answ. It is a necessary consequent of the union of the Elect with Christ. For
Christ being the only begotten Son of God by eternal generation, as he is
God, and as he is Man by personal union with God the Son, and by a
supernatural and miraculous generation, and so heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2.
It must necessarily follow, that whosoever are in him, one body with him, and
lead by his Spirit, do thereby come under the account of children and heirs of
God, and of coheires with Christ, and so God the Father does esteem, respect
and accoumpt them, and the Spirit dwelling in them does witness with their
spirit that they are the children of God. Romans 8. 16.


Quest. What is the Communion with Christ of all his benefits?


Answ. It is a consequent that is a grace necessarily following from union with
hrist. For whosoever are by one Spirit baptized into Christ, and made one
spiritual body with him, as really and substantially as all members in a man's
body, are one natural body with the head, they must needs have such a
spiritual communion of all Christ's treasures, virtues, and endowents as is the
natural communion which all the members in a man's body have with the head.
Christ's sufferings, satisfaction for sin, righteousness, ransom and
intercession are theirs, Romans 5. 19. and 10. 4.
and they have a right and interest in them, Romans 3. 7:
and communion of them all. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And thus God justifies and makes them fundamentally righteous by Christ's
perfect righteousness, frees them from the guilt of all their sins, by his
satisfactory sufferings, and accepts them for his redeemed, and reconciled ones
through Christ's intercession, and makes them actually accepted in his beloved
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6.


Quest. What are the works of saving grace, which God so works in the Elect,
that they also being moved by his Spirit, do cooperat and work together with
him?


Answ. They are the actions of the Elect regenerat, exercising by the motion of
the Spirit those spiritual gifts, and Christian virtues, which were given them
by renovation or renewing of the holy Ghost.


Quest. Which is the first of them?


Answ* The first is actual Faith, or Believing in God and in Christ, for as
the gift of Faith is the first of all spiritual gifts, which by the renewing of
the holy Ghost, is wrought in the elect regenerate: So the work of their
Faith, that is, actual believing is the first of all, which by the motion of
the Spirit, they perform after they are quickened and raised up to live a
spiritual life.


Quest. Why is the work of their Faith the first before the acts of knowledge,
repentance, love, hope, and the rest?


Answ. Because Faith possesses the whole heart and soul of man, and informs
after a sort all the powers and faculties thereof: even the understanding,
will, and affections. It is the opening of the understanding to take notice of
Gods goodness, and of the truth of his Word. It is the inclining of the will,
to give assent to the whole Word of God and all truth therein revealed, and to
acknowledge all Gods Truth, Goodness, and Mercy in Christ. It is the
rectifying of the affections, and the plyablenesse of them to trust in God, to
rely on him, to hope in his mercy; to love, fear, and reverence him, and to
hate all offense of his holy Majesty, to sorrow for sin with godly sorrow to
repentance, to rejoice and delight in the things of God, and to be zealous of
good works, and resolve to serve, honor, and obey God in a constant course of
life. This saving Faith sets a work all other graces, and therefore all works
of true godliness, holiness, and righteousness performed by the Elect
regenerate, and sanctified, are called fruits of Faith, by which their Faith is
openly showed, and made known as a tree by the fruits of it.


Quest. Which is the proper work of true saving Faith?


Answ: The proper work of it by which all other graces are set a work is a
firm, and steadfast believing with the whole heart, of the Word of God, and all
things therein revealed, which concern their salvation by Christ, that is,
both eternal life in the fruition of God, and the way to it.


Quest. What difference is there between this believing and that which is in
Devils, and in carnal hypocrites who believe these things, or at least many of
them at some times?


Answ. There is as great difference between them, as between light and
darkness. The believing of the Elect regenerat proceeds from a supernatural
cause, and from a Divine and holyroot, even the Spirit of God dwelling in them,
as Gods immortal seed, and sanctifying them, and therefore it is holy, firm,
and steadfast, and reaches beyond all hope, sense and reason. But that of the
Devils and carnal hypocrites, proceeds from their own natural reason,
convinced by sense, experience and plain arguments, or by a common
illumination of the Spirit, shining from without into the hearts of hypocrites,
and temporary believers, as we read of Simon Magus, Act. 8. 13. and the
hypocritical Jews who believed in Christ's name, when they saw his miracles,
John 2. 23. And therefore their believing is carnal temporary and vanishing,
and goes no further than sense and natural reason do lead. The believing of
the Elect is the subsisting of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11. 1. That is, they have the things which they believe, as
certainly as they believe that they have them and hope for them, and their
believing is a clear evidence to them of their being in Christ, and of their
communion with him in grace, and of their portion in Heaven, which things are
not seen with carnal eyes of sense or reason. For the Spirit which works this
belief, has united them to Christ, and made Christ and all his benefits
theirs already, so that their believing is infallible and cannot deceive them.
But Devils, carnal men, and hypocrites cannot reach so far as to believe their
own particular salvation in Christ, or their having of things thereto
belonging: And if any of them do at any time, Mich. 3. 11. it is but a false
and vanishing belief. In a word whosoever does by a true saving Faith, believe
historically the Word of God, and the truth therein contained, he has withal
an affiance in God, and grace to believe by all other acts of Faith, even to
apply to himself all Gods promise by believing steadfastly that they belong to
himself in particular. For as the Spirit which works this faith is the fountain
of all grace, and unites the believers to Christ, and makes him and all his
benefits theirs. So this Faith necessarily produces all acts of believing in
them, and makes them able by believing, to apply to themselves and to enjoy all
blessings, which are to be found in Christ.


Quest. What benefits do the Elect receive by their actual belief, and
exercise of their saving Faith?


Answ. They receive hereby, First a comfortable sense, feeling and fruition of
their regeneration, renovation, effectual calling, union, adoption, remission
of sins, justification, reconciliation, and in a word communion of all Christ's
benefits, and hence it is, that they are said by Faith to turn to God to be
united to Christ adopted, justified, and to obtain remission of all their
sins, that is, in their own sense, and feeling.

And secondly, by this actual believing, and by the sense and feeling, which
it brings to the believers, all other graces are set a work, and more and more
increased in them.


Quest. How does believing give to the Elect a feeling of their regeneration,
renovation, effectual calling union, adoption, and other saving works of God
in them?


Answ. First, as it is a fruit and work of the Spirit of regeneration and
adoption, which he never works in any but them who are regenerate, made new
creatures effectually called, united to Christ, adopted and have communion of
all his benefits: so it is a clear evidence to them of those graces in
themselves, and by it the Spirit witnesses with their spirits, that they are
the children of God by regeneration and adoption, and are effectually called and
engraffed into Christ, become new creatures, heirs of God and coheires with
Christ. Secondly, the act of believing by a true saving Faith is an applying of
the things believed to themselves, and by believing that they are regenerat,
renewed, effectually called, united, adopted and have communion of Christ's perfect
satisfaction, intercession and righteousness, they possess and enjoy all
those graces, and are in their own sense fully reconciled to God.


Quest. How are they justified and have their sins pardoned by Faith?


Answ. They are justified and have their sins remitted by Faith, not as by an
isntrumental cause and means to make them righteous before God; but as by the
hand of the soul, receiving and applying to themselves the righteousness of
Christ to make them righteous in their own sense and feeling. And their actual
believing that they are justified and pardoned, is neither their
righteousness, nor the satisfaction for their sins, nor any thing which in it
self properly is accepted of God or reputed for righteousness and
satisfaction, but is only the applying of Christ's righteousness and satisfaction
to themselves, and an assuring of themselves, that by communion thereof they
are justified. And by this believing they possess and sweetly enjoy them, and
are in their own sense and feeling, justified and absolved from the guilt of
al their sins, and obtain this testimony from God that they are righteous,
Romans 4. 3.


Quest. Can any man be justified before he does actually believe?


Answ. If we take justification in the first most proper and principal sense,
as it is the act of God alone, communicating Christ's righteousness and
satisfaction to his elect, when he does first unite them to Christ by his
Spirit, and make Christ theirs with all his treasures: Then it must be granted
that men may be and are justified, before and without any express act of
believing: As for example, elect infants which dye in their infancy, when they
are regenerated and united to Christ by his Spirit, they have communion of his
righteousness, and are justified and made righteous, and all their sins are
abolished and blotted out, and yet they do not actually believe, nor perform
any explicit and express act of Faith. Also they who are not effectually
called to the state of grace, and to communion with Christ till they come to
years of discretion, though they have the gift of Faith immediately at the same
time infused into them: yet Christ's righteousness is in order of nature
communicated to them and they are made righteous by it before God, before they
do actually believe, or can truly believe that Christ is made to them
righteousness, or can by believing possess and enjoy his righteousness for
justification. As a child may be borne, or made an heir to Lands, Honor and
riches, and may have a true right and interest in them, and be Lord of all,
before he has wit to know his own estate, or discretion to possess actually
and use them: So men may be justified by Christ's righteousness madetheirs, in
the first instant of their regeneration and spiritual union with Christ,
before they do actually believe, and sensibly possess, and enjoy Christ and
his obedience for justification. But if we take justification in a secondary
sense, as it is an act wherein the elect themselves do cooperat and work
together with God, by receiving and applying to themselves particularly the
gift of righteousness freely given unto them, and by possessing and enjoying
it; then must actual believing go before it as the isntrumental cause, by
which God justifies them in their own sense and feeling, and upon which he
does esteem and account them righteous in the intercourse between him and
them, and gives them his warrant to esteem themselves justified with him. But
if we take justification in a Judiciary sense, as it is used in Courts of
Justice and Judgment, for proving, declaring and pronouncing men righteous:
Then not only Faith and actual believing, but also repentance, amendment of
life, and all holy Christian duties, and good works of piety, mercy and charity
must necessarily go before as evidences, testimonies, and proofs by which men
must be justified, that is judged declared and pronounced righteous.

First, in the Court of their own conscience, so often as sin and Satan stand
up against them to accuse them.

Secondly, in the common judgment of men.

Thirdly, in the general judgment at the last day.

Of the first, Justification, the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 19. where he says
that by the obedience of Christ many are made righteous, and Romans 8. 4. and 1
Cor. 5. 21. Of the second he speaks, Romans 3. 28. and 4. 3. and Gal. 3. 8.
where he says, we are justified by says without works or deeds of the Law.

Of the third Saint James speaks, where he says, that Abraham was justified
by works, Jam. 2. 21. and Job 13. 18. where he says, Behold now I have ordered
my cause, I know that I shall be justified, and this S. Paul calls justification
of life, Romans 5. 18. because it is an adjudging of men to eternal life,
according to the evidence of their works, as our Savior shows, Mat. 24. 35.


Quest. How does justifying Faith differ from that which they call historical
Faith?


Answ. They both in the elect are one and the same Faith, and differ only as
several acts of the same Faith exercised about several objects. For when they
believe the History of the Scripture, and that those things are true which they
hear, or read out of Gods Word, this is called historical Faith. But when
they believe firmly and confidently, that the promises of God in Christ belong
to them, and that Christ, with his righteousness is given to them of God, and
made theirs, this believing and applying of Christ's righteousness to themselves
is the justifying act of Faith. And whereas the historical says of Devils and
carnal men, is only an assent unto the Word of God, that it is true, arising
from carnal reason, and arguments convincing the judgment without any
affection to the truth, or any relying on it. On the contrary every act of
believing any word or promise of God; if it proceeds from a true Faith in the
elect, is not a naked assent ruled by humane and natural reason, but guided by
Gods Spirit, and joined with a relying on God, and his Word, upon the Divine
authority of the speaker, and may be brought as an evidence of their salvation,
and may in that respect be called a saving belief, as we see at large, Heb.
11. where believing that the worlds were framed by the Word of God. And that
God would bring a flood upon the world and destroy all except them that were in
the Arc made by his appointment; and that he would give the land of Canaan to
the seed of Abraham the Israelites, and after 400 years deliver them out of
Egypt, and such like acts of believing, proceeding from an holy spiritual
Faith, are declared to be saving Faith.


Quest. How does actual believing set a work all other graces, and increase
them more and more in the Elect regenerate, and justified?


Answ. By the sense, feeling, and sweet fruition of Christ and his
righteousness, satisfaction, and intercession, it brings us to the sight and
experimental knowledge of the goodness, bounty, love and mercy of God to us
in Christ. And being justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1.
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and rejoice in hope of
the glory of God, and hereby the holy Ghost sheddeth the love of God abroad in
our hearts, so that being inflamed with the love of God, we begin more and
more to hate and abhor our own vile corruptions and sins, which are
offensive to his holy Majesty: We are ashamed and confounded, because we have
by our sins so often provoked so gracious a God, and merciful Father, we
grieve and mourn and sorrow with godly sorrow to repentance, we strive and
wrestle against our lusts, and by the assistance of the Spirit, tame and subdue
them; so that sin can no more reign in our mortal bodies, we contend to
sollow hard after God, to cleave to him in love, and to be still more and more
united to Christ in love and zealous affection of heart: And in holiness and
newness of life we study and strive to be conformable to his image; and in a
word we are stirred up to use all care and endeavor, that we may abound in
all good works, and still forgetting those things which are behind, may reach
forth unto those things which are before and press hard toward the mark for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: In all which works of
saving grace, as God moves us by his Spirit, so we being moved, enabled, and
made a free people, do cooperate and work together with him, till we come to
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, and be fitted to see God in
glory.


Quest. What outward means are to be used whereby the Spirit of God may work
in the Elect, and beget and increase Faith and belief with all other saving
graces in them?


Answ. The chief outward means is the Word of God, without which God does not
ordinarily shed his Spirit on them, beget them again and by his Spirit work
saving grace, and the works of grace in them. For they are borne again of
incorruptible seed, that is, of the Spirit by the Word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
and regeneration which is Gods shedding of the holy Ghost on them, through
Christ and the first saving work, even the ground work of all other saving
graces is not to be found where the Word is not Preached. By the Word of Christ
the holy Gospel only, the Spirit speaks inwardly to men's hearts, and leads
them into all truth, John 16. 13. By the Word preached he begets Faith, for
Faith comes by hearing, and none can believe except heheare, Romans 10. 14, 17.
The Word is the whole and perfect rule of Faith, and whatsoever the elect
believe to salvation, is contained in the Word, and there only to be learned,
John 3. 39. The threatenings of the Law are the means by which the Spirit
discovers to believers the danger of sin, and their own misery, humbles them in
their own eyes, and drives them out of themselves to Christ by repentance. The
precepts of the Law prescribe to them the right way in which they ought to
walk, and is a lamp to their feet, and light to their steps, Psa. 119 105. The
Word of the Gospel is the Covenant of life, and sets before them the
goodness, bounty, love and mercy of God in Christ, and by it the Spirit
inflames them with the love of God, with joy and delight in God, and with zeal
for his glory, and stirs them up to imitate God in works of mercy, love, and
charity, and in all holiness and sanctification, till they be conformed to
Christ, and to serve, honor, and worship God. And in a word, the whole
Scripture, which is the sure, infallible Word of God, given by Divine
inspiration, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.


Quest. How must the Word of God be used, that it may be such an effectual
means of the Spirit to work all these gracious effects in Gods elect people?


Answ. It must not only be read out of the Sacred Scriptures, in which it is
recorded by the Prophets and Apostles; but also preached, and expounded by
godly, able and learned Ministers, who are called and sent of God, Romans 10. 15.
For they are Gods watchmen, who have a charge given to watch for men's souls,
Ezekiel. 3. 17. and Heb. 13. 17. They are his Shepherds and Overseers to feed his
flock with his Word, the Bread of Life, Act. 20. 28. and Ezekiel. 34. and 1 Pet.
5. 2. Ephesians. 4. 11. And by delivering Gods message faithfuly, they obtain this
honor to themselves to be called the Angels of the Lord, Mal. 2. 7. and Gods
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and to be spiritual Fathers under God, who beget
children to God in Christ by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15.


Quest. What other means are to be used?


Answ: None but such as God has prescribed in his holy Word, to wit, the
Sacraments which are seals annexed to the Word, public Prayers, Invocation,
and Worship of God, And also good education, and private Prayers, and
instruction, and often reading of Gods Word alone, and in private Families.


Quest. What is a Sacrament?


Answ. It is a religious action prescribed by God, in which by using outward
visible rites consecrated to be signs, seals, pledges, and remembrances of
the invisible graces promised and given in Christ, the Covenant of grace is
sealed to his people, their Faith confirmed, and all holy graces stirred up,
quickened, and increased in them.


Quest. How many Sacraments are now in use under the Gospel?


Answ. There are but two properly so called, and ordained to be seals of the
whole Covenant of Grace: Baptism, and the Lords Supper. For these two are
expressly commanded and commended by our Savior, to the Church in the Gospel,
and to every true member thereof. There are diverse other signs, pledges, and
remembrances of benefits and blessings past or to come; but they either do not
belong to all Christians, as imposition of hands in ordeining Pastors and
Elders, is proper to them who are so ordained: Or else beside their
signification, they have other more principal uses, as the weekly Sabbath,
besides that it is a pledge of the eternal rest in Heaven, and a sign that
God is our God, who does sanctify us. It serves chiefly to be the first fruits
of our time, and is to be spent wholly in the worship of God public and
private, preaching and hearing of the Word, Prayer and other Religious
exercises, by which God is immediately served, and our souls edified. So also
holy Feasts, and Days which are remembrances of some great blessings, as
Easter, Pentecost, the days of Christ's Nativity, Passion and Ascension,
besides their signification have other far more principal use, to wit, the
solemn worship, and service of God, such as is used on the Sabbath, and
therefore they are called holy Signs and Sacraments improperly, and in a
secondary sense. But Baptism and the Eucharist serve only for Signs, Seals
and Pledges, and have no other notable use.


Quest. What is the Sacrament of Baptism?


Answ. It is an outward washing of the body with pure water, applied thereto by
dipping or sprinkling, ordained by God to be a Sacrament, that is, a Sign,
Seal and Pledge of regeneration to the party baptized, by which outward rite,
he is received into the true visible Church, and dedicated to Christ, to be a
member of his body, and a faithful servant of God all the days of his life.


Quest. To whom does this Sacrament belong?


Answ. It belongs to all that are either borne in the Church of God, or by the
Word preached are called to believe in Christ, and to profess true Christian
Religion, after they are come to years of discretion.


Quest. What warrant have Gods Ministers to baptize Infants, and to give them
the Sign, Seals, and Pledge of Regeneration, which a great number of them,
that are borne in the Church never have, but are reprobates and show themselves
so to be, by living in sin all their days, and dying in impenitency?


Answ. They have sufficient warrant in the Word of God. For the Apostle says,
that children of believing parents are not unclean but holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
that is, they are so far within the Covenant (being in their infancy, as it
were members of their believing parents and wholly at their disposing) that they
may justly be dedicated to God by Baptism, (as Samuel was by his mothers vow)
and received into the true Church. The vow which their parents and guardians
made for them in baptism, is a band to tie them to serve God so soon as they
begin to have knowledge and discretion. Certainly Gods grace and bounty toward
Infants of Christian Parents under the Gospel, is not straitened more than to
Infants in the Old Testament, whose males were Circumcised the eight day after
their birth. Baptism, and the promise and Vow therein ma^e for them is as
powerful a means and motive to provoke them from their youth to serve God, as
Circumcision was to the children of Israel. Also Christ has taught us that his
blessing and the Kingdom of eaven belongs to them, Marc. 10. 13. And the
Apostles baptized whole households of believing men and women, not refusing any
children, as we read of Lydias and the Iaylors household, Acts 16. 15. 33. In a
word, many who were at full age called by the Gospel preached to believe by a
temporary carnal says, and to profess Christ, were never truly regenerate,
as Judas, Simon Magus, Demas, and others, but proved hypocrites and backsliding
reprobates; and yet this was never counted a just cause to hinder or restrain
the Apostles from baptizing al who professed Christ outwardly, for fear of
profaning the Sacrament of Baptism, and abusing the holy ordinance of Christ.


Quest. How does the Spirit of God by Baptism increase grace in men, and set
it a work?


Answ. So often as they are put in mind of their Baptism, either by the name
of Christians or their own proper names given in Baptism, when they are
called by them, or by seeing others baptized; the Spirit of God does thereby as
by a sure pledge assure the Faithful that God is their Father, and they are
his children in his Son Christ, borne again of the Spirit, and so confirms
their Faith in that communion which they have with God the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ; hereby he stirs them up to remember, that their endeavor ought
to be to walk in newness of life, as new creatures, adopted to God, called
unto Christ out of the world mortified and dead to the world, and sinful
lusts, and sanctified to lead a godly life in all righteousness and true
holiness.


Quest. What is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?


Answ. It is that holy ordinance instituted by Christ after his last Supper, in
which by Bread and Wine consecrated, with blessing and giving of thanks, and
by the public Minister given and distributed; and received, eaten and drunk,
by the people assembled, Christ God and Man their Redeemer, together with all
his obedience and full satisfaction, made and performed in the days of his
humiliation, in the form of frail flesh and blood, is signified and sealed to
them and in greater measure given, and of them received by Faith, as a
spiritual nourishment to feed their souls to life eternal.


Quest. Is Christ given to all, and received of all who partake of this
Sacrament?


Answ. He is Sacramentally given, that is, the true signs and pledges, of him,
are given to all, and of them received; but he is not spiritually given to any
but true believers, and worthy receivers; Neither do any effectually receive
him or his benefits to the feeding of their souls, but only they who lay hold
on him by a lively working Faith. For the giving, receiving, eating, drinking,
is not carnal, but spiritual, as our Savior himself shows, John 6. 63.
saying, It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing, the
words that I speak they are spirit, and they are life.


Quest. Why does Christ call the Bread given and eaten, his Body, and the Wine
his Blood, if he be not in them bodily present, and his Flesh and Blood given
and received bodily?


Answ. The true reason of his speaking so is to call our thoughts to the
remembrance of him in the state of humiliation, and of his infirmities,
obedience and sufferings, which in that estate he did undergo in the form of
frail flesh and blood for us, and to stir us up so to apprehend him, and
feed on him by Faith. For Christ did not redeem us, and pay our ransom by any
thing which he did as God before his Incarnation, nor by any thing which he
does as man exalted and glorified; but as he God and Man in the days of his
flesh, fulfilled the whole Law, and suffered all punishments due to man's sin,
so he paid our ransom, brought in eternal righteousness, and made full
satisfaction to Gods Justice, and these are the things which together with
himself are signified and sealed by Bread and Wine, and are Spiritually given
to, and received by the Faithful in this Sacrament.


Quest. How can true Believers be said to receive Christ and his benefits,
seeing they are already united to him, and have Communion of them all, and his
satisfaction and righteousness is made theirs before in their regeneration,
when they were first effectually called, and made fit to partake of this
Sacrament?


Answ. The Spirit of God by this Sacrament rightly administered, does as by a
sure pledge confirm and increase their Faith, and set it a work to lay hold
on Christ, and to apply him and his righteousness, and satisfaction to
themselves more strongly and sensibly, and by this means they are more
feelingly united to him in love and affection, and have a more sweet communion
with him of all his benefits, which does like a plentiful feast, refresh and
feed their souls, strengthen them in all grace, and this is as it were a new
and fresh receiving of Christ and the benefits of his Life and Death, more
abundantly and in greater measure than they had him before.


Quest. You have well declared the efficacy of the Sacraments, and how the
Spirit works by them. Now tell me what the other means are, and first what
is prayer and invocation both public and private?


Answ. Prayer and Invocation, if it be public, is the speech of the whole
Congregation, and if it be private of one person or more directed to God, in
the Name of Jesus Christ, wherein all needful blessings and increase of grace,
are asked and desired in Faith, and Hope, that God will give them for Christ
his sake, in such a measure as he in his wisdom does know to be fit for every
one.


Quest. How is grace thereby increased?


Answ. The Spirit of God by stirring our hearts to pray, and by putting fit
words in our mouths, or in the mouths of them who are the mouth of the
Congregation, inflameth our affections, exercises our Faith, kindles our
desires, and reviveth the sense and feeling of our wants. And by directing us
to pray to God in the Name of Jesus Christ, he makes us implicitly to
acknowledge and confess that God is the author of all blessings, and giver of
all grace, and so makes us to give to him in our prayers all the glory with
all humble thankfulness. And God who is gracious, rich in mercy, faithful,
and true in his promises, will accept our holy and humble desires, and for
Christ's sake and his own truths sake, grant our requests and give a supply of
grace, and an increase of blessings.


Quest: How does the public worship of God increase grace?


Answ. The public worship of God performed outwardly and frequently in the
congregation of his people, by holy preaching and reverent hearing of his Word,
praises, thanks, singing of Psalms, and reverent gestures and behavior,
according to Gods Word, is a special means by the inward operation of the
Spirit, to kindle and increase devotion in the hearts of all his people. It is
their using of his talents, and improving of his graces in them to his glory.
And God has promised that as they get more gain of grace, Mat. 25. 29. so he
will still add more unto them, and will surely establish them, give them the
gift of perseverance and uphold them by his grace unto the end, till they be
received to glory and come to eternal life and blessedness.


Quest. Wherein does the eternal life and blessedness of the Elect consist?


Answ. In the eternal sight, knowledge, and fruition of God in his Heavenly
glory, Ephesians. 5. 27. For when Christ has fully purged, and sanctified his
Church and people, and made them fit to see God, then will he present them
before his glorious Majesty to dwell in his presence, where is fullness of joy
and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.


Quest. Where shall they enjoy this blessedness?


Answ. In the Heavens where a Kingdom is prepared for them, Luke 12. 32. and
John 14. 2. an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled which shall never fade
away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. which is far above all that the eye has seen, or the ear
heard, or that ever entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9.


Quest. When shall they come to possess this blessed inheritance?


Answ. They have the earnest of it in this life in the state of grace, even the
Spirit of adoption by which they are sealed up to the day of full redemption,
and even here in this life they find that sweetness and communion with God, 1
Pet. 1. 8.
that though they see him not, yet believing they rejoice with joy unspeakeable
and full of glory. But when their souls are loosed out of the prison of the
body, Heb. 12. 23.
then shall their spirit be made perfect, Phil. 1. 23.
and they shall in that better part depart hence and be with Christ, and reign
in glory, until the last great day of account, the general judgment. At
which time the Lord Jesus Christ shall descend from heaven, and bring them with
him. And he the Prince of Angels with the commanding voice of the Archangell
shall call all the Angels of God to attend him, Mat. 24. 31
and to gather before him al his Elect from the four winds, 1 These. 4. 15, 16.
from one end of Heaven to the other, and by the power of his voice and the
sound of the trumpet of God, shall raise up their dead bodies purged in the
grave, from all the degrees of corruption, and brought up in a most glorious
form like unto his own glorious body: Phil. 3. 21:
Which bodies shall not be prevented by the Elect and Faithful then alive on
earth, but shall be first raised up and joined with their glorified souls,
before those then living shall be changed, 1 Cor. 15. 52.
and in a moment in the twinkling of an eye shall they all together be ready
to meet the Lord in the air, Mat. 25. 33
whither they shall be caught up, and being set at his right hand shall receive
this comfortable sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, and so they shall be ever
with the Lord and reign with him in glory world without end, 1 These. 4. 17.
and 2 Timothy, 2. 12. and Rev. 22. 5.


Quest. But what shall become of all wicked reprobates, who were never chosen,
nor called to be of this number?


Answ. Their bodies also shall be raised up to everlasting shame, and joined
with their cursed souls, that as they have sinned in both, so they may in both
be punished, Dan. 12. 2. They shall also be gathered together like a flock of
ill savouring goats by themselves and brought before the judgment seat of
Christ full sore against their will, with horror, howling and trembling: And
tumbling and grovelling on the earth as if they would creep into the ground
intermingled among the Devils and wishing that the rocks and mountains might
fall on them, and the hills cover them, but all in vain; Luke 23. 30. they
shall receive an heavy doom. For the Judge sitting above in the air, attended
with all his glorious Angels, and with all his elect Saints, caught up to meet
him in their glorious bodies, and to sit with him in judgment, shall with a
dreadful voice pass this woeful sentence against them, Math. 25. 41. Depart
from me ye^ cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels. And then shall they go into everlasting destruction, and be punished in
unquenchahle fire, from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power;
where a gnawing worm which never dies, shall torment them world without end,
2 These. 1. 9. Isa. 66. 24. Mark. 9. 44.


Quest. What may we conceive of the punishment, and torment of the wicked
after this judgment?


Answ. It far surpasses all conceit of mortal man, being such as all the
tongues of men and Angels are not able to express. But this is plain by
Scripture, that whatsoever can be conceived, or is named among men as a cause
of extreme torment, or a means to increase it beyond all measure, that shall
be in their damnation and punishment. First, the Lord Christ whom they have
skorned, provoked and perfecuted, both in himself and in his members, shall be
their Judge, and shall give the sentence against them. And all his Saints whom
they have mocked, misused, proudly insulted over, despightfully handled, and
evil entreated, and put to death, shall sit as assessors with Christ in
judgment, and with their voices shall approve and applaud the sentence of
condemnation, as the Scriptures testify, Mat. 22. 28. and 1 Cor. 6. 2. and
shall judge the evil angels, v. 3. Now for malicious proud skorners full of
envy, to be judged and condemned by those who they have most of all others
hated, skorned and abused with despite, is worse than a thousand deaths, as
experience teaches. Secondly, their torment unto which they shall be adjudged
is said to be in everlasting fire, in that Lake of hell burning with fire and
brimstone, Mat. 25 41. which of all torments that men by sense can discern, or
reason conceive is the greatest and most intolerable, Rev. 19. 22. And yet as
if that were not enough, our Savior says, that they shall have a worm
inwardly gnawing them which shall never dye, even the worm of Devilish
malice, rancour and envy, which shall make them fret and rage against the Lord
Christ, and against his Saints gnawing their tongues for grief: For the sight
of their glory shall be to them inwardly as great a torment, as the torture of
fire and brimstone are outwardly unto them. Thirdly, they shall have no light
of comfort or refreshing from God, but shall be imprisoned in the dungeon of
everlasting darkness, for the blackness of darkness is reserved for them for
ever, Jude v. 13 which is a thing most horrid to the eyes. Also the sound of
horror and a doleful noise shall fill their ears, even weeping and wailing
and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 13. 42. and 25. 30. Luke 16. 24. And all the
world shall not yield them a drop of water to cool their tongues when they are
tormented in that flame. Fourthly, their misery and torment shall be endless,
easelesse, and remediless, when they have endured it many thousands and
millions of years and ages, more in number then the stars of Heaven, and drops
of water in the Sea, and sands by the sea shore; they shall be as far from any
end as they were at the first beginning. Now we know that when men suffer any
pain or misery, without hope of any end thereof, it is made by this means
most grievous and intolerable, though in it self it be not so great. And
therefore the extremity of torment to them who are cut off from all hope of
ease or end, must needs exceed all conceit and utterance, and be more than
can by tongue be expressed.


Quest. How can their sins committed in the short time of their life deserve
such an endless torment in so great extremity?


Answ. Very well, For first their sins being committed against an infinite
Majesty, and having offended the infinite God, and provoked his infinite wrath,
do by the rule of reason and justice deserve an infinite punishment.

Secondly, as the elect Saints, shall in the last Resurrection be all filled up
to the full with holiness, and with the image of Christ, and shall every one
have as much as his vessel can contain, so that he can desire no more, Even
so wicked reprobates after the last judgment shall be transformed into the
image of the Devil, and filled up with malice and rage against God to the
brimme, insomuch that they shall blaspheme and curse God, for tying them in
everlasting chains, that they can do no more mischief, and gnash their teeth
with anger against themselves, because they have no more provoked the Lord by
transcendent wickedness, so far shall they be from relenting and from remorse
and repentance for their sins. And therefore the more and the longer they
suffer the torments of hell, the more they deserve to suffer them for ever with
increase, if it were possible. That they are past all hope and possibility of
repentance, may easily be proved by that which the Scriptures testify of
Apostatas and such as sin against the holy Ghost, to wit, that it is
impossible to renew them by repentance, Heb. 6. 6. and it is a vain thing to
pray for them, 1 John 5. 16. for their hearts are hardened to commit all
iniquity with greediness: And therefore much more the damned in hell being
turned into the image of the Devil, are past hope of repentance, and must
needs be hardened in eternal malice and impenitency to the utmost.


Quest: Is there no difference of glory among the Saints in Heaven, and of
torment among the damned in hell?


Answ. The Apostle says, that as one Star differs from another in glory; so
it is in the resurrection of the Saints to glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41. But though
some of the Saints are capable of more glory then others, because they have
been more excellent members of Christ in the state of Grace, and instruments
of great good to the Church, as appears, Dan. 12. 3. and Mat. 19. 28. And some
reprobates are more capacious vessels of wrath, as they have more outragiously
and despightfully provoked God in the time of their life; and both these shall
be filled up to the utmost fulness of their measure, the one sort with glory,
the other with shame and wrath, and so they shall have the one more glory, the
other more misery: Yet he that has the least glory, shall have as much as he
can conceive or desire, and he who has the least torment and misery shall
have as much as his vessel can contain, and as he is capable of, and can
bear. This may be made plain by a familiar similitude. If diverse bottles or
earthen vessels of diverse measures and different capacity beeplunged into the
deep sea with open mouths; every vessel will be filled to the brim, that it
cannot contain one drop more, the least as well as the greatest; and though
the greatest conteines more; yet the least is as full, as it is, even to the
utmost. So it is both in the Saints glorified in Heaven, and the wicked
tormented in Hell. Though some are like vessels more capacious, and being
filled with glory, or with misery, have more than others: Yet the least Saint
is as full as he can be of glory, and can desire no more; and the least among
the damned is filled up with torment and with the wrath of God to the utmost,
and has as much as his vessel can hold. The one wants nothing, but has a
fullness of glory, to make him, as blessed, as he can desire, for ever. And
the other has so much torment, as makes him to the utmost extremity miserable:
And as there is no possibility of the falling away of the Saints from their
glory in the least degree. So it is impossible to ease the damned of the least
grain of his heavy and intolerable misery; but Gods wrath shall cleave to
them for ever, and abide on them to the utmost, world without end.


Quest. Seeing now I have lead you on by Questions to the utmost ends both of
the godly Elect, and wicked Reprobates: Now tell me what remains?


Answ. No more but this: That, as God has set before us Life and Death; For
the godly, Life eternal in the fruition of himself in Glory; but for the
wicked and ungodly eternal Death, misery and torment in Hell: So we by
following hard after God by Faith in Jesus Christ, and making his glory, the
mark which we shoot at in the whole course of our Lives, and the maine end
of all our labors, may be free from all danger and fear of eternal Death in
Hell, and may obtain the inheritance of Heavenly glory, and with Christ our
Head, and all his Elect Saints, may see God and enjoy all his goodness, as our
portion for ever, World without end. To this blessed God who has vouchsafed
thus far to reveal himself unto us, and to show us the right way, by which
we may come to him, be all glory, honor and praise given, and ascribed by us
and his whole Church, now and for ever. Amen.


Trin-uni Deo gloria.
FINIS.

