THE TRVE ORIGINAL OF THE SOVLE

Proving both by divine and natural reason, that the production of man's Soul
is neither by creation nor propagation, but a certain mean way between both.

Wherein the doctrine of original sin, and the purity of Christ's
Incarnation, is also more fully cleared then has been heretofore published.

By H. W. B. D.

PSALM. 139.14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
marveilous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

LONDON, Printed by T. Pain, and M. Symmons. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM FENIS, Viscount Say and Sele, Master of the
Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy
Council.

SO great is the unhappiness of our times, right Honorable, wherein men have
been rather led by affection, than judgment, that a bare ipse dixit has with
most men casily gained the authority of a truth. Hereby able wits have been
discouraged, Arts have lost much luster, and the World more light.

This ensuing Treatise, being a poor Orphant, that it might be secured from
such prejudice, the Epidemical distemper of our times, I thought best humbly to
shroud under your Honors protection, to the intent also that they who will not
receive a naked truth for it self, may embrace it for the beauty it shall
derive from so noble a Patron. Vouchsafe then, Right Honorable, as to accept
it, together with this my humble and thankful acknowledgement (the best coin
I have) of all your favors toward my self and stock whence I sprang: so to
pardon my boldness in interrupting you.

The God of the spirits of all flesh, bless your Lordship, your honorable
Lady, and hopeful offspring, in the fatness of the earth, and dew of heaven,
and after lead you to that place where the spirits of just men made perfect,
take sanctuary, which shall be, the daily prayer of

Your Honors in all humility to be commanded, ELIAS PALMER.

To the Reader.
WHether this Treatise (composed by Mr Henry Woolnor) were to satisfy himself
rather, or the curious world, I cannot say. He was early arrested by sudden
death, that sent him hence a prisoner to his grave: These papers (containing
his Essay of the Souls original) were brought to mine hands, for their birth,
all the interest I shall challenge therein: A discourse that may be as
profitable, as it is desirable, though in itself very sublime and remote from
the senses, yet levelled to the plainest capacity, that none, I hope, will
depart it unresolved.

To speak any thing of this subject definitively, is as far beyond mine
intentions, as my business, but shall as best becomes me, humbly submit to the
censure of the learned; whose counsels and encouragements gave not only being,
but lengthned out mine intentions toward the Press. As for others whose
indigested notions cannot admit of such a speculation, nor can therefore be
competent Judges in a matter beyond their sphaere, let them be sober; as God
distributes to every one, (...), ^om. 12.
a measure of, or in the faith. Farewell.

ELIAS PALMER.

The Contents of the several Chapters handled in this Treatise.
Chapter. 1. THE Use of this Treatise, and how it is to be handled. Chapter. 2.
Whether the original of the soul may be perfectly known in this life?
Chapter. 3. Diversity of opinions about the nature and the original of the
soul. Chapter. 4. The state of the question propounded, with the chief
difficulties on both sides. Chapter. 5. The mean chosen, and the question
resolved. Chapter. 6. Scriptures to prove the souls immediate creation,
answered. Chap. 7. Reasons from the Scripture for the souls immediate
Creation, answered. Chap. 8. Whether propagation can stand with the spiritual
nature of the Soul. Chap. 9. Whether the loss of seed be the loss of
souls. Chap. 10. How one soul can proceed from two souls. Chap. 11. How the
soul can be propagable, and yet indivisible. Chap. 12. How the manner of
conception can stand with the souls generation. Chap. 13. Testimonies out of
the old Testament, proving the souls propagation. Chap. 14. Testimonies out of
the new Testament, proving the souls propagation. Chap. 15. The propagation
proved from the Doctrine of Original sin. Chap. 16. How the nature of the sin
descending, confirms the souls propagation. Chap. 17. That a new created
soul cannot justly be united to a sinful body. Chap. 18. That a soul newly
created by God, cannot be infected with Original sin. Chap. 19. That
Original sin cannot pass but by propagation. Chap. 20. That Original sin
cannot be propagated, unless the whole man be. Chap. 21. That the whole man
cannot be propagated, unless the soul be. Chap. 22. That the whole humanity
of Christ, was taken from the Virgin. Chap. 23. That Christ's humanity was
never cleansed from sin. Chap. 24. How Christ's Incarnation was free from
corruption? Chap. 25. Natural reasons, proving the souls propagation. Chap.
26. Reasons from the nature of generation. Chap. 27. Reasons from the nature of
the soul. Chap. 28. Reasons from other considerations. Chap. 29. An answer to
some objections against this manner of propagation. Chap. 30. The Conclusion
recapitulating the sum of the premises.
A TREATISE PHILOSOPHICAL, Containing The true Original of the SOUL.
Wherein is labored to prove both by divine and natural reason, that the
production of man's Soul, is neither by Creation nor Propagation, but a
certain mean way between both.
CHAPTER I. The use of this Question, and how it is to be handled.
The difficulty and necessity of this doctrine.
AMong the many, intricate questions wherein the Church of God has almost lost
it self in this last age of the world, there is none more difficult to know
and more necessary to be known, than that which concerns the Souls
original. The difficulty appears in that so many worthies who have entered
into this Labyrinth, could never yet find a clear way out of it again. The
necessity, in that there are so many necessary points in divinity depending
upon this, which cannot be well cleared without it, especially the doctrine of
original sin, and the immortality of the soul, which are two of the maine
principles of Christian Religion.

The possibility of knowing it.
But some perhaps will say, who then shall undertake that which no man ever yet
could perform? It is true indeed, I say so too: and so in a manner say all.
And thus under a color of modesty and humility, we are all hindered from
seeking that which happily might otherwise be found. I reply therefore on the
contrary, why should we not attempt it. They are not always the learned men
that find out the greatest mysteries: neither are they always the greatest
men, by whom God brings the greatest things to pass. Sure I am, the promise
is made to the godly, Ioh. 7.17.
not to the great; and it is Gods usual course to produce the greatest effects
by the most unlikely instruments, that the power and praise may be of God, 2
Cor. 4.7.
and not of man. Certain it is, there is a truth if we could find it: For God
will prove himself true, Romans 3.4.
though every man be a liar, and therefore if any mistake be, the fault is in
our selves. This I hold as one principle. Again, look what God has spoken in
his Word, the same he has wrought in the world: he does not say one thing and
do another: but his word and his works agree, and this I hold as a second
principle. Lastly, I doubt not but in this controversall age God is about to
refine the Christian Religion; and to reveal secrets that have been hitherto
hidden: and seeing many other mysteries are daily cleared, why should not this
also? seeing that God which gives an heart to undertake, can give power to
perform; let men say and think what they will, I shall not therefore fail,
through his assistance, to do my best endeavor.

Curiosity to be avoided.
Two extremes notwithstanding I confess are in this matter to be avoided:
Curiosity and Negligence. First, Curiosity: It is strange how man's nature is
affected to noveltie, so divine a thing is knowledge, that even innocence it
self was ambitious of it; it cost Adam a fall, as we know. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Nevertheless, secret things belong to God, and only things revealed to us
and our children. Where God has not a tongue to speak, we may not have an
ear to hear; when he is sparing in revealing, we must be sparing in
enquiring; Genesis 2.17.
forbidden fruit may not be tasted; and when God has set us limits, Exodus
19.12.
we may not pass our bounds, least we die; Being creatures we must submit our
selves to our Creator: and if we will be Christians, faith must satisfy where
reason cannot. And good reason there is it should be so, both for our
humiliation and trial. To humble us when we shall see our reason non-plust,
even in matters of greatest consequence, and to try our faith in mounting above
reason, when it shall appear that we rely more upon Gods word then our own
fancy. Now that the soul is immortal, and that all men are stained with
original sin: are things most certain, for the Scripture plainly affirms
them: And if the original of the soul be doubtful, yet even reason teaches,
that it is altogether madness to reject a certain truth for uncertain.
Justly therefore is their curiosity to be condemned, who are wondrous
inquisitive to know whence the soul came, but care not at all whither it goes.
Indeed desiring to see cause of doubting in the one, that they may have the
more liberty to be careless in the other.

Cautions to be observed.
Yet is not this so to be understood, as if we were not to seek after any
thing, but that which is manifest in the Scripture, for so we shall not need to
seek at all. Neither is every question curious, which may seem to be so: but
that indeed is a curious question, which is either needless, or not revealed.
Nor how needful this present question about the souls original is, no man
doubts, the only quaere is, whither it be revealed or no; and indeed many
think it is not. But besides that all things are not revealed at once; we must
know that God reveals things two ways: either by his word, or by his works.
Now as many things are not to be found in the book of the creatures, are yet
manifest in the book of the Scriptures. So many things that are not mentioned
in the word, are yet manifest in the works of God. It is our duty therefore to
search both. But divine things are to be sought especially in the former, and
natural (as this is) in the latter, yet still comparing both together. If
therefore this truth can be found in either, then it is revealed: neither can
we say, it is a secret, until both be thoroughly searched. And because there is
a depth in both past finding out, therefore we must exercise our selves in them
day and night; and never leave searching, I mean for things needful, so long
as the world endures, and in this cause where God is sparing in revealing, it
is to make us the more diligent in searching and enquiring.

For as Curiosity on the one hand, so negligence on the other is also to be
avoided. And not only in regard of those fundamental doctrines which do so
nearly depend upon it, the overthrowing of which would overturne all Religion,
but also in regard of the godly themselves, both to stay their minds in this
wavering age, and to cut off those doubts and unbeseeming motions, which
through Satan's malice, and our own corruption, are too apt to arise even in
the hearts of Gods best children; and lastly, to stop the mouths of wicked men
and Atheists, who are ready upon all occasions to blaspheme GOD, and make a
mock of Religion. For the shunning of such difficulties as these; under a
color of modesty, and to avoid curiosity, or the like, gives them occasion of
suspicion, that there is some secret fraud which we are afraid to discover, in
all points of controversy therefore so much as is mani^^st in the word. I
certainly believe, though reason seems against it, and withal I know that it
is not for me to question the doctrine, but to blame mine own ignorance, and
so set my self to search, not because I doubt, but because I do believe the
truth. And this we may and must perform as well for our own satisfaction, as
the edification of others.

Neither may the difficulty discourage us, but rather whet on our diligence so
much the more: wherein for our comfort, so long as we maintain that the soul
is so produced (whither immediately from God, or mediately from man) that it is
of an immortal nature, and yet stained with original sin, according to the
Scriptures: what ever we determine of the manner, we are out of danger of
heresy, though perhaps subject to error. Neither yet may the fear of being
censured for presumption or curiosity, hinder the sober search of it; which
though it cannot justly for the former reasons, yet can hardly be avoided: not
only because some lazy persons would gladly free themselves of that labor, by
calling it curious, but also considering the intricate niceness of it, which
is such indeed as may seem to be handled curiously, and yet without
curiosity; yea, curiousness it self is no curiosity in such a curious
(though necessary) question. Wherefore taking Philosophy on the one hand, and
Divinity on the other hand, to lead me, and craving the light of Gods Spirit
to direct me, I will set my self unto it: resolving so God may be glorified,
not much to care who is offended.

CHAP. II. Whether the original of the Soul may be perfectly known in this
life.
BUt before I proceed any further, I must preadmonish my Reader, not to think
to attain perfect knowledge herein in this life: nor yet to think it strange
that he cannot. For how do we think it is possible to know how the soul is
made before it is: when we cannot conceive what it is after it is made? For
albeit we know it is a spiritual substance, truly subsisting, yet what manner
or metaphysicall matter, it is impossible for any man to conceive. Nor seeing
we doubt not but that we have souls, though we know them not, and are no whit
troubled that we do no^ know them: why should we doubt, or think i^ strange,
because we cannot (...) their original, which (...) ^^^s be harder than the
^^^er.

Reasons why the S^^les original cannot perfectly be known.
(...) ignorance should more trouble than the know, (...) ^ill (...) is good (if
reason (...) sa^^^ed with reason) I (...) make (...) appear, tha^ (...) ^ot
only reasonable so to (...) ^mpossible it should be oth^^wise: For first there
is no perfect knowledge to be had of any thing in this life. Whatsoever has
any being, has s^^h a secret de^^^dance on God, the first ^^ing as no man is
able to c^^^^end. And if it be so in those things w^ (...) best known un^^^
(...) m^^h more must it ^^^^^s (...) in those things whi^^^ (...) ^^^ye least
knowledge of.

Secondly, the soul is a spirit, and spirits are ever more difficult to judge
of than corporal substances: not being subject to sense, as anon we shall see.
Thirdly, the soul is an incomplete spirit, being but part of a creature. And
therefore more difficult to be known: for as is the thing known, such is our
knowledge of the thing, if that be imperfect, our knowledge is imperfect also:
and therefore by like reason, the soul being an incompleate spirit, we can
have but an incompleate knowledge of it. Fourthly, this question concerns the
existence of the soul. Now the existence of any thing is harder to know then
^he essence, and consequently those questions that concern the ^xistence are
more difficult then those that concern the essence. And therefore if it be
impossible ^or us in this life perfectly to know the essence of the soul, it
must needs be so much the more impossible to know the original.

What knowledge men have of spirits.
And to make yet this more plain to every man's apprehension, let us a little
compare the faculty of knowing with the nature of the things to be known: For
as the consideration of the faculties of spirits, do not a little help to
find out their natures, so by the nature of the soul, we shall better judge
of this faculty of understanding. And first, touching the whole man: we know
that man is a mixed creature, consisting of two natures, soul and body, which
are sweetly united to make up one complete creature. The body endued with
senses to receive the images of all corporal things: and the soul furnished
with a faculty of reason, which apprehe^ding those images, does discourse and
draw consequents from them, according to its own ingenerate principle of
reason, whereby it gets Knowledge of causes and effects, which sense cannot
attain unto. This being the only natural way of man's knowledge. Hence it
comes to pass, that when we come to discourse of spiritual natures, the
knowledge of which, lies not through the senses, but is gotten only by the
rational power or force of reason that is in man. We are put out of our
natural accustomed way, and so being half lost, we wander in uncertainties,
without any perfect knowledge, or such as might content the nature of man. And
this I take to be one reason why we are so dim-sighted in spiritu^ll things.

The souls knowledge of it self.
Again, to come more close^y to the nature of the soul: we know that
whatsoever excel^encies are in inferior natures, are much more and much more
perfectly in those that are superior. Whence it is that the perfections of
other creatures are much more perfectly in man, and chiefly in the soul of
man. And those virtues which are in men's souls, are after a more excellent
manner in Angels: and all perfection most perfectly of all in God. Now as their
natures are, so also are their faculties, and therefore in like manner the
knowledge of inferior natures, is comprehended by the superior, but never the
superior by the inferior; I mean properly and naturally. For because the
soul knows by certain spiritual Ideas, or abstracted species, which being
grossly taken from the senses, are perfected by degrees, as they come nearer
the soul: hence it is that the knowledge of things (according to the manner of
out knowledge) is a more intellectual apprehension of them; and so of an
higher nature than the things themselves that are known. Whence it appears
that it is impossible for the soul to know it self properly or perfectly,
yea, of so well as it can inferior natures.

If it be said, if the soul be thus ignorant of it self, how then do men
know Angels, and both men and Angels God, being superior natures?

First, Although the soul cannot know it self, 1. Reflection
according to that proper and natural way of knowledge, whereby it knows
other things, yet it knows it self by reflection, that is, by beholding its
own image in the effects as it were in a glass: but this knowledge is but a
shadow in comparison.

Secondly, I answer the soul knows Angels, 2. Comparison.
and both men and Angels, and God two ways: First, by the inferior; secondly,
by the superior it self. By the inferior: so by consequents of reason drawn
from sensible things, we conceive something of spirits, both our own souls
and Angels: and by the image of God in his creatures, we conceive something of
him also. But especially we know the superior by the superior it self: 3.
Infusion.
And so both men and Angels know God by union with him; that is, by the working
of his holy Spirit abiding in us; of which nature is that immediate vision of
God which the Angels enjoy in heaven, and the Saints somewhat taste of on earth.

To know that which knows impossible.
By this which has been said, it appears, that properly to know that by which
it knows is impossible for any creature: because to know that, is to be above
it self: and to have that which it has not. This therefore is proper to God
alone, whose essence and knowledge is both one: and all other natures by the
superior comprehend the inferior. As for example, we see in the senses (for
as the sense is, so is the understanding) the eye sees: but it cannot see* that
it sees. Beasts know, but they know not that they know* they know by sense
those things that ate inferior and subject to sense, but how they know, that
is, by sense cogitative (the highest perfection of their nature) they know not.
For that is to be comprehended by a higher perfection, that is, by reason; and
thereby indeed men know how they know: but how they know that, even themselves
do not know, otherwise then by the effects and by way of reflection; but the
thing it self, that is, the essence of the soul, the soul it self cannot
properly know. Every nature as it is more excellent, proves it self and the
inferior


Yet we must know that we know our souls better then beasts do themselves;
and no doubt Angels themselves better than we do our selves: and God who is
above all knows himself absolutely and perfectly; Why God knows all.
because his nature is of that height, that essence and knowledge in him are
all one. Thus we see the reason why GOD only can perfectly contemplate
himself, and every other creature as it comes nearer to his nature, can
thereby contemplate it self, and those which are inferior. And hence it is
that man who is a creature cansisting of soul and body, Why man knows not all
secrets of nature.
can by his soul co^template elementary natures: but for as much as his soul
is also united to a body, which is part of himself, he cannot perfectly know
the secrets of nature, even in these corporal things. Whence no doubt it is
that a man may find His reason non-p^ust in so many works of nature* But the
Angels being altogether of aspirituall nature, may have perfect knowledge of
these inferior natures (I mean as they are in themselves, not as they are
virtually in God, for so he only knows them perfectly) and yet they cannot
perfectly contemplate themselves, Why Angels cannot know our thoughts.
no nor our souls neither; because they also are spiritual like them. And
hence also it may well be, that Angels cannot know men's thoughts, as is
manifest in the Scripture. Much less then can man have any perfect knowledge
of his soul, Why man not knowing his soul, much less the original.
and much less the Original. No although he were not joined to a body,
unless he had another spiritual nature above the soul, yea, above Angels, by
which he might look down upon it, and so discern all those difficulties
which now he cannot comprehend. Even as by these souls we can look down upon
inferior creatures, and judge of elementary creatures in the world; For as
love, so knowledge does descend, and therefore if we had such superior souls,
yet then we should find as much difficulty in them also.

Here therefore it is to be noted^ that no nature (excepting Gods) can know it
self perfectly, so neither properly, but as it were by way of reflection. For
even as the eye, though it beholds all other things, yet it cannot see it
self, unless in a glass; so we cannot know our own souls, but as it showed
it self in the works as in a mirro^^, so that as by it we know other things,
so by other things we come to the knowledge of it: which must needs be an
imperfect shadow, and indeed not so much as a shadow of perfection. And
herein it bears the image of God in a special manner, who cannot be known
properly, but only by his creatures, rather what he is not, then what he is. So
that as it is proper to him alone, who is the perfection of all natures to know
all things: so he only can properly and perfectly know both them and himself.

How far the souls Original may be known.
Some perhaps will say, if it be a thing that cannot be known, then it is in
vain to enquire after it. I answer, that though the knowledge of the soul be
very difficult, especially the original of it, and though it be impossible to
know it perfectly, and so properly as we know other things, for the reasons
abovesaid, yet there is a competency and such as may give reasonable
satisfaction to our nature, to be attained, and therewith we ought to rest
contented. For though we can see no reason, yet if we see reason, why we should
see no reason, reason it is we should be content without reason.

CHAP. III. Diversity of opinions about the nature and the original of the
soul.
Strange conceits about the soul.
THE truth of this ignorance will farther appear; and also farther the point in
hand, if we shall consider the many strange opinions that have been in the
world, concerning the anture and original of it.

1. Aristotle's opinion.
First, Aristotle, that Prince of Philosophers, who being ignorant of the
Creation, held that the world was eternal: did also maintain that souls have
been from eternity: but yet propagated from parents to children, the soul
being in the seed potentially, though not actually: but whether it were mortal
or immortal, as himself was not certain, so his writings are very doubtful:
yet rather concluding that it was; howbeit, the first creation of nothing, is
denied flatly by him and all his followers.

Somewhat more tolerable than this (because it has some resemblance of truth)
is the fable of the Poets: that Prometheus. 2. Poets.
made the first man of the slime of the earth, and being beloved of the gods,
and sometimes taken up to heaven, he there saw the caelestiall Orbs to live
and move by fire; whereupon he made bold to steal some of the heavenly fire to
enlive his body, and so informed it with a living soul, whence it seems came
that opinion, that souls were made of caelestiall fire.

Others again held that Angels made all men's souls of spirit and fire: 3.
That Angels made them.
of this mind was Seleucus: and long before him all Carp^crates was of opinion
that they made the whole world. Also so Menander* and others.

4. Of his own substance.
Others say, God made them of his own substance, as Priscillianus Serve^^us,
and their followers.

5. Of the soul of the world.
But as touching the matter, most of the other Philosophers were of opinion,
that souls were bred of the soul of the world, which they imagine to be a
caelestiall substance or quint-essence, of which they say the stars are made,
and so are incorruptible and immortal, even as the body is corruptible and
mortal, being compounded of the elements.

6. Hypocrat.
Notwithstanding Hippocrates thought that the soul was engendered of the heat or
vital spirits, or else of the harmony of the whole body, or (to speak plainly)
it was he could not tell what.

7. Galen.
That famous Physician Galen also, held it to be either an aeriall body more
then the elements, or else not corporal, and yet carried by the animal spirits
as by a chariot.

8. Plato.
Plato, and his followers, maintain, that all souls were at first bred in
heaven, of the divine nature, and dwelt here, being endued with excellent
sciences and virtues: but afterward descending from thence into men's bodies,
as into stinking prisons, they are corrupted, and forget all their former
knowledge, and when afterward by study and instruction, those caelestiall
sparks are again kindled in them, they do only recall or call to mind those
things which they knew before in heaven. And farther they affirm, that if by
virtuous living, good works, or some other kind of purgation, after they are
separated from their bodies, (for which cause it is like Purgatory was
invented) they be purged from this corporal contagion: then they shall return
again to heaven from whence they came. For thus does Satan seek to obscure
the truth with lies, when he cannot put out all light of nature.

Not much unlike this (and as it is like derived from it) was the opinion of
Origin, 9. Origin.
who though he thought as the Scriptures teach, that God created the soul of
nothing, and not of any caelestiall substance, yet he says that all souls
were created together at the beginning of the world, as Angels were, and
because they sinned in departing from God, they are since put into diverse
bodies, to be as it were their Jayles and fetters to imprison and clog them,
more or less, according to the diversity of their sins. And that for this
cause the world was made, that so these evil spirits might be bridled.

No less, 10. ^^thago^^^^s.
if not much more strange was that (...), or transmigration of souls, which
the Pythagoreans imagined, viz. that they passed at death out of one man's body
into another, yea, into fowls, fishes, plants, without any difference,
exercising their power in them, so far as in those natures could be manifested:
and that accordingly as they had lived in one body more or less vitiously, so
they were received at death into a worse or better body. And it seems the
Jews themselves were somewhat infected with this opinion by the Romans, for
they thought that Christ was John Baptist risen again, Mat. 14.2. and 16.13,
14.
or Eliah, or Jar^^^ah, Mar. 6.14.
or some other of the old Prophets. Luke 9.7, 8


11. Certain Platonists or Pythagoreans.
Yea, there have not been wanting some heretics of old, who following the
opinion of the Platonists, have affirmed the soul to be of such a nature, as
it can never be quiet, until such time as it has finished all manner of works
whatsoever can be done in the world, of what nature soever; whether good or
bad, by passing out of one body into another, through all sorts of creatures.
And until then, say they, it can never be thoroughly purged or be at rest.

12. Certain Tertullianists.
Yet more, some have maintained that at death those souls that live well, are
turned into Angels, and those that have lived wickedly, become devils, as the
Tertullianists, etc. And hence it is that we read of conjurers, who have
killed men and children, that they might have their souls as their imps and
familiar spirits, to command after their deaths; and such an one it is said
Simon Magus was.

13. Every man 3 souls.
Neither is there more diversity about the nature than the number of souls,
for some are of opinion that every man has three souls; a vegetative soul
with plants, a sensitive soul with beasts, and a reasonable soul like unto
the Angels, although indeed they are but three faculties or sundry operations
of one and the same soul in us.

14. 2 Souls.
Other again think there can be no less than two souls at the least; one
sensual, the other rational; the one mortal, the other immortal; the one
propagated by the Parents, and the other created by God. And this Occam would
prove from the diversity and contrariety of appetites and desires in one and
the same man, which he thinks cannot be in one and the same individual nature.

15. Maniches.
Some others yet more grossly have affirmed, that every man has indeed two
souls, the one made of the substance of God, and the other of the substance of
the devils. These were the Maniches, who held two beginnings; a good God, and
an evil God.

16. Averrois.
Contrary to these, and yet no less unreasonable, is the opinion of that great
Philosopher Averrois, that there is one only soul of all men that ever were
or shall be in the world.

Diversities of opinions amongst Christians.
But leaving these Heathens and heretics, with their heathenish and heretical
conceits, as not worthy the confuting, let us hear the verdict of the learned
Christians since Christ, who all with one consent affirm, that the souls of
men are either immediately created by God, 1. Creation.
or else mediately propagated by man: 2. Propagation.
yet herein also there is no small diversity, for in either of these, there
are two opinions, each differing from other.

17. Created out of the body.
Of those that maintain the soul to be immediately created by God; some think
it is created without the body of nothing, and then infused into it by God
after the forming of the body: of this mind was Hillary, etc.

18. Created within the body.
Others again think it to be created within the body of the conceived fruit;
which has first vegetative life, then sensitive, and lastly, the reasonable
soul is created therein, and united therewith, by the immediate power of God
only. Both these have been countenanced by many of the best learned,
especially the latter; which is most commonly received: as the truth at this
day.

19. Propagated corporally.
Notwithstanding, others contend, that although God at first created Adams soul
of nothing, yet ever since, they have been naturally propagated from the
parents together with the body; so that as we have our bodies, from Adams
body, so our soul from Adams soul, but so as it is immortal notwithstanding.

But of these some conceiting it to be a corporeal substance, thought also
that it was generated after a corporal manner; which was worthily condemned by
Austin and others.

20. Propagated spiritually.
But those that held it to be a spiritual substance, held also that it was
propagated spiritually, the soul of the soul, as it were light of light; And
this heretofore was upholden by many of the most learned men amongst the
Ancients: yea, as St. Hierome witnesses, most of the Doctors of the Western
Churches were of that mind. So that it seems this opinion was as commonly
received among them there, as the other now amongst us.

Lastly, 21.
there were some that wavered between these two opinions, not knowing which to
take; and of this mind was St. Augustine and Eucherius, August. Epist. 157.
who durst neither condemn those that thought it was spiritually propagated
from the Parents, nor yet those that held it to be immediately created by God.
Lib. 2. Cap. 56.
The one professing in one of his Epistles that he could not find any
certainty of the souls Original throughout the Canonical Scriptures; in
which doubt he also continued to his death, as appears plainly in his
Retractations.

CHAP. IV. The state of the question propounded, with the chief difficulties
on both sides.
The censure and choice;
HEreby it appears sufficiently both how much difficulty is in this question
of the souls original, and how imperfect our knowledge is therein. But since
all the rest are most absurd, erroneous, and some blasphemous; and two, only
as most probable claim right therein: proceed we now to their titles, and so
if it be possible to find out the truth, in this most intricate question, viz.
whether the soul be naturally propagated from Adam, or supernaturally created
by God?

Not generated.
If we say the first, it must needs be generated of the soul, or of the body;
if of the body, then it will follow, that it is by nature corruptible, and so
not immortal. And if we say it is spiritually produced of the soul, that
seems contrary to reason, unless we should overthrow the excellent nature of
the soul; for if it be a spiritual and immateriall substance, indivisibly
subsisting by it self, how can it be that one should engender another? Besides
many other inconveniences would follow thereupon, as afterward we shall see.

Not created.
Now if on the other side we say; that they are daily created by God of nothing,
besides the oppositio^ that this has to Gods first institution of nature,
whereby all things were settled in a course to increase and multiply of
themselves, and God has rested from the works of creation ever since: it is no
less opposite to divinity. For if this be true, it cannot be conceived how
there can be any original sin without impeachment to Gods Justice. Original
sin denied by some of the Ancients.
Whenee it is that not only the old Anabaptists, the Pelagians, and our new
Pelagians the Anabaptists, holding that the soul is immediately created by
God: deny that there is any original sin, otherwise then by imitation: but
even diverse of the ancient Fathers seem to be of the same mind; and not only
Hierome, and Chrysostom, Zan. de operibus par. 3. li. 2. c. 5. these. 1.
but as ( Zanchy wintnesseth) this was the chief reason that moved the
chiefest Divines, and most famous Doctors of those times, to choose rather to
hold the propagation of the soul, than to fall into so many absurdities as
follow upon ^he former Doctrine. And as ^hey could not see how these two could
stand together; so neither can I see, how it can be seen. Not cleared by our
modern Divines.
Nay, I dare say farther, themselves that hold this opinion, themselves cannot
see it clearly; neither can they herein satisfy either themselves or others.
As appears plainly, first, 1.
because thoroughly urged, they put it off, by accounting it a curious question,
and so restrain diligent searching, under a color of modesty. 2.
Secondly, they plainly confess, they cannot satisfy such. 3.
Thirdly, they urge and exhort us to faith without reason. 4.
Lastly, they turn us from searching after the original, to make a good end
with it; and that indeed is good counsel; but in the mean while, if this
opinion be contrary to the truth, and staineth God by consequence, they must
give others leave to doubt, and to dissent. For as it is ridiculous folly to
neglect quenching, to find out who fired our house; so it is a great
wickedness to lay it upon him that did it not.

1. Not by the soul.
For if the soul comes immediately from God, the question is, how we come to be
defiled with original sin? this infection cannot proceed from the soul, for
if God created it, he makes it exceeding good; and it is not good to say, God
forsakes it before it sins, or it sins before it comes into the body, or
God punishes for another fault; a good soul for a man's sin.

2. Not by the body.
Again, it cannot be polluted by the body; for neither can the body be sinful
without the soul, nor yet if it could, could the divine nature of the soul be
corrupted by the body; and if it could be, yet not with original sin.

3. Not by union.
Neither can it be by the union of both, for that is done by God. And how can it
possibly stand with Gods Justice, to put a new created soul that is good and
without sin, into such a condition, as wherein it shall be straight way liable
to eternal damnation, for the fault of another, that does nothing perteine
unto it? or how can it belong to a good soul newly created of nothing, that
not a soul but a man some thousand years since sinned? Neither will it avail
any thing to say, it is created in the infusion, and infused in the creation:
for that is all one as if we should say in plainer word, Its made in the
marring, and marred in the making: for being a spitituall substance, and nature
distinct from the body, if it come from another principle, it must have a
proper existence of its own, before it can be made part of another; and if not
in time, yet in nature I am sure, it must first be, before it can be united to
the body. Neither can it help to say, it is Cods decree; for that cannot be
proved, and being unjust, is most justly disproved.

4. By neither by law of Justice insufficient.
But the last and best refuge is, that original sin passes neither by the
soul, nor by the body, but by the offense of our first parents, who standing
in the room of all their posterity; as look what gifts they ieceived, was no
less for their posterity, than for themselves: so what they lost, they lost
also for their posterity: And therefore in the instant that God creates
souls, although he creates them good, yet for Adams sin, he deprives them of
those supernatural gifts, which otherwise they should have had: which
deprivation although it puts no evil into the soul, yet evil necessarily
follows, and hence is Original sin.

The reason why.
This indeed comes somewhat nearer the matter, for if it be granted that the
soul is not propagated from Adam, it must be granted withal, that we are not
guilty of Original sin simply, because we proceed from Adam; but by some
other means; as namely, because he stood in our rooms; and we are men as he
was; but yet this will not serve the turn neither; For first it stands not
with the Justice of God, that Adams sin should be imputed to us any other way
then as it is our own: 1. It must be our own.
that is, as we sinned potentially in him: it being Gods just ordinance in
nature, Romans 11.16.
that all things should be potentially in their principles, and partake of
their natures: secondly, 2. Not by imputation only.
it is confessed (as the truth is) that original sin is not only by
implication, as this is, but also by propagation: yea, I will say more (and yet
according to the truth) that it is not by imputation, 3. Chiefly by p^opagation.
but only in respect of propagation. For if we could be without sin of our
own (as a new created Soul is) his sin could not justly hurt us. True it is
that. God may justly punish all mankind for the sin of Adam, yet this is and
must be his posterity only, and neither they for his sin properly, Ezekiel.
18.20.
(for the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father) but because by his
sin they are made sinful, or rather sinned in him, and so for their own sin
are justly subject to the same punishment. So that in truth, propagatio^ is the
main, if not the only stream of original corruption. Now if we receive
only the least parts of our selves, that is our body from Adam, which cannot
be the subject of sin, not only because it wants the soul, but because not
parts, but whole persons sinned in Adam; how can this satisfy any reasonable
man; that it is possible for us to be guilty of Original sin, if the soul
comes immediately from God.

CHAPTER V. The mean chosen, and the question resolved.
Further satisfaction needful.
THis therefore is a most profound question, full of wonderful difficulties;
this is that intricate Meander, and that endless Maze, wherein St. Augustine
wandered all his life long, and could find no issue: and to conclude, this is
that wherein Divines to this day have rather showed their modesty, in not
searching, than their judgment in determining the truth. If not rather too
much searing least they should seek too far, they have thereby failed in
finding. But how soever, it is very commendable to walk soberly herein; yet we
may not through too much modesty, leave a gap open to be trodden down by the
feet of beastly Atheists; and therefore notwithstanding it is a Labarinth,
where it is hard to wade out safely, yet we may and must endeavor to give
satisfaction in such a needful question.

The Authors apology for this singularity.
And here I most humbly crave leave to step a little out of the common path, or
rather to make the same path straight, which (as to me it seems) is a little
crooked in this place; bearing out against Philosophy on the one hand, and
Divinity on the other; and if force of reason do not prove my assertion, I
will willingly bear the blame that is due; which yet I hope, cannot be much
though I should err.





which has yet been maintained by the most wise and godly of the ancient
Fathers in former ages.





How man propagates man.
That we may therefore sail even between this Scylla and Charibdis, seeing we
see it can neither be merely propagated by man, nor yet immediately created by
God: my conclusion is, that it is partly from both. That is to say, that the
whole man consisting of soul and body, does propagate a creature like
himself, consisting of the same parts; by virtue of that efficacious word of
God in the beginning (increase and multiply) and the concurrence of his own
immediate power therewith. And that therefore God has set a steadfast law in
nature for the generation of mankind (both soul and body) as well as other
creatures. But yet partly mediately and partly immediately, Man's propagation
natural.
himself having a more peculiar work in this than in any other. For besides
this general providence in conseiving the natural order that himself has
instituted; as the nature of the soul is more excellent, Gods act in the
production of the soul.
so answerable thereunto the act of his providence is more immediate therein
than in any other creature whatsoever. And thus the soul may be propagated as
well as the body, after a manner convenient to either nature: God having so
much in it as to make it immortal; and man so much as to make if sinful* yet
not as if there were any separation in their generation, Soul and body not to
be divided.
the body of the body only, and the soul of the soul only (for this is but
to multiply difficulties without end, no man being able to say directly, here
it is either for the one or the other) but the whole of the whole, generation
being not of parts but of persons. For nature it self teaches, that neither
soul nor body can properly be said to be generated; but the creature
consisting of soul and body: neither is there any thing that seems to me more
absurd, than that when God and nature has thus conjoined them: the Scripture
always speaking of the generation of the whole man; and nature we see always
bringing forth the whole; we should notwithstanding make a separation; fetching
one part from heaven, and another from earth: and then vainly tire our selves
to bring both ends together again. How the soul is propagated of the soul.
Now if the soul and body may not be separated in this case, much less should
we take upon us to assign the proper cause of every effect herein: and yet
because such is the curiosity of man's nature, that it will not otherwise rest
satisfied; if we must needs in reason distinguish, what in nature cannot be
severed, I should thus determine.

The essential causes distinguished.
That the parents, by Gods immediate assistance, do out of their own
spiritual nature, inform their issue, with a reasonable soul, in the instant
of conception, for the preservation of humane kind. So that I conceive the
power of God to be the external efficient cause, 1. Efficient.
who as he made the first soul immediately of nothing: so by reason of the
purity of it, it can have no other external efficient cause, but his own
immediate power. The procreating cause is the parents, 2. Procreant.
who are as instruments in Gods hand, to bring forth what, how, and when he
please, according to his own eternal decree. The material cause, is the
spiritual matter of the parents souls. 3. Material.
It will be said, the soul is immateriall: be it so, then, I say, the soul is
made of that matter which is immateriall. For though it be not corporeal, yet it
is spiritual, and being a spirit and not a body, it is rather an act than a
matter: Mark this mystery.
so that according to the course of nature, I confess more is to be ascribed
to the efficient cause, yea, so much that the latter is almost extinguished in
the former. And hence it is that though the soul be congenerated with the
body, yet by reason of the pure nature of it, God being the efficient, it is as
near to a creation as possibly it can be: and as it were a mean between
creation and propagation. 4. Formal.
Touching the formal cause as it self is the form of the body, or rather of
the man; so its own form is the specificall difference, or individual
existence; which it has as a reasonable soul, in the common nature of man:
proceeding from the concurrence of all those causes. 5. Instrume^tall.
And herein that body or rather the corporal seed the perfection of the body,
especially the pure spirits therein (wherewith the soul naturally unites it
self, 1
by reason of sympathy and familiarity which is between them) becomes an
assisting or isntrumental cause. Lastly, 6. Final.
the final cause is the preservation of mankind, and his own glory by them,
according to his first institution. Now all this is done in conception, soul
and body beginning both in the same moment of time, Time.
and neither being before or after other. And thus we may conceive how the
soul is propagated of the soul, after a spiritual manner; as the flame of
one Lamp lights another (by promotion or multiplication) being blown by the
power of God, Simile.
and sed with the oil of the animal spirits. And that this may not seem
strange, Conclusions concerning the souls original.
before I come to the proof of it, I desire that these few Conclusions might
be considered.

1. Of the union of the body and soul.
First, that there is no such diametrall opposition between the soul and the
body, but that they may be naturally coupled together. Indeed the soul is far
from such a gross and visible substance as the body is compounded of; yet is
it not without some spiritual kind of substance, and that not altogether
simple. Neither do I think the creatures of God to differ so much in kind as
in degree. Besides, it is manifest that the soul is of the lowest degree of
spirits, and not only capable of, but coveting union with corporal natures,
and so according to the course of nature, may as well be propagated with them
as united with them. Secondly, 2. Of the union of the soul with God.
as any nature is more excellent; so it has a: nearer union with that first
being whereon it depends, and is more immediately moved by it? Now because all
natures do subsist, and are sustained more or less immediately by that first
being, according as their natures are nearer unto it, or farther removed from
it; answerable whereunto the work thereof is more or less immediate in them.
Hence it follows that the soul being more excellent, and confequently nearer
to God than any corporal creature can be: as he works more immediately in
them, than in others after they are made; so by like reason it follows, that
he does so in their first propagation.

3. The efficient cause in generation.
Thirdly, there is nothing generated in the world, but it has some external
efficient cause. Now this in corporal generations all grant to be the heavens,
which being of a more excellent nature, send down their influences to
inferior creatures, by virtue of which (next unto God) they continue their
kinds. But the soul, being a spirit, is above all corporal creatures, and
being made by Gods own immediate hand only at first it can have no other
external efficient but the same immediate power still. So that whereas it is
commonly said, Sol and homo generant hominem, it may more truly be said, Deuteronomy
and homo generant ani^nam. Neither is it absurd that man should have two
efficients; it is rather an honor that God and nature should concur,
together in his generation.

4. The true cause of mortality.
Fourthly, Mortality proceeds not so much from generation as divine malediction.
For had not ^an sinned, it is confessed that ^he body should have been
immortal as well as the soul. Al^hough therefore the soul were compounded
and generated after a corporal manner, without any immediate act of GODS power
(none of which are true) yet if would not presently follow, that it must needs
be mortal.

5. The cause of immortality.
Lastly, Whatsoever has the being immediately from God, cannot be annihilated
but by the same immediate power: so that it is the act of his immediate power,
that is the proper cause of immortality: and hence it appears that though
the body which is produced by the power of nature, only may dye and perish,
yet the soul whose production is not without an immediate act of the Deity,
can never dye, but by the same power omnipotent by which it lived.

How man is sinful, and the soul immortal.
Thus then it appears that though the soul be propagated in the manner
aforesaid, yet it is nevertheless immortal, since it is neither made of any
corporal matter, nor produced only by the power of nature; and God is never
the more faulty, though we be sinful, because being wholly in Adam, according
to the just law of nature, and so sinning potentially in him, he with us, and
we with him being then actually one; the whole nature of mankind is thereby so
corrupted, and this pure ordinance of God in producing souls so defiled, that
corruption passes in the very conception, and we are stained with original
sin, and so are liable to Gods eternal wrath, Psalm. 51.5 Ephesians. 2.3. Romans
11.16. Mat. 7.18. Gal. 6.7.8.
so soon as we begin to be. It being a just and necessary law in nature, that
as the root is, such are the branches: and look what the tree is, such must
the fruit be.

CHAP. VI. Scriptures to prove the souls immediate creation, answered.
The method and reason of it.
HAving thus declared the manner of the souls creation, or rather procreation;
for the better satisfying of the sober minded, and silencing such as shall be
wilfully contentious, it behooveth me in the next place more fully to explain
and prove the same. Wherefore after this general entrance having presumed to
determine this so intricate a question, that we may have the freer passage, my
next endeavor shall be to clear the same by removing out of the way such
obstacles and objections as may seem to oppose it. And the rather because they
are such, as whereby I shall best explain my self, and show that it may be
so, and so afterward prove the more clearly that it is so: and thereby also
take away that prejudice wherewith men's minds are forestalled, before I proceed
to the proof of it.

Objections marshalled.
Here therefore I must first encounter with a whole army of Arguments, that
seem to be set in battle array against me; and then pitch a new field of
reasons to maintain what I have spoken. The arguments that come marching
against me seem to be ranged in two several battalions: the former mainly
intending to fight for the immediate creation of the soul, the latter
altogether against the propagation of the soul; Those that most establish the
souls immediate creation, are of two sorts: partly, Testimonies of Scripture,
and partly, reasons drawn from them. Being thus greatly beset with enemies, I
have notwithstanding great hope of victory; not only because I have before
well abated their courage, and broken their force, 1 ^. hor^^ (...)
by setting them in the first encounter to fight one against another: but also
because by the advantage of the place, the forces of both fall besides me; for
neither do I hold that it is not at all from God, nor altogether from man.

Testimonies of Scripture.
And first to answer those testimonies of Scripture, which are brought to prove
the immediate creation of the soul; that general answer of that divine Father
Saint Augustine, may serve for all, i. e. that the divine testimonies only
teach that God is the giver and former of our souls; but they do not declare
how or by what means, God sends them into us. So that by his judgment they
strain the Scripture too far, who endeavor to prove this immediate manner
of the souls creation from them, and indeed if we proceed to a particular
examination of them, we shall find that amongst all, Exodus 21.22.23.24.
there is not scarce one that does purposely speak, either of the original of
the soul, or the generation of man. As for example (to take them up in order)
the first is drawn by consequence from a Law which God made concerning the
hurting of a woman with child: for which if it were so that her fruit did
depart from her before it was informed with a soul (as they would have it)
then he should have some light punishment only; but if it were informed with a
soul, and thereby perish; then he that did it should dye the death. And why
(say they) should so small a punishment be inflicted for the one, but because
it was void of a reasonable soul before; and so great a punishment for the
other, but because the soul was present, and so a man being slain, the slayer
must give life for life.

But first of all, Answer.
this is to corrupt the Text, for the words truly translated be these: If men
strive and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet
no mischief follow, or (as some read it) death follow not, Geneva Bible.
(for so it is in the Original) he shall he surely punished, according as the
woman's husband will lay upon him, etc. and if any mischief or death follows
then thou shall give life for life, etc. This being the true Text in the
Original, from which we ought not to swerve, it makes nothing to their
purpose: Indeed the Septuagint seems to read it thus; Et non fuit
efformatum, (...).
that is, and it has not been informed, or enlived with a living soul. And
thus that the fruit may depart without a soul, they make the text depart from
the true sense.

Secondly, if this should be granted, this informing must be understood of
quickening, else no judgment could be given, seeing none can know when the
soul is infused: and if that should be the meaning, seeing they say the
rational soul comes after vegetation and sense, it must be needs that the
child can move before it has a rational soul, and so it shall still be
uncertain when a man shall deserve death by such a mischance, unless we could
set down the just time when God did infuse the soul, or feel when it is
infused. But touching the quickening, there is more reason a man should dye for
it after then before, though the soul be the same from the beginning, both
because it is not so certain before what it is, or whether it be any thing or
no: and also before it be come to that perfection, any light matter might
occasion a mischance, for which there were no reason a man should loose his
life.

Lastly, 3.
this is to be understood of the mother, as well as of the child. It her fruit
depart from her, and yet death follow not, neither to her self, nor to it, a
light punishment may serve, but if either dye, he must render life for life.
But it is manifest then, there must be life, else there could be no death: and
life there cannot be in a reasonable creature without a reasonable soul; this
therefore makes nothing at all for them, 1
but yet something against them.

The next is taken from the prayer of Moses; Let the Lord, 2. Number. 27.16.
the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation, which
may go in and out before them: and when God was about to take away Moses, he
like a faithful Steward, having a care that the people might be well governed
after his departure, and knowing how weak man's judgment is, and how apt to
err in choosing of Officers, entreats God by that Epethite, that he would
choose for them. As if he should say, thou, oh father, from whom comes every
good gift; thou that give spirit and wisdom to all men; thou that searchest
the heart and tryest the reins; do thou set a man over the congregation, that
may be fit to go in and out before thy people, etc. And that this is the
sense, plainly appears by Gods answer: 1. Verse. 18.
Take ice Joshua, a man in whom is the spirit, etc. 2.
Besides if it were meant simply of the soul (for which there is no show of
reason) yet will it not follow, that because he is the God of them, therefore
he daily creates them of nothing.

Next follows that of the Psalmist; 3. Psalm. 33.15.
He fashioneth their hearts (or souls) alik; He considers all their works:
Pro. 22.1.2.
which is in effect this: The hearts of all men (even of Kings) are in the
hands of the Lord, and he turns them whethersoever he will: he orders both
the thoughts and actions of men, according to his own good pleasure, as is
plain from the words both before and after, and so is nothing to the purpose:
and if it should be meant of the original of the soul, whereof there was no
occasion to speak in this place, yet the question still remains, whether God
forms them mediatly or immediately, by creation or propagation.

But that which is esteemed of more weight, is that of Solomon, 4. Eccl. 12.7.
where resolving the parts of man at his death into the first principles, he
says, Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall
return to God that gave it. But though this may prove the immortality of the
soul, 1.
yet the immediate creation cannot be proved by it, but rather the contrary. 2.
For it is manifest that he has relation to man's first creation, and that
necessarily in the one, else it should not be true For every man's body is not
now made of the dust, 3.
but only Adams, from whom we came, and therefore if we will make a true
Antithesis, it will follow, that neither is every man's soul created of
nothing, but only Adams, from whom all others come. So that this is rather
Salomons meaning, as the body returns to dust, whereof it was first made, so
the soul returns to God from whom it first came: but that was immediately
from Adam, and so therefore is this.

The next proof is taken from the words of God by the Prophet Isay; 5. Isai.
57.16
I will not ever contend with man, for the spirit will fail before me, and the
souls which I have made: which some do thus expound: If I should straightly
mark what is done amiss, and severely punish your sins, then not only the
bodies which ye have received from your parents, but even the souls which I
have immediately created and infused into your bodies, would also perish: but
who sees not that there is more in the exposition than in the Text. If indeed
this were a truth manifest in the Scripture, it might happily be so understood;
but this being the thing we question, ought first to be proved, which cannot be
from this place; for the word translated soul, signifies breath, (...)
and sometimes any creature that has breath, and so the meaning is, those whom
he made to live and breath, would fail and dye; which the soul cannot do,
and therefore it cannot he meant of that. Neither would it follow, that because
he made them, therefore he made them immediately of nothing, and so the
question remains still unanswered.

Again, 6. Ezekiel 18.4
God says by the Prophet Ezekiel; Behold all souls are mine, etc. But is
little to the purpose, for here by soul is meant the whole person; for so it
follows in the next words; The soul that sins shall dye. What shall the
soul only be punished, and not the whole person rather? Besides, if every
soul be created of nothing, because it is Gods: then so should the body be,
for that also is his.

There is yet another place alleged out of the old Testament, 7. Zach. 12.1
to prove this, which as it seems to me is clearly against it, namely, that of
the Prophet Zachary, where it is said; Thus says the Lord, which stretches
forth the heavens, and lays the foundations of the earth, and forms the
spirit of man within him; if it be formed by the Lord, then not by man, say
some. But that follows not, for it may be by both. And therefore Augustine well
answers, it is not denied, but; God forms every man's soul, but the
question is whereof, whether of the substance of the parents souls, or of
nothing? But it is objected, that the scope of the place is to comfort the
Church by setting forth the omnipotent power of God. Be it so, if then we admit
an immediate act of Gods power herein (which I grant) the scope of the place
is answered, and yet the soul not immediately created. Again, it is manifest
the two former sentences have relation to the first creation; for God does not
now either stretch forth the heavens, or lay the foundation of the earth; and
therefore why should not the latter also, seeing it is apparent he created the
first soul immediately of nothing; but we do not read that he created ever
any other so since Lastly, it is to be noted, that the text says not the Lord
creates, but the Lord forms the spirit of man, etc. and where did ever
forming signify creating of nothing, de hoc postea.

To this purpose, 8. Ioh. 5.15.
(though to small purpose) some do also produce, that saying of our Savior,
My Father works hitherto, and I work: as if by this working he meant the
daily creating of souls: but his meaning was, not in the creation of new
things, but in the preservation of the old: and not so much in the preservatio^
of nature, as in the propagation of grace. For indeed it is not the government
of the world, but the regiment of the Church, that our Savior speaks of in
that place: not ordinary operations in the course of nature, but miraculous
works in the promulgation of the Gospel, as the words both before and after
do manifest And though it be true, that God and Christ too (being essentially
one) do cause all these things that are done naturally (for he is the Author
of Nature) yet he is not properly said to work that which nature works,
because he is therefore said to rest, because he has committed these things
unto nature.

Some also would seem to wring it out of the words of the Poet Aratus, 9. Acts
17.28.
cited by St. Paul; We are the offspring of God. For such weak proofs as
these, must serve where better is wanting, which poverty does indeed more
weaken and discredit the case, than any way confirm the same. For his meaning
is only, that we are of a divine nature, by reason of that spiritual and
immortal soul that is in us, but how woe come by it, whether by creation or
propagation, neither did Paul here purpose to speak, nor the Poet ever dispute.

But most of all, 10. Heb. 12 9
and most worthily of all, is that of the Apostle to the Hebrews urged; and
indeed, almost all the rest have no inference at all to the purpose, and this
no necessity, nor (as we shall see) no just probability: the wards are these;
If we ^ad Fathers four bodies that corrected us, and we gave them reverence;
shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and
live. Whence they collect that earthly parents propagate the body only, and
God creates the soul of every man immediately.

But for Answer, Answer.
first of all Beza, whose judgment is ( i. e. is to be) reverenced, renders
the sense of this place thus; If all men yield this right to natural parents,
to whom next to God we owe this life, that they may rightfully correct their
children; shall we not be much more subject to our heavenly. Father, who is the
Author of our spiritual and everlasting life? And indeed what else can be the
meaning? For if in the next place we consider the scope, it is to persuade to
the patient suffering of afflictions, and not to teach the original of the
soul Again, if we examine the words, we shall find, that the word (...),
flesh (for so it should be translated and not bodies) cannot be meant of the
body without the soul; for parents do not correct a carcass. Secondly, the
word, (...), of spirits, is not to be understood of a soul without a body, for
God is the father of men's bodies too, and not of the soul alone; and lastly,
the word, (...), chasticers, (as the parents are called) signifies such a
chastisement, as when instruction is joined with correction; but there can be
no such correction of the body without a soul, a castigation being of an
understanding man, and not of a body only; and as the word, so the Antithesis
makes it apparent that the Apostle in this place makes mention of a twofold
castigation, the one carnal, the other spiritual: so that not soul and body?
but spiritual and carnal castigation is here opposed. But be it that God is
here in a peculiar right called the Father of souls, it must not be in a sense
of our own devising, whereof there is no example nor warrant in the Scripture,
but as they teach us: which is that he created man's soul after a peculiar
manner; not of former matter, as the body, and all other creatures, but
immediately of nothing, when he breathed into him the breath of life. Lastly, I
grant that God has a more peculiar work in the production of every man's
soul, than in any other thing throughout the whole order of nature, and yet
according to the course of nature too. And this is the utmost that can be urged
from this or any of the former places; (these being the most and best that ever
I could find brought for the immediate creation of the soul) none of which
do infringe but rather confirm this mediate manner which I have propounded.

CHAP. VII. Reasons from the Scripture for the souls immediate Creation,
answered.
From the Creation of Adams soul.
THe reasons drawn from the Scripture to prove the immediate creation of the
soul, are these; first, because Adams soul was created of nothing, and in the
creation of his, God has declared the manner of the creating of ours; since it
is unlike the original of his soul and ours should be unlike, when as we are
both of one kind. And seeing our Savior Christ speaking of Manage, calls
men back to the first institution, saying, it was not so from the beginning;
there is the same reason why we should learn the original of our souls also
from the beginning. But notwithstanding this, there is no more necessity, nor
indeed probability that our souls should be created of nothing, because his
was: then that our bodies should be still made of the slime of the earth,
because his was. For every one knows there is one consideration in the first
creation or things, and another in the producing of them afterward, according
to their kinds by ordinary generation. And if this difference should alter the
kind, then it should do so in all other living creatures as well; for though
in part they were made of that first matter, yet were they in part also created
by the immediate power of God; as well as Adam. But seeing it cannot vary the
kind in them, it cannot by the course of nature do so in us neither. Nay, it
seems in the text there is more reason, it should be thus for man rather than
for any other creature. For it is said, God breathed into his nostrils the
breath of lives: Genesis 2.7.
the plurality of which word may in reason be better expounded of the many
lives that were potentially in him, than of the diverse faculties and operations
which yet are but one life: and proceed from one soul only. And the rather
because the words Spiraculum vitarum* might well be rendered the Spirit of
Souls. As who should say that spiritual nature which was the fountain of all
those souls which have been produced ever since; and (which is to be noted)
this is never affirmed of any creature in Scripture but such as being made male
and female, had power given them to propagate more of the same kind; Genesis 7
15. and 6.17.
so that it may seem to be principally spoken for this cause, and therefore to
be belonging to man above all the rest, and chiefly in respect of the soul,
which being made after such an immediate manner in man, is therefore of a far
different and more excellent nature than the souls of bruites, but yet
propagated as well as they.

From the creation of Eves soul.
A second reason is drawn forcibly from the creation of Eve, for because Moses
expresses the difference that was between the creation of her body and his;
the one being made of the dust, the other of a rib: but speaks not of aw
difference in the creation of their souls: therefore (say some) it is very
probable that both were created alike of nothing; otherwise Moses would never
have omitted it, especially considering it was his principal intent to declare
the original of all things.

But this also is easily answered. Answer.
For, first, if it be a good argument that Moses would not have omitted it, if
it had been otherwise created than Adams was; then it is much more forcible to
prove that she had no soul at all. For if that which was taken out of Adam
made the body only, then it is confessed he speaks nothing of the creation of
her soul, but leaves us to guess that it might be as Adams was; or rather
that she had none at all, otherwise Moses would never have omitted it.
Secondly, it is the thing in question, whether Moses expresses the different
creation of their bodies only, and not of their whole persons rather,
according to the express words in the text. Thirdly, if it should be granted
that her soul was immediately created of nothing, it were nothing to the
purpose: for this is still in the frist creation of mankind, and therefore no
fit rule to measure the manner of man's propagation afterward. Lastly, it is at
least to prove one unknown thing by another, there being no less doubt of the
manner of the creation of her soul than of ours. But for my part seeing in
things doubtful that which has most reason, is to be received as most
reasonable: I should rather think her whole person both soul and body, to
have been made of Adams substance than otherwise, and that for these reasons.

1. Because Moses speaks nothing of any more immediate creation of Souls,
but of the first; He says not, that God breathed into her nostrils the breath
of lives as into Adams: there is not the least word or title that can seem to
signify any such matter, and what reason can be given that he who omitteth not
the circumstance of the manner of closing up Adams side again, should overslip
that miraculous work of God in creating another new soul, if he had done so.
Neither is it sufficient to say, it was in vain to repeat it, for it is no
where affirmed; and if it were not needful, why should it still be doubtful,
and men left only to guess at it.

Secondly, Not only does Moses not speak of any new created soul infused into
her, but if only her body was made of that which was taken from Adam, (as is
said) then for ought Moses speaks of it, it may be questioned whither she had
any soul or no; which must needs be very absurd especially considering it wa^
his chief purpose to declare unto us the true beginning of every thing at the
first. I do not impute such an oversight to the holy penman of God. Thirdly,
so far is Moses from teaching that, that he plainly affirms the contrary;
saying, that of that rib, he made a woman; not a body, speaking of her whole
person, and not of a part only; unless a woman may be a woman without a
soul, as some silly ones have foolishly imagined.

Fourthly, Genesis 2.22. Zan. de operibus par. 3. li. 1. c. 1 Genesis 2.23.
those that hold the contrary opinion, yet grant that God did not only take
out the bare bone only out of Adams side, but some flesh together with it;
which made Adam to say, this is not only bone of my bone, but flesh of my
flesh. And it seems an unlikely thing, that being done instantly by the
almighty power of GOD, he should take out a dry and dead bone only; and not
the life, spirit, and soul, that was in it, (after the manner of the souls
being in such a substance) together with it Now it he took it thus whole
together as it was, (the soul not being shut out of any part of the body;) how
easy is it to conceive, how God might miraculously, in the first creation,
separate the whole matter of her person from Adam only, and so of that bone as
of a living body, produce a new creature in a short time; which now in longer
time usc to be separated from both sexes, and so perfected by degrees in
natural generation: yea, why may not this original affinity between the two
sexes, give strength to the course of nature in producing more, by uniting them
again in generation.

Fifthly, This is the more probable, because herein we have a clear type of
Christ's incarnation, whose whole humanity, (as we shall herafter see) was also
miraculously made of the substance of the virgin only, as Eves only of Adam;
a man of a woman only, as a woman of a man only: both being insensible of it:
and (as is probable) both asleep^ when it was done.

Lastly, when she was brought to Adam, he confessed that she was bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, that is, of the same humane nature that he
himself was both for soul and body, and also taken out or him. Neither needed
he to say, soul or my soul; for flesh is usually put for the whole person; as
where (even in the same book) it is said, All flesh had corrupted their ways:
Genesis 6.12.
which notwithstanding is chiefly in regard of the soul. And least any should
doubt of it, he presently adds. She shall he callea woman, because she was
taken out of man: where he plainly affirms, that her whole person was taken
out of man, and for that cause was named woman, which cannot possibly be
understood of the body only. I will therefore hereunto subjoyne the forgoing
words of our Savior; Let no man separate what God has joined together, Mat.
19.6.
and conclude that her whole person, as well soul as body was taken out of
man. So that in this also, that of the Apostle is true, God has made all of
one blood, even Adams. Act. 17.26.
Wherefore from this reason I also conclude the contrary, that seeing in all
probabilities Adams soul was of such a nature, as thereon could be made
another, and ours are of the same nature that his was: it is not absurd? but
very likely, that others may be made of ours also.

The third and last reason of any weight is, 3.
that Christ's soul was created of nothing, and he is like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted ( ergo, etc.) But first if it be necessary, 1.
From the creation of Christ's soul.
that we should be like unto him in all things except sin, then it would
follow that we should be conceived by the Holy Ghost, as he was, for that was
without sin; especially, if he might have been conceived without sin, without
that work, as by this doctrine it seems he might, as afterward we shall see.
2.
Secondly, it is not yet proved that Christ's soul was immediately created of
nothing; yea, it may be denied by the same reason, for then we should not be
alike to him in all things except sin. If it be said that if Christ's soul had
been traduced by ordinary generation, it must needs have been sinful, I
grant it; and therefore, I say, it was that his conception was extraordinary
and supernatural; for it being impossible in nature for a Virgin to conceive
without man, therefore this was brought to pass by the miraculous power of the
Holy Ghost, who separated a part of the Virgin for that purpose, and supplied
what was wanting in nature by supernatural power, which is signified in that
it is said, She was overshadowed by the holy Ghost. But although he was not
conceived after the manner that other men are, that so he might be without
sin: yet it follows not from hence, but his whole humanity, both soul and
body might be made of the same matter that other men's are, so as he be not
corrupted with sin. Which how it may be, we shall hear in the proper place,
where this also shall be brought as an Argument to prove the contrary: so weak
are objections against the truth.

Lastly, Though it should be granted that Christ's soul was immediately created
by God, as the first Adams was; because it could not be propagated after the
manner of mankind without sin, yet it would not follow, that all ours are
therefore so, as they collect. Nay, the contrary plainly appears; for, for
the same cause that his must be created immediately to be without sin, ours
must be mediately that they may be sinful; and tor the same cause he cannot be
propagated without sin, we cannot be sinful unless propagated.

And thus much for the Scripture, and reasons drawn from them, to prove the
immediate creation of souls. Whereby all men may see upon what weak grounds,
this opinion is fatherred upon the Scriptures. And now I am to encounter with
the other troop of Arguments taken from the impossibility of the souls
propagation.

CHAP. VIII. Whether propagation can stand with the spiritual nature of the
Soul.
Objection ordered.
From the probability of the Creation, proceed we now unto the impossibility
of the propagation of the soul. And indeed the reasons oppugning the souls
propagation are very many and forcible; and such as do sufficiently prove that
man cannot of himself alone (without some more special work of God) propagate
his like as beasts do theirs. 1. From the nature of the soul.
The reasons (that we may not be confounded with the number of them) are
either such as do more specially respect the nature of the soul, not without
some respect to propagation: or else such as do more specially respect the
nature of propagatio^, not without some respect to the soul. But before I come
to the particulars, the general answer to all may be this.

2. From the nature of propagation.
That all natural reasons are taken from corporal generations, and so do
only prove that souls cannot be propagated as bodies are, which is not
denied. For neither does the body propagate the soul, neither yet is it
propagated after a bodily manner: but the whole man generates the whole man
after a manner convenient to either nature.

1. The soul supernatural.
The first objection is that the soul is supernatural, and nature cannot
produce any thing above nature. But first it cannot be properly said that the
soul is supernatural. It is indeed above elementary natures, and therefore I
also deny, that it can be propagated of, or by the body alone. Again, I say
not that the whole man can beget his like, according to that common manner
whereby other creatures are generated: but by the supernatural power of GOD
assisting him. And so though it were supernatural, yet it is not against
nature that it should be propagated, seeing as it is supernatural, so it is
supernaturally propagated.

2. Spirits cannot propagate.
Secondly, It is objected that the soul is a simple spirit, like unto Angels:
and therefore as one Angel cannot beget another, so neither can souls.

First, I answer, 1.
that we might with as good reason, reason thus; souls are like unto Angels,
and Angels cannot be united with bodies, therefore souls cannot.

2. Homo generat nec materiam nec formam, sed totu^ compositum.
Secondly, I do not say that one soul does beget another, but one man another.
For generation is not of matter, or form only, but of the whole compound,
consisting of matter and form.

Thirdly, though souls are of a simple spiritual substance, as are Angels in
respect of elementary; yet even Angels themselves and much more men's souls,
are not without a spiritual kind of composition. For to be simply simple, is
proper only to the nature of God.

Fourthly, Men's souls are of a far more inferior nature, and so are more
compounded than the nature of Angels: and very fit it was that they should be
so, that they might be the more suitable to corporal natures, with whom it
pleased the Creator to unite them.

Lastly, We see it is the will of God, that souls should be produced with
bodies, one after another in a natural order to the worlds end, and therefore
has conferred his efficient power for the effecting thereof from the
beginning; none of all which can be affirmed of Angels. And now let reason or
any reasonable man judge, whether it will follow, that because one Angel
neither does nor can beget another, therefore man cannot beget man; yea, God
cannot by man produce one soul out of another, though after a metaphysicall
manner, as for the reasons aforesaid we cannot thoroughly conceive.

3. The soul is immateriall.
Of the same kind is that objection, that the soul is immateriall, and the
reason stands thus: Whatsoever is made, must be either of nothing, or of some
matter pre-existing: now the soul is without matter, and therefore cannot be
propagated, but must needs be immediately created of nothing. But I deny the
soul is altogether immateriall; for although it has no elementary matter, yet
it has spiritual matter: For all created spirits, being compounded of act and
potency, have a kind of similitude with corporal natures, both in regard of
matter and form; yea, even Angels themselves. But by a kind of transcendency,
their matter is as our form, and their form as the form of our form: which
because we want fitter words, may indifferently be called spiritual matter and
form, which do best of all agree with the inferior nature of the soul: And
if it be said, The spiritual matter of the soul.
it can have no such spiritual all matter. because then it must be of such a
nature as may receive contrary forms, as we see in the generation of all other
creatures, by reason whereof the soul shall be made corruptible I answer,
first, that though it be so in elementary generations, yet it follows not in
spiritual compositions, seeing their matter is of an higher kind. Secondly,
Though nature cannot produce one soul put of another, but by a corruptible
course, yet it follows not but the God of nature may. Thirdly, as the soul
to speak properly, consists rather of power than any parts: so the propagation
is rather by promotion then than any decision. Fourthly as the soul has its
essence more in the power and faculty, than in the matter of it: so more is to
be ascribed to the efficient, than to the material cause, more to God than to
man, and yet that according to the course of nature too. Lastly, as man is the
perfection of the creatures, so his is the perfection of generation. It is no
strange thing therefore, but very fitting that there should be somewhat in it
transcending the common course, as namely, that one immortal nature should be
derived from another, by such a kind of generation as is very near a creation,
by virtue of that first ordination, and continual assistance of the father of
spirits, on whom the soul has so near a dependence.

4. The soul corruptible.
Again, it is objected that the soul is incorruptible. and it is a rule in
nature, Generatio unius est corruption alterius; the generation of one is the
corruption of another. Now if in every generation there must be a corruption,
seeing the soul cannot be corrupted, it cannot be generated neither. But,
first, if this corruption should be granted in the generation of the soul, it
is only in termino a quo, which cannot hinder the immortality of the soul
that is propagated, neither does it belong to the soul that does propagate,
for the generaration is of the soul generated, not of the soul generating.
Again, what manner of corruption is that which is here meant? A perishing
indeed, but such an one is rather a perfecting. For in generation the seed is
not corrupted by putrefaction, but by perfection; that is, it cease to be
that which before it was, and is made that which it was not; because the
potentiall being is turned into actual being; seed into a creature: so that
the thing is the same that it was before, though not after the same manner that
before it was: and thus I grant there is a corruption in the souls
generation, namely, it cease to be in power only when it is in act: and why
then there is not something in man that is not the soul, but rather the
seminary of the soul, as the seed is of the body, we shall hear afterward.

5. It can subsist by it self.
Another argument is taken from the power that the soul has to subsist by it
self without the body after this manner: if the soul cannot be produced
without the body, then can it not live without the body: and if the bodies
generation be the cause of producing it, the bodies corruption must also cause
the death of it; but the soul can live without the body, and cannot be
corrupted by it; and therefore is not generated neither with nor by the body.
These things thus hudled up together, are partly true and partly false: for,
first, there is not, nor ever was there a soul produced without a body: that
opinion of Origin was justly hissed out long ago: So that though no soul is
produced by the body, yet no soul is produced without it. Secondly, it is not
to be thought that any soul is produced by the body otherwise then by an
assisting cause, or causa sine qua non; whether we consider the body
generating or generated: but this, I say, that the soul is not brought forth
without the seed of the parents, and yet not by that as it is corporal only,
but as there is soule-seede, or rather spiritual power in it: And thus the
soul shall be no less able to subsist by it self, although it be not
propagated without the body, then a child shall not be able to live after the
death of his parents, by whom it was brought forth into the world; and as it is
not generated, so neither can it be corrupted by the body. Lastly, it cannot be
said properly that the soul does subsist by it self alone, so long as it is
united to the body, for according to the course of nature it cannot do so; but
after the death of the body, for as much as it is not made of mortal seed nor
produced merely by the power of nature, and therefore cannot die: it cannot
do otherwise but must but must of necessity subsist by it self alone without
the body. 6. It cannot be hurt by the body.
Of the same kind is that objection, that as the body cannot corrupt or hurt
the soul, so much less can the soul be propagated by the body. For if it be
absurd to say the soul is infected with sin by the body, (because that which
is corporeal cannot work upon that which is incorporeall) much more absurd is
it that the soul should be generated by the body. But this also falls beside
without hurting, for though the soul cannot be generated of or by the body
(which I also confidently affirm) yet this is no impediment why it cannot be
produced out of the soul by the efficient power of God, to which the Body also
may be an isntrumental cause in this as well as it is in all other ordinary
actions of the soul.

7. It works in-organically.
Lastly, it is objected that seeing the proper actions of the soul (as to
understand and will) are performed without any help of the body: so also is the
original being of it; for such as the operation of any thing is, such is the
essence, and contrarily, as Philosophy teaches. But first it may be doubted
whether any action of the soul be performed without any help at all from the
body so long as the union lasts. Secondly, for as much as the soul
ordinarily does neither understand nor will, without the assistance of the
animal spirits, it follows (according to the former rule) that by the course
of nature neither is the original without some operation of the body. And
whereas it is said, the mind it self must be free from all matters, that it
may be the better able to discern the same; as the eye judges of colors:
this may proceed not so much from the vacuity of matter, as the equal respect
it has to all matter. For being the perfection of this mundane frame, it has
the Idea of all natures in it, as the eye does represent all colors. But as
the agent is more noble than the patient, though proportioned to it, so is the
soul above all matter, and yet agreeing with it. Answerable whereunto the
original (according to the former rule) must needs be more transcendent than
the common course of generation. Lastly, all those arguments are more forcible
to prove that the soul cannot be united with the body: and being manifestly
false in that, they have small probability of truth in this.

CHAPTER IX. Whether the loss of seed be the loss of souls.
Objection from propagation it self.
BUt the most forcible arguments (and which are indeed accounted impossible to
be overcome) are those which are taken from the course of nature in propagation
it self, whether we consider the matter or manner of it; the matter conceived,
or the manner of conception. As first, because many souls must be lost,
because much seed is. Secondly, because the soul must come from two souls.
Thirdly, the parents must loose part of their souls. Lastly, touching the
manner of conception, if may well be questioned how this doctrine can stand
with the time of conception; In one and the same womb.
the imperfect beginning and the variety of conceptions in the same womb. All
which seem to take away all power from man, for having any part in the
propagation of the soul: and these being the chief difficulties, if they may
be well cleared, I doubt not but this doctrine will easily be received.

1. Obj. About the loss of souls.
First therefore to begin with the first, which concerns the loss of seed,
which although it may seem difficult at the first, yet (I trust) may receive a
reasonable answer; for the adversaries of this doctrine do thus reason against
it: If the soul be propagated by the seed, what shall become of so much seed
as is lost? either in sleep, or by such dishonest means, Genesis 38.9.
as Er and O^an practiced, or which being received into the womb, never
comes to conception? What (say they) shall so many souls be lost? or shall
they be choked in the womb? or shall they remain alone without bodies,
seeing it is certain, they are not to be accounted amongst the number of men?
In a word, because it cannot be denied but much seed passes from man which
never comes to perfection, no not to conception; hence they conclude, that if
the soul passes in the seed, then many souls perish, and so the soul shall
not be immortal.

How the soul is in the seed, and yet not lost with it.
But these conceive not rightly, yea, too basely and bruitishly of the souls
generation; imagining that which no man sound in his wits will go about to
maintain. For by that which has been said, it appears that the soul never
passes in the seed, but at the instant of conception, and from thenceforth a
new soul remains in the conceived fruit. Neither can it be properly said
that it passes then, for as the soul is in the body, and yet not contained of
it, so it is always in the seed, though not comprehended by it, and
whenever the seed proves not effectual, the soul remains as it was, what
ever becomes of the seed; for the soul is never procreated but in conception,
when both seeds meet in a due proportion, and become one, and when the
efficient power of God concurring with all other natural causes, do out of
the substance of the generating souls, produce another together with a body
capable of that divine form.

Some resemblance whereof we may see in the lighting of a Lamp or Candle;
Simile.
for as fire is the most spiritual of all corporal substances, so by it we
may have the clearest resemblance in this case; the soul of man may well be
compared to a spiritual flame, united to the body by the spirits, as the flame
of the Lamp by the oil; now as in the lighting of a Lamp, every touch of fire
does not kindle it, but as after blowing and fit applying of fire thereunto, it
sometimes flameth with a touch; so the soul is not kindled at every
conjunction of seeds, but only then when (as I said before) it is blown by
the efficient power of God, which meeting with all other natural causes, out
of the matter of these flames applied, this new heavenly flame (the soul) is
produced. And as in that elementary inflammation the Lamp is not turned into
the flame, but inflamed by another; so the corporal seed is not turned into
the soul, but informed with a soul by others. Which soul being a spiritual
flame, not nourished by any elementary matter as the other is, nor kindled
without that everlasting breath whence it first came: it can never after be
extinguished as the other may. And hence it comes to pass, not only that
souls perish not when any seed is lost, but also that in case man's seed be
mingled with other creatures (as if sometimes happens) such unkindly
conceptio^s are never informed with reasonable souls: not only for that there
is a want in the concurrence of all natural causes; but because God does not
confer his efficient power, but where and when he pleases. To conclude,
therefore it appears that souls are neither lost, nor choked in the womb;
nor yet constrained to live alone without bodies when the seed proves not
effectual, for then there is no soul produced; I will not say, but there may
be fire, but in that case (I dare say) there is no such flame kindled.

CHAPTER X. How one soul can proceed from two souls.
THe former objection being taken away, 2. Obj. That the soul must be mingled
of the parents soul.
we are to proceed to the second, which is that if the soul be traduced from
the parents, it must needs be as well from the mothers soul as the father, and
if from both, then either there must be two souls, or else two souls must be
mingled together, and so grow into one, both which are no less than
impossible, to which (although it seems unanswerable) these things which shall
be spoken, being thoroughly considered, I trust will give sufficient
satisfaction. For first, why might we not for the same cause say, that there
must be two bodies also, one from the father and another from the mother? and
if it be said that one partakes of both, how comes it to pass then, that it is
sometimes like the father only, and sometimes only like the mother; yea,
oftentimes a son like the mother and a daughter like the father. In all other
things most contrary to that part from whence the sex is received. And if it
must be confessed that the work of nature herein is above reason, what wonder
if it be so in the soul also; yea, why should it not be so in that, much
rather than in this? and if the former draw us only to an admiration, but not
to a negation of if, because the thing is apparent: why should not the latter
do so also, seeing in nature it is no less manifest then the former, both
being brought forth together as we see? To come a little nearer the matter,
One creature cannot be made of two souls.
I would first of all demand how it comes to pass, that among all living
creatures of two diverse seeds, that is to say, of the male and female is
notwithstanding generated but one creature of the one kind? Since as
Philosophers truly teach, the species of things cannot be mingled no more than
souls: Vide Scal. de subti. exer. 268.
and the essence of every thing is indivisible; and two forms cannot be made
one. Now seeing the seed of any creature conteines in it both matter and form
thereof: and is the same in potentia (as they speak) differing from the
creature it self only so much as power differs from act; that is, ability
to be or do, from being or being done; how therefore can it possibly be that
one creature can be produced from two seeds in univocall generations; seeing
also that vegetative nature have therefore but one seed. These reasons made
Aristotle deny that females had any seed at all, being only as the ground
wherein seed is sown. Now if this be true, the point is clear without any
farther opening; for then the soul proceeding from the soul of the father
only, there shall not need be two souls, nor one mingled of two. How the
soul is from both as both are one.
But this is denied, and therefore some further answer is to be sought out. For
though the sex proceed not from the sex, yet (they say) if this were true,
neither by the course of nature could ever be propagation by both. Be it so,
yet I say, that as two seeds produce but one creature, because the seeds of
male and female, though they be two in number are but one kind (else there must
be two bodies also) so it is concerning the soul more plainly, I say, The
seed of both but one seed.
that as the seed of either apart cannot properly be called seed-seed, because
neither of them alone conteines the matter and form of the creature, and is
not Animal in potentia; but at the instant of conception, when both seeds are
so mingled that therein is contained the power of producing the like, then
only it is rightly called seed; and before, only, because it may be thus;
for that is to be actually seed to have this potency in it: so as the seed is
properly but one in all sensitive creatures as well as in vegetative, in that
sense that theirs is: so in like manner, I say, that the spiritual seed of
the soul (if by way of resemblance I may so call it) is not in the several
seed of either sex (for there is no such material or local division) but
rather in both when but one. For in generation we may not conceive one act to
be made of two; but two in act do make one. The mystery of which union lies in
this, that the nature is one, and the sexes two, which again united in one
produce a third.

For by the spiritual seed of the parents souls, What the souls seed is,
and how generated.
I do not mean any separated matter, as the bodies is: but far otherwise:
namely, that potentiall virtue in the parents souls, which in conjunction
uniting their forces together out of their own matter do inform their seed
with their nature, that is, a soul apprehended and united by the spirits
therein. It being the ordinance of God that man's nature should be distinguished
into two sexes, that by the more forcible union of both, the whole kind might
be preserved: And because the soul is rather faculty than matter, The
production of souls.
the seed must needs be rather power than sperme. Now the reason why parents
do communicate a soul to their issue, Genesis 2.24.
is because in this conjunction two are made one flesh, not only carnally, but
the very souls do so cleave together, that if it were possible they would
lose their proper forms and become one, which though being tied by nature or
rather Gods separation (which yet is not far removed) they cannot effect; yet
by the fitness of other causes concurring, and the infinite power and wisdom
of God so ordaining and assisting, another soul and creature like the former
is produced. Things brecoing without seed.
The like whereof we may see in aequivocall generations, where when one thing
is changing into another, even in the very change, a third most commonly is
engendered. And so here it is to be thought that in the interchanging of souls
(if I may so say) even in a small moment of time, Why conception so called.
this is performed; as it were by conceit or fancy, and therefore is worthily
called conception, or conceiving. Whence is that of Athanasius, Atha. lib. de
var. qu. 16.
who says, even as fire is begotten by the strinking together of the stone and
the steel; so is the soul by the parents. By all which it plainly appears,
that although the soul be received both from the father and the mother, and
indifferently from both, yet it follows not thereupon that there must be two
souls, neither yet that two souls should thereby be mingled in one; no more
than the seeds of both which are not two seeds mingled or two forms made one
(which is impossible) but only one; and that no less simple, spiritual, and
immortal, than either of the former.

CHAP. XI. How the soul can be propagable, and yet indivisible.
BY that which has been said, 3. Obj. Parents souls divided.
there is a way opened also, for the clearing of that other difficulty,
concerning the indivisible nature of the soul, which they say cannot possibly
stand with the course of generation. For if the soul be propagated from the
patents, it must needs be, that either the whole soul of the father is
traduced, and so the father shall be left soule-lesse; or else some part and
portion of the soul, and so the soul shall be divisible: and the like may be
said of the mothers soul, 1. ^ow a ^art is the ^hole.
as well as the fathers. For the answering of this objection, it must be
considered that the substance and matter of the soul is not like these
corporal natures; and so though this would follow in those, yet not in that.
It is commonly said of Philosophers (to which Divines also consent) that the
soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part; wholly in the whole body,
and wholly in every part. So that the soul cannot be divided into parts; but
if we will needs consider of a part, that part is the whole and yet the whole
not divided, and therefore when one soul is propagated of another, it is all
one whether we say it be of the whole, or of a part: for even that part is the
whole, and yet (according to the received doctrine) the whole not divided, nor
any whit diminished.

2. No parts but powers.
Others deal somewhat more subtly herein, as that learned both Philosopher
and Divine Keckerman; who in his Physickes treating on this subject says, that
the soul is not united to the body by any physical or corporal touching, and
thereupon concludes thus: Et quia anima non unitur corpori per contactum ideo
etiam non concluditur extremitatibus corporis, Keck. Syn. l. 4. cap. 6.
sicut aqua concluditur extremitatibus vasis, and quia non concluditur
extremitatibus corporis ideo etiam non extenditur ad extensionem corporis, and
per consequens, frustra a quaeritur, an sit in toto corpore tota, an in
singulis part ibus tota: Because the soul is not united to the body by
touching, therefore also it is not included within the bounds of the body (as
water is in a vessel) and because it is not so included within the bounds of
the body, therefore also it is not stretched out to the utmost limits of the
body; and consequently it is a vain quaere, whether the whole soul be in the
whole body, or whole in every part. Now if this indeed be the truth (as indeed
it comes nearer to the pure nature of the soul) it is no whit less to the
present purpose; seeing it follows accordingly, that the soul is in the
seed, and yet not contained of it: and so the propagatio^ thereof is rather a
powerful operation, than any local division. For seeing all confess that the
essence of the soul, properly considered, consists not in parts, but in
powers; it must needs be confessed likewise that proportionably thereunto that
the propagation of the soul is not by decision, whereby one part is separated
from another; but by promotion, whereby the same power is effected in another,
which it has in it self; and this is the manner of propagation, which (as I
said) is co^venient to the nature of the soul. The rather is this to be
received as agreeable to nature and reason, because if it be well observed, we
shall find that the very nature and essence of souls consist chiefly in their
faculties: as corporal natures in their elementary composition: and God
himself in virtues: his nature, being, as well as being most known, in
goodness, justice, mercy, etc. which perfections as they are too high to be
essential to any created nature: so are they all that one essential virtue
which is in God, or rather which is God himself. Now seeing the souls nature
consists especially in the divine faculty of it, this doctrine may best be
cleared by considering the faculties thereof. Whereby it may appear, even as
when I give another my understanding, or make him know that which I know, my
knowledge is still the same, and nothing diminished: so when these
intellectual natures, I mean one soul produces another, the soul is still
the same and indivisible. I know to communicate the notion is one thing and the
faculty another: notwithstanding herein the similitude holds, that even as
the notion communicated to another, is nevertheless perfect in his mind that
imparts it: so even the faculty it self (which in respect of corporal natures
is as a real notion) when it is propagated to another, is nevertheless
perfect in him from whom it proceeds.

And that it is thus the property 4. Spiritual natures may be communicated,
cannot be diminished.
of spiritual natures to loose nothing themselves in communicating their
essence to others, may farther appear by the testimony of that learned divine
Zanchy; who in confuting the heretics objection against the divinity ot our
Savior Christ, reasoning after this manner, that if he receive the whole
essence of the Father, the Father shall be left destitute: and if but a part,
then it will follow that the essence of God is divisible, Zanch. de trin. Eloh.
par. 2. l. 3. cap. 7.
answers the same thus; that he receives the whole essence, and yet the Father
has it all still. For, says he, spiritual natures whilst they are
communicated, are neither wholly taken away, nor anything at all diminished.
His words be these; Res enim spirituales, dum communicantur; neque tolluntur
penitus, neque etiam imminuuntur. Neither can it be said, that this is proper
to God, seeing he affirms it of all spiritual natures indifferently; yea what
else can be meant by the indivisiblenesse of the soul, but that it is of such
a nature as cannot be diminished by taking ought from it? else how should it
differ from corporal natures, for even they cannot be diminished if naught be
taken from them? yet, I say, not that the soul can be parted at all, after the
manner of dividing corporal natures; but this, I say, as the essence and form
of every creature is indivisible, no less than the soul, and yet they can out
of themselves propagate their like, without making their form or essence
divisible, so may man produce his like without dividing his form or essence,
which is his soul. For seeing the form of a beast, as it is so, is as much
indivisible as man's soul, and experience proves that they notwithstanding
communicate their forms to their issue, why also may not parents give souls
to their offspring without dividing their own? especially considering man is
the most excellent creature, who must needs therefore excel in this faculty as
well as in others. Neither can it be said, The soul not full of souls.
that then his soul must be full of souls, no more then that other creatures
should therefore have in them many of their own kinds, because they beget many:
for as Scaliger well answers, Scal. exer. 6. sect. 10.
there is in that one sufficient power for the generating of many: and so much
for those objectio^s which are taken from the matter conceived, I proceed now
to those that concern the manner of conception.

CHAPTER XII. How the manner of conception can stand with the souls generation.
TOuching the manner of conception, Objectio^s.
three things especially are and may be objected:

1. Whether conception be in generation.
First, I say, it is a question amongst the learned, whether conception be at
the first union of seeds or no: for (as some Physitia^s write) there must be a
certain concoction and preparation of the seed before conception. First of
all I might answer, that the ordinance of God herein is so wonderful as
passes all men's understandings, so as none can say directly how it is, either
for the soul or for the body: it being one of those things which David
professes was too wonderful for him, Psalm. 139. verse. 6.
and therefore much more for us. And yet if we make no question of the
conception of the body, though we cannot conceive the manner how; why should we
be more doubtful and inquisitive about the soul, of which we know we are
less able to conceive?

2. That the soul begins with the creature.
Secondly, I answer, that though it should be granted, that the more gross and
corporal parts of the seed do (as indeed they do) require time before they
can be thoroughly mixed and knit together to make a perfect conception: yet in
reason it must needs be, that the more spiritual parts, and chiefly the soul
is conceived in the first instant; I mean a small moment of time, and that in
the beginning at the first meeting and union of the seeds of both sexes. And
thus it must needs be, not only because spiritual natures are more quick and
subtle, and so move in less time than corporal; and therefore may do that
in a moment, which the other cannot do but in a longer time; whence it is that
in eating and drinking we see the spirits are refreshed, and the man
strengthened immediately after he has eaten, before ever the meat can be
concocted; but also experience teaches, that in the breeding of all creatures,
the internal parts are perfect before the external, the more spiritual parts
of the body, before those that are more gross and corporal; and therefore it
follows by like reason that the spirits in man have their perfection before
the body, and the soul before the spirits: for there is no doubt but nature
observes the same order in the beginning that she does in the continuance of
her work, there being one and the same cause of both. Again, be it that there
is such a concoction in conception, (as in respect of the body questionless
there is) yet it cannot be denied, but the corporal parts are prepared and
perfected by the other, which must needs therefore be first, and in the first
instant; for that which begins must of necessity be in the beginning;
because all that is done afterward is by virtue of that power wherewith it was
informed at first. (...)
For that power becoms the first act of the conceived fruit, and is the very
soul of the creature, wherewith if the seed be not informed at the beginning,
all comes to nothing at the end.

And hence it is that if all causes do not fitly concur together for the
forming the seed with the soul at first, by whose working it may proceed to
perfection afterward, the whole work is frustrated.

The consideration whereof may teach us, what the reason in nature should be,
that there is more failing in the conception of man than of other creatures.
Namely, because the soul being of a more excellent nature in man, requires a
more fit proportion, and due temper of all means, before such a heavenly flame
can be kindled, and the seed informed and united therewith, then is necessary
for the production of any other creature whatsoever. Now this very beginning
only is properly conception, all that follows afterward being nothing but a
continued perfecting of this beginning by insensible degrees: which not nature
but reason, has distinguished into conception, forming, quickening, etc. to
every of which that time is allotted, wherein that work most appears, though
natures work be one and the same from the beginning.

2. Whether the soul be imperfect at first.
But here it will he objected, that if the soul be in the seed at the first
conception, it must needs be very weak and imperfect at the first, and so
growing and increasing with the body, it must also decrease and dye with it.

For answer whereunto, I would first of all demand of them who hold that it
comes by immediate creation, how the soul of an infant newly quickened in the
mothers womb, can be as perfect as when it is a perfect man? Surely there is
not so much difference (at least in tho souls appearance) between conception
and quickening, as is between quickening and manhood: when therefore they
answer the one, I may happily thereby also answer the other. But not to stay so
long, in the second place I answer, that all souls as well the souls of
beasts as of men, are essentially as perfect in the first instant of
conception, as ever afterward, yea, even the soul of a plant when it is in the
seed, for though not being of such a fiery nature as living creatures, and
wanting means to exercise its power, it may lie a while, yea, many years as
dead (as Mustardseed will do) yet the vegetative soul in the effence thereof,
Reasons proving the souls perfection in the first conceptio^.
is as perfect as the most perfect plant, as plainly appears so soon as the
means of growing is administered to it. 1.
Now if the souls of other creatures (which as they are souls do neither
increase nor decrease, no more than the soul of a man does, may be perfect
when they show no perfection) no nor action at all, why should we think man's
soul imperfect, because it does not manifest the perfections at all times
alike. 2.
And if this be a good argument against the propagation of the soul, because
it should then seem to be imperfect at the first, and so to grow up with the
body: why should not that be as good against the immortality of the soul,
that it seems also to dye and decay with the body? 3.
yea why should it not be much stronger, seeing it may better stand with the
nature of immortality to increase, and grow better, than to decrease and wax
worse? But to put all out of doubt, 4.
seeing all confess that the soul is (...), the prime act or first mover, and
essential form of the creature; it must needs be perfect at the first, and
always the same. For reason teaches that that which is first, and gives
perfection to all the rest, cannot have another before it to give perfection to
that; for so there should be a first before the first: and a soul of the
soul. And seeing the soul is the essential form, it must needs be
unchangeable also: for it is impossible the form should be altered, so long as
the creature continues the same, what creature soever it be. So that this never
change but at death, nor then neither in men: because it is begotten of
immortal seed, and not brought forth without the immediate hand of GOD. It
skilleth not therefore whether the soul can see, hear, or reason, when it is
in the seed: it suffices that it has that spiritual and divine nature,
which when the organs are perfected, is able to do it. Herein it is with the
soul as with the body; the child newly conceived has not the fashion of an
humane body; yet is there all that is essential to the nature of it, as will
in time appear; so is there all that is essential to the soul in conception:
but the bodily parts requiring time has it imperfectly, the soul being
spiritual and above time, has it perfectly in the first instant: yet in this
case the soul, must stay for the expression of it self, till the body be
perfected; and then all those (seeming) new-come perfections, are to the souls
as cloths to the body: only accidental ornaments, and external habits, which
do not alter it indeed, but only in show.

3. Of conception of Twins.
Lastly, concerning the question of superfetation, whether twins be conceived at
once or at diverse times; we need not much to dispute. For whether it be either
or both ways, it makes no matter; for if nature has power to work so
diversely for producing of bodies, there is no question but that both God and
nature is able to indue them with souls accordingly. And it is sufficient for
the point in hand, that howsoever the manner of generation be, there is (at
least of the soul whereof we dispute) but one conception of one, and that at
once, which once is in propagation. For though among other creatures, the
receiving of the seed once, sometimes produces many, and often, many times
but one; yet we need not grant it so in humane propagation: and yet if we
should in regard of the former we need not doubt (as I said) but God is as
powerful to produce souls, as nature is to bring forth bodies: and for the
other, we must needs think, either that the former is a propagation to the
latter, or else the latter a perfecting of the former (otherwise there would be
diverse bodies too, any or all of which rightly understood, may well stand with
this manner of the souls propagation: yet in all probability there is but one
for one with us; howsoever there are many for one; and one for many in some
other creatures. Further then this, I think no modest or reasonable man will
or need inquire; but rather conclude this point as the Psalmist begins it;
Psalm. 139.14.
I will praise the Lord, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; marveilous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

Conclusion of all the objections.
Thus we have seen (I hope) sufficient reason, that it is not against reason,
that God should produce one soul out of the spiritual matter of another, by
the help of bodily organs. And if it were against reason, yet reason teaches,
that we should rather teach it, than that which is against Religion; which we
are now to prove, for having thus explained my assertion, and cleared the way
by answering all the material objections that I can meet with; whether from
divine or natural reason against it; whence it is manifest that it may be so:
I will now proceed to prove that it is so.

CHAP. XIII. Testimonies out of the old Testament, proving the souls
propagation.
The method observed in proving the souls propagation.
AS the former arguments to disprove this mediate manner of the souls
propagation, were of two sorts; Scripture, and natural reasons; so also shall
the arguments to prove the same be. For seeing God has a twofold voice, the
one speaking in the Book of the Scriptures, and the other in the Book of the
Creatures; when the divine Oracles of the former cannot be heard, we must give
ear to natural reasons drawn out of the latter: the voice of natures
agreeing with the Scriptures, being indeed the voice of God. The proofs from
the Scripture, shall be of two sorts likewise, either direct testimonies, or
reasons drawn from them. And again the testimonies shall be first from the old,
and then from the new Testament, which we will take up in order as we shall
meet with them.

And first that this doctrine may not seem new, I will prove it even from the
beginning of the world, beginning first with the testimony of God himself, who
in the day he created man upon the face of the earth; he created them male and
female, and blessed them, and said unto them; 1. Gods first Institution.
Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. Here without any
limitatio^, they are commanded to fill the whole earth, S^ to subdue it also,
Genesis 1.27, 28.
which must certainly be understood of the whole man, and not of the body
only. For what is the body that it should subdue the earth, or who is man that
he should limit the holy. One of Israel? or presume to set bounds where God
has set none? Neither can there be any color of doubt how this is to be
understood, seeing God spoke the very same immediately before, Verse 22.
even to the fishes and fowls. For, says the Text, God blessed them, saying,
be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters, etc. As therefore God so framed
their natures, and gave such power unto them, that the like might produce the
like unto it self, as touching the whole creature: so if we will believe God
and his word, man does produce man the whole, the whole as well as other
creatures. Besides, how can it stand with reason, that that blessing that
proves sufficiently effectual to the basest creatures, should not only be
effectual in man the most excellent? especially so grossly defective, as that
man should not be able to propagate man, but some imperfect formelesse piece of
a creature, which indeed is so unnatural, as no man knows what to call it.
For the body of a man can be no more termed man, than the carcass of a brute
beast, can be called a bruit beast: and shall a beast, upon whom there is no
such blessing expressly pronounced in Scripture, be acknowledged to do more
this way in his kind, than man who was most expressly blessed, even twice over?
yea, is it not contrary to reason, and religion too, that God should command
man that which he did not give him power to perform? for it is manifest, that
God did not only bless, but command them, and it is no less manifest, did
extend to the whole man. Now if Gods command reaches to the whole man, and
man's power reaches only to the body, or carcass; how can it be avoided but
Gods command, shall be in vain and unreasonable, if not unjust? If in this
work the chief part belongs to God, it cannot with reason be ascribed to man;
neither can God command him to do all (according to his kind, that is the law
of nature) if he can do but the least part. Lastly, it is to be considered
that God so framed the nature of every living creature, that it was apt, not
only for the bringing forth of the body, but also, and especially, of the
soul, that being the chief part of the creature: so that this blessing and
command of God does principally resp^ct the soul in every creature. Whence it
follows that it is more absurd to deny the propagation of the soul, than of
the body; but most of all absurd to deny it in man, who of all other creatures,
is the most excellent, and herein most especially blessed of God.

To conclude therefore from the premises we may well frame this argument, that
if the voice and ordinance of God, be no less effectual in man, then it is in
the rest of the living creatures propagating: then according to the ordinance
of God, man begets whole man, soul and body. But the Antecedent is true, as
appears in the text, and therefore all so the consequent.

2. Gods resting from his labor.
Secondly, It appears that God so ordered the nature of all creatures in the
beginning, that they might persist of themselves, and multiply their kinds by
the power of nature; that so he himselte might not need to be always creating
new creatures: and herein man was ranked amongst the rest without any
difference. And so on the seventh day (says Moses) God ended the work which
he had made, and he rested on the seventh day from all his-workes which he had
made.

How then dare we set him aworke to create thousands of new souls every day at
our pleasure. Obj.


I know the ordinary answer is, Ans.
that God indeed rested from creating any more new kinds of things, but not
from creating any more individuals of the same kind.



Secondly, This is a direct begging of the question; Moses speaks alike of
both, ascribing no more to one than to another.

than still to produce new kinds out of former matter. For according to the
common definition of creation; Creatio est productio entis ex non ente, a
making of something of nothing. And therefore if God has so ceased from his
work of creation, that he makes no more new kinds of creatures, although of
former matter, much more has he ceased from creating daily new substances of
nothing.

creating new substances of nothing. From this place of Scripture therefore I
reason thus: If God absolutely ceased from the work of Creation, then also he
ceased from the creation of souls: but the Antecedent is true, therefore the
consequent.

3. The creation of Eve.
Thirdly, we read that God of the rib of Adam as of a living body formed Eve,
but we do not read, that he breathed into her nostrils the breath of lives,
as he did into Adams, which certainly if it had been done, the Scripture would
not have passed over in silence: especially seeing it was Moses chief purpose,
to declare the original of all things: but contrarily, he plainly affirms,
that of that he made a woman: and speaking of her whole person, he says, that
she (that is, Eve the woman) was taken out of man; and adds moreover, that
therefore she was called wo-man: Gen 2.22, 23, 24.
and farther affirms, that therefore by marriage God made them one flesh
again, and for that cause others should be so united also: besides diverse
other reasons alleged before, which need not here to be repeated.

4. The promised seed
Fourthly, When our first parents had committed sin, before they had brought
forth any children, God made a comfortable promise to Eve, Genesis 3.15.
saying, that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head. Now the
body it self being without reason, what is it being compared to the Serpent?
Wherefore by seed in this place must needs be meant the whole nature of man,
which Christ took of the Virgin Mary: For whole man was conceived and borne of
her, except sin only; as afterward we shall see. Neither is this to prove one
doubtful thing by another: for it is out of doubt, that by seed is here meant
both body and soul: unless we shall say, that Christ redeemed us by a body
without a soul. And if this soul was received from Eve, as her seed, as well
as his body, I think there is none will make question of ours.

5. Adams offspring. Genesis 5.3.
Fifthly, Very forcible also if it be well considered, is that where Moses
says, Adam gat a son in his own likeness, after his own Image. Whence it
appears manifestly, that he was the parent of the whole nature, and not of
one part only: for this Image is opposed to the Image of God spoken of in Adam
before: which Image and likeness was not in the body, for then it Would follow
that God had a body, but in his soul in respect of his mind and reason; and
those other divine gifts whereby Adam excelled the rest of the creatures. So
that if we will make a true opposition, it will follow from this place, that as
God made Adam in his innocence, in his own Image and likeness, chiefly in
regard of the soul, and those divine gifts wherewith it was endued: so Adam in
his corrupted estate begat a son in his own Image and likewise, not in regard
of the body only, but chiefly in respect of the soul, and in that, corrupt and
sinful like himself.

6. Gods promise to Abraham. Genesis 17.7.
Sixthly, Such is that place also where God made a promise to Abraham, saying, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. Where by seed must needs
be meant that which is borne of seed, to wit, whole man, and not the body
only, for that without the soul of it self is dead: and as our Savior
speaks in another case; Matthew. 22.32.
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. And if God will not style
himself the God of the dead, unless the soul at least be still living, much
less will he call himself the God of a senseless substance, inferior to the
issue of brute beasts. Obj.
Either thorefore GOD must here promise to be the God of an unreasonable brute,
or else Abraham's seed must contain more than a body, yea, extend in self as
indeed it does to the whole man, as well soul as body, that is to say, persons
consisting of both, for to such only is this promise made. Ans.
Neither is it for any man here to except and say, that the whole man may be
said to proceed from man, though the soul comes from God: because he prepares
the body, and gives the existence to the creature; for besides that it is
contrary both to nature and reason (as afterward we shall see) that a man
should be a father to that to which he gives only the least part of the
matter, and nothing at all of the form: it cannot be avoided but the Scripture
does here plainly affirm, that the whole man consisting of soul and body, is
the seed, issue, and offspring of man: and consequently begotten, born, and
brought forth by the seed of man.

7. The souls that descended from Jacob.
Seventhly, When the Scriptures do expressly affirm, that sixty-six souls
descended from the loins of Jacob: does it not plainly teach that the souls
of children do descend from their parents? Neither can the force of this place
be avoided, by saying that the soul is here by a Metonymy put for the body, or
by a Synecdoche the whole soul put for the vegetable and sensible part of the
soul; neither yet that it is only for that denomination is taken from the
better part; or for that man disposes the matter of the body for the receiving
of the soul. The falsehood of these conceits does plainly appear out of the
Antecedent and consequent of the Text; for a little before it is said, these
are the sons of Rachel which were borne unto Jacob, fourteen souls in all;
and immediately after; the sons of Joseph were two souls: so that it is
evident in the text, the souls signify sons, viz. the whole person and
nature of man. Although therefore hereby is not meant souls only, but
persons; according to the propriety of the Hebrew tongue: yet why in this case
should the holy Ghost speak of the whole person, if only the least part of
him be thereby meant. Neither can I think the Hebrew tongue so double, or the
holy penman so much mistaken, as to say only souls descended, if bodies only
did: yea, how absurd is it, when by the rules of interpretation, the proper
litterall sense is always to be retained, unless some manifest falsehood or
absurdity do necessarily follow upon it: and When we must fly unto some
tropicall sense, it must be fetched out of the Text it self, if it may be,
here we should depart from both, only to confirm a fancy, which has no
apparent warrant in the whole Scripture? and that when in all other places we
understand the whole to comprehend the parts, yet in this case above when the
Scripture speaks of the whole, we must understand but the least part: and when
it names the soul, yet it means the body only.

8. Scriptures that purposely speak of man's generation.
Eighthly, As this doctrine is clear by the testimony or Moses from the
creation of the world, and the first institution of nature; so also from those
Scriptures which do purposely speak of the propagation of man, according to
the ordinary course of nature since the creation. Two places there are
especially where this matter is purposely handled in the Scripture: in both
which, the soul is said to be conceived in the womb, and brought forth by the
virtue of generation as well as the body. The first we find in the book of
Job, 1. Job 10.8.10, 11.
where in making his moan to God, he uses these words: Thine hands have made
me, and fashioned me together round about: -- Have thou not powered me out as
milk, and curdled me like these? Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh,
and have fenced me with bones and sinews. The other we have in the Book of the
Psalms, where David speaks unto God in this manner; Thou have possessed my
reins; 2. Psalm. 139.13.15.16.
thou have covered me in my mothers womb: -- My substance was not hid from
thee, when I was made in a secret place, and curiously wrought as in the lowest
parts of the earth; thine eyes did see my mass (or whole substance) yet being
imperfect and in thy book all, my members, were written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. To omit the omission
(although it is very unlikely that Job and David here describing so precisely
the manner of man's conception, breeding and bringing forth into the world:
wherein Gods power, wisdom, (...) 1.^^
and goodness, is most of all to be magnified; should pretermit that
wonderful work of the creation etc infusion of the soul, if it had been
known and believed in their days) this only I would know, how, if the soul
be immediately created by God, they could so pere^ptorily (without any
exception or limitation) affirm that the whole man was formed in the womb,
powered out as milk, curdled like cheese, etc. which that they both jointly
affirm, will plainly appear, if we consider these three things: Man, or me,
secret place, and mass or substance. For the first, it is manifest they do
not herein speak of their own persons only, as being a matter proper to them
alone, but in this they rank themselves with all mankind, so as man here
signifies all mankind, male and female (as Moses uses the word) soul and
body, Genesis 1.27. and 5.1.2.
and one as well as the other. When therefore they both expressly affirm, that
man is conceived in the womb, it follows that all men and women's souls,
have heir original together with their bodies. As for the term secret place,
it signifies the womb of the mother, where the child is conceived, which is
expressly named where he says, thou have covered me in my mothers womb:
therefore when David says, he was wonderfully formed in a secret place, he
intimates that the conception of the whole man, is made in the womb. Lastly,
the word mass, or substance, which he adds afterward, makes it yet more
manifest, for it signifies all whatsoever is in man, which is also proved by
the words that follow after: for he says, that this whole mass or substance
of man which is formed in the womb, was described in the book of Gods
providence, and who dare deny but soul as well as the body was from all
eternity known unto the providence of God? for it is not meant of the members
of the body only, but according to the true meaning of the words in the
originally, all things whatsoever in man, is brought forth in continuance of
time, which before was not. So that from these Scriptures I conclude thus; If
whole man, with his whole mass or substance be conceived in the womb of his
mother, then his rational soul, together with his body, is propagated out of
or by virtue of the seed. But whole man together with his whole mass or
substance, is conceived in the womb of his mother; therefore the rational
soul, together with the body, is brought forth by virtue and power of the
seed.

9. David's confession.
Ninthty, Like unto these also is that other speech of the Prophet David; where
he confesses that not his body only, but he himself; both soul and body was
conceived in sin. So are his words: Psalm. 51.5
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
Whence it appears, not only that the whole man is conceived in the womb,
but that he is bred and borne in sin; yea corrupt and sinful even from the
very first conception, which as (we shall afterward see) could not possibly be
if the soul were immediately created by God. And least we should not take
knowledge of this, or knowing if think it more strange than true; he sets
before it this special note of observation, Behold as being a matter worthy to
be known, and believed of all men.

Jeremies approbation.
Tenthly, The Prophet Jeremy likewise, or rather the Lord by the Prophet
speaks thus: Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee; and before thou
came forth out of the womb I sanctified thee. Whence also it appears, not
only that the whole man, the soul as well as the body is formed in the womb;
but also that the soul is present, and in some sanctified by grace (as all are
corrupt by nature) even from the beginning; for so it may well be understood,
that Jeremy was sanctified, Luke 1.15.41.
as John Baptist also was, with the gifts of the holy Ghost, even from his
mothers womb: yea, before he was borne, even from the time of his first
forming in the womb. And seeing such sanctification and special knowledge of
God cannot be ascribed to a body without a soul; it will follow that as all
are sinful, and some in part sanctified, even from the very conception,
neither of which can be without a soul: so all do receive both soul and body
together at the very first conception.

11. Salomons resolution
Eleventhly, Hereunto may be added that of Solomon, which was before alleged to
prove the contrary, where he says; Then shall the dust return to the earth as
it was, Eccl. 12.7.
and the spirit shall return to God that gave it. That is, at death the body
returns to the earth whereof it was first made, when God formed man of the dust
of the ground, and the soul returns to God who first breathed into Adams
nostrils the breath of lives. Now if Salomons meaning be, that look as the
body arises from the earth, so the soul comes from God (whence some would
infer the immediate creation of the soul) it holds much more strongly, that
the soul is not immediately given of God, but mediately by the means of
nature; seeing we have not our bodies neither immediately from the earth, but
mediately by propagatio^ from Adam, from whom both soul and body is
communicated to posterity, and both by the gift of God. To conclude, therefore
as our bodies come from the dust, so do our souls from God: but our bodies
come by propagation from Adam; and therefore (by this argument) so do our
souls souls also.

12. Zacharies testimony Zach. 12.1.
Lastly, That of the Prophet Zachary before objected to the contrary, serves
also notably for the confirmation of this mediate manner of the souls
propagation: his words be these; The Lord forms the spirit of man within him.
Now to form in the Scripture never signifies to create of nothing, as God did
in the beginning: but to frame of some matter pre-existing, (...) Non est (...)
Genesis 1.1.2.7.
as when the Lord formed Adams body of the dust of the ground. For though
indeed creating be sometimes put for forming, yet forming is never put for
creating of nothing. Seeing therefore the Lord forms the souls of men of
some matter, it must be either of the souls of the parents, or of his own
essence, they being neither bodies nor Angels; but the latter is impossible,
and therefore it must needs be the former.

Again the Prophet says not, without him, as if it were first made and then
infused, but within him. So that in saying the Lord forms the spirit of man
within him, he does evidently declare, 1. Of matter
that there is some matter within man, whereof the Lord forms the soul: than
which, what in so few words can so fitly and fully express the manner of the
souls propagation; being formed in conception of the spiritual matter of the
parents souls, by the power and virtue of the seed in generation. And yet not
merely by the power of nature; for in the last place it is to be observed,
that he says, the Lord forms it. For he indeed is the external efficient,
the nature of the soul being of that height, that without an immediate act of
his providence, it cannot be produced. Whence it is that in the production of
the soul, though it be not a creation, it is as near to a creation as can be:
and though it be by propagation, yet it is not merely by propagation, but some
way above it: and so it is in a manner a kind of mean between creation and
propagation. For according to these words of the Prophet, the soul is formed
of the spiritual matter of the parents souls, within the conceived fruit, not
without the omnipotent power of God.

So that by all these testimonies it appears (I think) sufficiently, that
this doctrine went current in the time of Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, and the
Prophets: and (I believe) never was once questioned in those first ages of the
world.

CHAP. XIV. Testimonies out of the new Testament, proving the souls
propagation.
THis doctrine is no less, if not much more clearly revealed and fully
confirmed in the new Testament also. 1. S. Paul.
For first the Apostle Saint Paul says as plainly as can be, that all men in
their whole persons, both were in Adam, and sinned in him. Death (says he)
passed by one man upon all men, in whom all sinned. Where he makes no such
division of soul and body, one from one place, and another from another, as
men have now invented: but he says plainly, the whole man, Romans 5.12.
yea all men (who consist of souls I am sure as well as bodies) were in Adam,
yea, and sinned in him too; which is absurd to say, and impossible to be
without souls. What would we, yea, what can we have more plainly spoken? Is it
not then high presumption (to say no worse of it) for men thus to sever what
God has joined together without apparent warrant from his word? how much more
then in this, for which it is confessed there is no warrant there at all?

And yet least any man should be mistaken, as thinking the whole man may well
enough be said to be in Adam, though not in other of our parents, by I know not
what imaginary imputation; because he was the stock of all mankind (or rather
of the bodies of all mankind;) the holy Ghost, I say, foreseeing our aptness
to err, to take away all exception says the very same concerning other
Fathers also; The Author to the Heb. Heb. 7.1.
as that Levi (together with all his sons) was yet in the loins of his
Father (grandfather, yea, and great grandfather) Abraham when Melchisedeck men
him; and which is more, paid tithes in him. So that by the testimony of the
Apostle, V^rs. ^.
Abrakam is to be reckoned in the number of those that did propagate the whole
man, soul and body together: and for that cause paid tithes for his posterity
while they were yet in his loins. And if Isaa^ Jacob, and the whole tribe of
Levi, were once in the loins of Abraham; we need not doubt, but we were all in
like manner once wholly in Adam, and consequently are now wholly propagated
from him.

2. The Angel Gabrell.
Again, that we may not deny it, unless we will deny Christ and our own
salvation. The Scriptures teach, that Jesus Christ as concerning his humanity
was the son of the virgin Mary, and so of David his Father: for so said the
Angel Gabrell, being sent unto her; Luk 1.31, 32.
Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son: and again, the
Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David. Neither is it
sufficient to say his body came from them; for the Apostle plainly affirms,
Romans 1.3.
that he was made of the seed of David according to the flesh. Where flesh is
figuratively put for his whole humanity, both soul and body, as themselves
confess. Per sy^ocdoch^n.
Neither can it be denied, for it is there opposed to his Divinity, as the
words immediately following do manifestly declare: and all Interpreters
acknowledge.

Whence it necessarily follows, that the soul of our Savior was the seed of
David, even the fruit of his loins as well as his body, 3. S. Peter. Act. 2.30.
as St. Peter witnesses: for since the holy Ghost affirms it, why should we
fear to do it? yea, why should we not fear to do otherwise? Is it not safer
to follow such a guide, than to run a way by our selves for which we have no
warrant? And seeing as the Apostle elsewhere affirms, Heb. 4.15.
He was made like unto us in all things, except sin; why should we make any
doubt, but it is so with us also, as it was with him? Especially considering
the whole current and full stream of the Scriptures run this way, even from
the beginning. And not only concerning him, as where it is said, Genesis 3.15.
and 22.18.
the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; and, in thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 5.10.11.
as we heard before: but also all other places speaking of his or our
generation, comprehends both soul and body under the name of seed, 1 Chronicles.
1, 2, 3, etc. Mat. 1. Luke 2. Mat. 19.6.
without any exception, making the soul no less the seed of man than the
body, and the body no more than the soul; and neither of them more or less
propagation than the other, and this throughout the whole Scripture, without
any the least word to the contrary. And therefore, I say again, let no man
dare to separate what God has so joined together.

4. Our Savior himself.
Lastly, Unless we will make God the Author of sin, and consequently deny God
that made us; we must confess the truth of this doctrine, proved from those
words of our Savior, where speaking both of the natural and the new birth of
man, he says; Ioh. 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit is spirit. Whence I reason thus; If the soul were immediately created
by God, it should not be flesh that is corrupt and sinful, but spirit, that is
pure and holy. For whatsoever comes immediately from God, he makes it pure and
good, yea, Genesis 1.3.
all things very good. But man from his very beginning is corrupt and sinful,
because he is borne of flesh; for says our Savior of the whole man that being
borne of the flesh he is flesh; Ephesians. 2.3.
and therefore the whole man has need of a second birth, that he may be borne
of the spirit. Either therefore we must deny original sin, or else make God
the Author of evil, if the soul be immediately created by him. But seeing it
is manifest we are borne of flesh, and are by nature children of wrath; and it
is impious blasphemy once to imagine that God is the Author of sin; I fear not
to conclude, that the soul is not borne of the spirit, I mean, created by
God, but of the flesh, that is, propagated by man.

The conclusion of the divine Testimonies.
Thus then for divine testimonies we have produced no less than a whole Jury of
witnesses* first God himself, then Adam, Moses, Job, David, Solomon, Jeremy,
Zachary, Peter, Paul, the Angel Gabrell, and our Savior Christ himself; and
if humane Testimonies would serve the turn, it were not hard to show more than
twelve Legions of Saints, learned and unlearned, that have lived and dyed in
this belief. It being the received doctrine of the western Churches in Saint
Hieromes time, as was before declared: but if these will not satisfy, much
less would those, and therefore I omit them.

CHAPTER XV. The propagation proved from the Doctrine of Original sin.
Reasons proving the souls propagation.
BEsides the Testimonies of Scripture, this mediate manner of the souls
propagation, may farther be demonstrated by reasons drawn from them; whereof
there are two only most material, and indeed necessary to be considered: the
one concerning the doctrine of original sin, so much the longer in them both.

1. Original sin.
And for the better clearing the first reason drawn from the Doctrine of
Original sin, I will first make way to it by a general description of these
three things: First, Original sin; Secondly, Creation; Thirdly, Propagation:
and then apply it particularly to the proving of the point in hand.

l. From the nature of the sin descending. 2. From the goodness of God in
creating. 3. From the course of nature in propagating.
Of all which, I will speak as briefly and plainly as I can, and according to
that divine light which is revealed in the Scriptures.

First therefore it must be showed out of the Scripture, whether there be any
original sin or no, and what it is. For the first, that the stream of man's
being, first poisoned in Adam the fountain, has infected every man that comes
into the world with sin, is manifest through the whole Scripture. Proofs out
of the Scripture.
By one man (namely Adam) sin entered into the world, and death by n="a" Romans
5.12.
sin: in the day that he did eat of the forbidden fruit, we began to die the
n="b" Genesis 2 17
death: yea, n="c" Romans 5.14.
even Infants that had not actually sinned, yet were tainted with original
sin: so that in Adam all dye n="d" 1 Cor. 15.22.
, because in Adam all did sin n="e" Romans 5.12.
: Hence it was that by and by after all the imaginations of the thoughts of his
heart were only evil continually n="f" Gen 6.5
: yea, evil even from his youth n="g" Genesis 8.21
: And now who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean n="h" Job 14.4.
: And what is man that he should be clean n="i" Job 15.14.
, and he that is borne of a woman, that he should be righteous, says Job.
Hence even David confesses of himself, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin
did my n="k" Psalm. 51.5.
mother conceive me: and of others, he says, the wicked are estranged from the
womb n="l" Ps. 58.3.
, they go astray as soon as they are borne. Esaias also calls man a
transgressor from the womb n="m" Isa. 48.8
and Jeremy says, the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked n="n" Ier. 17.9.
: hence also it is that the Apostle says, We are by nature children of Wrath
n="o" Ephesians. 2.3.
; and by the offense of one, the fault came upon all n="p" To. 5.18.
men to condemnation. And to conclude, our Savior says plainly, that which is
borne of the flesh is flesh n="q" Ioh. 3.6. Ioh. 3.3.5.
; and except a man be regenerate and borne again, he cannot enter into nor see
the Kingdom of God.

Reasons to prove it.
Besides, Reason teaches, that like begets like, as touching the substance and
accidents proper to the kind, 1.
according to the Rule, Generatum sequitur naturam generantis; Beasts bring
forth beasts; Serpents, serpents, and sinful man, a sinful offspring: We
cannot gather grapes of thorns, Mat. 7.16.
nor figs of thistles; but an evil tree brings forth evil fruit; and
corrupt Adam sinful men, otherwise how could Infants justly be punished with
death, seeing death is the wages of sin. And why were Infants circumcized,
and women purified after childbirth under the law, but to show that all that
comes of man's seed, is defiled with sin. Again, common experience shows
the fruit of this bitter root to bud forth in children, even from their very
cradles, and that by inclination before they can learn by imitation. The
necessity also of our regeneration proves it; for if by our first birth we
were not corrupt, then should not the second be necessary to salvation. Lastly,
the double grace which we receive from the second Adam Christ Jesus, namely,
Justification and Regeneration, shows that there flows a double evil from
the first Adam, namely the guilt and corruption of nature. If we had not this
double sin, we should not need this double remedy.

What original sin is.
And now that we see we are thus infected, let us inquire a little more narrowly
into the nature of it. It appears by that which has been said already, that
all men are become sinful through Adams sin, having lost those now
supernatural gifts, wherewith he and we with him were at first endued; and in
stead thereof, are all over infected with a venomous quality, or inclination to
all manner of evil, causing ignorance and blindness in the mind,
stubbornness and rebellion in the will disorder in the affections, making the
senses sensual and beast-like, all the members of the body instruments of
unrighteousness, and the whole man a slave to the devil; and that from our
first being, even so far as nature can reach (as well potentially as actually
ever since Adams sin, which grows up with us from the womb and in time (if
we live) brings orth the fruits of unrighteousness, in our thoughts, words,
and actions, by reason whereof we are not only corrupt, but guilty of Gods
wrath, and liable to eternal damnation from our first being. Now it is called
Original sin, Why it is so called.
first, because it was from the beginning, even as soon as ever Adam sinned:
secondly, because it is with us from the beginning, even in conception, as
soon as we do actually begin to be: and thirdly, because it is the beginning
of all actual sin whatsoever. Howbeit, in the Scripture it is called by other
names, Romans 6.6.
as, The old man, The body of sin, Romans 7.17.23.
The sin that dwells in us, The law of our members, The sin that incloseth us on
every side, Heb. 12.1.
Concupiscence, Iam. 1.14.
and the like. And as we use the word, it is sometimes taken more largely, for
the sin of Adam, together with the guilt and corruption following it: but
usually more strictly for the corruption of nature only: consisting of the
privation of goodness, and inclination to evil, before rehearsed. These
grounds being laid down, we may make a full definition of it after this manner.

Definitie Originalis peccati.
Original sin is the depravation of the whole nature of man, consisting of the
privation of original righteousness, and an inclination to all manner of
evil; derived from Adam to all his posterity by natural generation, whereby
they stand guilty of eternal death: in which definition, we may see all the
essential causes of original sin: the subject, or material cause, is the
whole nature of man, all men, and every part of all men, soul, body,
understanding, will, memory, affections, senses, and several members of the
body, as they constitute the person of a man propagated from Adam. The formal
cause is the depravation of the same, whereby every man is deprived of
original righteousness, and prone to every sin that can be committed. The
efficient cause, the sinning will of Adam; the isntrumental cause, natural
generation: and the end and effect of it, guilt and punishment: misery and
death here, and eternal damnation hereafter.

More briefly, Original sin is by some defined to be the depravation of man's
nature, consisting of the privation of righteousness, and inclination to
evil, contracted from the generation it self, and derived from Adam to all
his posterity. For as sickness is not only a privation of health, but also
an evil affection of the body, arising from the distemper of the humors: so
original sin is not only the want of righteousness, but also an
inclinablenesse to unrighteousnes, arising from the sin of Adam, and conveyed
unto us by natural propagation. In a word, it is our potentiall sinning in
Adam, whereby according to the law of nature, we are both corrupt and guilty.
And so much for the general nature of original sin.

Creation what it is.
Now for the second, what Creation is, we shall not need many words. Improperly
Creation is taken sundry ways, sometimes for the determination, and decree of
God to create, as where Wisdom says, Ecclu. 24.
He created me in the beginning before the world; that is, he decreed to create
and reveal me in the Church. Sometimes for renovation, and changing, not of
the substance, but the quality of a thing: Ps. 51.10.
So David prays, Create in me a clean heart, O God. Sometimes for the
natural generation of the creatures; Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, Psalm.
104.30.
and they are created. And sometimes it is taken for the restoration of that
which is destroyed; Isa. 65.17.
Behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth. But properly taken, it either
signifies to make something of nothing, or else to give forms to the matter,
unto which it has no natural power of it self. And for that cause do
require an omnipotent hand to effect if; so as creation properly taken belongs
to God only. Nevertheless, for the most part, it is used in the first sense,
and therefore creation is commonly defined thus; Creatio est productio entis ex
non ente; or as Aquinas has it; Est productio rei secundum totam substantiam
ex nihilo. So that in the most proper sense, a thing cannot be said to be
created, unless the whole substance be produced by the omnipotent power of God
out of nothing; and not at all, unless at least he has an immediate hand in
the forming of it.

Propagation, what it is.
Lastly, For Propagation, it is that most excellent and natural faculty,
whereby a living creature, by feed of generation, begets his like, for the
continuation of the kind. It is a faculty, commonly accounted a species of the
vegetative faculty, but is indeed the natural perfection of a living creature,
whether vegetative, sensitive, or rational; and it is the most excellent, and
the most natural faculty, being ingrafted into nature, with a special charge
and blessing from God in the creation, and is therefore most desired and
consequently most natural to all creatures that have life; Genesis 1.22.28.
whereby like begets like; univocall which is most properly so called, when as
a creature brings forth the like to it self, as a plant comes of a plant, and
a Lion of a Lion: and aequivocall generation of unlike, as when a plant or
living creature is bred of putrefaction, as, Mice, Flies, Serpents, and the
like, for the continuation of the kind, for nature aymeth at the highest
perfection that can be, even to continue all creatures for ever; and therefore
every creature naturally desires ever to be, which because it cannot be
effected in the individuals, therefore it is done another way, namely, by
propagation, for to beget the like, is after a sort to be ever. And to
conclude, this is done by the seed of generation, which as the faculty it
self is most excellent: so is the matter of it the perfection of man's nature,
as the seed of a tree, the sap whereof has passed through root, body, branch,
leaf, bud, and all: and so conteines the nature of the whole: so is the seed
of man the quintesse^ce of nature, which having passed through all the degrees
of concoction, and containing the whole kind of man, is reserved by nature in
a place convenient for the procreation of another of the same kind. Now
because this generation is the affection or rather perfection of the whole
compound, consisting of matter and form, a man cannot be said to propagate the
matter alone, but the whole creature, so as to speak properly, generation is
not either of the matter, or of the form, but of a certain third thing,
consisting of matter and form. So that here it follows, that our propagation
from Adam, is nothing else but the deduction of the whole man out of Adam,
according to the course of nature; that is, the turning of our potentiall being
in him into act by natural generation, which is the only means whereby Adams
nature is derived unto us.

Difference between generation and creation.
And here to conclude, it shall not be amiss to observe the differences between
natural generation, and immediate creation; the chief whereof are these.

First, Creation is the work of God by himself; Generation is the work of
nature from God: Secondly, Creation is wrought only by the word and command of
God by his only beck and will; generation is performed in a natural order
pre-ordeined of God. Vide Polan. Synt. lib. 5.6.2.
Thirdly, Creation is merely of nothing, not of any matter or substance, but of
nothing at all; generation is of some matter pre-existing indeed, old matter
putting on new forms. Fourthly, Creation is done in a moment, without any
time, being by an infinite virtue, which is not capable of any time; generation
cannot be but in time, being perfected by degrees and in succession of time.
Fifthly, In Creation, things are not made of the same substance with the
creator; but in generation, that which is generated, has the same substance
with the generator. Sixthly, Creation is performed without any motion or
mutation; but in generation, there is both motion and mutation, the same matter
being varied into diversity of forms. Lastly, the order of creation is one,
and of generation another; for in creation the privation is before the habit,
power before act, darkness before light; but in generation, the habit is
before the privation, sight before blindness, and light before darkness. And
so much for the general description of Original sin, Creation, and
Propagation.

CHAP. XVI. How the nature of the sin descending, confirms the souls
propagation.
The nature of the sin.
IT appears by the former description of Original sin, which is proved by
the scripture, and confessed by all, that it is not only a loss of original
righteousness, but an hereditary infection or spiritual corruption, which has
overspread the whole nature of man: which two, as they are the maine things in
original sin, so the one necessarily follows the other. For the soul
ceasing to be good, it must needs become evil; and being turned out of the
right way, goes on in a wrong; for it cannot stand still or be idle, but must
be doing either good or evil, and therefore being deprived of goodness,
corruption follows as darkness succeeds in the place of light.

The means of deriving it
Whereas therefore some make original sin, to consist of guiltiness and
corruption, as the parts of it; and to be derived from Adam by imputation and
propagation, guiltiness by imputation, and corruption by propagation; it
appears that guiltiness is no part of original sin, but an effect of it;
and consequently, that imputation is not properly the means of conveying it to
us, but an effect of the other. And as that depravation or corruption only is
properly original sin, and guiltiness comes only by reason of corruption; so
propagation only is properly the means whereby it is derived unto us, and
imputation is only in regard of propagation. For as we should not have been
guilty, if we had not been corrupt; so sin should not have been imputed, if it
had not been propagated. And as we were potentially guilty in Adam, because
potentially corrupt; so by like reason it follows, that it is now actually
imputed to us, because we are actually propagated from him. I conclude
therefore, that the nature of this sin consists in the corruption of nature,
and the stream thereof runs in natural propagation.

Objectio^s from the nature of sin.
But here it will be objected, that sin is such an accident, as cannot by the
course of nature be communicated to posterity.

1. It is nothing.
For if we consider the matter or substance of it, it is indeed nothing; it is
non ens in rerum natura; no substance, for then it should be created by God,
but a mere of privation, the want of that which should be, and not any thing
that should not be; as darkness is a privation of light, not any thing that
succeeds in the place of light. For there is nothing in the dark night which
was not in the day, only light is absent, and such a manner of thing (or
nothing rather) is sin said to be. And if it should be granted, that it is
somewhat more, namely, an evil quality, besides that then it must needs be
created of God as good qualities are, it must needs be either in the soul or
in the body, yea, in the soul and not in the body; for sin is a spiritual
thing, if it be any thing.

2. Not by the soul.
Now if it be a quality of the soul, it cannot be conveyed to posterity, for
such habits and indowments of the mind, as are not engrafted into nature, but
happen from without as this did, cannot be propagated, according to the
Proverb, Ex grammatico non nascitur grammaticus, but they are gotten by art
and industry, and so they will grant that Adams sin may be derived to us by
imitation, but not by generation.

3. Not by the body.
On the other side, if it be a corporal and elementary quality, besides that
it cannot then be sinful, it cannot descend to posterity neither, because it
is not inherent in the principles of nature, but an external accident which
nature has no sense of; for what is nature the worse for Adams taking the
forbidden fruit? yea, what if he had cut off his own arms, his children
should not have bin borne without, for nature follows the first institution:
yea more, if it had caused some distemper in the body, yet it is not necessary
it should be communicated to posterity, for all children have not the
sicknesses of their parents, how much less their sins then, which are not
natural either to soul or body.

These things, Ans.
I confess, have a show of truth, but I deny the power of it in them all for
disproving original sin, not doubting to make it appear, that all these do
agree together to confirm this only way of sins propagation.

1. Privation of good.
For first, let it be granted, that sin in regard of substance, is nothing but a
privation of goodness; then it will follow, that it cannot subsist without
some subject, which must also be good, because every substance is created by
God; It is in a good subject.
so that evil cannot be but in a good subject.

Again, being a privation, it can have no efficient cause, 2. Has no
efficient cause.
for to speak properly, it is no effect but a defect rather. And if evil can
have no cause, 3. It comes from a good God
much less can it be caused by the chief good. For God who is summum bonum,
being as the habit unto this privation, can no more be the cause of sin than
light can be of darkness; which cannot possibly be; for light always
inlightens; and no darkness can proceed from light; for though we read, that
God commanded light to shine out of darkness, yet for darkness to proceed
from light is altogether impossible; and even so it may stand with the nature
of God, to bring good out of evil, but not evil out of good.

4. There can be no evil God.
And for that sin is no positive thing, but a privation of good, hence it
follows also, that there cannot be a summum malum, as well as a summum bonum:
for the one is not, and if it were the one should destroy the being of the
other, in as much as there cannot be two chiefes: contrary to the devilish
conceits of the Manichees, of a good God, and an evil God.

5. It may be propagated.
Lastly, Though it be an accident, yea, a privation, yet it is not a mere
negation, and though it be but an accident, yet even an accident is his
imperfection, and sometimes the accident of a substance prevails as much as
the substance it self: so that though it be but a privation, yet it may have a
being in nature: Malum est in rerum natura etiamsi per se nihil est
else Aristotle was much over-seene in making privation one of the principles
of nature: and if that be so necessary in generation, why should we think this
impossible to be generated? and though it cannot hang in the air, but must
cleave to some subject, yet it follows not but it may be propagated, together
with the subject wherein it is. 2. An inclination to evil.


But if this will not satisfy, it is farther to be considered, that original
sin is not only a privation of goodness, but also a corrupt quality and
inclination to evil, as appears by the former description, an^ the proof of
it; and may farther be manifested by the punishment and consequents of the
same. For a mere privation of happiness were a sufficient punishment for a
mere privation of goodness: but we know that Adam and all his posterity,
have not only lost Paradise, but gained a great deal of labor, pain, sorrow
and misery. Neither was the earth only deprived of that excellent condition
wherein it was created; but in the place thereof has succeeded a curse, making
it barren of good fruit, and fruitful of evil, Genesis 3.17, 18.
thorns, thistles, and the like. Teaching us that there is an evil quality
in sin as well as a privation of goodness.

3. Seated in the Soul.
Against this it is objected, that if it be an evil quality, it must cleave
either to the soul, or to the body, or both. If to the soul, it cannot
descend, because such endowments of the mind as are not ingrafted into nature,
cannot be propagated, according to the proverb, etc.

To which I answer, Ans. 1.
first, that even those arts which are least natural, are not altogether
excluded in generation, nay, experience proves that children for the most part
are like their parents, even in such faculties as these, whether they be
inclined to Husbandry, Horse-manship, Merchandise, Navigation, or the liberal
sciences: howsoever they are often crossed in their inclinations.

Secondly, 2.
It is commonly seen, that children are like their parents also in the
faculties of the mind, as in acuteness of understanding, firmness of memory,
soundness of judgment, and the like.

Thirdly, 3.
It is well known that the affections of the soul, which are yet nearer to
the nature of sin, are very commonly communicated to posterity, whether
concupiscible or irascible, as covetousness, wrathfulnesse, mirth, sadness,
fear, boldness, and the like: whence is that other Proverb, Partus ventrem
sequitur.

Lastly, 4.
It is manifest, that sin cleaves to the will it self, which is the fountain
of the affections. For as there are certain natural principles of knowledge,
as of good and evil, which were at the first ingrafted into the understanding:
so there are certain natural inclinations in the will, as of love and hatred,
which at first were carried to their proper objects, and so were created good:
but now through man's failing and Gods curse upon it, they are carried a
contrary way, by means whereof we are now corrupt and sinful. Now if sin
cleaves thus to the will, whence these affections proceed, yea, pierces into
the most inward and purest parts of the soul, whence it spreads it self
through the whole man; it must needs be propagated much better (or rather) than
the affections which are removed a degree farther from the soul, and how much
more then, better than those external acts, which are not natural, but mere
habits gotten by use and industry: which nevertheless in regard of natural
aptness unto them, may also after a sort be propagated unto posterity.

4. Cleaving to the body.
Yet is not sin so seated in the soul, as that it should not affect or rather
infect the body also. For though it cannot dwell in the body alone, nor be
propagated by it, yet together with the soul the body is infected, and by them
both sin propagated.

Which may further appear.

Adam: and thu^ the body is sinful not of it self, but as a part of the
person of man.

nature at the first; yet why may it not be propagated as well as the gout and
leprosy (whereunto sin is resembled in the Scripture) especially considering
these are no less accidental, unnatural, yea, and contrary to created nature
at the first, and are not now common to all mankind as sin is.

Lastly, If it be granted, that nature does always follow the first
institution, notwithstanding external accidents, yet this is such an external
accident as it is also internal: yea, farther I affirm that sin is now no
less ingrafted into our nature (I mean the whole nature of man, 5. Ingrafted
into nature it self. How sin is ingrafted into man's nature and propagated with
it.
consisting of soul and body) than if the first, and yet without fault in God.
Which that I may plainly manifest, and so clear all in a word, I would know of
the adversaries of this doctrine, whether that wisdom and holiness which was
at first in Adam, was such as might and should have been communicated to his
posterity, if he had not sinned or no? If yes (as no reasonable man can deny
it) then it must follow by that rule of reason, Contraria contrariorum sunt
consequentia; that so may sin and corruption now since the fall.

All that can be objected to the contrary is this, Obj.
that these virtues which were in Adam, were good qualities created by God, and
ingrafted into him at his first creation: whereas our vices are neither such
qualities, Obj. 2.
nor so ingrafted into our nature in the beginning, and therefore though they
might have been propagated, yet it will not follow that these may.

To the first I answer, Ans. 1.
that his virtues were no more qualities created by God, than our vices are.
For God did only so rectify the will of Adam in his first creation, that it
had a disposition, and inclination to good, by the exercise whereof those
habits of the mind are in time gotten which we call virtues: and contrarily,
from the evil disposition of the will, proceeds those evil customs which we
call vices. So that (if I conceive right) neither the one nor the other, are
qualities created by God. Ans. 2.
And concerning the second, the ingrafting of them into our nature at the
first. I answer, that as God made Adam simply good, by giving him an
inclination unto good without evil; so he gave him a free will to evil,
though he were good. Neither was he at the first endued either with virtues or
habits, save only that same habitu^ inchoatus, which is called (...); a
disposition or inclination whereby he was carried to good, Adam had evil in
power and goodness in act.
yet not so strongly but he could as freely will evil also; whereby it came to
pass, that he had evil in power as well as goodness in act. So that the
seed and power of the one was ingrafted into his nature no less than the act
of the other, even in the beginning: which power also we see soon after came
into act as well as the other. For if Adam had alike freewill to either, it
must needs follow, that the one was as natural to him as the other; and
consequently as easy to be propagated. For however some conceive of it, for my
part I see no reason to persuade me, that Adam was ever more inclined, or had
more power to good than to evil; but that God made him, as Ecclesiasticus
says, Ecclus. 7.29.
right, that is, as I understand it in equal condition, either to stand or to
fall; to continue good or become naught, which as it was the perfection of his
nature, and that innocent condition* in which he was created; so that it might
appear, it pleased God so to order the matter, that he fell from it, by so
small an inticement as an apple. Now so far forth as he had natural power to
sin by creation; so far sin might be derived by propagation, all will
confess: and why then when Adam* through his own folly, and Gods just wrath
upon him for the same, had lost the former freedom together, and brought upon
himself a necessity of sinning; should not the corruption be propagated much
more, being so much more increased? To conclude, therefore it follows by just
consequence in reason, and is manifest by the rules of nature, that his
corruption may and must be propagated to his posterity, now he is fallen; as
well and as much as his goodness might and should have been if he had not
fallen: yea so much more, by how much goodness more properly belongs to the
nature of God, and evil to the nature of the creature. Wherefore having thus
proved, even from the nature of the sin it sell, that it is most agreeable to
the course of nature, that original sin should descend by propagation: I
proceed now to prove that it is most contrary to the justice of God that it
should descend by a course of creations.

CHAP. XVII. That a new created soul, cannot justly be united to a sinful
body.
THe necessity of the souls mediate propagation, will farther appear, if we
consider the impossibility of the immediate creation thereof, without
injustice in God in respect of Original sin: seeing a soul new created, can
neither be justly united, It justly united.
nor corrupted when it is united with the body; for touching the former, first
I would know, how it can agree with the goodness and justice of GOD, to put an
innocent soul (as he creates it) before it has sinned into such a condition,
as wherein it shall he liable straight my to eternal torments: yea, and
perhaps presently damned for another fault? Obj.
it will be said, that it is not liable before faulty; for so soon as it is
united to the body, it is guilty of Adams sin. Ans. 1.
I answer, first it must be showed how a soul newly created very good, can be
in the fault of his sin; otherwise it is unjust that it should be made guilty,
and much more punished for another fault Secondly, 2.
I must ask why then God makes such an union, as whereby it shall be both
liable and faulty? Obj. 2.
If it be said, that it was the eternal decree of God, It was the decree of
God.
which neither needed nor could be reversed for Adams sin: and so the evil is
not from God, but from the virtue, or rather vitiousnesse of the union which
Adam caused by his sin, whereby it comes to pass that so soon as they are
conjoined, both are guilty, which is merely accidental in respect of God.

Ans. 1. It cannot be proved that it is.
To this I answer. First that we cannot thus hide our selves under Gods decree:
for it cannot be proved, that it is thus, and therefore neither that it is the
decree of God. Indeed God did decree that all men should be corrupt and sinful
through Adams sin, yet this must be by some just means, which if it be by this
course of propagation only, and not by creation; then this and not that, is to
be accounted the decree of God. Now it appears by that which is and shall be
said, that this is the only just and natural way of sins conveyance, for
which cause God would have all men to proceed from one: and not that other,
which for ought yet said, seems to be an unjust course of man's devising.

And as it cannot be proved that it is, Ans. 2. It may be proved that it is not.
so it is easy to prove that it is not Gods decree, because it is contrary to
his word. For if the soul be created good, it must needs be unwilling to enter
into this sinful condition: else it should even therein sin, and none I hope
will say now (as some did of old) that it sinned before it came into the body:
and being unwilling to enter, It shall be enforced to sin.
God cannot justly force it into the body, nor punish it for doing that which
himself caused. Now God forbid that we should once imagine such a thought of
him. Genesis 18.25
Shall not the Judge of all the world do righteously? Zeph. 3.5.
Can Justice it self deal unjustly? No verily: in equity it self there can
be no iniquity.

Again, 2. It shall be unjustly punished. Ezekiel. 18.20.
Take it the most favorable way that can be, and it must needs be and is
granted by all, that for a good soul to be thus united* and set into such a
condition, is a punishment of Adams sin. Now since Gods justice and very nature
proclaims, that the innocent child shall not be punished for the fathers
offense: how can a good soul be punished in so high a degree for the sin of
another who was not the father of it, no nor of the same kind (for Adam was
not a soul but a man) without injustice, yea cruelty in God? how justly might
such a poor soul complain of God in this case, to be so far from mercy as
to be unjust? and how justly may the unjust Anabaptists cry out of us as they
do, that we make God the Author of sin? The Lord has taughtus in his word,
that he abhorres such courses: for my part therefore I am so far from
believing this doctrine, that I quake to think of it.

CHAP. XVIII. That a soul newly created by God, cannot be infected with
Original sin.
2. Not justly corrupted.
AS the soul cannot be justly united; so being united, it cannot be justly
corrupted, if it be immediately created. For whence should the corruption come?
it must be either from the body or the soul, or the union of both: but it can
be from none of these. It is manifest it cannot be from the body, for that
alone cannot be corrupt, and if it could, it cannot corrupt the soul: and if
it could corrupt the soul, yet not with original sin. 1. Not by ^he body.
That the body alone cannot be corrupt and sinful, may easily appear by many
reasons.

1. It cannot be corrupt
First, even the thing it self declares that the simple substance of the body,
is no more capable of virtue or vice than a stone; for sin can be only in a
subject that has power to understand, will, and move of it self: which the
body of it self cannot do, but only by reason of the reasonable soul. So
that the body cannot make the soul, but it is the soul that makes the body
sinful; Romans 6.13.
and so the Apostle also implies, that our members are the souls instruments
of sin. Although therefore the body may be choleric, melancholy, etc. all
the world know, that elementary qualities, humors, and affections, are not of
themselves sinful, but naturally good, and so rather dispose to good than to
evil.

Again, which is of spiritual nature: it being a spiritual evil, even as
obedience to God is a spiritual good.





2. It cannot corrupt the soul.
But let it be granted, contrary to all reason and truth, that the body is first
infected with original sin; can the body fasten the same upon the soul?
Nothing less.



Adam? why do they not cleanse and cleanse and purge the blots and filth of the
body? seeing they do sit as Judges in the body, and rule and guide it
according to their own pleasure.

If it be said that sin sometimes Obj.
begins in the body, as David's eye when he saw Bathsheba bathing of her self;
it is easily answered. For, Ans. 1.
first, the eye as a bodily part sees not, but the soul by the eye; Oculus
non videt, sed anima per oculum.

I am. 1.14
by consent, brought forth death in act: and therefore in his confession he
ascends by this stream to the original fountain, Psalm. 51.5.
namely, that original sin wherein he was conceived. Wherefore if the soul be
created good, and so infused into the body, there is more reason that it should
sanctify the body, than that the body should corrupt it: and according to this
doctrine, it may much better be maintained that all men have original
righteousness, because the soul comes from God, than that we have original
sin, because the body comes from Adam.

3. It cannot corrupt it with original sin.
But let this also be granted, that the soul is corrupted by yielding obedience
to the body, as Adam did to Eve, yet we cannot have original sin ever the more
for this, for the souls yielding obedience to the body, and following the
sinful motions thereof (if any such there be) is actual sin: and not that
original corruption wherewith the whole man is infected by descending from the
loins of Adam, in whom as the Apostle says, We all sinned, Romans 5.12.
and which only was before proved to be original sin. Not actually to
commit something against the will of God is original sin: but that inbred
homebred breathing of sin which is the spawne of all sin; which if it be
seated in the body, how it can corrupt that new created pure soul, without any
provocation or inticement to sin, cannot possibly be imagined. Again, if
Original sin most properly consists in ignorance of mind, averseness of
will, and perverseness of affections, none of which can be immediately in the
body: how can it give these things to the soul? and that original sin
consists mainly in these, besides the testimony of Scripture, and all orthodox
Writers, it is manifest in reason; for that from which actual sin comes, in
that does original sin consist; now all actual sin springs from ignorance,
unbelief, etc. and therefore therein especially original sin must needs
consist. To conclude, seeing the body alone cannot possibly have original sin,
nor give that which it has not; Original sin cannot possibly come by the body.

2. Not by the soul.
Neither can it proceed from the soul, if it be created good, but it will be
said it may; for in the instant of creation God depriveth it of supernatural
gifts for Adams sin; we without supernatural gifts, and a man may as well
imagine a God without goodness, as a good soul without such gifts. Fifthly,
Adam, but our being made sinful for Adam. So that if the soul be created
good, we cannot possibly be thereby infected with original sin.

will be said, that it comes neither by the soul not the body, Not by the
union of both.
but by the union of both, and that we are deceived if we suppose it to happen
through any physical touching, but because in the union we become Adams sons
(he receiving and loosing both for himself and us) his sin is thereby made
ours. Verily Calvin was a man of an excellent judgment, Calv. Inst. lib. 2. c.
1.
who seeing the former grounds unanswerable, flies to this as the last refuge;
yet with reverence to so worthy an instrument, I must seek for better
satisfaction. True it is that original sin is neither puddle nor stench, yet
it is a spiritual Leprosy, hereditarily descending from Adam to all his
natural posterity, and infecteth the whole man, both body and soul, with all
the parts and powers of both: And I would know how, if the soul be pure, and
the body sinful, the infant at first, is half holy and half corrupt, which
is absurd, and if both be clean at the first, can the uniting of them make
both unclean? can two goods (as both are confessed apart) make one evil? 2.
Goods cannot make one evil.
nay, rather they are so much the better, being conjoined, according to that
common saying, Vis unita fortior: neither will it serve the turn to say it is
imputed, and so we are reputed corrupt, for so it can be only, if it be
imputed only in this. 2. Imputation insufficient.
Indeed Christ's righteousness is really ours by imputation: For a voluntary
institution, Obj.
as it is a covenant of grace, Ans.
differs from a necessary course of justice in the order of nature; But we are
not only guilty of his sin, Adam.

CHAPTER XIX. That Original sin cannot pass but by propagation.
FRom the impossibility of the souls creation, we proceed now to the
necessity of the propagation thereof in respect of original sin: the former
being not more contrary to the nature of God, then this is agreeable to the
course of nature:







Wherefore that the truth of the one may appear in Scriptures as well as the
other is manifest in nature,

1. The necessity of proving this.
The first, that original sin can no way justly descend to us, but by
propagation: being the chiefest must chiefly be proved, and so much the rather,
partly, because this being granted, the other two will follow alone, and
partly, because some are of opinion, that we may justly be punished for Adams
sin, though we had never been borne of him; even as when one brother spends
the estate which he received for himself and all the rest. And so indeed all
must hold that hold the immediate creation of the soul, else there can be no
original sin: which course (being as I think) unequal, is as far from God as
God is from injustice.

1. The scriptures teach this and none others. (...).
First therefore this may appear by the clear testimonies of the Scripture,
for, says the Apostle, death passed upon all men, by one man in whom all men
sinned: or, because all men sinned in him. Whence it is manifest not only Romans
5.12.
that Adam was then all men, that is, the stock and root of all men
naturally; in whom all men were, and so sinned in him and with him; but also
that his sin is therefore imputed to his posterity, because they were in him.
For if the death threatened to him for sin, passed upon all, because all were in
him; it is plain, that the sin for which that death was threatened, was imputed
for the same cause; namely, because we were all in him. Now for the same cause
it was imputed to us then when we were in him, for the same cause it is
imputed now that we are out of him; and therefore as his sin was then ours,
because according to the course of nature we were in him: so it is now ours,
because by course of nature we are come out of him. So that Adams sin is ours
by imputation, and by propagation: but by imputation only, because by
propagation: yea so by this that* the other may well loose the name. For it is
not the imputing of another sin to us which was not ours: but by propagation
that is made ours naturally, which was before potentially only. And thus by
the order of nature (which is the rule we must go by in this) his sin is as
truly ours, we being potentially in him, as his own.

The Antithesis shows there can be no other.
This also farther appears by the Antithesis which the Scripture makes
between the first and second Adam Christ Jesus. For, says the Apostle, as in
Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22.
so in Christ shall all be made alive. And as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
Romans 5.19.
And again, If one dyed for all; 2 Cor. 5.14.
then are all dead. Whence it appears that as Adam was the stock of
mankind, in whom all men were by nature; so was Christ the head of the Elect,
in whom all they were by grace. For this is that admirable way, in
consideration whereof men and Angels may stand amazed, whereby God had from
eternity decreed, to give his creatures a higher perfection by grace, than he
could possibly give them by nature; for therein stands the opposition, which
alone well considered, may happily put an end to this question; that mistake
being indeed the ground of this error. Mark this difference or rather
similitude between grace and nature.
For they are deceived that think Adams sin to be imputed as Christ's
righteousness: the one being by the ordinance of nature, and the other of
grace; the one a voluntary institution of the creator, the other a necessary
operation of the creature: the one a work of mercy wherein kindness must be
showed without cause, the other a work of justice, wherein punishment ought not
to be inflicted but upon due defect. So that if we will here make a true
Antithesis, we must say, that as in Christ we fulfilled the Law, suffered
death, and are now in the seat of salvation, because we are in him as members
of his body by grace: so in Adam we did eat of the forbidden fruit, and are
under the condemnation of hell, because we were in him, and are still members
of his body by nature. And thus Adams sin shall be as truly ours by nature, as
Christ's righteousness is by grace* For as Christ derives his righteousness to
his children by grace, so Adam communicates his sin to his children by nature.
The means whereby Christ does it is by spiritual regeneration: Adam by
natural generation. Now therefore I conclude, that as Christ's righteousness
can be no way imputed unto us, but by means of regeneration, whereby we are
ingrafted into him, and made members of his body by the ordinance of grace: so
Adams sin cannot be imputed to us or become ours, but by generation, whereby we
descend from him, as members of his body, by the ordinance of nature.

The Law of Justice required it.
Again, it is contrary to Gods law of justice, that one should be punished for
another fault, yea, even innocent children for their wicked parents, much more
many thrifty brethren for one prodigal. Hence it was that the Lord abhorred
that wicked proverb of the Israelites; Ezekiel. 18.2, 3, 4
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge;
as I live says the Lord, ye shall not use this proverb, etc. the soul that
sins it shall dye. And again, he says, Verse. 20.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father
bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous shall be
upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. True it is
indeed the Lord will visit the sins of the parents upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation: but himself says, it is of them that hate him.
Exodus 20.5
And not simply for their fathers sins, but for their own: and the rather to
afflict the parents, who often live to see the fourth generation. Hence also the
Lord made a law that the fathers should not be put to death for the children,
nor the children for the parents; but every man should die for his own sin; and
it is indeed no less contrary to justice than to the Lords own practice; Deuteronomy.
24.16.
for who was ever more excellent than some that came of wicked parents, and who
more wicked than some that came of good parents, whereof not only the
Scriptures but also daily experience yield innumerable examples: and perhaps
the more to confute this error. On the other side, what can be more just and
natural than that all things should be in their first principles, and partake
of their natures: Mat. 7.17.
nature teaches that if the tree be evil, so must the fruit be: Romans 11.16
and divinity allows that if the root be holy, so should the branches be.
And hence God is just in making this order, might easily be cleared, but need
not here to be disputed.

Christ's righteousness proves it.
Lastly, The original righteousness of Christ's humane nature plainly proves
it; for he was freed from this corruption by his extraordinary generation: and
why should he herein differ from us to free him from sin, if we be not
hereby sinful? Again, if Adams sin be imputed unto us simply for that we are
men, as Adam was (because whatsoever he received or lost, was for all mankind
as well as for himself;) it cannot be avoided but it must be imputed to Christ
so far forth as he is man, as well as unto us. But God forbid that we should
say, Christ was sinful. Woe were us if this were true. And yet true it must
needs be, if the being man will make us sinful; for that his sin is to be
imputed to all men: If, I say, the mere being man, without being mere man
will do it. We must therefore beware of this, and hold, that not the being a
man, as Adam was, but our sinning in him, and now being sinfully propagated
from him, is both the cause and means whereby his sin is derived unto us: from
both which by his extraordinary generation. Luke 1.35.
Christ is not only free, but sanctified from the womb, and holy from his
first conception, as presently we shall see.

CHAP. XX. That Original sin cannot be propagated, unless the whole man be.
We sinned in Adam only as we were in him.
IT being evident that original sin cannot pass, but by propagation. I proceed
now to prove that it cannot be propagated, unless the whole man be; and this
will easily follow upon the former grounds; for as we sinned in Adam, only as
we were in him; so we are sinful from him, only as we are from him.
Wherefore as if the whole man was not potentially in Adam, the whole man did
not sin in him; so, if the whole man did not proceed from him, the whole man
cannot have original sin from him. For it is impossible we should be in him,
and sin in him, in that respect wherein we neither were in him nor could sin in
him, that i^, without the whole man: and therefore if the whole man neither was
nor could be in him, nor from him, the whole man neither have nor can have fin
in him, or from him. So that if we say we were in him in our bodies only, then
they only and not we sinned in him: yea, even they did not sin in him, for
bodies simply considered, cannot sin, as we heard before: and therefore to say
we sinned in our bodies only, is as much as to say, we did not sin at all.
Besides, The whole man is the subject of sin.
it is manifest that neither the body nor the soul alone is the subject of
sin, but the person or whole man. For if according to the rule of reason, that
be the proper subject to which the accident properly cleaves: then either the
whole man is the subject of sin, or else the whole man is not properly sinful.
Obj.
And why else is the law given to the whole man? and the whole man rewarded or
punished, Ans.
according to his virtuous, or vicious manner of living? If any object, Obj. 2.
that the soul cannot be punished alone after death: Ans. 2.
I answer, Neither is it simply as a soul, but as the soul of a wicked man.
If they reply, that so our souls sinned in Adam, not as our souls, but as the
souls of-men. I answer (nay, they must answer themselves) that according to
their doctrine, the soul never was before, and so had no being in nature, no
not potentially: much less was it the soul of a man, and least of all could
it sin in Adam.

5. Scriptures.
Seeing therefore I could not sin in Adam, but as I was in him, and I sinned in
him in my whole person, consisting of soul and body: and that not by I wot not
what imaginary imputation, but really and truly, as I was potentially in him by
the law of nature: it necessarily follows that I was naturally and really in
him, in my whole person, both soul and body, and so have proceeded from him.
And hereto serve the former Scriptures, in him all men sinned: and, Romans 5.12.
1 Cor. 15.22.
in Adam all dye: speaking of the whole person, and therefore so must we. For
what is mortal man, that he should contradict the holy Ghost; or seek a new
way when God has chalked out the old? Wherefore I conclude, that as none can
partake of Christ's righteousness, unless the whole man be regenerated and
borne again, by and from his grace, Ioh. 3.3.
so none can partake of Adams sin, unless the whole person be generated, by
and from his nature.

CHAP. XXI. That the whole man cannot be propagated, unless the soul be.
1. The whole cannot be without the essential parts.
IN the last place it remains to prove, that if the whole man do; the soul
also must needs come from Adam: for this must also be proved, be it never so
manifest, because some seeing the former grounds unanswerable, would make us
believe, that the whole man may be said to be in Adam, though the soul comes
from God. I deny not but it may be said, but I cannot see how it can be said
truly. For what can be more false and absurd, than to say the whole was in
Adam, but not the essential parts, whereof the whole consists. And indeed
such a manner of being must be an idle imagination, or nothing, for it is
impossible to be either really or rationally. But what is their reason? man
gives the subsistence to the person, and the soul comes from Adam quoad
existentiam, though not quoad essentiam. But I deny this too: man does indeed
something in the subsistence of the person, but that (as they say) is only to
provide, I know not what, a body (it should be) without a form; which at the
most is but the least part, and therefore not the whole nor half.

2. The conjunction if it put them in one case. cannot yet bring them from one
place.
But they say, man conjoynes both natures together, whereby it does subsist by
it self as a person. But neither is this true, for the conjunction is (they
say) no body knows how long after co^ception; and therefore not man but the
woman must do it alone. And yet hot she neither, for they say, God does
create it in the infusion and infuse it in the creating. But say that God gave
the soul to the parents, and they did unite them, would it follow that the
conjunction of both, makes both to come from Adam? Why do they not rather come
both from God, and not at all from Adam? it were more reason the greater should
draw the lesser, than the less the greater; and that the baser should attend
the more noble, rather than the most noble to wait on the baser: verily if the
whole man may be properly said to proceed from Adam, because the body does;
much more may the whole man be said to proceed from God, because the soul
does. The vanity of this reason (that the whole man comes from Adam, because
the body does) may appear by the like. If a lame man should have a wooden leg
joined to his body, Simile.
might it be said his whole body grew in the wood, because his leg did? nothing
less. And yet is not the wooden leg so much inferior to the body, as the
body is to the soul. Any child therefore may take away these stilts from such
a lame reason as this is.

3. It could not be in Adams time nor ours.
And if any will still urge it in good earnest, let him tell me when the whole
man was in Adam? since the former Scriptures say plainly it was, it must needs
be in Adams time, or ours, yea in both: but according to this doctrine it could
be in neither, and so not at all. It could not be in Adams time, for the whole
man had not being in nature (nor not potentially in respect of the soul) many
hundred years after; neither could it be in our time, for Adam was dead
likewise many thousand years before we had any being, especially in respect of
the better part of the soul: and so consequently never was, contrary to those
Scriptures, and the doctrine of original sin. It must needs be therefore that
the whole man, as well soul body, form as matter, even the whole compound was
potentially in Adam (as the whole tree in the root or seed, many grains of
wheat in one) and so being naturally propagated from him, does partake of his
nature both in soul and body.

Else mark what absurdities will farther follow. Absurdities.
That we were in Adam in that wherein we were not: 1.
2.
we sinned without that without which we could not sin: 3.
the whole man was in Adam, and yet never came from him: 4.
and we left that in Adam, which we never had in him, viz. our souls. 5.
Then also Adam shall be still full of souls, which yet he never had: 6.
and (that I may not be endless in that which is needles) who can abide a
speech so contrary to it self, the whole was in Adam, but not that which is
the whole? All which are rather wholly to be laughed at, than confuted in any
part.

CHAP. XXII. That the whole humanity of Christ, was taken from the Virgin.
The use and order of handling this questio^n.
HAving thus showed out of the Scriptures the necessity of the souls
propagation, by reason of original sin; I proceed now to prove it from the
incarnation of Christ, which yet is accounted the maine let why it cannot be
propagated: for because the Scripture says, He is like unto us in all things,
Heb 4.15.
sin only excepted: and it is taken for granted, that his soul was created of
nothing: this is used not only as one of the chief weapons to maintain the
creation of ours; but also as a shield to defend them from the force of many
other Arguments, which cannot otherwise possibly be avoided. It is very
necessary therefore fully to clear this point, and to show both that it was
mediately (though extraordinarily) produced from Adam, as well as ours, and how
so it could be free from sin.

No Scripture for it.
That the soul of our Savior was not immediately created of nothing, may
appear; first, because it is more than is in the Scripture. 1.
The holy Ghost in the description of Christ's incarnation, says nothing of any
such thing, no notwithstanding it is thought to be such a notable, yea, such a
necessary way to clear him from sin. 2.
And who dare say or think the holy Ghost should omit one of the most principal
things, in the mightiest matter that ever was revealed to men or Angels? yea,
how contrary to all reason is it, 3.
that when the four Evangelists were so careful, to set forth every material
circumstance (touching his birth, life, death, etc.) so as that which is
wanting in one, is supplied by another; yet in this alone, which is the chief
of all, they should all forget to mention it, if there had been any such
matter? And why then should we thrust in our conceits of such things as never
were heard of in the Scriptures? For from the beginning of the world since
Adam) it was never heard that a soul was created of nothing: and shall we
then father our imaginations upon the Scripture? yea, why or how dare man
speak where the holy Ghost is silent? know, Deuteronomy. 14.2
that cursed is he that adds ought to the word of God?

Scriptures against it.
But not only do the Scriptures not speak it, but they plainly affirm the
contrary: as where it says, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: and in thy seed shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed. and 22.18.
Where by seed is meant the whole nature of man which Christ took: and how
can it be denied then, but his soul as well as his body was their seed.
Again, Christ was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1.3.
that is, his whole humanity; for it is there opposed to his divinity As also
where it is said, God raised up Christ, Act. 2.30.
of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh: And how else can he be in
all things (except sin) like unto us, who (as is abundantly proved before) are
mediately traduced from Adam both soul and body.

3. Then Adams sin must be imputed to him.
Again, If his and all souls be immediately created by God, then the
imputation of Adams sin to all men, must lay hold on Christ as man. Neither is
it sufficient to say, that he is more than a man, for if Adams sin be imputed
unto all men, eo nomine, even because they are men, it cannot be avoided, but
it must light upon him also, so far forth as he is man. And thus they must
needs fall into that which they so much fear; the making of Christ's humane
nature sinful: so slippery is it to walk out of the right way, though never
so warily.

4. His soul and body conceived together.
This appears also in that his soul and body were conceived together both at
once: and not after the perfecting of the vegetative and sensitive souls; as
they say it is with us. For this is generally confessed, because the divine
nature is immediately united to the soul, and by the soul to the body: so
that unless we should say, that his body did subsist by it self out of the
divine nature before it was assumed; or else that the divine nature was united
with a brute body, (or unformed un-informed Embrio) which no man. I believe, is
so brutish to affirm: it must of necessity be granted (so forcible is the
truth) that however it is with us, his soul and body was conceived together.
Which being so, it follows by the same reason that if he be like unto us, and
we like unto him in all things, except sin; our souls and bodies also
conceived together as his was. And if it be granted that all souls are present
at the first conception; there will be small reason to think they come by
immediate creation.

5. His miraculous co^ception.
Besides, it is manifest from the manner of his conception; for if his soul had
come immediately from God, he might have been begotten after the common manner
of men without sin: but this could not be: and therefore the former is not. The
connection of the proposition is manifest, for if his and all souls do come
immediately from God, Original sin cannot possibly come by propagation: but
either because God bereaves it of supernatural gifts, whereby it becomes
evil; or by the union with the body at the instant whereof it is guilty of
Adams sin, because the soul of man. But seeing Christ's soul so soon as it
was, was together with the body one person with the eternal word: he must
needs be exempted from the common condition of men, and so even (by their
doctrine) neither could be bereaved of those gifts; nor guilty of Adams sin,
being more than a man. Neither can it be said, Generation not evil.
that there is evil in the act of generation, for that is naturally good; 1.
and the soul (they say) is not then present: 2.
and the body alone is not capable of sin: no though the soul were present, if
(as they say) man propagate the body only. Wherefore if his soul had been
immediately created by God, he might well have bin propagated without sin. But
the assumption that this could not be, is no less apparent, if for no more but
this; that if it could, no question it should. For God and nature do nothing
in vain; and we cannot deny the truth of that saying, Frustra fit per plura
quod fieri potest per pauciora. So that either this extraordinary work of the
holy Ghost was in vain, or else Christ's soul was not immediately created.

6. The confession of the adversaries.
Lastly, For the confirmation hereof, I will only add one reason more, taken
from the reasoning of the Adversaries unto this Doctrine, who therefore prove
the holy Ghost not to be Christ's father (though he overshadowed the Virgin)
because the matter of his humanity was not from the holy Ghost, but from the
Virgin. From whence I might conclude;

then the greatest part of his humanity should have been from the holy Ghost:
because all external works of God are common to each person in Trinity.

Secondly, 2.
That his soul was taken from the Virgin, for they say his humanity was:
whereof I am sure the soul is the principal part: yea, that without which it
cannot be humanity.

But that which I do especially conclude from hence is, that if the holy Ghost
cannot be Christ's father, because he gave not the matter of his humanity,
Christ cannot be the son of Adam nor David according to the promise: no nor the
son of man (and so no Savior) unless he receive the matter of his humanity
(whereof the soul is the chief part) from them. And herein indeed they speak
the truth, for it is impossible to be a natural father to that whereunto we
give not the whole matter, yea and form too: as we shall see when we come to
the rules of nature, which God has instituted, and from whence the truth of
this is also to be fetched.

How Christ was true man.
I conclude therefore, that Christ's whole humanity, both soul and body, was
traduced from Adam: that is, deduced out of his substance, though not after the
common manner, but separated from the person of the Virgin only by the
miraculous work of the holy Ghost, which uses to be taken from both sexes in
ordinary generation. And though a soul cannot by the power of nature be
produced of one soul, no more than a body: yet it being performed by
supernatural power, it is a true soul no less than the body is a true body;
and both together makes a true man, no less than Eve was a true woman (whom
Adam called bone of his bone, Genesis 2.23.
and flesh of his flesh, even his other selfe-woman) although she was taken
only out of man. For that which the Apostle spoke in a spiritual sense, is
true also literally, that We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones: Ephesians. 5.30.
and consequently so is he of ours: which could not be if he had not the true
nature of man, though taken out of a woman only: as well as Eve, who was made
only of a man: yea, much more because she was immediately made perfect at the
first: and he conceived of seed, formed, nourished, and brought forth by
degrees: like unto us in all things excepting only the manner of his first
conception, that so he might be free from sin. And here let us stay a little to
behold and wonder at the admirable correspo^dency, yea, double concordancy in
the fourfold production of mankind, to wit, in Adam and us* Eve and Christ:
immediately and mediately: after this manner.

A double harmony in the fourfold productio^ of mankind.
Adam made immediately without man or woman.

Other men mediately, both of man and woman.

Eve partly both ways, of man and woman.

Christ also both ways, of no man but woman.

Thus by the same authority that they would prove our souls created of
nothing, Conclusion.
because Christ's was; I can prove they were not because his was not, yea, by so
much more, as there are abundance of Scripture, and reasons to confirm this,
and none of all for, but against that.

CHAP. XXIII. That Christ's humanity was never cleansed from sin.
The purity of Christ's Incarnation.
COncerning the Incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, it is commonly
said, that the holy Ghost did sanctify a part of the Virgins substance, which
was then assumed by the divine nature to make the person of Christ. Which words
must be warily interpreted, and wisely understood, for by a part, we are not to
understand a part of her body only, but of her whole person as well soul as
body, whereof his humanity was formed: and by sanctifying, we are not to
imagine cleansing it from sin, but only the consecrating it to this holy
purpose, and endowing it with gifts fitting such a divine union. The former is
already proved, namely, that his whole humanity both soul and body was taken
from the substance of the Virgin: and the latter, how thus it could be free
from sin, we are now to show. For the ground whereof, I will first prove, 1.
that it was not cleansed from sin, 2.
and then show how he could be incarnate without sin. The former I will prove,
first, 1.
because it could not be sinful; and secondly, 2.
if it had been sinful, it could never have been sanctified.

That Christ's humanity was not sinful.
The first, that that part of the Virgins substance which was assumed by the
divine nature, was never sinful, may appear;





cleaving to the person of him in whom it is, and so cannot properly be said to
the substance of man's nature.



None therefore is to be accounted sinful, but only that which necessarily
serves to make up the perfect person of a sinner: and so much, so, is sinful,
and must and shall be punished in it self, or Christ.

Now where no law is, Rom 4.15.
there is no transgression, says the Apostle: not simple parts therefore, but
only persons can be sinful.



Adam, in as much as he was his son, and so by this doctrine must needs be
sinful. This doctrine not so well cleared of old.
But this seems to be granted by Divines, and therefore they say, that the
holy Ghost did in the same moment that it was assumed, cleanse that mass
whereof his body was made from sin: and so it was sanctified from the first
conception in the Virgins womb. Whereof we give this reason, that it became
not the eternal son of God personally to assume unto himself a nature,
stained, defiled, and polluted with sin. And farther they say, that indeed Mary
was a sinner, but the mass of flesh which was taken out of her substance, was
at the same instant sanctified by the operation of the holy Ghost. So that it
is granted, that the substance whereof Christ's humanity was made, was sinful
before it was assumed. This point not being so well cleared, has much troubled
the Church in former ages: being assailed with diverse dangerous errors, why
else did the Marcionites and Manichees hold that Christ had an incorporeall or
heavenly body; which was not taken from the Virgin, but only passed through her?
and what else caused Apollinarius to hold; that Christ had no humane soul, but
only a body which was insould with the deity, but to free him from sin?

2. If it had been sinful, it could never have been sanctified.
That we may therefore fully clear this truth from all such fantastical
opinions; I deny that it can be truly and properly said that Christ's humanity
was ever sinful. And not only for the former reasons, but because if it had
been sinful, it could never have been sanctified; the Son of God could
never have been incarnate, nor any man ever saved. For who should have purged
away that sin? the holy Ghost? nay; there is one only Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus: 1 Timothy 2.5.
and it is through his blood that we have redemption, Ephesians. 1.7.
even the forgiveness of sins: Col. 1.14.20.
and it is the blood of his cross, that reconcileth all things. 1 Pet. 1.2.
And again, Heb. 9.22.
it is the sprinkling of the blood of Christ that gives power to the purging
away of sin: and therefore also it is said, that without shedding of blood
there is no remission. So that the blood of Christ only cleanses from sin.
Yea, but the holy Ghost also sanctifies. It is true, Obj. Mat. 3.11. Ioh. 3.5.
Romans 8.14
the holy Ghost does now sanctify the elect, purg out sin, and infuse grace:
but all by virtue of Christ's redemption. For if he had not first (I mean in
the order of nature) taken away the guilt by his blood no man could have been
sanctified by the Spirit. Now this he could not do by his own humanity, for
it was impossible that he should purge sin, by that blood which he had not: and
therefore if it had been necessary, that Christ should have taken away the guilt
and corruption of his own nature, (which could not be but by the same nature
taken) before he took it; it had been impossible, that ever Christ could have
bin incarnate. Yea, but God is omnipotent. True, Obj. 2.
but his omnipotency cannot work co^tradictions, and such is this: we must take
heed therefore how we hold this, lest at unawares we shut out Christ from being
a Savior, and our selves and all other from salvation by him. Now then if his
substance was never sinful, the work of the holy Ghost herein was not to
cleanse it from sin, but to separate that which was not sinful in it self, from
a sinful creature, that so being free, it might be assured by the divine
nature, and subsist in the person of the same.

CHAPTER XXIV. How Christ's Incarnation was free from corruption?
How Christ was free from sin.
THis ground being laid, we have a fair way opened for the freeing of our
Savior Christ from sin in every respect, although his soul and body came from
Adam as well as ours: which we shall more fully conceive by showing how it was,
1. How free.
and why it was so. 1. His person free.
For the first, seeing neither the substance of soul or body, can be sinful,
as it is substance, but as both together are a person; for as much as Christ's
soul and body is no person, but as it is united with the divine nature: he,
namely, his person never was, and so never could sin in Adam. And thus is his
person free. If then it be said that though his person was not, His humanity
free.
nor could sin in Adam, yet seeing his humanity was in him, and came from him
(else he were not true man) that must needs sin in him. It cannot possibly be
neither. 1. From imputation.
For as is said his humanity without the divinity never was a person, and not
being a person but substance only, 2. By propagation.
he is thereby exempted from the common condition of men, and original sin
could not justly be imputed unto him.

3. His substance in the Virgin free.
Neither could it be propagated, because he was conceived after an extraordinary
manner without man: and thus is his humanity free also. If it be further said,
that though he be not sinful as Christ, nor yet as having the mere substance
of man: yet he must needs be sinful as his substance was belonging to the
person of corrupt Adam, in whom it was, and afterward to the sinful Virgin;
that cannot be neither. For though it were sinful as a part of their persons,
yet as it was so it was none of his. Christ never assumed the person of the
Virgin (for one person cannot be another though sin were not) but he took her
nature or substance only, which because it was good in it self, though sinful
as hers, the holy Ghost did separate it (by an unusual course) from belonging
to her person (and so being by it self it was sinlesse) and then it was
instantly assumed by the eternal Word, and so made the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that in the same moment that it was: being by that union
enriched with supernatural gifts, and exalted above all men and Angels. And
thus also was his substance sinlesse, although it was the substance of the
sinful Virgin. And to conclude, Ioh. 1.29. 1 Pet. 1.19.
thus is he the immaculate Lamb that takes away the sins of the world. 2.
Why his conception was extraordinary.


Now all this was effected by the immediate working of the holy Ghost at the
instant of his conception. For it neither might nor could be performed after
the manner of man's sinful propagation. 1. It could not be by man.
Because if man had ministered the matter of his humanity after the ordinary
way, it should have been sinful in part: that is, as man gave it to be a part
of Christ's person, or endeavored the subsistence of that nature in the person
of the Son, which nature alone would have made a person, and consequently a
sinner. For by the law of nature in ordinary generation, so much as man begets
another person, he begets another sinner (which yet if the soul were
immediately created, were so little, as there could be no original sin, as we
heard before.) So that by propagation the humanity of Christ which is the whole
person, so far as man could in this cause have effected, should have been
sinful. And though not merely as humanity, yet as a nature sinfully
propagated from man, wherewith it was impossible the divine nature should be
united. Seeing therefore it could not be by man: and the Virgin neither might
nor could conceive alone (for corruption must have no hand in it) it was
necessary therefore that it should be done by the supernatural power of God.
And seeing it must be done extraordinarily by the immediate power of God, no
person was so fit for it as the holy Ghost, whose office it properly concerns
from the Father and the Son, to consecrate and set apart for holy uses, and
especially to indue men's souls with supernatural gifts: and therefore most of
all in the incarnation of our Savior Christ, which was absolutely the most
holy of all GODS external works.

And this (as I am undoubtedly persuaded) is the true doctrine of the
Incarnation of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.6, 7 Heb. 4.15 2-6.
who was like unto us in all things, sin only excepted: made of the same
substance both for soul and body, and therefore true man; and yet not sinful.
He was in Adam in respect of his humanity as well as we: and yet sinned not in
him as we did. In the consideration of all which, we may well say with the
Apostle, Without controversy, 1 Timothy 2.16.
great is the mystery of godliness.

Why this truth has been so long obscured.
Thus I hope, I have sufficiently manifested, both by Scripture and reasons
drawn from them, that souls are not immediately created of God of nothing,
but all mediately propagated from Adam: yea, Christ's as well as ours, though
his after an extraordinary manner, because he was an extraordinary man. From
all which, it plainly appears, that the holy Ghost has not left us to wander
in uncertainties, concerning the souls original, but clearly enough revealed
it, had not men set up two false opinions, one of which they thought must needs
be true: and neither having sure footing in the Scripture, because both false,
the truth has been long obscured, and both accounted doubtful, and almost
curious, because difficult to be known.

CHAP. XXV. Natural reasons, proving the souls propagation.
The nature and validity of natural reasons.
HItherto we have proved the souls propagation; by testimonies and reasons
drawn out of the Scripture: and now we are to proceed to natural reasons,
which in worth and authority are to be regarded next the former: they being
the word of God wrought, as the other is his written word: the one we call the
voice of nature, the other the word of grace: the one mediatly manifested in
the creatures, the other immediately revealed by himself. For if nature be (as
is no less commonly than truly said, ordinaria dei potentia) the ordinary
power of God, as miraculous works are his extraordinary power: then by like
reason it follows, that the voice of nature is the ordinary voice of God;
even as the divine Oracles are his extraordinary voice. Now as this question
chiefly concerns nature, so the resolution thereof ought chiefly to be
fetched from nature: whose sentence is therefore so much the more to be
respected; yea, so much that though the Scripture said nothing, yet natures
testimony were in this of sufficient credit alone. And if we will hearken to
nature, I doubt not to make it appear, that there is nothing more manifest in
nature, than this mediate manner of the souls propagation: and when as well
nature as divinite concludes for it, I see not with what reason it can be
gainsaid.

1. Reason from the nature of reason.
The first natural reason which I will produce, shall be from the nature of
reason it self: which teaches not to believe any thing for which we have no
reason, Scripture, nor experience. Some things our senses teach us to believe,
as the virtues of the Loadstone, for which we can render neither Scripture nor
reason, but only experience. Some things reason teaches us, It has neither
Scripture, sense, nor reason. 1.
as that the whole conteines the parts, which we would believe without
Scriptures or experience, only by reason. And some things we receive from
Scripture, as the Trinity in the Unity, which cannot appear either by sense
or reason, but only by faith. 2.
But none of these can manifest the souls immediate creation, for it is
confessed to be above sense or reason, neither is there any Scripture to prove
it. For who ever heard of a soul newly created since the first in the
beginning? is it likely that God should continually do such wonderful works,
which the Scripture never spoke of, and whereof there can no example be given?
yea, is it not contrary to all sense and reason, that God should work a
perpetual miracle, and that the most omnipotent work that can be, and yet
this only among all the works of God should be omitted in the Scripture? If
there were such a thing as this, we should need none other Arguments to
confute all the Atheists and Epicures in the world: this therefore of all other
should have been revealed, if it had been so.

2. From the order of nature.
Seeing therefore there is no divine testimony to warrant it, there had need be
strong reasons to make a man believe it. Neither is it unreasonable only, but
as it seems to me a most unnatural opinion: clean contrary to the whole
order of nature, and end of all GODS extraordinary works. For although the
supreme goodness of GOD would not content it self without producing more
good, for which cause he created the world: Why God made the world. Why he
instituted nature.
yet for as much as his essence is chiefly manifested in the virtues which are
essential to himself only, and the end of all his works is to manifest
himself, which as it is the greatest good, is this greatest glory: he
therefore could not without disparagement to his own excellency, work always
immediately in the matters of his creatures, as in creating new substances of
nothing, but only in bringing to an higher perfection, by qualifying them with
his own essential virtues, so far as the creature is capable: and for this
cause at their first creation he disposed all things in such order, as they
might persist of themselves, without his immediate working any more in their
matter or substance, which order we call nature.

It breeds a disturbance in the course of nature.
Now seeing this is true in Angels, and all other creatures that ever God
created; were it not unreasonable and unnatural too, to disturb the order of
all Gods works in exempting man only? Nay, then let nature go to wrack, and
every thing be done miraculously, for the whole order of nature is broken, and
instituted in vain. And for my part, I think that God would have rather
created men together when he made Adam (as he did Angels) than thus to continue
creating to the worlds end.

3. From the end of GODS works.
But it pleased the wisdom of God to make choice of this course, not only for
the former reason, namely, because it was most fit for the excellency of his
nature, 1. This is a disparagement to God.
which might work no more in the substance of his creatures than needs must:
but also for the meanness of ours, which require his working by means, after a
natural order, 2. Unfit for us.
proportionable to that reason he has given us (which only our nature was
capable of) the better to manifest himself unto us. 3. Against the order of
grace.


Again, that so he might propagate his Church of mankind successively by
course of nature, 4. A vain work against nature.
who thus according to his decree might and did all fall most fitly and justly
in one Adam by nature; as they are restored again most fitly and justly in
another Adam Christ Jesus by grace.

And lastly, that he might not work perpetual miracles, which only manifest
his power, one of the meanest of his attributes: which yet is so fully
manifested without it in the first creation of all things of nothing, and still
preserving them, that it should be in vain for him to do so at the best: and
therefore certainly he does not; Arist. De Caelo. lib. 1. cap. 4.
according to the Rule, Deus and natura nil frustra faciunt.

CHAP. XXVI. Reasons from the nature of generation.
Man can father no more than he begets.
NOw by this mediate manner of Gods working, I mean the rules of nature, and
that order which God instituted for all creatures in the beginning: it is
impossible that Adam should be our father and we his children, if we have not
our whole man as well soul as body from him. For if we receive only the least
part of our selves, that is, our bodies from him, then he does not beget a man,
that is to say, a reasonable creature, but only I wot not what formelesse
matter or dead carkase: for such an uncouth thing is the body without the
soul: and though a soul comes afterward from another, Obj. Ans.
that is nothing to the parents, for they beget only the former: and I trow it
is unjust to make them father that which they never begat. So that by the
course of nature, if man do not beget the whole man, he cannot possibly be
said to be a father to the whole man.

No father without giving the form.
This farther appears for that by the law of nature, it is not the giving of
the matter alone, much less the matter of the body only that makes a father,
for that is of the elements: in the conveyance whereof the father is as it were
an instrument only: but the form is properly and immediately his, which if he
do not propagate to his offspring, he can no more be a father to his children,
than to fleas or lice, that breed of his matter, but without his form, than
which, what grosser absurdity can be in nature.

3. Else he cannot be a father to the body.
Besides, man should then be so far from being a father to the whole man, that
he could be father to no part of him. For he can be but partly a father that
begets but part of a creature, and so not a whole father to any part. And if
fatherhood consists especially in giving the form, and that comes only from
God; he only is a father to the whole man rather: yea, is not there much more
reason to say, God only is our father, because the soul, the more noble part,
comes from him; than that Adam is, because the baser part the body, and yet not
the body neither, but something like the body comes from him? I suppose any
reasonable man will grant it, without any farther reason.

4. Else he can beget nothing.
And thus he cannot be father to our bodies, unless to our souls also: yea, it
is impossible in nature, that he should beget any thing without the soul. For,
there can be no natural body without form, and no form of a humane, body but
the soul.

If therefore man does not propagate the soul, together with the body, he
cannot propagate any thing but a mere nullity, viz. nothing at all.

5. Else he cannot beget at all.
Moreover, I say, he cannot propagate at all, for generation is not of parts,
but of creatures, the matter and form simply considered, cannot be said to be
generated, but the creature, consisting of matter and form: and therefore when
I say the soul is generated or produced, it is to be understood jointly with
the body, because the whole is: otherwise neither can properly be said to be
generated, but rather congenerated; so that if man begets not both, he begets
not at all.

6. Else man shall be inferior to beasts.
Again, If man cannot beget man, he is by nature herein inferior to brute
beasts, yea, even the basest creatures, who yet can propagate their like, both
in regard of soul and body: And to make man herein inferior to beasts, Ob. Ans.
what can be more absurd? Neither is it not any disparagement, so long as his
soul comes from an higher principle; for it is not only an indecorum, and a
gross deformity in nature, that man should be left destitute of that power
which is given to brute beasts in so maine a thing, yea, even the highest
degree of natural perfection: but also it casts an aspersion upon GOD
himself, as if he were overseene in endeavoring to make a creature subject to
the laws of nature, of so high perfection, as could not be subjected
thereunto: and so God should fail in his workmanship, and be constrained to
help himself, and work perpetually in creating souls, notwithstanding his
creating all Angels together, which could not be propagated, and instituting
natural means for the rest, that so he might rest, and yet cannot.

7. Like begets like.
Yea, do not the contrary directly follow, and not only from the common rule
in nature, like begets like, and therefore, man, man: but also because if man
be the most excellent of the creatures, having all or at least the most
excellent faculties in an higher perfection than they, he should so much the
rather be more able to propagate his like than they? yea, shall any beast bring
forth another, which shall be able to persist of it self, and bring forth
more; and shall the God of all creatures make man's nature so lame and
imperfect, that he and he only cannot go alone as well as they, unless God
lead him? If this be true, God shall be the most step-father to man, and man
the worst creeple of all Gods creatures.

8. Everyman two fathers or none.
Furthermore, As men can have no children this way: so children can have no
fathers, or else every one two fathers. For if the soul comes from God, who is
a man's father, the whole man's, I mean? not Adam, for he is the father of our
bodies only; nor God, for our souls only come from him. If then neither God
nor Adam be our father, whose sons I beseech you are we? By this doctrine he
is a wise child that knows his own father. Perhaps it will be said, we are
the sons of both. But then every one must have two fathers, an infinite and a
finite father. Oh strange absurdity, and no less ridiculous than impossible*
for how can both be, when by the laws of nature neither can* To be short,
either they must make GOD and Adam both one, or else every child must have two
fathers, or none at all.

9. Children like their parents.
Neither is it without force, that children are ordinarily like their parents,
and not only in the features of the body, but in the faculties of the mind
also. Now though all souls be essentially alike, and this is not always true,
neither in soul nor body, for diverse reasons, yet since it is true in both for
the most part, it appears that the parents have more in generation, than the
body; yea, so much as the whole man is ordinarily like the parents, so much is
the whole man propagated from him.

CHAP. XXVII. Reasons from the nature of the soul.
Everyman must have two souls.
NEither is this kind of propagation more agreeable to the ordinary course of
generation, than to the nature of the soul it self: nor that of the immediate
creation more contrary to the one than the other. For, first, as by that
doctrine every one must have two fathers, or none, so also two souls; for if
the rational soul be infused by God after the perfecting of the vegetative
and sensitive souls, as they are called (though in truth both be performed by
one soul, as we see in beasts) I would know what soul it was that did
inform and shape the fruit before, giving it vegetation and sense? These
things cannot possibly be done without of soul, which if it were not the
rational, was some other unreasonable soul, such as is in beasts; and so
every man must have two soul. For we see by experience, the former did not
perish at the coming of the latter, as it is in the form of corporeal
substances, when one perish, then another succeeds; but here both, remain, and
therefore either must be mingled and made one with the reasonable scule (which
cannot be unless it be corruptible;) or else every man must have two souls,
one reasonable and another unreasonable: which opinion is verily as far from
reason, as the soul is from being unreasonable.

Again, 2.
The soul is an essential part of man, The soul the chief part of man.
and the very form of man, without which man is not man, and therefore it is
against nature, and contrary to all reason, that man by the course of nature
propagating a creature like himself, should not be able to propagate such an
essential part as the soul is: especially seeing it is granted he can
propagate such an accident as sin is. Yea, how can this doctrine possibly be
true, that man should propagate that which is unnatural, and not that which is
natural; an unnatural accident, and not a natural essential part? sin which
cannot be without the soul, and not the soul without which there can be no
sin.

3 The soul compared with other spirits.
This also will farther appear, if we compare the nature of the soul with
other spirits. For it is observed by the learned, and manifest even to the
ignorant, that GOD has created three sorts of spirits in the world.

First, Angels, which are so spiritual that they cannot be joined with bodies.

Secondly, The spirits of beasts, etc. which are so corporal, that they cannot
be separated from bodies.

Thirdly, Men's souls, as a mean which can both live without bodies (as after
death) like Angels; and united with bodies, as in this life like beasts.

Again, we see it is the will and ordinance of God, that Angels should neither
increase nor decrease: corporal spirits (as I may call them) both increase and
decrease: and that souls should increase and multiply, but never decrease or
perish. Do not then the order of nature teach then, that as Angels ate
immediately created by God only, and the spirits of beasts altogether mediately
propagated, so the souls of men, which are the mean betwixt both, should be
produced, partly by the immediate power of God, and partly mediately by
propagation, or rather by such a manner of production as is even a mean
between creation and propagation. It were to disturb the order of nature, to
confound the nature of the soul, and to make a mingle-mangle of the orderly
works of God, to deny it.

4. The nature of the soul it self.
And this is no less apparent, if we consider the nature of the foul alone,
then compared with others. For it is to be considered, that the soul is the
lowest nature of all incorporeall spirits, endued with power to use the bodily
organs, to those purposes whereunto they were ordained by nature: but chiefly
by its rational faculty, to get knowledge of all sensible things, which senses
ar^ (...) proportioned by God, that the reasonable soul by them get all its
natural knowledge. Ye^ even but knowledge of God himself, does ordinarily
arise from sense, only ordered by reason: and reason it self is a mean
between the sense of beasts, and intelligence of Angels. And therefore God
has united the soul with the body, it is incompleate without it, it naturally
desires union with it, It cannot ordinarily know any thing but by it, and the
end and use of it is in all things naturally to work mediately by the body.
For the soul is not such a strange nature, dwelling in the body miraculously,
as some imagine, but lovingly united by a sweet union, and fit concordance in
nature. And therefore without question, as the nature, use, end, and all
ordinary faculties and works, are naturally and mediately by these corporal
natures, so also is the original, and could not otherwise have such union and
sympathy with the body. But yet as the nature and works also are some ways
extraordinary, without and above all elementary natures, so proportionably
thereunto, God has an extraordinary and supernatural work in producing of it.

5. The faculty of propagation seated in the soul.
Another reason that the soul is propagated, may be because the faculty of
propagation belongs as well to the soul as the body: yea, has originally the
chief seat in the soul only. For the body alone is but a dead instrument
(as the pen in the hand of the writer) and therefore must needs be in the
soul, which is the first principle, and principal cause of all actions:
unless we should grant more souls than one, and disturb, yea, destroy the
uniforme government of nature, by placing diverse commanders in one body. Now if
the soul has a part, yea, the chiefest power in propagation; it were most
absurd to say, that all is spent in the producing of I know not what brutish
thing, which is neither nan not beast. And seeing according to the rule of
reason, such as the cause is, such also is the effect: how can it be but the
soul must produce a soul, and consequently the whole man the whole man.

6. The soul present in conception.
Add hereunto that the soul does accompany the seed, and perfecteth the body
from the very first conception, which not only the ancient Philosophers.
acknowledge as most agreeable to nature and reason; whence it is that nothing
is more common with Aristotle, Arist. de^ genesis anim. l. 1. cap. 3.
than that the power of the soul is in the seed, making its own house, fitly
framing the bodily organs, and bringing them to the highest perfection that the
first constitution of the matter is capable of: but even amongst our modern
Philosophers and Divines, it is acknowledged, for such effects cannot be done
without a soul, as the most acute Scaliger abundantly proves. Scal. Exerc. 6.
Sect. 5.
And if the soul informs the seed at the very instant of perfection, when
there are as yet no organs, is it not more probable, that it is mediately
propagated with the seed, than immediately created by GOD? Yes doubtless:
Neither need any doubt how the rational soul, can (...) the seed without
organs, know that the chief, yea, the only immediate organs of the soul are
the spirits, and these are as well in the seed, as in the most perfect body.

The souls work in the Embrio.
Although therefore there are, as yet, no eyes or ears, for the soul to hear
or see with, yet there is work enough for it, to heat and cool, moysten and
dry; and thereby to separate and conjoine, to thicken and thin, to extend and
contract, to make rough and smooth, to harden and soften: these and such other
are the works of the soul, whereby it does ordain, place, number, and form
the seed. For though they be the prime and secondary qualities of the
elements, yet in such a natural body, all are do^^ by the power of the soul,
and none of all can be done without it.

7. God the efficient cause.
Lastly, It appears that not nature, but God is the efficient cause of the
souls procreation, because even elementary bodies cannot be produced without a
more excellent efficient than themselves. For we see that all natural things,
yea every plant that grows out of the earth, besides the material cause the
elements, whereof it is compounded, and the seed whence it receives the
form, has also an external efficient cause, which certainly is the influence
of the celestial Orbs, who by causing motion, gives it the first hint and
power of growing. And seeing the soul has such similitude with these
corporal natures, that though they have not matter and form as they have; yet
having a spiritual kind of composition, which for likeness justly meriteth
the name: therefore as the spiritual matter and form thereof is propagated
from the parents by the seed; so it must also have a spiritual external
efficient cause more excellent than it self, which can be no other but the
immediate power of God the father of spirits. For as all natural bodies have
an efficient cause correspondent to their natures, which in course of nature
cannot be good immediately with whose nature they have so small affinity, yea,
so great contrariety: but these heavenly powers, with whom they have such
sympathy, being of the same corporal nature, though of a more excellent
temper: so the efficient cause of our souls must needs be agreeable to their
natures, which cannot be the Stars, which are far inferior, but God who is
also a spirit, and of a more excellent nature than our spirits; even as the
Sun is more glorious than these earthly substances: between whom there is
such sympathy, that even as plants welke and fade, without the force of their
efficients, that heavenly lamp the Sun, and the rest of those celestial
orbs; but grow and flourish with them: so how a soul separated from God and
one united unto his and enjoying the beams of his grace, is either miserable
or happy: we know in part, but cannot perfectly comprehend.

CHAP. XXVIII. Reasons from other considerations.
Rareness of humane conceptio^.
BEsides these arguments taken from the ordinary course of generation, and the
nature of the soul, diverse other probable reasons may be produced. As first,
the often failing, and indeed rareness of humane conception in comparison of
other creatures, as common experience teaches. Now if the soul be created
after the perfecting of the body, then the first conception and breeding being
by the power of nature only, why shoud there not be as much frequency and
certainty in the propagation of mankind as of other creatures? This rareness
of humane conception does intimate unto us, that it is not by the power of
nature alone that man is conceived in the womb, but that there is some more
special work of God in it, than in the generation of other creatures. And if
it cannot be denied but God has such a special work in the conception of
man, why should we not think that the soul has its beginning then also,
rather than (with reverence be it spoken) to put God to a double labor, and to
set him twice on work in every man generation.

2. God should be tied to nature.
And this may farther appear, not only by testimony of Scripture, which makes
conception to be a special work of God, and never mentions any
extraordinary power, in the quickening and giving of souls to children: as when
Rachel rashly cried oud; Give me children or else I dye; Jacob gravely
answers, Am I in Gods stead? And so when Boaz went in unto Ruth, it is said,
the Lord gave her conception: but even reason it self will evince it. For is
it not an absurd thing, that God should wait our leisures, and be set on work
at our pleasures? And yet this must needs be, if God create souls after the
forming of the body; for then the former being done by the power of nature, God
shall be bound to give souls immediately whenever nature produces bodies:
unless he should suffer children to be born without souls or corrupt and
kill their bodies before they be informed, (and so endanger their mothers too)
both which are both against nature and reason. Whereas if this mediate manner
be admitted, this cannot justly be objected, for as much as God shall not then
produce man's soul according to a particular immediate and new creation: but
according to his almighty blessing, powerful ordinance, and constant
conserving providence: which though it be somewhat more immediate in this than
in other cases, yet it is still within the lists of nature, nature it self so
requiring.

3. The excellency of man's nature requires it.
Yea farther it follows, both by divine and natural reason, that as God has
from eternity decreed concerning man above all creatures, both who shall come
into the world, and at what time: therefore accordingly he must needs have a
work in man's conception above all other creatures. Which what can it be in the
course of nature, but that he is the immediate efficient of men's souls,
whereby he blesses or blasteth, furthers or hinders, man's conception at the
first, and so by a special providence, orders the same according to his own
most wise decree. And hence it is that men cannot propagate either what or when
they will.

4. God and nature should work in vain.
Again, Otherwise this absurdity will also follow, that there are many
children, begotten, conceived, formed, quickened with sense, and so well nigh
perfected, and yet dying before the rational soul be infused, they shall
never rise again at the end of the world; that God might be glorified in their
salvation or damnation, unless he should then create new souls for
un-informed bodies. And this besides crossing the word of God, which teaches
that all that are conceived in sin, must be punished in Christ or themselves,
for the satisfying of Gods Justice: we must absurdly frustrate the works both
of God and nature, notwithstanding, neither can do any thing in vain.

5. Unnatural conceptions void of reason.
Furthermore, It is manifest that not nature alone, but the efficient power of
God is joined with the propagation of souls, because it is wholly denied to
such copulations as are out of kind. For nature alone would make a mixture,
whereas notwithstanding, we see that some kind of creatures, as Apes and
Satyrs, which (as it is probable) were at first begotten by such unkindly
conjunctions, are not endued with reasonable souls Or if not they, yet it is
possible that humane seed should be mingled with other creatures (for which
cause buggery is forbidden in the Law) and yet such issue is altogether
soulelesse, and void of reason: although it cannot be denied but natural
sense may be and is the more perfect in them, and so they more crafty than
other creatures. They therefore make a monstrous and profane mingle-mangle
that would have man propagate his like by the power of nature merely, as other
creatures do.

6. Souls infused in adulterous generations.
On the other side it is plain also, that it is not altogether immediately
created by GOD without natural means, because it is not denied to children
that are unlawfully begotten: for then God should seem to approve of that
which is evil. For albeit it is true (as it is commonly answered) that it is
good in God to make stolen corn grow, because that order of nature is good,
though the action of stealing be naught, and there is no reason he should
alter that good institution of nature, for the personal corruption of some
men: yet this helps them not at all, who maintain the immediate creation of
the soul, but only freeth him in regard of this mediate manner and natural
order in propagating souls, which is indeed this way sufficiently answered.
But if (as they say) there be no natural order for the souls propagation, but
they come immediately from God (he not being bound to infuse souls, but where
he pleases) he cannot be free from tollerating, if not allowing and approving
of evil in this behalf. Whereas in the other, though he be not bound neither
(unless by his own band) yet he may lawfully by the just order of nature.

7. Sense arises out of the dead elements.
Moreover, Concerning the matter of the soul, seeing we see by daily
experience, that nature by virtue of Gods first ordination, does out of the
dead matter of the elements, continually produce so admirable powers, as
seeing, hearing, etc. yea, common sense, fantasy, memory, and all those
cogitative virtues which are in brute beasts; the manner of which working is
above humane reason to conceive: how can it seem strange that the God of
nature by his own special assistance, should out of that far more excellent
and divine nature in man, produce others like unto it, though we cannot
conceive the manner how? Even this well weighed, will add no small credit to
this truth amongst the wise.

The corporal seed a fit instrument.
Lastly, That the corporal seed is a fit instrument for nature to use in so
high a work, is manifest enough in as much as it is of a more excellent
temper, especially the spirits therein, being more purely subtle, and
temperate, than they are in any other creature in the world. And how this may
farther the operation, and consequently the propagation of the reasonable
soul, appears in that Elephants, who being of a more excellent temper, and
coming nearer to the nature of man than other creatures, do both live longer,
and are (as I may say) endued with more reasonable parts than others. So that
although the soul cannot arise out of any elementary temper (as appears by
the immortal nature, which even natural reason is able to demonstrate;) yet
there is no question, but it may be instrumentally furthered or hindered
thereby, yea even in the most excellent works of reason, this being indeed
one of the maine reasons in nature, why one man excels another in wisdom.
Now then seeing the Spirits in humane seed are of such a transcendent nature,
not merely corporal, but approaching very near to the nature of the soul,
whereby they are soon acquainted and easily united, and used as the hand of
the soul, even in the most divine operations of reason: why should they not
much more be a fit instrument for the conveyance of the soul in natural
generation. And thus I have finished my task in proving this manner of the
souls propagation, both by divine and natural reason.

CHAP. XXIX. An answer to some objections against this manner of propagation.
BUt now me-thinkes I hear some call me back, saying, I contradict my self
in that I say, and that even this mean way has its extremities. Having
therefore showed that the soul of man can neither be immediately created by
God, not yet merely propagated by man, and proved this middle way between
both, both by Scripture and natural reasons: I will now in the last place
(that there may remain no just scruple to cavil at) briefly answer some few
Objections, which I conceive may be made more directly, even against this mean
manner of the souls procreation, and so conclude.

The Objections are these four: Objections.


First, That the soul shall not be immortal, if it may be resolved into a
former principle, namely, Adams soul from whence all came.

Secondly, God shall hereby still work immediately in the creation of souls,
and so shall not yet have ended his work, and rest from his labors.

Thirdly, Man shall still be inferior to beasts, in that he cannot beget his
like alone, but must have more help from God than they.

Lastly, God shall still be touched with sin, in being the immediate efficient
of our sinful souls. All which may be as easily answered as objected.

1 Obj. That the soul must be mortal if it proceed from another.
For the first, first, although it is true, that all mixed bodies may be again
resolved into their former principles the elements, whereof they are
compounded, and out of which they arise: yet this is no impeachment to the
souls immortality. For the comparison is unequal, and the causes nothing
like, unless we should say that all bodies must return into Adams also,
whence they came as well as souls.

Secondly, Mixed bodies are not the simple elements, but compounded of them:
where as our souls are of the same nature, and no less simple than his was.

Thirdly, If it were compounded, yea, even of the elements, yet it would not
presently follow, that it must needs be mortal, because corruption and death
comes not only, nor so much from propagation or composition, as from divine
malediction, for death is the wages of sin, without which even Adams body
should have been immortal, as well as his soul.

Lastly, To this objection I will oppose an infallible conclusion, viz. that
nothing can return to nothing, but by the same means whereby it receives the
first being. And hence it is that all creatures that are produced out of the
elements by the power of nature, do by nature resolve into them again: but
because men's souls cannot be propagated from their parents, but by the
immediate power of GOD concurring, hence it necessarily follows, that neither
can they be again dissolved or annihilated but by the same omnipotent power.
This therefore does invincibly prove, so far is it from disproving proving
the souls immortality.

2 Obj. That God still works in creating Souls.
For the second, that God shall not yet rest from his labor, but be still set
aworke in the creation of souls.





Ioh. 5.17.
in such things the Father works hitherto and the Son likewise.

Lastly, This work is no part of creation properly, but of preservation, which
is ordinarily either mediate or immediate Mediate, so all elementary creatures,
and individual natures, are preserved by God; but by the means of nature or
rather natural means: but now nature it self, (or as I may say) the very
nature or Symmetry of nature, is preserved by his own immediate power, there
being no nature above nature, but only his to preserve it. And by the same
immediate power it must needs be that the production of soul is conserved: the
excellency of whose nature, is such as can have no natural or mediate
efficient cause, and therefore of necessity it must be his immediate
providence only, and that even by course of nature.

3 Obj. That man shall still be inferior to other creatures.
To the third objection, that if man's generation requires more help from God
than other creatures, his nature shall therein be still inferior to theirs.

I answer, That no creature can propagate the like alone, no more than he; and
that he does as much in the generation of his like, as any other creatures do
in theirs. For it is well known, that in generation, besides the matter and
form, which proceeds from the generators, it is necessary that there should
be an efficient power, coming from an external cause, which all grant to be
the influence of the celestial Orbs; whence is that common Proverb amongst
Philosophers; Sol and homo generant hominem; now seeing man gives the matter
and form of the whole man, soul and body, though in regard of his soul, he
has a more excellent efficient than they, or rather the same efficient after a
more excellent manner, that is, immediately: this is so far from disparaging,
that it exalts man's nature above all other creatures in the world.
Nevertheless, if man did not give both matter and form, this were indeed
justly objected, and he should be herein according to the order of nature
inferior to all others, as we heard before.

4. Obj. That God shall still be touched with sin.
Lastly, The last objection, that God shall be touched with sin in being the
immediate efficient of our sinful souls, is easily answered: for God is
simply the efficient cause of the soul, and not of sin, but that comes from
our corrupt parents, who supply the matter of the whole man, corrupt and
sinful like themselves. It being Gods just ordinance in nature; Romans 11.16.
that as the tree is so should the fruit be. And thus sin is merely accidental
in respect of God, who as he made man at the first perfect: so also this
ordinance of generation, whereby he should have begotten children perfect like
himself, but he by his fall corrupting himself, has likewise corrupted all
his posterity, albeit God still performs his part as perfectly as ever, in
conferring of his efficient power for the producing of them. Thus then we see
how the generation of men, which should have been perfect, is become sinful
through out faults, and not Gods, and why then God did not make man new again,
or stop sin there, but continue his first institution, might be sufficiently
cleared, but is not in this place to be disputed.

CHAP. XXX. The Conclusion, recapitulating the sum of the premises.
Use of this Tractate.
IT is now time to conclude this so difficult a doctrine, which as in the
beginning it seemed so hard that no words could sufficiently explain it, so
now me thinks it is so plain and easy, that I fear nothing more than that I
have insisted too long in the proof of that which I think no man can or will
deny; yet considering that such is the curiosity of some in this age, that are
wittily acute, and such also the difficulty and necessity of understanding
this doctrine aright, that a man's life were well bestowed in giving full
satisfaction therein; this short discourse I hope will not seem overlong to
the judicious.

1. The original of the Soul.
I conclude therefore as before, first, that the soul is neither immediately
created by God of nothing, nor yet merely propagated by man without his
immediate power: but that he has instituted a natural order whereby the whole
man begets the whole man, both soul and body, and as well the one as the
other. Not the soul the body, nor the body the soul, neither the soul the
soul alone, nor the body the body alone, yet in this order, the soul the
soul only immediately, but mediately by the body: and the body the body only
immediately; but mediately by the soul. And thus in man the whole propagation,
the whole, as concerning matter and form as well as other creatures: albeit in
the one the immediate power of GOD concurreth as an efficient cause, and
natural means only, in the other.

2. ^he im^^ortali^^ of the ^^^le.
From this natural yet divine beginning, I also conclude the immortal nature
and everlasting continuance of the soul. For seeing it is not produced by the
power of nature alone, nor yet made of any corporal matter, but spiritual
both for matter and manner, wherein it excels all other creatures, though
united through Gods institution to the natural generation: it must needs
transcend the condition of all corporal creatures, as well in the end as in
the original, and so can be no less than immortal, though we go no higher
than the rules of nature.

3. Original sin.
Hence also I conclude, that all Adams offspring are infected with that stain
of nature which he contracted to himself by sin; which is propagated from
parents to children, together with the whole man the subject thereof; and that
without any fault in God, it being our act and not his, our sinful souls
proceeding not from him but our sinful parents, and so not being corrupted by
him, but by our selver in Adam.

4. Christ's incarnation.
And lastly, hereby also appears the purity of Christ's incarnation, who,
though he were true man like unto us, and made of the same substance both for
soul and body, yet was not propagated after the common manner of men, to
avoid that infection of sin which we receive in propagation.

Reasons to believe without reason.
Now if any cannot conceive, through the subtle conceit they have of it, how the
soul should minister any matter to the producing of another (which I confess
is hardest;) yet considering that most of the most learned ancient Fathers and
Schoolmen in former times, have allowed aereall bodies even to the Angels
themselves: it cannot be thought absurd, that I ascribe such a spiritual
composition to souls, as has such a near resemblance unto corporal matter
and form, as may well stand both with this manner of propagation and the
divine nature of the soul. And if thus much be not granted, it cannot appear
in nature neither, how it can be united with the body, the one being in my
conceit as hard to conceive as the other. But seeing I see the one is, I
believe the other may be. And further I add that, that though this did seem
to disagree with reason, yet we ought rather to believe it than the other
which we plainly see do disagree with Religion. But to conclude, seeing we
see the reason why we cannot see the reason, let us not be so vainly curious
to enquire, of that which we know certainly we cannot certainly know, let us
content our selves a while not heathenishly to reason, but Christianly to
believe, and shortly after this life, Phil. 3.15.
all these things shall be revealed unto us.

FINIS.
A Compendious Table of matters concernable in this TREATISE.
THE possibility of knowing the Souls original. 2 Cautions in searching it. 6
What knowledge men have of spirits? 14 Souls knowledge of it self. 15 How the
soul knows inferior natures, how superior? 17 Angels know not our thoughts.
21 How far may be known of the soul? 23 Twenty-one opinions of the souls
original. 25 A censure of the opinions, and the choice made. 35 Of Original
sin. 39 How man propagates man. 46 Gods act in the souls production, what?
47 How the soul is propagated of the soul. 49 Soul and body be at once
propagated. 50 Souls double union. 52 Causes of immortality. 55 How man is
sinful, and yet immortal? 56 Texts of Scripture answered, and explained. 60
Reasons from the Scripture answered. 75 From the creation of Adams soul. 75
From the creation of Christ's soul. 85 Of propagation of spirits. 91 How the
soul is immateriall. 93 Its incorruption. 95 Its selfe-subsistence. 97 It
cannot be hurt by the body. 99 It works inorganically. 100 Whether loss of
seed be loss of souls. 100 How one soul proceeds from two. ibid. Whether
parents loose part of their souls. 101 Of imperfect conceptions. 104 Of the
souls seed, how generated. 111 Spirits may be communicated and not diminished.
121 That the soul is perfect in conception. 230 Of Eves Creation. 144
Testimonies of Scripture, to prove the souls propagation, what? 181 The nature
of Original sin. 186 In it is nothing positive. 188 Body cannot corrupt the
soul. 130 Original sin it propagable. 241 The whole man is received from
Adam. 158 Christ's humanity taken from the Virgin. 259 Christ's soul and body
conceived together, and how? 263 How Christ was free from sin? 279 Why the
truth of propagation of soul hid so long time? 284 Natural reasons to prove
propagation. 285 Man can father no more than he begets. 292 No father without
giving the form. 293 The faculty of propagation seated in the soul. 306 The
souls work in the Embrio. 308 Rareness of conception. 312 Of unnatural
copulations. 317 Souls infused in adultery. 318 Objections removed and
cleared. 324 Conclusion of all. 331
FINIS.

