THE EXPLANATION OF THE Frontispiece.
FIrst cast your Eye upon a Rustic Seat,
Built strong and plain, yet well contrived, and neat;
And situated on a healthy Soil,
Yielding much Wealth with little cost or toil.
Near by it stand the Barns, framed to contain
Enriching stores of Hay, Pulse, Corn and Grain;
With Bartons large, and places where to feed
Your Oxen, Cows, Swine, Poultry, with their breed.
On the other side, hard by the House, you see
The Apiary for the industrious Be.
Walk on a little farther, and behold
A pleasant Garden from high Winds and Cold
Defended (by a spreading fruitful Wall,
With Rows of Lime and Fir-trees straight and tall,)
Full fraught with necessary Flowers and Fruits,
And Natures choicest sorts of Plants and Roots.
Beyond the same are Crops of Beans and Pease,
Saffron and Liquorice, or such as these;
Then Orchards so enriched with fruitful store,
Nature could give (nor they receive) no more:
Each Tree stands bending with the weight it bears,
Of Cherries some of Apples, Plums and Pears.
Not far from thence see other Walks and Rows
Of Cyder-fruits, near unto which there flows
A Gliding Stream: The next place you discover,
Is where St. Foyn, La Lucern, Hops and Clover
Are propagated: Near unto those Fields
Stands a large Wood, Mast, Fuel, Timber yields.
In yonder Vale, hard by the River, stands
A Water-Engine, which the Wind commands
To fertilize the Meads; on the other side
A Persian Wheel is placed, both large and wide,
To the same intent: Then do the Fields appear
Clothed with Corn and Grain for the ensuing Year.
The Pastures stockt with Beasts, the Downs with Sheep;
The Cart, the Plough, and all good order keep:
Plenty unto the Husbandman, and Gains
Are his Rewards for's Industry and Pains.
Peruse the Book, for here you only see
The following Subject in Epitome.
Systema Agriculturae, Being The Mystery Of Husbandry Discovered and laid Open
by J W
F H Van Houe scul



Printed for Tho. Dring at ye. Corner of Chancery lane in Fleetstreet. 1675.

Systema Agriculturae; The MYSTERY of HUSBANDRY DISCOVERED: Treating of the
several New and most Advantageous Ways OF Tilling, Planting, Sowing, Manuring,
Ordering, Improving Of all sorts of GARDENS, ORCHARDS, MEADOWS, PASTURES,
CORN-LANDS, WOODS and COPPICES.

As also of FRUITS, CORN, GRAIN, PULSE, NEW-HAYS, CATTLE, FOWL, BEASTS, BEES,
SILKWORMS, etc.

With an Account of the several INSTRVMENTS and ENGINES used in this PROFESSION.

To which is added KALENDARIVM RVSTICVM: OR, The HUSBANDMANS Monthly Directions.

ALSO The PROGNOSTICS of Dearth, Scarcity, Plenty, Sickness, Heat, Cold,
Frost, Snow, Winds, Rain, Hail, Thunder, etc.

AND DICTIONARIVM RVSTICVM: OR, The Interpretation of RUSTIC TERMS.

The whole WORK being of great Use and Advantage to all that delight in that
most NOBLE PRACTICE.

The Second Edition, carefully Corrected and Amended; with many large and
useful Additions throughout the whole Work: By the Author.

Published for the Common Good: By J. W. Gent.

Virgil. O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint, Agricolas. -- LONDON: Printed
by J. C. for T. Dring; and are to be sold by Charles Smith and Tho. Burrell, at
the Angel near the Inner-Temple-gate, and the Golden Ball under St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street. 1675.

TO THE GENTRY AND YEOMANR OF ENGLAND.
SIRS;
O you formerly was Dedicated the First Edition of this succeeding, though then
imperfect Tract; and for your sakes principally did it then submit it self to
the Censure of this Critic Age. It Is now a bad time for so mean and Rustic a
Subject to appear again, when every Shop and Library is repleat with the Fruits
and Labors of the most Acute Wits. Yet I hope it may obtain a better Welcome
than heretofore, being Revised and Corrected, in many places Enlarged, and many
new and necessary Experiments and Observations added: You also being every day
more and more addicted to this Noble, though heretofore neglected Science; as
is manifest from the Effects in most places discernable: It being easy for a
Passant Traveller to distinguish the Villa's of the Ingenious from the
Slothful, by the Improvements made in them; some being well Manured, and
Planted with many curious Plantations of Fruit, and Avenues of Timber and other
Trees, when others are bare and naked, to the shame and Ignominy of their
Owners. I hope what I formerly wrote on this Subject, might be some inducement
toward such improvement, amongst the many Elaborate and more Excellent Works:
And I question not but this Second Edition, so much Enlarged, may more
encourage and assist you in the Culture of your Farms to your best
advanvantage, in the propagating and increasing of such things that may most
retaliate your Cost and Industry, and most improve your Lands, not only for the
benefit of your selves and Posterity, but the Kingdom in general; The several
ways and means to accomplish the same, being here presented to your view, well
Pruned and Advanced. For which end, and no other, these Experiments and
Observations have formerly been not with a little care composed, and contracted
into so convenient and brief a Method, and in such a familiar Style, suitable
to the apprehensions of those they most concern; and now also made more useful,
that they may answer your Expectation; which is the desire of

J. W.

Virgil. -- Laudato ingentia Rura, Exiguum colito. --
PROOEMIUM IN LAUDEM AGRICVLTVRAE; BEING The PREFACE or INTRODUCTION TO THE
WORK: Showing the EXCELLENCY, UTILITY, and NECESSITY of HUSBANDRY.
THIS is an Age, wherein to commend or extol an Ingenious Art or Science, might
be esteemed a needless labor, especially in a Country so highly improved in
every thing; but that we find the more Noble, Advantageous, Useful or
Necessary any Art, Science, or Profession is, the stronger Arguments are framed
against it; and more particularly against this Rustic Art, and its infinite
Preheminencies and Oblectations, by the vainer and more Pedantick sort of
persons, despising the worth or value of what they are ignorant of; who judge
it below their Honor or Reputation, to take any notice of so mean a
Profession; that esteem the Country no other than a place for Beasts, as Cities
for men. This makes us tread in the steps of more Worthy Rustic Authors, and
give a short Preface, not to seek Credit of the Envious, but to satisfy or
confirm the Ingenious of the Excellency and Inestimable value of this Art, not
only for the exercise and health of our Bodies, the increase of our Fortunes,
and our Universal benefit, use and advantage, but also for the tranquillity and
peace of our Minds, and improving our Understandings; which they will assuredly
find does proceed from such Noble, pleasant and necessary Enterprises. If they
diligently read and peruse the Ancient Writers, they may observe that many Wise
and Learned Men, worthy of praise, were exceedingly delighted, not only in a
Rural Habitation, but did also exercise themselves in Tilling the Earth: That
the Study of Agriculture was of so high an esteem, and so worthy of honor,
that Poets, Philosophers, Princes, and Kings themselves, did not only acquire
an Honorable and an Immortal Name, by their Writings and Precepts in this Art
left to Posterity; but have also diligently performed the Office of a
Countryman, and wrought with their own hands, and obtained thereby not a little
Fame and Renown. For which cause, Xenophon in his Elegant Tract of Oeconomicks
tells you, That nothing can be of a more Regal (or Noble) Estimation and
Splendor, than Judicious Agriculture. Socrates also gives you a Relation, how
Cyrus, that most Renowned King of Persia, a Man of a Sublime Wit and most
Illustrious Fame, when Lysander of Lacedemonia, a Man endowed with excellent
Virtues, came and brought him Presents; At a certain time, for their
Recreations, he conducted Lysander into his Garden, on every side enclosed with
a Noble Fence, and cultivated with most curious Art and fingular Industry. Then
Lysander (admiring the complete order of every thing, and the height of the
Trees planted in such direct lines, and every way lineal, the Earth adorned
with Plants, the fairness of the Fruits, the beauty and order of the pleasant
and fragrant Flowers) said, That he did exceedingly admire, not so much at the
Study and Diligence, as the Industry and Ingenuity of the Workman, by whom the
same was so Artificially ordered and contrived. Then Cyrus being well pleased
with the praise and commendation of his Workmanship, answered Lysander: All
these things were preformed by my own Industry; these curious Orders were by me
delineated; these Trees, Plants, Flowers, and all these things thou so admirest
at, were all planted and performed by my own hands. Then Lysander beholding his
Purple Habit, the Excellency of his Person, and his Persian Ornaments
glittering with Gold and Precious Stones, said: O Cyrus! how deservedly may you
of all men be esteemed happy, seeing so high an Honor and Fortune is conjoined
and united with so Excellent a Spirit!

Pliny writes, that the Romans had so high an esteem for Agriculture, that
their Laws did extend to the Reformation of the negligences and abuses in the
exercise of that necessary and Honorable Art. The same Author brings several
Prefidents of many worthy and honorable Persons that addicted themselves unto,
and affected this Art; and highly sets forth the praise and commendation
thereof; and shows how the Ancient Romans did execute their Rustic Laws, and
encouraged the industrious and ingenious Husbandman: As by the example of C.
Furius Cresinus, who out of a small piece of Ground gathered much more Fruits
and Profits, than his Neighbors about him out of their great and ample
Possessions; which highly contracted their envy and hatred against him,
insomuch as they accused him, that by Sorcery, Charms, and VVitchcraft, he had
transported his Neighbors Fruits, Fertility and Increase, into his own Fields:
For which he was ordered by Spurius Albinus peremptorily to answer the matter.
He therefore fearing the worst, at such time as the Tribes were ready to give
their Voices, brought into the common place his Plough, and other Rural
Instruments belonging to Agriculture, and placed them in the open face of the
Court. He set there also his own Daughter, a lusty strong Lass, and big of
bone, well fed, and well clad; also his Oxen full and fair: Then turning to the
Citizens of Rome, My Masters (quoth he) these are the Sorceries, Charms, and
all the Enchantments that I use: I might also allege my own Travel and Toil,
my early rising, and late sitting up, and the painful sweat I daily endure; but
I am not able to present these to your view, nor to bring them with me into
this Assembly. Which when the people had heard, they unanimously pronounced him
Not Guilty, and he was highly commended of all persons for his Ingenuity and
Industry.

It is most evident, that this Art of Agriculture does not require so great
charge and expense, as it does judgment, labor and industry; which to possess
men withal, and encourage them unto, is the intent and scope of our Learned,
both Ancient and Modern Authors, that we may not spend the best of our times in
the most vain, costly, unnecessary and trifling Studies and Affairs; for in
former times (Cato testifies) he was highly commended and praised that was
esteemed a good Husband. It cannot be thought that so Learned and Wise Men
could set so high a value and esteem upon this Art of Agriculture, but upon
very solid and weighty grounds and reasons. Not to speak of the various
Delights, Pleasures and Contents that these Rusticities plentifully heap upon
us, they supply us for our necessities and advantages; for without this Art
none in City or Country could subsist: as the Mother suckles the Infant with
her Milk, so does the Earth, the Mother of us all, universally feed and nourish
us at an easy, liberal, and profitable rate; whereof we have daily experience,
that our industry, labor and costs, are returned upon us, with a manifold
increase and advantage, unless the Celestial influences impede. Chrysostom also
shows how necessary the Art of Agriculture is (when enumerating the several
advantages of Mechanic Arts) at length concludes, that this Art is by far more
worthy, excellent and necessary, than all the other. We all know how ill we can
subsist without Garments, and other necessaries of that nature; but without the
Fruits, and other increase of the Earth, we cannot live. The Scythians,
Hamaxobians, and Gymnosophists, esteemed all other Arts as vain and
unprofitable; but this Art of Agriculture they accounted the only necessary for
humane life; they exercised and applied all their industry, ingenuity,
practices and studies, principally to this only Art.

Romulus and Cyrus knowing the necessariness and usefulness of this Art above
all other Exercises and Arts, did first Institute or introduce their Subjects
in Military Affairs and Agriculture, judging these only sufficient to preserve
and defend them from the injuries of others, and to sustain their lives. We
also read, that the Helvetians or Switzers, a very Wise People in their
management of Affairs, inhabit or possess about one hundred Towns, out of which
they yearly send a thousand chosen men into their Army, the rest remain behind
to Till the Ground. The next year some of them that staid go forth to the War,
the other return; by which means they are as well exercised in War as in
Husbandry. It is also noted of Romulus, that he used to prefer Husbandmen above
Citizens, esteeming those that lived in Towns with their wealthy Stocks and
Trade, not equal nor worthy of compare with those that Tilled the Land, and
wearied themselves daily in Rustic Exercises. The Romans, when Pliny.
they gave names to their Tribes, called the chiefest of the States the Rustic
Tribes, and the meaner in degree the Vrbane.

Numa Pompilius, to encourage Agriculture, commanded the Fields to be divided
into a certain number of Villages, in each of which he constituted a
Supervisor; whose principal Office it was to observe and enquire, who
diligently and industriously did Till their Land, and who neglected it, whose
Names were brought unto him. He oftentimes called for the Industrious
Husbandman, and courteously received him, and sometimes dismissed him with
Noble Gratuities: And contrariwise, the idle and slothful he rebuked; whereby
some for fear of shame and disgrace, the rest in hope of favor and reward,
were all continually intent on their Affairs, that they might render themselves
and their Lands praiseworthy to their King: A Worthy and Noble President for
the encouragement of our English Husbandmen that are Ingenious and Industrious,
and for the Regulation and Reformation of the infinite abuses, injuries and
neglects, so frequently committed and suffered in every Village, by the
slothful, ignorant, and envious Rustic. The like examples we find to be in
several Countries, as Spain, Germany, Venice, Holland, etc. of Compulsive Laws,
and excellent Customs for the propagation of Trees for Timber, and for Fruits.
In Burgundy, where Wallunt-Trees abound, whenever they fell a Tree, they always
plant a young one near that place: And in several places betwixt Hanaw and
Francfort in Germany, no young Sylva.
Farmer is permitted to Marry a Wife, till he bring proof that he has Planted,
and is a Father of such a stated number of Wallnut-Trees; which Law is
inviolably observed to this day. It has been a long time designed, and
attempted by several Worthy Persons, Affecters of Ingenuity, and the Public
Good of the Kingdom, that there might be some Constitutions or Orders for the
advancing and propagating of this Noble Art, especially that part relating to
the increase and preservation of Timber and Fruit Trees; and that there might
be Judicious and Experienced Supervisors in every place for that purpose. I
must needs confess we have several good Laws relating to our Rural Affairs, but
none more slighted nor neglected than those. Our hopes and expectations are now
great, that something will shortly be done therein, seeing that Royal and most
Excellent Society at Gresham-Colledge, make it one of the most principal
Objects of their Studies and Care; it being so Universally necessary for our
well-being and preservation, if not the most necessary, all things considered.

Maximus Tyrius, a most Grave Philosopher, composed a Dialogue, wherein, with
many sufficient and firm Reasons, be demonstrates, that this Art of Agriculture
has the Precedence of, and is more necessary than the Military; and Elegantly
and Learnedly discusseth many things, and very much of the profits and
advantages of the Rustic Art, and Rural Affairs.

As to its Antiquity, no Art or Science can precede it; every one knows that a
Country-life was the most Ancient, and that men did in the Infancy of time
inhabit in Country-Habitations, and sustained themselves by the Fruits of the
Earth, and dwelt in Tents, Woods, etc. instead of Houses.

As to the state, qualification, and condition of a Country-life, we may
confidently maintain, that it far excels the City-life, and is much to be
preferred before it. Plato affirms, that a Country-life is the Mistress, and as
it were the pattern of Diligence, Justice, and Frugality; that he could find
nothing more profitable, pleasant or grateful, than to live in the Country
remote and free from Envy, Malice, Calumny, Covetousness and Ambition: which
occasioned this Grave Author to ordain several peculiar Laws relating to this
Noble Art, which were brought unto and confirmed by the Emperor Justinian,
etc. Cicero discoursing of the 1 De Offic.
Utility of several Arts, at length concludes, that of all things necessary and
useful, nothing is better, more advantageous, stable, pleasant, nor more worthy
a Noble and Ingenious Spirit, than Agriculture, etc. Virgil also had as high an
esteem thereof, and did very much extol and celebrate this Rustic Art;
insomuch that when he was almost lost amongst the pleasant Groves, and
ruminating on the Felicities the Country yielded, he brake forth into this
expression.

O Fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint,
Agricolas; quibus ipsa procul discordibus Armis
Fundit humi facilem victum justissima tell us.
And Horace in a certain Ode sings thus.

Beatus ille qui procul negotiis,
Vt prisca gens mortalium,
Paterna Rura, bobus exercit suis,
Solutus omnifoenore, etc.
Also hear the Divine Du Bartas in his Commendation of Husbandry.

O thrice, thrice happy he who shuns the cares
Of City-troubles, and of State Affairs;
And serving Ceres, Tills with his own Teem,
His own Free-land left by his Friends to him.
The Pleasures and Oblectations are superabundant and infinite which we daily
enjoy and receive from the Verdant Fields and Meadows, from the sweetness and
beauty of the flowers, the springing Woods, the delicate fruits, and the
variety of Domestic and Pleasant Animals educated even to the very hand, and
from the various and harmonious Notes of the Nymphs of the Woods.

The winged Fancies of the Learned Quill,
Tell of strange Wonders, sweet Parnassus Hill,
Castalia 's Well, the Heliconian Spring,
Star-spangled Valleys where the Muses sing.
Admired things another story yields,
Of pleasant Tempe and the Elysian Fields:
Yet these are nothing to the sweet that dwells
In low-built Cottages, and Country-Cells, etc.
We may well admire at such as are not highly delighted at the Prospect of the
most of our Country-Villages, whose beauty and luster daily increase, (where
their Inhabitants are Industrious) and appear more and more neat, adorned and
enriched, and in every part yield innumerable of pleasant and fruitful Trees.
Can there be a more ravishing and delightful object, than to behold the Towns
planted with Trees in even lines before their doors, which skreen their
habitations from the Wind and Sun, where they may fit or walk under the dark
shadows of the Woods and Groves, and where are always the gliding Streams, most
clear and bright Rivolets, pleasant Hills, and shadowie Valleys, delightful
Meadows, and many other the like Oblectations?

Fair, firm, and fruitful; various, patient, sweet, Du Bartas.

Sumptuously clothed in a Mantle meet,
Of mingled color, lac't about with Floods,
And all Imbroidered with fresh Blooming Buds.
That the highest and most absolute Content any man enjoys or finds in any
Sublunary thing, is in this Science of Agriculture; and the several Branches
and Streams of Pleasure and Delight proceeding or flowing therefrom, none but
such as are ignorant thereof will deny. Of such that affirm it, we could
produce infinite of Testimonies; also of many that so highly affected this Art
and Life, that they deserted their Powers, Dignities, Kingdoms, Victories and
Triumphs, and wholly applied themselves to Agriculture, and a Rustic
Habitation; some whereof we shall here instance, as Manlius Curious Dentatus,
who after he had not only Conquered the Warlike King Pyrrhus, but had expelled
him out of all Italy, and had three several times Triumphed with Glory and
Renown, and had very much enlarged the Roman Empire by his Honorable
Achievements, returned with infinite affectation, and very joyfully, to his
former Exercises and Rusticities; and there concluded the residue of his days
with much tranquillity of mind and rest. No less delight did L. Quintus
Cincinnatus take in that Country-life, who when he was called by the Roman
Senate to the Dictatorship (an Office of very high Dignity) was found at Plough
in a rude and dirty habit or condition in his little Farm; and after he had
obtained his freedom from the Office, he immediately returns to his Rural
Occupations.

Also Attalus, that rich Asian King, who left his Regal Dignity, and refigned
his Empire, was then so intent on Agriculture, with such incessant care and
diligence, that he formed, planted, and contrived several peculiar Gardens, by
his own singular Ingenuity and Industry. We must not omit Dioclesian the
Emperor, who left the troublesome Empire, and affecting a Private Life, betook
himself to the Country; and there lived a long time, and enjoyed the
Experience, and reaped the Fruits of most pleasing Tranquillity and happy rest.
And although that he were oftentimes invited and solicited by Letters and
Ambassadors from the Senate to return again to his Empire, yet could he never
be tempted away from his Beloved Village.

We read also of that most excellent person Attilius Calatinus, who for his
singular Virtue was called from the Plough and Harrow to be a Dictator; yet
still so persisted in his pleasing Frugality and Parsimony, for the great love
he bare to Agriculture, that he rather chose to live privately in the Country,
and to weary himself with digging and ploughing his Land, than to be a Prince
of the Romans, and possess the highest place amongst the Senators.

And likewise of Abdolonymus, who from a poor Gardener (yet of Princely Race)
was chosen to the Crown of Sidon.

Noah the Just, Meek Moses, Abraham, Du Bartas.

(Who Father of the Faithful Race became)
Were Shepherds all, or Husbandmen at least,
And in the Fields passed their days the best.
Such were not yerst, Attalus, Philemetor,
Archelaus, Hiero, and many a Praetor:
Great Kings and Consuls, who often for Blades
And glist'ring Scepters, handled Hooks and Spades?
Such were not yerst, Cincinnatus, Fabricious,
Serranus, Curious, who un-self-delicious,
With Crowned Coulters, with Imperial hands,
With Ploughs triumphant plough'd the Roman Lands?
How much honor were Piso, Fabius, Lentulus, and Cicero worthy of, who
invented and brought into use the Commodious way of sowing of the several
Pulses that from that time have born their names? We must not forget our Famous
and most Ingenious Countryman the Lord Verulam, a Person, who though much
concerned in the Public Affairs of the Kingdom, yet spent much of his time and
Studies in the diligent scrutiny of the Nature and Causes, and proposed means
for the advancement and propagation of this part of Natural Philosophy; as his
Sylva, and several other of his Works testify.

Many other Examples of this Nature might here be inserted: But these, together
with the multitude of the like Presidents our present Age and Country affords
us, as well of the Industrious and most Judicious Operations of our Nobles and
Gentry in these Rusticities, as of their Noble and pleasant Palaces, and Rural
Habitations; and the Contentments and Delights they place in them, may be
sufficient to convince all Ingenious Spirits that are not prejudiced against
this Art, not only of the Dignity, Pleasure, and Delight thereof, but of its
Utility and Necessity.

Here they enjoy all things necessary for the sustentation of life, and are
freed from the perturbations, cares and troubles, that in other places disturb
the mind; and live content with their Lot, in tranquillity and moderation of
spirit. Here is

Secura quies, and nescia fallere Vita,
Dives opum variarum. --
This Country-life improves and exercises the most Noble and Excellent parts of
our Intellects, and affords the best-opportunities to the infatiable humane
spirit to contemplate and meditate on; and to penetrate into, and discover the
obscure and hitherto-occult Mysteries and Secrets of Nature; the fixity or
mobility of the Earth, the nature of the Air, its weight and diverse Mutations;
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; the nature and matter of Comets, Meteors, etc.
the Mystery of Vegetation; the nature of Animals, and their different Species;
the discovery and improvements of Minerals, and to attain the highest
perfections in Science and Art: yea, this condition capacitates a man to the
study and practice of the most secret and mystical things Nature affords, if
adapted thereunto.

That there is no place so fit for such study or contemplation of Natural
Philosophy, or any of the Liberal Arts, Plato the Prince of Philosophers
testifies by his deserting Athens, that Splendid City, and erecting his Academy
in a remote and Rustic place. Also Petrarchus, for the quietude and
solitariness of that kind of life, was so much delighted therewith, that he
most pleasingly spent those years he lived, alone in a secret Valley; which
caused him so often to invite his Friends to come and enjoy with him the
contentments of so happy and grateful a Country-life, as it appears by many of
his Epistles. You will also find that all studious and learned men have
exceedingly delighted in a solitary and Rural Habitation, and to have much
preferred it: for besides the serenity of the Air, and the pleasing Viridity,
which much quickens the Genius, it is most certain that the Spirits also are
thereby recreated, and the Intellectual parts wonderfully acuated; as the same
Petrarcha says:

Hic non Palatia, non Theatra, nec atria,
Sed ipsorum loco Abies, Fagus, and Pinus,
Inter herbas virescentes, and pulchrum montem vicinum,
Vnde and Carmina descendunt, and Pluviae,
Attolluntque de terra, ad sidera nostram mentem.
By which it is most apparent, that the Study of Arts and Sciences, and the
exercise and fruition of a Country-life, are of so near a Resemblance, that
they may both be practiced without impeding each the other.

This Rustic life also most certainly has the Pre-eminence above the
habitations in great Towns and Cities; for that it yields a perpetual Rotation
of its infinite variety of Oblectations and Contents, as the various times and
seasons of the year with a pleasing Face successively present themselves.
Sometimes the Spring approaches, the most certain Forerunner of the Summer;
all Trees then exercising, as it were, a mutual Emulation, which should be
arrayed with the most verdant leaves, and adorned with the most excellent and
curious blossoms, that they afford (besides most fragrant Odours every way
breathing from them) incredible delight and pleasure to all. To these may you
add the pleasant Notes of the Chanting Nymphs of the Woods singing their
Amorous Ditties, ravishing our Ears with their sweet Harmony. Then follows the
Summer, adorned with various Flowers, the Lilly, the Rose, the Gilliflower, and
infinite other most curious and pleasant; and also several delightful Fruits,
Animals, and other necessaries for humane use. Then also succeeds the Autumn,
or Harvest, wherein we reap the fruits of our past labors: then does the Earth
discharge it self of its infinite variety of its Grain and Pulse, and the Trees
of their delicacies: then also does the Air begin to wax cool, to recollect and
refresh our spirits, before debilitated with too much heat. At length enters
cold Hyems, which of all the rest conduces most to the health of our bodies:
for then our superfluous humors are with cold compressed, or else concocted;
and the Natural heat being the more concentrated, renews its power, and more
easily performs digestion; and expelling Obnoxious Humors, as Philosophers
say, Powers united are of greater force than dispersed; so then are we more
firm, active, and strong. The end of Winter gives a beginning to the subsequent
Spring: Annus in Angue latet; so are the Rural Pleasures and Oblectations
renewed ad infinitum.

The Heathens of old had also a very high esteem of Agriculture, as appears by
their several Gods and Goddesses whom they judged had a Tutelar care over those
Fruits of the Earth, and other things under their Tuition; as Bacchus, Ceres,
Diana, Saturn, Flora, Pales, and several others. But leaving them, we find
many Learned men, of Profound parts, and most excellent Ingenuity, to have
taken delight, and to have been very studious of this Art; as Cicero, who so
highly affected and esteemed these Rusticities, that (amongst several other
Rural Habitations, wherein he took much delight) he was so well pleased with
the pleasant Situation of the Tusculan Fields or Country, as there to
institute as it were another Academy, and compose those Philosophical
Questions, which from the place he named Tusculan. Cato the Roman Censor, and
Excellent Moralist, was wont to say, that he placed his whole Recreation and
the Universal Tranquillity of his mind in the exercise of Rural Affairs:
therefore with infinite of pleasure and affectation did he inhabit in the
Village Sabine, positively affirming, that a better and more pleasant life was
not to be found. Seneca also was of the same Opinion, that he could tarry in no
place more willingly than in his own Village; into which, with a very great
Art, he brought an Aquaduct to water his Gardens. What shall we say of Varro,
Palladius, and Columella, who published so many useful and profitable Precepts
of Agriculture, and so industriously exercised and delighted themselves in a
Rustic life? We might produce many more instances of most Honorable, Learned,
and Worthy Persons, who rather elected and preferred to spend their remaining
days in the Country, than in the most Pompous Palaces and Cities, but that we
judge it needless. Such that desire to hear more, we refer them to Pliny, and
other Authors more Copious in Historical Relations.

It is for no other reason that Gardens, Orchards, Partirres, Avenues, etc. are
in such request in Cities and Towns, but that they represent unto us
Epitomized, the Form and Idea of the more ample and spacious pleasant Fields,
Groves, and other Rustic objects of pleasure. Formerly Gardens were not in
Cities and Towns, but in Villages without, as Pliny witnesses, until Epicurus
(the Doctor and Master of Pleasure and Voluptuousness) first planted them in
Athens; which was afterward imitated and brought into use by such who loved
their Pleasures. Gardens, where ever planted, were always in esteem; as the
Famous Gardens of Adonis and Alcinous, and those Horti Pensiles of Semiramis
Queen of Babylon, or Cyrus King of Assyria, elevated so high from the Earth on
Tarraces and other Edifices, that they were numerated amongst the most
stupendous and wonderful works that were in the World. Also that Renowned and
Fictitious Garden of the Hesperides, Hieroglyphically and Philosophically
representing unto us the Summary of Eternal Achievements or Enjoyments. The
Romans also made great store of Gardens, and placed great pleasure in them. We
must not forget the singular care and industry of the Egyptians in Tilling
their Gardens; wherein, by reason of the temperature of the Air, the goodness
of the Earth, and their exquisite Industry, flourish and grow throughout the
year, the green Herbs, and infinite variety of pleasant Flowers. How many rare
and excellent Gardens, and places allotted and designed for Pleasure, are in
every part of this Kingdom, and in our Neighboring Countries; but more
especially in Renowned Italy, the Garden it self of the World? The great study,
care, ingenuity, cost and industry bestowed and employed about them, are
Arguments sufficient to convince the greatest Antagonist of the infinite
contentment and delight they had and enjoyed in Agriculture, and those kind of
Rural exercises: the commendations whereof, the great advantages, oblectations,
and its universal uses and pleasures are so many, and too tedious here to
enumerate, that it requires an eloquent Pen, and an expert hand to discover its
worth, and not to be crowded into so narrow a confine as a Preface. More you
may read in several Authors of its praise, practice and worth; as Horace in
several of his Poems has written in the praise of Agriculture, and a
Country-life. In Tibullus also you have one of his Elegies full of praises and
delights of a Country life. So also Angelus Politianus his Sylva Rustica, and
Pontanus his second Book De Amore Conjugali: Also Cicero in his Book De
Senectute, writes in praise and commendation of the Country, and of
Agriculture; where he says in one place, Venio nunc ad voluptates Agricolarum,
quibus ego incredibiliter dilector, etc. Du Bartas also in his Divine Poems,
omits not the praise of this, as most praiseworthy. But Virgil has more fully
and amply set forth its praises and commendations in his Georgicks, where he
treats particularly of that Subject; and does not only recount the pleasures
and profits that proceed from it, but very Learnedly and Ingeniously also
treats of the Art it self, and gives many Precepts which are necessary to be
observed in the exercise of Agriculture, which renders it more delightsome and
beneficial. Hesiod also, one of the prime Poets amongst the Ancients, has
written an excellent exciting and necessary Poem treating of this Art. Several
others there are that have copiously and learnedly treated on this Subject.

Also a most evident demonstration and sure Argument of the Utility, Pleasure
and Excellency of this Branch of Natural Philosophy, is the principal care the
Royal and Most Illustrious Society take for the advancement thereof, and for
the discovery of its choicest and rarest Secrets, and the most facile and
advantageous means to improve the several Experiments and Practices relating to
that Subject; as the ever-honoured Mr. Evelin, a most Worthy Member of that
Society, in particular has done on one of the most principal parts of
Agriculture; viz. the planting of Trees both for Timber, Fruits, and other
necessary uses, and of making that Incomparable Liquor, Cider.

But nothing could more conduce to the propagating, encouraging, and improving
of this most necessary Art, and of all other Ingenious and Mechanic Arts,
Inventions, and Experiments, than the Constitution of Subordinate Societies
(after a Provincial manner) in several places of the Kingdom, whose principal
care and Office might be to collect all such Observations, Experiments, and
Improvements they find within their Province, relating to this or any other
Art within their Inquiry; which particular Societies might annually impart such
Collections, Observations, Experiments, and Improvements that they have
obtained, to the Grand Society; and from them also might Copies or Duplicates
of the whole Collection be Annually transmitted to each Subordinate Society,
that any person may have a place near unto him for the discovery of his
Observations, Experiments, Inventions, or Improvements; and that diligent,
industrious and ingenious persons may have recourse thereunto, for the inquiry
and search into the several Inventions, Discoveries, and Improvements of
others: by which means every person may have an opportunity to publish or
discover his Observations, Experiments, etc. which otherwise have been, and
will be, for the most part, with their Authors buried in Oblivion; and every
one may also have the like opportunity or advantage to search into, or enquire
after the several Ways, Methods, Inventions, etc. used or discovered in any
other place of England, of such things relating to this Society; which of
necessity must abundantly improve Science and Art, and advance Agriculture and
the Manufactures, two of the Principal Supports of this Nation, Wealth and
Honor.

That the particular proceedings (already made known) of that most Illustrious
Society, and the more Universal much desired and expected from them, (next unto
the Public Peace and Tranquillity of the Nation) are esteemed the only ways
and means to promote Industry and Ingenuity, to employ our numerous People, to
cultivate our waste Lands, to convert our barren Fields into fruitful Gardens
and Orchards, to make the Poor Rich, and the Rich Honorable, every man is
willing to assist in so Universal a work (unless those who thrive by others
ruins.) We find many have acted their parts, and discovered to the World
what they apprehended or had the experience of; which though much short of what
may be done, yet have they not lost their Aim. Many by their Rules, Precepts,
Observations and Experiments, have highly advanced this Noble Science of
Agriculture. But seeing some of those Treatises are relating to particular
Countries or places, or to some branch only or part of this our Subject, and
those also difficult to be obtained, and many of them filled with old obsolete
and impertinent directions and things, and too voluminous for our Laborious
Husbandman, whom they principally concern, I thought it no time ill spent in
such times and hours, as other necessary Affairs detain me not, to collect such
useful Observations, Precepts, Experiments and Discoveries, which I find
dispersed in the several Authors treating of this Subject, and to reduce them
into the following Method; omitting such things as have been found to be
useless, false, or merely putative or conjectural, or relating to other
Climates; and adding also such Discoveries, Observations and Experiments as I
have obtained from others, and my self discovered, and never before published
by any. You have here Epitomized the Substance and Marrow of all or most of the
known Authors treating of this Subject, or any part thereof; and also such new
and necessary Observations and Experiments as are for the benefit and
improvement of our Country-habitations: which I hope may gratify such Readers
as desire a work of this Nature, until our Philosophers and Heroes of Science
and Art, handle the Plough and Spade, and undertake the more Plenary Discovery
and Description of these Rustic Operations; which indeed require not only an
experienced Hand, but a judicious and ingenious Pen: until when, I hope this
indigested Piece may find a place in our Rural Libraries; and then I shall
willingly be the first that shall commit this to the Flames, to give way for a
better; which that we may suddenly obtain, is my earnest desire.

VALE.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this TREATISE.
I. OF Husbandry, and Improvements in general; plainly discovering the Nature,
Reasons, and Causes of Improvements, and the growth of Vegetables. II. Of the
great benefits and advantages of Enclosing Lands. III. Of Meadow and
Posture-lands, and the several ways of their Improvements, either by Watering
or Drowning, or by Sowing or Propagating several sorts of extraordinary
Grasses, Hays, etc. IIII. Of Arable Land and Tillage, and of the several
Grains, Pulses, etc. usually propagated by the Plough. V. Of the Manuring,
Dunging, and Soyling of Land. VI. Of the benefit, raising, planting, and
propagating of all sorts of Timber Trees, and other Trees useful either in
Building, or other Mechanic uses, or for Fencing, Fuel, etc. VII. Of
Fruit Trees. VIII. Of such Tillage, Herbs, Roots and Fruits, that are usually
planted and propagated in Gardens, Garden-grounds, either for necessary food,
use, or advantage. IX. Of several sorts of Beasts, Fowls and Insects, usually
kept for the advantage and use of the Husbandman. X. Of common and known
External Injuries, Inconveniences, Enemies and Diseases incident to, and
usually afflicting the Husbandman in most of the Ways or Methods of Agriculture
before treated of; and the several Natural and Artificial Remedies proposed and
made use of for the prevention and removal of them. XI. Of the several sorts of
Instruments, Tools and Engines incident to this Profession of Agriculture; and
of some Amendments and profitable Experiments in Building, either by Timber,
Stone, Brick, or any other way. XII. Of Fishing and Fowling. XIII. Kalendarium
Rusticum: Or, Monthly Directions for the Husbandman. XIV. Of the Prognostics
of Dearth or Scarcity, Plenty, Sickness, Heat, Cold, Frost, Snow, Winds, Rain,
Hail, Thunder, etc. XV. Dictionarium Rusticum: Or, The Interpretation of
Rustic Terms, etc.


THE ANALYSIS, OR Summary of the Ensuing WORK.
THE Preface or Introduction, in the praise of Husbandry

CHAP. I. Of Husbandry, and Improvements in General, plainly discovering the
Nature, Reasons, and Causes of Improvements, and the Growth of Vegetables, etc.
Fol. 1 What Agriculture is id. Of the subject whereon the Husbandman bestows
his labor id. Of the Universal Spirit, or Mercury 2 Of the Universal Sulphur
id. Of the Universal Salt 3 Of the true matter of Vegetables id. Where Water or
Spirit abounds 4 Where Fatness or Sulphur abounds 5 Where Salt abounds id.
Equal commixture of Principles 6
CHAP. II. Of the great Benefits and Advantages of Enclosing Lands. 10
Enclosure an Improvement id. Several Interests an Impediment 12 Highways an
Impediment id. Trees not thriving an Impediment id. Dividing Land into small
parcels an Improvement. 13 Enclosure for watered Meadows, not an Improvement
id. Wheat in enclosures subject to mildew 14
CHAP. III. Of Meadow and Pasture-lands, and the several ways of their
Improvements, either by watring or drowning; or by sowing or propagating
several sorts of extraordinary Grasses, or Hays, etc. 15 Sect. 1. Of the
watring of Meadows id. Of Meadows watered by Floods 16 Of Meadows watered by
diversion of Rivers id. Hindrances to such diversion id. Of Meadows watered by
artificial Engines 17 Of the Persian Wheel 18 Of Wind-Engines for the raising
water 19 What Windmils are best for this work id.
Sect. 2. Principal Rules to be observed in drowning Lands 21 Cutting the main
Carriage id. Cutting the Lesser Carriages id. Making the Drains id. Times for
watering 22 Manner of watering of Land by small Streams or Engines id. Barren
Springs not useful id.
Sect. 3. Of dry Meadow or Pasture improved id. By Enclosure 23 By burning the
rushy and mossy ground id. By stubbing up Shrubs, etc. id. By Dunging or
soyling 24 Time for soyling id. Soil for rushy and cold Land id. For sandy or
hot land id. For other Meadows id.
Sect. 4. Of several new Species of Hay or Grass id. Of the Clover-grass 25 Of
the profit of Clover-grass id. Best Land for Clover-grass id. Quantity of Seed
for an Acre 26 Time and manner of sowing Clover-grass id. Of cutting it for
Hay, and for Seed id. Of pasturing or feeding Clover-grass 27 Of thrashing or
ordering the Seed id. Of St Foyn, and the profits thereof 28 On what Land to
sow it id. Quantity of Seed on an Acre, and manner of sowing of it id. La
Lucern 29 What ground it requires id. Time and manner of sowing it id. Its use
id.
Sect. 5. Of some other Grasses or Hays id. Esparcet id. La Romain, or French
Tares or Vetches id. Spurry-seed id. Trefoyl 30 Long Grass in Wiltshire id.
Saxifrage id.

CHAP. IV. Of Arrable Land and Tillage, and of the several Grains, Pulses, etc.
usually propagated by the Plough. 31 Sect. 1. What Lands Improved by Tillage
id. Manner of Ploughing each sort 32 Clay stiff, cold, and moist id. Rich and
mellow Land 33 Poor and barren Land id.
Sect. 2. Of digging of Land for Corn 34 Sect. 3. Of the different Species of
Grain, Corn, Pulse, etc. usually sown, or necessary to be propagated in our
Country-farm 35 Wheat id. Barley 36 Rye 37 Massin id. Oats id. Buck-wheat, or
French-wheat id. Other sorts of Grain id. Pease id. Beans 38 Fitches id.
Lentils id. Lupines id. Tares id. Other Pulses id.
Sect. 4. Hemp and Flax 39 Impediments to the sowing of Hemp and Flax id. Want
of Trade an Impediment id. Want of Experience id. Tithes an Impediment id. Hemp
40 Value of Hemp id. Flax id. Best Seed id. Value of Flax 41
Sect. 5. Woad, etc. id. To know when it is full ripe id. Profit of Woad 42
Rape and Cole-seed id. Profit thereof id. Turnips id.
Sect. 6. Of the manner of setting Corn, and the howing it in, etc. 43
Description of Mr. Grabriel Plat's Engine of setting Corn 44 The second Engine
45 Errors in this way 46 Howing of Corn commended id. New Instrument for sowing
of Corn 47 The more particular use and benefit of this Instrument 48 1 As to
time 2 Equality of Seed 3 Rectification of the Feeder 4 No difference in
driving fast or slow 5 No loss of Seed 6 Needs no harrowing General advantages
of this Instrument 49 Another excellent advantage of this Instrument 50
Sect. 7. Of the general Uses of Corn, Grain, Pulse, and other Seeds propagated
by the Plough 51 Of Wheat id. Of Barley id. Of Rye id. Of Oats id. Of Pulses
id. Of the uses of Hemp Seed, Flax-seed, Rape and Cole-seed 52 Of the
preservation of Corn id.
Sect. 8. Of the preparation of the Seed 53 Change of Seed an Improvement id.
Steeping of Corn in Dung-water, and other preparations 54, 55, 56

CHAP. V. Of the Manuring, Dunging, and Soyling of Land 58 Sect 1. Of Burning
of Land id. On what Lands Burn-baiting is good 59 Manner of Burn-baiting id.
Sect. 2. Soyls and Manures taken from the Earth 61 Chalk id. Lime id. Marle 62
Fullers-Earth 63 Clay and Sand 64 Earth id.
Sect. 3. Soyls taken from the Sea, or Water 65 Water-sand id. Sea-weeds, and
Weeds in Rivers id. Snayl, Cod, or Snag greet id. Oyster-shells 66 Mud id. Fish
id.
Sect. 4. Of Dungs or excrementitious soils id. Of Horse-dung id. Of Cow or
Ox-dung id. Of Sheeps-dung 67 Of Swines-dung id. Of the Dung of Fowl 68
Pigeons-dung id. Poultry-dung id. Goose-dung id. Of Urines 69
Sect. 5. Of several other Soyls or Manures id. Ashes id. Soot 70 Salt id. Rags
id. Hair 71 Malt-dust* id. Fern, Straw, Stubble, etc. id. Bones, Horns, etc.
id. Bark of Trees, and old Earth in Trees id. Urry id.

CHAP. VI. Of the Benefit, Raising, Planting, and Propagating of all sorts of
Timber Trees, and other Trees useful either in Building, or other Mechanic
uses, or for Feneing, Fuel, etc. 72 Sect. 1. Of the benefit of propagating
Timber Trees, and other Trees in general id. Particular advantages 73 More
unniversal advantages 74
Sect. 2. Of Timber Trees in general 75 The Oak, its propagation and use id.
The Elm 76 The Beech 78 The Ash 79 The Wallnut 80 The Chestnut id. The Service 81
Sect. 3. Of several other Trees, not so generally made use of for Timber, as
for Fuel; Coppice-woods, Hedgerows, etc. 81 The Birch id. The Maple 82 The
Horn-beam id. The Quick-beam id. The Hasel id.
Sect. 4. Of Aquaticks, or Trees affecting moist and watery places 83 The Poplar
id. The Aspen id. The Abele id. The Alder id. The Withy id. The Salley id.
Ofiers id. Willow 84
Sect. 5. Of other Trees planted for Ornament, or adorning Gardens, Avenues,
Parks, and other places adjoining to your Mansion House; and convertible also
to several uses 84 The Sycomore id. The Lime-tree id. The Horse Chesnut-tree 85
The Fir, Pine, Pinaster, and Pitch-tree id. The Larch, Platanus, and Lotus id.
The Cyprus 86 The Cedar id. The Alaternus id. The Phillyrea id. The Bay Tree
id. The Laurel id. The Eugh-tree id. Privet id.
Sect. 6. Of Shrubs and other Trees less useful, yet planted for Ornament and
Delight 87 The Myrtle id. The Box id. Juniper id. Tamarisk id. Arbor Vitae id.
Some Flower-trees; and other Trees of delight id.
Sect. 7. Of such Trees that are necessary and proper for Fencing, and
Enclosing of Lands, Orchards, Gardens, etc. And the best way of raising such
Fences 88 The White-thorn id. The Holly id. Piracantha id. The Black-thorn 89
The Elder id. Furzes id. The speediest way of planting a Quickset-Hedge id.
Another way id. Of planting the Holly-Hedge id. Preserving Hedges from Cattle
id. Weeding of Hedges id. Plashing of Hedges id.
Sect. 8. Of the Nursery for the more convenient propagation of most of the
forementioned Trees. 90 Trees produced of Seed id. Preserving and preparation
of the seed id. Election of the seed 91 Place for a Nursery id. Manner of
sowing id. Ordering of the Nursery id. Sowing of a Coppice id.
Sect. 9. Of the transplantation of Trees 92 The time id. Of such Trees that
come of Slips, Suckers, etc. id. Time to slip or lay id. The time for Aquaticks
id. Manner of transplanting id. Watering of Trees 93 Staking of Trees id.
Planting of Aquaticks id. Removing of Trees 94 Transplanting of great Trees id.
Helps to Trees id. Planting of Coppices 95 Thickning of Coppices id.
Sect. 10. Of the pruning, shrouding, cutting, and felling of Trees and
Coppices id. Pruning of Trees id. Times for Shrouding 96 Observations in
Shrouding id. Pruning of Winter-greens id. Cutting of Aquaticks id. Cutting of
young Coppices id. Felling of Coppices, time and manner id. Felling
Timber Trees, time and manner 97

CHAP. VII. Of Fruit Trees. Sect. 1. Of the profits and pleasures of
Fruit Trees. 98 Of Apples 99 Of Pears 100 Of Cherries 101 Of Walnuts id. Of
Filberts 102 Of Quinces id. Of Mulberries id. Of Plums 103 Of Medlars id. Of
Barberries id. Of Almonds id. Of Services 104 Of Gooseberries id. Of Currants
id. Of Rasberries id.
Sect. 2. Of Wall-trees id. Of the Vine 105 Of Aprecocks 107 Peaches,
Nectorines, and Melacotones id. Of Figs id. Of Currants id. Other Fruits id.
Sect. 3. Of the propagation of Fruit Trees id. By Grafting 108 What Fruits are
grafted, and on what Stocks id. By Inoculation id. What Fruits are Inoculated,
and on what Stocks id.
Sect. 4. Of the Nursery for Stocks 109 Sect. 5. Of the time and manner of
grasting 111 The time for Grafting id. The choice of Grafts id. The keeping of
Grafts id. Instruments for Grafting 112 Grafting in the Cleft id. In the Bark
id. Shoulder, or Whip-grafting 113 Grafting by Approach 114 A new way of
Grafting 115
Sect. 6. Of the time and manner of Inoculation. 116 The time for Inoculation
id. Choice of Buds id. Instruments for Inoculation id. The three several ways
of Inoculation id.
Sect. 7. Of raising Fruit Trees by the Seeds, Stones, Nuts, or Kernels 117
What Trees are so raised id.
Sect. 8. Of raising and propagating of Fruit Trees, by Layers, Slips, or
Suckers 118 What Trees are to be so raised id. To lay the branches of Trees 119
Sect. 9. Of the transplanting of Trees id. Time to transplant Trees id. The
manner of transplanting Trees id. The distance of Trees 120
Sect. 10. Of the pruning of Trees 122 Of young Trees id. Of Wall-trees id. Of
old Trees id.
Sect. 11. Other necessary observations about Fruit Trees 123 The raising of
Land id. The ordering of the Roots of old Trees id. Alteration of the Ground.
124 Defending Trees from Winds id. Raising Stocks id. Soil for Fruit Trees 125
Height of Trees id. Diseases of Trees id.
Sect. 12. Of the use and benefit of Fruit Trees 126 By Cider id. Cider-fruits
id. Making of Cider 127 By Perry 128 Making of Perry 129 Some observations
concerning Cider id. Botling of Cider id. Of the Wines or Juices of other
Fruits: As Cherry-Wine 130, 131 Wine of Plums Mulberry-Wine Rasberry-Wine Wine
of Currants

CHAP. VIII. Of such Tillage, Herbs, Roots, and Fruits that are usually planted
and propagated in Gardens, and Garden-grounds, either for necessary food, use,
or advantage 132 The advantage of Garden-tillage in general id. Sect. 1. Of
Hops 133 Best Land and Situation of a Hop-garden 134 Defending the Hop-garden
by Trees id. Preparing the Ground id. Distance of the Hills id. Bigness of the
Hills 135 Time of planting Hops id. Choice of Sets, and manner of setting id.
Dressing of Hops 136 Poling Hops 137 Tying of Hops of the poles 138 Of the
making up the Hills 139 Manner of watering Hops id. When Hops blow, bell, and
ripen 140 When to gather Hops, and the manner how id. Of the drying of Hops 142
Description of an Oost or Kiln id. Another way to dry Hops 143 The best way to
dry Hops id. To dry Hops suddenly without turning of them 144 Bagging of Hops
id. Laying up the poles 145 Dunging or soyling the Hop-garden id.
Sect. 2. Of Liquorice, Saffron, Madder, and Dyers Weed 146 Best Land for
Liquorice, and ordering of it id. Choice of Sets id. Time and manner of
planting id. Taking up of Liquorice, and its profit 147 Of Saffron id. What
Land is best for Saffron id. Time and manner of planting of it id. Time of the
flowering and gathering of Saffron id. Drying of Saffron 148 Profits of Saffron
id. Of Madder id. Land fit for Madder id. Time and manner of planting it id.
The use and profit of Madder id. Of Weld, or Dyars Weed id. What Land it
requires id. Manner of sowing it id. Gathering and ordering of it id.
Sect. 3. Of Beans, Pease, Melons, Cucumbers, Asparagus, Cabbage, and several
other sorts of Garden-tillage 149 Garden-beans id. Pease id. French-beans 150
Melons and Cucumbers id. Pompions id. Artichoaks 151 Their preservation against
Frost id. Dressing of Artichoaks id. Asparagus id. Planting of them 152 Odering
and cutting of them id. Early Asparagus id. Strawberries id. The Coleflower 153
Cabbages and Coleworts id. Lettuce 154 Savoys id. Beets id. Anise id.
Sect. 4. Of Carrots, Turnips, and other Roots useful in the Kitchen id.
Carrots id. Turnips 155 Parships id. Skirrets id. Radishes id. Potatoes id.
Jerusalem Artichoaks id. Onions id. Garlic 156 Leeks id. Tobacco id.
Sect. 5. Of the manner of ordering and preparing of Garden-ground, making of
Hot-beds, and watering of the Gardens, etc. 157 The several ways of tempering
Mold id. The best way of sowing Garden-seeds 158 To lay ground warm and dry id.
The making of Hot-beds id. Of watering of plants id.

CHAP. IX. Of several sorts of Beasts, Fowls, and Insects, usually kept for the
advantage and use of the Husbandman 160 Sect. 1. Of Beasts id. Of the Horse id.
Of the Ass id. Of the Mule 161 Of Cows and Oxen id. Of Sheep id. Of Swine id.
Of Goats 162 Of Dogs id. Of Coneys id.
Sect. 2. Of Fowl 163 Of Poultry id. Profit of Poultry 164 Feeding and fatting
of Poultry id. Increasing of Eggs id. Hatching of Eggs Artificially id. Of
Geese id. Of fatting of Geese 165 A principal observation of fatting of Geese
id. The Jews manner of fatting of Geese id. Of Ducks id. Of Decoy-Ducks id. Of
Turkeys id. Of Pigeons 166 To increase a Stock of Pigeons id. Of Swans 167
Fatting of Cignets id. Of Peacocks id. Of tame Pheasants, and the ordering of
them. id.
Sect. 3. Of Insects 168 1 Of Bees id. The praise and pleasure of Bees id. Of
the Apiary 170 Form and manner of the Apiary id. Of the seats or stools for
Bees 171 Of Benches 172 The best Seats id. Of the Hives 173 The form and
bigness of the Hives 174 Dressing the Hives id. Of Wooden Hives id. Of Glassen
Hives id. Of Spleeting the Hives 176 Of the swarming of Bees id. Several
Experiments to increase Bees without swarming id. The bigness of swarms or
stocks of Bees 178 Signs of swarming 179 Signs of present swarming id. Signs
and causes of not swarming id. To make them swarm id. Signs of after-swarms 180
Ringing of Bees id. Hiving of Bees id. Uniting of Swarms 181 Defense against
Bees 182 To cure the sting of a Be id. Of the Bees work id. The numbers of
Bees 183 Of the Bees Enemies id. Removing of Bees 184 Feeding of Bees id. An
Experiment for improving of Bees 185 A singular observation concerning the food
of Bees id. Of the fruit and profit of Bees id. Driving of Bees 186 Exsection,
or gelding of Combs id. Of the generation of Bees 188 The making of Metheglin
id.
2. Of Silk*worms 190 Their Food id. Time and manner of Hatching Silkworms
Eggs id. Their sicknesses id. Their time and manner of feeding 191 Their
spinning id. Their breeding id. The winding of the Silk 192


CHAP. X. Of common and known external Injuries, Inconveniences, Enemies, and
Diseases incident to, and usually afflicting the Husbandman in most of the Ways
and Methods of Agriculture before treated of: And the several Natural and
Artificial Remedies proposed, and made use of for the prevention and removal of
them 193 Sect. 1. From the Heavens or Air id. Great heat or drought id.
Remedies for want of water 195 To make Cisterns to hold water 196 Great Cold
and Frost 197 Much Rain 200 High Winds id. Thunder and Tempest, Hail, etc. 201
Mildews id.
Sect. 2. From the Water and Earth 203 Much water offending id. Overflowing of
the Sea id. Land-floods id. Standing-waters 204 Stones, Shrubs, etc. 205 Weeds
206 Blights and Smut 207
Sect. 3. From several Beasts 208 Foxes id. Otters id. Coneys, Hares 209
Poll-cats, Weasels, and Stotes id. Moles or Wants id. Mice or Rats 210
Sect. 4. From Fowls 211 Kites, Hawks, etc. id. Crows, Ravens, etc. id. Pigeons
212 Jays 213 Bullfinches id. Goldfinches 214 Sparrows, etc. id.
Sect. 5. Of Insects, and creeping things offending id. Frogs and Toads id.
Snails and Worms id. Gnats and Flies 215 Wasps and Hornets id. Caterpillars 216
Earwigs id. Lice id. Ants id. To destroy Ant-hills id. Snakes and Adders 217 To
cure the stinging of Adders, or biting of Snakes id.
Sect. 6. Of some certain Diseases in Animals and Vegetables 217 Of Beasts and
Fowl id. Of the Murrain 218 Of the Rot in Sheep id. An approved Experiment for
the cure of the Fashions in Horses, and Rot in Sheep 219 Another for the
Measles in Swine, and also to make them fat id.
Sect. 7. Of Thieves and ill Neighbors 220
CHAP. XI. Of the several sorts of Instruments, Tools, and Engines incident to
this Profession of Agriculture; and of some Amendments and profitable
Experiments in Building, either by Timber, Stone, Brick, or any other way 223
Sect. 1. Of the several sorts of Ploughs id. Double-wheeled-Plough 224
Turn-wrest Plough id. Single-wheeled-plough id. Plain Plough id. Double Plough
id. Another sort of Double Plough id. Other sorts of Ploughs 225 Good
properties of the Plough id. Errors of the Plough id. A Turfing Plough id.
Sect. 2. Of Carts and Wagons 226 New sort of Cart id. Wagon with sails 227
Sect. 3. Of several other Instruments used in digging id. Of the
Trenching-plough id. Of Spades id* Turfing-spade id. Trenching-spade id. Common
Spades id. The How 228 Other Instruments used in digging, etc. id.
Sect. 4. Other various Instruments id. Sect. 5. Of Amendments and profitable
Experiments in Building 229 The situation of a House 230 Securest and cheapest
way of building a House 231 Best Covering for a House 232 Of Tiles, Bricks,
etc. id. Of building of Stone or Brick-walls 233 Of Mortar id. Of Timber 234 Of
Mills id.

CHAP. XII. Of Fowling and Fishing 236 Sect. 1. Of Fowling in general id. Of
Fowling the nature of waterfowl id. The haunts of Waterfowl id.
Sect. 2. Of taking the greater sort of fowl with Nets 237 The form of a
Draw-net id.
Sect. 3. Of the taking small Waterfowl with Nets 238 Sect. 4. Of taking great
Fowl with Lime-twigs id. Of the diverse ways of making Birdlime id. Of the
several uses of it 139 Of the taking small Fowl with Lime-twigs 240
Sect. 5. Of taking Fowl with Springes id. Sect. 6. Of killing Fowl with the
Fowling-piece 241 Of the choice of Gunpowder id. The way to make shot id. Of
the Stalking-horse 242 Of the artificial Stalking-horse 243 Artificial Trees
id. A digression concerning decoy-ponds id. Of the taking Wilde-Ducks Eggs 244
Sect. 7. Of taking Land-fowl id. The greater sorts of them id. Of taking Fowl
by day-nets id. Of taking Larks by day-nets id. Of Stales 245 Another way to
take Larks by a Day-net, called daring of Larks id. To take Birds with the
Low-bell id. To take Birds with the Trammel only 246 To take Birds by
Batt-fowling id. To take small Birds with Lime-twigs id. To take Fieldfares or
Bow-thrushes 247
Sect. 8. Of taking Fowl with Baits id. To take Land-fowl with Baits id. To
take Waterfowl with Baits id.
Sect. 9. Of taking some sorts of Fowl id. To take the Pheasant with Nets id.
To drive young Pheasants 248 To take Pheasants with Lime-twigs id. To perch
Pheasants id. To take Partridge id. To take them with a Trammel-net 249 To take
them with a Setting-dog id. To drive Partridges id. To take them with Bird-lime
id. To take Woodcocks id. To take them in a Cock-road id. Of Fishing 250 Sect.
1. Of taking Fish by Nets, Pots, or Engines id. To Fish with Nets id. With the
Trammel or Sieve id. With the Casting-net 251 With the shore-net or pot-net id.
With Fish-pots id. With Wears id. With Hawks 252 The way of making a Piscary
id. A Hawk-net id.
Sect. 2. Of Angling 253 Observations in Angling id. Seasons for Angling 254
Seasons not to Angle in id.
Sect. 3. Of Angling for Salmon and Trout 255 Sect. 4. Of Angling for Pike and
Perch id. Sect. 5. Of Angling for standing-Water or Pond-fish 256 For the Carp
id. For the Tench id. For the Dace 257 For the Roach id. For the Bream id.
Taking of Eels id. By Angle id. With Bank-hooks id. By Sniggling id. By Bobbing
258
Sect. 6. Of Angling for the Barbel, Grailing, Umber, Chevin, and Chub id. Of
Cormorant Fishing 259


CHAP. XIII. Kalendarium Rusticum, or Monthly Directions for the Husbandman 261
In January 265 February 267 March 269 April 271 May 273 June 275 July 277
August 279 September 281 October 283 November 285 December 287
CHAP. XIV. Of the Prognostics of Dearth, or Scarcity, Plenty, Sickness, Heat,
Cold, Frost, Snow, Winds, Rain, Hail, Thunder, etc. 289 Sect. 1. Of the
different appearances of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Meteors, or any other thing in
the Air, or above us 290 Of the motions, colors, and appearances of the seven
Planets id. Of the Sun id. Of the Moon 292 Of the other Erraticks or Planets
id. Of Comets, or Blazing-stars 293 Of the shooting of Stars 294 Of the fixed
Stars id. Of Fire, or other casual appearances id. Of the Clouds 295 Of Mists
and Fogs id. Of Winds 296 Of Whirlwinds 297 Of the Rainbow 298 Of Noise and
stilness in the Air id. Of Thunder and Lightening id. Of the rarity and density
of the Air id. Of the Weatherglass, or Thermometry 299 Of the Baroscope 301
Sect. 2. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from the Earth and Water 302
Of the Earth id. Of the Water id. Of the Sea id.
Sect. 3. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from Beasts 303 Of Beeves, or
Kine id. Of Sheep id. Of Kids id. Of Asses id. Of Dogs id. Of Cats id. Of Mice
and Rats id. Of Swine 304
Sect. 4. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from Fowl id. Of Waterfowl
id. Of Land-fowl id. Of the Heron id. Of the Kite 305 Of the Crow, etc. id. Of
Sparrows id. Of the Jay id. Of Bats id. Of the Owl id. Of the Woodlark id. Of
the Swallow id. Of the Cock id.
Sect. 5. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from Fishes and Insects id. Of
Seafish id. Of Fresh Water Fish id. Of Frogs id. Of Snakes id. Of Ants id. Of
Bees id. Of Gnats, Flies, and Fleas id. Of Spiders 306 Of Chaffers, etc. id.
Sect. 6. Promiscuous Observations Prognostics id. Of Trees and Vegetables id.
Of Fire id. Signs of Rain 307 Signs of Snow id.

CHAP. XV. Dictionarium Rusticum. 312


CHAP. I.
Of Husbandry and Improvements in general; plainly discovering the Nature,
Reasons, and Causes of Improvements; and the Growth of Vegetables, etc.

AGriculture has been (not undeservedly) esteemed What Agriculture is.
a Science, that principally teaches us the Nature, and diverse Properties and
Qualities, as well of the several Soils, Earths and Places, as of the several
Productions or Creatures, whether Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral that either
naturally proceed, or are artificially produced from, or else maintained by the
Earth. Agricultura est Scientia docens quae sunt in unoquoque Agro serunda and
faciunda, quae terra maximos perpetuo proventus ferat, says Varro.

The Judicious and Understanding Husbandman must first consider Of the Subject
whereon the Husband man bestows his labor.
the Subject whereon to spend his Time, Cost, and Labor, viz. the Earth, or
Ground; which we usually term either Meadow, Arable, Pasture, Woodland,
Orchard, or Garden-ground: then, whether it be more Commodious or Profitable
for Meadow, for Pasture, or for Woods, which in most places are naturally
produced, to the great advantage of the Husbandman; or with what particular
Species of Grain, Pulse, Trees, Fruits, or other Vegetables, it is best to
Plant or Sow the same, to his greatest benefit; And with what Beasts, Fowl, or
other Animals, to Stock his Farm or other Lands. Also he is to consider the
best and most commodious way of Tilling, Improving, Propagating, Planting, and
Manuring all such Meadows, Arable and Pasture Pasture-Lands, Woods, Orchards,
and Gardens; and the Reasons and Causes of such Improvements. All which we
shall endeavor to discover, to the satisfaction and content of the diligent and
laborious Husbandman.

But before we enter upon the particular Ways and Methods of Agriculture
treated of in this ensuing Work, we shall endeavor to unvail the secret
Mysteries (as they are commonly esteemed) of the Productions and Increase of
Vegetables, after a plain and familiar Method, not exceeding the Capacity of
our Husbandmen, whom this Treatise does principally concern; by the true
knowledge whereof, a gate is opened to Propagate, Maturate, or Advance the
Growth or Worth of any Tree, Plant, Grain, Fruit or Herb, to the highest pitch
Nature admits of.

This Globe of Earth that affords unto us the substance, not only Of the
Universal Spirit or Mercury.
of our selves, but of all other Creatures Sublunary, is impregnated with a
Spirit most subtle and Ethereal, as it were, divinioris Aurae particula (as
the Learned Willis terms it) which the Original De Fermentatione.
or Father of Nature has placed in this World, as the Instrument of Life and
Motion of every thing. This Spirit is that which incessantly administers unto
every Animal its Generation, Life, Growth, and Motion; to every Vegetable its
Original and Vegetation: It is the Vehicle that carries with it the
Sulphurous and Saline parts, whereof the Matter, Substance, or Body of all
Vegetables and Animals are formed or composed. It is the Operator or Workman,
that transmutes by its active heat the Sulphurous and Saline parts of the
Earth or Water into those varieties of Objects we daily behold or enjoy,
according to the different Seed or Matrix wherein it operates: It continually
perspires through the pores of the Earth, carrying with it the Sulphurous and
Saline parts, the only treasure the Husbandman seeks for, as has been by some
Ingenious Artists mechanically proved, by receiving the same between the Vernal
and Autumnal Equinoxes in an Alembick head, where it has condensed, and
copiously distilled into the Receiver, at that season of the year; the Earth
then more liberally affording it, than in the Winter-season: which Spiritual
Liquor so received, is not a Treasure to be slighted or neglected, carrying
with it the only Matter of Vegetables, as the same Artists affirmed, that
having placed the same under a Melon-Glass near some Vegetable, it was thereby
wholly attracted externally, and converted into that Vegetable; they concluded
also the same to be that Materia Prima quae absque omni sumptu, labor and
molestia reperta est, and quam in aere capere te oportet antequam ad terram
perveniat, etc. This Liquor undoubtedly would be of singular Virtue and Effect
in advancing and maturating the Growth of the more excellent Flowers or
Curiosities, being irrigated therewith. It is easily obtained, and that in
great Quantities, by such that think not a little time and labor lost, to
scrutine into the Mysteries of Nature. But whether we obtain it singly, or
simply, or not, this we know, that it is to be received by placing the more
natural Receptacles, the Seeds and Plants in the Earth, which gives it us
transmuted into such Forms and Substances as are most desired and necessary.

Although the Spirit or Mercury be that active and moving Of the Universal
Sulphur.
part, and that principally appears in the Generation or Conception of any
Vegetable or Animal, and is also the first that flies in the separation or
dissolution of Bodies, yet is it imbecile and defective without that most
Excellent, Rich, and Sulphurous Principle, which (according to the description
of the Learned Willis) is De Fermentatione.
of a little thicker consistence than the Spirit, and next unto it the most
active; for when any mixture or compound is separated, the Spirits first fly,
then follow after the Sulphurous Particles. The temperature of every thing, so
far as to the Heat, Consistence, and curious Texture thereof, does principally
depend on Sulphur; from hence every Plant, Fruit and Flower receives those
infinite varieties of Forms, Colors, Gusts, Odours, Signatures, and Virtues;
it is that which is the proper Medium to unite the more Volatile Mercury or
Spirit to the more fixed Salt. Spiritus Mediante Anima cum corpore conjungitur
and ligatur, and fit unum cum eis, say the Philosophers. This Sulphur, or oily
part, is easily separated and distinguished in Vegetables by the more curious:
it arises out of the earth with the aforesaid Mercury or Aqueous Spirit,
though not at the first discernable, yet in every Plant more and more maturated
and augmented by the Suns influence, as the Seed or Matrix is more or less
inclined to this Principle: This is also that which gives to our hot and
stinking Dungs, Soils, or Manures, the Oleaginous pinguidity and Fertility, and
which begets that fiery heat which is in Vegetables, as Hay, Corn, etc. laid on
heaps not thoroughly dry.

Not only the Duration of Individuals, but also the Propagation Of the
Universal Salt. Willis de fermentatione.
of the Species depends much on the Principle of Salt: for the Growth of
Minerals, the Fertility of Land, the Vegetation or Growth of Plants, and
chiefly the fruitful Foetation and Progeny of Animals, have their Original from
their Saline Seed. This Salt obscurely passes with the Mercurial Spirit and
the Sulphur, and is associated therewith; where ever that passes, and where it
finds a convenient Receptable, Seed, or Matrix, it is more fixed than either
the Sulphur or Spirit. The Salt is that which gives to every Creature a
Substance or Body, without which neither the Spirit nor Sulphur could be
reduced or coagulated into any Form; It is in every thing: Sal autem reperitur
in rebus omnibus. It is volatile, when carried in the wings of the Spirit and
Sulphur, by the natural Fire or Motion: But afterward it is more fixed, when
separated from the Spirit, or Mercury, and Sulphur by artificial Fire, as
appears in the ashes or Caput Mortuum of all Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals
distilled or burnt; much also of the Sulphurous or Mercurial parts are
coagulated by, or transmuted into the Saline by natural or artificial Heat or
Warmth, as is evident in the Sea, the nearer it is to the Equinoctial Line, and
the more it receives of the Perpendicular or direct Beams of the Sun, the
greater quantity of Salt it contains, not only by the exhalation of the Aqueous
or Phlegmatic parts, but the Maturation, Transmutation, or Fixation of the
more Volatile, Spiritual, and Sulphurous parts, into the more Saline or fixed:
For in those hotter Climates the Land it self also is more Fertile through the
abounding quantity of this Vegetating Salt, as appears by the great plenty of
Nitre, or Sal terrae found in the hotter Climates, lying on the Surface of the
Earth in the morning like a hoary Frost: when the Regions nearer the Poles,
having not those natural advantages of the Sunbeams in so high a degree, are
not so Fertile, nor abound so much with Salt, the most principal cause of
Fertility.

But we will leave these Philosophical Principles as they are simply Of the
true matter of Vegetables.
and apart very necessary to be known by those that Operate in the more-Secret,
Mystical, and Mechanic Indagations of Nature, and discourse only of that
Universal Spirit or Vapor, which daily and every moment perspires and proceeds
out of every part of the Earth, and is in every thing, containing in it self
the Spirit or Mercury, the Sulphur and the Salt in one body united: and without
Art indivisible, yet some one Part or Principle abounding more or less in every
thing; as the Water contains more of the Spiritual or Aqueous part; several
Fruits, Plants, Flowers, and Soils, more of the Sulphurous; and Barks of
Trees, Blood of Animals, and several Minerals, more of the Saline. And
wheresoever these Principles are most equally tempered or mixed, there is most
of Fertility, as is evident in the several Natures, Tempers and Qualities of
Places, for the Production or Propagation of Vegetables; and wheresoever any or
either of these Principles do overmuch abound, Vegetables are not produced; as
Waters, or any other Liquors, or Spirits, are not Where Water or Spirits abound.
Fertile in themselves as to Vegetation, unless they are either conjoined with
some other Substance or Matter, or the more Phlegmatic parts evaporated, and
the remaining part maturated by the Sun or Air into an augmentation of the
other Principles, then is it capable of yielding naturally some sort of
Vegetables: For although several Plants set in Water only, do emit fibrous
roots, and flourish therein for a time; yet is it merely an attraction of the
most Saline and Sulphurous parts or Principles to its own relief, as is
evident by its better thriving, if the Water be often changed: At best, this
nourishment is but weak, having so little of the Sulphur and Salt; as the
Withy, Poplar, and other Aquatick Plants demonstrate. Therefore out of any sort
of Waters only, it is in vain to attempt any material or effectual increase of
Vegetables, other than that are naturally Aquatick, because they contain a
superaboundant Spirit or Moisture. Therefore vain is the new received Opinion
that Trees and other Vegetables, and also other Minerals, proceed from Water
only. But our Spiritus Mundi, or Materia propinqua Vegetabilium, although it
appear in a Liquid form, yet it contains actually an equal proportion of the
three Principles: And the more any Substance or Matter is impregnated, or
irrigated therewith, the more prone or apt it is to Vegetation; as Rainwater
being animated with it by the continual Exhalations or Fumes ascending from the
Earth, and by it coagulated and detained, is more prone to Vegetation than any
other Waters, as you may perceive by Plants watered therewith, and by its
sudden Generation of Animals and Vegetables in the Springtime, then the Earth
more copiously breathing forth that Spiritus Mundi, which returned again, does
by the vivifying heat of the Sun, easily transcend into another Species. How
soon will Horse-hairs receive life, lying in Rainwater but a few days in the
heat of the Sun in the Springtime! whereof I have seen many in the Highways
after Rain in the Month of May, very nimble and quick, that had not yet lost
their shape of a Horse-hair. This is worthy our further enquiry, to what Period
this may be advanced: it may also serve as an Index to point at several other
Excellent Discoveries.

Neither is the more Sulphurous part or Principle of it self capable Where
Fumes or Sulphur abounds.
of yielding Vegetables, being of too hot and pinguid a Nature, as the Dung of
Animals (and especially of Volatiles that eject no Urine, whereby the more
fiery and Sulphurous part of the others is diluted) containing much of that
pinguidity, produce no Vegetables of it self, unless commixed or allayed with
some other Matter abounding with the other Principles, or that it loose its too
fiery or destructive Nature, by being exposed to the Sun or Air, until it be
evaporated, then will it emit several Vegetables: Of the like Nature also are
the flesh and bones of Animals, yielding a very rich Compost, though of
themselves (through overmuch heat and pinguidity) sterile.

The Saline, or more fixed Principle, which is esteemed by most Where Salt
abounds.
Authors the only thing conducing to Fertility, yet is of its self, or in an
over-bounding quantity, the most barren and unfruitful. It is prescribed as a
sure way to destroy Weeds (Vegetables) by watering the place with Brine or
Salt Water; yet what more fruitful, being moderately commixed with other
Materials of another nature, than Salt? But observe, that Salts extracted out
of the Earth, or from Vegetables or Animals, are much more Fertile than those
of the Sea, containing in them more of the Vegetative Power or Principles, and
are therefore much to be preferred. Glauber makes it the highest improvement
for the Land, and for Continuatio Miraculi Mundi.
Trees also, affirming that by it you may enrich the most barren Sands, beyond
what can be performed by any other Soils or Manures, in case it be deprived of
its Corrosive Qualities; for then will it naturally attract the other
Principles, continually breathing out of the Earth, and in the Air, and
immediately qualify it self for Vegetation; as I observed in a parcel of
Field-Land of about three Acres denshired or burn-beaten in a very hot and dry
Spring, of it self naturally barren, and after the burning and spreading the
ashes, wherein was the Fertile Salt deprived of its Corrosive sterile quality,
the Land was plowed very shallow, and Barley sown therein about the beginning of
May, in the very ashes as it were (no Rain falling from the very beginning of
cutting the Turf) yet in thirty and six hours was the Barley shot forth, and
the Ground colored green therewith; this Salt attracting and condensing the
ever-breathing Spirit. The like you may observe in Walls and Buildings, where
several sorts of Vegetables, yea, trees of a great bigness will thrive and
prosper remote from the Earth, and without any other nourishment than what that
Fertile Salt attracts and condenses, as before; which it could not have done,
had it not been purged of its Corrosive and Sterile Nature by Fire when it was
made into Lime: For all Chemists know, that no Salts more easily dissolve per
deliquum, than those that are most calcined.

The Salt also of the Sea is not without its Fertile Nature, being ordered with
Judgment and Discretion, as we see evidently, that the Salt Marshes (out of
which the Sea is drained) excel in Fertility: and many places being irrigated
with the Seawater, yield a notable increase; Corn also therewith imbibed, has
been much advanced, as appeared in the President of the Countryman that
casually let his Seed-Corn fall into the Salt Water. And in the Isle of Wight
it is observed, that Corn flourishes on the very Rocks that are bedewed with
the Salt Water by the Blasts of the Southern Winds. The shells of fish, being
as it were only Salt coagulated, have proved an excellent Manure for barren
Lands after they have lain a competent time to dissolve.

From what has been before observed, we may conclude that Equal commixture of
Principles.
the highest Fertility and Improvements are to be advanced and made from the
most equal Commixture of the aforesaid several Principles, or of such Waters,
Soils, Dungs, Salts, Manures, or Composts that more or less abound with either
of them, having regard unto the nature of such Vegetable, whose propagation or
advancement you intend: Some delighting in a more Hot or Cold, Moist or Dry,
Fat or Barren, than others. And next unto that, from due Preservation,
Reception, and right disposing and ordering of that Spiritus Mundi, every where
found, and to be attained without Cost, and as well by the poor as rich.

It continually breaths from the Earth, as we noted before, and is diffused in
the Air, and lost unless we place convenient Receptacles to receive it, as by
Planting of Trees, and sowing of Pulses, Grain, or Seed. Out of what think you
should these things be formed or made? Out of Rainwater, is the common Answer
or Opinion. But we experimentally find, that this Universal Subject gives to
every Plant its Essence or Substance, although assisted by Rain or Water both
in its nourishment and condensation.

We see how great a Tree is raised out of a small Plat of Ground, by its
sending forth of its Roots to receive its nourishment, penetrating into the
smallest Crannies and Joints between the Stones and Rocks, where it finds the
greatest plenty of its proper food. We constantly perceive and find, that
Vegetables having once emitted their fibrous Roots, vegetate and increase only
from the assistance of this our Universal Subject, when the Earth wherein it
stands is of it self dry, and not capable to yield that constant supply of
Moisture the Plant daily requires. Although we must confess that Rain or other
Water accelerates its Growth, having in it a Portion of that Spiritus Mundi,
and also better qualifies the Earth for its perspiration.

That this Subject is the very Essence of Vegetables, and that from it they
receive their Substance, and not from water only, is evident, in such places
where Vegetables are not permitted to grow, and where it cannot vapor away, nor
is exhaled by the Sun nor Air; as Underbuildings, Barns, Stables,
Pigeon-houses, etc. where it condenses into Nitre, or Saltpeter, the only
fruitful Salt (though improperly so called) containing so equal and
proportionable a quantity of the Principles of Nature, wholly Volatile, only
condensed in defect of a due recipient; not generated, as some fondly conceive
from any casual Moisture, as Urine in Stables, etc. though augmented thereby,
but merely from the Spiritus Mundi. Lands resting from the Plough or Spade, are
much enriched only by the increase of this Subject, and ordinary way of
Improvement.

Lands defended from the violent heat of the Sun, and from the sweeping,
cleansing, and exsiccating Air or Winds, grow more Fertile, not so much from
the warmth it receives, as from the preservation of that Fertile Subject from
being wasted; as we evidently see it to be in all open Champion Lands, when
part of the very same Species of Land being enclosed with tall and defensive
Hedges, or Planted with Woods, are much more Fertile than the other: yea, we
plainly perceive, that under the Covert of a Bush, Bough, or such like, any
Vegetable will thrive and prosper better than on the naked Plain. Where is
there more barren, dry, and hungry Land, than on the Plains and Waste Lands?
and yet but on the other side of the hedges Fertile, either by Enclosure, or
Planted with Woods: an evident and sufficient demonstration of the high
Improvements that may be made by Enclosure only. Also Land has been found to
be extraordinary Fertile under Stones, Logs, of Wood, etc. only by the
condensation and preservation of that Universal Subject, as appears by the
flourishing Corn in the most stony Grounds, where it has been observed that
the Stones taken away, Corn has not proved so well; and Trees having Stones
laid on the Ground about the Roots of them, have prospered wonderfully from the
same cause: As the Learned Virgil hinted on the same occasion.

-- Jamque reperti
Qui Saxo super, atque ingentis pondere testae
Vrgerent. --
In the watering of Meadows, you may observe that the superficial gliding
watering thereof does infinitely advance its fertility, and accelerates its
growth or vegetation; not so much from the fruitfulness of the water, (although
that be a very great help, and some waters abound very much with that Universal
Subject) but by its condensation and preservation of that Subject; as appears
by the warmth and early springing of such Meadows, where the water thinly and
superficially moves over it; where on the contrary, water standing and
submerging such Meadows, and lying and soaking long under the superficies of
the Earth, impedes the motion of that Subject, and makes the ground more
sterile, and backward in its growth or springing. That this Spiritus Mundi has
in it a sensible heat as well as fertility, we may perceive by Springs in great
Frosts, when the Pores of the Earth are shut; the Body from whence the Springs
flow is warm; on the contrary, when the Pores are open, and this Spirit wasted,
and transformed into Vegetables, Animals, etc. and exhausted by the heat of the
Sun, then is the Body internally cold, as we sensibly perceive by the waters in
Wells in Summertime.

This Spiritus Mundi whereof we treat, is that which in some places perspires
more freely than in other, and causes that different verdant color of the
Grass in certain rings or circles, where the Country People fancy the Fairies
dance.

The more the Aqueous humor or part is concocted or exhausted by the heat of
the Sun in the Summertime, the thicker and more viscous is this subject; as
appears by its condensation in the Air into Mildews, which after a more
glutinous manner than other Rains or Dews, is by the cool Air condensed into a
fat and fruitful matter, part thereof resting on the close and glazie leaves of
the Oak, and suchlike Trees, is collected, and with very little Art
transformed by the industrious Be into that noble substance Honey; other part
thereof falls on the young Ears of Wheat, and the Buds of springing Hops, where
suffering a further degree of congelation, impedes their growth, unless a
timely shower wash it off: It also by its heat tinges the straw of corn and the
leaves of some Trees in spots. At that season of the year also it usually
coagulates in some places into Mushrooms, which are merely formed and made up
of this subject undigested, and perspire forth in such places in great plenty,
so that I have seen a Mushroom near an Ell in compass of less than two days
growth: the Owner in whose Garden it grew, affirmed it to be of one night only.
You may also perceive it in a clear and cool morning condensed into small lines
like unto Spiders-webs, near the surface of the earth, especially on the lower
and richer Lands.

This is that Viscous Vapor that being concocted and digested long in the Air
by the heat of the Sun, or otherwise, is condensed at length into that
Sulpherous and Saline Matter; and which, by its combat in the Air, occasions
those Igneal Flames, and Claps of Thunder, which more frequently happen at such
seasons of the year, and in such Climates when and where this more concocted
Vapor abounds; and less in the colder Climates and Seasons, where it is more
aqueous.

This is that inexhaustible Treasure the Countryman is to preserve, much more
than the Soils and Dungs, and suchlike matters washed away with waters into
the Sea, which are inconsiderable in comparison of this: for although Land be
never so much impoverished through over-tilling thereof, yet duly ordered and
defended, by this only Subject may it be recruited and fertilized, as is
evident in the poorest Land where Trees are grown, after the removal of them,
the Land is much enriched by their shelter. Also the return of the Soil or Dung
that is made of the Product of any Land either by Pasturing or Tilling the
same, is a principal part of a good Husband; and not to feed Cattle, cut Hay,
and sow corn on some Lands, and spend their Soil and Manure on other; which is
a grand neglect, and a main cause of so much barren and unfruitful Land in
England.

Another thing worthy our consideration concerning this Universal Subject, is
the abating or removing the Impediments of its Fertility, which do as it were
suffocate or conceal that fertile or vegetating quality that is in many things;
As in Chalk, and several other Stones, Minerals, and Earths, the Acid or
sterile Juice does prevent that Fertility, which otherwise might be raised from
it. Therefore do our Husbandmen usually burn Stones into Lime, which gradually
evaporateth the Acid quality, and coagulateth and fixes the more Saline and
Fertile, which causes it to yield so plentiful a nourishment unto Vegetables
more than before it was burnt into Lime.

For the same cause is the Superficies or Turf of the Earth burnt in many
places, which Countrymen usually call denshiring or burn-beating; only they
suppose that the Ashes of the Vegetable contained in the Turf occasions the
Fertility: But although that does yield a part, yet it is the heat of the fire
evaporating, and consuming the Acidity of the Earth, which makes the Earth it
self so prepared, to be the more fertile; As you may observe by the very places
where those hills of fire were made, that although you take the Ashes wholly
away, yet the Earth under those hills being so calcined, yields a greater
nourishment to such Vegetables growing thereon, than on any other part of the
ground where the Ashes themselves are spread.

For the same reason are the Summer-Fallowings advantageous to the Husbandman,
not only for the destroying of the weeds, but for the evaporation of the Acid
barren Juice, and digesting and fixing the fertile; by which way of Calcination
may several Stones, Minerals, and Earths be made fertile, which unprepared are
not so: this may also prove of great use for the advancement of the growth of
many excellent Plants and Flowers, as I have been credibly informed has been
secretly practiced to that purpose.

The last and none of the least considerable means for the re-reviving and
improving this Subject, is not only the planting, sowing, and propagating of
Vegetables in every place, but to plant, sow, or propagate such that delight
in the Soil or Place under your improvement: be the nature of the Soil or Earth
what it will, there is some Plant or other delights in it: from the highest,
cold, hot, dry, or barren hill, to the lowest valley, although in the water it
self, you will find either Trees, Pulses, Grasses, Grains, or some other
Vegetable may be found that will thrive in it. Hic segetes, illic veniunt
faelicius uvae; Arborei foetus alibi; atque myrissa virescunt gramina, etc.
Virgil. The want of the right understanding hereof has been one of the
greatest checks to our English Improvements; there being so great variety of
Land in this Kingdom, yea almost in every Parish does the Land vary, that when
we have had any new way or Method of Improvement urged, by sowing or
propagating any new sort of Grain, Pulse, or Hay, or otherwise, several have
attempted it, few only perhaps have hit the mark, or applied it to the right
Soil; the rest having lost their labor and cost merely through their own
ignorance of the true nature and way of ordering of what they undertake, have
cast a scandal on the thing it self, to the great discouragement of others, who
otherwise might have reaped great advantage by it.

Having thus given you a short Description of the Growth of Vegetables, and of
that Universal Subject, or Spiritus Mundi, out of which they are formed, and of
the general Causes of Improvements, I will now descend to the more particular
and practicable Application thereof; And first

CHAP. II.
Of the great Benefits and Advantages of Enclosing Lands.

ENclosing of Lands, and dividing the same into several Fields, Pastures, etc.
is, and has been ever esteemed a most principal way of Improvement, it
ascertaineth every man his just and due Propriety and Interest, and preventeth
such infinite of Trespasses and injuries, that Lands in common are subject
unto; occasioning so much of Law, Strife, and Contention: It capacitates all
sorts of Land whatsoever for some of the Improvements mentioned in the
subsequent Discourse, so that a good husband may plant Timber, Fruit, or other
Trees in his Hedge-rows, or any other part of his Lands, or may convert the
same to Meadows, Pasture, Arable, or Gardens, etc. And sow or plant the same
with any sorts or species, of Grain, Pulse, or other Tillage whatsoever,
without the check or control of his unthrifty or envious Neighbors.

It is also of its self a very considerable Improvement: And take Enclosure an
Improvement.
it, as it is the most general, so it is one of the highest Improvements in
England, and it seems to have born an equal honor and pre-eminence, above Lands
in Common in other Countries; and to contend for its Antiquity with the Plough
it self; else why should Virgil say?

Ante Jovem nulli subigebant arva Coloni,
Nec signare quidem, aut partire limite Campum,
Fas erat, --
Enclosure with a good tall Hedge-row, preserves the Land warm, and defends and
shelters it from the violent and nipping Winds, that generally nip and destroy
much of the Corn, Pulse, or whatsoever grows on the open Field or Champion
Grounds, and preserves it also from those drying and scorching Winds more
frequent in hot and dry Springs, much damaging the Champion Lands: It much
preserves that fertility and richness the Land is either naturally subject
unto, or that is by the diligent care and cost of the Husbandman added. It
furnishes the Owners thereof with a greater burden of Corn, Pulse, or what
ever is sown thereon: Also where it is laid down for Meadow or Pasture, it
yields much more of Grass than the open Field-Land; and the Hedges being well
planted with Trees, affords shelter and shadow for the Cattle both in Summer
and Winter, which else would destroy more with their feet, than they eat with
their mouths, and might lose more of their fat or flesh in one hot day, than
they gain in three cool days; and affords the industrious Husbandman plenty of
Provision for the maintenance of Fire-boot, Plough-boot, Cart-boot; and (if
carefully planted and preserved) furnishes him with Timber, Mast for his Swine,
and Fruits for Syder, as we have in several other parts of this Treatise
casually hinted.

It is one of the greatest Encouragements to good Husbandry, and a good Remedy
against Beggary; for it brings Employment to the poor, by the continual labor
that is bestowed thereon, which is doubly repaid by the fruitful crop it
annually yields, and generally maintains treble the number of Inhabitants or
more than the Champion, as you may easily perceive if you compare such Counties
and Places in England, that are for the most part upon Enclosure, with the
Champion and Chilterne Counties or Places: And compare also the difference of
their manner and condition of Living, and their Food and Apparel, etc. it must
needs convince you that Enclosure is much to be preferred above the Champion,
as well for the public as private advantage. Our Predecessors were very
sensible of the difference, as appears by what ingenious old Tusser (who took
upon him Husbandry in Edward the Sixth's days) says in his Rythms in his
Comparison between Champion Country, and Several.

The One barefoot and ragged does go,
And ready in Winter to sterve;
When the other ye see do not so,
But has that is needful to serve.
The One pain in a Cottage does take,
When the other trim Bowers do make.
The One lays for Turf and for Sedge,
And has it with wonderful suit,
When the other in every Hedge
Has plenty of Fuel and Fruit;
Evils twenty times worser than these,
Enclosure quickly would ease.
In Wood-land the poor men that have
Scarce fully two Acres of Land,
More merrily live, and do save,
Than the other with twenty in hand,
Yet pay they as much for the two,
As the other for twenty must do.
The Differences also, and the Profits thereof, are plainly to be discerned and
proved by the Severals, or enclosed Parcels of Land that have been formerly
taken out of the Field-land or Commons, and how much they excel the other in
every respect, though of the same Soil, and only a Hedge between; and what a
yearly value they bear above the other.

And also by the great quantities of Lands that have within our memories lain
open, and in common, and of little value, yet when enclosed, tilled, and well
ordered, have proved excellent good Land, and suddenly repayed the present and
greatest expense incident to Enclosure.

Of all which, and many other infinite Pleasures, Contentments, and Advantages
that Enclosure yields above the Champion and Field-Land, were they but sensible
who so much affect and contend for the Champion, etc. they could never be so
brutish as to persist in so injurious and unthrifty a method of Husbandry, both
to themselves, to their neighbors, to the poor, and to the Commonwealth in
general.

This great Improvement meets with the greatest difficulties Several
Interests an Impement.
and impediments; amongst which none appears with a bigger face, than the
several Interests and diversity of Titles and Claims to almost every
Common-field or waste Land in England. And although (by many) the greater part
of the Interested Persons are willing to divide and enclose it, yet if but one
or more envious or ignorant person concerned oppose the Design, or that some or
other of them be not by the Law under a capacity of assuring his Interest to
his Neighbor, the whole must unavoidably cease; which has proved a general
Obstruction, and has been frequently complained of: For the remedy whereof, a
Statute to compel the Minor party to submit to the Judgment and Vote of the
Major, and equally to capacitate all persons concerned for such an Enterprise,,
would be very welcome to the Countryman, wherein all particular Interests
might be sufficiently provided for; as well the Lord of the Soil, as the
Tenant, and the poor.

It is a common thing to have very many great and large Highways Highways an
Impediment.
ways over most of the Common Fields and Waste Grounds in England, which prove
a very great Check to the Design of Enclosure, and may most easily be reduced,
if a Statute may be obtained for that purpose, which was not long since in
agitation, though not completed; than which, as well for the Compulsion and
Enabling of opposite and uncapacitated persons, and providing for several
Interests, as for the Regulating and right Disposition of common and necessary
Ways, no Act or Statute can be of greater or more public Advantage to the
Kingdom, in the more vulgar way or method of Husbandry.

There are several Common-fields, Downs, Heaths, and Waste Trees not thriving,
an Impediment.
Lands, that should they be enclosed, it would be very difficult, and in some
places seem impossible to advance or propagate any quick Fences, or
considerable quantity of Trees, as before is hinted at, by reason of the great
drought such Land is subject unto in the Summer, and destructive cold Winds in
the Winter and Spring. To which we reply, That after, or according to the usual
manner of Planting, such Trees or Hedge-rows come to little, because the young
Cions they remove, are commonly brought from a fertile, warm, or moist Soil,
into a cold, barren, or dry; which must needs produce such an inconvenience.

Also they oftentimes plant Trees not naturally agreeing with the Soil they
remove them into, or else plant them deep into the barrenest part of the Earth;
or at least take little or no care to defend them (when planted) from the
external Injuries of Drought, Cold, etc.

But if any are willing, or intend to raise a Quick-fence, or propagate Trees
on such open Land subject to such Inconveniences, the only way is to raise a
sufficient quantity beforehand in a Nursery for that purpose, of such Trees or
Plants that naturally delight in that Land where you intend to plant them, and
then to place them in such order, (as you will find hereafter described in the
Chapter of Woods) that the Roots be not below the best Soil; and that they have
a sufficient Bank to shelter them on the one side, and an artificial dry Hedge
on the other, which may be continued till the quick Plants are advanced above
common Injuries: Or you may sow the Seeds of such Trees you intend to
propagate in Furrows, made and filled with a good Earth, and secured from
Cattle, either by a double Hedge, or by ploughing the Land for several years;
and not feeding the same with Cattle, till such time as the Trees are grown up,
which will soon repay the imaginary loss of the Herbage, or Grasing, especially
if the young Cions be (the first and second years of their growth) a little
sheltered from the sharp Winds, by shattering a little Straw, Brake, or Hawm
lightly over them, which will also rot, and prove a good Manure, and qualify
the heat and drought of the Summer.

And when once you have advanced an indifferent Bank, Hedge, etc. about your
new Enclosures, you may much more easily plant and multiply Rows and Walks of
Timber, Fruit, and other necessary Trees, the destructive edge of the cold
Winds being abated by the Hedges, etc. We frequently have observed on several
high and supposed barren Hills and Plains, Woods and Trees flourish; and in
open Fields or Gardens within the shelter of those Woods, Trees and other
Plants prove as well as in the lower Valleys; that it is enough to convince any
rational person, that by Enclosure only, may most, if not all the Open,
Champion, Plam, Waste, and supposed barren Lands in England, be highly improved
and advanced to an equal degree of Fertility to the Enclosures next adjacent,
using the same good Husbandry to the one as to the other; which can never be
whilst it is in Common.

It is observed that of most sorts of Land, by how much the Dividing Land into
small parcels an Improvement.
smaller the Enclosure or Crofts are, the greater yearly value they bear, and
the better burden of Corn or Grass, and more flourishing Trees they yield; and
the larger the Fields or Enclosures are, the more they resemble the Common
Fields or Plains, and are most subject to the like inconveniences. We
generally find that a Farm divided into many Severals, or Enclosures, yields a
greater Rent, than if the same were in but few.

Too many Hedges and Banks in rich or watered Meadows waste Enclosing of watered
Meadows not an Improvement.
much Land, and injure the Grass by their shadow, and by dripping, for that
needs no shelter: Grass abides any weather; and in case the cold Spring keeps
it back, it fears not drought, but has water and heart sufficient to bring it
forwards, unless you plant such proving Aquatick Trees, whose shrowds shall
exceed in value the Grass they injure; which may well be done in Rows, and on
the edges of the Banks, etc. and will amount unto a considerable Improvement,
if you select the right kinds.

That Wheat sown in Enclosures, or any Land under the Winds, Wheae in
Enclosures subject to Mildew.
is subject to Mildew, is a general opinion amongst Husbandmen: And the only
great Inconveniencie Enclosure is subject unto, Mr. Hartlib says, is Mildew.
But this is only an injury to one sort Legacy.
of Grain; Neither is it yet certain that Enclosure is the cause, for we find
and observe that Wheat in the Fielden Country is subject to Mildews, though not
so frequent as in the Enclosure, by reason that the Land is not so rich
generally, nor so moist as Enclosures are, which in Summertime emit a greater
quantity of that Moist Spirit, or Universal Matter of Vegetables (whereof we
discoursed before) than the dry, hungry, open Field-Land does; which being
coagulated in the Air, falls in form of a Dew, sometimes on the Oak, and is
then food for Bees; sometimes on Hops and on Wheat, whether high or low,
enclosed or open: Nay, sometimes on the one half of a Hop-garden, or a
Wheat-field, and not on the other.

But Blasting has commonly been mistaken for Mildew, Wheat being subject also
to it in the best and richest Lands in moist years, (whereof more in another
place) so that we cannot find Enclosure only to be the cause of either
Blasting or Mildew, other than that it is the richest and best Land. Also we
may observe, that in the Wood-lands, or Countries where most Enclosure is,
there the Land yields the greatest burden of Wheat, as well as other Grain,
and more rarely fails than in the Champion Country; wet Summers being not so
frequent as dry; the Vales and Enclosures also being by far the greater Support
of our English Granary, than the Open, Champion, and the Hills; which yields
us, it is true, the greater part of our Drink-corn, delighting in the more
hungry Soil, and proves a good Supply in a wet Summer for the other.

CHAP. III.
Of Meadow and Pasture Lands, and the several ways of their Improvements,
either by watring or drowning; or by sowing or propagating several sorts of
extraordinary Grasses or Hays, etc.

MEadow and Pasture Lands are of so considerable use and advantage to the
Husbandman, that they are by some preferred above Arable, in respect of the
advantage they bring annually into his Coffers, with so little Toil, Expense
and Hazard, far exceeding in value the Corn Lands; and of principal use for the
Increase and Maintenance of his Gattle, his better food, and the chiefest
strength he has for the Tilling and Improving his other Lands: Meadow and
Pasture Lands are generally of two sorts; Wet or Dry; the Wet Meadows are such,
that the Water overflows or drowns at some times of the year; under which term
we shall comprehend all such Meadows, or other Lands that are artificially
watered or over-flown, or that are under that capacity of Improvement. The Dry
Meadows or Pastures are such that are not over-flown or watered by any River or
Stream, under which we shall comprehend all such Enclosures or Severals that
lie warm and in a fertile Soil, yielding an annual burden of Hay or Grass, or
that are capable of Improvement, by sowing or propagating of new Grasses, Hays,
etc. or other ways of Improvement.

SECT. I. Of the Watring of Meadows.
Of Wet Meadows or Land under that capacity of being over-flown or watered,
there are several sorts.

First, Such Meadows that lie generally flat on the Banks of great Rivers, and
are subject to the overflowing of such Rivers in times of Land-floods only.

Secondly, Such Meadows that lie near to lesser River or Streams, and are
capable of being drowned or watered by diverting such River, or some part
thereof out of its natural Current over the same.

Thirdly, Such Meadows or Lands that lie above the level of the Water, and yet
are capable of Improvement by raising the Water by some artificial ways or
means over them.

All which sort of Meadows or Lands under those capacities are very much
improved by the Water overflowing them, as every Country and place can
sufficiently evidence and testify,

-- Humida Majores herbas alit. -- Virgil.
Neither is there scarcely any Kingdom or Country in the World, where this is
not esteemed an excellent Improvement. How could Egypt subsist, unless Nilus
did annually Fertilize its Banks by its Inundation? Several other Potent and
wealthy Countries there are in those African and Asian Territories, whose
richest and most Fertile Lands are maintained in their Fertility by the
Sediment of the overflowing Waters.

-- Huc summis liquuntur rupibus Amnes Virgil.

Felicemque trahunt limum.
But these are Natural; yet are not some Countries without their Artificial
ways of advancing this ponderous Element to a very considerable Improvement, as
Persia, Italy, etc. abound with most ingenious ways for the raising of the
water, as well for their Meadows as other necessary uses.

On the Banks and Borders of our great Rivers and Currents, are Of Meadows
watered by Floods.
the most and richest Meadows, consisting generally of a very good fat Soil, as
it were composed of the very Sediment of the Water overflowing the same, after
great and hasty Rains: such Meadows are capable of very little Improvement,
especially those that border on the greater Rivers, as Thames, Severn, Trent,
Ouse, etc. incapable of obstruction at the pleasure of the Husbandman.

Yet where such Meadows lying on the borders of great Rivers are of a dry and
hungry Soil, and not frequently overflowed by Land-floods, may Artificial Works
be made use of for the raising the water over the same, to a very considerable
advantage: whereof more hereafter in this Chapter.

Other Meadows there are, and those the most general in England, Of Meadows
watered by diversion of Rivers, etc.
that border on the lesser Rivers, Streams, etc. and in many places are
overflown or drowned by diverting the Water out of its natural and usual
Current over them: This is of late become one of the most universal and
advantageous Improvements in England within these few years, and yet not
comparable to what it might be advanced unto, in case these several
Obstructions were removed that impede this most noble and profitable
Improvement.

First, The several Interests that are in Lands bordering on Rivers,
Hindrances to drowning.
hinder very much this Improvement, because the Water cannot be brought over
several quantities of Land under this capacity, but through the Lands of
ignorant and cross Neighbors, who will not consent thereunto (although for
their own advantage also) under unreasonable terms; and some will not at all:
others are not by the Law capacitated for such consent (as we noted before
concerning Enclosures.)

Secondly, That great and pernicious impediment to this Improvement, Mills
standing on so many fruitful Streams, prohibiting the Laborious and Ingenious
Husbandman to receive the benefit and advantage of such Streams and Rivers,
carrying in their bowels so much Wealth into the Ocean, when the Mills
themselves yield not a tenth of the profit to the Owners that they hinder to
their Neighbors, and their work may as well be performed by the Wind as by the
Water; or at least the Water improved to a better advantage, by facilitating
the Motion of the Mill; whereof more hereafter.

Thirdly, Another grand Impediment is the Ignorance of the Contrymen, who in
many places are not capable of apprehending neither the Improvement, nor the
cause thereof: But because some certain Neighbors of theirs had their Land
overflown a long time, and was little the better, therefore will they not
undergo that charge to so little purpose; or because they are commonly
possessed with a foolish opinion, that the Water leaves all its fatness on the
Ground it flows over, and therefore will not advantage the next; which is most
untrue; for I have seen Meadows successively drowned with the same Water, to
almost an equal Improvement for many miles together. It is true, the Water
leaves its fatness it has washed from the Hills and Highways in the time of
great Rains; but we find by daily experience, that Meadows are fertilized by
overflowing as well in frosty, clear, and dry weather, as in rainy, and that to
a very considerable Improvement: And also by the most clear and transparent
Streams are improved ordinary Lands, that they become most fertile Meadows.

Fourthly, From a greedy and covetous Principle, they suffer the Grass to stand
so long on the watered Meadows, that it is much discolored and grown so hawmy,
and neither so toothsom nor wholesome, as that on unwatered Meadows; which
brings an ill name on the Hay; which if cut in time would be much better, and
in most watered Meadows as good as any other; And the Aftir-grass, either to
mow again, or to be fed on the place, will repay the former supposed Loss.

The former Impediments may with much facility be removed by a Law, which would
be of very great Advantage to the Kingdom in general. The later only by the
good Examples and Presidents of such industrious and worthy Persons that
understand better things; the generality of the world being rather introduced
to any ingenious and profitable Enterprise by Example than by Precept; although
some are so sordid and self-willed, that neither apparent Demonstration, nor
any convincing Argument whatsoever, can divert them from their Bias of
Ill-husbandry and ignorance: whom we leave.

On the Borders or Banks of most Rivers or Streams, lie several Of Meadows
watered by artificial Engines.
Pieces of Land that are not capable of being overflown by the obstruction or
diversion of the Water, without a greater injury than the expected advantage
would recompense; which may notwithstanding be improved very considerably, by
placing of some Artificial Engine in or near such River or Stream, for the
overflowing thereof.

Persian wheel The Persian Wheel.


The most considerable and universal is the Persian Wheel, much Of the Persian
Wheel.
used in Persia, from whence it has its name, where they say there are two or
three hundred in a River, whereby their Grounds are improved extraordinarily:
They are also much used in Spain, Italy, and in France, and is esteemed the
most facile and advantageous way of raising Water in great quantity to any
Altitude within the Diameter of the Wheel, where there is any current of Water
to continue its motion; which a small stream will do, considering the quantity
and height of the Water you intend to raise. This way, if ingeniously
prosecuted, would prove a very considerable Improvement; for there is very much
Land in many places lying near to Rivers that is of small worth, which if it
were watered by so constant a stream as this Wheel will yield, would bear a good
burden of Hay, where now it will hardly bear Corn.

How many Acres of Land lie on the declining sides of hills by the Rivers
sides, in many places where the Water cannot be brought unto it by any ordinary
way? yet by this Wheel placed in the River or Current, and a Trough of Boards
set on Tressles to convey the Water from it to the next place of near an equal
altitude to the Cistern, may the Land be continually watered so far as is under
the level of the water.

Also there is very much Land lying on the borders of Rivers that is flat and
level, yet neither does the Land-floods overflow the same, or at most but
seldom; nor can the water be made by any obstruction thereof, or suchlike way
to overflow it. But by this Persian Wheel placed in the River in the nearest
place to the highest part of the Land you intend to overflow, therewith may a
very great quantity of water be raised: For where the Land is but little above
the level of the Water, a far greater quantity of Water, and with much more
facility may be raised, than where a greater height is required; the Wheel
easier made, and with less expense.

There are also many large and flat pieces of Land bordering Of Wind-Engines
for the raising of water.
near unto several Rivers or Streams, that will not admit of any of the
aforementioned ways of overflowing or watering, either because the Current
cannot easily or conveniently be obstructed, or because such a Persian Wheel
may not be placed in the water without trespassing on the opposite Neighbor,
or hinderance to others, or the Water not of force sufficient, etc. which
places may very well admit of a Wind-engine or Windmill erected in such part
thereof, where the Winds may most commodiously command it, and where the Land
swells above the ordinary level you intend to Water or overflow, though it be
remote from the Current or Stream, the water being easily conducted thereto by
an open or subterraneal passage from the Stream. Such Wind-mils raising a
sufficient quantity of water for a reasonable height for many Acres of Land,
must needs prove a very considerable advantage to the owner, as well for the
overflowing thereof, as it has done to many for the draining large Fens of
great quantities of water to a considerable height: Neither is it altogether
necessary that such Land be wholly plain, and open to all Winds; for in Valleys
that are on each side defended with Hills, or in such Lands that are on some
sides planted with Woods, may such Wind-mills well be placed, where the wind
may at some certain seasons perform its work sufficiently, though not so
continually as where the place is free to all winds.

Several have been the Inventions of Ingenious men to accomplish What
Wind-mills are best for this work.
this design, and much have they promised to perform; some by the Horizontal
Windmil, and by a Wheel with Buckets or Scoops fixed unto chains; Also by a
Wheel carrying the Water up in Buckets fixed thereto, and casting the same
forceably from it by the swiftness of its motion: Others by the perpetual
Screw, which you may find mentioned or delineated in Mr. Bliths English
Improver Improved. But there is none seems to me more feasible, less expensive,
of longer continuance without repair or danger of Winds, nor more effectual to
raise much Water with little Wind, than Vertical Sails like the ordinary
Wind-mills, horizontal windmill only more in number, and not so long, placed on
an Axis of a length proportionable to the length of the Vanes; the one end
resting on an Iron fork upon the top of a single post, the other end moveable
to several points on a Quadrant of a Circle, that be the Wind which way it
will, by only moving the one end of the Axis on the Quadrant, it will be direct
to the one or the other side of the Vanes or Sayls. Under the end of the Axis
that rests on the single Post, let there be a Pump placed in the Water you
intend to raise, the head of the Pump not rising much above the place or
passage to convey it away; which Pump may be made of what Diameter you please,
according to the strength of your Wind-mil, and height you raise the Water: you
may make the trunk of the Pump round; or if you would have it large, then
square may serve as well as round: let the Bucket always dip into the level of
the Water, which prevents much trouble and injury to the work: let the handle
of the Pump extend in length to the Axis of the Wind-mil, which must be made
crooked to receive and move the same, like unto the Axis of a Cutlers
Grinding-stone or Dutch Spinning-wheel turned with the foot, which Windmill or
Engine by any reasonable Gale of Wind will raise a very great quantity of Water
(proportionable to its strength and height) with ease; being made for a very
small charge, considering other costly Engines; is composed of very many parts,
and therefore requires the less repair, and is the less subject to damage by
violent Winds; and is easily managed, and therefore the more suitable to our
Countrymen, who usually reject any thing, though never so excellent, if it be
difficult.

SECT. II. The Principal Rules necessary to be observed in Overflowing or
drowning of Lands.
When you have raised or brought the Water by any of the 1 In cutting the main
Carriage.
aforesaid means to the height you expected, then cut your main Carriage,
allowing it a convenient descent to give the Water a fair and plausible Current
all along; let the mouth of the main Carriage be of breadth (rather than depth)
sufficient to receive the whole Stream you desire, or intend; and when you come
to use a part of your Water, let the main Carriage narrow by degrees, and so
let it narrow till the end, that the Water may press into the lesser carriages,
that issue all along from the main.

At every rising ground or other convenient distances you ought 2 In cutting
the lesser Carriages.
to cut small tapering Carriages, proportionable to the distance and quantity
of Land or Water you have, which are to be as shallow as may be, and as many in
number as you can: for although it seems to waste much Land by cutting so much
turf, yet it proves not so in the end; for the more nimbly the Water runs over
the Grass, by much the better the Improvement is, which is attained by making
many and shallow Carriages.

Another principal observation in Drowning, or Watering of 3 In making the
Drains.
Lands, is to make Drains to carry off the Water the Carriage brings on, and
therefore must bear some proportion to it, though not so large; and as the
lesser Carriages conduct the Water to every part of your Land, so must the
lesser Drains be made amongst the Carriages, in the lowest places, to lead the
Water off, and must widen as they run, as the Carriages lessened; for if the
Water be not well drained, it proves injurious to the Grass, by standing in
pools thereon; in the Winter it kills the Grass, and in the Spring or Summer
hinders its growth, and breeds Rushes, and bad Weeds; which if well drained
off, works a contrary effect.

Some graze their Lands till Christmas, some longer; but as soon 4 Times for
watring or drowning of Land.
as you have fed it bare, then is it best to overflow: from Alhallontide
throughout the Winter may you use this Husbandry, until the Spring that the
Grass begin to be large: during April and the beginning of May, in some places
may you give the Grass a little water once a week, and it will prove
wonderfully, especially in a dry Spring. In Drowning, observe that you let not
the water rest too long on a place, but let it dry in the intervals of times,
and it will prove the better; nor let Cattle tread it whilst it is wet.

In the Summer if you desire to water your Land, let it be in mild or Cloudy
weather, or in the nightime, that the water may be off in the heat of the
day, lest in scorch the Grass, and you be frustrate of your expectation.

In many places you may have the opportunity to command a 5 Manner of watring
of Land by small streams or Engines.
small Spring or Stream where you cannot a larger, or may obtain water by the
Engines beforementioned, which may not be sufficient to overflow your Land in
that manner, nor so much to your content as the greater Currents may; therefore
you must make your Carriages small according to your water, and let there be
several stops in them, that you may water the one part at one time, and another
part at another: also in such dry and shelving Lands where usually such small
Springs are, and water by such artificial ways advanced, a small drilling
water, so that it be constant, works a wonderful Improvement.

In some places issue Springs whose waters are sterile, and injurious 6 Barren
Springs not useful.
to the Husbandman, as are usually such that flow from Coalmines, or any
Sulphurous or Vitrioline Minerals, being of so harsh and brackish a substance,
that they become destructive to Vegetables: Not but that those Minerals, and
also those waters contain much of that matter which is the cause, and of the
principles of Vegetation, though not duly applied, nor equally proportionated,
as much Urine, Salt, etc. kills Vegetables; yet duly fermented, and
artificially applied, nothing more fertile. Such Springs that you suspect,
prove them first before you go too far: those that are bad are usually reddish
in color, and leave a red sediment, and shine as it runs, and is not fertile
until it has run far, and increased it self from other Springs, and gained
more fertility in its passage; as we usually observe greater Rivers, though
reddish in color, yet make good Meadow.

SECT. III. Of dry Meadow or Pasture.
Every place is almost furnished with dry Meadows, which are convetible
sometimes into Meadows, and sometimes into Pastures; and such places much more
where Waters, Springs and Rivolets are scarce, or the Rivers very great, or the
Country hilly, that water cannot so well be commanded over such Lands as in
other places they may: which dry Meadows and Pastures are capable of
Improvement by several ways.

And principally by Enclosure; for where shall we find better Improved by
Enclosure.
dry Meadows, and richer Pastures, than in several hilly places of
Somersetshire, among the small Enclosures? which not only preserves the young
Grass from the exsiccating Spring-winds, but shadoweth it also in some measure
from the Summer-scorching Sunbeams, as before we noted in the Chapter of
Enclosure. Such Meadows or Pastures well planted with either Timber or
Fruit Trees in the Hedge-rows, or other convenient places, and enclosed in
small parcels, will furnish you with good Hay and good Pasture, when your
Neighbor whose Lands are naked, goes without it; for dry Springs or Summers
more usually happen than wet; besides the shadow for your Cattle, and many
other advantages, as before we observed.

In several places where the ground is moist, cold, clay, spewy, Burning of
Rushy and Mossie ground.
rushy or mossie, or subject to such inconveniences, that the Pasture or Hay
is short, sower, and not proveable, it is very good Husbandry to pare off the
turf about July or August, and burn the same (after the manner as is hereafter
described when we come to treat of burning of Land) and then plough it up
immediately, or in the Spring following, and sow the same with Hay-dust, or
with Corn and Hay-dust together; for by this means will that acid Juice that
lay on the surface of the Earth, which was of a sterile nature, and hindered the
growth of the Vegetables, be evaporated away, and also the Grass which had a
long time degenerated by standing in so poor a Soil, be totally destroyed, and
the Land made fertile, and capable to receive a better species brought in the
Seed from other fertile Meadows.

It is too commonly observed that many excellent Meadows, or Stubbing up of
shrubs, etc.
Pasture-land, are so plentifully stored with Shrubs, small Hillocks,
Ant-hills, or such like, that a good part thereof is wholly lost, and so much
thereof as is mown is but in patches here and there, and that that remains not
so beneficial as if it were either mown or sed together. Now the best way or
Method of stubbing up such thorny Shrubs, or Broom, or Goss, or any such
annoying Shrubs, which proves both laborious and costly any other way than
this, is ingeniously delivered by Gabriel Platt: the Instrument Discovery of
hidden Treasures.
by him discovered is like a three-grained dung-fork only, but much greater and
stronger, according to the bigness of the Shrubs, etc. the stale thereof like a
large and strong Leaver; which Instrument being set half a foot or such
reasonable distance from the Root of the Shrub, etc. then with a Hedging-beetle
drive it in a good depth; then elevate the Stale, and lay some weight or
fulciment under it, and with a Rope fastened to the upper end thereof, pull it
down, which will wrench up the whole bush by the Roots. Also Ant-hills prove a
very great annoyance to Pasture, and Meadow-lands, which may be destroyed by
dividing the Turf on the top, and laying of it open several ways; then take out
the core, and spread over the other Land, and lay the Turf down neatly in its
place again, a little hollowing in, and lower than the surface of the Earth;
and at the beginning of the Winter the Water standing therein will destroy the
remainder of the Ants, and prevent their return, and settle the Turf by the
Spring, that by this means may a very great Improvement be made of much Meadow
or Pasture-land, now a great part thereof Bushes and Ant-hills.

These Meadows and Pasture-lands where the water overfloweth Dunging or Soyling
of Meadows and Pastures.
not at any time, are the only places where you may lay your dung, or other
Manure to the best advantage, it being not capable of being improved by water,
nor the Soil laid thereon subject to be carried away, or at least the better
part thereof extracted by the water, either casually by Floods, or any other
way overflowing the same.

The best time for the Soiling of Meadows and Pasture-lands Time for Soyling.
is in the Winter-season about January or February, that the rains may wash to
the Roots of the Grass the fatness of the Soil, before the Sun dries it away:
and dissolve the clots, that may be spread with a Bush drawn over it like a
Harrow, before the Grass be too high.

Ashes of Wood, Peat, Turf, Sea-coal, or any other Fuel, is Soil for Rushy and
cold Land.
very proper to be laid on Cold, Spewey, Rushey, and Mossie Land (not sandy or
hot) and suits best therewith, and agrees with the Husbandry of burning the
Turf, as is before advised: the dung of Pigeons, or any other Fowl, works a
better effect on that than other Lands; also all hot and sandy Soils are
fittest for that sort of Lands.

Lime, Chalk, Marle, or any cold fossile Soils, are an extraordinary For sandy
or hot Land.
Improvement to dry, sandy, hot Lands of a contrary nature or temperature, as
well for Meadow and Pasture, as for Corn-Land: I have seen much of the blew
Clay, which they call Vrry, that is dug out of the Coal-mines, and lies near
the Coal, laid on Meadow and Pasture-lands, to a very considerable advantage.
Many instances of wonderful Improvements made by mixing of Soils of contrary
natures, you may find in several of our modern Rural Authors.

Between these two extremes, your ordinary dung or Soil is best For other
Meadows.
bestowed on your Meadows and Pastures, not so much inclining either way; for
it is a very principal part of good Husbandry to apply the Soil or Compost
properly, as the nature of the ground requires; whereof you may find more
hereafter, in the Chapter of Soils, Dungs, etc.

SECT. IV. Of several new Species of Hay or Grass.
It is found by daily experience, not only in foreign parts, but in our own
Country, that a very great Improvement may be made on the greater part of our
Lands, by altering the species of such Vegetables that are naturally produced,
totally suppressing the one, and propagating another in its place, which may
rejoice and thrive better there than that before, as we evidently see by Corn
sown on Land where hardly Grass would have grown, what a Crop you reap; but
these are but Annuals: that which raises the greatest advantage to the
Husbandman, is what annually yields its increase without a renovation of
expense in Ploughing and sowing; as we find in the Clover-grass or great
Trefoyl, St. Foyn or Holy-Hay, La Lucern, Spurrey-seed, Trefoyl, Nonesuch,
etc. whereof apart.

This Grass has born the name, and is esteemed the most principal Of the
Clover-grass.
of Grass, both for the great Improvement it brings by its prodigious Burden,
and by the excellency of the Grass or Hay for Food for Cattle, and is much
sown and used in Flanders and in Holland, Presidents to the whole world for
good Husbandry.

In Brabant they speak of keeping four Cows Winter and Summer on an Acre, some
cut and laid up for Fodder, others cut and eaten green: here in England they
say an Acre has kept four Coach-horses and more all Summer long; but if it
kept but two Cows, it is advantage enough upon such Lands as never kept one.
You may mow the first Crop in the midst or end of May, and lay that up for Hay;
if it grow not too strong, it will be exceeding good and rich, and feed any
thing: then reserve the next for Seed, which may yield four Bushels upon an
Acre, each Bushel being worth three or four pound a Bushel, which will amount
to the reputed value of ten or twelve pounds per Acre; and after that Crop also
it may be fed. It has also this Property, that after the growing of the
Clover-grass three or four years, it will so frame the Earth, that it will be
very fit for Corn again, which will prove a very great Advantage, and then
again for Clover. Thus far Mr. English Improver.
Blithe. Others say it will last five years, and then also yield three or four
years together rich Crops of Wheat, and after that a Crop of Oats.

In the Annotations upon Mr. Hartlibs Legacy, we find several Computations of
the great Advantage has been made by sowing Clover-grass, as that a parcel of
Ground, a little above two Acres, the second year, did yield in May two Load of
Hay worth five pounds: the next Crop for Seed was ripe in August, and yielded
three very great Loads worth nine pounds that year; the Seed was 300 l. which
with the Hay was valued at thirty pounds, besides the after-Pasture. Another
President is, that on four Acres there grew twelve Loads of Hay at twice
mowing, and twenty Bushels of Seed; one Load of the Hay mown in May being worth
two Load of the best of other Hay, and the After-pasture three times better
than any other; the four Acres yielded in one year fourscore pound. Another,
that six Acres of Clover did maintain for half a year thirteen Cows, ten Oxen,
three Horses, and twenty six Hogs; which was valued at forty pound, besides the
Winter-Herbage.

The aforesaid Presidents and Valuations seem prodigious, unless The best Land
for Clover-grass.
a rich, light Land, warm and dry, be sown therewith, in which it principally
delights; and then it may probably answer the said Valuations, and must needs
be a very high Improvement, although the Ground were good and profitable
before. It will also prosper and thrive on any Corn-land, well manured or
soiled, and brought into perfect Tillage. Old Land, be it course or rich, long
untilled is best for Corn, and best and most certain for Clover-Grass; and when
you have Corned your Land as much as you intend, then to sow it with Clover is
the properest season: Land too rich for Corn, cannot be too rich for Clover.
Poor Lands are not fit for Clover, unless burnt or denshired, as we shall
hereafter direct; or limed, marled, or otherwise manured, and then will it
bring forth good Clover.

An Acre of Ground will take about ten pounds of your Clover-Grass Quantity of
Seed for an Acre.
Seed, which is in measure somewhat above half a peck, according to Sir Richard
Weston. The quantity of Seed for an Acre Mr. Blithe conceives will be a Gallon,
or nine or ten pounds; which agrees with the other: But if it be husky (which
saves labor in cleansing of it, and also sowes better by filling the hand,
than mixed with any other thing) you must endeavor to find out a true
proportion according to the cleanness or foulness you make it: but be sure to
sow enough, rather too much than too little; for the more there is, the better
it shadows the Ground: Some have sown fifteen pound on an Acre with good
success; ten pound some judge to be of the least, however let the Seed be new
and of the best, which the English is esteemed to be.

The usual way is thus advised: when you have fitted your Land The time and
manner of sowing Clover-grass.
by Tillage and good Husbandry, then sow your Barley and Oats, and harrow
them; then sow your Clover-grass upon the same Land, and cover it over with a
small Harrow or Bush, but sow not the Corn so thick as at other times the Land
usually requires. The principal seasons for the sowing thereof are the end of
March, and throughout April. Sir Richard Weston advises to sow the
Clover-seed when the Oats begin to come up; also that you may sow it alone
without any other Seed or Grain, and that it will be ready to cut by the first
of June the first year. It is also observed that Polish Oats are the best Corn
to be sown with Clover about the middle of April: two Bushels and a half, or
three Bushels to an Acre, which will yield a middle Crop of Oats at Harvest,
and shadow the Clover from the heat of the Sun; which will be a notable Pasture
in September or October following.

About the midst or end of May, may you cut the first Crop for Of cutting it
for Hay and for seed.
Hay; which takes up more time and labor to dry it than ordinary Hay, and will
go very near together: yet if it grow not too strong, it will be exceeding rich
and good, and feed any thing. The exact time of cutting is when it begins to
knot, and then will it yield good Hay, and ere the year be about it may yield
you three such Crops; and afterward feed it with Cattle all the Winter, or
until January, as you do other Ground: But if you intend to preserve the Seed,
then you must expect but two Crops that year; the first Crop as before, but the
second must stand till the Seed be come to a full and dead ripeness, for it
will not be very apt to shed. When first you can observe the Seed in the Husk,
about a month after it may be ripe, and then the Seed begins to change its
color, and the Stalk begins to die and turn brown; and being turned to a
yellowish color, in a dry time mow it, and preserve it till it be perfectly
dry. In some years it ripens sooner than in other, therefore you need not be
precise as to the time, but to the ripeness of it. The Stalks or Hawm after you
have thrashed out your Seed, Cattle will eat; but if they be too old and hard
they will not. Some direct to boil them, and make a Mash of them, Sir Richard
Weston.
and it will be very nourishing, either for Hogs, or any thing that will eat
thereof. Others reject the Stalks as useless, and esteem the Seed only to be a
sufficient Advance of that Crop. If after two years standing of Clover-grass
you suffer the later Crop to shed its Seed, you will have your Land new stored
with Clover, that you need not convert it to other uses.

One Acre of this Grass will feed you as many Cows as six Acres Of pasturing or
feeding of Clover-grass.
of other common Grass, and you will find your Milk much richer, and exceeding
in quantity, and fatterns very well: The best way of feeding of it, and as is
reported is the usual way in Holland and Flanders, is to cut it daily as your
Cattle spend it, and give it them in Racks under some Trees, or in some Shed or
Outhouse, for the Cattle will injure it much with their feet, it being a gross
sort of Vegetable. Unless you mow it for the Seed, the best husbandry is to
graze it, or feed it in Racks; because it is so excellent a Food green, and
shrinks so much in the drying. Swine will grow fat with what falls from the
Racks. It is not good to let Cattle that are not used to this Food, eat too
liberally of it at the first; for I knew a Yoke of Oxen put hungry into a field
of Clover-grass, where they fed so heartily on this sweet Food, that one
immediately died through a mere Surfeit, the other with difficulty preserved;
therefore some prescribe to give them a little Straw mixed therewith at the
first, or to diet them as to the quantity, may do as well. Swine will pasture
on it in the fields.

It being preserved thoroughly dry, about the midst of March Of threshing or
ordering the Seed.
thrash it, and cleanse it from the Straw as much as you can; then beat the
Husk again, being exceeding well dried in the Sun after the first Thrashing,
and then get out what Seed you can; or after you have thrashed it, and chaved
it with a fine Rake, and sunned it in a hot and dry season, if you will then
rub it, you may get very much out of it; some have this way got above two
Bushels out of an Acre: Sir Richard Weston says you may have five Bushels from
an Acre.

He is a good Thrasher that can thrash six Gallons in a day, and English
Improver.
after the second Thrashing, drying, and winnowing or chaving, it is
confidently averred that it may be purely separated from its Husk by a Mill,
after the manner as Oatmeal is separated from the Chaff, and that at a very
easy rate: But it is also experimented that our own Seed sown in the Husk has
proved the best, thicker, and certainer than that sowed of the pure Seed it
self, otherwise you must be forced to mix therewith ashes of Wood or Coals
coursly sifted, or with Saw-dust, or good Sand, or fine Mould, or any thing
else that will help to fill the hand, that you may sow it evenly and with a
full hand. Some have invented new ways of separating the Seed from the Husk.

Of St. Foyn.
This St. Foyn, or Holy-hay, has in several places of England The profit
thereof.
obtained the preferrence above Clover-Grass, for that it thrives so well, and
is so great an Improvement on our barren Lands, where the other will not; it
being also natural to our timorous Rusticks not to hazard Land that will yield
them any considerable advantage any other way, on any new method of Husbandry;
but if they have a Corner of Land that is of little use to them, they will
perhaps bestow a little Seed on it, and but few of that mind neither. Then it
continues longer in proof than Clover-Grass, which wears out in a few years;
this continues many, which is a daily provocation to the sloathful to go so
near and plain a way, when so long time trodden before his face. In Wiltshire
in several places there are Presidents of St. Foyn, that has been these twenty
years growing on poor Land, and has so far improved the same, that from a
Noble per Acre, twenty acres together have been constantly worth thirty
shillings per Acre, and yet continues in good proof.

If it be sown on the poorest and barrennest Land we have, it On what Land to
sow it.
will thrive, and raise a very considerable Improvement, for on rich Land the
Weeds destroy it; besides, it meliorateth and fertilizeth the Land whereon it
has stood for many years, and not barrennizeth it, as it usual with Annual
Seeds. You may break it up, and sow it with Corn till it be out of heart, and
then sow it with St. Foyn as formerly: it will thrive on dry and barren
Grounds where hardly any thing else will; the roots being great and deep, are
not so soon dried by the parching heat of the Sun, as of other Grasses they are.

It must be sown in far greater quantity than the Clover-seed, Quantity of
Seed on an Acre, and manner of sowing of it.
because the Seed is much larger and lighter. It may be sown with Oats or
Barley, as the Clover: about equal parts with the Grain you sow it will serve;
always remembering you sow your Grain but thin. Be sure you make your Ground
fine for this and other French Seeds, as you usually do for Barley. Fear not
the sowing of the Seeds too thick; for being thick they sooner stock the
Ground, and destroy all other Grasses and Weeds. Some advise to how these
Seeds in, like Pease in Ranges, though not so far distant, the better to
destroy the Weeds between it: this will bear this way of husbandry better than
the Clover, because that has but a small Root, and requires to shadow the
Ground more than this. Feed it not the first year, because the sweetness
thereof will provoke the Cattle to bite too near the Ground, very much to the
injury of your St. Foyn; but you may mow it with your Barley or Oats, or if
sown by it self, the first year.

Of La Lucerne.
In the next place this Plant La Lucerne is commended for an excellent Fodder,
and by some preferred before St. Foyn, as being What Ground it requires.
very advantageous to dry and barren Grounds. It is managed like the former
Seeds: Some write that it requires a moist Ground and rich, others a dry, so
that we may conclude it has proved well on all. The Land must be well dressed,
and three times fallowed.

The time for sowing it, is after the cold weather be over, about Time and
manner of sowing of it.
the middle of April; some Oats may be sown therewith, but in a small
proportion: the Seed is very small; therefore the sixth part of it is allotted
to an Acre, as is required of any other Grain, one Bushel thereof going as far
as six of Corn: It may be mowen twice a year, and fed all the Winter; the Hay
must be well dried and housed, for it is otherwise bad to keep. It is good Its
use.
for all kind of Cattle; but above all, it agrees best with Horses: it
feeds much more than ordinary Hay, that lean Beasts are suddenly fat with it;
it causes abundance of Milk in Milch-beasts. It must be given at the first
with caution, as before we directed concerning the Clover, that is mixed with
Straw or Hay. You may also feed all sorts of Cattle with it green all the
Summer. It is best to mow it but once a year: it will last ten or twelve years.
If you desire the Seed when it is ripe, cut off the tops in a dewy morning, and
put into sheets for fear of losing the Seed; and when they are dry, thrash them
thereon, the remaining Stalks may be mowen for Hay. By eating this Grass in the
Spring, Horses are purged and made fat in eight or ten days time. One Acre will
keep three Horses all the year long. Hartlibs Legacy.

SECT. V. Of some other Grasses or Hays.
This is a kind of St. Foyn, and by some judged to be the same. Esparcet.


This is a Grain annually sown in France and other Countries, La Rome in, or
French Tares or Vetches.
very quick of growth, and excellent food for Cattle, especially for Horses;
and after the feeding of it the former part of the Summer, it may be let grow
for Hay. It is not so good as La Lucerne, because this is annual, the other of
long continuance; only this will grow on drier and poorer Land than Lucerne,
wherein it exceeds it.

In the Low Countries they usually sow it twice in a Summer; the Spurrey-seed.
first in May: in June and July it will be in Flower, and in August the Seed is
usually ripe.

The second time of sowing is after Rye-harvest, which Grounds they usually
plough up, and sow it with Spurrey-seed, that it may grow up and serve their
Kine (after all late Grasses be eaten up) till New-years-day. This Pasture
makes excellent Butter, preferred by many before May-butter. Hens will greedily
eat the Herb, and it makes them lay the more Eggs. Hartlibs Legacy.

Hop Clover, Trefoyl, or Three-leaved Grass is both finer and sweeter Trefoyl.
than the great Clover-grass; it will grow in any Ground: it may be sown with
Corn (as before) or without, or being sprinkled in Meadows will exceedingly
mend the Hay, both in burden and goodness.

At Maddington in Wiltshire about nine miles from Salisbury, Long Grass in
Wiltshire.
grows a Grass in a small Plat of Meadow-ground, which Grass in some years
grows to a prodigious length, sometimes twenty four foot long; but not in
height as is usually reported, but creeping on the ground, or at least touching
the ground at several of the knots of the Grass. It is extraordinary sweet, and
not so easily propagated as has been imagined; the length thereof being
occasioned by the washing of a declining Sheep-down, that the Rain in a hasty
shower brings with it much of the fatness of the Sheep-dung over the Meadow; so
that in such Springs that are not subject to such showers, or at least from
some certain Coasts, this Grass thriveth not so well, the Ground being then no
better than another.

This Herb so little esteemed (because not far fetched) is an Saxifrage.
excellent and proper Herb to be nourished or sown in Meadows, for amongst all
House-wives it is held for an infallible Rule, That where Saxifrage grows,
there you shall never have ill Cheese or Butter, especially Cheese; whence it
comes that the Netherlands abound much in that Commodity, and only, as is
supposed, through the plenty of that Herb.

These and many other most rare and excellent Plants there are, which if they
were advanced or propagated that they might openly manifest their worth, might
be of much more advantage to the Laborious Husbandmen, than the short, sour,
and naturally wild and barren Grass, mixed with a super-aboundant proportion
of pernicious Weeds: Therefore it would be very acceptable service to the whole
Nation, if those that have Land enough would yearly prove some small proportion
of these and other Vegetables, not yet brought into common use: By which means
they would not only advance their own Estates, but the whole Nation in general,
and gain unto themselves an everlasting Fame and Honor, as did the Families of
Piso, Fabius, Lentulus, and Cicero, by bringing into use the several Pulses,
now called by their Names.

CHAP. IV.
Of Arable Land and Tillage, and of the several Grains, Pulses, etc. usually
propagated by the Plough.

IN greatest esteem, and most worthy of our Care, is the Arable Land, yielding
unto the Laborious Husbandman the most necessary Sustentation this Life
requires, but not without industry and toil: The Plough being the most happy
Instrument that ever was discovered; the Inventor of the use whereof was by the
Heathens celebrated as a Goddess.

Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere terram Virgil.

Instituit. --
But the Plough it self Triptolemus is said to have invented. Pliny.
This Art was always in esteem, as before in the Preface we have shown; and
from this part thereof, being the most principal, does it take its Name of
Agriculture, from the Tilling of the Land with the Plough, or with the Spade
the more ancient Instrument, though not more necessary and beneficial: And
since its first Invention has there been many several Improvements made of it,
for the more facile and commodious use thereof; and every day almost, and in
every place does the ingenious Husbandman endeavor to excel the slothful in
this most necessary Art; that from a burthensom and toilsom labor, it is in
some places become but a pleasing and profitable Exercise: and it is hoped that
by those Presidents and Examples, the more Vulgar will be provoked to a more
universal use of that which is best and most advantageous to themselves, as
well as the public. More of this Instrument see hereafter in this Treatise.

SECT. I. What Lands are improved by Tillage.
Non omnis fert omnia tellus. Every sort of Land almost requires a different
Husbandry; some Grounds producing plenty of that which on another will not
grow. This is none of the meanest part of the Husbandmans skill, to understand
what is most proper to be propagated on each sort of Land: the strong and stiff
ground receiving the greatest Improvement from the Plough; and the mellow,
warm, and light, from other Plantations of Fruits, etc.

Densa magis Cereri, rarissima quaeque Lyaeo. Virgil.

Although the best, warmest, and lightest Land yields most excellent Corn, yet
the other sorts of Lands yield not so good Fruits, Plants, Grass, Hay, etc.
also necessary for the Husbandman: therefore our principal design must be to
appropriate each sort to that Method of Husbandry most natural unto it; that
where the nature of the Land differs, which it usually does in the same Parish,
and many times in one and the same Farm, and sometimes in the same Field, that
there may be used a different way. We have before discoursed of what Lands are
fittest for Meadows and Pastures, and now shall give you those Directions I
find, to know what is most proper for the Plough.

The strong and stiff, as we said before, and also the cold and moist, and that
which lies obvious to the extremities of cold or heat, as is most of the
Champion or Field-land; for there may be sown such Seeds that naturally affect
such places, until they are reduced and better qualified by Enclosure, the
first and main principle of Improvement: Also mossie and rusty Grounds are much
improved by ploughing; and Grounds subject to pernicious Weeds may be much
advantaged by destroying the Weeds, and propagating good Corn or other Tillage
in the room thereof.

All clay, stiff, cold, and moist Grounds are generally thrice The manner of
ploughing or husbanding each sort. Clay, stiff, cold and moist.
ploughed, in the Spring, Summer, and at Seed-time for Wheat; and four times
for Barley, if it be the first Grain sown after long resting, which in most
places is not usual. These several Ploughings or Fallowings are very
advantageous to Ground in several respects.

1. It lays the Ground by degrees in Ridges in such order as the nature
thereof requires; for the more in number, and the higher the Ridges, the
better they are for Wheat, which naturally delights in a moist Ground, so
that it be laid dry, that is, not subject to be drowned or over-glutted with
water in moists years. And this Method of laying the Ridges, much prevents the
blasting of Wheat; for Wheat is easily overcharged with Water, either in Winter
or Summer.

2. This often stirring the Land makes it light, and fitter for the Seed to
take root therein; the Clods being apt to dissolve by being exposed to the
weather, and often broken by the Plough.

3. It kills the weeds which in strong Lands are apt to overrun the Corn.

4. It fertilizeth Land: The Sun and the Sull are some Husbandmens Soil. Virgil
also seems to hint as much, where he says,

Pingue solum primis exemplo a mensibus Anni
Fortes invertant Tauri; glebasque jacentes
Pulverulenta coquat maturis solibus aestas.
5. It defends the Corn much from the extremities of Weather, especially cold
Winds: for the more uneven any Piece of Land is, the better it bears the
extremities of the Winter; for which reason in the open Champion where the Land
is dry, and they do not lay up their Ridges as in other places, yet they harrow
it but little, and leave it as rough as they can, for no other cause but to
break the fleeting Winds. The Gardiners near London now seem to imitate this
practice, by laying their Gardens in Ridges, not only the better to shelter
their Seeds from the cold Winds, but also to give it an advantage of the Sun,
as I my self proved it many years since, that Pease sown on the South Side of
small Beds, so raised that they seemed to respond the Elevation of the Pole,
prospered well, and passed the Winter better, and were much earlier in the
Spring, than those otherwise planted.

But in case you intend to sow Barley first therein, after the third
Fallowing, it must lie over the Winter, that the Frosts may the better temper
it for the Seed-time, when it is to be ploughed again: If for Pease or Beans,
once Fallowing before Winter serves the turn.

If it has a good Sward or Turf on it, I rather advise you to denshire or burn
it the Summer before you sow it; this is the more expeditious and advantageous
way, it spends the Acid moisture (an enemy to Vegetation) it kills the weeds,
and brings the Land quickly to a fine light temper.

Other sorts of Land improveable by the Plough, are very good, Rich and mellow
Land.
rich, mixed Land, and of a black mould, Nigra fere and pinguis -- Virgil.

Optima frumentis --
Or of any other color that has lain long for Pasture, till it be overgrown
with Moss, Weeds, or suchlike, which will as soon grow on rich Lands as poor:
To these Lands Ploughing is not only a Medicine or Cure, but raises an
immediate Advantage, and much benefiteth the Land for the future; in case you
take but a Crop or two at a time, and lay it down for Pasture again well
soyled: or else sown with some of the New Grasses or Hays before named; but if
not, yet only by soyling it the year before you lay it down, it may yield a
very good Grass after the Corn is carried off, and soon come to a Sward. The
Land is to be laid in height according as it is inclinable to Moisture or
Drought. New broken Ground if it be sown with Pease the first year, saves one
ploughing, and a good part of the Herbage the Summer before; it also destroys
the Weeds, and better prepares the Land for any other Grain.

In every part of England there is much Waste Land, and other Poor and barren
Land.
old Pastures that bears the name of Barren Land, although for the most part by
good Husbandry it may be reduced into Tillage, and become very fruitful and
advantageous to the Husbandman in particular, and Commonwealth in general: As
is evident in many particular parcels lately Enclosed, and taken out of the
supposed barren Heaths and Commons, that are now fruitful Fields; therefore
before any thing considerable can be effected to the Improvement and right
Ordering of these sorts of Land, the Design of Enclosure ought to be seriously
prosecuted; but for such that are already Enclosed, and yet remain barren and
unfruitful, it is a manifest sign of the ill management of the Proprietors, or
that the Tenant in possession has but a short time, or that he is obliged not
to alter the nature and order of the Ground; or (which is too common) that the
present charge of good Husbandry, exceeds an ill Husbands Store: His poor and
beggarly Farm has wasted what he has, and he has no more to try new
Conclusions withal: And in this condition is abundance of Land in this Kingdom:
barren Land, poor Cattle, and bad Corn, do insensibly as it were devour us;
because once in five or seven years in a very wet Summer, or suchlike, when
the rich Vales suffer, these barren Lands yield a considerable Advantage, which
as a Lottery, encourages us to beggary.

The best and speediest way to reduce these Lands that have long lain untilled,
and that have a Sward either of sour Grass, or of Rushes, Weeds, or suchlike,
or of heathy Goss, Fern or Broom; by which means they have contracted an evil
Juice, injurious to Vegetation, and withal a fertile Terrestrial Salt: the best
way, I say, to improve and reduce these Lands into Tillage, is to burn*boot, or
denshire them, as is hereafter shown; which way is used on the barrennest and
poorest Lands in England or Wales, where before hardly any thing would grow,
now will grow as good Wheat or other Grain, as on the best Land you have. Many
Presidents hereof there are in several places of England, where in two or three
years, by this only means the Husbandman gains as much above all expense, as
the purchase of the Land was worth before. Observe only this Caution, That you
be not too greedy to sow it so often till you have drawn out the heart of the
Land, which then it will easily yield, that it must lie rested many years, to
gain a Sward again; Nor that you expend the Soil made of the Straw, on other
Lands; which ill Husbandry is generally used, that it brings an ill name on
this part of Improvement; which if well soyled and laid for Pasture, after two
Crops will yield a very good Grass, as I have seen experienced, or else may be
sown with new Hays or Grasses.

SECT. II. Of Digging of Land for Corn.
The Spade seems to contend with the Plough for Antiquity; and it is the common
Opinion, that it was in use before it; the Spade being the more plain and
simple Instrument, and withal the laborious. The Plough seeming to be an
Invention for expedition, ease and advantage, to which generally all New
Inventions should tend; but that now at last the Spade should supplant the
Plough, I see no reason; for as the one is necessary and useful for the better
propagating of Plants that take deep root, so is the other as necessary and
profitable for such that root more shallow, as Corn and Pulse usually do: Other
differences seem to be in the loosening and tempering the ground for the Seeds,
the better to extend and spread their Roots, and for the better burying and
destroying the Weeds: These seem to be of greater Importance than the depth
only; but all these by a Judicious and Industrious Husbandman are remedied and
performed by the Plough as well as by the Spade: for if the depth of the mould
will bear it, or the nature of the Seed you sow requires it, a Double Plough,
the one succeeding Deep ploughing as good as digging.
the other in depth, may be made; or the labor may be performed by two
Ploughs, the one following the other in the same Furrow; but if a Plough be
Artificially made, and set to work deep, although yon plough the less in a day,
it will stir the Land deep enough for any of our usual Grain or Pulse: And as
for breaking or tempering the Land, and destroying the Weeds, ploughing and
cross ploughing at several seasons will do more, and at less expense, than once
digging can do: And if you please you may draw over the same (before your last
ploughing) a large kind of Harrow very heavy, or with a sufficient weight on
it, which in some places is usually called Dragging. This extremity is only
necessary in some sorts of stiff Land, other lighter is much more easily
managed. Mr. Platt in his Adams Tool Revived; or, His New Art of Setting Corn,
where he so much contends for the Spade, gives this instance of the Plough,
That a parcel of Land first cross ploughed with a deep-cutting Plough, and then
ploughed over the third time with a shallow Plough, that made very close and
narrow Furrows, then was the Seed sown by a skilful Sower, and then harrowed
over, yielded fifteen quarters on each Acre so Tilled and Sown. I presume if
this Relation may upon experience prove true, that none will be so much
conceited of a Novelty, as to desert this Method of Agriculture, for that
tedious and costly way of the Spade: But in case it does not Annually amount
unto such a prodigious increase as this President, yet does it plainly evidence
that good Culture does infinitely meliorate the Land, and advance the Crop, and
manifoldly repay the expense and labor bestowed thereon; which is the most you
can expect of the Spade.

SECT. III. Of the different Species of Grain, Corn, Pulse, etc. usually sown,
or necessary to be propagated in our Country-Farm.
There is not any Grain more universally useful and necessary Wheat.
than Wheat; whereof there are several sorts, some more agreeable and better
thriving on some sort of Land than on other, that it conduces much to the
Husbandmans advantage rightly to understand the natural temper of his Land, and
what Species of Grain, and particular sort of such Grain best agrees with the
nature of his Land: As some sorts of Land bear Pulses better than Corn, and
some bear Barley better than Wheat, and some sorts of Wheat prove better on
cold stiff Land, than on hot or dry, etc. We find many sorts of Wheat mentioned
in our Rustic Authors, as Whole Straw-wheat, Rivet-wheat, white and red;
Pollard-wheat, white and Kinds of Wheat.
red, great and small; Turkey-wheat, Purkey-wheat, Gray-wheat, Flaxen-weat: I
suppose the same in some places called Lammas-wheat, Chiltern, Ograve-wheat,
Sarasins-wheat, with several other Names, though it is probable may be the same
sorts. The Great Pollard they say delights best on stiff Lands, and so does the
Ograve; Flaxen-wheat and Lammas on indifferent Land, and Sarasins-wheat on any.
But what the different natures of these and other several sorts are, and in
what Land they most principally delight, and the differences of their Culture,
I leave to the more ingenious and expert Husbandman to find out, and discover.

It is observed that the Bearded-wheat suffers not by Mildew, because the
Beard thereof is a kind of defense to preserve it from Dew. Wheat is usually
sown in the Autumn, and best in a wet season; Triticum luto, hordeum pulvere
conserite: and either earlier or later, as the nature of the Land, and
situation of the place requires.

This is another very necessary Grain, though usually converted Barley.
to the worst use of any that grows in England: It is the principal Ingredient
into our necessary Drink moderately used, but the use thereof in excess is
become the most general raging Vice, and as it were the Primum Mobile to most
other detestable Evils. It is also a Bane to Ingenuity, many of our best
Mechanics being too much addicted to the tincture of this Grain; nevertheless
it so naturally delights in our meaner sort of Land, and in the Champion
Countries, that it is become a principal part of the Countrey-mans Tillage, that
the too great a quantity thereof does impede the propagation of several other
Grains and Pulses much more necessary. Neither know I any way to remedy this
Neglect on the one side, and Wilfulness on the other, unless the Design of
Enclosure might take effect; for then would the Lands be so much the more
enriched, that they would bear other Grain, to a greater advantage to the
Husbandman than Barley; or that a double or treble Tax might be imposed on
every Acre of Barley-land, for what it is on other Grain, which would provoke
the Husbandman to that which would be most for his Advantage; then would there
be a greater plenty of all other sorts of Grain and Pulse, and at a lower
price, and only good Liquor a little the dearer, which may by Housekeepers the
easier be born withal.

The Seasons for sowing of Barley differ according to the nature of the Soil,
and Situation of the Place: Some sow in March, some in April, others not
until May, yet with good success; no certain Rule can be herein prescribed: it
usually proves as the succeeding Weather happens, only a dry time is most
kindly for the Seed.

There is little difference observed in Barley, only there is one Difference of
Barley.
sort called Rath-ripe Barley, which is usually ripe two or three weeks before
the other, and delights best in some sorts of hot and dry Land.

This is a Grain generally known, and delights in a dry warm Rye.
Land, and will grow in most sorts of Land, so that the Earth be well tempered
and loose; it needs not so rich a Ground, nor so much care nor cost bestowed
thereon, as does the Wheat; only it must be sown in a dry time, for rain soon
drowneth it: they usually say a shower of Rain will drown it in the hopper; Wet
is so great an Enemy to it. It is quick of Growth, soon up after it is sown,
and sooner in the Ear, usually in April, and also sooner ripe than other Grain;
yet in some places is it usual to sow Wheat and Rye mixed, which grow
together, and are reaped together; but the Rye must needs be ripe before the
Wheat: Neither can I discover where a greater advantage lies in sowing them
together, than in sowing them apart. The principal season of sowing of Rye is
in the Autumn about September, according as the season permits, and the nature
of the Ground requires.

Oats are very profitable and necessary Grain, in most places of Oats.
England: they are the most principal Grain Horses affect, and commended for
that use above any other: On such Lands that by reason of the cold no other
Grain will thrive, yet Oats grow there plentifully, as many places in Wales and
Darby-shire can witness: there is no ground too rich nor too poor, too hot, nor
too cold for them; they are esteemed a peeler of the Ground; the best season
for sowing of them is in February or March. The white Oat is the best and
heaviest Grain: The Meal makes good Bread, and much used for that purpose in
many places, and also good Pottage, and several other Messes, and is in great
request toward. Scotland and in Wales: Oaten Malt also makes good Beer.

It is a Grain exceeding advanteous on barren sandy Lands, Buck-wheat, or
French-wheat.
it is much sown in Surrey; much less than any other Grain sowes an Acre: it
is usually sown as Barley, but later; it is also late ripe, and yields a very
great increase, and is excellent food for Swine, Poultry, etc. after it is
mowen it must lie several days till the stalks be withered before it be housed:
Neither is there any danger of the seed falling from it.

Our Rustic Authors mention several other sorts of Corn or Other sorts of
Grain.
Grain, as Xea or Spelt-corn, Far, Millet, Sesame, Rice, etc. which I shall
forbear to particularize on, until we are better satisfied of their natures and
use, and experienced in the way or method of their propagation.

Of all Pulses that are sown or propagated, Pease claim the Pease.
pre-eminence, not only for their general use both by Sea and Land, both for
man and beast, but also for the diversity of their kinds: Almost for every sort
of Land and for every season a different sort of Pease; some are white Pease,
some gray, green, etc. not necessary here to be enumerated, every understanding
Husbandman knowing what sorts best accord with his Land. In a stiff fertile
Ground they yield a very confiderable Crop, without such frequent Fallowings as
other Grains requires, and destroy the Weeds, and fit and prepare the Land for
After-crops, being an Improver, and not an Impoverisher of Land, as Husbandmen
usually observe.

This also is of general use and benefit, and placed before any Beans.
other Pulses by Pliny, for its commodiousness both for man and beast; yet we
find the Pease to be more universally propagated. Of Beans there are several
sorts; the Great Garden-Beans, and middle sort of Bean, and the small Bean, or
Horse-bean: The later only is usually sown in Ploughed Lands, and delights
principally in stiff and strong ground, and thrives not in light, sandy, or
barren: They are proper to be sown in Land at the first breaking up, where you
intend afterward to sow other Grain, because they destroy the Weeds, and
improve the Land, as generally does all other Cod-ware. Of the other sorts of
Beans, and also of Pease, we shall say more hereafter in this Treatise.

The Citch or Fetch, whereof there are several sorts; but two of Fetches.
most principal Note, the Winter and Summer-Fetch; the own sown before Winter,
and abiding the extremity of the Weather; the other not so hardy, and sown in
the Spring: they are much sown in some places, and to a very considerable
Advantage: they are a good, strong and nourishing food to Cattle, either given
in the Straw or without, and are propagated after the manner of Pease.

The least of all Pulses is the Lentil, in some places called Tills: Lentils.
They are sown in ordinary ground, and require it not very rich. Of a very few
sown on an Acre, you shall reap an incredible quantity; although they appear on
the Ground but small, and lie in a little room in the Cart: they are a most
excellent sweet Fodder, and to be preferred before any other Fodder or Pulse
for Calves, or any other young Cattle.

This Pulse, though not used in this Country as ever I could understand Lupines.
(unless a few in a Garden) yet we find them highly commended to be a Pulse
requiring little trouble, and to help the Ground the most of any thing that is
sown, and to be a good manure for barren Land, where it thrives very well, as
on sandy, gravelly, and the worst that may be, yea, amongst Bushes and Briars.
Sodden in water they are excellent Food for Oxen, and doubtless for Swine and
other Cattle. If this be true, as probably it seems to be, I admire this Plant
should be so much neglected; but I may give you a more plenary and satisfactory
Account of this and some other not usual Seeds and Pulses another time.

These are not usual in most places of England; but where they Tares.
are sown they much benefit the Land as other Pulses, and are rather to be
preferred for Fodder than any other use they can be put unto.

There are several other Pulses or Seeds mentioned in our Authors, Other Pulses.
as Fasels, Cich Peason, Wild Tares, etc. which if carefully and ingeniously
prosecuted might redound to the Husbandmans Advantage; and in the same manner
might several other not yet brought into common use, although they might in all
probability be as beneficial as those already in use.

SECT. IV. Of Hemp and Flax.
Within the compass of our Lands subject to the Culture of the Plough, may
these two necessary and profitable Vegetables be propagated; requiring a
competent proportion of Ground to raise a quantity sufficient to supply our
ordinary occasions and necessities; in defect whereof, and merely through our
own neglect and sloth, we purchase the greatest share of these Hempen and
Flaxen Commodities we use from Strangers at a dear Rate, when we have room
enough to raise wherewith of the same Commodities to furnish them: But that (to
our shame be it spoken) we prefer good Liquor, or at least the Corn that makes
it, before any other Grain or Seed, although other may be propagated with
greater facility, less hazard, and abundantly more advantageous, both to the
Husbandman and Nation in general, than that.

I need not put Excuses into the Countrey-mens mouths, they Impediments to the
sowing of Hemp and Flax.
have enough for their grand Negligence in this principal part of Agriculture;
but that I here propose them in hopes some Worthy Patriots will use their
endeavors to remove these Impediments.

1. The first and most grand Impediment to this Improvement, Want of Trade an
Impediment.
is want of Encouragement to Trade, or a right Constitution or Ordering of
Employments for the Poor throughout the Countries, which may be accomplished
without charge (the common Remora to all Ingenuities) by granting some
extraordinary Immunities to certain Societies in several places convenient in
every County to be established; which being the first and chiefest thing to be
done, will almost of it self remove all other Impediments.

2. The next is the defect of Experience; very few understanding Want of
Experience an Impediment.
the way of Sowing, Gathering, Watering, Heckling, and other particular Modes
in ordering these Commodities, nor yet the nature of the Ground either of them
delights in: All which by the President and Example of some public and
ingenious Spirits, and by the constitution of a Trade to take off the said
Commodities to the Husbandmans Advantage, may easily be removed.

3. Another main Impediment to the Improvement and Propagation Tithes an
Impediment.
of these and several other Staple-Commodities, not yet brought into public
use and practice, is, that the Planter after he has been at extraordinary
Expense in Fertilizing, Tilling, and Planting his Land, and in preserving and
advancing the Growth of such Commodities, not only the Profit of his Land, but
also of all his Expense and Labor must be decimated; which in some years
amounts to more than his own clear Profits; when before such Improvements made,
little Tithe was paid, as for Pasture-Lands is usual; either a reservation to
the Parson of what was formerly paid out of such unimproved Lands, or a certain
Modus decimandi, according to the nature of the Commodity planted, might prove
a very great Encouragement to the Husbandman, an infinite Advantage to the
Nation in general, and not the least injury or loss to the Clergy or
Impropriator. Some other Impediments there are, and also other Propositions
might be made for the Advancement of this and several other Commodities, but
they require more time to treat of, than in this place we may dispense withal.

Hemp delights in the best Land, warm and sandy, or a little Hemp.
gravelly, so it be rich and of a deep Soil; cold Clay, wet and moorish is not
good: It is good to destroy Weeds on any Land. The best Seed is the brightest,
that will retain its color and substance in Rubbing: three Bushels will sow
an Acre; the richer the Land, the thicker it must be sown; the poorer, the
thinner: from the beginning to the end of April is the time of sowing,
according as the Spring falls out earlier or later; it must be carefully
preserved from Birds, who will destroy many of the Seeds.

The Season of Gathering of it is first about Lammas, when a good part of it
will be ripe, that is the lighter Summer-hemp that bears no Seed, and is called
the Fimble-hemp, and the Stalk grows white; and when it is ripe it is most
easily discernable, which is about that season to be pulled forth and dried,
and laid up for use; you must be cautious of breaking what you leave, lest you
spoil it: you must let the other grow till the Seed be ripe, which will be
about Michaelmas, or before; and this is usually called the Karle-Hemp. When
you have gathered and bound it up in bundles, in Bonds of a yard compass (the
Statute-measure) you must stack it up, or house it till you thrash out the
Seed. An Acre of Hemp may be worth unwrought from five to eight pound; Value of
Hemp.
if wrought up, to ten or twelve pound or more; and is a very great succor to
the poor, the Hempen Harvest coming after other Harvests: And then in the bad,
wet, and Winter-seasons it affords continual employment to such also that are
not capable of better.

But for the Method and right way of Watering, Pilling, Breaking, Tewtawing,
etc. I shall leave you to such that are experienced therein, finding no certain
Rules left us by our Rustic Authors.

This is also a very excellent Commodity, and the Tilling and Flax.
Ordering thereof a very good piece of Husbandry; it will thrive in any good
sound Land be it in what Country soever, but that is best that has layen long
unploughed: the best Land yields the best Flax, and raises the greatest
Improvement. The Land must be well ploughed, and laid flat and even, and the
Seed sown in a warm season, about the middle or end of March, or at farthest in
the beginning of April. If it should come a wet season, it would require
weeding.

The best Seed is that which comes from the East Country, although Best Seed.
it cost dear, yet it will easily repay the Charge, and will last indifferent
well two or three Crops, then it is best to renew it again: Of the best Seed two
Bushels may serve on an Acre, but more of our English Seed, because it grows
smaller. You must be sure to sow it on good Land, because it robs the ground
much and burns it, as anciently it was observed by Virgil, Vrit enim lini
Campum Seges, but it liberally repayeth it.

You must be careful that it grow not till it be over-ripe, nor to gather it
before it be ripe; the ripeness is best known by the Seed; at the time let the
Pluckers be nimble, and tie it up in handfulls, and set them up until they be
perfectly dry, and then house it.

An Acre of good Flax on the Ground may be worth, if it be of Value of Flax:
the best Seed, from seven to twelve pound, yea far more; but if it be wrought
up fit to sell in the Market, it may come to fifteen or twenty pound.

As for the Watering, Drying, Breaking, and Tewtawing, as we said before of
Hemp, we must refer to those that are better experienced therein.

SECT. V. Of Woad, etc.
This is a very rich Commodity, and worthy to be taken notice of by the
Husbandman; it requires a very rich Land, sound and warm, says Mr. Blithe: But
I have seen it usually planted upon an ordinary Ground, but warm and light, and
in good heart, having long rested, and but new broken up: it robs Land much,
being long continued upon it; yet moderately used, it prepares Land for Corn,
abating the overmuch Fertility thereof, and draws a different Juice for what
the Corn requires: the Land must be finely ploughed and harrowed for this Seed,
whereof about four Bushels will sow an Acre; it must be finely harrowed, and
all Clots, Stones, Turfs, etc. picked away and laid on heaps, as is usual in
Woad-Lands, then it is to be continually weeded till the Leaves cover the
Ground; and when the Leaves are grown fair and large, then set to cutting, and
so throughout the Summer, that you may have five or six Crops, and sometimes
but three in one year of Woad: what grows in Winter, Sheep will eat.

The time for sowing of Woad is in the middle and end of March.

When it is cut, it must be immediately carried to the Mill. The manner
whereof, with the right ordering of Woad, and of all other necessary
circumstances relating thereto, is best learned of an experienced Workman,
which is easily obtained.

To take it in the very season is a fundamental Piece, which is To know when it
is full ripe.
when the Leaf is come to its full growth, and retains its perfect color and
lively greenness; then speedily cut it, that it fade not, nor wax pale before
you have cut your Crop.

The two first Crops are the best, which are usually mixed together in the
seasoning; the later Crops are much worse, which if either are mixed with the
former, they mar the whole.

It is a Staple Commodity for the Dyers Trade, and is very advantageous Profit
of Woad.
to the Husbandman; it more than doubleth the Rent of his Land, sometimes it
quadruples it: it has been sold from 6 l. to 30 l. the Tun.

The planting and propagating whereof is esteemed another excellent Rape and
Cole-Seed.
piece of Husbandry and Improvement for Land, and more especially on
Marsh-Land, Fen-Land, or newly recovered Sea-lands, or any Land rank and fat,
whether Arable or Pasture.

The Cole-Seed is esteemed the best, the biggest and fairest also that you can
get: let it be dry and of a clear color, like the best Onyon-Seed; it is
usually brought from Holland.

It is to be sown at or about Mid-summer: you must have your Land ploughed very
well, and laid even and fine, and then sow it; about a Gallon will sow an
Acre: the Seed must be mixed with some other matter, as before we directed
about Clover-Grass Seed, for the more even dispersing thereof.

When the one half of the Seed begins to look brown, it is time to reap it,
which must be done as you usually do Wheat, and lay it two or three handfuls
together till it be dry, and that through-dry too, which will be near a
fortnight ere it be dry enough; it must not be turned nor touched, if it be
possible, lest you shed the Seed: it must be gathered on Sheets, or large
Sayl-clothes, and so carried into the Barn or Floor very large, to be
immediately thrashed out.

The main Benefit is in the Seed: If it be good, it will bear five Profit
thereof.
quarters on an Acre, and is worth usually four shillings the Bushel, sometimes
more and sometimes less; the greater your parcel is, the better price you will
have. It is used to make Oil thereof; it thrives best on moist Land, it cannot
be too rank; it fits the Land for Corn, etc. Thus far has Mr. Blithe delivered;
little else is written of this Seed, therefore we leave it to the more
experienced persons.

Although this be a Plant usually nourisht in Gardens, and be Turnips.
properly a Garden-Plant, yet it is to the very great Advantage of the
Husbandman sown in his Fields in several foreign places, and also in some parts
of England, not only for Culinary uses, as about London and other great Towns
and Cities, but also for Food for Cattle, as Cows, Swine, etc. They delight in
a warm, mellow, and light Land, rather sandy than otherwise, not coveting a
rich Mould. The Ground must be finely ploughed and harrowed, and then the Seed
sown, and raked in with a Bush, or suchlike. They are sown at two Seasons of
the year; in the Spring with other the like Kitchin-Tillage, and also about
Midsummer, or after, in the Harlib's Legacy.
Fields for the use of Cattle, or any other use. In Holland they slice their
Turnips with their tops, and Rape-seed Cakes, and Grains, etc. and therewith
make Mashes for the Cows, and give it them warm, which the Cows will eat like
Hogs.

Cows and Swine also will eat them raw, if they are introduced into the diet,
by giving the Turnips first boiled unto them, and then only scalded, and
afterward they will eat them raw.

It is also reported, that at Rouen they boil Turnips with the Leaves on them
till they be tender, and add thereto Wheaten-bran, and of the Cakes of
Rape-seed or Lin-seed, all which has a singular faculty of fatting Cattle (but
for Milch-beasts they put less of the Seeds:) this they give twice a day, and
is the most part of their Feeding for the Winter only.

It is a very great neglect and deficiencie in our English Husbandry, that this
particular Piece is no more prosecuted, seeing that the Land it requires need
not be very rich, and that they may be sown as a second Crop also, especially
after early-Pease; and that it supplies the great want of Fodder that is usual
in the Winter, not only for fatting Beasts, Swine, etc. but also for our
Milch-Kine.

SECT. VI. Of Setting of Corn.
Besides the usual manner of sowing of Corn, are there several other ways of
dispersing it, as by setting, and howing of it in, etc. This Art of setting
Corn seems to be very Ancient, as appears by Virgil, Vnguibus infodiunt and
ipsis fruges -- and has been a long time attempted to be brought into practice
again, as appears by Mr. Platt's Adams Tool Revived, Printed in the year 1600.
where he does very ingeniously describe not only the way, but the great
advantage that accrews by this then new Discovery: The first part thereof
giving you the reason why Corn sown in the common way yields not so great an
increase as it does by being set; then he shows you the manner of digging the
Land where you are to set your Corn (whereof we have spoken before) then he
proceeds to the Description of his Instruments, whereof some are only many pins
set at a convenient distance in a Board, which compressed on the Earth make so
many holes wherein the Wheat-grains are to be dropped one by one: but because
these are very unnecessary and troublesome, and that there are newer and better
ways found out, I shall decline any further discourse about them. Also he gives
you the distance and depth; where he observes, that at three Inches distance
and three Inches depth there has grown thirty Quarters of Wheat on an Acre of
Ground, and that four Inches in depth and distance has yielded but twenty
Quarters: he also speaks of five Inches in depth, and five in distance: It Is
probable the diversity of the Land, or of these years wherein the experiments
were proved, might beget some differences. Afterward he advises in barren
Lands to fill up the holes with some good mixture or fat Compost, or to imbibe
the Grain you set therewith; whereof more hereafter.

Then Mr. Gabriel Platt succeeds with his newer and better Discovery of
infinite Treasure.
composed Method of setting Corn, whereby he pretends to remedy all the
Inconveniences of the former way, by his two new invented Engines, the one for
the more expeditious setting of the Corn, the other for the laying up the Land
on Ridges, just on the tops of the rows of Corn, that neither surplusage of
moisture might annoy it, nor frost in Winter kill it; which way prevents the
laying the Land in high Ridges before sowing: Neither need the Land be dug,
only ploughed, harrowed, and then set.

The description of which Engine for the setting of Corn he Description of Mr.
Platts Engine for setting Corn.
gives you in these words: Let there be two boards of equal breadth boared with
wide holes at four inches distance, and be set in a Frame of two Foot high, the
one from the other; then let there be a Funnel for every hole made of thin
boards, about two Inches square: Then for the top let there be two thin boards
of equal breadth boared likewise, whereof the uppermost is to be boared with an
hot Iron, with holes longer the one way than the other, and is to be of such a
thickness, that but one Corn only can lie in the hole: The other board is to be
boared with wide holes, and to be loose, that while the Engine is charged, the
holey part may be under the holes of the uppermost board; and when the holes in
the Earth are made by the Nether-works, then to be moved, so that all the Corns
may drop down.

And for charging, a little Corn being swept up and down by a Broom or a Brush,
will fill the holes; and if any miss, the workman may put in here and there an
odd Corn with his fingers, and then moving the second Board till the holes be
answerable, all the Corns will drop down at an instant; then let a large ledge
be set about the top of the Engine to keep the Corn from spilling; and so is
the upper part thereof made: And as for the Nether-work, it is somewhat more
chargeable and intricate; for there must be for every hole a little socket of
brass, cast with a Verge to nail unto the Nether-board about the hole, which
must be turned; and boared all of one wideness to an hairs-breadth, and must be
wide above, and straight below like a Faucet: Then there must be Iron pins of
five inches long, of great thick Iron-wyer, drawn so fit, that no earth can
come into the brass-sockets. Now to make these play up and down at pleasure, is
the greatest skill in the whole work, and there is no other way but that which
is here described. There must be for every wooden Funnel a piece of Iron forged
flat with a hole in the middle, edge-wise, which through two slits in the
nether-part, must play up and down, through which a brass-nail must be fastened,
cast with an head, contrary to other nails, bowing downwards, to which the
Iron-pins must be fastened with wyers, and so thrust down and plucked up at
pleasure; And then every end of the flat pieces of Iron must be fastened into a
piece of Wood, of such thickness, that two thereof may fill up the distance
between the rows of the wooden Funnels. These may be made to play up and down
like Virginal-Jacks; and when they are lifted up, then the brass Funnels being
wider above than below, give leave for the Corn to fall into the holes all at
an instant. These Jacks must be fastened together, the two first on either side
of the wooden Funnels, then so many together as the weight of the workmen is
able to thrust down to make the holes: And there must be a stay to hold up the
Jacks at pleasure when they are lifted up again to such an altitude, as that
the Corns may descend by them into the holes: And the bottom of the Iron-pins
must be flat, and by that means they will not be so apt to draw up the Earth
into the Funnels; also the roots of the Corn will spread better, and bring a
greater increase, if the ground be sadned a little in the bottom of every hole:
And the tops of the Iron-pins must likewise be flat, and hang a little loose in
the wyers; else if any of the brass-sockets get a little wrench, they will not
be drawn through, because the holes must be straight. Though the making of this
Engine be somewhat chargeable and troublesome, yet if skilful men first break
the Ice, then it will be common, and the most profitable Invention that ever
was found out: and the top of the Engine must be ledged about with large ledges
to to keep the Corn from spilling; so will a quart or two of Corn serve a good
while, and must be renewed upon occasion. Also if the slits in the Funnels be
lined with Iron, the work will be more durable.

But lest the charge of this Engine, together with the difficulty The second
Engine.
of getting it, may be a hinderance to the work intended, our Author adds a
description of a more easy way (as he supposes) for the poorer sort, which is
subject to the capacity of every ordinary workman, and is made of Wood only
without either Brass or Iron. But he further tells you, these Engines will not
endure like the other; besides, there must be four workmen, because the Engine
must be made of two parts, the one to go before and make the holes, and the
other to come after and drop in the Corn. This last must not differ a whit from
the upper part of the former, only it must have four feet like tops, in the
four corners, which must be set right in the holes, which are made by the other
part which goes before, which likewise must have four such feet to leave an
impression when it is removed forward, whereby the second may be rightly
placed, so that the Corns or Grains may fall right into every hole. That part
which must make the holes is to be made of two boards of equal breadth to the
other, and must be boared full of holes, of equal distance likewise; the wooden
pins must be greater than those of Iron, because the holes will need to be
somewhat large and wide, and they must be fast in the upper-board, and loose in
the nether-board.

The reason whereof, is I suppose, that the lower board should be kept down
whilst the pras be drawn out of the earth, that the earth fall not into the
holes.
And if the Engine be large, as this way it may be larger than the other, by
reason that it is easilier lifted and removed, being in two parts, then the
upper part must be slit, and divided into so many parts, that the weight of the
workmen by treading upon them, may press them down to make the holes: and
though this way will require four workmen, yet the charge will not be double,
nor much more than the former way, by reason that the workmen may go forward
with more expedition, and may set a broader compass of Ground at one time.

Thus far has Mr. Gabriel Platt proceeded in his description of his
Instruments, which are the most accurate and ingenious that we find published.
I have given it you verbatim, lest any mistake might be imputed to the Relator.
To ingenious men it is plain enough, but to others this and every thing else
besides the plain Dunstable-road is intricate. Capiat qui capere potest. Let
such make use of it that are willing to promote Ingenuity: it is probable it may
succeed, according to his design, and your expectation; if not, by the Errors
of these and suchlike, you may discover some better and more facile way to
accomplish this Enterprise: Facile est addere Inventis. Let not a few Errors or
mistakes, or bad success, discourage any man in a design of so great and
public concernment, and experimented at so easy an expense.

But lest any should be over-confident in these Engines, and Errors in these
Engines.
spend much time and some cost on their preparation, and not immediately find
them to respond to his expectation, which might beget a Prejudice not only
against this, but all other ways esteemed Novel (for such that are over-earnest
to accomplish any design, in case it succeed not, are sooner prejudiced
against it than those that undertake it with more Caution) I shall discover
such Inconveniences and Errors that you may probably meet withal in this way
Mr. Platt describes.

1. Men, not Children nor Women are capable of this Employment, that it will be
very difficult to procure Setters for any great quantity, the work being so
tedious, and so many required to perform it: Such Inventions being to be
preferred, that are most universal, most easy, and performed in less time and
with less expense.

2. In hard, stiff, clay-ground, or any other after rain, holes will be very
troublesome to make; the pins going downright, and rising perpendicularly
again, will bring up much of the Earth with them, that it will be an
intolerable trouble to keep the pins clean, and the holes open.

3. In stony Land, or where roots of trees, etc. annoy the ground, this Engine
will be useless; for if one straw hinder one pin, the rest cannot enter.

4. The pins must be very thick and near together, else if any of the Corn be
injured by worms, frost, etc. your Crop will be defective.

All which Inconveniences and Errors are remedied and prevented Howing in of
Corn commended.
by howing in of Corn by hand in rows, both for the saving of Corn, and
conveniencie of weeding, and for the better increase at the harvest, far beyond
what can be expected the common way: Also it is of much less expense than the
setting Hartlib 's Legacy.
Engine.

These several ways are all that we find as yet discovered, and these also for
what I can understand but little practiced, at least for Corn; but for Pease it
is usual, especially the better sort of Pease, to be howed in as Mr. Hartlib
prescribes, and that to a very considerable advantage: Also I have caused the
best sort of Pease to be set as Beans in double rows at a good distance, with
admirable success. The same Method is used at this day about Godalming in
Surrey.

But to remedy and remove all manner of Errors or Inconveniences that can be
found in setting or howing in of Corn, I shall here give you a plain and
perfect description of an easy and feasible Instrument that shall disperse
your Corn, Grain, or Pulse, of what kind soever, at what distance and in what
proportion you please to design, and that with very great expedition, and very
little extraordinary charge, expense, or hazard.

instrument to disperse corn or grain

First, Make a Frame of Timber of about two or three Inches square, the breadth
of the Frame about two foot, the height about eighteen inches, the length about
four foot, more or less as you please; place this Frame on two pair of ordinary
Wheels like Plough-wheels. The Axletree of the two foremost Wheels is to lock
to either side as does the fore Axletree of a Wagon, for reasons hereafter
shown; the hindermost Axeltree being of Iron, and square in the middle, must be
fixed to the Center of the Wheels, that the Axes and Wheels may move together:
Then about the middle of the Frame in the bottom let there be fixed an
Iron-Instrument, or of Wood pointed with Iron, like unto a Coulter, made a
little spreading at the bottom in the nature of a Share, made to pass through
two Mortoises on the top for its greater strength, and made also to be wedged
higher or lower according as you will have your furrow in depth; the use
whereof is only to make the furrow so that you must make the point thereof of
breadth only to move the Earth, and cast it or force it on either side, that
the Corn may fall to the bottom of the furrow; then over this Share or Coulter,
a little behind it may a Wooden-pipe be made to come from the top of the Frame
to the lower end of the Share, tapering downwards, and as near as you can to
the Share, to deliver the Corn immediately as the ground is opened, and before
any Earth falls in, that what Earth does afterward fall in, it may fall on the
Corn. This Pipe is to proceed out of a large Hopper fixed on the top of the
Frame, that may contain about a Bushel more or less, as you think fit; but that
the Corn may gradually descend, according to the quantity you intend to bestow
on an Acre, at the very neck of the Hopper, underneath in the square hollows
thereof, must be fitted in the edge of a Wheel of Wood, about half an Inch
thick, and proportionable to the cavity of the neck; the Wheel need not be
above two or three Inches Diameter, and fixed on an Axis extending from one
side of the Frame to the other; on which Axis is also to be another Wheel with
an edge on the Circumference thereof like the wheel of a Spit or Jack, which
must answer to another Wheel of the like nature and form fixed on the Axis of
the hindermost Wheels; then fit a Line (of silk is best, because it will not be
so apt to shrink and reach as Hemp) about these two Wheels, that when the
Instrument moves on the hindermost Wheels by the means of the line, the small
Wheel at the neck of the Hopper may also move; which lesser Wheel in the neck
of the Hopper may have short pieces of thick Leather fixed in the Circumference
thereof like unto the teeth of a Jack-wheel, that upon its motion it may deduce
the Corn out of the Hopper, in what proportion you please; for in case it comes
too fast, then may you by a wedge at the Tenon of the piece whereon the Hopper
rests, or at the end of the Axis of the lesser Wheel, like as in a Querne,
force the Wheel and Hopper together; and in case it feeds too slow, then may
you remove them by the same wedges to a further distance: also in case your
line be too slack or too hard, you may prevent either extreme by a wedge in the
place where the Axis of the wheels moves, or by a third Wheel about the middle
of the line made to move further or nearer as you see cause.

One Horse and one Man may work with this Instrument, and The more particular
use and benefit of this Instrument.
sow Land as fast or faster than six Horses can Plough, so that you may with
ease compute the expense, in case your Instrument be single; but you may in the
same Frame have two Shares at twelve inches distance more or less, as you will
have the rows of Corn distant 1 As to time.
the one from the other; and two Pipes out of the same Hopper, and two small
Wheels on the same Axis, with other Wheels answerable, every whit as easy to
be performed as one, and then may you double your proportion of Land in a day.

This Instrument will always keep the same proportion you first set him to,
which you must thus contrive: First know the length 2. Equality of Seed.
of the Furrow you sow, then cast up how many of these Furrows at such
distance your Instrument is made for (whether a foot more or less) will amount
unto an Acre; then conclude how much to sow on an Acre; as suppose a Bushel,
then divide that Bushel into so many parts as you have furrows or distances in
that Acre: then take one or two of those parts, and put into your Hopper, and
observe whether it will hold out or super-abound at the end of one or two
Furrows, and accordingly proceed and rectify the Feeder; or you may judge by
your own reason, whether it feed too fast or too slow.

In case it feeds too fast, notwithstanding they be close placed 3
Rectification of the Feeder.
together, then you may make that Wheel at the lower Axis, wherein the Line
moves, to be less than the upper, then will the motion be slower: And thus may
you make it move as slow as you will, by augmenting the upper, and diminishing
the lower Wheels wherein the Line is, and make it move faster by the contrary
Rule.

In case you drive apace, it feeds apace; in case you drive but 4 No difference
in driving fast or slow.
slow, it feeds but slowly: here is no error.

When you come to any turning at the Lands-end, by lifting up 5 No loss of Seed.
the hindermost part of the Instrument, that those Wheels touch not the ground,
the feeding of the Corn immediately cease until you set it down again.

Also all the Corn you sow lies at one certain depth, none too deep^, nor any
too shallow.

You may place a small kind of Harrow to follow, but the best 6 Needs no
harrowing.
way is to have on each side each Furrow a piece of wood a little broad at the
end, set aslope to force the Earth rounding on the Corn; this may well be
placed and fitted to the bottom of this Instrument just behind the Share and
Feeding-pipe.

By this Method of Sowing, any sort of Grain or Pulse may be General Advantages
of this Instrument.
saved the one half, and in some places more, which by the other way is either
buried so deep under Clots, that it cannot come up, or else is so shallow that
the Cold in the Winter, or Drought in the Summer kills it, or else lies on
the Surface as a prey to the Fowls of the Air: Much also thereof falls in
clusters, twenty or thirty Grains where one or two might suffice, which are
common Inconveniences, and usually happening to the vulgar way of sowing Corn,
the greater half by far is lost, which in all probability may be saved by the
use of this very Instrument, which will doubly requite the extraordinary charge
and trouble thereof; for here is no Corn sowed under Clots but in Rows, as the
Earth is stirred and moved: it is all at one certain depth, and at one certain
distance, and equally covered, below the injury of Frost, and Heat, and Rapine
of Birds. Also by this way the Corn may be sown in the very middle or
convenient depth of the mould, that it may have the strength of the Land both
below and above the Root, which in the other more usual way the Corn falls to
the bottom of the Furrow on the Gravel, Clay, or suchlike hard Ground, that it
seldom thrives so well as what happens to be in the midst. This way also
exceeds the way of Setting Corn, where the Pins thrust into the Ground hardens
and fastens the mould, that unless the Land be very light, it confines the
Roots to too narrow a place, which in this way is prevented, as I have lately
observed in Garden-beans, that those howed in, prove better than those set with
a stick.

By the use of this Instrument also may you cover your Grain or Pulse with any
rich Compost you shall prepare for that purpose, either with Pigeon-dung dry or
granulated, or any other Saline or Lixivial Substance, made disperseable, which
may drop after the Corn, and prove an excellent Improvement; for we find
experimentally that Pigeons-dung sown by the hand on Wheat or Barley mightily
advantageth it by the common way of Husbandry; much more then might we expect
this way, where the dung or suchlike substance is all in the same Furrow with
the Corn, where the other vulgar way a great part thereof comes not near it.

It may either be done by having another Hopper on the same Frame behind that
for the Corn, wherein the Compost may be put and made to drop successively
after the Corn; or it may be sown by another Instrument to follow the former,
which is the better way, and may both disperse the Soil, and cover both Soil
and Seed.

The Corn also thus sown in Ranges you may with much more conveniencie go
between, and either weed it or how it, and earth it up as you think good, and
at Harvest will easily repay the Charges.

Also the Fore-wheels being made to lock to and fro on either side; you may
have an upright Iron-pin fixed to the middle of the Axis extended to the top of
the Frame; and from thence a small Rod of Iron to come to your hand, with a
crooked neck just against the neck of the Hopper; by means of which Iron-rod
you may lock or turn the Wheels either way, and guide your Instrument, and
rectify it, if it deviate out of its right course.

The Hopper must be broad and shallow, that the Seed press not much harder when
it is full, than when it is near empty, lest it sow not proportionably.

This Instrument, although it may at the first seem mysterious and intricate to
the ignorant, yet I am very confident it will answer to every particular of
what I have written of it; and any ingenious Wheel-wright, Joyner or Carpenter
may easily make the same with very little Instruction, and any ordinary
Plough-man may use it.

If your Land be either near the Water, or Clay, or Sand, Rock, Another
excellent Advantage of this Instrument.
Gravel, etc. it is not then convenient to sow the Corn within the Land,
because it may not have depth for rooting: By this Instrument may you then by
placing the Share near the top of the Land, only to remove as it were the
Clots, etc. drop your Seed in rows, and by certain Phins or pieces of Wood or
Iron, made flat at the end, and a little sloping, set on each side such Rows of
Corn or Grain, the Earth may be cast over it and laid in Ridges, above the
ordinary level of the Land; which way I have proved to be very advantageous to
Beans laid on a shallow Ground, and covered over, etc.

SECT. VII. Of the General Uses of Corn, Grain, Pulse, and other Seeds
propagated by the Plough.
This is the most general Grain used here in England for Bread, Use of Wheat.
although it be not unfit for most of the uses the other Grains are fit for: As
for Beer, the best Beer to keep has usually a proportion of Wheat added to the
Malt; and the Bran also of Wheat a little thereof boiled in our ordinary Beer,
makes it mantle or flower in the Cup when it is poured out; which shows with
what a rich spirit Wheat is endowed withal, that so much remains in the very
Bran. Also Starch is made of musty and unwholesome Wheat, and of the Bran
thereof, than which there are few things whiter.

Its principal Use is for the making of Beer, being the sweetest Of Barley.
and most pleasant Grain for that purpose; it is also one of the best Grains
for fatting of Swine, especially being either boiled till it be ready to break,
with no more water than it drinks up; or ground in a Mill, and wet into a
Paste, or made into a Mesh, either way it produces most excellent sweet Bacon.

Its general Use is for Bread, either of it self or mixed with Of Rye.
Wheat; it makes Bread moist, and gives it a very pleasant taste to most
Appetites. I know no other particular use thereof (it being not universally
propagated) only it is reported that it yields great store of Spirit or Aqua
vitae.

This is the only Grain for a Horse, and best agrees with that Of Oats.
Beast of any other, and in which the Horse most delights; and is a constant
food either for Bread, Cakes, or Oatmeal to the Scots, and several Northern
places in England, and in some part of Wales. Oats also will make indifferent
good Malt, and a little thereof in strong Beer to be kept, is usual. They are a
Grain that Poultrey also love to feed on, and it makes them lay store of Eggs
above what other Grain does.

The common Use of Pulses are generally known, as well for Of Pulses.
Men as Beasts; but there are several that pretend to extract from them
excellent Liquors, and distill very good Spirits or Aqua Vitae, without
maulting, as one (in a certain Tract published by Mr. Hartlib) pretends, that
Rye, Oats, Pease, and the like inferior sort of Grains, handled as Barley until
it sprout, needing not for this work to be dried, but beaten and moistened with
its own Liquor, and soundly fermented, will yield a monstrous increase. He also
affirms, that out of one Bushel of good Pease will come of Spirit at the least
two Gallons or more, which will be as strong as the strongest Anniseed-Water
usually sold in London: this he affirms to be of the least. He afterward in
the same Tract gives the partilar Process, which is thus:

Let Pease be taken and steeped in as much Water as will cover them, till they
swell and Corn, and be so ordered as Barley is for Maulting; only with this
difference, that for this work if they sprout twice as much as Barley does in
Maulting, it is the better. The Pease thus sprouted, if beaten small, which is
easily done they being so tender, put into a Vessel and stopped with a Bung and
Rag, as usually, these will ferment; and after two, or three, or four Months,
if distilled, will really perform what before is promised.

Thus (he also adds) may a Spirit or Aqua Vitae be made out of any green
growing thing, Roots, Berries, Seeds, etc. which are not oily.

Also that the Spirit which is made out of Grain not dried into Malt, is more
pleasant than the other.

It is not unlikely that Grain may afford its tincture, and that excellent Beer
or Ale may be made thereof without Maulting: but these things require in
another place to be treated of; and also of the different ways of Fermenting
Liquors, which we refer to another time and place.

Hemp Seed is much commended for the feeding of Poultrey The uses of Hemp Seed,
Flax-seed, Rape and Cole-seed.
and other Fowl, so that where plenty thereof may be had, and a good return for
Fowl, the use thereof must needs be advantageous, ordered as you shall find
hereafter when we treat of Poultrey.

Flax-seed or Lin-seed, Rape and Cole-seed, are generally made use of for the
making of Oil.

Of the Preservation of Corn.
The Preservation of Corn when it is plenty and good, is of very great
advantage to the Husbandman, and the Kingdom in general; for in scarce and dear
years the Husbandman has little to sell to advance his Stock, and the Buyers
are usually furnished with musty and bad Corn, from Foreign parts, or from such
that were ignorant of the ways to preserve it.

Therefore in cheap years it will be very necessary to make use of some of
these ways for the storing up your Plenty of Corn, against a time of Scarcity.

The way of making of it up in Reecks, on Reeck-stavals, set on On
Reeck-stavals.
stones that the Mice may not come at it, is usual and common.

But Corn thrashed and clean winnowed is apt to be musty, therefore Corn laid
up with Chaff.
some advise that you lay up your Corn in the Chaff in large Granaries made for
that purpose secure from the Mice; and when you use or sell it, then to winnow
it.

Also it is advised to mix Beans with Corn, and that it will preserve Corn laid
up with Beans.
it from heating and mustiness. It is probable that if the Beans be well dried
on a Kiln it may succeed, for then will they attract all superfluous moisture
unto them, which is the only cause of the injury to the Corn: for in Egypt
where it is so dry, Corn will keep in open Granaries many years, as in
Pharaoh's time. The Beans are easily separated afterward from the Corn.

It is also reported, that pieces of Iron, Flints, Pebles, etc. mixed Iron,
stones, etc mixed with Corn.
with Corn, preserves it from heating; which may be true, for it is usual to
set a stick an end in Corn, only to give passage for the Air to prevent
heating. A large Granary also full of square wooden pipes, full of small holes,
may keep long from heating, though not so well as the Chaff, Beans, etc.

Also some have had two Granaries, the one over the other, and A double
Granary, one over the other.
filled the upper, which had a small hole in the bottom, that the Corn by
degrees, like Sand in an Hourglass, has fallen into the lower; and when it
was all in the lower, they removed it into the upper, and so kept it in
continual motion: which is a good way also to preserve it.

SECT. VIII. Of the Preparation of the Seed.
The greatest part of Vegetables, and more especially those whereof we have
before treated, are propagated of Seed, which included in a very small shell,
skin, or husk, contains the very Quintessence of the Plant that produced it,
and is as it were the Life and Spirit of the Vegetable, coagulated into a small
compass. Etenim [Natura] e tota Plantae mole nobiliores and maxim activas Dr.
Willis de Fermentatione.
particulas segregat, easque cum pauxillo terrae and aquae simul collectas, in
Semina velut Plantae cujusvis quintas essentias efformat; interim truncus,
folia, caules, and reliqua Plantae membra, principiis activis, pene orbata,
valde depauperantur, ac minoris efficaciae ac virtutis existunt. This Seed or
Spirit of the Plant being cast into its proper Matrix or Menstruum, in its
proper time, does attract unto its self its proper nourishment or moisture,
which by its own strength or power it does ferment, and transmute that which
was before another thing, now into its own being, substance or nature, and
thereby does dispand its self, and increase into the form and matter by Nature
designed. A more Philosophic Definition and Dissection of the nature of the
Seed and Vegetation, we will leave to the more Learned, and content our selves
in our Rural Habitation with so much of the understanding thereof, as shall
guide us unto the Discovery and Application of what may be this proper
Menstruum wherein each Seed most rejoices in, and with most delight
attracteth; for it is most evident, that every Seed as it differs in nature
from another, so it requires a different nourishment. For we perceive that in
the same Land one sort of Seed will thrive where another will not, according to
the Proverb, Ones Meat is another Poison; and that any sort of Grain or Seed
will in time extract and diminish such Nutriment that it most delights in.
Which is the cause that our Husbandmen do find so Change of Seed an
Improvement.
great an Advantage and Improvement by changing their Seed, especially from
that Land which is often tilled, which they call Hook-Land, into Land newly
broken; and from dry, barren, and hungry Land, to rich and fat Land; also from
Land inclining to the South, to Land inclining to the North, and e contra; all
which produce a good Improvement. As Cattle that are taken out of short, sour,
and bad Pasture, and put into good sweet Pasture, thrive better than such that
are not so exchanged. After the same manner it is with Trees removed out of bad
Ground into good; all which are manifest Signs that there is some particular
thing wherein each Seed delights: which if we did but understand, we might
properly apply it, and gain Riches and Honor to our selves; but because we are
ignorant thereof, and are content so to remain, we will make use of such Soyls,
Dungs, Composts, and other Preparations and Ways of Advancement of the Growth
of Vegetables, as are already discovered and made use of, and shall here give
unto the Reader the several Ways and Methods we find dispersed in our Rustic
Authors for the imbibition of the Seed, which has been long attempted, and
many ways tried; but most of them have fallen short of the expectation of the
Experimenters, because they neither took the right Matter, nor observed the
right manner of the Operation. As according to some Authors Steeping of Corn in
Dung-water.
you are prescribed to steep your Corn in Dung-water, or Water wherein Cow Dung
has lain some time, which its probable may be some, though little advantage to
the Corn.

Then in one of the same Authors are ye commended to an Experiment better than
the former, That whereas before you steeped your Corn in the Water which had
sucked out the strength and salt of the Dung, you must now mingle your Dung,
your Water and your Corn together, and stir them one whole hour at the least;
also in the evening stir them again for half an hour or more, let them stand
together all night, and the next day at some tap draw away the Water, then
mingle the Corn and Dung thoroughly well together, and after sow the Dung and
Corn so mixed in a barren and hungry mould, and you shall have (says mine
Author) as rich a Crop, as if the Ground it self had been dunged before; he
gives also a Probatum est unto it.

The same Sir Hugh Platt gives you a process of steeping Corn Adam 's Tool
Revived.
out of Johannes Baptista Porta, which he pretends to cause a wonderful
increase, and at least five for one above the accustomed yield, which is, To
take the Corn out of the middle of the Ear, and bathe it in sweet Ointment made
with the fat of old Goats, being mixed with Bacchus and Vulcan [which our
Author interprets to be Goats-dung, the older the better, moistened with Wine,
or new Must, or I rather judge Lees of Wine] let their soft and even laid bed
be gently warmed: [which he also Interprets to be the Digging of the Land; and
by warming, it is probable he means soyling or watering it with some prepared
rich Liquor.]

Also our Author there advises for the steeping of Corn in new Ale or Wort, its
own natural Bathe; but seems to prefer the steeping thereof in the Water
wherein the Dung of Oxen, Kine, and Sheep, and Pigeons-dung has been imbibed,
which he prescribes to be about two parts of Water to one of Dung, and let them
stand four or five days, often stirring them together; which water decauted or
coursly filtred is fit for your use, wherein you are to steep your Corn till it
be glutted therewith; which you may easily discover: but be sure not to
overcharge the Corn with this Liquor.

Thus far we find how the steeping of Corn in Dung-water has been used and
approved of, and that as may be presumed from the rationality of the thing, and
credit of the Author, with some good success; But it is probable it might not
always answer the expectation of the Experimenters, or at least not to produce
so great an Increase as the Authors promise; neither can those ways be so
excellent as these we shall advise you to, being grounded on more rational
Principles, and have been proved to be more effectual than the other.

That which contains in it most of the Universal Subject or Matter of
Vegetables (whereof we discoursed at the beginning of this Treatise) is the
fittest for this purpose; of all which, Nitre or Sal terrae is esteemed the
best, wherewith Virgil advises to infuse or besprinkle the Seed:

Semina vidi equidem multos medicare serentes
Et intro prius -- profundere --
This also is that Subject Glauber so highly extols, where he says, Miraculum
Mundi, p. 50.
Si Agricolae semen hoc menstruo humectatum in agrum spargunt, citius
maturescit, granis pinguioribus, etc. If Husbandmen did sow their Seed imbibed
with this Menstruum, it would sooner be ripe, and bear better Grain, etc. This
Subject or Menstruum he labors in several Tracts of his, to prefer above any
other matter whatsoever, for all sorts of Vegetables, either by application
thereof unto the roots, or by way of irrigation, or by imbibition of the Seed
therein, as very highly conducing to Fertility and acceleration of Maturation;
but in another Tract of his, being the Explication of the former, he very
honestly undeceives all such that judge this Nitre or Subject to be common
Nitre or Saltpeter. Velim Explicatio Miraculi Mundl. 51.
autem mentem intelligi meam non accipiendum esse nitrum commune, hisce minime
proficium, Common Nitre being not fit for that purpose. The Nitre or Sal terrae
intended by these and other Learned Authors as apt for this work, is the fixed
Salt extracted out of any Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral thoroughly calcined, as
after the burning of Land in the common way of burn-baiting, that which causes
so great Fertility is as well the fixed Salt or Alcali that is left in the
Ashes, as the waste or expense of the sterile acid Spirit which before kept
that vegetating Salt from acting. What is it that is fertile in Lime, Ashes,
Soap-ashes, etc. but this Nitre, or Sal terrae, this Universal Subject left
therein, and most easily separable after calcination?

Therefore let every Husbandman that expects so large a Product Idem 46.
or Reward, take the right matter, such that Glauber cast on his Asparagus,
which through its fiery nature destroyed the Worms or banished them wholly from
their ancient habitations, are by its vegetating and fructifying nature it made
the Asparagus thrive more fully and perfectly than before, etc. This Salt is as
easy to be procured, as the Lee or Lixivium wherewith the women usually scour
their Clothes, being extracted out of any Ashes, either of Vegetables, Animals,
or Minerals. All the difficulty is in the true proportion and strength of this
Lixivium or Menstruum: for Glauber advises in another Tract of his, by no means
to add too Continuatio Miraculi Mundi, 21.
much thereof to the Vines, lest they grow too rank: but in our way of
Imbibition of Grain, we need not fear that; only this we must be cautious of,
that the great and fiery heat thereof destroys not the Corn, for the highest
Medicines taken in excess, prove the greatest Poisons: but let not this prove a
Discouragement, for it cannot be difficult to prevent this Inconvenience,
either by moderating the quality of the Menstruum, or the time of imbibition.

Next in place to this Universal Subject may be used such materials that
contain most of the same, as the Dung of Sheep, Pigeons, and other Fowl, who
because they make no Urine, have their Dung enriched with a greater quantity of
that Subject than other Creatures, whence it is usually extracted by the Urine:
Sheep also drink but little, and feed dry, which makes their Dung exceeding
rich and fertile. I casually met with the following Process highly applauded by
the Owners thereof, promising wonderful Productions from it, which is thus:

Take half a Bushel of Sheeps-dung, and put upon it twenty quarts of
Spring Water, set it on the fire till it be lukewarm, but not boiling, and so
rub with your hand all the Sheeps-dung by little and little (till it be
dissolved in the water) then let it stand twelve hours, after which strain the
water through a course Cloth, with a hard Compression; this water keep for use:
Then take of Bay Salt and dissolve it in lukewarm water, which water filter
and evaporate in an earthen Vessel over the Fire; of this congealed Salt after
the waters Evaporation, take two good handfuls, likewise do the same with
Saltpeter, dissolve it in water, filter the water, and evaporate it; then take
of the remaining congealed Saltpeter one good handful, and let both those
Salts dissolve in the forementioned Liquor of Sheeps-dung, making it again
milk-warm: when all the Salts are therein well dissolved, put into that
prepared Liquor eight Gallons of Corn, or other Seed, and let it steep therein
thirty or thirty six hours; then take it and put it into a Sieve, and drain the
water into another Vessel, which water may be used again in like manner: when
the water is all drained away, take the Corn or other Seed and dry it in some
Upper-loft exposed to the Air, not to the Sun, and being almost dry, scatter or
sow it in half proportion: N. B. that the Sheeps-dung dregs being dried must
be calcined, and the Salt thereof drawn in lukewarm water, which being filtred
and evaporated, the remaining Salt thereof is to be dissolved with the other
Salts in the Sheeps-dung water.

I have here given you this Process gratis, which has been valued and
contracted for at a high rate, the Owners promising a very great Increase to
succeed. The Process appears to be made not by such that are experienced in
Rural Affairs, for you will find it difficult to strain your Sheeps-dung
water, dissolved in those proportions; for the Sheeps-dung wholly dissolves,
which does so thicken the water, and convert it into a mucilage, that all goes
where the water goes, if rightly done; and that which is more strange, the
Grain will not only imbibe the water so animated, but the very substance of the
Dung also, if rightly ordered; which is an Argument sufficient of the
melioration of the Grain, insomuch that no dregs or remainder of the
Sheeps-dung was lost, save only a few undissolved treddles. As for the Salts, I
think little good is to be expected from them, and therefore hold those
troublesome preparations of them needless; only the Salt of the Dung must needs
be good, because it is that Vegetative Salt, or Universal Subject whereof we
discoursed before, only it is far fetched and dear bought: as good may be had
at a far easier rate for this purpose.

Nevertheless common Sea Salt has been much cried up by some for an Improver
of the Seed, and an Example produced of a silly Jewel-house of Art and Nature.
Swain, who passing over an Arm of the Sea with his Seed-corn in a Sack, which
by mischance at his landing fell into the water, and so his Corn being left
there till the next low water, became somewhat brackish, yet (out of necessity)
did the man bestow the same Wheat upon his ploughed Grounds, and at the Harvest
he reaped a Crop of good Wheat, such as in that year not any of his Neighbors
had the like.

Doubtless infusion of the Corn or Seed in any of the aforesaid materials, is
some advantage to it; or in the Lees of Wine, Ale, Beer, Perry, Syder, or else
in Beef-broth and the Brine of Poudering-tubs, as is by some advised.

Also some affirm that Corn spritted a little, as they use to do for Malt, and
then sown, came up speedily, and got the predomination of the Weeds at first,
and so kept the same, that there was produced a far greater increase than
ordinary; which is a sufficient convincing Argument, that if common water
produce so manifest an Improvement, that then a better Liquor may much more.

Because the Corn also will seem troublesome to sow being wet, it is prescribed
either to let it dry a day or two on a Floor, or else to sift slackened Lime
thereon, which is to be preferred, because it preserves the Corn from Vermin,
Smutt, etc.

I find also another compounded Liquor to have been commended Hartlib 's
Legacy.
and experimented for the steeping of Grain therein, which is thus: Pour into
quick and unslaked Lime, as much Water as suffices to make it swim four inches
above the Water, and unto ten pound of the said water poured off, mix one pound
of Aqua Vitae, and in that Liquor steep or soak wheat or Corn twenty four
hours; which being dried in the Sun, or in the Air, steep again in the said
Liquor twenty four hours more; and do it likewise the third time: afterward
sow them at great distances the one from the other, about the distance of a
foot between each Grain, so one Grain will produce thirty, thirty six, thirty
eight, forty two, fifty two Ears, and those very fruitful, with a tall Stalk
equalling the stature of a man in height.

This seems to be a most rational Process for this purpose, and on this and the
like ways of maceration or fermentation of the Seed depends those several
Experiments, where the Corn or Seed has yielded so prodigious an Increase, as
that one grain of Wheat should yield a hundred and fourteen Ears, and in them
six thousand Grains: but in case it generally hold to be but a quarter of the
number, it is beyond what any other way of Husbandry can perform.

CHAP. V.
Of the Manuring, Dunging, and Soyling of Lands.

HAving discoursed of Meadows, Pastures, and Arable Lands, and of the great
Advantages and Benefits that are raised out of them, and of the several ways of
Improving Meadows by drowning or watering, and of Pastures and Arable Lands by
Enclosure, by sowing and propagating New Hays, Grasses, and the best sorts of
Corn, Pulse, and other Seeds, and by the best way of Tilling and Ordering the
same: Now it will be necessary to say a little concerning this most general way
of Improvement by Manuring, Dunging, and Soyling of Land; under which terms we
comprehend all the several ways of tempering, altering, renewing, or adding
unto the Land, or applying any subject whatsoever thereunto for its Improvement
and Advantage.

SECT. I. Of the Burning of Land.
The Burning of Land, or any other operation on it by Fire, seems to be the
greatest, though not most universal advance to most of our barren, poor and
hungry Lands, as well dry as wet: the Burning of the Ground it self seems to be
of very Ancient use, as appears by Virgil:

Saepe etiam steriles incendere profuit agros. And burning of Wood, and other
Combustible Materials on Gages Survey of the West Indies. Sylva.
Land, is practiced amongst the Americans for the Improvement of their Land;
which is an Argument as well of their Natural Ingenuity, as of the excellency
and advantage of the Improvement. For the burning of such Combustible things on
Land, does very much heat the Ground, and wastes that Acid sterile juice that
hinders fertility, and sets free that fertile Principle the Sal terrae which
before was for the most part bound up; also it leaves a good quantity of that
Salt on the Land mixed with the ashes, which is generally held to be the only
advantage this way yields, though the contrary appears; for wheresoever the
Fire is made, although you remove the ashes wholly, yet will the place bear a
better Crop than where you bestow the ashes, as formerly we noted.

This Art of Burning of Land, usually called Denshiring (quasi On what lands
burn-baiting good.
Devonshiring or Denbighshiring, because it seems there to be most used or to
have been invented) or burn-beating, is not applicable or necessary to all
sorts of Land: for in a good, fertile, rich, loose Soil, where a good sweet
Grass, or good Corn flourishes, it wastes as well the good as the bad juice;
wherefore in most places in Sommersetshire, and such other fertile places, they
reject it.

But for barren, sour, heathy, and rushey Land, be it either hot or cold, wet
or dry, it is a very great Improvement, insomuch that most sorts of such poor
Lands will yield in two or three years after such Burning more above all
charges, than the Inheritance was worth before.

The most usual Method is, with a Breast-plough to pare off the Manner of
burn-baiting.
Turf, turning it over as it is cut that it may dry the better: if it prove a
very dry season and the weather hot, then it needs no more turning; but if the
weather be casual, it must be turned, and the Turfs set a little hollow, that
they may dry the better, and when they are through-dry, they may be laid on
small heaps about two Wheel-barrow loads on a heap: the lesser the heaps are
the better, so there be enough to make a good Fire thoroughly to consume the
whole to ashes. If the Turf be full of fibrous roots, or has a good head on
it, it will burn without any other additionary fuel; if not, you must raise
your heap on a small bundle of Ling, Goss, Fearn or suchlike, which in some
places they call Ollet, which will set the whole on Fire: you may afterward
let those little hills of Ashes lie till they are a little saddned with rain,
before you spread them, or take a quiet time that the wind may not waste your
ashes, nor hinder their equal scattering; also you must pare the ground under
the hills somewhat lower than the surface of the Earth, to abate its overgreat
fertility, caused by the Fire made thereon. It is also to be observed that the
Land is to be but shallow or half Ploughed, and not above half the usual
quantity of seed sown on an Acre, and that also late in the year; if Wheat,
toward the end of October, only to prevent the excessive rankness or greatness
of the Corn, by which you may judge what advantage Burning is to the Land, and
this also on the poorest Plains or Heaths.

Others there are that when they stubb up their Goss, Broom, and suchlike, lay
the Roots on heaps when they are dry, and cover them with the parings of the
Earth between where they raised the roots, and so Burn over the Land, which is
also a very considerable Improvement.

In some places also it is usual to Burn the stubble and other trash they can
rake together on their Lands, which must needs be very good so far as may be
according to the quantity thereof, although it be not so much used for
fertility-sake, as to rid themselves of the stuff, as they usually burn Heaths
and Turf-Commons to give liberty to the Grass.

Sir Richard Weston gives this for a good way, that is, First pare off the
Heath [or Turff] then make the paring into little Hills: you may put to one
hill as much paring as comes off from a Rod or Pole of Ground.

The Hills being sufficiently made and prepared, are to be fired and burnt into
ashes; and unto the Ashes of every Hill you must put a peck of unslaked Lime:
the Lime is to be covered over with the Ashes, and so to stand till rain comes
and slakes the Lime, after that mingle your Ashes and Lime together, and so
spread it over your Land.

In such places where Fuel is not scarce, and the Land barren, it is very
excellent Husbandry to get together into such Land you intend to fertilize, all
the small Wood, Bushes, Furze, Broom, Heath, Fearn, Stubble, or what ever
combustible matter you can procure, which in most places are easier obtained
than Dung; and in a dry time lay it in heaps dispersedly about the ground, and
cast over it the parings of the Land where it lies, and set fire to it, and
whilst it burns (having several to help you) cast on Turf or Earth on the most
flaming parts, to hinder that it flame not too much; the heat of which fires
will so calcine the Earth under them, and the Earth cast on them, besides the
ashes of the Vegetables, that it will yield an increase far exceeding the
charge and labor bestowed thereon: there can be no better use made of these
combustible matters, and especially of the Hawme or strings of Hops, which
burnt in the Hop-garden, and the parings of the Turfs on the side of the
Garden, or elsewhere, or any other Earth cast over it as it burns, and then
more Hawme over that, and more Earth on that, as they use to say, Stratum super
stratum, till all be done, either in one or several places, will make so
excellent a Compost to be applied to the Hop-hills, that none can exceed it,
which I my self have done: And this answers to what Glauber delivers as a great
secret, and very profitable: Perticae, Longurii, aut Continuatio Miraculi
Mundi, p. 34.
pali, quibus Vites lupulorum Caules sustinenter, si igne, qua in extremitatem
suam inferiorem desunt, adurantur, and extremitate adusta, in lignorum oleum
illud immittantur, ut pinguedinem illam imbibant, etc. duplex hoc pacto
emolumentum afferentes; prius est quod perticae a putredine conservatae
quotannis breviores non evadant, sed diutius durent: Alterum quod vitium and
lupulorum radices pinguedinem and alimentum ex perticarum extremitatibus
attrahentes luxuriante incremento excrescant. By which it appears, that the
ends of the Hop-poles only being burnt and imbibed in his vegetable Oil, or
fixed Salt, will not only endure long from rotting, but also will yield
extraordinary nourishment to the Roots of the Hops; of such wonderful efficacy
is this subject, that the least Grain thereof carries with it much of
fertility, as the same Author says a little before of the same Subject; Non
tantum in agris praestat, sed Page 21.
etiam arboribus, and vit ibus, adeo ut una eodem plena tonna tantum ad agrorum
stercorationem confer valeat, quantum december simo equino, aut vaccine replet a
plaustra solent.

This kind of Manure either by Burning as before, or with the fixed Salts of
any thing whatsoever, does also much more enrich your Crop than any other Dung
or Soil, for this tends principally unto fertility, ordinary Dung of Beasts
more unto the gross substance of the Straw or Hawme, than unto Fruit or Seed,
and also breeds more of Weeds than this our Universal Subject.

There are also several other sorts of Materials to be used, as Other Soyls and
Manures.
Soils and Manures for the fertilizing and enriching of Lands: Some whereof are
taken from the Earth, as Chalk, Marle, Clay, etc. Others from the Waters, as
Sands, Weeds, etc. Others also are the Dungs and Excrements of living
Creatures, and others that are several sorts of Vegetables themselves, and
other casual things, as Soot, Rags, etc. Of all which we find these whereof
we shall now treat, to have been found out and commended to be useful and
beneficial to the Husbandman for the purposes before mentioned.

SECT. II. Soyls and Manures taken from the Earth.
Whereof there are several sorts; some of so hard and undissoluble Of Chalk.
a nature, that it is not fit to lay on Lands simply as it is, but after it is
burned into Lime, becomes a very excellent Improver of Lands: there are also
other sorts of Chalk more unctuous and soluble, which being laid on Lands crude
as they are, and let lie till the Frosts and Rain shatter and dissolve the
same, prove a very considerable advantage to barren Lands; now where any of
these Chalks are found, it is good to prove their natures, by laying them on
some small portion of Land crude as they are, or by burning them into Lime, if
Fuel be plenty, or to half burn them; by which you may experimentally know the
true effects and benefits that Subject will yield.

And although Chalk simply of it self either burnt or unburnt, may not prove so
advantageous as many have reported, yet is it of very great use to be mixed
with Earth and the Dungs of Animals, by which may be made an admirable, sure,
and natural fruitful Composition for almost any sorts of Lands, and raises
Corn in abaundance.

Liming of Land is of most excellent use, many barren parts of Of Lime.
this Nation being thereby reduced into so fertile a condition for bearing most
sorts of Grain, that upon Land not worth above one or two shillings an Acre
well husbanded with Lime has been raised as good Wheat, Barley, white and gray
Pease as England yields. English Improver.

Also that by the same means from a Ling, Heath, or Common naturally barren and
little worth, has been raised most gallant Corn, worth five or six pound an
Acre. By the same Author.

He also affirms that some men have had and received so much profit upon their
Lands by once liming, as has paid the purchase of their Lands, and that
himself had great advance thereby, yet lived twenty miles from Lime, and
fetched the same by Wagon so far to lay it on his Lands.

One Author says twelve or fourteen quarters will Lime an Acre; another says
160 Bushels: the difference of the Land may require a different proportion.

The most natural Land for Lime is the light and sandy, the next mixed and
gravelly; wet and cold gravel not good, cold clay the worst of all.

Also a mixture of Lime, Earth, and Dung together, is a very excellent Compost
for Land.

Marle is a very excellent thing, commended of all that either Of Marle.
Differences of Marle.
write or practice any thing in Husbandry. There are several kinds of it, some
stony, some soft, white, gray, russet, yellow, blew, black, and some red: It is
of a cold nature, and saddens Land exceedingly; and very heavy it is, and will
go downwards, though not so much as Lime does. The goodness or badness thereof
is not Signs of good or bad Marle.
known so much by the color, as by the Purity and Uncompoundedness of it; for
if it will break into bits like a Dye, or smooth like Lead-Oar, without any
composition of Sand or Gravel; or if it will slake like Slate-stones, and slake
or shatter after a shower of Rain, or being exposed to the Sun or Air, and
shortly after turn to dust when it is thoroughly dry again, and not congeal like
tough Clay, question not the fruitfulness of it, notwithstanding the difference
of colors, which are no certain signs of the goodness of the Marle. As for
the Slipperiness, Viscousness, Fattiness, or Oyliness thereof, although it be
commonly esteemed a sign of good Marle, yet the best Authors affirm the
contrary, viz. That there is very good Marle which is not so, but lies in the
Mine pure, dry and short, yet nevertheless if you water it you shall find it
slippery. But the best and truest Rule to know the richness and Best way to
know Marle.
profit of your Marle, is to try a Load or two on your Lands in several places,
and in different proportions.

They usually lay the same on small heaps, and disperse it over Use and Benefit
of Marle.
the whole Field, as they do their Dung; and this Marle will keep the Land
whereon it is laid, in some places ten or fifteen, and in some places thirty
years in heart: it is most profitable in dry, light, and barren Lands, such as
is most kind and natural for Rye, as is evident by Mr. Blithes Experiment in
his Chapter of Marle. It also affords not its virtue or strength the first
year, so much as in the subsequent years. It yields a very great Increase and
Advantage on high, sandy, gravelly, or mixed Lands, though never so barren,
strong Clay-ground is unsuitable to it: yet if it can be laid dry, Marle may be
profitable on that also.

It is very necessary in marling Lands to find out the true proportion, how
much on every Acre, that you add not too much, nor too little (in medio
virtus.) It Is better to err by laying on too little than too much, because you
may add more at pleasure, but you cannot take away; the surest way is to try
some small quantities first, and proceed as your Experiments encourage. It has
been also experimentally observed, that you are to lay your Marle in the
beginning of Winter on hard and binding Grounds. And on the contrary, you are
to lay it in the Spring on light, sandy, dry, and gravelly lands, but it is good
to try both; it is held to be best to lay it abroad in the beginning of Winter,
that the Frosts may first make the same moulder into small pieces, and so to
become apt for Solution, which is done by the Rains that more plentifully fall
in the Winter.

You shall observe (says Markham) that if you cannot get any Of Fullers Earth.
perfect and rich Marle, if then you can get of that Earth which is called
Fullers-Earth, and where the one is not, commonly the other is, then you may
use it in the same manner as you should do Marle. and it is found to be very
near as profitable.

Mr. Bernhard Palisly (that French Author cited so often by Sir Hugh Platt)
commends the same; I have not known it at any time practiced in England for the
bettering of any ground (says Sir Hugh Platt) but by all presumption the same
must of necessity be very rich, because it is full of that vegetative Salt,
which appears in these scouring effects, for the which it is diverse ways had in
use amongst us.

Clay is by many commended to be a considerable Improvement Of Clay.
Jewel-house of Art and Nature.
to some sorts of light and sandy Ground, as Sir Hugh Platt gives the relation
of a certain person that assured it to be most true that the very Clay which he
dug up in St. Georges Fields being laid upon his pasture-ground which he
there held by Lease, did exceedingly enrich the same, insomuch as he did never
regard to seek after any other Soil.

Also Mr. Gabriel Platt relates that he knew light sandy ground which was good
for little or nothing, cured by laying thereon a great quantity of stiff
Clay-ground which converted it to good temperament, whereby it became fruitful,
and not subject to fail upon every light occasion as it did before, but would
abide variety of weather according to the nature of Hasel-ground: And this
Improvement (says he) is of no little value, for there is a great difference
betwixt Land that is subject to fail once in two or three years, and Land thus
improved that will not fail once in two or three and twenty years through the
distemperature of the weather.

Mr. Bernhard also affirms that all Marle is a kind of Clay-ground, and it
should seem to differ only in digestion from Marle.

It is good to try it on several grounds both Arable and Pasture, and for
several Grains at several times in the year, and in several proportions, by
this means you may find out the true value and effect of this, and by the same
Method of all other Subterraneal Soil or Manure, and thereby raise unto your
self a considerable advantage.

By the same Rule, and for the same Reason that Clay advances Of Sand.
the benefit of light and Sandy grounds, may Sand be an inrichment and
Improvement to cold Clay-grounds, as Mr. Gabriel Platt testifies that he has
known stiff Clay-grounds that would seldom be fruitful unless the season of the
year proved very prosperous, to have been cured by laying thereupon a great
quantity of light Sandy-ground, which afterward was converted to a good
temperament, like to the sort of ground commonly called Haselground, which
seldom or never fails to be fruitful.

The best Sand for fertility is that which is washed from the hills or other
Sandy places by the violence of Rain; other Sands that are dug, have little
fertility in them, only by way of contracting to Clay-ground they may effect
much, as Columela says, that his Grandfather used to carry Sand on Clay, and
on the contrary to bring Clay on Sandy grounds, and with good success.

Sand also is of great use to be mixed with Soil, as Mr. Blithe advises; for
the speedy raising of great quantities of Soil in the Winter by the sheep when
foulding is generally neglected; and that is by making a large Sheep-house for
the housing of Sheep in Winter, which may be Sheep-cribbed round about and in
the middle too, to fother them therein: you may bring herein once or twice a
week several Loads of Sand either out of the Streets or ways, or from a
Sand-pit, and lay it three or four inches thick, and so continue once or twice
a week as long as you please; and what with the heat and warmth of their
bodies, and the fatness of their Dung and Urine, the Sand will turn to
excellent rich Soil, and go very far upon Land, and be more serviceable than
you can conceive.

There are several sorts of Earth that are of singular use for the Of Earth.
bettering of Land, as all Earth of a Saltish nature is fruitful; especially
all such Earth as lies dry covered with Hovels or Houses, of which you make
Saltpeter, is rich for Land, and so are old floors under any Buildings.

Mr Platt affirms that he has known many hundred loads of Earth sold for
twelve pence a load being dug out of a Meadow near to Hampton Court, which
were carried three or four miles to the higher grounds, and fertilized those
grounds wonderfully, and recompensed the labor and charges very well; which
Earth being laid upon Arable Land within a Furlong of the same Meadow did more
hurt than good: which shows that the Earth must be of different nature from
the Land whereon it is laid.

Also any sort of Earth may be made use of for the folding of Sheep thereon
under a Covert, after the Flanders Manner, as before is said of Sand.

All sorts of Earth are very useful to intermix with Lime, Dung of Beasts,
Fowl, or any other fatty substance being laid, stratum super stratum, in pits
or on heaps to putrify together, as well to moderate the quality as to
increase the quantity of your Soil.

Street-dirt in Towns and Villages is an excellent Improver of several sorts of
Land, especially the light and sandy.

SECT. III. Soyls taken from the Sea or Water.
The richest of all Sands is what comes from the Seacoasts and Of Water-Sand.
the Creeks thereof, and all Lands bordering on the Sea may be improved by
them; it is the usual practice in the Western parts of England for the people
to their great charge in carriage to convey the Saltish Sands unto their barren
grounds, whereof some of them do lie five miles distance from the Sea, and yet
they find the same exceeding profitable, for that their inheritance is thereby
enriched for many years together, the greatest virtue consisting in the
Saltishness thereof.

Others say the Richness of the Sands is from the fat or filth the Sea does
gather in by Land-floods, and what the Tide fetches daily from the shores, and
from fish, and from other matters that putrify in the Sea, all which the Water
casts on shore, and purges forth of it self, and leaves in the Sands, while it
self is clean and pure.

The Sands of fresh Rivers challenge also a place in our Improvements being
laid on Land proper for the same, but more especially if it be mixed with any
other matter, as most usually it is, where it is cast on shelves at the falls
of some Land-waters descending from Hills or Highways.

In Devonshire and Cornwall, and many other parts, they make a Of Sea-weeds, and
Weeds in Rivers.
very great Improvement of the Sea-weeds for the Soiling and Manuring of their
Land, and that to a very great advantage.

All manner of Sea-owse, Owsy-mud, or Sea-weeds, or any suchlike, growing
either in the Sea or fresh Rivers, whereof there is a very great quantity lost
and destroyed, are very good for the bettering of Land.

In Cornwall there is also a Weed called Ore-weed, whereof some grows upon Rocks
under high Water-marks, and some is broken from the bottom of the Sea by rough
weather, and cast upon the next shore by the Wind and Flood, wherewith they
Compost their Barly-Land.

Of Snayl-Cod, or Snag-greet.
It lies frequently in deep Rivers, it is from a Mud or Sludge, it is very
soft, full of Eyes and wrinkles, and little shells, is very rich; some they
sell for one shilling two pence the Load, another sort they sell for two
shillings four pence the Load at the Rivers-side, which men fetch twenty miles
an end for the Enriching of their Land for Corn and Grass, one Load going as
far as three Load of the best Horse or Cow Dung that can be had: It has in it
many Snails and Shells, which is conceived occasioneth the fatness of it.

I am very credibly informed that an Ingenious Gentleman living Of
Oyster-shells.
near the Seaside, laid on his Lands great quantities of Oyster-shells, which
made his Neighbors laugh at him (as usually they do at any thing besides their
own clownish road or custom of ignorance) for the first and second years they
signified little; but afterward they being so long exposed to the weather and
mixed with the moist Earth, they exceedingly enriched his Lands for many years
after: which stands also with reason, the Shells of all such Fish being only
Salt congealed into such a form, which when it is dissolved of necessity must
prove fertile.

There is in most Rivers a very good rich Mud of great fruitfulness, Of Mud.
and unexpected advantage; it costs nothing but labor in getting, it has in
it great worth and virtue, being the Soil of the Pastures and Fields, Commons,
Roads, Ways, Streets, and Backsides, all washed down by the flood, and settling
in such places where it meets with rest.

There is likewise very great fertility in the residence of all Channels,
Ponds, Pools, Lakes, and Ditches, where any store of Waters do repose
themselves, but especially where any store of Rainwater has a long time
settled.

In Foreign parts where Fish are plenty they prove an excellent Of Fish.
Manure for Land; in some places here in England there are plenty of some sorts
of Fish, and at some seasons not capable of being kept for a Market, it were
better to make use of them for our advantage than not; I presume they are of
the best of Soils or Manures, but herein I submit to experience.

Doubtless there is not any thing that proceeds from the Sea or other Waters,
whether it be Fish or the Garbish of Fish, Vegetables, Shells, Sands, or Mud,
or any suchlike dissolving matter, but must be of very great advantage to the
Husbandman, if duly and judiciously applied.

SECT. IV. Of Dungs or Excrementitious Soyls.
This is the most common of any Dung whatsoever, by reason Of Horse dung.
that Horses are most kept in Stables, and their Soil preserved, yielding a
considerable price in most places; the higher the Horses are fed, the better is
the Dung by far: it is the only Dung in use whilst it is new, for hot Beds,
and other uses for the Gardener.

Next unto the Horse-dung is Cow Dung, whereof by reason of Of Cow, or Ox-dung.
its easy solution, has been made the Water wherein Grain has been steeped,
and has deceived many a plain-meaning Husbandman, for there is not that
richness nor virtue therein as many judge, for that purpose.

But this, together with Horse-dung, or other Dung, is of very great advantage
to Land if it be kept till it be old, and not laid abroad exposed to the Sun
and Wind, as is the practice of the several ignorant Husbands, letting of it
lie spread on their Field-Lands three or four of the Summer-months together,
till the Sun and Air has exhausted all the virtue thereof; which if it be laid
on heaps with Earth mixed therewith, and so let lie till it be rotten, it will
be the sooner brought to a convenient temper, and on Pasture-grounds brings a
sweeter Grass, and goes much farther than the common way, and spread before the
Plough produces excellent Corn: It is also to be used with Judgment; for
ordinary Dung used the common way in some years does hurt, and sometimes makes
Weeds and trumpery to grow, which ordered as before, is not so apt for such
inconveniences. Of all Beasts, Sheep Of Sheeps-dung.
yield the best Dung, and therefore is most to be esteemed; it is a very high
Improvement to the common Field-lands, where there is a good Flock duly folded
on them, especially where it is turned in with the Plough soon after the fold:
the only way to Improve your Sheeps-dung to the highest advantage, is to fold
them in a covered fold with intermixture of Earth, Sand, etc. as before, and by
this means we may make our sheep enrich most of our barren Lands.

Sheeps-dung is very excellent being dissolved wholly (as it will be if well
squeezed) to steep Grain therein, for the Grain does very eagerly imbibe the
whole quantity of the Dung into it self, except only here and there a treddle
undissolved, and proves a great Improvement if rightly ordered.

Great quantities of this Dung might be obtained, if poor Women and Children
were employed to pick up the same on the Rode-ways, and burning tops of hills,
where it seldom does any good, but would prove much more advantageous than the
cost or trouble, by far.

This has in former Ages been esteemed the worst of Dungs, Of Swines-dung.
very hurtful to Corn, a breeder of Thistles, and other noisome Weeds.

But our late Husbands (whose experience I rather credit than English Improver.
an old vain Tradition) say it is very rich for Corn or Grass, or any Land; yea,
of such account to many ingenious Husbands, that they prefer it before any
ordinary Manure whatsoever, therefore they make their Hog-yards most complete,
with an high Pale paved well with Pibble or Gravel in the bottom, etc. they
cast into this yard their Cornish Muskings, and all Garbidge, and all Leaves,
Roots, Fruits, and Plants out of Gardens, Courts and Yards, and great store of
Straw, Fearn, or Weeds for the Swine to make Dung withal; some Hog-yards will
yield you forty, some sixty, some eighty Load of excellent Manure of ten or
twelve Swine.

It Is most likely that this Manure so made by these large additions, is more
natural and kindly to Land, than the bare Swines-dung it self; and must of
necessity prove a very high advantage, considering the despicable vile state of
this Beast.

Some good Daries will make the Soil of their Hog-yard produce them twenty or
thirty pounds worth of profit in a year.

Of the Dung of Fowls.
This challenges the Priority not only of the Dung of Fowl, Of Pigeons-dung.
but of all other Creatures whatsoever.

Pigeons or Hens-dung is incomparable, one Load is worth ten Load of other
Dung, and therefore it is usually sown on Wheat (or Barley) that lies afar off,
and not easily to be helped; it is extraordinary likewise on a Hop-garden.

A Load of Pigeons-dung is more worth than twenty shillings in many parts; a
very excellent Soil for a cold moist-natured Land.

I have caused it to be sown by hand after the Grain is sown, and in the same
manner, and then harrowed in with the Grain, and received a very great increase
on poor Land.

I have known (says Platt) a Load of Pigeons-dung fetched sixteen miles, and a
Load of Coals given for it, which in the Soil where it was fetched would have
done more hurt than good for the Manuring of Land, yet where it was carried, it
did as much good for the fertilizing of Land as double the charges: In the one
Soil it cured the barrenness, and in the other it poisoned the fertility.

This Dung is of less esteem, because it is not obtained at so easy Hen-dung.
a rate; and where it is, it is generally little set by, because our
Forefathers did not make any great matter of it, and because they understand
not the strength and power of it; for when they take it out of the houses it is
of a very hot nature, and must needs injure some things, if laid thereon; but
if it be mixed well with common Earth, Sand, or suchlike, and let lie till it
rot well together, you will find it a very rich Manure, and of value to answer
a great part of your Poultreys expense.

I have known a Quince-tree whereon Poultrey always pearched, that by reason of
the Rain washing to its Roots the salt and fatness of the Dung, did bear yearly
an incredible number of very excellent Quinces.

This has been held by the Ancients to be most hurtful and unprofitable Of
Goose-dung. Markham.
to any Grounds. They say that to good Grass they are a great enemy, for their
Dung and treading will putrify it, and make it worse than barren.

I have it from a credible hand, that Goose-dung is very advantageous to Corn,
it being discovered by a flock of Geese daily passing over-thwart a Field of
Wheat, making as it were a Lane over the same in the Wintertime, and had
nibbled the Wheat clean from the Ground, and dunged it where they went; in
which passage the next year proved to be very gallant Wheat, far exceeding any
other part of the Field.

Like unto that I have heard, that a Flock of Wild-geese had pitched upon a
parcel of green Wheat, and had eaten it up clean, and sat thereon, and dung'd
it several nights, that the Owner despaired of having any Crop that year, but
the contrary happened; for he had a far richer Stock of Wheat there than any of
his Neighbors had in the Land adjoining, to the admiration of all.

Which demonstrateth that this Dung is of a very hot and fiery nature, which
occasioneth that barrenness falsely suggested to be in it; and being laid abroad
thin in the Wintertime, proves a very rich Manure, and therefore to be
esteemed of; and being mixed with cooling Earths, and let putrify some time,
may prove very much for your benefit: therefore neglect it not, but make
several trials, the Advantage will be your own. The same may be said of the
Dung of any other Waterfowl.

Although that Urines are esteemed to be of a destructive and Of Urines.
Explicatio Miraculi Mundi, p. 50.
mortifying nature to Vegetables, as Glauber affirms, by reason of its
Salarmoniacal and burning Spirit that is therein, as is evident to our Senses
upon the casting of new Urine on Nettles or other Vegetables, it soon
destroys them: But it is with this, as with many other moist things subject
to putrefaction, time will digest it, and alter the nature and property
thereof, as it does Wine or Beer into Vinegar, so it will of this fiery matter
produce an excellent Soil, as many have had the experience of.

Mr. Hartlib testifies, that in Holland they as carefully preserve the Cows
Urine as the Dung to enrich their Land. Columella in his Book of Husbandry
says, That old Urine is excellent for the Roots of Trees.

I know a woman (says Mr. Hartlib) who lived five miles South of Canterbury,
who saved in a Pail all the Urine; and when the Pail was full, sprinkled it on
her Meadow, which caused the Grass at first to look yellow, but after a little
time it grew wonderfully.

Another also says, That Man's Urine is of great worth, and will English
Improver.
fatten Land more than you are aware of, and it were not ill Husbandry to take
all opportunities to preserve it for Land, and so of all other Urines, after
the Dutch manner.

Humane Ordure ought not here to be omitted as a rich Soil, if the Husbandman
would be so careful as to place his House of Office, that he may once in two or
three days add some mixture of Earth, Straw, Stubble, or suchlike, to reduce
it into a necessary Substance portable into his Lands or Grounds remote from
his Dwelling, where after it has lain some convenient time in a heap to
putrify together, and then thinly dispersed, proves an unexpected Advantage.

SECT. V. Of several other Soyls or Manures.
Ashes contain in them very much of a rich and fertile Salt, as Ashes.
before we noted, and therefore not so much to be slighted and neglected as
they are, be they of what kind or nature soever.

Virgil. -- Ne pudet,
Effoetos Cinerem immundum jactare per agros.
The Wood-ashes are the best, and very useful; yet after they have been used in
the Bucking of Clothes, they are worth little, unless it be in cold and moist
Land, where I have known them also to avail much.

Sea-coal ashes with Horse-dung make an excellent Compost for diverse uses.

Turf and Peat-ashes must needs be very rich, being much after the same manner
as the Burning of Land, which most know to be a very great Improvement, and
whereof we have already treated.

Ashes are a great Curer of Moss and Rushes in most Grounds.

The Ashes of any sort of Vegetables are very profitable, as diverse places in
England can testify by experience, who consume their Fearn, Stubble, Straw,
Heath, Furs, Sedge, Bean-stalks, and the very Sward and Swarth of their Ground
to ashes; and these according to the store of Salt which their Ashes do
contain, do either for a longer or shorter time enrich their barren Grounds.

Mr. Platt highly commends Soap-ashes, after the Soap-boylers have made what
use of them they please, to be a very great enriching to Land; and gives you an
instance of a Stalk and Ear of Barley of an Ell and three Inches in length,
that grew on barren Land, enriched with Soap-ashes; he also says he found the
like success in Pasture-ground.

In Lombardy they esteem them much above other Dung.

It Is best to lay them either on Corn, or Pasture, or Meadow in the beginning
of Winter, that the showers may the easier dissolve them.

Soot also is affirmed by some to be very good, especially that Soot.
which is made of Wood. It Is most beneficial to Trees or Plants that either
grow in the shade, or to cold and moist Grounds.

Common Salt may prove advantageous, if used with moderation Salt.
and discretion, as well to saltish Sands, Muds, Earths, etc. Some commend very
much the sweeping of a Ship of Salt, or drossie Salt and Brine.

It is of singular use, as daily experience testifies, being dissolved and
Seed-corn steeped therein, to prevent the Smut, and add fertility, as we noted
before in the Preparation of the Seed.

There is also a relation of one that sowed a Bushel of Salt long before on a
small patch of barren Ground at Clapham, which to that day remained more fresh
and green, and full of Swarth, than all the rest of the Field about it: This,
though not a beneficial Experiment, by reason of the price of Salt, yet a plain
demonstration of the Fertility that is in Salts, and gives us encouragement to
make use of the Brines of Salt Pits, or suchlike, now not in much esteem.

In Rags of all sorts there is good virtue; they are carried far Rogs.
and laid upon Lands, and have them in a warming, improving temper: one good
Load will go as far as a dozen or more of the best Cow Dung.

Diverse also have found singular profit in the Hair that is gotten Hair, etc.
from the Hides of Beasts, being thinly laid upon the Ground, and suffered to
putrify.

Also course Wool-nippings and Tarry Pitch-marks, may be reckoned into the
number, having great virtue in them.

Mault-dust is commended as an Inricher of barren Lands; but Mault-dust.
because great quantities are not to be had thereof, it is best to be used in
Gardens, where you will find it to be of singular use: only it is apt to breed
Weeds.

All sorts of Fearn, Straw, Brake, Stubble, Rushes, Thistles, Fearn, Straw,
Stubble, etc.
Leaves of Trees, or any manner of Vegetable Trash whatever, either cast into
the yards amongst the Cattle or Swine, or cast into Pools or places to rot in,
or mixed with other Soils, help very much, and make very good Compost.

All Marrow-bones, Fish-bones, Horn or shavings of Horn, or Bones, horns,
stinking flesh, etc.
Liquors wherein Flesh or Fish have lain, or any other thing whatsoever that
has any oyliness or fatness in it, is useful in Husbanding Lands.

It were not much labor to try whether the bones of Horses or other Beasts,
whereof there are great quantities at some Dogkennels, which if being burnt in
heaps with some small addition of Fuel would be of good effect to be laid on
Lands.

There is in all Bark a very rich Salt, but in the Oaken-bark the Bark of Trees.
most, which is made use of principally by Tanners; but such Barks or Rinds of
Trees not of so high a value, being broken into small pieces must of necessity
enrich either Corn or Pasture-ground being Earth in Willow-trees.
laid thereon: It must needs be much richer than the Mould or Earth usually
found in the bodies of old, large, and hollow Willow-trees, that are putrified
within, which is esteemed to be so rich and effectual.

Amongst the Coal-Mines they usually dig a kind of blew or black Clay that lies
near the Coal, and is as it were an unripe Coal, which the Countrymen commonly
call Vrry, which they Urry.
lay on their Pastures with wonderful success, and is very proper for warm
Lands.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Benefit, Raising, Planting, and Propagating of all sorts of
Timber Trees, and other Trees useful either in Building or other Mechanic
Uses, or for Fencing, Fuel, etc.

SECT. I. Of the Benefit of Propagating Timber Trees, and other Trees in
general.
THe Propagation of Woods or Trees is none of the least Improvements that can
be made on most of the Lands in England, for the particular advantage and
pleasure of the Countryman, and in raising the yearly profits of his Farm, and
very much advancing the price of the purchase thereof over and above the Annual
gain: and nothing can render a Seat more delectable and pleasant than Wood and
Water, but principally the curious Groves surrounding or bordering near it.

What can be more profitable than Woods or Trees? which will thrive and
increase on the most barren and unfruitful Land, be it either wet or dry, cold,
mountanous, uneven, remote, or never so inapt for any other manner of Culture,
where neither Corn, Grass, or any other necessary or useful Vegetable will
hardly grow, yet may we there perceive the lofty Woods flourish, far exceeding
in value the purchase of the Land without them; and instead of injuring the
Land whereon they stand, it is much bettered and capacitated to bear tillage at
the removal of the Trees; also the other bordering grounds yield a greater
increase of Corn or Grass, by their defense from the extremity of the cold, and
bitter blasts in the Winter, and the scorching drought of the Summer.

And what can be more pleasant than to have the bounds and limits of your own
Propriety preserved, and continued from age to age by the Testimony of such
living and growing witnesses, in the Spring yielding a reviving Cordial to your
Winter-chilled spirit, giving you an assurance of the approaching Summer by
their pregnant Buds, and Musical Inhabitants? In the Summer what more
delectable than the curious prospect of the variety of Greenness, dark shades,
and retirement from the scorching Sunbeams? The Autumn and Winter also not
without pleasure and content for the active Husbandman.

And what place can be more displeasing and ungrateful than a naked and dry
Seat, lying open to all Winds and Weathers? of which it may be said as once of
old Sarum:

Est ibi defectus Lymphae, sed copia Cretae;
Saevit ibi Ventus, sed Philomela silet.
As for the more particular advantages and benefits of planting Particular
Advantages.
Woods and Trees, you shall find that,

First, It improves and meliorates the Land it self; for those Lands where
Woods have formerly stood, and are now grubbed up or taken away, the ground is
very good and rich, and bears excellent Corn, or any other Tillage or Grass,
although the ground was before the planting or growing of those Woods barren,
lean, and thin, as may appear by the bordering Land on either side of such
Woods that were never planted.

Secondly, The Annual profits of most Land planted with Coppice-woods are much
greater than if the same Land were used for Corn, Grass, or suchlike: For I
have known on a hill, Land not worth for Corn or Grass above five shillings per
Acre, that at twelve years growth the Coppice-wood thereon growing has been
sold at the rate of twenty pounds per Acre; and at the next felling at seven
years growth it is like to be of the same value, it coming much thicker, and
being better preserved than at the first, which is a very considerable advance
of the value or profits; besides, it is not subject to those casualties and
hazards that Corn, Cattle, etc. are subject unto: It will also bring in an
Annual profit if you divide your Coppice into so many parts as you intend it
shall stand years before it be felled, then may you every year fell a part: as
if you have ten Acres, you may every year fell one Acre at ten years growth.

The better and lighter your Land is, the greater will your increase be, which
may in some sort (if the Land be very good) make good the Improvement: Mr.
Blyth instances in his Improver Improved, of a new Plantation that at eleven
years growth a fall was made, and so much Wood cut upon the same as was worth
or sold for sixty pounds per Acre or more; it was much Pole-wood, yea a good
part of it made Spars, and some part of it small Building Timber, etc. the Land
was worth about ten shillings per Acre, dug and planted with Quicksets.

The same Author also gives very great encouragement for the planting of
Poplar, Willow, and Alder, on wet, morish, or boggy Land, to the advancement of
Land not worth two shillings an Acre, unto five pounds an Acre at seven years
growth, which is the least I am confident, if it be carefully ordered.

Thirdly, The Benefit and Advantage is very great that is raised from Timber
and other Trees standing singly, and in Hedge-rows, Avenues, or any other way
disposed or ordered about your Houses, Lands, Commons, etc. that a man may
plant, and in a few years himself or his successors may reap the benefit.

Mr. Blithe gives you an instance of one that planted one hundred Ashes, and at
the end of fifty years sold them for five hundred pounds: And of another that
planted so much Wood in his own life, that he would not take 50000 l. for.

For Ash, Elm, Poplar, Willow, and such Trees that are quick of growth, it is a
very great profit that is made of them where Fuel is scarce, by planting them
in Hedge-rows, and other spare places, and shrouding them at five, six, eight
or ten years growth: they constantly bear a good head, and every time whilst
the Tree is in proof, the shrowds increase. They are out of the danger of the
bite of Cattle, and require no Fence.

Fourthly, Another main Benefit accrews to the industrious Husbandman from the
Propagation of Trees in Hedge-rows, and Out-bounds of his Lands, it gives a
check to the fierce cold Winter-blasts which nip the Winter-Corn, and finely
refrigerates the Air in the Summer-parching Heats, and qualifies the dry and
injurious Winds both in Spring and Summer. Let the Champion-Farmers object what
they please, there is no Field Champion-Land of that yearly value for either
Corn or Pasture, as is the Woodland: I know no other reason for it than the
natural warmth and defense thereof by the Fences and Trees, else why should an
Enclosed and well-planted piece of Several yield so much more certain Rent than
the Land of the like nature in Common and Open, lying but on the other side of
the Hedge obvious to the injurious Airs, although both converted to the same
use?

Fifthly, Trees planted sparsim here and there in the Hedgerows, and other
places of your Land, prove an excellent shelter for Cattle in the Winter, to
preserve them from cold Storms and Winds, and also in the Summer from the
scorching Sunbeams, else would the Cattle destroy more with their Feet than
they eat with their mouths, and lose more fatness in one hot day than they gain
in three cool days.

These universal Advantages also accrue to those Places or More universal
Advantatages.
Countries well planted with Woods and Timber.

First, There is a constant supply of Timber for the Building of Ships, the
Bulwarks and Defense of this Nation, and for the reedifying of Towns or Houses
destroyed by Fire, or other Casualties; and for the Building, Maintaining of,
and Repairing of all Houses, Barns, and other Edifices. And also it yields us
a continual Recruit of necessary Boots, Instruments and Materials for all our
Rural and Mechanic uses; as for our Mills, Carts, Ploughs, etc. and for
Turners, Joyners, and other Wooden Trades; also for the maintenance of the
Grooves or Pits of Lead, Coal, and other Mines under the Earth, that where
plenty of Woods and Trees are, they need not be enforced to fetch these
Materials afar off, at a great expense and labor. In some places they fetch
most of the Necessaries aforesaid near twenty miles on Horsback, when the Land
at the same place where they need it, as is capable of bearing it as the place
from whence they bring it.

Secondly, Where Woods are raised and maintained, there is a constant Supply of
Fuel. The difference may be very easily discerned between the Woodlands and
the Champion; in the one you have Fuel in every house, as well poor as rich,
of good Wood; in the other, the Rich have but little, and that at extraordinary
Rates, and the poor none but what they filch and steal from the Rich; or if
their honesty exceed their necessity, they either sit and starve with cold, or
burn Stubble of Corn or Cow Dung dried, or the Parings of the Earth, or
suchlike, that the other make use of for the Improvement and Manuring their
Land.

Thirdly, The Tanners Trade depends upon the Oaken-Trees, therefore where they
are scarce, there must of necessity be a defect of that Occupation, which must
in fine prove prejudicial to the whole Nation.

Fourthly, Where Beech, Oak, Hasel, and suchlike Mast-bearing Trees are in any
considerable quantity standing, they yield a very good Food for Swine, of no
small value to the Husbandman in such years they take.

I shall therefore give you a brief Catalogue of such Trees as usually flourish
in our English Soil; the places they most delight in, the most natural and
likely way of Propagation, and their uses, and what other Observations we have
met withal concern-them. And first,

SECT. II. Of Timber Trees in particular.
There is no Timber natural to our English Soil exceeds the The Oak.
Oak, for its Plenty, Strength, and Durableness; Where are better or stronger
Ships for the War, than those built of Oak? And what Timber more lasting or
stronger than Oak in our Rural Edifices? It is a Tree universally known, and
will grow and prosper in any Land, good or bad, Clay, Gravel, Sand, or mixed;
warm, cold, dry or moist, as experimentally appears by its growth in several
Place:
places of contrary natures or tempers; but they do most affect the sound,
black, deep, and fast Mould, rather warm than overwet and cold, and a little
rising, for this produces the firmest Timber; although I have known them thrive
very well in extraordinary cold, moist, and clay-ground, that a Tun of Timber
could not be thence haled unless in the dry and Summer-season, but that the
Wheels would sink in the Clay to the Axle-tree. They will also grow, though but
slowly, on the high, stony, and barren Hills.

The Acorns, or Oaken-Mast, being sown in your Nursery, after Propagation.
they are full ripe, and before they are withered (which will quickly be if
they lie open in the Air) will the next Spring yield you plenty of young
Plants, which you may order and transplant, as hereafter in the Nursery you
shall have Directions.

Or for expedition-sake, you may have young Sets drawn by those that seek the
Woods for Quick-sets, in such places where Acorns have spontaneously grown, and
been sheltered from Cattle till they are fit for a remove; but these prove
generally crooked and ill-shaped, and so are to be cut near to the ground when
you plant them, by which means they will emit another shoot more straight.

Oaks also prosper very well in Coppices, being felled as other Under-woods
are. It is reported that a Lady in Northamptonshire sowed Acorns, and lived to
cut the Trees produced from them twice in two and twenty years, and both as
well grown as most are in sixteen or eighteen. Also that Acorns set in
Hedge-rows, have in thirty years born a Stem of a Foot Diameter.

The several uses of Oaken Timber for Buildings, and other Mechanic etc.

For Waterworks also it is second to none, especially where it lies obvious to
the Air as well as the Water, there is no Wood like it: For Fuel either as it
is, or made into Cha^coal, there is no Wood equals it.

The Bark also for the Tanner and Dyer, exceeds all other Barks: the very
Saw-dust and ashes also of the Oak challenge a preference, the Mast exceeds any
other Mast of the Forrest-trees, and is of great use to the Husbandman in
fatting Swine; for in the Forests and great Woods many herds of Swine are very
well fatted in such years that the Oak yields plenty of Mast; and that Bacon so
fed (especially if the Swine are kept up with Pease some time after) is the
most delicious meat; for the Hams we have from Westphalia and other parts of
Germany under that name, are of those Swine that feed on this Mast: for their
exercise they of necessity use in searching for these Acorns, as well as the
natural sweetness of the Fruit it self, very much meliorateth the flesh of
these Animals, as it does of Deer, Hares, Conies, Pheasants, Ducks and many
others, the flesh of them that are wild being by much to be preferred to the
tame.

The young Boughs of the lopped Oak in the Springtime are of equal use to the
Tanner, as is the Bark of this Tree, as has been found by the experience of
many Tanners of this Nation within these few years.

The Elm is one of the most easy Trees to propagate, and delighting The Elm.
in most sorts of ground, except only Land very dry, hot and parching, shallow
Land near Chalk or Gravel; on the tops of Hills it thrives not well, yet it
will grow almost in any place.

But the places it principally delights in, is the level, light, and loose
Land, so that it be moist; on the Banks of such level and fertile grounds,
whether they be of Gravel, Earth, or Chalk, the Elm prospers well.

About the beginning of March fall the seeds of the Elm, which Propagation.
being sown in your Nursery, will yield you Plants. But the care and trouble
thereof is superfluous, seeing there are newer and more expeditious and
advantageous ways known, viz. by the Suckers.

Which are produced in great plenty from the roots of the Elm, and may be
transplanted into any places: where the Elms grow, great plenty of these
Suckers will yearly shoot out of the Earth if Cattle be kept from them; or if
any Elm be felled, the old Roots will yield plenty of Suckers; or if the old
Roots be chopped or slit, and slightly covered with light mould, they will send
forth plenty of Suckers, all which may be slipped off, and transplanted even
unto any bigness; there being no Tree more easily transplanted and with good
success than the Elm, observing these Cautions, that if you remove them very
young, that you cut not off the top, because it is sappy, and the wet will be
apt to get in and decay the Plant, being weakened by his removal; but the
greater you must be sure to disbranch, leaving only the stem; some cover also
the head of such Elm so cut off with a mixture of Clay and Horse-dung.

I have been very credibly informed, that a certain Gentleman in the
North-Country having a desire to raise suddenly a Plump or Grove of Trees about
his Mansion House, there being a great scarcity of Wood in that place, obtained
a parcel of Elm-trees, lops and tops, and made Trenches or Ditches in the
Earth, and cut his Elm-branches, etc. into several lengths of six, eight, ten,
or twenty feet in length, as with best conveniencie he could, and buried them
singly in the Trenches so dug, and covered them wholly from the one end to
the other, leaving only a hole open about the middle of the interred branch; or
if it were a long piece, then two open places might be left, out of which
places did spring forth several shoots the first year of a very great length;
the Winter succeeding he took these branches or shoots, all, save only the
fairest, and which was most probable and likely to thrive, and so filled up the
hole about it, by which means they grew to a prodigious height in a few years,
that his habitation was completely adorned with living aspiring products of his
ingenious attempt. Note, that the true time of this Sepulture is when the sap
is full in the Tree, when the Leaves are newly sprung, for then the great
quantity of the sap that is in the whole branch forces it self into those
shoots or Cions that then have found a passage; also for the succeeding years
the whole Tree in the Earth becomes a main principal nourishing Root to the
nimble growing Tree. For it is evident, that if an Elm be felled in the
Springtime when the sap is up, that then the Tree lying on the ground will
spend much of its sap in small shoots in every part of it. Much rather if such
Tree were buried in a good moist Soil, with only one part thereof open to the
Air, from which part you expect a flourishing shoot to proceed. Some have with
good success buried such Elm-branches about the end of January or beginning of
March; but if the Land be not over-dry, the later is better.

If the Elm be felled between November and February, it will always dry; it is
also a timber of great use for its toughness, and therefore used by
Wheel-wrights, Mill-wrights, etc. It is also good to make Dressers, and Planks
to chop on, because it will not break away in chips like other Timber.

The Elm is good Fuel, and makes very good Charcoal; the Branches and Leaves
of this Tree are good food for Cattle; in the Winter where other fodder is
dear, they will eat them before Oats.

The Elm is also a most pleasant Tree to Plant in Avenues or Walks, it growing
so straight and upright, and mounts to the greatest height of any other Tree in
so short a space: It will grow the nearest of any other together, being very
sociable, and affecting to grow in company, and spreads its Branches but little
to the offense of Corn or Pasture-grounds; to both which and the Cattle it
affords a benign Shade, Defense, and agreeable Ornament.

This Tree is also very flexible, and to be reduced into what form or shape you
please for shade and delight; it also springs earlier than most other
Forrest-trees.

This Tree commonly grows to a great stature, delights most in The Beech.
warm Land, it grows plentifully in Gravelly, Stony, and sandy Land: great
Beechen-woods I have seen on the driest barren sandy Lands; they delight on the
sides and tops of high Hills, and chalky Mountains; they will strangely
insinuate their Roots into the bowels of those seemingly impenetrable places.

This Tree is altogether a stranger to most Counties in England. And it is
probable that there might be none here when the Great Caesar denied that he
found any. For many of those great Woods of Beeches may have sprung up after
the felling of Oak; as it has been observed of late years, that where Oak has
been felled the Beech has succeeded, and that not only here and there a Tree,
but in many Acres, and also where no Beech has been near unto the place.
Sponte sua veniunt. Some places naturally produce them.

If the Species of Trees may be wholly extinct, as is reported of the Chestnut,
at least from a spontaneous growth; why may not as well a new Species naturally
succeed? As the Elm, which is reported to be no ancient product of our English
Soil.

This is raised from the Mast as the Oak, and from young Plants Propagation.
drawn by the Quickset-gatherers, and planted as the Oak; it grows but slow
whilst it is young, but when the Beech is gotten a little out of the way, no
Tree thrives better, nor sooner attains to a large bulk than this Tree; and
although it be crooked, knotty, and ill-shapen whilst it is young, yet will it
overcome all those, and prove a straight and complete Tree.

Its use is principally for the Turner, Joyner, Upholsterer, and Mast feeds
Swine, Deer, Pheasants, etc. The Wood of this Tree will be cut by an Instrument
made for that purpose, into thin and broad Leaves, wherewith they make
Band-boxes, Hat-cases, etc. being covered with Paper; this they now do in
London, though formerly sent into other Countries for that purpose.

That it is a Tree of great use in Mechanics, witness the vast quantities that
are in Hampshire and some adjacent places, converted into Turners-ware, and
weekly sent to London. Many of the Instruments used aboard-ship are made of
this Timber.

This Tree planted in Avenues or Walks yield a most delectable and agreeable
shadow all the Summer, few or none exceeding it for color and shade.

The Leaves also gathered about the Fall, and somewhat before they are much
frost-bitten, afford the best and easiest Mattresses in the world to lay under
our Quilts instead of Straw, and continue sweet for seven or eight years.

The Ash is a gallant quick-thriving Wood, it delights in the The Ash.
best Land, and will prove well in almost any sort of Land whatsoever, and will
also grow in the hard, barren, mountanous Land, but not so well for Timber, as
in Coppice-woods. Pollards shrouded or lopped, refuse no place. The best Ash
grows in the best Land: yet is it not convenient to plant them near
Ploughlands, for the Roots hinder the Coulter, and exhaust the fertility of the
Soil; the dripping also is injurious to Corn.

There is no Tree delights more, nor is more beneficial in the Chalk or White
Land than the Ash; for on those white Hills in Wiltshire, Hampshire, etc. that
Tree thrives exceeding well, and being sown in the Keys there, would in time
prove a very considerable advantage as well to the private as public.

It is propagated from the Seed or Keys, which being gathered Propagation.
in October or after, when they begin to fall, and sown in your Nursery, the
next Spring come twelvemonth they will appear, and will afterward thrive and
prosper very well: they are to be removed whilst they are small, because of
their speedy deep rooting. Take not off the tops of the small young Ash,
because it is a sappy plant; but of the greater Sets it is best to cut them near
the ground, and then will they send forth new shoots, which will soon supply
the defect of the other; which may also be done in all young Ash after they are
well settled, and it will cause to shoot large and thriving shoots: I have seen
the experience of it in such plants that stood several years, and every year
decayed till cut off at the roots, and then they did wonderfully thrive.

You may also have Plants drawn by those that draw Quicksets, etc.

When you intend to raise this Tree on hills or in open grounds, the best way
is to sow the Seeds in the place before or after the Plough; if in Copses
where the Plough cannot pass, then to prick them in amongst the Rides of Hasel
or other stuff, which will defend this Plant from the bite of Cattle; so that
amongst the infinite numbers that thus you may cause to be interred, in a few
years you may observe many fair Trees to steal up amongst the Underwood, which
you may preserve.

The use of the Ash is almost universal, good for Building or etc. For
Garden-uses also no Wood exceeds it, as for Ladders, Hop-poles,
Palisade-hedges, and all manner of Utensils for the Gardener or Husbandman. It
serves also at Sea for Oars, Handspikes, etc. and is preferred before any other.

There is not any Wood so sweet for Cattle to brouse on as this: Rangers and
Keepers of Parks in hard Winters have the experience of it, by brousing their
Deer on it, and prefer it before any other. Every Countryman also has the
experience of it, by feeding of Cattle on the fallen Hedges, where the
Ashenboughs are first chewed even to admiration before any other by the
tender-mouth'd Heifer.

For Firing there is no Wood comparable to it, for a light sweet burning; it
will also burn better newly cut than any other Wood.

The only season for setting the Ash for use, is from November till the end of
January; for if the sap be never so little in the Tree, the Worm takes it, and
spoils the Wood in a short time.

There is no Timber of so speedy a growth as the Ash, that it is related that
an Ash at forty years growth from the Key, has been sold for thirty pounds.
Mr. Blithe also inserts a President of a Nursery of young Ash that were casually
sown by the Wind, that speedily returned to the owner a very great advantage.

Because this Tree is more generally planted for the sake of the Of the
Walnut-tree.
Fruit than the Timber, we shall refer it to the Chapter of Fruit Trees; only
let you know, that the Timber of the Walnut-tree is of so great use and
benefit, that it is encouragement sufficient for the propagation thereof; the
fruit then added makes the encouragement the greater.

This Timber is of universal use (unless for outward Edifices) none better for
the Joyner, Upholsterer, Gunsmith, Cabinet-maker, and other Occupations; of a
more curious brown color than the Beech or other Woods, and not so obnoxious
to the Worm.

They delight in a light ground or moist gravel, and will grow Of the
Chesnut-tree.
in Clay, Sand, and all mixed Soils, upon exposed and bleak places, as more
patient of cold than heat.

They are raised from the Nuts, thus: First, spread them to Propagation.
sweat, then cover them in Sand; a month being past plunge them in Water, and
reject those that swim; being dried, for thirty days more Sand them again, and
plunge them as before; keep them in Sand till the beginning of the Spring, and
set them in your Nursery, but they thrive best unremoved; you may also set them
in Winter or Autumn in or without their husks, and sow them with other Mast
for the raising of Coppices.

The Chesnut-tree growing in Coppices yields incomparable ten or twelve years
time grow to a kind of Timber, and bear plentiful Fruit. The Timber whereof is
(next the Oak) one of the most-sought after by the Carpenter and Joyner, and is
of very long lasting, as appears by many Ancient Houses and Barns built thereof
about Gravesend in Kent.

Being planted in Hedge-rows, or for Avenues to our Country-houses, they are a
magnificent and royal Ornament; and although our Englishmen delight not so much
in the Fruit of the Chesnut-tree as other Nations, yet will they yield no small
advantage to supply our other occasions.

This Tree delights in reasonable good ground, rather inclining The
Service-tree.
to cold than over-hot, for in places that are too dry they never bear kindly.

They are raised from the Berries, which being ripe may be Propagation.
sown as other Mast: these will come soon to be Trees, and being planted young
thrive exceedingly; the best and speediest way is to increase them from Suckers
or Sets.

The Timber is useful for the Joyner, and being of a very delicate

The shade is beautiful for Walks, and the Fruit not unpleasant.

SECT. III. Of several other Trees not so generally made use of for Timber, as
for Fuel, Coppice-woods, Hedgerows, etc.
The Birch will grow on any Land, and cannot well be too barren; The Birch.
it will thrive on the hot burning Sand, in the cold wet Clay, Marshes, Bogs,
and Stony places, no place comes amiss to it.

The Birch is altogether produced of Suckers, which being Propagation.
planted at four or five feet interval, will suddenly rise to Trees; after the
first year you may cut them within an inch of the ground, and they will shoot
out very strongly.

It is useful for the Turner, and for some Rustic Utensils: It

This tree yields the best Sap of any Tree in England, and the most in
quantity, prepared either with Honey or Sugar into a Wine; which being now
frequently made, has obtained the name of Birch-wine, being a very pleasant
and innocent Liquor, and retains a very fine flavor of the Tree it came from.

Where this Tree plentifully grows, great quantities of this Liquor may be
extracted, by cutting off some small branches, and hanging of Bottles, with the
ends of the Branches in the mouths of the Bottles, into which the Chrystalline
Liquor will distill: several Bottles may thus hang on one Tree; or by boring or
cutting any part of the stem of the Tree, and by a Chip or the like, to guide
the Sap into the neck of the Bottle: By either of which ways great quantities
of this Liquor may be extracted in the month of February or beginning of March
when the Sap ascends, and before the Spring of the Leaf; it will run freely
when the Wind is South or West, or the Sun shine warm, but not so if the
weather be very cold, or in the nightime. Some have reported that a
Birch-tree will yield in 12 or 14 days its own weight in this Liquor; I shall
not persuade any man to believe it, although it be most evident that a few
Trees will yield you a great quantity of it.

This Liquor thus extracted and duly prepared, makes a very delicate repast.

The Maple affects a sound and dry Mould, growing both in The Maple.
Woods and Hedge-rows.

It is propagated of the Keys, as the Ash. Propagation.


The Timber is excellent for the Turner and Joyner, for its whiteness, its
lightness, and fine diapred knots, etc.

This Tree chiefly desires to grow in cold hills, and in the barren, The
Horn-beam.
and most exposed parts of Woods.

The most expeditious way of raising it, is by Sets of about an Propagation.
inch Diameter, and cut within half a foot of the Earth; it may also be raised
of the Seeds sown in October, which are ripe in August.

It is a very hard Wood for the Mill-wright, for Domestique, or

Being planted at half a yard interval in a single row, it makes a stately
Hedge or Walk in a Garden or Park, growing tall and speedy, leaved to the very
foot of the stem.

It delights in Mountains and Woods, and to fix it self in good The Quick-beam.
light ground.

The Sets may be planted as the Ash, or the Berries ripe in October Propagation
and use.
may be sown; It is a quick-growing Coppice-wood, is good for some ordinary
uses, and for Fuel.

This Tree above all affects cold, barren, dry and sandy grounds, The Hasel.
also Mountains and Rocky Soils produce them; but more prosperously in the
fresher bottoms and sides of hills, and in Hedge-rows.

They are best raised from the Nut, preserved moist, not moldy, Propagation.
by laying them in their own dry leaves or in sand, and sown about the latter
end of February: They are also propagated of Sets and Suckers, the young wands
by no means to be cut the first year, but the Spring following, within three or
four inches of the ground; greater Sets may be cut within six inches of the
Earth the first year.

The use of Hasel-Poles and Rods is generally known to the

It is the only Plant for the Virgula Divina, for the Discovery of Mines.

It is a good Ornament for Walks, and yields a pleasant Fruit, but why should
we bring this so near us, when we have a much more excellent Plant at as easy
a rate? viz. the Filbert.

SECT. IV. Of Aquaticks, or Trees affecting Moist and Watery places.
The white Poplar delights in moist grounds, and near the Margins The Poplar.
of Rivers, but not in the Water as the Willow does.

They are usually increased by the streght branches or pitchers Propagation.
set in the ground, but by no means cut off the top until they have stood two
or three years, and then head them at eight, ten, or fifteen foot high or more,
and they will yield in a few years a very considerable shroud, which shrowds or
branches may also be transplanted; you may also let them grow upright without
topping them, they are then more Ornamental, but not so beneficial.

Its White Wood is of singular use for the Turner, and also for

This Tree little differs from the Poplar, only it will grow not The Aspen.
only in moist but in dry grounds, in Coppices, etc. is propagated by Suckers,
but cut not off the tops of the young Cions the first year: its use the same
with the Poplar.

The Abele-tree is a finer kind of white Poplar, and is best The Abele.
propagated of slips from the roots; they will likewise grow of layers and
cuttings.

In three years they will come to an incredible altitude; in twelve years be as
big as your middle; and in eighteen or twenty arrive to full perfection.

This Plant of all other is the most faithful lover of Watery and The Alder.
boggy places.

They are propagated of Truncheons, and will come of Seeds; Propagation.
but best of roots being set as big as the small of ones leg, and in length
about two foot; if you plant smaller Sets, cut them not till they have stood
several years. They are a very great Improvement to moist and boggy Land.

The greater Alders are good for uses under the Water, where

The Withy is a large Tree, and fit to be planted on high banks, The Withy.
because they extend their Roots deeper than either Sallies or Willows.

Sallies grow much faster if they are planted within the reach of The Sally.
the Water, or in a very moorish ground, and are an extraordinary Improvement.

They are smaller than the Sallies, and shorter lived, and require Osiers.
constant moisture.

The Common Willow delights in Meads, and Ditch-sides, not Willow.
over-wet.

They may all be planted by Pitchers, as the Poplar: those Sets or Pitchers are
to be preferred that grow nearest to the stock, they should be planted in the
first fair weather in February, and so till they bud: the Osiers may also be
planted of slips of two or three years growth, a foot deep, and half a yard in
length, in Moorish ground, etc. The Willow may be planted of stakes as big as
ones leg, and five or six foot long.

These Aquatick Trees yield a clean white Wood, fit for many etc. for the
Gardiners use: the Osier is of great use to the Basket-maker, Gardener,
Fisherman, etc. They are all good Fuel, and make good Charcoal, they are a
very great Improvement to Moorish and wet Lands; an Acre at eleven or twelve
years growth may yield you near an hundred load of Wood: no Tree more
profitable than some of these Aquaticks (according to the nature of the place)
to be planted upon the edges of Rivers, and on Banks, Bounds, or Borders of
Meads or wet Lands; they yield a considerable head, and ready for shrowding in
a few years. Mr. Evelin relates that a Gentleman lopped no less than two
thousand yearly, all of his own planting.

SECT. V. Of other Trees usually planted for Ornament, or adorning Gardens,
Avenues, Parks, and other places adjoining to your Mansion House, and
convertible also to several uses.
This Tree is a kind of Maple, and delights in a good light Garden-mould, The
Sycamore.
and will also thrive in any indifferent Land, but rather in moist than dry.
It Is propagated of the Keys, which being Its propagation and use.
sown when they are ripe, and falling from the Trees, come up plentifully the
next Spring, and is a Tree of speedy growth. Sets also cut from the Tree will
grow set in moist ground, or watered well in the Summer; they afford a curious
dark and pleasant shadow, yield a good Fuel, and the Timber fit for several
Mechanic uses.

The Lime-tree delights in a good rich Garden-Soil, and thrives The Lime-tree.
Propagation.
not in a dry hungry cold Land. It is raised from Suckers as the Elm, or from
Seeds, or Berries, which in the Autumn drop from the Trees.

We have a sort of Tilia that grows wild here in England, which almost equals
those brought out of Holland, where there are Nurseries to raise them straight
and comely.

This Tree is of all other the most proper and beautiful for Body, smooth and
even Bark, ample Leaf, sweet Blossom, and a goodly shade at the distance of
Sylva.
eighteen or twenty foot, their heads topped at about six or eight foot high:
but if they are suffered to mount without check, they become a very straight
and tall Tree in a little time, especially if they grow near together, they
afford a very pleasant dark shade, and perfume the Air in the months of June
and July with their fragrant blossom, and entertain a mellifluous Army of Bees,
from the top of the morning, till the cool and dark evening compels their
return. No Tree more uniform both in its height and spreading breadth.

I have known excellent Ladders made of Lime-tree-Poles of a very great length;
the Wood may also serve for several Mechanic uses, like unto the other soft
and Aquatick Woods.

This most excellent Tree delights in a rich Garden-mould, or The Horse
Chesnut-tree.
other light mould not too dry, and is easily propagated by Layers: It Is a
quick-growing Tree, most pleasant to the eye at the Spring, Its propagation and
use.
when its clammy Turpentine buds break forth into curious divided hanging
Leaves; it bears a cluster of beautiful Flowers, and prospers well in our cold
Country, and therefore worthy to be taken into our most pleasant Gardens,
Avenues, Parks, and other places of delight and pleasure.

They delight in cold, high, and rocky Mountains, where they The Fir, Pine,
Pinaster, and Pitch-tree.
naturally grow in great abundance, yet will they grow in better and warmer,
but not in over-rich and pinguid; if you plant them you must be careful at
first to preserve them moist; therefore Land over-hot, Sandy, or Gravelly, is
not so good.

They are all raised of the Kernels taken out of the Clogs, which Propagation.
being laid in Water some days, and then exposed to some gentle warmth of the
fire, will open, that you get the Seeds out with much facility, which may be
sown in your Nursery, or rather where you intend they should grow, especially
the Pine, which will hardly bear a remove unless very young; the Firs will very
easily, and may also be propagared of slips, as I have been credibly informed.

The Fir grows tall, straight, and neatly tapering, therefore more etc. but the
Pinaster bears the proudest and stateliest branches, with a fairer and more
beautiful Leaf: these two excel the rest for any Ornamental use, and are sooner
mounted, growing in a few years to a very great height. Mr. Evelin gives you
the relation of one that shot no less than sixty foot in height in little more
than twenty years: I have seen Presidents of the like nature. For the first
half dozen years they make no considerable advance, but afterward they come
away miraculously.

The use of this Timber is so well known to our Ship-wrights, Carpenters, and
other Mechanics inhabiting near the Maritime Coasts, that nothing here need be
said.

Out of these Trees are made Turpentine, Rosin, Tar, and Pitch.

These Trees are not much in use, yet deserve to be propagated The Larch,
Platanus, and Lotus.
for their rarity, excellent shade, and durable Timber.

This curious Tree delights in a warm and dry Land, not so The Cypress.
much desiring a rich as a warm place.

It is propagated from the seed sown in March, and easily abides Propagation
and use.
transplantation.

It is one of the most Ornamental Plants nature affords, and may either stand
single, Pyramid-like, or set in Hedges, and clipped to any form you please: we
have so little of its Timber here, that we only refer you to the joyner and
Cabinet-maker for its use.

This Tree grows in all extremes; in the moist Barbado's, the hot Cedar.
Bermudas, the cold New England, in the Bogs of America, in the Mountains of
Asia.

It is propagated of the Seeds; is a beautiful Tree: its Timber incomparable,
and almost perpetual.

The Alaternus thrives very well in England, as if it were natural; The
Alaternus.
is raised from Seeds, is swift of growth, and one of the most beautiful and
useful of Hedges and Verdure in the world, and yields an early honey-breathing
Blossom.

This Tree delights in a warm fertile Soil, and is propagated of The Phillyrea.
the Berries or Seeds sown in the Spring, and also of the slips set like the
slips of Box.

It is a most beautiful Plant, and one of the quickest growth of any, for the
raising of Espalier Hedges, and covering of Arbors, being always of
incomparable Verdure.

This Tree greatly loves the shade, yet thrives well in our hottest The
Bay Tree.
Gravel.

They are raised of their Suckers, and their Seeds gathered when they are
through ripe, in the midst of Winter, and sown in March.

The beauty and use of this Tree is commonly known.

This Tree preserves its Verdure best in the shade, but grows any The Laurel.
where, is propagated like the Bay, and is one of the most proper and
Ornamental Trees for Walks and Avenues, of any growing.

It grows generally in the barrennest grounds, and coldest of our The Eugh-tree.
Mountains, is easily produced of the Seeds, washed and cleansed from their
Mucilage, and buried in the ground like Haws: it will be the second year ere
they peep, and then they rise with their caps on their heads; at three years
old you may transplant them: they are also propagated by Plants or Suckers, but
they are difficult of growth.

The Timber is a very hard wood, and very useful to most Mechanics that work
in Wood; they are also a beautiful Ornament, and a sure defense against
impetuous Winds, and nipping Cold.

Privet is a Plant that has been in great request for adorning Privet.
Walks and Arbors, till of late other new and more acceptable Plants by degrees
begin to extirpate it out of the most modish Plantations, nevertheless it may
yet claim a corner in ours.

SECT. VI. Of Shrubs and other Trees less useful, yet planted for Ornament and
Delight.
This Tree requires a Winter-shelter, is raised usually by slips Myrtle.
and layers, but may be raised of Seeds; it is a very sweet and pleasant Plant.

The Box is a Plant that has been much more in use than now Box.
it is in the Garden, from whence most banish it by reason of its injurious
scent, it deserves to be planted in the more remote parts; it will grow in any
indifferent Land, and is increased by slips; the Tree is a very curious
Ornament, and may be reduced to diversity of shapes and forms, and yields a
most excellent Wood, than which none is more desired by our Mechanics.

This Tree is highly commended by Mr. Evelin in his Sylva, for Juniper.
a Tree that may be formed into most beautiful and useful Hedges, and that one
only Tree covered an Arbor capable for three to sit in, seven foot square, and
eleven in height, yet continually kept shorn, having been planted there hardly
ten years. They are raised of their Berries, which come up in two months.

This Tree grows tall and great, is increased by Suckers and Tamarisk.
Layers, and is usually planted by those who respect variety and pleasure: the
Wood also is medicinal.

Is usually propagated for its pleasant green leaf, though the Arbor Vitae.
cold Winter makes it dark and brown; it is usually planted by slips and layers.

There are several Trees that are planted on the edges of Walks, Some
flower-trees and other trees of delight.
and in spare places in Rural Gardens and Orchards, only for their Ornamental
habits they usually wear in the Spring and Summer, as Arbor Judae, Laburnum,
the Sena-tree, Spanish-broom, the Bladder-nut, the Gelder-rose, the Pipe-tree,
Paliurus, Jesamies, Wood-binds, Virgins-bower, the Stawberry-tree, Mezereon,
Laurus-tinus, double-flowred Pomegranats, Apples, Pears, Cherries, Peaches,
etc. Roses of all sorts, and several other Trees, yielding great variety,
pleasure, and content to the Laborious Husbandman. For the nature, ordering,
and propagating, and uses of them, and all other pleasant Plants, Flowers and
Herbs, I must refer you to those Tracts that peculiarly handle that Subject, my
intentions being only to promote the Propagation, and encourage the Industrious
in their advancing of such Trees, Plants, Grains, etc. that are necessary and
profitable to the Country-farmer, although I have a little in this place
digressed from my former purpose: But return, and give you an account

SECT. VII. Of such Trees that are necessary and proper for Fencing and
Enclosing of Lands, Orchards, Gardens, etc. And the best way of raising such
Fences.
Seeing that Fencing and Enclosing of Land is most evident to be a piece of the
highest Improvement of Lands, and that all our Plantations of Woods, Fruits,
and other Tillage are thereby secured from external Injuries, which otherwise
would lie open to the Cattle:

Texendae sepes etiam, and pecus omne tenendum est,
Praecipue dum frons tenera, etc. Virgil.
And also subject to the lusts of vile persons, as old Tusser observed, where
Fences and Enclosures were deficient.

What Orchard unrobbed escapes?
Or Pullet dare walk in their Iet?
But homeward or outward (like Apes)
They count it their own they can get.
For which reason we are obliged to maintain a good Fence, if we expect an
answerable success to our Labors. I shall therefore enquire out the most
proper Trees for that purpose: And first, the White-thorn is esteemed the best
for fencing; it is raised either of Seeds or Plants; by Plants is the speediest
way, but by Seeds where the place will admit of delay, is less charge, and as
succesful, though it require longer time, they being till the Spring come
twelvemonth ere they spring out of the Earth; but when they have past two or
three years, they flourish to admiration.

Next unto the White-thorn, is the Holly, which claims a preference Toe Holly.
much before the White-thorn, were it not for its slow growth in its puberty;
which may the better be born withal, if we consider the excellency thereof,
either for sight, ornament, or defense; for thickness and closeness it may
compare to a Wall or Pale to defend your Enclosure from Winds, or the eyes of
ill neighbors; and for its strength against man or beast is impregnable; for
height or thickness it will answer your desires.

It is raised of the Berries of the Sets, as is the White-thorn, but the Sets
are more difficult of growth, unless they are planted late in the Spring, and
well watered.

This Plant deserves a principal place amongst our Trees for Pyracautha.
Fences, it yielding a very strong and firm prickly branch, and ever-green
leaves; is quick of growth, and easy of propagation; it is raised either of
the bright Coralline berries, which hang most part of the Winter on the Trees,
and lie as long in the ground ere they spring, as the Haw-thorn berries, or
else it is raised of Suckers or slips.

The Black-thorn (and Crab also) yield a very good Fencing Black-thorn.
branch, and are raised as the White-thorn.

A considerable Fence may be made of Elder, set of reasonable The Elder.
lusty Truncheons like the Willow, and may be laid with great curiosity; this
makes a speedy shelter for a Garden from Winds, Beasts, or suchlike injuries,
rather than from rude Michers.

Furzes, Brambles, etc. are very necessary for the planting of Furzes, etc.
dry Banks, where it is difficult to raise a better Fence, and in those places
they will maintain the Bank against any Cattle. Furzes are also sown on barren
Land, and esteemed a considerable Improvement, the green tops are good food for
Horses, the pricklines thereof being taken away by chopping.

Let your Plants be about the bigness of your thumb, if you can, The speediest
and best way of planting a Quickset-Hedge.
and set almost perpendicular, and cut within four or five inches of the
ground, and planted in a double row at about half a foot distance; they will
prosper infinitely, and much outstrip the closest ranges of our trifling Sets.

The other way most followed for the planting of a quick Another way more
usual, and better for the Field.
Hedge, is on the Bank of a Ditch thus: Place the first row of Sets on the
brink of the Ditch in the upper-mould, and cover them with the better part of
the mould taken out of the Ditch, and raise the bank about eight or ten inches
above them; then place another row of Sets, each Set against the spaces of the
first row; then lay more of the best mould to the roots of the Sets, and raise
the bank as before, and place another row of Sets opposite to the first,
applying the best mould to the Roots, and finish the Bank with the bottom of
the Ditch.

You may plant it as the White-thorn; but if you think that too Of planting the
Holly-bedge.
tedious to wait its rise, you may plant it with the White-thorn, and let every
fifth or sixth be an Holly-set, they will grow infallibly with the Quick, and
as they begin to spread, make way for them by extirpating the White-thorn, till
they quite domineer.

Also you may lay along well-rooted Sets a yard or more in length, and
stripping of the leaves and branches, cover them with a competent depth of
Earth, and they will send forth innumerable Suckers, which will advance into an
Hedge. Holly is one of the slowest, though best Plant for a Fence.

All these Hedges being young should be carefully Fenced with Preserving of
Hedges from Cattle.
a dry Hedge from the biting of Cattle on both sides, if need require, until
the the tops are out of their reach; and where any fail, to supply them in time
with new, or to plash the next to fill such vacant gaps.

Whilst they are yet young, they are to be constantly weeded, Weeding of
Hedges.
lest the Weeds prevent the thick-spreading of the Hedge at the bottom, as well
as check the growth and prosperity of the Plant.

If your Hedge stand remote, or that you do not Annually keep Plashing of
Hedges.
it clipped whereby it should thicken, then at about six years age you may plash
it about February or October. Some workmen are far more expert and judicious at
this than others are, and can better do it than any pen can direct, therefore I
shall not trouble you therewith, but leave you to the skill of the workman.

Whatsoever you plant or make your Fences withal, it is a piece of very good
husbandry to plant at some convenient distance Setters either of Timber proper
for the Soil, or of Crabs whereon to graff Apples, or Perry-stocks for Pears,
as you shall be advised or judge convenient; which will very much improve your
Land for the future, and commend the industry of the Planter.

SECT. VIII. Of the Nursery for the more convenient propagation of most of the
forementioned Trees.
Several of the said Trees are usually produced of the Seed, Trees produced of
Seeds, etc.
Mast, or Berries, and those are the Oak, Beech, Chestnut, Service, Maple,
Sycomore, Horn-beam, Quick-beam, Hasel, Firs, Pines, Pinaster, Pitch-tree,
Cypress, Cedar, Bays, Laurel, Privet, and Juniper, which being sown spring the
first year; and the Ash, Phillyrea, Eugh-tree, White-thorn, Black-thorns,
Holly, and Pyracantha, whose Seeds or Berries usually lie in the Earth another
year after they are sown, ere they spring.

To produce Trees immediately of the Seed is the better way: First, because
they take soonest: Secondly, because they make the Best raised of Seed.
streightest and most uniform shoot, being very considerable in Timber Trees:
Thirdly, because they will neither require staking, nor watering, which are two
very considerable Articles: And lastly, for that all transplanting (though it
much improve Fruit Trees) is a considerable impediment to the growth of
Forrest-trees, but if they are removed out of the Nursery whilst they are
young, and carefully preserved, this injury is not so great; also Plants raised
of the Seed in the place where they are to stand, shall soon outstrip a removed
Plant of a greater age, especially the Pine and Walnut, where the Nut set into
the ground shall certainly overtake a Tree of ten years growth which was
planted at the same instant.

Because of the coldness of the Winter, and the damage the Preserving and
preparation of the Seeds.
Mast, Seeds, or Berries may receive from Mice, and other Vermin, it is not
good to sow them till the Spring, for the better preserving of them from
drying, rotting, or decaying; you may put them into Pots, Barrels, or other
Vessels, Cellars, Sheds, or suchlike places, with a mixture of Earth or Sand,
not too dry, intermixed stratum super stratum, with the Seeds, etc. At the
Spring you will find them sprouted, and being committed to the Earth, as apt
to take as if they had been sown with the most early.

Some affirm that by this way of preparing the Seed, etc. those Seeds that
otherwise would have lain over another Winter in the ground before they had
sprung, being now committed to the ground before the Full in March, will that
season be chitting, and speedily take root.

Choose not your Mast or Seeds from the aged, decaying, or not Election of the
Seed.
thriving Trees, but from a thriving Tree, of a sound stock, and firm Wood, and
let the Seed be the most weighty, clean and bright.

Make choice of some spare place of ground well Fenced and Place for a Nursery.
secured from Cattle, Conies, etc. respecting the South-East rather than the
full South, and well protected from the North and West; let the ground be
rather dry than moist, for Trees will rarely thrive being removed out of a wet
into a dry place, but exceeding well out of a dry into a moist; break up the
ground, and prepare it the Winter before you sow it; the cleaner it is from
Weeds, and the lighter and mellower the ground is, the better will the Seeds
thrive, for in much weeding the young Plants are endangered.

The Nursery for your Firs, Pines, Cypresses, and all such Winter-greens, and
tender Plants, had need be sheltered from the Southern Aspects either
artificially, or else made where it is naturally so defended.

You may make Furrows or Trenches of four or sive Inches Manner of sowing.
deep, at about two foot breadth, with a convenient Interval for the more
commodious Weeding and dressing the Plants: Into these Furrows cast your Seed
or Mast, such as usually spring the first year in beds by themselves; and such
that stay the second, by themselves, or (as it is best for the better ordering
them at their removal) sow each Seed or Mast apart, then cover them with a
Rake.

The Seeds of Firs, Pines, etc. need not be sown above an inch deep, and
covered finely with a Sieve, and duly watered.

If the Seeds of Pines, or Firs be rolled in a fine Compost made of
Sheeps-dung, and planted, they never fail.

But for the more convenient removal of the Pine (which least abides it of any
Tree I know) take small earthen Pots without bottoms, or small Baskets, Boxes,
or suchlike, and set them to the brims in rows in the ground, and fill them
with good mould, and plant in each of them two or three Seeds; when they grow,
leave only one, and by this means at two or three years growth may you securely
remove them, the Earth being kept fast about the Roots; and wherever you
plant them the Tree it self in time will rid its stem of the Pot or Box.

When the young Imps or Seedlings are sprung up, you must Ordering of the
Nursery.
be very careful in keeping them from Weeds, which else will soon overrun
them; and after weeding the ground being unsettled, give them a little water if
it be a dry and hot season.

The Winter following you may lay a few Bushes, Furze, or such like over them,
and scatter a little Straw only to break the force of the Winds, which in the
Winter season injure more than Snow or Frost.

But for the Cypress, Phillyrea, and such other tender Winter-greens, you must
defend them with more care.

If you intend to raise a Coppice from Mast, or Seed, dig or plough Sowing of a
Coppice.
the parcel of ground you intend, as you would prepare it for Corn, and with
the Corn either in the Autumn or Spring, sow also good store of such Mast,
Nuts, Seeds, Berries, etc. as you desire; then take off your Crop of Corn, and
lay it up for Wood; although that several sorts of your Seeds come up the
first, yet will they receive but little injury by treading at the Harvest, but
injure it as little as you can: also the stubble being left high, will be a
shelter for the young Trees the first Winter.

SECT. IX. Of the Transplantation of Trees.
The best time for removing or transplanting of all Trees that The time.
shed their leaf, is in October, or the beginning of November immediately
after, or at the fall of their leaf; but that time being omitted, you may
transplant them till the Spring in open weather, and before they bud.

All Trees that shed not their leaf Annually, but are ever green are to be
removed in the Spring when the cold is over, for they spring not so soon in the
year as the other: But some affirm the only time to be in August.

Such Trees that are pithy, as the Ash, Sycomore, Lime-tree, Aspen, Cut not the
tops of some Trees.
and suchlike, cut not off their tops the first year of their remove, because
the wet will be apt to perish the Plant; neither diminish the heads, nor many
of the branches, nor Roots of the Firs, Pines, or other Rosinaceous Trees, for
they are prone to spend their Gum, to the great injury, if not ruin of the
Plant.

The same time and Method is to be observed in the transplantation, Of such
Trees that come of Slips, Suckers, etc.
removal, or propagation of the Suckers, Cions, Slips, or Layers of the Elm,
Birch, Lime-tree, Horse-chesnut, and such other Trees that are usually produced
of Suckers, Layers, Slips, etc. as you do in the removal of the young Seedlings
of the other Trees.

Only that for the slipping or laying of such Branches of Trees Time to slip or
lay.
that had not before taken any Root, the most proper time is in the top of the
Spring, about the time that the Sap is newly risen, and the Tree ready to bud.

All Trees that are raised of Pitchers, or Sets, as the Poplar, Aspen, The time
for Aquaticks.
Abel, Alder, Withy, Salley, Osier, Willow, Elder, and Privet, are to be
planted in February or March, before they are too forward.

Let your young Plants be removed rather into a better mould Manner of
transplanting.
(though there is but a little about the Roots) than a worse: let as much Earth
adhere to the Roots as you may, and leave as much of the Root on as you can,
abating only the top-root or downright Roots, and spread the other every way in
the pits or holes made for that purpose, which ought to be made larger and
deeper than the Plant at present requires, and filled up with loose mould, that
young Roots may the better spread to seek nourishment for the Tree.

In Transplanting be sure to preserve the smallest Roots which gather the Sap;
and in filling the Earth about the Tree, endeavor to keep them to a level with
Earth between them, that they may not be irregularly placed; for the well
settling these Roots will conduce very much to the prosperity of the Tree.

It is good to plant it as shallow as might be, and not below the Plant shallow.
better part of the Earth into the Gravel, Clay, Sand, nor Water, etc. but
rather advance the Earth about the Tree, than set the Tree too deep; be sure
also not to set it deeper than it stood before.

In the removal of such Trees that have arrived to any considerable Observe the
coast.
bigness, it is very expedient to observe the coast and side of the stock,
which way it stood before its removal; and not to be esteemed such a trifle as
Lawson, and many other trifling Authors pretend: For it is most evident that
the Sap does naturally flow most on that side of the Tree that is next the Sun,
and on that side does the Tree more increase than on the other, as is evident
in observing the Pith to be nearer the North than South Side of the Tree: But
in such Trees that stand thick in a Nursery, or have long stood in the shade,
where the Sun has wrought little or nothing upon them, you may be less
critical.

The Oak, Pine, and Walnut-trees bear spreading large branches, The distance.
and require greater distances than any other; therefore the nearest should
stand forty foot.

The Beech, Ash, Eugh, Fir, Chestnut, etc. may stand somewhat nearer than the
other.

The Elm, and the Horn-beam will grow the nearest of any Trees: For the other,
you may plant them at what distance the magnitude of the Tree, your occasions,
or the nature of it requires.

The Watering of your Trees immediately upon their transplantation, Watering of
Trees.
very much conduces to their prosperity, and settling the Earth about the
Roots, unless in weather extreme cold, and where the Plant is of a tender
kind: Also the young Plants for the first year will require your aid in
watering of them in a dry Spring.

Also if Trees have been carried far, the setting of the Roots in Water some
certain time before you inter them, conduces much to their revival.

If the Trees be of any considerable height, they ought to be Staking of Trees.
carefully defended, as well from the injurious Winds, as the frications of
Beasts, by staking them, and with a wisp of Hay or other soft Ligament to bind
them to such stake, not omitting to interpose a little Moss, or Hay, etc.
between the Tree and stake, to preserve it from galling: If your Trees be in
danger of Cattles injuries, then you ought to bind or set bushes about them, to
prevent rubbing.

Planters in most places do strictly observe to cut the foot or Planting of
Aquaticks.
ground-end of Poplar, Withy, or other Aquatick Pitchers or Sets, only one way,
like a Hindes foot, pretending that to be a principal observation.

If either your impatient fancy, or your urgent occasions oblige Removing
Trees in Summer.
you to the removal or Transplantation of Trees in the Summer; you may tread in
the steps of a certain Prince Elector that at Hidelbergh in the midst of Summer
removed very great Lime-trees out of one of his Forests, to a steep hill
exceedingly exposed to the heat of the Sun, the Heads being cut off, and the
Pits into which they were transplanted, filled with a Composition of earth and
Cow Dung, which was exceedingly beaten, and so diluted with Water, as it became
almost a Liquid Pap, wherein he plunged the Roots, covering the Surface with
the Turf: It is presumed that if the Trees were smaller, be they of what Wood
soever, there needs not so absolute a decapitation.

Several relations there are of Trees that have been planted or Transplanting
of great Trees.
removed of eighty years growth, and fifty foot high to the nearest bough,
wafted upon Floats and Engines four long miles, with admirable success, and of
Oaks planted as big as twelve Oxen could draw; to which effect, these are
prescribed, as the ways to accomplish the like designs.

Choose a Tree as big as your Thigh, remove the Earth from about him, cut
through all the Collateral Roots, till with a competent strength you can
enforce him upon one side, so as to come with your Axe at the Tap-Root; cut
that off, redress your Tree, and so let it stand covered about with the mould
you loosened from it, till the next year or longer, if you think good; then
take it up at a fit season.

Or a little before the hardest Frost surprise you, make a square Trench about
your Tree, at such distance from the stem as you judge sufficient for the Root;
dig this of competent depth so as almost quite to undermine it, by placing
blocks and quarters of Wood to sustain the Earth; this done, cast on it as much
Water as may sufficiently wet it, unless the ground were moist before; thus let
it stand till some very hard Frost do bind it firmly to the Roots, and then
convey it to the pit prepared for its new station.

But if it be over-ponderous, you may raise it with a Pully between a Triangle,
placing the Cords under the Roots of the Tree; set it on a Trundle or Sled to
be conveyed and replanted where you please: by these means you may transplant
Trees of a large stature, and many times without topping or diminution of the
head; which is of great importance to supply a defect, or remove a Curiosity.

After you have transplanted your Trees, if you lay about the Helps to Trees.
Roots or Stems, Fern, Straw, Stubble, Hawm, or any other Vegetable whatsoever,
either green or half rotten is best, which will preserve the Roots moist in the
Summer, and yield a good Manure or Soil, which the Rain will carry to the Roots.

Also stones laid about the Roots of Trees preserves them moist in the Summer,
and warm in the Winter, and keeps them fast against the shaking Winds.

Copses may also be planted about Autumn with the young Planting of Copses.
Sets or Plants, the best way is in rows about ten or fifteen foot distance,
for then may you reap the benefit of the Intervals, by Ploughing, or Digging
and Sowing, till the Trees are well advanced; Carts also may the better pass
between at the time of felling without injury to the Stems, or danger of the
Cattle; There will also be many pleasant Walks, and yet an equal burden of
Wood at the full growth of the Copse, as though they were thick, and confusedly
planted.

There is a compendious way for thickning of Copses that are Thickning of
Copses.
too thin, by laying of some of the Branches of the Trees (that stand nearest
unto the bare places) on the ground, or a little in the ground, giving it a
chop near the foot the better to make it yield; this detained with a hook or
two, and covered with some fresh mould at a competent depth, will produce a
world of Suckers, and thicken and furnish a Copse speedily.

SECT. X. Of the Pruning, Shrowding, Cutting, and Felling of Trees and Copses.
In the discreet performance of this work, the Improvement of Pruning of Trees.
our Timber and Woods does much consist; and renders our Avenues, Walks, Parks,
etc. much more pleasant and commodious to have the Trees stand in order, their
Branches at a convenient height, and kept clean from all superfluities.

Such Trees that are for Timber, it is best to prune whilst they are young, and
the Branches not too big; of these and other Trees it is good to cut off the
Branches that are superfluous, about January, with a very sharp Bill or other
Tool, making the stroke upward by reason of the grain of the Wood, and to
prevent the slitting of the Tree at the fall of the Branch, and cut it clean,
smooth, and close; for by cutting of the Branches at a distance from the Tree,
the stumps rot, and leave hollow holes which decay the Tree, and spoil the
Timber.

Such Trees that are not fit for Timber, or that you desire should Shrowding or
lopping of Trees.
yield you a present advantage, or serve for Fuel, you may shroud or lop them,
which will return you a considerable advantage, and is much to be preferred
before a Copse in these several respects: 1. These Pollard or Shrouded Trees
need no Fence to be maintained about them, standing in no danger of the
browsings or Frications of Cattle, Conies, etc. 2. You have the benefit of
Grazing under these Trees, which is very considerable whilst the tops are
young. 3. The stocks taken in time before they decay or grow hollow, yield a
good Timber fit for many uses, or at least good cleft for the Fire. 4. And
lastly, you may raise these Pollards in Hedge-rows and spare places, and
borders of your grounds, where they prove a good shelter as before we noted,
and little injure the ground.

Notwithstanding the Copse is quicker of growth, and raises a more considerable
advantage for the present than this way, in some places, therefore where you
have conveniences for a Copse, I leave you to your election.

Trees are not to be shrouded till they have taken fast rooting, Times for
shrowding.
and so stood for three or four years, at what height you think convenient, so
it be out of the reach of Cattle, either at the beginning of the Spring, or the
end of the Fall. For the harder sorts of Woods it is very indifferent,
observing that they be not lopped above once in ten or twelve years, and at any
time in the Winter. The Elm and the Ash, and suchlike pithy and softer Woods
are fittest to be shrouded at the Spring, lest the Winter injure the Tree.

Always observe to cut the remaining stumps aslope, and Observations in
shrowding.
smooth, that they cast the Water off, that the Tree perish not.

Take not off the head of the Poplar, nor of any of the soft Woods (before
unshrowded) growing upright, and smooth, after they have attained the bigness
of ones Leg, unless you leave some Collateral shoots to attract the Sap; for it
will endanger the Tree.

All Perennial Greens, or Resinous Plants, are not to be pruned Pruning of
Winter-Greens.
or cut until the greater Frosts and bitter Winds are past, and then not in any
wise decapitate the Fir, Pine, nor such pithy Plants, and be very sparing of
their Collateral Branches.

You may cut Aquatick Trees every third or fourth year, and Cutting of
Aquaticks.
some more frequently according as the Tree is in proof, or the shrowds or tops
fit for your occasions; cut them not too near the main stock, because of
perishing the Tree; and besides, it gives leave for the new sprouts.

The best time for cutting Aquaticks, either to dress or plant The time.
them, is about the beginning of March, or the first open weather at the
Spring; but if for the Fire, in the Winter before the Sap begins to rise, or
you may cut them at any time between Leaf and Leaf.

Such Copses or Copse-trees that you have lately planted at one, Cutting of
young Copses.
two, or rather three years growth, may be cut within two or three inches of
the ground, in the Springtime (the less prosperous especially) which the new
Cions will suddenly repair in clusters, and tufts of fair Poles.

Copses being of a competent growth, as of twelve or fifteen Felling of Copses.
years, are esteemed fit for the Axe: but those of twenty years standing are
better, and far advance the price: seventeen years growth affords a tolerable
Fell: you are to spare as many likely Trees for Timber, as with discretion you
can.

The growth of Copses is so various according to the nature of the Ground, some
being dry and barren, some moist and fruitful, that no time can be set but as
the Copses are quick or slow in growth, and the bigness of the Wood suits with
the Market, or your occasions, so may your discretion be guided.

Copses may be felled or cut from mid-September to mid-March, Time.
and to be avoided by mid -May at the farthest, else much injury may be done by
Teams in bruising the young Cions, and injuring them with their feet; also the
removing of the Rough or Brush, breaks off many a tender Sprig.

Cut not above half a foot from the ground, and that slopewise, Manner.
trimming up such as you spare for Standards, as you go from their extravagant
Branches, Water-boughs, etc. that hinder the growth of others.

After the Felling and removing of the Wood, shut up all the Gaps about the
Copse, having received a sufficient Hedge about the same before the Spring, and
so keep it fenced and defended from Cattle, till it be above their reach; then
about July may you put in your Beasts to spend the Herbage in such well-grown
Copses.

If your Copses have been neglected, so that they have been browsed by Cattle,
and kept under that they are not apt to thrive, the best way is at felling-time
to new cut them, and preserve them better from Cattle, and they will soon be
reduced to a better state than before, and thrive beyond expectation.

When your Timber Trees are arrived to their perfect age, full Felling of
Timber Trees.
growth, or best state, (for at such a time it cannot be esteemed illhusbandry
to take them away, so that you be careful to preserve others in their stead,
though not in their places) or that you are necessitated to fell them, then
consider which way, and what time is best for your advantage.

The time of the year is to be considered of according to the Time.
occasions or uses you have for your Timber; if it be for sale, and that your
present advantage only you seek, then the best time to fell Oak is from
mid-April to Mid-summer, the Sap being then proud, and the Bark easy to be
taken off, which will yield you a considerable price. But all other Timber
whilst the Sap is down in the Winter-season.

If you desire your Oaken Timber for your own proper occasions, fell it in
December or January, when the Tree is clearest of Sap, by which means the
Timber will not be so much subject to the Worm, neither will it cast, rift, or
twine, as it will if cut in the Summer: It will also last longer in any
Buildings, and not be so apt to yield under a Burden: for the great plenty of
Sap mollifies the Timber, and makes it rot and decay; therefore the cutting of
Trees at Barking-time, does very much injure our Timber, debilitates our
Edifices, and expedites their approaching decay.

Fell not in the increase nor full of the Moon, nor in Windyweather, at least
in great Winds, lest it throw the Tree before you are willing. I have seen a
good Tree much injured by falling too soon.

For the Felling of the greater sort of Timber Trees, one of the Manner of
felling great Trees.
first and most principal things is, the skilful disbranching of the Boal of
all such Arms and Limbs as may endanger it in the fall; for many excellent
Trees have been utterly spoiled for want only of this consideration: In the
greater Arms chop a nick under it close to the Boal, and meet it with the
downright stroke, it will be cut without splitting.

If you reserve the Roots in the Earth in expectation of a new increase of
Suckers; then fell the Tree as near the Earth as you can, for that is the best
Timber: But if you intend a total extirpation, then grub the Tree, which is
more for your advantage: some advise to Bark the Trees as they stand, and the
next season to fell them; which I take to be worthy of your practice.

CHAP. VII.
Of Fruit Trees.

SECT. I. Of the Profits and Pleasures of Fruit Trees.
THe planting of Fruit Trees is undoubtedly one of the greatest Improvements
that can be made of the most part of our English Land, as all who have written
of Improvents do agree; and Worcestershire, Hereford-shire, Gloucester-shire,
Kent, and many other particular places in this Land can sufficiently evidence
the truth thereof.

1. Because it is more universal than many other sorts of Improvements, there
being but little ground in England, but one sort of Fruit or another will
prosper upon it, if judicially prosecuted.

The Charge of planting or raising most sort of Fruit Trees being so small, and
the pains so easy, that the most slothful has not any rational objection
against it; but the most common is, that the poorer sort of people will rob and
spoil the Plantations, etc. If you plant but a few, this objection may have
place; but if you plant any considerable number, it will be worth while to
attend them at that season, which is but short, when they are pallatable; or to
plant such that are not very inviting, and yet as profitable to the Planter as
the most pleasant.

And when they become more common, they will be little regarded by these
Filchers; or if they do borrow a few sometimes in their Pockets, or to make a
few Apple-pies withal, yet that is a poor discouragement to an ingenuous
Spirit; and much like that Rusick Humor of one that would not improve a very
good piece of ground for that purpose with Fruit Trees, because the Parson
would have the decimation of it; and so denied himself the nine parts, because
the Parson should not have the Tenth; which indeed is a grand Impediment to
Improvement: and it is to be wished that there were some more certain Modus in
lieu of that troublesome way of Tything.

This way of Improving by planting of Fruit Trees is more practiced within
these few years than has been in Ages before; a sufficient Argument of the
benefit the Countryman receives by it. The Computation may be taken from the
expense of the young Trees, especially of Syder-fruit that our Nurseries have
annually yielded throughout the greatest part of this Kingdom.

2. The use of Fruits is also universal both for meat and drink: That there
cannot be an over-stocking of the Country with them, especially of
Syder-fruits. This drink being more universally celebrated than any other, as
the most pleasant (being of good Fruits, and rightly prepared) the most healthy
and the most durable of any other, and must necessarily bring a very
considerable advantage to the whole Kingdom in general, because a far greater
quantity of Syder is usually produced out of an Acre of Land in one year, than
can be made of the Barley growing on an Acre, and much less cost and trouble in
the preparation; so that if but a small part of every Farm were planted for
Syder, much of the Barley-land might be converted to other uses, which in the
end would be a National Improvement and advantage.

It will also lessen that vast consumption we make of French-Wines, which we
drink to the enriching of a Foreiner, the impoverishing of our selves, and the
great prejudice of our healths, especially by the corroding Claret, and stummed
White-Wines, when we have a thousand Testimonies that English Syder is to be
preferred before any French-Wines, and known to be more Homogeneal to our
Natures.

Mr. Hartlib in his Legacy tells you of the benefits of Orchard-fruits, that
they afford curious Walks for pleasure, food for Cattle in the Spring, Summer,
and Winter (meaning under their shadow) Fuel for the fire, shade from the
heat, Physic for the sick, refreshment for the sound, plenty of food for man,
and that not of the worst, and drink also of the best; and all this without
much labor, care, or cost.

The high Applauses, Dignities, Advantages, and variety of Pleasures and
Contents in the planting and enjoyment of Fruit Trees, Mr. Ralph Austen has
very copiously and particularly set forth in his Treatise of Fruit Trees, to
which for brevity-sake I refer you, and shall only in this place give you a
Catalogue of such Fruit Trees as are for our advantage, with the several ways
of propagating and ordering of them. And first of Standard-trees.

Amongst which the Apple worthily deserves the pre-eminence, 1 Of Apples.
both for its universality of place, scarce a Country-parish in England but in
some part or other it will thrive; and also for its use, being both Meat and
Drink, and generally esteemed by the most curious, as a pleasant Dish. It also
exceeds all other English-Fruits for the time we enjoy them; not a day in the
year but they may be had, and not of the worst. There is a very great diversity
of the Species of them; Mr. Hartlib speaks of one who had about two hundred
sorts, or Species, and does verily believe there are near five hundred in this
Island: The French Gardener reckons up eighty seven several sorts of choice
kinds of them in that Country; I presume he computes not the common.

They are of different Natures; some are early ripe, some later; Apples.
some are but for a time, others are long preserved: I have heard of Pippins
that have been kept two or three years sound, only by care in gathering of
them, and at the right season, kept in a Room free from the common Annoyances
of Heat and Cold, and hung by the Tails: some are preserved for the Table,
others for Cider; the best for the Table are the Jennitings, the Harvey Apple,
the Golden Pippin, Summer and Winter Pearmains and Pippins, the John Apple,
with many others. There is a sort of Russeting, with a fine rough Gold-coloured
skin, with some Warts on it, which I can give no other name than the Aromatic
Russeting, knowing no other for it; which Fruit excels any other Apple I have
seen or tasted, and is worthy to be placed, not only the Tree in the best of
your Plantations, but the Fruit at the best of your Brumal Repasts. The Tree
may be had at Mr. George Ricket's, near Hodsden; and at Mr. Ball's at
Brainford, two of the best Planters in England. The best for Cider are the
Red-Streak, the Jennet-Moyl, Eleot, Stocking Apple, and some others.

Apples planted dispersedly about your Ground, either in the Profits of Apples.
Hedges, or in Rows by the Hedges, raise a very considerable advantage, at a
very easy Rate or Charge, and that only in Nursing them up till they are freed
from common injuries; the great advantages accrewing thereby, are evident to
the Inhabitants of Herefordshire, Glocestershire, and several other places in
England. I heard it certainly related in Herefordshire of a Tenant that bought
the Living he then Rented, only with the benefit he made of the Fruit growing
thereon in one year; with this advantage, that he uttered his Cider by Retail,
as they usually do Beer. Orchards planted with Apples arise to a very
considerable improvement: I know (says Mr. Hartlib) that ten, or fifteen pound
an Legacy.
Acre, has been given for Cherries, more for Pears and Apples; the Land it
self, whilst these Trees are small, and yield you not your desired gain, is
capable of bearing any sort of Tillage, till the Trees yield too much shadow;
and then, if they are not too thick, the Land is better than before it was
planted, sometimes to a threefold improvement, and has the Preheminency above
other Pastures in being Earlier, not subject to scorching heats; and in the
Winter there is plenty of Food for Sheep, Calves, etc.

Next unto Apples, the Pear challenges his place: They will 2 Of Pears.
prosper in some sorts of Land where Apples will not, as in Stony, Hungry,
Gravelly Land; yea, in a tough binding hungry Clay, the Root of a Pear Tree
being, it seems, more able to pierce astony and stiff Ground.

The Pear Tree bears almost its weight of Sprightful Winy Liquor; sometimes one
Tree bears two, three, or four Hogsheads per Annum. In Herefordshire I was
credibly informed, that near Ross grows a Pear Tree of that Magnitude, that
the Circumference of the Body, or Stem of the Tree; was as much as three men,
from hand to hand, could beclip or fathom; and that there was made in one year
of the Fruit thereof 7 Hogsheads of Perry.

There are supposed to be four or five hundred several kinds of Pears; the
French Gardener reckons about three hundred of choice sorts of Pears.

Several are for the Table; as the Windsor-Pear, Burgamets, Boon-Christiens,
Greenfield-Pear, etc. For Perry, the Horse-Pear, both White and Red, the
Bosbury-Pear, Choak-Pear, etc. It is worthy to be taken notice of, that the
best Pears for Perry, and so of Apples for Cider, are not very pleasant, Crude
as they are from the Trees, and may be planted in the Fields or Pastures with
less danger of loss than the Table-fruit.

Some of these also are for the Summer only, and will not last; others will
keep over the Winter.

The advantage of the Pear are equal to those of Apples; for though they are
deficient in some cases, yet they recompense it in other. It is the goodlier
Tree in a Grove, to shelter a House and Walk from Summers heat, and Winters
cold Winds, and far more lasting; and for the quantity of ground it covers,
bears much more than the Apple, because of their height.

Of Cherries there are several sorts; some of one color, some 3 Of Cherries.
of another; some early, and some late: but for the Orchard or Field, the
Flanders Cherry excels. The Great-bearing Cherry also is a very good kind, for
that he seldom fails; though in a cold and sharp Spring they are late ripe, and
hang near a fortnight after they are Red, before they be through ripe: they are
the fittest sort for the coldest places; they are not so pleasant as the other,
by reason of the Tartness of the Juice, yet sharp Cherries are more wholesome
than the sweet.

The advantages of a Cherry-Orchard are very great: Mr. Hartlib Legacy.
gives the Relation of a Cherry-Orchard about Sittenburn in Kent, of thirty
Acres, that produced in one Year above a thousand pound: That President might
be but once; one Swallow makes not a Summer; yet they are usually worth ten or
fifteen pound per Acre.

They are a Fruit that keep not long; therefore if your store exceed your
Market, a most excellent Wine is made of them, by those that delight in such
Liquors, which indeed are to be preferred before Foreign.

Wall-nuts, not without desert, challenge a principal place in our 4 Of
Wall-nuts. Sylva.
Rural Plantation; the Tree grows tall, is a great defense against Winds, a
most Excellent Ornament, delights in a dry, sound, and rich Land, if it incline
to a feeding Chalk or Marl; also in stony grounds, and on hills, especially
Chalky; likewise in Cornfieldsd: In several places in Germany no young Farmer
is permitted to Marry a wife, till he bring proof that he has planted, and is
a father of such a stated number of Walnut-trees. The Fruit will yearly
sufficiently recompense the loss of the ground it drops with a good advantage;
the Timber bears a good price, and is of excellent use in every place, strong,
and not subject to the Worm: but is not to be entertained in Hedge-rows, no
Tree thriving under its drip.

Stately Avenues and large Plantations are of them in Surry, to the very great
advantage and recompense of the industry of the owners.

That which is produced of the thick shell of the Nut, becomes the best Timber;
that of the thinner, the better Fruit.

If the Market should happen to be overstocked of this Fruit for the Table by
overgreat Plantations, yet may a considerable advantage be raised by
extracting an Oil of the Kernel, as at this time they do in Normandy, which is
their principal use they convert them to. The Oil is excellent for the Limner
for laying his white Colors; it is good for Lamps and many other uses.

These are a Fruit growing so low, that we generally look over 5 Of Filberts.
them; they delight in a fine mellow light ground, but will grow in almost any
ground, especially if they are defended from the violent and cold Winds: the
Tree is easily propagated, generally bears well, and yields a most excellent
Fruit, not much inferior to the best and sweetest Almond. There are the White
and Red, but the White is the best.

Being planted in rows near the greater Trees, they will bear under the shadow
of them, and give you a good reward for your Industry. They delight in shady
places, where few other fruits will prosper.

They are a Fruit that may be kept long in the husk, or in Sand.

Quinces are a very good Fruit; the Trees delight in moist 6 Of Quinces.
ground, and near the Waters-side; and where they like their ground, they yield
a very great increase; it is good to apply hot and rich Soils to the Roots of
them, which will be fully repaid in the Fruit. There are several kinds of them,
some are a small Crab-quince; others a fair, large kind of quince: it is good
to plant of the best sort, and the best bearers; the Portugal-Quince is judged
to be the best both for bearing and use.

Mr. Hartlib tells you of a Gentleman at Prichnel in Essex, who Legacy.
had a Tree from beyond Sea, and had the best in England, and had made above
thirty pound of a small piece of ground planted with them.

They are difficult to propagate; they will grow in any reasonable 7 Of
Mulberries.
good Land: the Fruit is made use of several ways, some make a Drink or Wine of
them, it is very good to color Wine or Syder; but the greatest and most
principal benefit and use of the Mulberry-tree is the leaf, being the only
known food for the Silkworm; if the Trees were more increased, it would be
encouragement sufficient to keep these curious Creatures: although many have
kept them, and made great quantities of the Silk, yet the difficulty of
obtaining the leaves, and where they are, they Hartlib's Legacy.
grow in Gardens generally, few in quantity, and valued according to the ground
they grow on, that it is a great discouragement to that noble Improvement.

If King James's Letter for the planting of Mulberry-trees were Legacy.
again revived, or some compulsive Statute to that purpose, and diligently
prosecuted, it would produce in time a very considerable advantage to this
Kingdom.

Or rather, if his Majesty, or some Honorable Person, would allot some large
parcel of Land, out of some Forest or Chase, to be wholly Cultivated for the
raising of a Mulberry-wood, it would become a most noble President for others
to imitate: For the principal Advantage must be raised on such Land not yet
improved to the highest value by other Plantations, as usually Gardens are.

There are many kinds of Plums, and very much differing 8 Of Plums.
from each other. The better sorts, as the Mustle-plum, the Damazine, Violet,
and Premorden-Plums, with many others, are very pleasant to be eaten, and
require a very good rich warm Soil and place: the common ordinary Plums will
grow almost any where; they are not worth the planting to be eaten, unless you
can find a way to make a good Wine out of them; doubtless they yield store of
Spirits or Aqua Vitae.

They are the more to be regarded, for that they thrive very well in shady
places, where, except the Filberd and the Current, scarce any other Fruit will
prosper.

The Damzin is one of the best, wholsomest, and most profitable of Plums, and
deserves a place in your Plantation: Mr. Hartlib Legacy.
gives it as a deficiencie, that the great Damzin or Pruin-plum is neglected,
which grows well, and bears full in England.

Plum-trees and Damzins may also be planted in Hedges, being ordinarily thorny
Plants; they will thrive there better than Apples or Pears.

The Medlar is a Fruit of very little use, the reason I suppose 9 Of Medlars.
they are no more multiplied, yet have they been of long standing; they are
pleasing to the Palate: This Tree may serve to fill up a spare Corner in your
Orchard.

If we could obtain the Medlars without stones, mentioned in the French
Gardener, they would be better worth the planting. The great Dutch Medlar is
the best.

The Barberry is a common Plant in Orchards, and bears a Fruit 10 Of Barberries.
very useful in Housewifry: There are several sorts of them, although but one
only common, above which is to be preferred that which bears its Fruit
without stones: There is also another sort, and chiefly differs from the common
kind, in that the Berries are twice as big, and more excellent to preserve.

Mr. Hartlib condemns us much for neglecting the propagation 11 Of Almonds.
Legacy.
of this Tree, which (says he) grows well, and bears good Fruit, as he
has seen diverse bushels on one Tree in his Brothers Orchard; they grew large
and upright, and need not the help of a Wall; the Almond is in some sweet, in
others a little bitter. The Tree is chiefly received for the beauty of its
Flowers, which being many, early, and of a fair, pale, reddish color, make a
fine show in a Garden.

The common Service-tree grows wild in many places: but 12 Of the Service-Tree.
there is a kind thereof more rare, which by long standing grows to a fair
Tree with many branches set with winged leaves, like those of the Ash; but
smaller, and indented about the edges: The Flowers grow in Clusters, succeeded
by Fruits; in some round, in others Pear-fashion, much bigger and better tasted
than those of the common kind.

There are many sorts and colors of Goosberries; the White-Holland, 13 Of
Gooseberries.
or Dutch-Goosberry, is the fairest, and best Bearer of all others: The Berries
are large, round, smooth, white, transparent, and well tasted. There is a sort
of Green Goosberry that is also a very pleasant Fruit.

It Is not a small advantage that is yearly reaped by this Fruit, the Tree
propagated with so much facility, and yields a wonderful increase; and from the
beginning of May, to the middle of July, contains a useful Berry.

This Tree bearing so great plenty of Berries, and is so easily propagated,
that it may be supposed the Market, especially remote from London, may be
over-stockt: but this Fruit, taken in its right time, yields so delicate a
Wine, that you cannot convert them to a better use, nor solace your self with a
finer Summer-Repast.

There are also several sorts and colors of this Fruit; the 14 Of Currants.
White is very pleasant, but the Great Red exceeds all the rest, is a plentiful
Bearer, and yields the largest Fruit.

The same may be said of the Current, as before was of the Goosberry, it being
also easily propagated, and a great Bearer, and yields a very pleasant Liquor;
to be compared, being rightly ordered, with French-Wines.

Rasberries are not to be omitted out of the number of the most 15 Rasberries.
pleasant and useful Fruits, which yield one of the most pleasant Juyces of any
Fruit; and being extracted and preserved, will serve to tinge any other Liquor
with its delicate Aromatic Gust.

SECT. II. Of Wall-Trees.
Having given you a taste of the most usual Fruits growing in the Fields,
Orchards, or Gardens, on Standards that necessarily depend not on any other
Prop or Stay, I will now give you a List of such that are usually planted
against Houses, Walls, Pales, or other Supports; not only to preserve them from
the violent Percussions of the Weather, but to augment the heat of the Sun, for
the sooner and better Maturating their Fruit; amongst which the Vine claims the
Precedence, being esteemed by Ancient 1 Of the Vine.
Philosophers the King of this Vegetable Kingdom, as Man is of the Animal, and
Gold of the Mineral; most Countries of the World enjoying the delicious fruits
of this most excellent Plant: Hartlib 's Legacy.
It is esteemed a great deficiency, that they are no more propagated in this
Island than they are; many are of Opinion they will prove well, being planted
in Vineyards, as they do in France, and give many instances of Vineyards that
have formerly been in Treatise of Fruit Trees.
England, diverse places yet retaining the name of Vineyards; as in
Bromwel-Abbey in Norfolk, and at Ely in Cambridgeshire, which afforded Wine, as
these Rimes seem to testify.

Quatuor sunt Eliae, Lauterna Capella Mariae,
Et Molendinum, necnon dans Vinea Vinum.
There are many places in Kent called by the names of Vineyards: Hartlib 's
Legacy.
The same likewise in Glocestershire, between Gloucester and Ross, is a place
containing the name of a Vineyard, as I was credibly informed traveling that
way.

There are at this day several Presidents of making Wine in England; Mr.
Hartlib gives an instance of one at Great Chart in the Wild of Kent, that
Yearly made six or eight Hogsheads, which was much commended by diverse that
tasted of it, and had kept of it two Years; and also of a Gentlewoman that
pressed her Grapes, and expecting Verjuice, drew Wine.

Without question our Grapes will afford good Wine, if we can find places
enough to bring them to such Maturity, as some years they do on the House
sides, and Walls, which has been often attempted: but I cannot undersand that
they Annually succeed, according to expectation; neither indeed do they on the
Houses, or Walls. The like inconveniences, though it is probable not in so great
a measure, are the Vineyards in other the Northern parts of France and Germany
subject unto; which methinks should not prove so great a discouragement, seeing
that Hops, Apples, Cherries, etc. are also subject unto the same
disappointments. But if they can be Cultivated, and raised to that state, as to
bear well, and ripen well in seasonable Summers, we may the better dispense
with such casualties, as well in this, as other meaner Productions.

The places most commodious for this use and purpose, and most free from those
Annual casualties or inconveniences, must be so situated and defended, either
Naturally or Artificially, as to be free from the continual Assaults of the
Winds; for any Vine.
Wind in the Summer Refrigerates, and impedes the Maturity of the Grape, and
ought also to decline toward the South; if it does not Naturally decline
enough, it ought to be so laid by Art, that it is Elevation may be as near as
you can equal to the Elevation of the Pole, or somewhat less; that it may lie
square to the Sunbeams, for the most part of the time the Sun passes through
the six Northernly Signs. The Banks or Borders so laid, ought also to be made
circular (not straight) as though they contained about the eighth part of a
Circle, the Center being in the South, like the Concave of the Burning-Glass
which burns by Reflection; for by this means it does as it were embrace and
detain the heat received from the Sunbeams, and breaks the Winds: for I have
known the fairest, best, and most early ripe Grape, to grow on the side of a
House after the aforesaid manner cited, when on the same Tree, and on another
part of the House, although it received as much of the Sun, they were not so
good, nor early, by reason they lay more in the Wind, and the Sunbeams less
direct.

There are several other things also to be considered of, to accelerate the
Maturity of this most excellent Fruit, as the warmth, richness, and lightness
of the Soil, which may be much advanced by Art, in applying of several
Ingredients suitable to that purpose; also by covering the Surface of the
Ground with Tiles, Sand, or such like, that may keep down the Weeds, and afford
some assistant heat. The Land that is most apt to produce the largest Brambles,
is said to be the most Natural to the Vine, and the fittest to plant a Vineyard
on.

It has also been the usual practice to deprive the Vine of its leaves in the
Summer, under pretense of laying the Grape more open to the Sun; but that has
proved, rather than a help, an impediment to the Maturity of them, by depriving
them of their shelter from the cool Airs, which in most Summers are more than
the scorching heats; as I have often observed the best Grapes, and earliest
ripe, to be under the shadow and protection of some Leaf. For what I have here
said, and for what else is necessary toward the propagating of this Noble
Plant, I must submit to the judgment and experience of such Persons worthy of
Honor, that have made far deeper Essays than I have done, and are better
capacitated by Reason, Judgment and Experience, to further and advance their
Design.

The Choice of Grapes also is very necessary: Mr. Hartlib commends the
Parsley-Grape, the Rhenish-Grape, the Paris-Grape, and the small Muskadel, as
most suitable to our Climate.

But if our Countryman be not minded, or have not conveniences for the
raising of a Vineyard, yet may it prove a very considerable advantage to plant
Vines on the South-East and West-sides of his Houses, Barns, and Walls; and by
good Culture, and Pruning, they will yield a very considerable increase. I have
known several Bushels of Grapes grow on one Vine, being well Pruned, when the
same Vine neglected has yielded very few, and those not so good as when there
were many.

Although the Wine that is produced of our English Grapes be not so Excellent
as that which is produced of other Fruits, yet to be converted to Vinegar, may
prove a very great advantage; that yielding no mean price, the right way of
making of it being not difficult, the same Method being ordinarily used for
converting Cider into Vinegar, which may to better advantage be done with sharp
Wines.

They are very well known, almost every where; there are several 2 Of Aprecocks
kinds of them, some earlier, and some larger than the other: although the Tree
will grow very well as a Standard, yet it seldom brings its Fruit to Maturity,
unless it has the benefit of some Wall or Pale.

This Tree flourishes much in a light, free, and rich Soil, but spends it self
too much in Branch, and but little in Fruit; besides, is subject to the Canker:
Wherefore to correct that Vice in the Mould, the best way will be to dig a
large Pit where you intend to plant your Tree, and fill it above a Foot thick,
and within a Foot or eighteen Inches of the Surface, with Chalk, Marl, or other
White Earth, if you can obtain it; by which means the Tree is prevented from
rooting too deep, or drawing too much of that luscious Sap; and so thereby may
the Tree be more fertile, the Roots also lying warmer, and nearer the Sun and
Air: For it is observed, that in White Lands this Tree is sound, spends but
little in Branch, and bears plentifully; and in the rich black Mould it runs
out in Branch, is subject to the Canker, and bears but little.

There is lately a new Mode of planting these, and other sorts of Fruit, as
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Grapes, etc. in Dwarf-trees; that is, they are kept
underhand, that they attain not to full three Foot in height; by which means,
being under the Wind, and having the benefit of the reflecting heat of the
Earth, they produce their Fruit Mature, and early.

Peaches, Nectorines, and Melacotones, are also to be planted 3 Of Peaches, etc.
against Walls, Houses, etc. and are of several sorts, very much differing the
one from the other; the best are best cheap.

These are also to be planted against Walls; but being of so 4 Of Figs.
little use in our Rural Habitation, I shall leave them.

Although they are generally planted as Standards, and in the 5 Of Currants.
Sun, yet there is no Tree admits of a greater improvement against a Wall, and
in the Shade, than this very Tree; it growing much larger, and spreading
against a Wall to twelve or fourteen foot high and broad, on the North-side of
a House or Wall, and bearing most plentifully, and large and delicate Fruit.

There are some other Fruit Trees, as the Lote-tree, the Virginia Other Fruits.
Plum, the Cornel-tree, and such like, that are of small use, advantage, or
pleasure; which I leave to the freedom of every man to plant, or use as he
pleases.

SECT. III. Of the Propagation of Fruit Trees.
There are several ways of increasing or multiplying the forementioned
Fruit Trees; some by Grafting, some by Inoculation or Budding; some from the
Seed, Nut, or Kernel, others by Layers, Slips, and Suckers, whereof more
particularly; and first of Grafting.

This Art has been, for many Ages, the most proper, speedy, and beneficial way
to propagate several sorts of Fruits; although the same Fruits may be raised by
Kernels, yet do they most usually prove wild, and in taste austere and sharp,
tending rather to the wildness of the Stock on which the Tree (whereon the
Fruit grew) was Grafted; and although they seem fair, yet they want that
vivacity of spirit, and are more woody than the Grafted Fruit: they are also of
a much longer continuance e're they bear, and are not then so fruitful.
Sometimes Apples have proved well from the Kernel, and have proved much larger
Trees, and have born great burdens, (when they have been many years old) but
rather by accident, and at best not worth ones labor. Of other Fruits, as
Plums, Cherries, Aprecocks, Peaches, etc. unless Grafted, or Inoculated, are
not of any value: Therefore this Art and Custom of Grafting, or Inoculation,
does preserve the Species of our most dainty Fruits, and meliorate their Gusts,
and affords us the most expeditious, pleasant, and advantageous way of
gratifying our Senses, and fulfilling our desires in this most Innocent of
Natural Practices.

The Fruits that are to be Grafted are the Apple, Pear, Cherry, 1 By Grafting.
Plum, and the Medlar; Filberds, Services, and Quinces, may also be Grafted.

The first thing to be considered in Grafting, is the Stock; according Stock to
Graft on.
to the nature of the Tree you intend to raise, must your Stock be; for Apples,
the sowrer the Stock is, the better is the For Apples.
Fruit: therefore the Crab-Stock is usually preferred; they will be more free
from the Canker, will become large Trees, and last longer: the Fruits also will
be better and harder on Crab, or sour Apple-stocks, than on sweet.

The best Stocks to Graft Pears on, are those raised from the For Pears.
Kernel, or the wild Pear Tree; the White-thorn is not good.

Cherries prove best Grafted on the Black-Cherry-Stock, or For Cherries.
the Merry-Stock, which may be raised in great quantities from the Stone.

Plums are to be Grafted on Plum-Stocks, and no other. For Plums.


Medlars may be Grafted on the White-thorn, but prove best For Medlars.
on Pear-Stocks.

Filberds may be Grafted on the common Nut, and Services on For Filberds, and
Services.
their own kind.

Quinces also may be Grafted on their own kind. For Quinces.


The Fruits that best succeed by Inoculation, are Aprecocks, 2 By Inoculation.
Peaches, and Nectorines; Goosberries and Currants, Plums, Apples, Pears and
Cherries, may also be Inoculated with good success; and several other sorts of
Fruits and Trees.

Aprecocks, Peaches, and Nectorines, are usually Inoculated Aprecocks, etc.
in Plum-Stocks, raised either from Suckers, or from Stones; those of the white
Pear-Plum are esteemed the best; and those of any other great white, or red
Plum, that has large leaves and shoots, are very good either to Graft or
Inoculate other choice Plums upon, or for the budding of Aprecocks and Peaches;
but for a Nectorine, a Peach-Stock is most proper.

The Stones of Aprecocks and Peaches are not worth the setting, for Stocks to
Inoculate with other good kinds, in respect their Roots are Spongy, and will
neither last nor endure to be transplanted; therefore the Stones of Plums and
Cherries are chiefly for that purpose to be regarded, except the Peach-stock
for the Nectorine.

Goosberries and Currants are Inoculated on their own kind; Goosberries, etc.
and so are Plums, Apples, Pears, and Cherries.

SECT. IV. Of the Nursery for Stocks.
For the obtaining of a sufficient number of Stocks to Graft and Inoculate the
several sorts of Fruits you intend to propagate and advance, and also to
pleasure your self with such that may be suitable for your intended purpose,
and not to be enforced to rely on such that the Country spontaneously affords,
either for quantity or quality, prepare a Bed of Earth well dressed from Weeds,
proportionable to the Seeds or Stones you intend to sow, and therein sow your
Kernels of Crabs, or such like Apples as you intend to raise your Stocks from,
and cover them with Earth sifted or raked over them, two or three fingers
thick. This may be done about October, and so let lie till the Winter: For the
Stones of Fruits, you may prick them down in Rows, two or three fingers deep,
with the sharp end downwards. You may also cover them with long Dung, or Straw,
to keep them from the violence of Frosts, which in April you may take off, and
in May they will come up; and being kept from Weeds, in two years will be ready
to remove into other Beds prepared for that purpose; whereof they are to be
planted at a more convenient distance, and better order, for the benefit of the
Plant, and convenience of the Grafter.

In Autumn is the most convenient time for this purpose, though it may be done
at any time in the Winter, or Spring, before they bud: Let them be set in Rows,
about two foot distance, or as best pleases your self, and the Plants in each
Row about six or eight inches apart, for the better convenience of
transplanting them; make the holes with an ordinary Setting-stick, and cut off
the downright Roots, and the Tops and Side-branches of the Plants, and fasten
the Earth about them: Let not the Roots be too long, nor set deep, because they
are afterward removed with more difficulty.

It is necessary to remove Seed-plants, for by that means they get good Roots,
which otherwise they generally thrust down one single Root only.

The Nursery thus set, may be ready after one year to Inoculate, and after two
or three years to Graft.

Crab-stocks or Apple-stocks thus raised, are better than those that come from
the Woods, or any other ways.

Let the Kernels you raise your Nursery from, consist most, or altogether, of
Crabs or Wildings for the Apple-Grafts.

Trees Grafted on a Gennet-Moyl or Cider-stock, preserve best the Gust of any
delicate Apple; but on a Crab-stock the Tree lasts longer, and imparts a more
Juicy and Tart relish, and so are to be preferred before most sorts of Apples:
The wild Stock does enliven the dull and Phlegmatic Apple, and the Stock of a
Gennet-Moyl sweetens and improves the Pepin, etc. or may rather seem to abate
some Apple over-tart and severe. The same Rules may be observed in the choice
of Stocks for Pears, Plums, Cherries, Aprecocks, etc. the more Acid the Stock,
the more life it gives to the Fruit of the Graft; as the black Cherry, or the
Cherry-Tree, is the only Stock for the Cherry, etc.

Although the Fruit does generally take after the Graft, yet is it somewhat
altered by the Stock, either for the better or the worse: as Apples or other
Fruit Grafted on Stocks select, as before, advance or meliorate them; so if
they are Grafted on Stocks of another contrary Nature, much debaseth the Gust
of the Fruit.

The Pear Grafted on a Quince-stock, produces its Fruit better than the same
kind upon a wild Pear-stock, and fairer; much better colored, and the Trees
to bear sooner, and more store of Fruits; for the Fruit not only receives
something of the Nature of the Stock, as well as the Graff, but also of the
Soil wherein they are planted, and of the Compost applied unto them.

Therefore choose a plat of ground for your Seminary and Nursery, that may be of
an indifferent nature, not too much enriched with dung, nor too sterile, lying
warm, the Mould light, that the Stocks may the better thrive: Also let your
Stocks be of Fruit select, as before, for that purpose.

If you desire to raise Dwarf-trees, let the Stocks whereon you Graff them, be
of the Paradise-Apple for Apples, of the Quince for Pears, of the Morello, or
common English Cherry, for Cherries; and so will they be the more fit for the
Wall, or for Standards, being kept low according to the new Mode, though I see
but little pleasure or profit in that way.

The best way, and most expeditious to raise a great quantity of Quince-stocks
for your Nursery, is to cut down an old Quince-tree in March, within two inches
of the ground, which will cause a multitude of Suckers to rise from the Root:
When they are grown half a yard high, cover them at the bottom a foot thick
with good Earth, which in dry times must be watered; and as soon as they have
put forth Roots, in Winter remove them into your Nursery, where in a year or
two they will be ready to Graft with Pears.

Plum-stocks and Cherry-stocks may be raised from Suckers, as well as from
Stones, having regard to the kinds whence they proceed.

SECT. V. Of the Time and Manner of Grafting.
Having thus prepared your Nursery, and raised a sufficient quantity of Stocks
to Graff or Inoculate on, you must consider the several ways the several kinds
of Fruits are to be propagated, and which are most suitable; and also the
several times and seasons wherein to Graff, and wherein to Inoculate.

The times to Graff in, are most usually in February and March; 1 The time for
Graffing.
but I have grafted even unto mid-April some backward Fruits, and that with
good success. You may begin also in January, especially with the more forward
Fruits, as Plums, Cherries, etc. such that have many to do, or much employment
other way, may begin more early, lest they want time.

You may either Graff or Inoculate at any time of the year, except October and
November, says Stephens, the Author of the Country Farmer; but whether that
may be practiced with success in these colder Countries, I much question. But
doubtless the temperature of the Season does very much conduce to the growth or
proof of the Graff, as mild Weather in December or January, may be better for
this work, than Frosty Weather in February. Frost Weather at no time is fit to
Graff in.

When the Zephyres of the Spring are stirring, choose that season Evelin 's
Pomona.
before all others for this work.

Make choice of your Graffs from a constant and well-bearing 2 Choice of Graffs.
Branch, if conveniently you can; others may do very well.

The Graffs of such Trees as are ill bearers, or not come to bear Fruit, are to
be rejected, the Graffs always partaking of the quality of the Tree from whence
they are taken.

Choose not those that are very small and slender, they commonly Austin of
Fruit Trees.
fail; but take the fairest upon the Tree, and especially those that are
fullest of Buds.

In Herefordshire they do frequently choose a Graff of several years growth, and
for the Graffing of such large Stocks as are taken out of the Woods or
Nurseries, and fitted into Rows: for Orchards they choose not the Graffs so
small as in other Countries they require them.

Once for all, The stumpy Graff will be found much Superior to the slender
one, and make a much Nobler and larger shoot. This upon experience.

Graffs of any kind being cut before they begin to spring, may 3 The keeping
of Graffs.
be kept many days or weeks, and carried many Miles, being bound up in Moss,
the ends stuck in Clay or Earth; or being wrapped in oiled or waxen leather, or
the ends stuck in a Turnep.

Many Excellent Graffers assure us, that the Graff which seemed withered, and
fit to be cast away, has proved the best when tried: That the Graff a little
withered and thirsty, is better received of the Stock.

Having your Stocks and Graffs ready at the time convenient, 4 Instruments for
Grafting.
together with your Tools, and other materials, as the Pruning-knife,
Penknife, or other small sharp Knife to fit the Grafts withal, fine Saw,
Mallet and Wedge, and also Rushes, or strong soft Flags, or woollen Yarn to
bind the Graft and Stock together, and Clay well tempered with Horse-dung to
keep the same from chopping in dry weather, or soft Wax for the smaller Trees,
and a small Basket to carry the Graffs in, with such other Instruments and
Materials as you shall judge necessary for your work, and suitable to the
Method you intend to proceed in, or as your own Ingenuity shall direct, then
may you proceed in some or one of these several ways or manners of Grafting:
Viz.

Either first by Grafting in the Cleft, which is the most known Grafting in the
Cleft.
and Ancient way, and most usual for the middle-siz'd Stocks; the manner thus:
First Saw off the head of the Stock in a smooth place; for Wall-trees or
Dwarf-trees, within four fingers of the ground; for tall Standards higher, as
you shall think convenient, or your Stock will give way: then pare away the
roughness the Saw has left on the head of the Stock; then cleave the head,
(some advise a little besides the pith) and put therein the Wedge to keep the
Cleft open; which cut smooth with the point of your small sharp knife, that the
sides may be even: then cut the Graff on both sides, from some Knot or Bud, in
form of a Wedge, suitable to the cleft with shouldrings; which Graft so cut,
place exactly in the Cleft, that the inward Bark of the Cion may join to the
inward part of the Bark or Rind of the Stock closely, wherein lies the most
principal skill and care of the Grafter, if he expects the success answerable
to his labors or expectation; then draw out the wedge: but if the Stock pinch
hard, lest it should endanger the dividing of the Rind of the Graff from the
wood, to the utter spoiling of the Graff, let the inner side of the Graff that
is within the wood of the Stock be left the thicker, that so the woody part of
the Graff may bear the stress; or rather you might leave a small wedge in the
Stock to keep it from pinching the Graff too hard, and then may you leave the
outside of the Graff a little the thicker; which I have usually done, as in
smaller Stocks which pinch but weakly. Herein also is required care and
judgment: then cover the head of the Stock with the tempered Clay, or with soft
wax, to preserve it, not only from the extremity of cold and drying winds, but
most principally from wet.

The second way of Grafting, and much like unto the former, Grafting in the
Bark.
is Grafting in the Bark or Rind of the greater Stocks, and differs only in
this, that where you cleave the Stocks, and fasten the Graffs within the Cleft
in the other way, here you with a small wedge cut tapering downwards, to a
point thin, like unto a half round File, and made of Ivory or Box, or other
hard wood; only force in the same wedge between the Rind and Stock, after the
head thereof is Sawn off, and the roughness pared away: then you are to take
the Graff, and at the shoulder or grossest part of it, cut it round with your
small Grafting-knife, and take off the Rind wholly downwards, preserving as
much of the inner Rind as you can; then cut the wood of the Graff about an
inch in length, and take away half thereof to the pith, and the other half
Taper it away, and set in the place you made with your wedge, between the Bark
of the Stock and the wood, that the shouldring of the Graff may join closely to
the Bark or Rind of the Stock; and then with Clay and Horse-dung cover it as
you do the other.

This way is with most convenience to be used when the Stock is too big to be
cleft, and where the Bark is thick. Here you may also set in many Graffs in the
same Stock, and with good success.

Also especial care is to be taken to keep the Tops of your Stocks covered from
time to time, till the Bark it self has covered it, to prevent the Rains from
rotting the Stock; yet (as Mr. Evelin says in his Pomona) it has been noted,
that many old Trees quite decayed with an inward hollowness, have born as full
burdens, and constantly, as the very soundest, and the Fruit found to be more
delicate than usually the same kind from a perfect and more entire Stock.

Leave not your Graff above four, five, or at most six inches above the Stock;
for being too long, they draw more feebly, and are more exposed to the injuries
of weather, and hurt by Birds, and prosper not so well: but herein regard is to
be had to the greatness of the Stock, and its long continuance in the same
place, and its ability to furnish the Graff with Sap sufficient.

Graff your Cions on that side of the Stock where it may receive the least hurt
from the South-west wind, it being the most common, and most violent that blows
in Summer, so as the wind may blow it to the Stock, and not from it. Regard is
here also to be had to the situation of the Nursery or place you Graff in.

The third way of Grafting that is made use of, and to be performed Shoulder,
or Whip-graffing.
somewhat later than the other, and seems to be of later invention, because it
is not so generally taught and used as the former, is Shoulder or
Whip-graffing, and may be done two ways. First, by cutting off the head of the
Stock, and smooth First way.
it as in Cleft-graffing; then cut the Graff from a Knot or Bud on one side,
sloping about an inch and a half long, with a shouldring, but not deep, that it
may rest on the top of the Stock. The Graff must be cut from the shouldring
smooth and even, sloping by degrees, that the lower end be thin: place the
shoulder on the head of the Stock, and mark the length of the cut part of the
Graff, and with your knife cut away so much of the Stock as the Graff did
cover, (but not any of the wood of the Stock) place both together, that the cut
parts of both may join, and the Saps unite the one in the other, and bind them
close together, and defend them from the Rain with tempered Clay or Wax, as
before.

The other way of this Whip-graffing is where the Graffs and The second way.
Stocks are of an equal size, the Stock must be cut sloping upwards from the
one side to the other, and the Graff after the same manner from the shoulder
downwards, that the Graff may exactly join with the Stock in every part; and so
bind, and clay, or wax them, as before.

These (especially the first way) of Whip-graffing are accounted the best. 1.
Because you need not wait the growing of your Stocks; for Cleft-graffing
requires greater Stocks than those ways. 2. This way injureth less the Stock
and Graff than the other. 3. The wound is sooner healed, and thereby better
defended from the injury of the Weather, which the Cleft-stock is incident
unto. 4. This way is more facile, both to be learned and performed.

The fourth way of Graffing is by Approach or Ablactation; Graffing by Approach.
and this is performed later than the former ways, to wit, about the Month of
April, according to the state of the Spring. It is to be done where the Stock
you intend to Graff on, and the Tree from which you take your Graff stand so
near together, that they may be conjoined; then take the Sprig or Branch you
intend to Graff, and pare away about three inches in length of the Rind and
Wood near unto the very Pith; cut also the Stock or Branch on which you intend
to Graff the same after the same manner, that they may evenly join each to
other, and that the Saps may meet; and so bind them, and cover them with Clay
or Wax, as before.

As soon as you perceive the Graff and Stock to unite, and be incorporated
together, cut off the head of the Stocks (hitherto left on) four inches above
the binding, and in March following the remaining stub also, and the Cion or
Graff underneath, and close to the grafted place, that it may subsist by the
Stock only.

Some use to cut off the head of the Stock at first, and then join the Cion
thereunto, after the manner of Shoulder-grafting, differing only in not
severing the Cion from its own Stock: Both ways are good, but the first more
successful.

This manner of Grafting is principally used in such Plants that are not apt to
take any other way; as Oranges, Lemons, Pomgranats, Vines, Gessamins,
Althea-frutex, and such like. By this way also may attempts be made to Graff
Trees of different kinds, one on the other, as Fruit-bearing Trees on those
that bear not, and Flower-trees on Fruit Trees, and such like. I have also by
this inverted the top of a Cion downwards into the Stock, which has taken; and
afterward cut off the Graff three or four buds above the Stock, which grew,
although but slowly, by means of the Sap being forced against its usual Current.

These are the most usual ways of Grafting: some other there are, but they
differ so little from the former, and where they differ its rather for the
worse; and therefore not worthy the mentioning.

Those Graffs that are bound, you must observe to unbinde them toward
Mid-summer, lest the Band injures them.

Where their heads are so great that they are subject to the violence of the
Winds, it is good to preserve them, by tying a stick to the Stock, which may
extend to the top of the Graff, to which you may bind the Graff. The first
year the best thriving Graffs are most in danger; afterward they rarely suffer
by the Winds.

Graffs are also subject to be injured by Birds; which may be prevented, by
binding some small Bushes about the tops of the Stocks.

There is another way of Graffing lately invented, which is by A new way of
Graffing.
taking a Graft or Sprig of the Tree you design to propagate, and a small
piece of the Root of another Tree of the same kind, or very near it, and
Whip-graft them together, and bind them well, and plant this Tree where you
intend it shall stand, or in a Nursery; which piece of root will draw sap, and
feed the Graft, as does the Stock after the other ways.

You must observe to unite the two Butt-ends of the Graff and Root, and that
the rind of the Root join to the rind of the Graft.

By this means the Roots of one Crab-stock or Apple-stock will serve you for 20
or 30 Apple-grafts: And in like manner of a Cherry or Merry-stock for as many
Cherry-grafts; and so of Pears, Plums, etc.

Thus may you also raise a Nursery of Fruit Trees instead of Stocks, by
planting them there, when they are too small to be planted abroad, where they
are subject to prejudice.

This way, more than any other, is best for the raising of tender Trees that
will hardly endure the Grafting in the Stock; for here they are not exposed to
the injuries of Sun, Wind or Rain.

It is also probable, that Fruits may be meliorated by Grafting them on Roots
of a different kind, because they are more apt to take this way than any other.

The Trees thus Grafted will bear sooner, and be more easily Dwarfed than any
other, because part of the very Graft is within the ground; which being taken
off from a bearing sprig or branch, will blossom, and bear suddenly, in case
the Root be able to maintain it.

The only Objection against this way is this, that the young Tree grows slowly
at the first, which is occasioned by the smalness of the Root that feeds the
Graff; for in all Trees the Head must attend the increase of the Root, from
whence it has its nourishment.

Nevertheless this work is easily performed, Roots being more plentiful than
Stocks, and may be done in great quantities in a little time within doors, and
then planted very easily, with a slender Dibble in your Nursery, and will in
time infinitely recompense your pains.

SECT. VI. Of the Time and Manner of Inoculation.
Next unto Graffing, Inoculation takes place; by some preferred before any of
the ways of Graffing before treated of: It differs from the other ways in this,
that it is performed when the Sap is at the fullest in the Summer; and the other
sorts of Grafting are before the Sap ascends, or at least in any great
quantity. Also by this way of Inoculation may several sorts of delicate Fruits
and Trees be propagated and meliorated, which by Grafting cannot be done,
unless in the last way beforementioned. As the Aprecock, Peach, or Nectorine,
rarely thrives any other way than this, because few Stocks can feed the Graff
with Sap so early in the Spring as the Graff requires it, which makes it
frustrate your expectation; but being rightly Inoculated in the fullness of the
Sap, rarely fails.

The Stocks on which you are to Inoculate, are to be of the same kind, as
before was directed to Graff on.

The Peach takes best on its own kind; but the Nectorine thrives not well,
unless upon a Peach-stock.

The time for this work is usually from Midsummer to the 1 The time for
Inoculation.
middle of July, when the sap is most in the stock. Some Trees, and in some
places, and in some years, you may Inoculate from mid -May to mid-August. As to
the time of the day, it is best in the Evening of a fair day, in a dry season;
for Rain falling on the Buds before they have taken, will destroy most of them.

The Buds you intend to Inoculate must not be too young nor 2 The choice of
Buds.
tender, but sufficiently grown: The Aprecock Buds are ready soonest; they must
be taken from strong and well-grown shoots of the same Year, and from the
strongest and biggest end of the same shoots.

If Buds be not at hand, the stalks containing them may be carried many miles,
and kept two or three days, being wrapped in fresh and moist Leaves and Grass, to
keep them cool. If you think they are a little withered, lay the stalks in cold
water two or three hours; and that, if any thing, will revive them, and make
them come clean off the stocks.

Having your Buds and Instruments ready for your work, viz. 3 Instruments for
Inoculation.
a sharp-pointed Knife or Penknife, a Quill cut half away, and made sharp and
smooth at the end to divide the Bud and Rind from the Stalk; and Woollen Yarn,
or dry Rushes, Flags, or such like, to bind them withal: Then,

On some smooth part of the stock, either near or farther from 4 The manner of
Inoculation.
the ground, according as you intend it, either for a Dwarf-tree, or for the
Wall, or a tall Standard, cut the Rind of the stock overthwart; and from the
middle thereof, gently slit the Bark or Rind, about an inch long, in form of a
T, not wounding the stock; then himbly prepare the Bud, by cutting of the leaf,
and leave only the Tail about half an inch from the Bud; then slit the Bark on
each side the Bud, a little distance from the Bud, and take away the Bark above
and below, leaving the Bark half an inch above and below the Bud, and sharpen
that end of the Bark below the Bud, like a Shield or Escutcheon, that it may
the more easily go down, and unite between the bark and the stock: Then with
your Quill take off the bark and bud dexterously, that you leave not the root
behind; for if you see a hole under the bud on the inside, the root is gone,
cast it away, and prepare another. When your bud is ready, raise the bark of
the stock on each side in the slit, (preserving as carefully as you can the
inner thin rind of the stock) put in with care the shield or bud between the
bark and stock, thrusting it down until the top join to the cross cut; then
bind it close with your Yarn, etc. but not on the Bud it self.

There is another way of Inoculation more ready than this, Another way to
Inoculate.
and more successful, and differs from the former only that the bark is slit
upwards from the cross cut, and the shield or bud put upwards, leaving the
lower end longer than may serve; and when it is in its place, cut off that
which is superfluous, and join the bark of the bud to the bark of the stock,
and bind it as before; which sooner and more successfully takes than the
other, as I my self have experienced.

I have also cut the edges of the bark about the bud square, Another way.
and have cut the bark of the stock fit to receive the same, and bound it fast;
which succeeded well, and is the readier way, and more facile.

About three weeks or a months time after your Inoculation, you may unbinde
the buds, lest the binding injure the bud and stock.

When you unbinde them, you may discern which are good, and have taken, and
which not; the good appear Verdant, and well colored, the other appear dead
and withered.

In March following cut off the stock three fingers above the bud; and the next
year cut it close, that the bud may cover the stock, as Graffs usually do.

SECT. VII. Of raising Fruit Trees by the Seeds, Stones, Nuts, or Kernels.
We have given you a short Survey of such Fruits as are propagated by Grafting
and Inoculation, and the way or method of promoting the same. Now we are to
touch upon some few Trees or Fruits that are raised from their own Seed or
Kernel, as Almonds, Services, Wall-nuts, and Filberds. Some others there are,
as Oranges, Lemons, and such like, not necessary for our Rural Theater;
therefore I shall say little to them.

But the only known and beneficial way to propagate the Wall-nut-tree,
Wall-nuts.
is from the Nut; which from the time of gathering of them you may keep, and
preserve in Beds of Sand or Earth till March; and then plant them, if you can,
in the places where they are to abide; for so will they prosper exceedingly,
and much more than any removed: but if you remove any, be cautious of cutting
the branches or roots, lest you endanger the Tree.

Be careful to preserve the Nuts from Mice; for if they can come at them, you
will have but few left. Although I planted some hundreds in their Husks, and a
great number of them wrapped in Clay, yet were all to a very few transplanted
by the Mice.

Filberds also may be raised from the Nut, and are easier obtained, Filberds.
and carried farther, than the Suckers or Plants of the same Tree, and are
raised and ordered as Wall-nuts are.

It Is the best and most usual way also to raise Almond-trees from Almonds.
the stone, which must be set in the place they are to abide, not easily
growing after a remove.

Chestnuts and Services are also raised from the Fruit of them, Chestnuts, and
Services.
by being sown in your Seminary, and thence removed.

SECT. VIII. Of raising and propagating Fruit Trees, by Layers, Slips, and
Suckers.
There are also several sorts of Fruits that are to be raised with more
advantage and facility from Layers, Slips or Suckers, than from Graffing,
Inoculation, or from the Seed; and such are Codlings, Gennet-Moyls, Quinces,
Filberds, Vines, Figs, Mulberries, Goosberries, Currants and Barberries.

The Kentish Codling is very easily propagated by slips or Codlings.
suckers, and is of so good a nature as to thrive being set very near, that
they make a very ornamental hedge, which will bear plentifully, and make a most
pleasant prospect; the fruit whereof, besides the ordinary way of stewing,
baking, etc. being very early, makes a delicate Cider for the first drinking.

These Trees ought not to be topt or plashed, as is usual, they growing tall
and handsome, which if topt decay, and grow stubby and unpleasant; neither do
they bear so well.

The Gennet-Moyl-Tree will be propagated by Slips or Cions, Gennet-Moyls.
as is the Codling, but is not so apt to grow in a hedge as the other: Both of
them bear sooner, if grafted, as other Apples are.

The manner of raising the Quince we have already discoursed, Quinces.
where we treated of raising Stocks to Graff on.

Filberds are generally drawn as Suckers from the old Trees, Filberds.
and will prosper very well, and sooner come to be Trees, than from the Nut.

Any shoot of the last year, more especially if a short piece of The Vine.
the former years growth be cut with it, will grow, being laid about a foot or
eighteen inches within the ground long-ways, and not above two or three Buds at
most out of the ground, about the month of February, and watered well in the
drought of Summer.

The Fig Tree yields Suckers, which is the usual way to multiply Figs.
them.

The Mulberry is a very difficult Tree to raise, and is best done Mulberries.
thus: Cut a Bough off as big as a man's Arm, and cut it in pieces a yard long,
or less: lay all these in the ground a foot deep, only one end out of the
ground about a hands breadth; let it be in fat and moist ground, or usually
watered; and after a year or two diverse young Springs may be drawn with Roots,
and planted at a distance, and the old Roots will yet send out more.

These three kinds of Fruits yield such plenty of Suckers, that Gooseberries,
Currants, and Barberries. To lay the Branches of Trees.
you never need doubt of a supply.

But if you desire Plants from the same, or any other sorts of precious Fruits
or Plants, and where you cannot obtain Suckers from the Roots, and where the
branches will not easily take root, being separated from the Tree, you may
obtain your desire by bending down some branch of the Tree to the ground; and
with a hooked stick thrust into the ground, stay the same in its place, and
cover the same branch with good Earth, as thick as you shall think fit, and
keep the same well watered; or if you cannot bring the branch to the Earth, you
may have some Earthen pot, Basket, or such like, with a hole in the bottom, and
fasten the same to the wall (if against a wall) or on some Post or Stake: Put
the Sprig or Branch you intend to plant through at the hole, and fill the same
with good Earth, and water it often as before: Some prick the Rind that is in
the Earth full of holes, that it may the better issue thereout small Roots;
others advise to cut away the Bark. This may be done in the Spring, from March
to May, and the Plant will be fit to cut off below the Earth the Winter
following. By this means you may obtain the Plants of Vines, Mulberries, or any
manner of choice Fruits or Plants.

SECT. IX. Of the Transplanting of Trees.
The best and most successful time for the transplanting or removing 1 The time
to transplant.
of Trees (such that shed their leaves in the Winter) whether they are the
young Stocks, or new Graffed Trees, or of longer standing, is in the Autumnal
Quarter, when the Trees have done growing: about the end of September you may
begin; the prime time is about the middle of October. You may continue till the
Tree begins to bud, if the weather be open.

Be careful in taking up the Plants, that requiring great care of 2 The manner
of transplanting.
the Remover. See the Roots be left on as much as may, especially the spreading
Roots, and let the Roots be larger than the head, the more ways they spread the
better; but you may take away such Roots as run downwards: Also take off the
leaves, if any, lest they weaken the Branches by extracting the Sap.

The younger and lesser the Tree is, the more likely he is to thrive and
prosper, because he suffers less injury by the removal than an older or greater
Tree: And an Orchard of young Trees will soon overtake another planted with
larger Trees at the same time.

Plant not too deep, for the Over-turf is always richer than the next Mould:
And in such places where the Land is Clayish, over-moist, or Spewy, plant as
near the Surface as you can, or above it, and raise the Earth about the Tree,
rather than set the Tree in the wet or Clay. The same Rule observe in Gravelly
or Chalky Land, for the Roots will seek their way downwards, but rarely
upwards: That I have known Trees planted too deep pine away, and come to
nothing. This Rule observed, many places may be made fruitful Orchards that now
are judged impossible, or not worth ones while.

In the transplanting of your young Trees, you may Prune as well the branches
as the roots, taking away the tops of the branches of Apples and Pears, but not
of Plums, Cherries, nor of Wall-nuts.

The Coast also is necessary to be observed, especially if the Tree be of any
considerable bigness, that the same side may stand South that was South before,
the Tree will thrive the better: Although in small Trees it be not much
observed, yet it might prove none of the least helps to its growth and
thriving. The most facile way to preserve the memory of its situation, is to
mark the South or North side of the Plant with Oker, Chalk, or such like,
before you remove it.

It is not a small check to a Plant, to be removed out of a warm Nursery into
the open Field, where the Northern and Eastern Winds predominate; or its
shelter to be removed, as by the cutting down of Hedges, and other Trees that
formerly defended them.

It is also very necessary to be observed, that the ground into which you plant
your Tree be of a higher and richer Mould than from whence you removed it, if
you expect your Tree to thrive; the change of Soyls or Pastures, from the
worser to the better, being of very high concernment for the improvement and
advance of all Vegetables and Animals.

These, and several other the like Observations, if they can be observed, will
much advantage the growth of your Tree for the first year or two; but if place
and time, and other accidents will not admit thereof, in a short time the Plant
may by the care and diligence of the Planter, overcome those inconveniences or
obstructions.

Let not the Ground wherein you plant Apples be too much enriched with Dung,
they requiring rather a vulgar and ordinary light Mould.

According to the nature or quantity of your ground or Trees 3 The distance of
Trees.
may the distance be; but the usual distance, and most convenient for
Apple Trees or Pear Trees for an Orchard, may be from twenty to thirty foot, if
you expect the benefit of the Land, under and between them, either for Grass or
Tillage, or that you plant them in your Fields or Pastures; then from thirty to
sixty foot may your distance be: The farther distance they are, the more
benefit and refreshment do they receive from the Sun and Air; the Fruit are
much the better, and the Trees prosper the better also: And if they are too
near together, the ground is for the most part of no advantage under them,
neither do the Trees thrive so well, nor are so fertile.

Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, Quince-trees, and such like, may be planted about
fifteen or twenty foot distance, which is sufficient.

Wall-trees may be planted at such a distance, as the height or breadth of the
Wall, the nature of the Tree, and the nature of the ground requires: the higher
the Wall, the nearer together the Trees; and the lower the Wall, the farther
distance, that they may have the room to spread in breadth which they want in
height. Vines require a more spacious and ample Wall or place to spread against
than any other Fruit; next to that the Pear, then the Aprecock, the Peach, the
Nectorine, and then the Cherry, the May-cherry, etc.

For the distance of other small Trees, as Filberds, Goosberries, Currants, etc.
you may plant them at such convenient distance, that the branches may not
entangle the one in the other, according to your own discretion.

Codlings, Cherries, Plums, etc. may be planted to make hedges withal, and then
are to be planted near together: the nearer, the sooner it will be a hedge; the
farther distance, the more Fruit will they bear, but not so soon a hedge.

If you design to fill your Plat of Ground with all sorts of Fruits for your
greatest advantage, then plant several Rows of Apples and Pear Trees at a
convenient distance in each Row, but the Rows of a farther distance each from
the other; and then about ten or fifteen foot on each side the Rows of the
greater Trees, plant a Row of Cherries, Plums, or such like Trees, of a lesser
stature or growth, and nearer together than the Apple or Pear Trees: Next unto
them also, at a convenient distance, a Row of Filberds; and next unto them
Goosberries, Currants, Rasberries, or such like small Fruit, leaving only a Walk
between the lesser Trees: For by this means will the whole ground be supplied;
and by that time that the greater Trees are grown to any competent stature, the
lesser will be decayed, that the greater Trees may have the sole Predominancy.

But the most complete order in the planting of an Orchard of the larger
Fruit Trees, is that which they term the Quincunx, by planting them at an equal
distance every way, only with this observation, that every Tree of the second
Row may stand against the middle of the space of the first, in the third
against the space of the second, and so throughout; which makes it appear
pleasing to the eye, in what part of the Orchard soever you stand.

In planting of Trees observe this Rule, that if the crookedness of the Tree
will enforce you to plant it leaning, or tending any way, let it be to the
West, from whence the strongest winds blow, or to such Coast your Orchard is
most obvious.

SECT. X. Of the Pruning of Trees.
It conduces very much to the proof and growth of a Tree to be Pruned, or the
unnecessary and injurious branches to be taken off by the skilful hand of the
Husbandman.

When your Graffs are grown half a Yard high, those you find 1 The pruning of
young Trees.
to shoot up in one Lance, pinch off their tender tops; which will prevent
their mounting, and cause them to put forth side-branches. It Is found to be the
best way to guide a Tree either to grow, or extend it self in height, or to
cause it to spread in breadth: It gives not that wound to Trees that Incisions
or Lances usually do; and besides, this may be done at that season, when the
taking away of a Bud prevents the expense of Sap in waste, and diverts its
course to others necessary to remain.

In March is the best time to take away the small and superfluous branches,
giving the Lance close behind a Bud, a thing to be specially observed in
Pruning.

Wall-trees are to be pruned in the Summer, and in the Winter. 2 Of Wall-trees.
In the Summer about June or July, you may take of such superfluous sprigs or
shoots of the same years growth off from Vines, Aprecocks, or other Trees that
put forth many large shoots, that impede the Fruit from its due Maturation, and
contract much of the sap of the Tree to themselves, and thereby rob the other.

In the Winter, as soon as the leaves are off the Trees, you may Prune and cut
away the residue of the branches, and place those that are fit to be left in
order. This work may be continued throughout the Winter to the rising of the
Sap, except in great Frosts, when it is not good to wound the Vine, or any
other tender plant. Some hold February to be the best time to plash, prune, and
nail Trees, after the great Frosts are past, except Peaches and Nectorines;
which being cut before the rising of the Sap, are apt to die after the Knife,
and so stump and deform the Tree: Therefore such must be left till they begin
to put forth Buds and Blossoms.

The greater Trees in your Gardens, Orchards, Fields, etc. 3 The pruning of old
Trees.
may be pruned in October, November, or thenceforward, to the rising of the
Sap. Observe to cut away superfluous branches, such as cross one the other, as
grow too thick, or that offend any other Tree or place, or that are broken,
bruised, or decaying; the Tree will be the better preserved, and the remaining
branches will yield the greater increase.

In Pruning of Trees, especially the Wall-tree, be sure to leave Other
observations in pruning Trees.
the small Twigs that are short and knitted to blossom the succeeding year; for
you may observe, that most Aprecocks, Peaches, Plums, Cherries, etc. hang on
those Sprigs, being usually of two years growth: These are therefore to be
carefully nourished, and not cut off, as is usual, to beautify the Tree. By
this very Observation your Walls shall be full of Fruit, when your Neighbors
have but few.

In Wall-fruit cut off all gross shoots, however fair they seem to the eye,
that will not without much bending be well placed to the Wall; for if any
branch happen to be wreathed or bruised in the bending or turning (which you
may not easily perceive) although it does grow and prosper for the present, yet
it will decay in time; the Sap or Gum will also spew out in that place. By
neglect of this Observation, many seeming fair Trees decay in several parts,
when the Husbandman is ignorant of the cause.

In Pruning the Vine, leave some new branches every year, and take away (if too
many) some of the old; which much advantageth the Tree, and increases its
fruit.

When you cut your Vine, leave two knots, and cut at the next interval; for
usually the two Buds yields a bunch of Grapes. I have observed Vines thus
pruned to bear many fair bunches, when cut close, as usually is done for Beauty
sake (which by the Husbandman is not in this case to be regarded) the Tree has
been almost barren of Fruit.

When you cut any Pithy Tree, the Vine especially, make your Lance, if the
Sprig be upright, on the North-side; if sloping, then make your Lance under, or
on one side, that the wet or Rain lodge not on it, nor decay the Pith, which
usually damnifies the next Bud, and sometimes more.

SECT. XI. Other necessary Observations about Fruit Trees.
Where the ground is shallow, or lies near Gravel, Clay, Stone 1 Of the
raising of Land.
or Chalk, or near the Water, take the top of one half of the same Land, and
lay it on the other in Ridges, abating the intervals like unto Walks, and plant
the Trees on the midst of the Ridges; by which means they will have double the
quantity of Earth to root in that they had before, and the Walks or Intervals
preserve the Ridges from superfluous moisture. It has been found an approved
Remedy in dry shallow Land, as well as in low wet Land.

It has been observed, that Pear Trees will thrive and prosper Pear Trees.
in cold, moist, hungry, stony, and gravelly Land, where Apples will not bear
so well.

The Roots of such Trees that thrive not, nor bear well, may 2 Of the ordering
the Roots of old Trees.
be laid open about November; and if the ground be poor and hungry, then
toward the Spring apply good fat Mould thereto; but if the ground be over-fat
and rich, that the Tree spends it self in Branches and Leaves with little
Fruit, then apply to the Roots, Ashes or Lime, or any of the Composts that are
salt, hot and dry, mixed with the Earth, which contain more of fertility than
the ordinary Dung.

Also laying store of any manner of Vegetables all the Summer about the roots
of Fruit Trees, to kill the Grass and Weeds growing about the Tree, it keeps
the ground moist and cool, and adds much to the flourishing and fertility of
the Tree, and is the best Natural Remedy against the Moss; so that it lie not
too near the Tree, to decay the Bark thereof.

Digging or Ploughing about the Roots of Fruit Trees, adds much to their
fertility, and prevents the Moss in most Trees.

Stones laid in heaps about the Roots, preserves them cool and moist in the
Summer, and warm in Winter; and is of great use and concernment to the
fertility and advance of the growth of Fruit Trees.

The ground wherein you plant your Fruit Trees, if you find it 3 Alteration of
ground.
not suitable to the Nature of the Tree, may be several ways altered as before:
and by the applying of Earth, Clay, or Sand, of a diverse Nature from the ground
where the Tree grows.

If your Orchard or Garden be not naturally well situate, and 4 Defending
Trees from Winds.
defended from the injurious winds by Hills or Woods; or that Buildings, Barns,
Walls, or such like, are not conveniently situate near to preserve it, it is
of great advantage to raise a perpetual, lasting, and pleasant shelter, by
planting a complete Thorn-hedge about the same at the time, or in that Year you
White-thorn.
first plant your Orchard or Garden, which will grow in a few years to a
considerable height, and very much break the cold winds, and preserve the
smaller and lower part of the greater Trees, in their blossoming and kerning
time, from the nipping winds: But for that, that the principallest parts of the
greater Trees exceed the Summity of the White-thorn, the Wallnut-tree
Wallnut-tree.
raised in time on the borders or naked sides of the Orchard or Garden, and if
you can on the outsides of the Fences, will prove a Noble and profitable
defense from the furious winds.

If you regard not the Fruit or profit, so much as the pleasure and sudden rise
of such a defense, that which is most facile and expeditious to be raised is
the Poplar, which may be planted poplar.
near together, and ten or fifteen foot in height the first year, which will
prove and thrive wonderfully, especially if the ground be any whit inclineable
to moisture.

Or the Lime-tree, if you can conveniently obtain them, make Lime-tree.
a close and secure defense from the winds, and of all other is the most
odoriferous, regular, and delicious verdant pale to a Garden or Orchard. The
Sycamore, and the Elm also are not to be rejected; only the Elm has an ill
name, as being subject to raise or attract Blights.

At the removal of Trees, the trimmings of the roots planted, 5 Raising Stocks.
or rather buried in the ground within a quarter of an inch, or little more of
the level of the Bed, will sprout and grow to be very good Stocks.

Pigeons dung, or the dung of Poultry, or any Fowl, being of 6 Soil for
Fruit Trees.
a hot, dry, and salt Nature, has been experimentally found to be the Soil
most conducing to fertility for Fruit Trees, especially in cold grounds.

It is usual to select aspiring Trees, and to expect the fairer 7 Height of
Trees.
Trees (because taller) and better and more Fruit, than those that are low. It Is
true, the more remote the branches are from the Earth, the less are they
subject to the injuries of Cattle, or the Fruit to light fingers.

But the lower the Tree brancheth it self and spreads, the fairer and sooner
will it attain to be a Tree, and the greater burden will it bear of Fruit, and
those better and larger. The Tree and Fruit will also be less obvious to the
furious winds, which make havoc most years of a great part of our stock; and
in the Spring the new-kerned Fruit will be more within the shelter of the
Natural or Artificial Securities from the nipping cold morning Breese; and the
Fruit, when ripe and apt to fall, will not receive so great injury from the
humble, as from the aspiring Tree. Sed medio Virtus. As the tall Tree is not
for your advantage; so the Tree that is too low is not for your convenience. I
aim not at Extremes.

In many places Fruit Trees are much injured by Moss; it rarely 8 Diseases of
Trees. Moss.
grows on Trees where the ground is yearly dug, ploughed, or otherwise
preserved from Grass or Weeds, as we noted before. If the cold, moist, or
barren nature of the ground be the cause, then rectify the same, as before.
After Rain you may scrape off the Moss with a knife, or rub it off with a
Hair-cloth.

If the Tree be Bark-bound, and thrive not well, with a knife Bark-bound.
you may slit the Bark down the body of the Tree in April or May, and it will
cure it.

If the Cleft where the Tree was grafted, or any other wounded Canker.
place be neglected, the Rain is apt to engender the Canker: the cure is
difficult, if too far gone. There are many prescriptions for the cure of it;
but if the cutting off of the Canker or cankered-branches will not cure it, and
the Tree be much infected with it, the best way is to place a better in the
room.

Some Trees are hurt with small Worms that breed between Worms in the Bark.
the bark and wood, which makes the bark swell: cut away part of the bark, and
wash with Urine and Cow Dung.

Strong or hot dung is not good for Fruit Trees; but after it is Soil for Trees.
thoroughly rotten and cold, it may be mixed in cold grounds with success, but
in rich or warm Land. Any dirt or soil that lies in streets or highways, where
it may be had, is best, especially for the Apple Tree.

Commonly Husbandmen apply Soil, Fern, etc. to the stems of How to apply Soil
to Trees.
their Trees; and if they dig to apply it, it is usually near the body of the
Tree, which will not answer the trouble; for the Roots that feed the Tree,
spread far from the Trunk or Stem: therefore the soil that is to be applied
should be laid at a convenient distance proportionable to the spreading of the
Roots; wherein the long standing of the Tree is to be considered; digging
about, the roots of Trees should also be used accordingly.

In planting of Trees, it is usual to apply good Mould, or other additional
soil, to fill up the Fosse after the placing the Tree; which conduces not so
much to the prosperity of the Plant, as to place the better Mould or soil in
the bottom of the Fosse, and then plant your Tree on it, spreading its roots
over the good soil; for all roots of Plants as naturally tend downwards and
side-ways, as the branches spread and advance upwards: So that the soil that
lies above the roots, only yields some fatness which the Rain washes down unto
them; but the soil that is under, the roots flourish in it. The difference, in
this case, may at any time be sensibly perceived by the experienced.

SECT. XII. Of the use and benefit of Fruits.
Not any of the aforementioned Fruits, but are very pleasant, necessary, and
profitable to many of our English Palats and Purses; the most of them being a
familiar food to the Noble and Ignoble. These extend their virtue also to the
cure of many infirmities or diseases, being judiciously applied.

But over and above their use for food, for pleasure, and for Physic, to be
converted into so many several sorts of curious, pleasant, palatable, and
lasting Liquors, is not the least of the benefits accrewing unto the Husbandman
from the diversity of Fruits by him propagated. Next unto Wine (whereof we
treat not in this place) Cider is esteemed the most pleasant natural Liquor our
English Fruits afford.

Several are the ways used in making this excellent Liquor, and 1 By Cider.
that according to the skill of the Operator, and diverse kinds of the Fruit
whereof it is made.

Cider-fruits may be reduced into two sorts or kinds; either the wild, harsh,
and common Apple, growing in great plenty in Hereford, Worcester, and
Gloucestershire, and in several other adjacent places in the fields and
hedg-rows, and planted in several other places of England for Cider only, not
at all tempting the Palate of the Thief, nor requiring the charge and trouble
of the more reserved enclosures.

Or the more curious Table-fruits, as the Pippin, Pearmain, etc. which are by
many preferred to make the best Cider, as having in them a more Cordial and
pleasant Juice than other Apples.

For the former, the best sorts for Cider are found to be the Cider-fruits.
Red-streak, the White-Must, and the Green-Must, the Gennet-Moyl, Eliots,
Stocken-Apple, Summer-Fillet, Winter-Fillet, etc.

The greater part of them being merely savage, and so harsh, that hardly Swine
will eat them, yet yielding a most plentiful, smart and winy Liquor,
comparable, or rather exceeding the best French-Wines: And for the advantage of
planting them, they claim a preference before Pippins, or any other of our
pleasant Garden-fruits, especially the Red-streak, which Mr. Evelin so highly
commends, as at three years grafting to give you fair hopes, and last almost an
hundred years; and will bear as much Fruit at ten years, as Pippins or
Pearmains at thirty.

The best sorts of Cider-fruit are far more succulent, and the Liquor more
easily divides from the Pulp of the Apple, than in the best Table-fruit.

Some observe, the more of red any Apple has in his rind, the better for
Cider; the paler, the worse. No sweet Apple that has a tough rind, is bad for
Cider.

Cider-Apples require full maturity, e're they be taken from Making of Cider.
the Trees: And after they are gathered (which is to be done with as much
caution as may be, to preserve them from bruises) it very much conduces to the
goodness and lasting of the Cider, to let them lie a week or two on heaps out
of the Rain and Dew: the harsher and more solid the Fruit is, the longer may
they lie; the more mellow and pulpy, the less time. This makes them sweat forth
their Aqueous Humidity, injurious to the Cider, and matureth the Juice
remaining, and digesteth it more than if on the Tree, or in the Vessel: But
it is probable they will yield more from the Tree than so kept, but not so good.

Such that are Wind-falls, bruised, or any ways injured, or unripe fruit,
divide from the sound and mature. It Is better to make two sorts of Cider, the
one good, the other bad, than only bad. Take away all stalks, leaves, and
rotten Apples; the stalks and leaves give an ill taste to the Cider, the rotten
Apples makes it deadish.

Let such that are through casualty, or otherwise fallen from the Trees before
their full time of maturity, be kept to the full time, else will not the Cider
be worth the drinking.

About twenty, or twenty two bushels of good Cider-Apples from the Tree, will
make a Hogshead of Cider; after they have lain a while in heaps to mellow,
about twenty five bushels will make a Hogshead.

Then either grind them in a Horse-mill, like as Tanners grind their Bark, or
beat them with Beaters in a Trough of Wood, rather than of Stone; the more they
are ground or beaten, the better.

After the grinding it should be pressed, either being Artificially made up with
Straw, in form of a Cheese, as the experienced Countryman may direct you; or
in a Hair-bag (the more ordinary way for small quantities) and so committed to
the Press; of which there are several sorts, but the Screw-press is to be
preferred.

After it is pressed, strain it, and put it into the Vessel, and place it wherein
it may stand to ferment, allowing but a small Vent-hole, lest the spirits
waste: Fill not the Vessel quite till it has done working; then fill the
Vessel of the same kept for that purpose, and stop it well, only with caution
at the first, lest it break the Vessel.

The best Vessels for the Tunning up of Cider, and to preserve it, are those
whereof the Barrel-boards are straight, the Vessel broader at the one end than
the other, and standing on the lesser end, the Bung-hole on the top; the
convenience is, that in the drawing the Cider, though but slowly, the Skin or
Cream contracted by its Fermentation descends, and wholly covers the Liquor by
the tapering of the Vessel, and thereby preserves the Spirits of the Cider to
the last, which otherwise would waste and expend themselves.

If you intend a mixture of water with your Cider, let it be done in the
grinding, and it will better incorporate with the Cider in the grinding and
pressing, than afterward.

Some Cider will bear a mixture with water, without injury to its preservation,
others will not; therefore be not overhasty with too much at once, till you
understand the nature of your Fruit.

Some advise, that before it be pressed, the Liquor and Must should for four and
twenty hours ferment together in a Vat for that purpose close covered, which is
said to enrich the Liquor.

The other sorts of Fruits for the making of Cider, are the Pippin, Other
Cider-Fruits.
Pearmain, Gilliflower, etc. by many preferred; with whom we may rank all sorts
of Summer-Apples, as the Kentish Codling, Marigolds, all other sorts of Pippins
and Pearmains, etc.

Which after they are through ripe, and laid on heaps to sweat (as before is
directed) and grownd or beaten, and pressed as the other, then is not this Cider
or Must to be tunned up immediately, but suffered to stand in the Vat four and
twenty hours, or more; according as the Apples were more or less pulpy, and
close covered with Hair-cloaths or Sacks, that too much of the Spirits may not
exaporate, nor be kept so closely in as to cause Fermentation; in which time
the more gross part of the Feces will precipitate or fall to the bottom, which
otherwise would have prejudiced the Cider by an over-fermentation, and have
made it flat and sour.

Then at a Tap, three or four inches from the bottom of the Vat, draw forth the
Cider, and Tun it up, wherein is yet a sufficient quantity of that gross Lee or
Feces to cause Fermentation; the want of the right understanding whereof, is
one of the main causes of so much bad Cider throughout England.

2. Of the making of Perry.
Non omnis fert omnia tell us. In some places Pears will thrive Sorts of Pears.
where Apples will not; the Trees are larger, and bear greater quantities than
Apple Trees. In Worcestershire they have great plenty of Pears for Perry; and
also in the adjacent Countries: The best for Perry are such that are not fit to
be eaten; so harsh, that Swine will not eat, nay hardly smell to them; the
fitter to be planted in Hedg-rows, etc. The Bosbury-Pear, the Horse-Pear, the
Bareland-Pear, and the Choak-Pear, are such that bear the name of the best
Pears for Perry; the redder they are, the more to be preferred.

Pears are to be fully mature e're they be grownd, and let lie Making of Perry.
on heaps as the Apples.

Crabs and Pears grownd together, make an excellent Liquor; the Crabs helping
to preserve the Perry.

The method of making Perry differs not from that of Cider.

3. Some Observations concerning Cider.
Thick Cider may by a second Fermentation be made good and clear; but Acid
Cider is rarely recovered.

Wheat unground, about a Gallon to a Hogshead, or Leven or Mustard ground with
Cider, or much better with Sack, a pint to a Hogshead, is used either to
preserve or recover Cider that is in danger of spoiling.

Ginger accelerateth the Maturation of the Cider; gives it a more brisky
Spirit, helps Fermentation, and promoteth its duration.

New Vessels affect the Cider with an ill savor, and deep color; therefore if
you cannot obtain Wine-Cask, which are the best, nor yet can season your own
with Beer, or other Drinks, then scald it with water, wherein a good quantity
of Apple-Pounce has been boiled.

If the Vessel be tainted, then boil an ounce of Pepper in water, enough to
fill the Vessel; and let it stand therein two or three days.

Or take some quick Lime and put in the Vessel, which slacken with water: close
stop it, and tumble it up and down, till the Commotion cease.

Two or three Eggs put into a Hogshead of Cider that is sharp, sometimes
lenifies it: Two or three rotten Apples will clarify thick Cider.

The mildness and temperature of the weather is of much concernment in the
Fermentation of Cider.

Boil Cider immediately after the Press, before Fermentation.

Wheaten-Bran cast in after Fermentation, thickens the Coat or Cream, and much
conduces to its preservation.

The Cider that runs from the ground, or beaten Apples, before they are in the
Press, is much to be preferred.

Let the Vessel not be quite full, that there may be room for the Cider to
gather a head or Cream.

Pearmains make but small Cider of themselves.

Botling is the only way to preserve Cider long: It may be Botling of Cider.
botled two or three days after it is well settled, and before it has thoroughly
fermented; or you may bottle it in March following, which is the best time.

Bottles may be kept all the Summer in cold Fountains, or in Cellars in Sand:
If they are well Corked and bound, they may be kept many years in cold places;
the longer the better, if the Cider be good.

After Cider has been botled a week, (if New Cider, else at the time of
botling) you may put into each bottle a piece of white Sugar as big as a
Nutmeg; this will make it brisk.

If your bottles be in danger of the Frost, cover them with straw: about April
set them in Sand, or in a Fountain.

It is not the best way to grind or beat Apples in Stone-troughs, because it
bruises the kernels and tails of the Fruit too much, which gives an ill savor
to the Cider; but beaten or ground in wooden-troughs, frees it from that
quality.

After your Apples are beaten or ground, it is the best way to let them stand a
day or two before you press them; for the Cider does a little ferment and
maturate in the Pulp, and obtains a better color, than if immediately pressed.

After they are pressed, it is good to let the Cider stand in a Vat covered, to
ferment a day and night, before you Tun it up; and then draw it from the Vat by
a Tap, about two inches from the bottom, or more, according to discretion,
leaving the Feces behind; which will not be lost, if you put it up on the
Chaff; for then it meliorates your Pur, or Water-Cider, if you make any.

When your Cider is Tunn'd into the Barrel where you intend to keep it, leave
some small vent open for several days, until its wild spirit be spent; which
will otherwise break the Barrel, or find some vent that will always abide open
(though but small) to the ruin of your Cider. Many have spoiled their Cider by
this only neglect, and never apprehended the cause thereof; which when stopped
close, after this wild spirit is spent (although seemingly flattish at first)
will improve, and become brisk and pleasant Cider in a little time.

If Cider prove thick or sowrish, bruise a few Apples, and put in at the Bung
of your Barrel, and it will beget a new Fermentation, and very much mend your
Cider, so that in a few days after you draw it off into another Vessel.

If Cider be only a little sowrish, or drawn off in another Vessel, the way to
correct or preserve it, is to put about a Gallon of Wheat (blaunch'd is best)
to a Hogshead of Cider; and so, according to that proportion, to a greater or
lesser quantity, which will as well amend as preserve it.

If Cider has any ill savor or taste from the Vessel, or any other cause, a
little Mustard Seed ground with some of the Cider, and put to it, will help it.

Mixture of Fruit is of great advantage to your Cider: the meanest Apples mixed
make as good Cider, as the best alone; always observing, that they be of equal
ripeness, except the Red-streak, and some few celebrated Cider-Apples.

4. Of the Wines or Juices of other Fruits.
If Cherries were in so great plenty that the Markets would not take them off
at a good rate, they would become very beneficial to be converted into Wine,
which they would yield in great quantity, very pleasant and refreshing; and a
finer, cooler, and more natural Summer-drink than Wine. It may also be made to
keep long: Some has been kept a whole year, and very good.

Although it may not prove so brisk, clear, and curious a drink Wine of Plums.
as Cherry-wine, yet where Plums are in great plenty, (they being Trees easily
propagated) a very good Wine may be made of them; according to the great
diversity of this sort of Fruit, you must expect diverse Liquors to proceed from
them. The black tawny Plum is esteemed the best.

This Fruit yields a good Wine, being prepared by a skilful Mulberry-Wine
hand; the natural Juice serves, and is of excellent use to add a tincture to
other paler Wines or Liquors.

England yields not a Fruit whereof can be made a more pleasant Rasberry-Wine.
drink, or rather Wine, than of this humble Fruit; if compounded with other
Wines or drinks, it animates them with so high a fragrant savor and gust, that
it tempts the most curious Palats.

The juice of this Fruit, boiled with a proportionable addition Wine of Currants.
of water and Sugar, makes a very pleasant Wine to the eye and taste, it being
duly fermented and botled. A great quantity of this Fruit may also be raised in
a little ground, and in a few years.

Of the Juice of Goosberries extracted in it is due time, and Gooseberry-Wine.
mixed with water and Sugar, is prepared a very pleasant cooling Repast. This
Fruit is easily propagated, and yields much Liquor: It Is usually made unboiled,
because it contracts a brown color in the boiling.

As for any other Liquors, Preservations, or Conservations of these or any
other Fruits, I leave you to the many Tracts published already on that Subject.

CHAP. VIII.
Of such Tillage, Herbs, Roots and Fruits, that are usually planted and
propagated in Gardens and Garden-grounds, either for necessary Food, Use, or
Advantage.

MOst of these several sorts of Tillage, whereof we are now The advantage of
Garden-Tillage in general.
to treat in this Chapter, will raise unto the Industrious Husbandman an
extraordinary advantage, and are not to be esteemed amongst the least of
Improvements; for each sort being properly planted in such ground they most
naturally delight in, and being well Husbandried, and judiciously ordered,
produce an incredible advantage.

But think not this strange, that common and well-known Plants, that are so
natural to our English Soil, should prove so beneficial; it is for no other
cause, than that some men are more Industrious and Ingenious than others: For
these Garden-plants prosper not without great labor, care and skill; and
besides, are subject more than others to the injuries of unseasonable weather.
Neither of which the slothful or ignorant Husbandman can away with; affecting
only such things that will grow with least toil, hazard, or expense, though
they feed on bread and water, when the diligent and industrious Adventurer
lives like a petty Prince on the fruit of his labors and expectation, which
sufficiently repays his expense and hazard. It is hard to find any Trade,
Occupation, or Employment, that a man may presume on a large and Noble Requital
of his time, cost or industry, but it is hazardous, especially to such that
attempt the same without a special affectation thereunto, or skill therein.

Nil tam difficile est quod non Solertia vincet. So this Art and Employment of
Planting, Propagating and Increasing of Hops, Saffron, Liquorice, Cabbage,
Onions, and other Garden-Commodities, being casual, and more subject to the
injuries of the weather than commonly Corn or Grass is, makes it so much
neglected; for one bad Crop, or bad year for any of them, shall more discourage
a Countryman from a Plantation thereof, than five good Crops, though never so
profitable and advantageous shall encourage: Ignorant and self-willed men are
naturally so prone to raise Objections, on purpose to deter themselves and
others from any thing whatsoever that is either pleasant or profitable.

But we hope better of the Ingenious, that they will set to their helping hand
to promote this useful and necessary Art, and thereby become a provoking
President to their ignorant Neighbors, that our Land may be a Land of Plenty,
that it may superabound with necessaries, and rather afford a supply to their
Neighbors, than expect it from them, as we are enforced to do in several sorts
of those things we treat of in this Book: Those of our own growth also far
exceeding that we have abroad; which inconveniences and disadvantages nothing
can better prevent, than our own Industry and Ingenuity.

Besides, most of this Garden-Tillage is of late years become a more general
Food than formerly it was: Scarce a Table well furnished, without some dishes of
choice Roots or Herbs; and it is not only pleasant to the rich, but good for
the poor laboring man; many, where plenty is, feeding for the most part on
Tillage, which has occasioned that great increase of Gardens and Plantations
in most of the Southern parts of England. Several sorts also of Tillage being
profitable in the feeding of Cattle and Fowl.

SECT. I. Of Hops.
We mention this Plant in the first place, not for his worth or Dignity above
the rest, it being esteemed an unwholesome Herb or Flower for the use it is
usually put unto, which may also be supplied with several other wholesomer and
better Herbs; but for that of all other Plants, it advances Land to the
highest improvement, usually to forty pound, or fifty pound; sometimes to an
hundred pound per Acre.

And yet have we not enough planted to serve the Kingdom, but yearly make use
of Flemish Hops, nothing near so good as our own. The principal cause I presume
is, that few bestow that labor and industry about them they require, and
sufficiently retaliate: for being managed carelessly, they scarce yield a
quarter part of the increase that those yield that are dexterously handled,
though with very little more cost. Another cause is why they are no more
propagated here, that they are the most of any Plant that grows subjected to
the various Mutations of the Air, from the time of their first springing, till
they are ready to be gathered. Overmuch drought, or wet, spoils them:
Mill-dews also sometimes totally destroys them; which casualties happening unto
them, makes their price and valuation so uncertain, and proves so great a
discouragement to the Countryman; else why may not we have as great a plenty of
them, as in Flanders, Holland, etc. Our Land is as cheap, and affords as great
a Crop (if as well Husbandried) and we pay not for carriage so far, but that
they are more Industrious than us: Therefore seeing that is so gainful a
Commodity to the Husbandman, and that there is a sufficient vent for them at
home, we shall be the more Prolix in the subsequent discourse.

The Hop delights in the richest Land; a deep Mould, and Best Land and
situation for a Hop-garden.
light; if mixed with Sand it is the better: a black Garden-mould is excellent
for the Hop.

If it lie near the water, and may be laid dry, it is by much the better.

Most sorts of Land will serve, unless stony, rocky, or stiff Clay-ground,
which are not to be commended for the Hop.

If you can obtain it, a piece of Land a little inclining to the South, and
that lies low, the ground mellow and deep, and where water may be at command in
the Summer time, is to be preferred for a Hop-garden.

Also it ought to lie warm and free from impetuous winds, especially from the
North and East, either defended by Hills or Trees, but by Hills the best.

Every one cannot have what Land he pleases, but must make Defending the
Hop-garden by Trees.
use of what he has; therefore if your ground lie obvious to the winds, it is
good to raise a natural defense therefrom, by planting on the edges of the
Hop-garden a border or row of Trees that may grow tall, and break the force of
the winds at such time the Poles are laden with Hops. The Elm is esteemed not
fit to be planted near the Hop, because it contracteth Mill-dews, say our
Country Hop-planters; the Ash on a dry ground, and the Poplar or Aspen on a
moist, are to be preferred for their Aspen.
speedy growth. Also a tall and thick hedge of White-thorn keeps the ground
warm, and secures it in the Spring from the sharp nipping winds that spoil the
young Shoots.

If your Land be cold, stiff, sour or barren, you design for a Preparing the
ground and distance of the Hills.
Hop-garden, the best way is about the latter end of the Summer to burn it, (as
before we directed) which will be very available to the amendment of the Land.
Some also prescribe to sow Turnips, Hemp, or Beans therein, to make the ground
light and mellow, and destroy the Weeds.

But in whatsoever state or condition your ground be, Till it in the beginning
of the Winter, with either Plough or Spade.

And when you have set out the bounds of your ground you intend to plant, and
laid the same even, then must you mark out the several places where each Hill
is to be: The best way is by a Line straightened over-thwart the ground, with
knots or threads tied at such distance you intend your Hills. Some plant them in
squares, Checquer-wise; which is the best way, if you intend to plough with
Horses between the Hills: Others plant them in form of a Quincunx, which is the
more beautiful to the eye, and better for the Hop, and will do very well where
your ground is but small, that you may overcome it with either the
Breast-plough or Spade: which way soever it be, pitch a small stick at every
place where there is to be a Hill; and when it is all so done, in case your
ground be poor or stiff, bring into it of the best Mould you can get, or a
parcel of Dung and Earth mixed; and at every stick dig a hole of about a foot
square, and fill it with this Mould or Compost wherein your Plants are to be
set, they will thrive the better, and the sooner come to bear, and sufficiently
repay your charge and trouble.

Great Rarity there is both in the judgment and the practice of Distance of the
Hills.
most men about the distance of the Hills, by reason of the different Seasons:
Sometimes it falls out to be a moist year, and then the Hop grows large; and
the wider the Hills are, the better they prove. Some years also prove hot and
dry, the Hops then grow thin; and the nearer they are, the more Hops they have:
But let me advise to keep a convenient distance, that you may have room
sufficient to come between, and ground sufficient to raise the Hills with the
Parings or Surface of it; and that the Sun may come between; and that the Poles
may not be driven the one against the other with the winds, when they are laden.

If your ground be dry and burning, about six foot may be a convenient
distance; but if it be a moist, deep, and rich Mould, subject to bear large
Hops, then eight or nine foot distance is most convenient: and so, according to
the goodness of the ground, place the distance of the Hills.

But if your Hills are too far asunder, the best way to remedy Bigness of the
Hills.
that inconvenience, is by increasing the number of Hops in the Root in each
Hill; by which means you may apply more Poles, and supply the former defect.
Hills may be made of that bigness, that they may require six, ten, or twenty
Poles. The common Objection is, they cannot so conveniently be dressed; but I
only propose it as amendment, to make them somewhat bigger than ordinary: Or if
your Hills be too near together, you may also abate the Hops, and apply the
fewer Poles; for over-poling of a ground, as well in number as height, injures
it more than under-poling.

Authors, and most Practisers, usually advise to plant Hops in Time of planting
Hops.
the end of March, or in April; but some of our best experienced Planters
affirm it to be best in October, before the cold Winter; and that then the Hops
will settle against the Spring.

Choose the largest Sets that you can get; which are to be had Choice of Sets,
and manner of Setting.
best out of a Garden well kept, and where the Hills have been raised very high
the precedent year, which increases the Plants both in number and bigness: Let
them be as long as you can get them; about eight or ten inches may be of a very
good length, and in each plant three or four joints or Buds.

Before you have your Sets out of the ground, make the holes ready to put them
in, if you can, else you must be forced to lay them in cold and moist Earth,
and take them out as you have occasion to use them: dig your holes according to
the depth of your Plant, eight, ten, or twelve inches deep, and about a foot
over.

Some take two or three of the Plants, and join the tops together, and set them
bolt-upright, directly in the middle of the hole, holding them hard together
with the one hand, while you fill the hole with the other, with fine Mould
prepared and made ready beforehand for that purpose; observing, that you set
the tops even with the Surface of the ground, and the same end uppermost that
grew so before; then fasten well the Earth about the Roots.

Others place at each corner of the hole a Plant; which way is to be preferred
before the other.

It is convenient to raise the Earth two or three inches above the Set, unless
you plant so late, that the Green Sprigs are shot forth; then you are not to
cover them wholly, lest you destroy them.

Beware of wild Hops, which are only discerned by the Stalk and Fruit.

If your Hops be old and ill husbandried, or worn out of heart, Dressing Hops.
then about the beginning of Winter dig them, and take away as much of the old
barren Earth as you can, and apply good fat Mould or Compost to their Roots; or
if you cannot conveniently, or think it not fit to do it before Mid-winter, yet
neglect not to do it in January or February at the furthest, the weather being
open; for such Winter-dressing, and renewing their Mould, is a principal
Renovation to a decaying Hop: or if your Hop-ground be full of Weeds or
Couch-grass, such Winter digging of it destroys them.

But if your Hops be in good heart, and strong, then late dressing is most
proper, which restrains them from too early springing, which is the cause of
many injuries to the Hop: The only time for such strong Hops to be dressed in
is March; some dress in the beginning of April.

In the dressing of Hops, these Rules are necessary to be observed: First, to
pull down your hills, and undermine them round about, till you come near to the
principal Roots; and then take the upper or younger Roots in your hand, and
shake off the Earth: which Earth being removed away, with your said Tool you
shall discern where the new Roots grow out of the old Sets; in the doing
whereof, be careful that you spoil not the old Sets: As for the other Roots
that are to be cut away, you shall not need to spare them to the delay of your
work, except such as you mean to set.

Take heed that you uncover not any more than the tops of the old Sets in the
first year of cutting: at what time soever you pull down your hills, cut not
your Roots before March.

At the first dressing of young Hops, cut away all such Roots or Sprigs as grew
the year before out of your Sets, within one inch of the same: Every year after
you must cut them as close as you can to the old Roots, even as you see an
Osters head cut, say our Authors; but it is found experimentally to be
advantageous to a weak Hop, to leave some principal new shoots at the dressing;
and that the clean cutting off of them, has very much decayed a Hop-garden.

The Roots that grow downward are not to be cut, but such that grow outward at
the sides of the Plants may, else they will incumber the ground.

The old Roots are red, these of the last year white; if there be any wild
Hops, you must take up the whole hill, and new plant it, marking the hill with
a stick at the Hop-harvest, to prevent mistakes.

When you have dressed the Roots, then apply of your rich Mould or Compost
prepared for that purpose, and make the hill not too high at first, lest you
hinder the young Shoots; although the Hops be sprung out of the hills, yet fear
not the cutting of them off when you dress them.

Be sure to keep Poultry, and especially Geese, out of the Hop-garden,
especially during the Spring.

According to the distance of your hills, and nature of the Of Poling the Hops.
ground, provide the number of your Poles; and according to the strength of the
Hop, the length or bigness.

If the hills be wide, the more Poles, sometimes four or five to a hill; if the
hills are near, then two or three may suffice: In hot, and dry, and hungry
ground, the Poles may stand nearer than in rich mellow Land, where they are
more subject to grow gross and hawmy.

Also if your Hops be strong, and ground rich, provide large Poles, either in
bigness or in length, or else you loose the best of your profit for want of
Poles; but if they are poor, provide but small Poles, lest you impoverish the
Root, for the Hop will soon run it self out of heart, if over-poled: More
especially, be sure not to over-pole Hops the first Year of their Plantation,
although they require as many Poles (or rather Rods) the first, as any other
Year.

You must be content with such Poles the Country you live in affords;
Alder-poles are esteemed the best, because the Hop most willingly climbeth
them, by reason of their straight and tapering form, and also their rough
rind, which suffers not the Hop so easily to slip down.

But the Ash is esteemed the best for lasting, especially such that grow on dry
and barren Lands of many years growth, which are known by the many Circles in
the bottom: I have known such to have lasted ten or twelve Years, the Wood
being much harder, and more durable, than the speedy grown Poles.

Some altogether reject forked Poles, and usually cut off the forked branches,
if any, because they cannot (as they pretend) so easily strip off the Hops at
gathering time: But I have known the greatest burden of Hops on a forked Pole,
and to have suffered less injury by the Winds when they have been fully blown;
and that inconveniency of not stripping them, is easily remedied by our
directions, as you will hereafter find.

Disperse the Poles among the hills before you begin to Pole, laying of them
between the hills.

Begin not to Pole until your Hops appear above the ground, that you discern
where the biggest Poles are required, and so may you continue Poling till they
are a Yard in height, or more; but stay not too long, lest you hinder the
growth of the Hop, which will grow large, unless it has a Pole, or such like,
to climb unto.

Set the Pole near to the hill, and in depth according to the height of the
Pole, nature of the ground, and obviousness to winds, that the Pole may rather
break than rise out of the ground by any fierce winds.

Let the Poles lean outward the one from the other, that they may seem to stand
equi-distant at the top, to prevent Housling, as they term it, which they are
subject unto if they grow too near the one from the other; that is, they will
grow one amongst another, and cause so great a shade, that you will have more
Hawm than Hops. Also it is esteemed an excellent piece of Husbandry to set all
the Poles inclining toward the South, that the Sun may the better compass
them. This is most evident, that a leaning or bending Pole bears more Hops than
an upright.

Be sure to reserve a parcel of the worst Poles, that you may have for your
need, in case when the Poles are laden, a Pole may break, or be over-burthened,
to support it; for if they lie on the ground, they soon perish.

With a Rammer you may ram the Earth at the outside of the Pole, for its
further security against winds.

If after some time of growing you find a Hop under or over-poled, you may
unwinde the Hop, and place another Pole in its place, having a Companion with
you to hold the Hop, whilst you pitch in the Pole; or else you may place
another Pole near it, and bring the Hop from one Pole to the other.

The next work is after the Hops are gotten two or three foot Of tying of Hops
to the Poles.
out of the ground, to conduct them to such Poles as you think fit, that are
either nearest, or have fewest Hops, and wind them or place them to the Pole,
that they may wind with the course of the Sun, and bind them gently thereto
with some withered Rush, or woollen Yarn; two or three strings are enough to a
Pole. I have known more Hops on a Pole from one string, than from four or five,
though there has been more of Hawm.

Be cautious of breaking the tender Shoots, which in the morning is most
dangerous; but when the warmth of the day has toughned them, may it much
better be done.

You must be daily amongst the Hops, during April and May, especially guiding
and directing them, else will they be apt to break their own Necks by going
amiss: It will sufficiently requite your labor and care at Harvest.

It is convenient with a forked Wand to direct the Hops to the Poles that are
otherwise out of reach, or to have a stool to stand on, or a small Ladder made
with a stay on the back of it, that you may reach them with your hands.

About Midsummer, or a little after the Hop begins to leave running at length,
and then begins to branch, that such Hops that are not yet at the tops of the
Poles, 'twere not amiss to nip off the top, or divert it from the Pole, that it
may branch the better; which is much more for the increase of the Hop, than to
extend it self only in length.

Sometimes in May, after a Rain, pare off the Surface of the Of the making up
the Hills.
ground with a Spade, How it off with a How, or run it over with a Plough with
one horse, if you have room enough, or with a Breast-plough; and with these
parings raise your hills in height and breadth, burying and suppressing all
superfluous Shoots of Hops and weeds.

By this means you will destroy the weeds that otherwise would beggar your
Land, and you suppress such Suckers and weeds that would impoverish your Hops;
and you also preserve the hills moist by covering them, that the drought of the
Summer injureth them not: Also the Hop, so far as it is covered with Earth,
issues forth its roots to the very surface of the Earth, which proves a very
great succor to the Hop. This work may be continued throughout the Summer, but
more especially after a Rain, to apply the moist Earth about the roots of the
Hop.

Therefore it behooves you to keep the ground in good heart, for this purpose,
that your Hops may be the better; and in case it should prove a very dry
Spring, it would not be amiss to water the Hops before you raise your hills.

A dry Spring, such that happened in the Years 1672. and Manner of watering
Hops.
1674. proves a great check to the hop in its first springing, especially in
hot and dry grounds. In such Years it is very advantageous to water them, if it
can with convenience be obtained, either from some Rivulet or Stream running
through, or near your Hop-garden, or from some Well dug there, or out of
some Pond made with Clay in the lower part of your ground, to receive hasty
showers by small Aqueducts leading unto it, which is the best water of all for
this purpose.

In the midst of every hill make a hollow place, and thrust some pointed Stick
or Iron down in the middle thereof, and pour in your water by degrees, till you
think the hill is well soaked; then cover the hill with the parings of your
Garden, as before we directed, which will set the Hop mainly forward, as I have
known, which otherwise would be small and weak, and hardly ever recover to
attain its usual height. Also a very hot and dry Summer, will make the Hop blow
but small and thin; therefore would it not be labor lost to bestow a pail of
water on every hill, prepared beforehand to receive it.

For in such dry Springs or Summers, such Hops that either stand moist, or have
been watered, do very much outstrip their Neighbors, and in such years they
will far better requite your labor and industry, yielding a greater price, by
reason of their scarcity, than in other seasonable years, when every ground
almost produces Hops; Industry and Ingenuity, in these Affairs, being most
encouraged, and best rewarded, at such times when Ignorance and Sloth come off
with loss and shame.

After every watering (which need not be above twice or thrice in the driest
Summers, so that they be thoroughly wet) be sure to make up the hills with the
parings, and with the weeds, and coolest and moistest materials you can get;
for the more the Hop is shaded at the root from the Sun, the better it thrives,
as is evident by such that grow under shelter that are never dressed, yet may
compare with those you bestow most pains and skill on.

The dressing of your Hops, and poling them, the directing and binding them to
the Poles, the watering and making up the hills throughout the Summer, seems to
be a tedious task, requiring daily attendance: But without these Labors little
is to be gotten, which makes this Plantation so little made use of in some
places; yet he that is diligent, and understands his business, is so highly
requited for his care, cost and industry, that an Acre or two of ground so
managed by one or two persons, shall redound one year with another to more
advantage, than fifty Acres of Arable-Land, where there is much more time, cost
and expense bestowed on it.

Toward the end of July hops blow, and about the beginning When Hops blow,
bell, and ripen.
of August they bell, and are sometimes ripe, in forward years, at the end of
August, but commonly at the beginning of September.

At such time as the hop begins to change his color, and look a When to gather
Hops, and the ^anner how.
little brownish, or that they are easily pulled to pieces, or that the Seeds
begin to change their color toward a brown, and they smell fragrantly, you
may conclude them to be ripe, and procure what help is necessary for a quick
dispatch, to gather them before they shatter, one windy day or night may
otherwise do you much injury.

The manner usually prescribed for the gathering of hops, is to take down four
hills standing together in the midst of your Garden; cut the roots even with
the ground, lay it level, and throw water on it, tread it, and sweep it; so
shall it be a fair Floor, whereon the hops must lie to be picked.

On the outside of this Floor are the Pickers to sit and pick them into
Baskets, the hops being stripped off the Poles, and brought into the Floor.

Some there are that sit dispersedly, and pick them into Baskets, after they
are stripped off the Poles.

Remember always to clear your Floor twice or thrice every day, and sweep it
clean every such time, before you go to work again.

In these ways of picking, it is necessary that the Poles be straight, without
forks, scrags or knobs.

But the best and most expeditious way, is to make a Frame with four short
Poles or Sticks, laid on four Forks driven into the ground, of that breadth to
contain either the hair of your Oost or Kiln, or a Blanket tacked round the
same about the edges; on which Frame you may lay your Poles with the hops on
them, either supported with Forks, or with the edges of the Frame; the Pickers
may stand on each side, and pick into it. When the Blanket or hair is full,
untack it, carry it away, and place another, or the same emptied, in the same
Frame again: every day you may remove your Frame with little trouble to some
new place of your Garden near your work.

This way is found to be most convenient, expeditious, and advantageous; for it
saves the labor of stripping the Hops off the Poles. Also any forked or
scraggy Poles which are best for the Hop, prove no impediment to this way of
Picking: It preserves the hops from briting or shedding, which by stripping off
the Poles, and wrapping them up in bundles to carry up and down, they are apt
to do. Also this way they may pick them clean off the Poles as they hang,
without tumbling and tearing, which causes much filth to mix with the Hops,
besides the spoiling and loss of many Hops: and being thus picked over your
Frame, if the Hops be never so ripe, and subject to shatter, all is preserved.
The Pickers may this way also make more expedition than the other, the Hops
hanging in view as they grew on the Poles.

Before you draw your Poles, with a sharp hook fixed at the end of a long stale
or pole, divide the Hops above where they grow together with other Poles; then
ought you to cut the Hops, not as is usually prescribed and practiced close at
the hills, but about two or three foot above the hills, else will the Hop bleed
much of his strength away. This has been found to be a great strengthner of
weak Hops, the other a weakner to all.

Then draw your Poles, which in case they are so far or fast in the ground,
that you cannot raise them without breaking of them, you must get a pair of
Tongs made like unto a Blacksmiths Tongs, only stronger, and toothed at the
end, with which Tongs you may beclip the Pole at the bottom, and resting the
joint thereof on a block of wood, you may weigh up the Pole without trouble or
danger of breaking the Pole: or for cheapness sake, you may have a wooden
Leaver forked at the end, in which Fork fix two sides of sharp and toothed
iron; which put to the Pole, and on a block of wood, as before, you may heave
up the Pole by the strength of your right hand, whilst you pull the pole to
you with your left.

Cut no more stalks, nor draw no more than you can conveniently dispatch in an
hour or two, in case the weather be very hot, or it be likely to rain.

If your Hop-garden be large, it were worth your cost and pains to raise in the
midst thereof a Shed, or suchlike house, on four or six main forks or posts,
and Thatched over, under which shelter you may pick your Hops; which will both
defend your pickers from the Sun, and your Hops from the Sun and storms. Herein
also may you lay a parcel of Hops unpicked overnight, that your pickers may to
work in the next morning, before the Dew be off the other that are abroad: or
in case a storm comes, you may lay in here enough to serve till the other are
dry again. Under this shelter also may your Poles lie dry all the Winter.

Let not your hops be wet when you gather them; but if the Dew be on them, or a
Shower has taken them, shake the Pole, and they will be dry the sooner.

If your hops be over-ripe, they will be apt to shed their seed, wherein
consists the chiefest strength of the hop: Also they will not look so green,
but somewhat brown, which much diminishes the value of them; yet some let them
stand as long as they can, because they waste less in the drying: four pounds
of undried Hops, through ripe, will make one of dry; and five pounds of Hops
scarcely ripe, yet in their prime, makes but one: So they judge they get more
in the through-ripe Hop by the weight, than they loose in the color.

There are also two sorts of Hops, the green and the brown; the one yielding a
better color by much when they are dry, the other bears larger and a greater
quantity of Hops, which is rather to be preferred.

In the picking, keep them as clean as you can from leaves and stalks, which
will damage you more in the sale, than they will advantage you in the weight.

As fast as you pick them dry them, for their lying undried Of the drying of
Hops.
heats them, and changes their color, very much to the damage of the Hop: but
if your Kiln be full, and that you must keep your Hops a while, then spread
them on some Floor, that they may not lie too thick; and thus will they keep a
day or two without much damage.

Well drying of a Hop, is the most necessary thing to be taken care of; for if
that be not rightly done, they are not fit for the Market, nor for use; for a
handful of slack dried Hops will mar and spoil many pounds, taking away their
pleasant scent and color: Therefore let your Hops be thoroughly and evenly
dried; which to accomplish, there are several ways made use of, some whereof
that are most useful and necessary, I shall here discover.

This following Description we find to be used by the Flemmings, Description
of an Oost or Kiln.
or Hollanders; and also at Poppering.

First make the square Room or Kiln above eight or ten foot wide, according as
you desire it to be in bigness, built up with Brick or Stone, with a Door-place
at one side thereof.

In the midst of this Room, on the Floor, must the Fireplace be made, about
thirteen inches wide within, and about thirty inches high in length from the
mouth thereof, almost to the back-part of the Kiln or Oost, leaving only a way
for a man to go round the end of it; it is usually called a Horse, and is
commonly made in Malt-kilns, the fire passing out at holes on each side, and at
the end thereof; and needs no farther description, every Mason or Bricklayer
almost is acquainted with it.

About five foot high is placed the Bed or Floor whereon the Hops lie to be
dried, which must have a Wall about it four foot high, to keep the Hops up from
falling. At the one side of the upper Bed must be made a Window, to shove off
the dried Hops down into the Room prepared for them.

The Bed must be made of Laths or Rails sawn very even, an inch square, and
laid a quarter of an inch asunder, with a cross Beam to support them in the
middle; into which Beam the Laths are to be let in even with the top of it,
which keeps the Laths even in their places.

On this Bed, without any Oost-cloth, lay your Hops by Basket-fulls, beginning
at the one end, and so proceeding till all be covered about half a Yard thick,
without treading on them; then lay them even with a Rake or Stick, that they
may not lie thicker in one place than in another.

Then make your fire below of broken Poles, or other wood, say our Authors: But
Charcoal is the only fuel for Hops, not in any wise diminishing the color,
which smoaky wood or brands will do.

You must keep your fire at a constant heat, only at the mouth of the Furnace
the Air will disperse it sufficiently.

The Hops this way are not to be stirred until they are thoroughly dried, which
is not until the top are dry as well as the bottom; but if any place be not so
dry as the rest, (which you may perceive by reaching over them with a Stick or
Wand, and touching them in several places, observing where they rattle, and
where not) then abate them there, and dispose of them where the places were
first dry.

When they are all through dry, which is known by the brittleness of the inner
stalk, if rubbed, and it break short, then are they enough; then take out the
fire, and shove out the Hops at the window for that purpose, with a Coal-rake
made of a board at the end of a Pole, into the Room made to receive them; then
go in at the door below, and sweep together the Seeds and Hops that fell
through, and lay them with the other.

Then proceed to lay another Bed of green Hops, as before, and renew the fire.

In several places they dry their Hops on the ordinary Malt-kilns Another way
to dry Hops.
on a Hair-cloth, laying them about six inches thick; and when they are almost
dry, with a Scoop made for that purpose, they turn them up-side down, and let
them lie again till every hop as near as they can, be thoroughly dried; and then
with the Hair-cloth remove them to the heap where they are to lie till they are
picked.

Both these ways are subject to several inconveniences: In the first way the
hops lying so thick, and never turned, the underpart of them must needs be dry
long before the upper; and the fire passing through the whole Bed to dry the
uppermost hop, must needs over-dry, and much injure and waste the greater part
of the Hops, both in strength and in weight, besides the waste of firing, which
must be long continued to through dry so many together.

In the second way, the turning of the hops breaks them very much, by forcing
the Scoop against the rough Hair-cloth, frets and spoils many hops, and
shatters their seeds, else this way is rather to be preferred above the other.

Which several inconveniences may be removed and prevented, The best way to
dry Hops.
by making the lower part of the Kiln as before is described, and the Bed
thereof made after the following manner: First, make a Bed of flat ledges about
an inch thick, and two or three inches broad, sawn, and laid across on the
other, Checquerwise, the flat way, the distances between about three or four
inches, the ledges so entered the one into the other, that the Floor may be even
and smooth: This Bed may rest on two or three Joyces set edge-wise to support
it from sinking.

Then cover this Bed with large double Tin soudred together at each joint; and
so order the ledges before you lay them, that the joints of the Tin may always
lie over the middle of a ledge; and when the Bed is wholly covered with Tin,
fit boards about the edges of the Kiln to keep up the hops, only let the one
side be to remove, that the hops may be shoved off (as before.)

On this Tin-Floor or Bed may the hops be turned without such hazard or loss,
as before on the hair, and with less expense of fuel: Also any manner of fuel
will serve for this purpose as well as Charcoal, the smoke not passing through
the hops as in either of the other ways: but you must remember to make
Conveyances for it at the several corners and sides of your Kiln or Oost.

Only the saving of fuel, besides the advantage your hops receive, will of it
self in a little time recompense the charge extraordinary in making the
Tin-Floor.

The turning of hops after the most facile and secure way, is To dry Hops
suddenly without turning them.
yet found to be not only a waste and injury of the hop, but also an expense of
fuel and time, because they require as much fuel, and as long time to dry a
small part when they are turned, as if they were almost all to be dried; which
may be prevented, in case the upper-bed whereon the hops lie, have a Cover made
that may be let down and raised at pleasure; which Cover may be Tinned over,
only by nailing single Tin over the face of it, that when the hops begin to
dry, and ready to turn, that is, that the greatest part of the moisture be
evaporated away, then may you let down this Cover within a foot or less of the
hops, which (Reverberatory-like) will reflect the heat upon them, that the
uppermost hop will soon be as dry as the lower, and every hop equally dried.

This is the most expeditious, most sure, and least expensive way that can be
imagined to dry hops, which is one of the costliest, troublesome, and most
hazardous piece of work that belongs to the hop, as it is vulgarly used.

As soon as your hops are off the Kiln, bag them not immediately, Bagging of
Hops.
but lay them in some room or place, that they may lie three or four weeks or
more, that they may cool, agive, and toughen; for if they are immediately
bagged, they will break to a Powder, but if they lie a while (the longer the
better, so they be close covered from the Air with Blankets) you may pack or
bag them with more security.

The manner whereof is usually thus; make a hole round or square in an upper
Floor big enough, that a man may with ease go up and down, and turn and wind
in it; then tack on a hop about the mouth of the Bag fast with Packthread, that
it may bear the weight of the Hops when full, and of the Man that treads them;
then let the Bag down through the hole, and the Hop will rest above, and keep
the Bag from sliding wholly through: Into which Bag cast in a few Hops; and
before you go into ^ead, tie at each lower corner a handful of Hops, with a
piece of Packthread, to make as it were a Tassel, by which you may conveniently
lift or remove the Bag when he is full; then go in to the Bag and tread the
Hops on every side, another casting still in as fast as you require them, till
it be full: When it is well trodden and filled, let down the Bag by unripping
the hoop, and close the mouth of the Bag, filling the two upper corners as you
did the two lower.

Which Bag, if well dried and well packed, may be preserved in a dry place
several Years; but beware lest the Mice destroy and spoil them.

After you have dried and laid by your Hops, you may return Laying up the Poles.
again to the Hop-garden, and take care to preserve the Poles for another Year.

Strip off the Hawm clean from them, and set up three Poles (like unto a
Triangle, wherewith they usually weigh heavy ware) spreading at the bottom, and
bound together near the top, about which you may set your Poles as many as you
please; bind them about with a little Hawm twisted, to keep them together: By
this means the outward Poles are only subject to the injuries of the weather,
which keep all the inner Poles dry, except only the tops, which for the most
part are exposed to the Air and wet.

Therefore the most part Pile them up at length in Piles in several places of
the Hop-garden, by pitching in several Poles on each side the Pile, and laying
two or three old Poles athwart at the bottom to keep them from the moist
ground, and so lay the Poles that the smaller ends may be inwards, and the
bigger ends outward; for which purpose the Pile must be made somewhat longer
than the Poles; and when you have raised them high enough, with Ropes of Hawm
bind the Poles that stand on the one side overthwart to the Poles on the
other, to preserve them upright, and cover them with Hawm, to defend them
against the Rain.

But the better way is to lay them in such Shed or house erected in your
Hop-garden, which may serve for picking of Hops there in the Summer, and
preservation of the Poles in the Winter; it will soon require your cost.

In the Winter, when sittle else can be done to the hop-garden, Dunging or
Soyling of the Hop-garden.
then may you provide Soil and Manure against the Spring; if the Dung you carry
in be rotten, then mix it with two or three parts of the common earth, and so
let it lie well mixed till the Spring, which will serve to make up the hills
withal.

But if the Dung or Soil be new, then let it lie mixed till another Year, for
new Dung is very injurious to hops.

Horse-dung, Cow Dung, or Oxe-dung are very good, but no Dung is to compare
with Pigeons-dung, a little thereof only to a hill, and mixed, that it may not
be too hot in a place: Sheeps-dung also is very good.

In the Spring or Summertime, if you steep Sheeps-dung, Pigeons-dung, or
Hen-dung in water, till it be quite dissolved; and when you water your hops on
the top of every hill in the hollow place made to contain the water, you may
put a dishful of this dissolved dung, and the water wherewith you water your
hops will carry with it the virtue thereof to the roots of the hop, which may
prove the most expeditious, advantageous, and least expensive way of enriching
the hop-hills of any other.

Also by this means you may convey to the Roots of hops, or any other Plant,
the fixed Salt or virtue of Lime, Ashes, or any other Fertilizing or enriching
Subject whatsoever, whereof we have already discoursed.

SECT. II. Of Liquorice, Saffron, Madder, and Dyers Weed.
The Land this Plant principally delights in, being not every Of Liquorice.
where to be had, is one of the causes it is so much neglected, and the method
of Planting and ordering of it so little understood: although our English
Liquorice exceeds any Foreign whatsoever, yet have not we enough Planted, but
Yearly buy of other Nations.

It much delights in a dry and warm Land, light and mellow, Best Land for
Liquorice, and the ordering of it.
and very deep: for in the length of the Root consists the greatest advantage;
for if it be not light, dry and deep, the Roots cannot enlarge freely; such
Land that Carriots, Parsnips, etc. delight in, Liquorice will prosper in it: If
the ground be not very rich of it self, you must mix good store of the best and
lightest Soil in the digging; it must be trenched very deep, at the least three
Spades deep, in case the Mould will bear it, and lay it as light as possibly
you can. The best way is to dig it with the Dung at the beginning of the
Winter, and then dig it again at Planting-time, which will lay it much the
lighter, and mix the Dung the better.

Procure your Sets from the best and largest Liquorice; the best Choice of Sets.
Sets are the Crown-sets, or heads got from the very top of the Root. Next, and
near as good are the Runners, which spread from the Master-roots, and have
little Sprouts and Roots which will make excellent Sets, being cut about four
or five inches long. The branches also may be slipped and planted; if it prove
moist weather, they will many of them grow; these may serve to thicken where
they are too thin.

The usual and best time for the planting of Liquorice, is in Time and manner
of Setting.
February and March; about a foot distance is usual to plant your Sets in Rows
by a Line, in holes made with a Setting-stick, deep enough to contain the
Plant, which as soon as it is in the hole, Earth it up; and if they prove dry,
water them as soon as they are set; and so for several days, until they have
recovered their witheredness. The first Year you may sow the ground with
Onions, Lettice, or suchlike herbs.

Then afterward they must be kept Howed every Year, till they are taken up.

The Sets are impatient of being planted, after they are once out of the
ground; therefore use what expedition you can, and Earth them up if you carry
them far, and be sure to have the ground ready before the Sets.

After it has stood three Summers in the ground you may dig Taking up of
Liquorice, and its profit.
it up, about the Month of November or December; for then it weighs most, and
will keep best without loss for some time. It is best to dispose of it whilst
it is new and green, because it will much decay in its weight.

Some that have very good Liquorish have gained much by it, the better the Land
is, the more is the advantage: There has been made from fifty pound to an
hundred pound of an Acre, as some affirm.

Pontefract in Yorkshire is the most noted place for this Plant Improver
improved.
that I have heard of: Next unto that, Godalming in Surry deserves to be
remembered also, for the industry of the Inhabitants in propagating this
necessary Plant: The long continuance of the Planting whereof in those places,
to the so great advantage of the Inhabitants, is an Argument sufficient of the
improvement it makes, there being in many other places as good Land for this
purpose, as either of those places afford.

English Saffron is esteemed the best in the world, it is a Plant Of Saffron.
What Land is best for Saffron.
very suitable to our Climate and Soil; therefore it is our negligence that it
is no more propagated: It delights in a good, dry, sound Land, brought into
perfect Tillage by Manure and good Husbandry; the better your Land is, the
better may you expect your Crop. About Midsummer it is to be planted, some say
Time and manner of planting of it.
about March; it is increased by the Roots which yearly multiply in the ground,
like unto other Bulbous Roots, or rather more. They are to be taken up, and new
planted usually once in three Years, and then may many of the Roots be
obtained: They are set in Ranges two or three inches deep, and about two or
three inches asunder, but the Ranges about four or five inches apart, for the
more convenient weeding or howing of them.

About September the Flower appears like a blew Crocus, and Time of the
flowring and gathering of Saffron.
in the middle of it comes up two or three Chives which grow upright together,
and the rest of the Flower spreads abroad; which Chives being the very Saffron,
and no more, you may gather betwixt your Fingers, and reserve it. This must be
done early in the morning, else it returns into the body of the Flower again;
and so for about a Months space may you gather Saffron. You must procure many
hands, according to the quantity of your ground; you may gather two or three
Crops, and then remove it. After it has done Flowring, it remains green all
the Winter.

Care must be also taken in the drying of it, which may be done Drying of
Saffron.
in a small Kiln made of Clay, and with a very little fire, and that with
careful attendance; three pound thereof moist usually making one of dry.

One Acre may bear from seven to fifteen pound, and has been Profits of
Saffron.
sold from twenty shillings a pound to five pound a pound, and may cost about
four pound per Acre the management thereof; which gives a very considerable
Improvement and Advantage.

This is esteemed by some to be a very rich Commodity, and Of Madder.
worthy our care and cost to propagate it, being so much used by Dyers in the
Dying of their red colors, and in so great request of the Apothecaries for
Medicinal uses; and a Plant also that delights in our Climate.

It is to be planted in a very rich, deep, warm, and well-manured Land fit for
Madder.
Land, dug at least two or three Spade graft deep.

Then about March or April, as soon as it springs out of the Time and manner of
planting it.
ground, is it to be planted: The Sets are to be gathered two or three inches
long, with Roots to them, and immediately planted or put into Mould, if carried
far; and then set about a foot apart the one from the other, and kept watered
till they Spring, and continually Weeded, till they have got the Mastery of the
Weeds.

At three Years end you may take it up; reserve the Plants for The nse and
profit of Madder.
your own use, and sell the roots to the Apothecaries, or dry them for the
Dyers use: But the description and manner of drying and Milling thereof for
that purpose, I leave to those that are better experienced therein, or until I
have obtained some light thereinto. The great advantage that it brings to the
Planter, according as it is by some related, is encouragement sufficient to any
Ingenious man to make a farther enquiry and progress into its Nature and Method
of ordering it.

This is a rich Dyers Commodity; it grows in many places Of Weld, or Dyers
Weed, what Land it requires.
wild, and is sown also in many places in Kent to a very great advantage: it
will grow on any ordinary or barren Land, so that it be dry and warm.

It may be sown on Barley or Oats after they are sown and Manner of sowing it.
harrowed, this requiring only a Bush to be drawn over it: A Gallon of Seed
will sow an Acre, it being very small, and is best to be mixed with some other
material, as before we advised concerning Clover-grass Seed: it grows not
much the first Summer; but after the Corn is gathered it is to be preserved,
and the next Summer you shall receive your Crop.

You must be very cautious in the gathering of it, that the Gathering and
ordering of it.
Seed be not over-ripe, for then it will fall out; if not enough, neither Seed
nor Stalk will be good: It is to be pulled as they do Flax, by the Roots, and
bound up in little handfuls, and set to dry, and then housed: Then may you beat
or lash out the Seed, which is of good value, and dispose of the Stalk and Root
to the Dyer, which is of singular use for the Dying of the bright Yellow and
Lemon-Colour.

SECT. III. Of Beans, Pease, Melons, Cucumbers, Asparagus, Cabbage, and several
other sorts of Garden-Tillage.
Of Beans in general we have already discoursed in this Treatise; Garden-beans.
only here, as it falls in our way, we shall say a little concerning the
greater sort of Garden-beans, which you plant only for the Table: They delight
in a rich stiff Land, or any Land new broken up; they are usually set between
S. Andrew's day and Christmas, at the Wane of the Moon: But if it happen to
freeze hard after your Beans are spired, it will go near to kill them all;
therefore it is the surest way to stay till the greatest Frosts are over, until
after Candlemas. It is a general error, to set them promiscuously, and too
near together, when it is most evident, that being set, or otherwise planted in
Rows by a Line, they bear much more, the Sun and Air having a more free passage
between them: Also you may the better go between them to Weed, top, or gather
them: Also you may sow Carrots in the Intervals, which after the Stalks are
drawn up, will prove a good second Crop. Let the Ranges run from South to
North, for the greater advantage of the Sun.

If you sow or plant them in the Spring, steep them two or three days in fat
water, as before is prescribed for the steeping of Corn; it is better to How
them in, than to set them with Sticks the usual way. In the gathering of green
Beans for the Table, the best way is to cut them off with a knife, and not, as
is usual, to strip them down; for that Wound prevents the prosperity of the
younger Cods not yet ripe: When you have gathered your early Beans, then cut
off the stalks near the ground, and you may probably have a second Crop e're
the Winter approach. These larger sort of Beans yield a far greater increase
than the ordinary sort; therefore it is great pity they are no more propagated
in the Fields than they are, especially where the ground is rich.

There are several sorts of Garden-Pease sown or planted in this Of Pease.
Kingdom, some approved of for their being early ripe, and some for their
pleasant taste; others for their being late ripe succeeding the other: The
Hot-spurs are ripe the soonest, from their time of sowing, of any other; then
succeeds the large white Pease, and several other sorts of green, gray, and
white Pease; then the large white Hasting, and great gray Rouncival Pease.
There is also another sort of Pease in some places, usually called the
Sugar-pease for their sweetness; they are to be eaten in their Cods, which grow
crooked and uneven; their extraordinary sweetness makes them liable to be
devoured by the Birds, unless you take great care to prevent them. These are
sown later than the other, by reason of their tenderness.

A fat rich Garden-Mould yields the largest Pease; but a light, warm, and
ordinary Soil, yields the tenderest and sweetest.

If you would have the earliest Pease, sow them in September or October, that
they may get some Head before the Frosts take them; and then with due care may
they be preserved over the Winter, and will bear very early. Also to have them
very late, sow them a little before Midsummer, and so may you have Pease in
September.

As for the manner of sowing, it is diverse; some sow at random, as they sow
Corn; which is altogether to be disapproved of, because they cannot be so
evenly dispersed, nor at so equal a depth, as in the other ways: Others set
them in Ranges with a Dibble or Setting-stick; which is a very excellent way
both to save Pease, and to give liberty to pass between for the Howing,
gathering, etc. But that which is most used, and best approved of, is the
Howing of them in, which makes a quick riddance of the work, and covers all at
a certain depth, and does not sadden or harden the ground as setting does.

It is good to make the Ranges at some reasonable distance, that you may the
more conveniently pass between them to How the Weeds, and Earth up the Roots in
the Spring: for the nakedness and barrenness of the ground, adds much to the
Maturation of the Pease, by the Reflection of the Sun; and the laying up the
Earth at the Roots, preserves them much from Drought.

Where your ground is small, or that you can easily furnish your self with
sticks, they will yield a greater increase if they have sticks to climb on. But
this, and several other ways of ordering them, we leave to the pleasure and
skill of every one, whose curiosity and delight is exercised in such Affairs.

Of all the sorts of Codware, there is none so fruitful, nor multiplies Of
French-beans.
so much, as does the French or Kidney-bean; being also a very pleasant,
curious and wholesome food, and deserves a greater place and proportion of Land
in our Farm, than is usually given it: It is a Plant lately brought into use
among us, and not yet sufficiently known; the greatest impediment to its
farther Propagation, is the tenderness of it at its first springing, and the
sweetness of it, which makes it more liable to be devoured by Snails, Worms,
etc. But a little care and industry bestowed about them, will be plentifully
recompensed in the fruitful Crop; the several uses whereof, as well for the
Kitchen, as for the feeding of Beasts and Fowl, are not yet commonly known or
practiced.

These being merely Fruits raised for our pleasure in the Summertime, Of
Melons and Cucumbers.
and not of any general use nor advantage to the Husbandman, we shall therefore
pass them by, only as to the ordering of the ground. For the setting and
raising them early, see more at the end of this Chapter.

The best way for the raising of Pompions, is to plant the seeds Of Pompions.
first in a good Mould, in a warm place, and then to transplant them into a
rich dungy Bed made for that purpose, watring them now and then with water
wherein Pigeons-dung has been infused; then take away, about blossoming time,
all the by-shoots, leaving only one or two main Runners at the most, and so
shall you have them grow to an huge bigness. Take heed you hurt not the heads
of the main Runners.

The Artichoak is one of the most excellent Fruits of the Kitchin-garden, Of
Artichoaks.
and recommended not only for its goodness, and the diverse manners of Cooking
of it, but also for that the Fruit continues in season a long time.

The ground is to be very well prepared, and mixed several times with good
dung, and that very deep: The Slips that grow by the sides of the old Stubs
serve for Plants, which are to be taken and planted about April, when the great
Frosts are over, and kept watered till they are firmly rooted; and if they be
strong, they will bear heads the Autumn following. They are to be planted four
or five foot distance the one from the other, if the Soil be rich; but if it be
not, then nearer. After the Planting, they need no other Culture before Winter,
save only Weeding, and dressing sometimes, and a little water if the Spring be
dry.

Against the Winter, before the great Frosts, they are to be preserved
Preservation against Frosts.
against them: Some cut the leaves within a foot of the ground, and raise the
Earth about them, in manner of a Molehill, within two or three inches of the
top; and then cover it with Long-dung; which both preserves them from Frosts,
and keeps the Rain from rotting them.

Others put Long-dung about the Plants, leaving the Plant a little Breath-room
in the middle, which will also do very well.

Others prescribe them to be covered with an Earthen-pot, with a hole at the
top; but a Bee-hive is to be preferred before it.

It is not good to Earth them too soon, left it rot them.

The Winter spent, you shall uncover your Artichoaks by little Dressing
Artichoaks.
and little, at three several times, with about four days interval each time,
lest the cold Air spoil them, being yet tender; you shall then dress, dig
about, and trim them very well, discharging them from most of their small
slips, not leaving above three of the strongest to each foot for Bearers, and
give a supply to the Roots as deep as conveniently you can, of good fat Mould.

It will be good to renew your whole Plantation of Artichoaks every fifth year,
because the Plant impoverishes the Earth, and produces but small Fruit.

If you desire to have Fruit in Autumn, you need only cut the Stem of such as
have born Fruit in the Spring, to hinder them from a second Shoot, and in
Autumn these lusty Stocks will not fail of bearing very fair Heads, provided
that you dress and dig about them well, and water them in their necessity,
taking away the Slips which grow to their Sides, and which draw all the
substance from the Plants.

This Plant seems to contend for Pre-eminence with any of Of Asparagus.
the Garden-plants for the Kitchen, being so delicate and wholesome a food,
coming so early, and continuing so long, as to usher in many other of the best
Rarities.

They are raised of seeds in a good fat Soil, and at two years Planting of them.
growth may be transplanted into Beds.

Which must be well prepared with Dung, first dug about two foot deep, and
four foot wide, made level at the bottom; and so mix very good rotten Dung with
some of the Mould, and fill them up, considering that it will sink: Then plant
your Asparagus Plants at about two foot distance; you may plant three or four
Rows in this Bed of four foot wide, they will in time extend themselves
throughout all the Bed.

Some curious persons put Rams-horns at the bottom of the Trench, and hold for
certain, that they have a kind of Sympathy with Asparagus, which makes them
prosper the better; but it is referred to the Experienced.

Three years you must forbear to cut, that the Plant may be Ordering and
cutting of them
strong, not stubbed, for otherwise they will prove but small; but if you spare
them four or five years, you will have them as big as Leeks.

The small ones you may leave, that the Roots may grow bigger, permitting those
that spring up about the end of the Season, in every Bed, to run to Seed; and
this will exceedingly repair the hurt which you may have done to your Plants in
reaping their Fruit.

At the beginning of the Winter, after you have cut away the Stalks, cover the
Bed four or five fingers thick with new Horse-dung: Some prescribe with Earth
four fingers thick, and over that two fingers of old dung, which will preserve
them from the Frost.

At the Spring, about the middle of March, uncover the Beds, and take of good
fat Mould and spread over them, about two or three fingers thick, and lay your
Dung in the Alleys, or elsewhere, which will rot, and be fit to renew the Mould
the next Spring.

If you take up the old Roots of Asparagus about the beginning Early Asparagus.
of January, and plant them on a hot Bed, and well defend them from Frosts, you
may have Asparagus at Candlemas, which is yearly experimented by some.

When you cut Asparagus, remove a little of the Earth from about them, lest you
wound the others which are ready to peep; cut them as low as you can
conveniently, but take heed of hurting those that lie hid.

There are diverse sorts of this most pleasant and delicious Fruit, Strawberries.
and not any of them but are worthy of our care, and that little pains they
require in Nursing them up.

The greater sort delight in a new-broken Bed, or at least in such places where
they have not grown before: They must be kept stringed, and removed every two
or three years, and then will yield a very great increase: They delight most in
warm sandy Soil: the best Plants are said to be such as come of the Strings;
they bear best in the shade.

The white Strawberry, and the ordinary red, may be either planted in Beds, or
on the sides of the Banks, at your pleasure.

The ordinary red grows plentifully in the new-fallen Copses, from whence if
you take your Plants about August, you will have a very fair increase.

There is a sort of green Strawberry (though not usual) that lies on the ground
under the tall and slender leaves, exceeding sweet in taste, and of a very
green color.

Also there is another sort of Strawberry of a very excellent Scarlet-colour,
and most pleasant taste, that grows plentifully in New England, and will
prosper very well with us, as is experienced by a Merchant at Clapham near
London, who has many of them growing in his Garden.

To preserve them over the Winter (though they seldom die) you strew a little
Straw, Litter, Fern, or suchlike over them.

To have Strawberries in Autumn, you may only cut away the Late Strawberries.
first blossoms which they put forth, and hinder their bearing in the Spring,
and they will afterward blow anew, and bear in their latter season: I have
gathered many on Michaelmas-day.

As soon as your Strawberries have done bearing, cut them Large Strawberries.
down to the ground; and as often as they spire, crop them, till toward the
Spring: When you would have them proceed toward bearing, now and then as you
cut them, strew the fine Powder of dried Cow Dung (or Pigeons-dung, or
Sheeps-dung, etc.) upon them, and water them when there is cause.

The Cole-flower is an excellent Plant, and deserves a place in the
Kitchin-garden; their seeds are brought out of Italy, and the Italians receive
it from Candia, and other of the Levantine parts, which is the best, and
produces the largest Heads.

You may either sow the seeds in August, and carefully preserve them over the
Winter, or you may raise them in your hot Beds at the Spring, and remove them
when they have indifferent large leaves into good Land prepared for that
purpose; but the best way is to dig small Pits, and fill them with good, rich,
light Mould, and therein plant your Cole-flower, which must be carefully
watered.

There are diverse sorts of Cabbages, and of several colors and Cabbages and
Coleworts.
forms; but we shall here take notice of no more than the ordinary Cabbage and
Colewort, being sufficient for our Country-Kitchin.

The Seed is to be sown between Midsummer and Michaelmas, that it may gain
strength to defend it self against the violence of the Winter; which
nevertheless it can hardly do in some years: or you may raise them on a hot Bed
in the Spring.

In April, or about that time, they are to be transplanted into a very rich and
well-stirred Mould; if you expect the largest Cabbages, they delight most in a
warm and light Soil, and require daily watering till they have taken Root.

In any ordinary ground, being well dug and wrought, may you raise great
quantities of ordinary Cabbages and Coleworts.

If you intend to reserve the seed, let it be of your best Cabbages, placed low
in the ground during the Winter, to preserve them from the great Frosts and
cold Winds; cover them with Earthen-pots, and warm soil over the Pots, and at
Spring plant them forth.

There is another sort of Cabbage, commonly called the Savoy, Savoys.
being somewhat sweeter and earlier than the common Cabbage; and therefore to
be preferred: It is raised and planted as the other, as also is the small Dutch
Cabbage.

This is so common a Sallet-herb either raw or boiled, and the Lettuce.
way of propagating thereof so easy, that I may the better pass it by.

Only if you have a desire to have them white, or blanch them, (as the French
term it) then when they are headed or loaved, in a fair day, when the Dew is
vanished, bind them about with long Straw, or raw Hemp; or more speedily, you
may cover every Plant with a small Earthen-pot, and lay some hot Soil upon
them, and thus they will quickly become white.

This ordinary Plant is by several made use of; it loves a fat Of Beets.
and rich Soil; it is usually sown in the Spring, and will come up several years
in the same ground, and may be planted forth as Cabbages are.

Aniseeds may also be propagated in England, as some have Of Anise.
already experienced, by sowing them in February between the Full and Change of
the Moon; then strew new Horse-dung upon them to defend them from the Frosts.
These will ripen about Bartholomew-tide; then also may you sow again for the
next year.

Let your ground be well stirred about Michaelmas, for that which you sow in
February; the black rich mellow-ground is the best.

SECT. IV. Of Carrots, Turnips, and other Roots useful in the Kitchen.
This is one of the most Universal and necessary Roots this Of Carrots.
Country affords, only they will not prosper in every ground; they principally
delighting in a warm, light, or sandy Soil; or if others, it must be well
stirred and manured: but if the ground be naturally warm and light, though but
indifferently fertile, yet will they thrive therein: It is usual to sow them in
the Intervals between the Beans, in dug, not in ploughed Land, because of
extending their Roots downwards: After the Beans are gone, they become a second
Crop; the best are for the Table, the other for the feeding or fatting of
Swine, Geese, etc. some of the fairest laid up in reasonable dry Sand, will
keep throughout the Winter. The fairest of them may you reserve till the
Spring, and plant them for Seed.

As to the general way of propagating them, we have already Turnips.
given you a hint; therefore have we little more to say, but that for your
Kitchin-use you may sow them at several times; and if the Weather, the Birds,
or the Worm destroy them, you may renew your labor and cost for a small
matter. After they are in their prime, you must house them from the Frost, by
laying them in your Celler, or suchlike place, on heaps.

This is an excellent sweet Root, and very pleasing to some Parsneps.
people; it is to be sown in the Spring, in a rich, mellow, and well-stirred
Soil. When they are grown to any bigness, tread down the tops, which will make
the Roots grow the larger: The like may be done to Carrots, Turnips, or any
other Roots. Toward the Winter, when you raise them, they may be disposed of
in Sand, to be preserved as Carrots, Turnips, etc. The fairest may be kept for
Seed, as before of Carrots; and then take the fairest and tallest tops of those
seeds in the Summer and sow them, and by this means may you attain the fairest
Roots.

The Skirret is sweeter than any of the former Roots; they delight Of Skirrets.
in a very fat and light Mould, and are raised of the Slips, being planted in
the Springtime in Ranges, about five or six inches asunder: At the Winter,
when you raise the Roots, you may lay the tops in Earth till the Spring, for
your farther increase.

They are so cummonly known, and their propagation so easy, Of Radishes.
that here needs no more to be said of them.

These are very usual in Foreign parts, and are planted in several Of Potatoes.
places of this Country to a very good advantage; they are easily increased, by
cutting the Roots in several pieces, each piece growing as well as the whole
Root; they require a good fat Garden-mould, but will grow indifferently well in
any: they are commonly eaten either Buttered, or in Milk. I do not hear that it
has been as yet essayed, whether they may not be propagated in great
quantities for food for Swine, or other Cattle.

These are near of the Nature of the Potatoes, but not so good Of
Jerusalem-Artichoaks.
nor so wholesome; but may probably be propagated in great quantities, and
prove good food for Swine: They are either planted of the Roots, or of Seeds.

Onions are Roots very much in request for their several and Of Onions.
diverse uses they are put unto in the Kitchen; they delight in a fine, fat, and
warm Mould, and are to be sown in March, or soon after; but if you sow them
sooner, you must cover them at the first: where they come up too thick, they
may be drawn and planted where they are thinner; when they are grown to some
reasonable bigness, you ought to bend down, or tread the Spindle or Stalk,
which will make the head the larger: being sown with Bay Salt, they have
prospered exceeding well. In August they are usually ripe; then are they to be
taken up and dried in the Sun, and reserved for use, in places rather dry than
moist.

This is so Universally known and propagated, that I need say Of Garlic.
little of it: If set in rich ground, it increases to admiration; and may be
Annually multiplied, without hazard of Weather: keeping down the Leaves makes
the Root large.

They are sown as the Onions, and afterward it is best to Of Leeks.
transplant them deep, that they may have a great deal of White-stalk, one such
Leek being worth two others.

The fairest and biggest of Leeks and Onions are to be reserved and planted for
Seed; the stalks whereof are to be propped up with sticks, by reason of their
weight: When the Seed is ripe, reserve the Heads on some Cloth, and let them be
through dry e're you rub them out.

There are several sorts of Kitchin-herbs and Plants very necessary and useful,
and also profitable to be propagated and advanced in our Country-gardens; as
Thime, Hyssop, Sage, Rosemary, Marjerom, Violets, and several others: Their
ways and manner of Planting being so Universally known, and not altogether
pertinent to our discourse, I shall pass them by, and refer you to others that
treat of them.

I thought to have omitted this Plant, by reason the Statute-Laws Tobacco.
are so severe against the Planters of it, but that it is a Plant so much
improving Land, and employing so many hands, that in time it may gain footing
in the good Opinion of the Landlord, as well as of the Tenant, which may prove
a means to obtain some liberty for its growth here, and not to be totally
excluded out of the Husbandmans Farm. The great Objection is the prejudice it
would bring to Navigation, the fewer Ships being employed; and the lessening
his Majesty's Revenue. To which may be answered, that there are but few Ships
employed to Virginia; and if many, yet there would be but few the less; for
it is not to be imagined, that we should Plant enough to furnish our whole
Nation, and maintain a Trade abroad also: And in case it should lessen the
number of Ships for the present, they would soon increase again, as the Trade
of Virginia would alter into other Commodities, as Silk, Wine and Oil, which
would be a much better Trade for them and us.

And as to the lessening his Majesty's Revenue, the like Imposition may be laid
on the same Commodity growing at home, as if imported from abroad, or some
other of like value in lieu of it.

Certain it is, that the Planting of it would employ abundance of people in
Tilling, Planting, Weeding, Dressing and Curing of it. And the improvement of
Land is very great, from ten shillings per Acre, to thirty or forty pound per
Acre, all Charges paid: before the last severe Laws, many Plantations were in
Gloucestershire, Devonshire, Somersetshire, and Oxfordshire, to the quantity of
many hundreds of Acres.

Some object, that our English-Tobacco is not so good as the Foreign; but if
it be as well respected by the Vulgar, let the more Curious take the other
that is dearer. Although many are of Opinion that it is better than Foreign,
having a more Hautgust, which pleases some; if others like it not, they may in
the curing of it make it milder, and by that means alter or change it as they
please: It has been often sold in London for Spanish Tobacco.

The best way and manner of Planting and Curing it, would be easily obtained by
experience: many attempting it, some would be sure to discover the right way of
ordering of it, and what ground or places it best affects.

But that which has been observed is, that it affects a rich, deep and warm
soil well dressed in the Spring before Planting time: The Young Plants raised
from seed in February or March, on a hot Bed, and then planted abroad in your
prepared ground, from whence you may expect a very good Crop, and sometimes two
Crops in a year. The leaves, when gathered, are first laid together on heaps
for some time, and then hanged up (by Threads run through them) in the shade,
until they are through dry, and then put up and kept, the longer the better. In
this, Experience is the best Master.

SECT. V. Of the manner of ordering and preparing of Garden-Ground, making of
hot Beds, and Watering of the Gardens, etc.
There are many Garden-plats in England, which either for their cold
situation, or the cold or unnatural temper of the soil, or suchlike
impediments; and by reason of the ignorance of the Gardener, or Owner thereof,
produce little or no Fruit or Tillage answerable to the costs, trouble, or
expectation of the Owners thereof: Wherefore we shall give you here the best
Rules, Directions, and Instructions we either know, or have read of in any of
our Rustic Authors.

If the Land be of a light and warm Nature of its self whereof The several ways
of tempering mould.
your Garden is made, there needs only common Horse-dung or Cow Dung to be
mixed therewith in the digging or trenching, to enrich it: but if the Ground or
Mould incline to a cold Clay, or stiff ground, then procure some good, light
and fertile Sand, or Mould of that nature, and mix with your Dung in some corner
of your ground equally together, and suffer it so to lie and rot over the
Winter, which in the Spring will prove an excellent warm Manure to lay to the
roots of your Plants, or to make whole Beds thereof, by mixing it in good
quantities with the natural soil; and if you can procure it with convenience,
the more of Pigeons-dung, Poultry-dung, or Sheeps-dung you mix with it, the
lighter and warmer it will be. Also an equal composition or mixture of Dung and
Earth is necessary to be laid by, that it may be thoroughly rotten and turned to
Earth by the Spring, that it may then be fit to renew the Earth about your
Hops, Artichoaks, and suchlike; and also for the planting and sowing therein
Coleflowers, Cabbages, Onions, etc.

The best and surest way of sowing seeds to have the most advantage The best
way of sowing Garden-seeds.
of such Dung or soil, and that they may come up most even, and be all buried
at one certain depth, is thus: First rake your Bed even, then throw on a part
of your mixture of Earth and Dung, which also rake very even and level, on
which sow your seeds, whether Onions, Leeks, Lettice, or suchlike; then with a
wide Sieve sift on the Earth mixed with Dung, that it may cover the Seeds about
a quarter of an inch deep, or little more, and you shall not fail of a fruitful
Crop.

If your Garden be obvious to the cold winds, which are very To lay ground warm
and dry.
injurious to most sorts of Plants, next unto Trees, Pales, Walls, Hedges, etc.
lay your ground after this following manner; that is, let it be laid up in
Ridges a foot or two in height, somewhat upright on the back or North-side
thereof, and more shelving or sloping to the Southward, for about three or four
foot broad, on which side you may sow any of your Garden-Tillage; and these
Banks lying one behind the other, will much break the Winds, and these
shelving sides will much expedite the ripening of Pease or other Fruits, by
receiving more directly the Beams of the Sun: and in case the ground be
over-moist, you may plant the higher; and if over-dry, then the lower: so that
it seems to remedy all Extremes, except Heat, which rarely injures.

To make a hot Bed in February, or earlier, if you please, for The making of
hot Beds.
the raising of Melons, Cucumbers, Radishes, Coleflowers, or any other tender
Plants or Flowers, you must provide a warm place defended from all Winds, by
being enclosed with a Pale or Hedge made of Reed or Straw, about six or seven
foot high, of such distance or capacity your occasions require; within which
you must raise a Bed of about two or three foot high, and three foot over, of
new Horse-dung of about six, eight, or ten days old, treading it very hard down
on the top, being made level; and if you will, edged round with boards; lay of
fine rich Mould about three or four inches thick; and when the extreme heat of
the Bed is over, which you may perceive by thrusting in your finger, then plant
your seeds as you think fit; then erect some Forks four or five inches above
the Bed, to support a Frame made of sticks, and covered with Straw, to defend
the Seed and Plants from cold and wet; only you may open your Covering in a
warm day for an hour before Noon, and an hour after. Remember to Earth them up
as they shoot in height; when they are able to bear the cold, you may
transplant them.

Many curious and necessary Plants would suffer, were they Of Watering of
Plants.
not carefully watered at their first removal, or in extreme dry seasons;
therefore this is not to be neglected. Early in the Spring, whilst the Weather
is cold, be cautious of watering the leaves of the young and tender Plant, only
wet the Earth about it.

When your Plants or Seeds are more hardy, and the Nights yet cold, water in
the Fore-noons; but when the Nights are warm, or the days very hot, then the
Evening is the best time.

If you draw your water out of Wells, or deep Pits, it ought to stand a day in
the Sun in some Tub, or suchlike, for your tender Plants in the Spring.

But Pond, or River, or Rainwater needs it not, and is to be preferred before
Well-water, or Spring Water.

If you infuse Pigeons-dung, Sheeps-dung, Hen-dung, Ashes, Lime, or any fat
soil or matter in your water, either in Pits, Cisterns, or other Vessels for
that purpose, and therewith cautiously water your Plants; it will much add to
their increase and multiplication.

For Cole-flowers, Artichoaks, and such like, let the ground sink a little
round the Plant, in form of a shallow Dish, the water will the better and more
evenly go to the Roots.

Water not any Plant overmuch, lest the water carry with it away the
Vegetative or fertile Salt; and so impoverish the ground, and also chill the
Plant.

It is also better to water a Plant seldom and thoroughly, than often and
slenderly; for a shallow watering is but a delusion to the Plant, and provokes
it to root shallower than otherwise it would, and so makes it more obvious to
the extremity of the Weather.

If you are willing to have the ground always moist about any Plant, place near
it a Vessel of water, putting therein a piece of Woollen Cloth or List, and let
the one end thereof hang out of the Vessel to the ground, the other end in the
water, in manner of a Crane: Let the List or Cloth be first wet, and by this
means will the water continually drop till all be dropped out of the Vessel,
which may then be renewed. The end that hangs without the Vessel must be always
lower than the water within the Vessel, else it will not succeed: If it drop
not fast enough, increase your List or Cloth; if too fast, diminish it.

If the Weather be never so dry when you sow any sort of Seeds, water them not
till they have been in the ground several days, and the ground a little settled
about them.

CHAP. IX.
Of several sorts of Beasts, Fowls and Insects, usually kept for the Advantage
and Use of the Husbandman.

OUR Country-Farm is of little use and benefit to us, notwithstanding all our
care, pains and cost in Fencing, Planting, or otherwise ordering the same,
unless it be well stocked and provided with Beasts, and other Animals; as well
for labor and strength in Tilling and Manuring the Ground, and facilitating
other Labors and Exercises, as for the furnishing the Market and Kitchen.

SECT. I. Of Beasts.
The Horse has the Pre-eminence above all others, being the Of the Horse.
Noblest, Strongest, Swiftest, and most necessary of all the Beasts used in
this Country for the Saddle, for the Plough and Cart, and for the Pack.

Where you have good store of Pasture, either in Several, or in Common, or in
Woods or Groves, it is no small advantage to keep a Team of Mares for the
Breed; but where there is most of Arable, and little of Pasture-Land, Horses or
Geldings are more necessary: which difference we may observe between the great
Breeding-places for Horses in the Pastures and Wood-lands, and the naked
Corn-Countries; the one full of gallant lusty Mares, the other of Horses and
Geldings.

As to the Shape and Proportion, Colors, Age, Ordering, Breeding, Feeding, and
Curing the several Diseases of Horses, I shall here be silent, and refer you to
the several Authors who have copiously treated of that Subject, it being too
large for this place.

Asses are commonly kept, yet not to be little set by, because of Of the Ass.
their sundry Commodities, and the hardness of their Feeding: for this poor
Beast contents himself with whatsoever you give him; Thistles, Briars, Stalks,
Chaff, (whereof every Country has store) is good Meat with him: Besides, he
may best abide the ill looking to of a negligent Keeper, and be able to sustain
blows, labor, hunger and thirst, being seldom or never sick; and therefore of
all other Cattle longest endures: for being a Beast nothing chargeable, he
serves for a number of necessary uses: in carrying of Burdens he is comparable
to the Horse; he draws the Cart (so the Load be not great) for grinding in
the Mill he passes all others. Thus far Haresbatch.

The Milk also of the Ass is esteemed an excellent Restorative (by most Learned
Physicians) in a Consumption.

But I presume one main impediment of their not being so frequently kept, is
their destructive Nature to Trees, which they will bark with their mouths where
they can come at them: This is no ways pleasing to a good Husband.

The Mule, or Moil, is bred of a Mare covered with an Ass: Of the Male.
It Is a hardy Beast, much better than an Ass, and very tractable and capable of
much service.

These worthy sort of Beasts are in great request with the Husbandman, Of Cows
and Oxin.
the Ox being useful at his Cart and Plough, the Cow yielding great store of
Provision both for the Family and the Market, and both a very great advantage
to the support of the Trade of the Kingdom.

Concerning their form, nature and choice, I need say little, every Countryman
almost understanding how to deal for them.

The best sort is the large Dutch Cow that brings two Calves at one Birth, and
gives ordinarily two Gallons of Milk at one Meal.

As for their breeding, rearing, breaking, curing of their Diseases, and other
ordering of them; and of Milk, Butter and Cheese, etc. I refer you to such
Authors that do more largely handle that Subject than this place will admit of.

Next unto these, the Sheep deserves the chiefest place, and is Of Sheep.
by some preferred before any other, for the great profit and advantage they
bring to Mankind, both for Food and Apparel.

Whereof there are diverse sorts, some bearing much finer Wool than others; as
the Herefordshire-Sheep about Leicester bear the fairest Fleeces of any in
England. Also they are of several kinds, as to their proportion; some are very
small, others larger: But the Dutch-sheep are the largest of all, being much
bigger than any I have seen in England, and Yearly bear two or three Lambs at a
time. It is also reported, that they sometimes bear Lambs twice in the Year. It
may doubtless be of very good advantage to obtain of those kinds; and also of
Spanish-sheep that bear such fine Fleeces.

As for their breeding, curing and ordering, I refer you (as before) to such
Authors that have largely treated of them.

This Beast is also of a very considerable advantage to the Of Swine.
Husbandman, the Flesh being a principal support to his Family, yielding more
dainty Dishes and variety of Meat, than any other Beast whatsoever; considering
them as Pig, Pork, Bacon, Brawn, with the different sorts of Offal belonging to
them: Also they are of the coursest Feed of any Creature whatsoever; being
content with any thing that is Edible, so they have their fill, for they are
impatient of hunger.

It is a great neglect that they are no more bred and kept than they are, their
Food being obtained at so easy a rate: Besides, the Offal of Corn, Whey, and
other Culinary Provision, it cannot but prove a very considerable advantage to
sow or plant Land on purpose with Coleworts, Kidney-beans, and several other
gross thriving Pulses, Plants and Roots; whereby you may not only raise a
considerable stock of them, to your great gain and profit, if old Tusser said
true: And yet by the Yeat have I proved e'te now,
As good to the Purse is a Sow as a Cow.
but also by their Treading and Batling, in case they be kept in a Court made
several for that purpose, they will convert all such Vegetables they eat not
into excellent Soil.

If they are suffered to run abroad, they waste their flesh much: therefore it
is esteemed the most frugal and beneficial-way, to keep them always penned into
some Court, both for their flesh and soil.

These are kept in some places for advantage, being a very Of Goats.
course Feeder. The Kids are esteemed good Meat: their Hair also is of use to
make Ropes, and other things; it never rots in the water. The best sort of them
breeds twice in the Year: they are usually kept in Stables where many Horses
are, to preserve them from several Epidemical Diseases.

The Milk of Goats is esteemed the greatest Nourisher of all liquid things
whereon we feed, (except Woman's Milk) and the most comfortable to the stomach;
from whence the Poets feign, that their God Jupiter himself was nourished with
Goats-milk.

They crop, and are injurious to young Trees; therefore are to be kept with
much caution.

Although they are not esteemed amongst the number of profitable Of Dogs.
Cattle, yet are they very necessary servants, and the most observant and
affectionate of all Beasts whatever to Mankind: Their love, even to the loss
of their lives, in defense of their Master, his Cattle, Goods, etc. their
officiousness in Hunting, and seeking after all sorts of Prey or Game, are so
commonly known, and so frequently made use of, that it is needless to tell you
so.

Only that they are of different sorts and natures; some as a Guard to defend
your House and Goods, others as Shepherds to defend your Sheep and Cattle,
others as Jaccals or Watchmen, always wakeful to rouse up the heavy Mastiffs;
whereof some are for the Bear, others for the Bull.

Some Dogs also are for the Game; as for the Stag, Buck, Fox, Hare, Coney,
Pollcat, Otter, Weesel, Mole, etc. Also for the Duck, Pheasant, Partridge,
Quayl, Moor-hens, and several other sorts of Land and Waterfowl.

Others also are kept for their Beauty, Shape and Proportion, and for their
docible Nature, being apt to Dance and perform several other Acts of Activity,
etc.

Besides the wild, which are very profitable in Warrens, tame Coneys.
Coneys may be kept to a very great advantage, either in Hutches or in Pits,
which is much to be preferred. These Pits are sunk about six or seven foot
deep, in a good light Mould; or in Chalk or Sand they delight most. These are
to be made round or square, and walled with Stone or Brick, to preserve the
Earth from foundring, in leaving places on the sides for the Coneys to draw and
make their Stops or Buries.

At the one end or side make a hollow place for the Buck to rest in, chaining
him to a small stump, that he may have liberty to go to the Rack to feed, and
to his Den to rest: On the other side or end, let the places be left for the
Does to make their stops in.

About the middle of the Pit may you place the Rack to feed them in; the Buck
on the one side, and the Does on the other.

In a Pit of about ten foot square may be kept two or three Does, (besides the
Buck) which will bring each of them about fifty or more Young ones in a year,
sometimes seventy or eighty. When they are about a Month old, you may take
them out of the Pit, and either spend them, or feed them in another Pit or
place made for that purpose.

Their Food is for the most part Greens growing in and about your Gardens; as
Carrots and their Greens, Coleworts, Sowthistles, Malloes, Dandilion,
Saxifrage, Parsley, Grass, and many other. Also Hay, Bran, Grains, Oats, etc.

They ought to be constantly fed and cleansed, and great care taken to keep
them from Cats, Pollcats, etc.

If you have much Garden-ground, and a good soil free from Water, Clay or Stone
for them to breed in, they will thrive exceedingly, and doubly repay your care
and trouble.

By feeding them with dry Meat between whiles in the Winter-season, it
preserves them from the Rot, which in moist weather they are subject unto; but
if you feed them much with dry Meat, you must set them water, otherwise not.

The black or silver-haired are most usually kept tame, their Their kinds.
skins being of great value.

The great Dutch-Rabbit is the best for their food, being much larger than the
other.

But the white Shock-Rabbit of Turkey is the most pleasant, having long and
fine hair, and is now become the most in Mode.

SECT. II. Of Fowl.
The Countrymans Farm or Habitation cannot be said to be completely stored or
stocked without Fowl, as well as Beasts, yielding a considerable advantage by
their Eggs, Brood, Bodies, and Feathers, amongst which the Poultry seems to
have the Of Poultry.
Pre-eminence, being more universally kept than any other sort whatsoever;
insomuch that any poor Cottager that lives by the High-way-side may keep of
them, being able to shift for themselves the most part of the Year, feeding on
Insects, and on any thing almost that is Edible by any other sort of Animal.

They are also kept to a very great advantage in the Backsides, Profit of
Poultry.
and at the Barns-doors of great Farms; and as I have been certainly informed,
a good Farm has been wholly stockt with Poultry, spending the whole Crop upon
them, and keeping several to attend them; and that it has redounded to a very
considerable Improvement. It seems also consonant to Reason, especially if
within a days Journey of London, that they might have a quick Return, and a
good Market, being in a capacity to furnish the Market, throughout the Year,
either with Eggs, Chickens, Pullets, Capons, or Cocks and Hens. Also the
Feathers must needs yield a considerable advantage; and the Dung of Poultry
being of great use on the Land, much exceeding the Dung of any Cattle
whatsoever.

Therefore if convenient places or houses were made for them, Feeding and
fatting of Poultry.
as dark as may be, which does much expedite their fatning; and the Poultry
there fed, and their Dung reserved, and before it has taken wet, let it be
mixed with Earth, it will undoubtedly answer the expense of a great part of the
Corn you feed them withal.

If they are fed with Buck, or French-wheat, or with Hemp Seed, Increasing of
Eggs.
they will lay more Eggs than with any other sort of Grain.

Buck-wheat either grownd and made in Paste, or whole, (the former way is the
better) is the best single fatner of Fowl; Hemp Seed, as they say, giving an
ill favor to the flesh of the Bird that feeds on it: but this only upon
report; if it prove otherwise, it would be one great encouragement to the
planting or sowing of Hemp, that the Seed should be of so great use.

In Egypt they hatch their Eggs in great quantities, in Ovens Hatching of Eggs
artificially.
made for that purpose. In several places in this Country also, one Hen will
lead the Brood of two or three Hens, so that they be hatched near about a time:
therefore may you with much facility hatch three or four dozen of Eggs in a
Lamp-Furnace made of a few Boards, only by the heat of a Candle or Lamp; so
that you order them that they may hatch about the same time that the Hen
hatches her Eggs that you intend shall lead them: By which means in a warm Room
may one Hen lead many Chickens, and raise them up with little charge, and
without the loss of time of the other Hens.

This way may be of singular use, where you keep Poultry of diverse kinds; that
is, of the largest kinds to Lay, and a few of the Lesser to Sit and Nurse up
the Chickens.

They are a Fowl very profitable in many places where there Of Geese.
are Commons to feed them on, being a Creature that requires little care and
attendance, and little charge in feeding them.

They multiply extraordinary in some places, breeding twice a Year; and in all
places yielding a considerable price.

Also their Feathers are no small advantage, especially if you sheer them as
they do Sheep, as in some places is usual.

You may set them on any number of Eggs under fifteen, and above seven, giving
to each Goose her own Eggs; for (it is said) they will not hatch a strangers.

The Young or Green-Geese are best fatted if kept dark, and Of fatting of Geese.
fed with ground Malt and Milk mixed together.

The Old and Stubble-Geese will be fat the same way, or fed with new Malt.

But in fatting of Geese you may observe, that they usually sit, A principal
Observation in fatting of Geese.
especially in the nightime, with their Beaks or Bills on their Rumps, where
they suck out most of their moisture and fatness at a small bunch of Feathers,
which you shall find standing upright on their Rumps, always moist; which if
cut away close before you put them up to fatting, they will be fat in much less
time, and with much less Meat than otherwise.

They will feed on, and fatten also with Carrots cut small, and given them.

The Jews, who are esteemed the skilfullest Feeders that be, do The Jews manner
of fatting Geese.
wrap the Goose in a Linen Apron: they hang her up in a dark place, stopping
her Ears with Pease, or some other thing, that by neither hearing nor seeing of
any thing, she be not forced to struggle nor cry. After they give her Pellets
of Ground-malt or Barley, steeped in water thrice a day, setting by them water
and gravel; by which manner of feeding they make them so fat, that it is almost
incredible.

I have heard it also confidently affirmed and related by one, that in France
he saw Carps fatted, by being bound with their Noses upright, and daily fed
with white-bread and Wine: whether their bodies were in the water or no, I
remember not. This, as he affirmed, made the Carps exceeding fat and pleasant.

Most certain it is, that darkness does much conduce to the fatning of any
Creature; and also rest and sleep, as appears by the Bears and Foxes in the
Northern Climates.

Gravel also not a little avails, it being usual that when Poultry are penned
up, and have lost their appetite, being set where Gravel is, will greedily eat
it.

Tame Ducks being much of the nature of Geese, we shall Of Ducks.
say the less of them, only that they require more water to dabble in than do
the Geese, and that they are not so good Meat. There are some sorts of them
that lay great store of Eggs, which are more to be preferred, and are
distinguished from the other by the turning up of their Bills, more than the
other sorts.

There are also a certain sort of Ducks kept only to draw unto Of Decoy-Ducks.
them, and, as it were, Trapan whole Flights of Wilde-Ducks, and bring, or
conduct them to the places of their retirement, which are Pools made on
purpose: The manner and form whereof, and also of the breeding of these sorts
of Ducks, and the taking of the wilde-Fowl they bring with them, we leave to
the more skilful in that Exercise to treat of.

Turkeys, or Ginney-hens, or Cocks, are a melancholy Fowl, as Of Turkeys.
appears by their doleful cry, and the anger that they seem to have against red
colors, being possessed with a strong conceit that they are mocked, by reason
their own Combs or Wattels are red. They are a great Feeder, devouring more
than they are worth by far, if they are fed with Corn; but if let at liberty,
and have Ranging room enough, they feed on Herbs, or the Seeds of Herbs,
without any great charge or trouble, except in the breeding; at which time they
require careful attendance, being an extreme chill Bird.

Some having the convenience of a Wood or Grove near their house, have let the
Hen-Turkeys take their liberty and seek their own Nests, and take care of their
Young; which they will do, concealing their Nests from the Cock, and bring up
their Brood with much better success than the more tame.

They are seldom very fat till the Winter be well spent, that they forget their
Lust: the cold weather gets them a stomach, and the long nights afford them
much rest.

Several sorts of Pigeons or Doves there are, both wild and Of Pigeons.
tame; as Wood-Pigeons, or Wood-Quests, Rock-Pigeons, Stock-Doves,
Turtle-Doves: Then there are House-Pigeons, such as are usually kept in
Dove-cots, or Pigeon-houses; and diverse sorts of Tame-Pigeons fed by hand, kept
for their largeness of body, for their beauty and diversity of colors,
breeding almost every Month in the Year. But we shall only here treat of
Pigeons kept in Dove-houses, that bring in unto such that are privileged to
keep them, a considerable Yearly advantage, with very little cost or trouble,
only feeding of them in the Snowy or Frosty weather, when nothing is to be had
abroad, and about Midsummer before Pease be ripe; which time they usually call
Benting-time, because then necessity inforceth them to feed on the Bents, or
seed of Bennet-grass, no other food being then to be had: And usually, about
that time, have they store of Eggs and Young Ones, which will otherwise be
starved, unless you help them; but the Dung of their Houses will in a manner
satisfy you for their Meat, if carefully made use of.

There is nothing that Pigeons more affect than Salt; for they To increase a
Stock of Pigeons.
will pick out the Mortar out of the Joints of Stone or Brick-walls, merely for
the saltness thereof: therefore do they usually give them, as often as occasion
requires, a Lump of Salt, which they usually call a Salt-Cat, made for that
purpose at the Salterns, which makes the Pigeons much affect the place; and
such The Salt-Cat.
that casually come there, usually remain where they find such good
entertainment.

If Assa-fetida be boiled in water, and the holes washed therewith, Assa-fetida.
their Feathers will bear the scent thereof about them; that whatsoever company
they light into will be so well pleased therewith, that they will bear them
company home, to the great increase of your Stock.

This has been always esteemed an excellent Drawer of Pigeons, Cummin-seed.
either by washing the holes with water wherein it has been boiled, or feeding
them with Meat steeped in such water.

But that which has been experienced to have had the greatest A baked Bitch.
power to draw these Birds from their former homes to the place you desire, is,
that you take a Bitch (in her heat of Lust, or hot or salt, as they usually
term it) and after she is Fleyed and Bowelled, bake her in an Oven; (some
prescribe to roast her with Cummin-seed in her Belly) then lay her in the
Pigeon-house; and if you have but few Pigeons there, you shall soon find a
wonderful increase. This has been an experienced way to stock a decayed House
in a very short time.

These Birds are kept for their Beauty and magnificent deportment, Of Swans.
being the proudest, most chaste and jealous, and least sustainer of injuries
of any other: their flesh not so much regarded as the flesh of other Waterfowl.

Yet is the Cignet a Noble Dish at great Entertainments, which Fatting of
Cignets.
may be fatted and made the more acceptable, by keeping them apart in a close
Pond, out of which they cannot get, having only a little dry Grass-plat to sit
and prune themselves in. Near to the water you shall place Tubs or shallow
Vessels, with Oats, Wheat, Barley, dried Malt, or such like, some dry, and
some in water, for them to feed on at pleasure; and sometimes cast them some
hot sweet Grains on the water: By this means, in one month, may they be fat.

These Birds are usually kept for their Excellent Beauty and Of Peacocks.
Deportment; yet they are beneficial also to the places where they are kept, by
cleansing them of Snakes, Adders, and suchlike: Their Chickens also are good
meat.

It is a Bird of Understanding and Glory; for being praised, he elevates and
spreads his lofty Tail; and of Pride, for no sooner does he behold his feet,
not thinking them complete enough for so painted a Pageant, he lets his Tail
fall for mere conceit; which appears by his melancholy posture at the loss or
shedding of his Tail, till Nature has renewed it.

In any place these may be kept for pleasure and variety; but Of tame
Pheasants, and the ordering of them.
in places near London, or some great City, for advantage.

Mr. Hartlib has the Relation of a Lady that kept so many near Chelsey, that
she hatched two hundred in one Spring; whereof that though many died, yet by
far the greater part would come to perfection: Also, that there are many near
London who keep them to make profit of them; that they are very easy to bring
up, and to keep, when they are once past the first month; for till then they
must be kept only with Ants Eggs, and fed with nothing else, which are easily
obtained. The first month being past, they are fed with Oats only, requiring
nothing else: But as they love to be kept in Grassie Fields, so one must change
them often to fresh grounds, because they taint the Grass. Also the Courts may be
enclosed with Laths; the Fence must be made high, and places of Refuge covered
with Nets to keep the Hawk from them and their Chickens, which they more
greedily desire than any other Game whatsoever.

SECT. III. Of Insects.
Over and above the stock of Cattle, Fowl, etc. wherewith the Country-Farm is
generally replenished, there are several sorts of Insects, that being
judiciously and carefully managed and ordered, may bring into the
Husbandmans-Purse no small advantage. Amongst many of them that are useful in
several Countries, and to several ends and purposes, we have only two, which
are Bees and Silkworms, that are familiarly known and preserved amongst us,
whereof we shall treat apart. And first of Bees.

Being so commonly known and kept in this Kingdom, that Of Bees.
there is scarcely a Village (excepting near great Cities and Towns) where they
are not kept; whereof there are many several Tracts written and published full
of Rules, Precepts and Directions for the ordering, preserving, and managing
these profitable Creatures, both after the old and commonly known Method, and
according to such new ways and inventions that have been lately discovered and
experienced, for the improvement and advancement of the Income or profit of
this most admirable Creature: Which several ways of ordering them being so
multifarious, and the several Tracts written on them so difficult to obtain, so
intricate to be understood, and their Rules and Directions so different and
uncertain, and subject to so many gross errors and mistakes, I hope it will be
an acceptable work to the Countryman for me, in this place, to give you the
most select and approved Rules and Directions that are dispersed in such
several Authors, and to discover unto you the many Fallacies and Deceits that
some would lead you unto, by pretending newer and more advantageous ways of
ordering them than before were known, who themselves had never made a through
Experiment of what they published; ever reserving unto the Ingenious and Worthy
BVTLER, the praise and respects justly due unto him, for his most Accurate and
Excellent Piece on this Noble Subject; who has as Methodically and completely
handled this Part, as ever any Author in our Language did any other belonging
to the whole Mystery of Agriculture, or in any wise relating to it; yet are
there many Rules, Precepts, and ways of ordering these curious Creatures, not
mentioned in his Book, else had it been needless here to have said any thing
concerning them.

There is no Creature to be kept about our Rural Seat, that The praise and
pleasure of Bees.
affords unto us so much variety of pleasure as the Be.

In tenui labor, at tenuis non gloria: Virgil.
Although they are small, yet they are numerous; and although they are busied
up and down on poor and mean things, yet the matter they collect is Rich and
Noble: They never rest, nor are idle, but in the extremest cold and wet
seasons. In the Spring the first warm Sun invites them abroad to seek after
employment, which they daily follow, till the bitter Frosts, cold and stiff
Winds, -- Nam pabula venti Virgil.

Far domum prohibent --
and great Rains hinder them. They are out early in the morning; you shall hear
them like Swarms humming on the Line-trees by the Sunrising, when they send
forth the fragrant scents from their blossoms. Also in the Evening late shall
you have them return from their hard, yet pleasant labors.

At fessae multa referunt se nocte minores, Virgil.

Crura thymo plenae. --
Idleness is so detestable a Vice amongst them, that they will not admit of it,
nor tolerate it in any (save their Sovereign) but every one is continually
busied either abroad in collecting their Food, or at home in building Combs,
feeding their Young, or some other employment.

Namque aliae victu invigilant, and foedere pacto, Virgil.

Exercentur agris; pars intra Septa domorum, etc.
There are no Creatures persist in that Unity and Amity one toward another in
the same house or habitation, they having no single propriety in any thing they
do or get; for whatever they gather, all have a part; if any be injured, the
other will revenge his wrongs, although to the loss of their lives.

Their labor is not compulsive, every one acting his part voluntarily, and
seemingly contend and endeavor to outvie each other in their nimble and
expeditious Voyages, where they so mightily lade themselves, that many times
their decayed Wings are not able to support them home.

Saepe etiam duris errando in cotibus alas
Attrivere, ultroque animam sub fasce dedere
Tantus amor florum, and generandi gloria mellis.
What Living Creature can you keep about you, that can yield you more pleasure,
delight and profit, than these that possess so little Room as a small Partition
of your Garden; that require no other houses than what is made of Straw, unless
you will afford them a better; that seek their own food throughout the Year, if
judiciously ordered; that require so little trouble and attendance, as only a
careful Inspection some few hours in the day into your Apiary, in the Months
of May and June, and the lending unto them your assistance sometimes in their
defense against their Enemies, and to help them in their necessities, in the
Wintertime and bad Weather, when they cannot help themselves; and that yield
so considerable an Yearly Reward unto you for all your care, pains and industry
about them.

There can be nothing kept more advantageous than an Apiary, according to the
stock or sum you lay out. Many a Countryman has raised a sufficient livelihood
only from these laborious Creatures: We need produce no President for it; it is
so usual, Virgil also seems to hint as much, where he says:

Corycium vidisse senem; cui pauca relicti
Jugera ruris erant. Nec fertilis illa juvencis,
Nec pecori opportuna seges, nec comoda Baccho,
Regum aequabat opes animis; seraque revertens
Nocte domum, dapibus mensas, onerabat inemptis.
-- Apibus faetis idem, atque examine multo,
Primus abundare.
But many are ready to object, that they will not thrive in this or that place,
or with this or that person; and that sometimes they thrive a Year or two, and
no more, with many other suchlike conceits; which if rightly considered, it is
only the ignorance, slothfulness, or wilful neglect of the Keeper or Master of
them that occasions these mishaps: And I question not, but if the due and
orderly Rules hereafter mentioned be observed, but that they will equally
thrive at all seasonable times, and with all persons, the places and other
accidents considered.

Principio seeds Apibus, statioquae petenda. Virgil.
A convenient and necessary place is to be made choice of for Of the Apiary.
your Apiary: It is usual for those that have but few, to place them in any
corner of their Garden, or in their Courts or Backsides, and some in the Closes
adjoining to their houses, others for want of convenient room without doors,
have set them in the Lofts or upper Rooms of their houses, and in all or any of
these places will this laborious Creature live; but not with that content, nor
to that advantage of the Bee-Master, as if more propitiously disposed of; for
either they have not sufficient of the Sun wherein they principally delight,
and which inables them for their employment, or they are too much open to the
Winds, which is a great hinderance to them in their return when laden, or they
are subject to Annoyances, incident to such close corners and inconvenient
places; which is a principal cause of their not thriving so well as otherwise
they might do, if better placed.

Therefore where it is in your Election what place to have, and Form and manner
of the Apiary.
intend to possess your self of a considerable stock of Bees, make a square
Plat, and sever and divide it by its self, of capacity answerable to the stock
you intend to raise; but rather bigger than less, and rather long (extending
from East to West) than square, facing to the South; rather inclining to the
West than East, because of the Bees late returning home, that they may not then
want light: But some are of another Opinion, that it is best to let them have
the first Sun in the morning, that they may go early abroad, that being the
most apt time for the gathering of honey: Also I have known Bees thrive very
well having the first rise of the Sun at their doors; and others not to thrive,
being detained some hours from it by shadowy Trees, and in another place by a
Wall; but the surest way is to let them have as much of both Morning and
Evening Sun, as the places and fences will give way to.

You may be sure that the Morning-Sun makes them swarm early in the day, else
they will swarm late.

Let it be securely defended from high winds on every side, either Naturally
by Hills, Trees, etc. or Artificially by Houses, Barns, Walls, Pales, Hedges,
etc. and let the highest Fences be on the North; the other should be but low,
or far distant, left it hinder the Sun, and also their flight: Also let there
be no ill smells or savours near it, nor that Poultry frequent the place.

Let the ground of your Apiary be kept Mown, not dug nor pared, because it
is too hot in the Summer, and too cold in the Winter.

It is also very convenient to plant several Trees at some reasonable distance
from your Bees, as Plum-trees, Cherry-trees, Apple Trees, Filberts, Hazels,
Thorns, etc. that they may pitch at Swarming-time near at home, and not be in
danger of being lost for want of a lighting place; for want whereof you may
stick up green Boughs, and the Bees will pitch upon them.

Also let not your Apiary be very far from your home, that you may be often
with them at Swarming-time, and on several other occasions.

The common and usual way is either Stools or Benches; Stools Of the Seats or
Stools for Bees.
are used by most, and esteemed the better of the two, some whereof are of
Wood, and some of Stone; the Wood are esteemed the better, the Stone being so
hot in the Summer, and cold in the Winter. These Stools also are placed at
different heights, some on the ground, others mounted aloft two foot high; but
in medio virtus, about twelve inches is an indifferent height, and set a little
shelving, that the Rain may run off. These Stools also ought to be two or three
inches wider than the Hives you place upon them, with a place before a little
broader for the Bees to light on.

These Stools ought to stand at least five foot the one from the other,
measuring from the middle of each other Stool, in straight Ranks from East to
West; which Ranks, if you place them one behind another, had need be six or
eight foot asunder, and the Stools of the one Rank placed against the open
places or intervals of the other: Place them not near the Fences on neither
side, nor before, for hindering their flight.

Benches are also used by many; some I have seen placed the Of Benches.
one above the other, and on each a Row of Stocks of Bees; which although they
may possibly thrive, yet is not in any wise convenient; for Benches cannot be
thought necessary, unless you place the Hives near together, which produces
many inconveniences. Also one cannot so easily come at them, to trim, dress,
or order them, where they stand so near, or on Benches, as where they stand
singly, or apart.

But if you intend to go through-stitch with the work, and The best Seats.
make a complete Apiary worthy of your care and pains, and wherein you intend
to place a part of your delight, you may make for every Stock of Bees you
intend to keep, a square Cot or House of about two foot square, and two foot
and a half in height, set on four Legs about ten inches above ground, and five
or six inches within the ground, and covered over with Boards or Tiles to cast
off the Rain, the back or North-side being closed up, and the Sides respecting
the East and West to have doors to open and shut at pleasure, with Latches or
Hasps to them, the face or South Side to have a Falling-door to cover the one
half thereof, which is to be elevated at pleasure, and serves in the
Summertime for a Pent-house, not only to keep off the beating Rain from the
Hives, but to defend them from the extreme heat of the Sun, which about the
Midday is apt to melt their Honey. The other lower half should have two small
doors to open to either hand, which will serve to defend the doors or the holes
of the Hives from injurious Winds. When the Winter approaches, and the cold
Winds are like to injure your Bees, then may you fasten all your doors; which
will as well defend your Bees from the extremity of Cold in the Winter, as
extremity of Heat in the Summer; both injurious to this Innocent and
industrious Creature.

-- Nam frigore mella Virgil.

Cogit hyems, eademque Calor liquefacta remittit
Vtraque vis Apibus pariter metuenda. --
You may remember at the bottom of your little doors, to make an open square
place just against the Tee-hole, that the Bees may have some liberty (after you
have shut the doors) to fly abroad.

Here needs no Hackle to defend the Hive from Rain, nor is there any fear of
wet or wind to annoy them. Here may you place any sort of Hives, whether of
Straw, Boards, Glass, or any other thing whatsoever, without any sudden decay
or loss by the injuries of Weather, which by placing them abroad they are
subject unto: By the means of the Side-doors, especially if you make the
West-door to open to the right hand, may you sit secure, and observe the
several workings of the Bees in your Glass-Hives, if you are pleased to make
use of them; but if not, you may at these places order, view, and observe them,
better than when they stand on naked Stools, and with less offense to the Bees,
and more security to your self.

In the Wintertime if your Apiary stand cold, and you fear the extremity of
Frost may injure your Bees, you may within these doors stuff good sweet Straw
about your Hive, to keep the Bees the warmer.

But extremity of cold injureth not the Bees so much in the Winter, as wet,
which these Cases best preserves them from; or as Light, and the warm Beams of
the Sun, at such time when there is no provision abroad for them, against which
this House or Cot is a most certain Preservative; for when the doors are shut
in such Months you are not willing they should fly abroad, although the Sun
shine, yet they are dark, and unsensible of so small a heat, the Hive standing
six or eight inches within the doors; when after the common way of Stools or
Benches, the Sun casts his Rays to their very doors; which warmth and light
together excite them forth, to the expense of their provision, and the loss of
many of their Hives, as is evident by frequent experience, the mildest and
clearest Winters starving and destroying the most Bees; and on the contrary,
the coldest and most frozen Winters best preserves them. It is also more
plainly manifest, that in the Northern Regions, as Russia, Muscovia, etc. Bees
do much more abound in the Woods than in these parts, their Winters being so
dark and so cold, which by this way may in some measure be imitated.

In the Springtime also there are several days that are not fit for the Bees
to be abroad in; at such times may you keep the doors shut, leaving only the
under-passage open, where such that list may take the Air, though by far the
greater part lie still unsensible that the Spring is so near. But when you see
the Weather is good, and that the Willow or Withy yields them employment, you
may set open your two under-doors, that the warmth and light of the Sun and Air
may encourage them to work, otherwise you will hinder their early breeding, and
make them slothful; for I have had the experience, that by setting an empty
Hive before a full, expecting that by the continual passing of the Bees to and
fro through that empty Hive, they might stock it, that so I might have had two
Stocks for one without Swarming; but it framed not according to expectation,
the Bees in the inner Hive being so far removed from the light and Air became
lazy, and did not increase nor labor so well as those that were otherwise
ordered; therefore open your doors in time, but not too early, for fear of the
other extreme: we can give you no certain time for it, because the Springs vary
sometimes two or three Weeks.

Several sorts of Hives are used in several Countries, but here Of the Hives.
in England they generally make use of two sorts, either Wicker-Hives made with
Spleets of Wood, and daubed with Cow-cloom tempered for that purpose, or
Strawn-Hives made of good Wheaten-straw bound with Bramble, which are the best
and most usual that are yet common.

The Wicker-Hives are still at fault, the Loom mouldering away upon every
occasion; which is not in any wise good for the Bees, who love not to have any
Vents open but their doors.

There is great diversity of Opinion amongst Authors, concerning The form and
bigness of the Hives.
the bigness and form of the Hive; some preferring the high and narrow Hive, of
three foot in height, and one in breadth, or of two foot broad, and two foot
high, neither of which can be convenient: but that form which is most round,
and in quantity about half a Bushel and upwards, is most in use, and is
esteemed the best way, and fittest size for your purpose: some you may have
under half a Bushel for small Swarms.

Before you put any Swarm into a new Hive, you must make Dressing the Hives.
the inside as smooth as may be, from the ends of Sticks and Straws, which
much trouble the Bees, who spend much of their time in gnawing them off; as in
the nightime you may observe in a few days after the Hiving. After that you
have picked out the greatest Sticks and Straws, then rub the inside over with
a Sand-stone, and then singe it with a little flame of Straw, and wipe it clean.

Hives may be made of Boards, either of an eight-square form Of Wooden-Hives.
joined together, or round with Hoops, like a Milking-pail, flat on the top. In
these Hives, if they are made of Wood that has no unsavory scent or taste, as
Deal, Beech, or suchlike, the Bees will delight and breed as well as in either
of the other, and they will last many years, and are freer from the injuries of
the Weather, and several other casualties the other are subject unto, provided
they are made with dry seasoned Wood that is not apt to shrink.

In these Hives of Wood may be made several Glass-windows, Of Glassen-Hives.
at what height or distance you please, not only for your observation of their
work, which you may with much facility and delight perceive how far they
proceed, and in what time, but that the Bees also may have the more light; a
principal help and encouragement in their labors.

To every of these Windows of Glass you ought to have a small and light Shutter
of Wood to hapse on the outside of the Glass in cold weather, and at such
times as the Sun shines on that part of the Hive, it being subject to both
extremes of heat and cold; yet so as you may take them down at your pleasure
for your inspection, and leave such always down during the Summer that are from
the Sun-wards.

We have also an Experiment of Glassen-Hives, published by Mr. Hartlib in his
Commonwealth of Bees; as invented by one Mr. William Mew, Minister at
Easlington in Glocestershire, and thus written:

The Invention is a fancy that suits with the Nature of that Creature; they are
much taken with their Grandeur, and double their Tasks with delight: I took
(says he) fourteen Quarts out of one of the Transparent Hives, double their
quantity of others, they quickly paid me the Charges with their Profit, and
doubled it with pleasure. And in another place thus:

They serve only to give me an account of the daily Income, and a Diary of
their Negotiations; whereby if I spend (says he) half an hour after Dinner or
Supper, I know what has been done that day; can show my Friends the Queens
Cells, and sometimes her Person, with her Retinue. She afforded me fourteen
Quarts, or near upon, in one year; and if the rest afford ten a piece, I think
it a fair gain. There is not a Hive to be seen about my House, nor a Child
stung in a year: My Apiary consists of a Row of little Houses two Stories high,
two foot apart, which I find as cheap at seven years end as Straw-Hackles, and
far more handsome. Thus far Mr. Mew.

We also in the same Book find the description of a Bee-hive made of boards of
an Octogonal form, with a Glass-window on the backside of it, for the
observation of their work; the rest of the inside of the Hive lined with Mat
made of Rushes: Three of these were set one on the other, with open passages
between each of them, which produced these effects: Viz.

In May (says the Relater) we put in two Swarms together, leaving the places
to go in open only in the lowermost, but all the Passage-holes open from Box to
Box: In the middlemost they first began their Combs, then in the lowermost,
before they had filled the middlemost, and so continued till they had filled
both; which before they had quite finished, they began to make two little Combs
in the upper-Box, etc.

The Combs in the lower stories were well replenished with Honey, and suddenly;
but these little Combs in the upper, they quite desert. Thus far that Relation.

These are the several Descriptions and Forms of Bee-hives we have met withal
published; but it is reported, that there are several other Forms and Fashions
made, and that with very good success, as well for the advantage of the Bees,
as pleasure of the Bee-Master, by several worthy and ingenious persons. It
would be very much for their Credit and Reputation, and exceeding satisfactory
to others, if such their Inventions and Observations were made public.

As for my own particular, I have made many and difficult Experiments and
Essays toward the advancement of the profit and pleasure of this Industrious
Animal, and have made use of most of the former sorts of Bee-hives, and framed
several others, with Remedies and Provisions for such inconveniences and
omissions I found in the other; and have with as much Caution observed the
Operations and Nature of Bees throughout the whole year, as my Occasions would
give way to, and my shallow Capacity could apprehend; as you may find by the
sequel of the Tract: Yet have I not finished to attain the right Method, or way
of ordering them, as I principally aim at. The two unseasonable years for Bees,
1665, and 1667; and my present Removal preventing the greatest part of my
design: It also being the work of a year, or at least that part of time that
comes but once a year, to make one Experiment or Observation. And the
Observations already published, which ought to be a Guide, prove rather an
Ignis Fatuus, to lead one out of the way, than an Index to point out the truth;
as we shall hereafter in this Book make appear.

Nevertheless, this Observation I have found to be true; viz. that Bees delight
not in an high habitation; the broader and flatter it is, the better they
prosper; for they cannot with ease pass up through the intervals of their Combs
to the Summit of their Hives: Therefore if you mean to make a Hive wherein they
should delight, let it not be very high, but allow it as much in breadth as you
please, they will be sure to fill it.

But before we have done with the Hives, we must not forget Of Spleeting of the
Hives.
the Spleeting of them. The way they usually Spleet the ordinary strawn and
daubed Hives, every Country Coridon understands. As for our Wooden or
Glass-Hives, some prescribe that there be three downright Sticks from the top
to the bottom, and about two small Hoops fastened unto them at convenient
distances, which will very well serve for the fastening and supporting of the
Combs, which way I have used: it is best to let the perpendicular sticks extend
to the bottom, for the Bees the better to crawl up by them to the Combs; but
you may have only downright sticks, or any other ways placed, as best agrees
with the form of your Hive, so that there be not too wide intervals between.

Having prepared such Hives you design to make use of, the Of the swarming of
Bees.
only way to stock them is by putting Swarms into them; notwithstanding I have
many times attempted to entice, and enforce them without Swarming (confiding
too much on the Writings and Reports of other men) out of their own old
habitations, into my new Hives.

The one way I used was this; I set an empty Hive before a Several Experiments
to increase Bees without swarming.
full, that the Bees passing from their old through the new and empty Hive,
might choose rather to live therein, than go forth in Swarms to seek another:
but the long and darksom passage, being of Strawn-Hives, made the Bees lazy (as
before we noted) together with the unseasonableness of that year, that the Bees
did not breed any more than to maintain their old stock; so that my design
became fruitless.

Then presuming on that Principle, that the Bees always begin their work above,
and so work downwards, I took an old Stall of Bees, and long before
Breeding-time inverted the same, with the skirts upwards, and the tops
downwards, in an hollow stool made for that purpose, and placed thereon one of
my new wooden Hives, with Glass-windows thereto, having a bottom which covered
the whole under-Hive, save only a wide hole in the middle, through which the
whole Stock of Bees had their passage in my new Hive; and so out at the door of
my new Hive they continually passed to and fro. In the Summertime, when the
under-Hive was over-full, they took to the top of the new Hive, and built there
some few Combs; which before Winter, when their number lessened, and the
under-Hive was able to contain them all, they deserted; and did not, according
to my expectation, forsake their old Stock, and take altogether to the new,
although the same were above them, and the old one under them: But in all
probability I had had a greater number of Combs, and a greater stock of Bees,
and they also would have continued longer; which would much have elucidated
this Experiment, had it not fallen out to be in such a year that few Stocks
yielded any Swarms.

Another way I made use of was this: thinking the Bees would leave no place
above them uninhabited, I cut off the top of a Strawn-hive, until I had made a
passage through the top of the Combs, and thereon I placed one of my
Glassen-hives, with a bottom, and a hole in the midst thereof, through which I
used all the means I could to provoke the Bees to pass, but in no wise would
they; for as soon as they were in the upper, though light by means of the
Glass, yet they immediately returned.

Also I placed several Stocks in Strawn-hives on Wooden-hives with
Glass-windows, and left convenient passage out of the one into the other, with
a Cover also to the hole that passed between the two Hives, which I might move
at pleasure. I also stopped the doors of the Strawn-hive, that they had no
other passage than through the Wooden-hive, wherein at Swarming-time they built
many large Combs, and stored them well with Honey (it being a good Year for
breeding of Bees wherein I made this Experiment) but when the cold Weather
came, and the number of Bees began to lessen, which they always do against the
Winter, they crowded all up into the upper Hives, carried up or spent the Honey
in the new Combs, and deserted them, leaving them as an empty Spectacle through
the Glass-windows.

The one of these Stocks about Swarming-time having a good quantity of Bees in
the under Glass-hive, I shut the passage between the upper and lower Hive with
the Shutter made for that purpose, and took away the upper Stock, and set in
another place, thinking thereby to have two Stocks for one (the Bees being as
equally divided as might be) yet the Bees in the under-hive having lost their
old passage, or not having their King or Queen, or for some cause or other, did
not like their habitation very well, but in two or three days were most of them
gone into their old Hive, or lost; which compelled me (for further tryal-sake)
to place the one over the other, as before; then they fell again to their
business: So that by any way hitherto Essayed, I cannot discover how to
increase my Stocks, as to number, without giving them leave to Swarm, or go
forth in Companies from their own homes (as it were) with their Prince or
Leader to seek a new habitation.

But having thus far spent much time and labor to understand the Nature of
these wonderful and industrious Creatures, and finding these Attempts not to
answer my expectation, I was unwilling to desist; the Errors of one, usually
leading to the discovery of another and better Experiment: but began a new way,
and more probable than the other; which is, in every Bee-hive of Wood with
Glass-windows I had a large Pipe of about two inches square in the clear, that
came from the top of my Hive to the bottom, open at both ends: at the bottom it
was cut on the four sides Arch-wise, that the Bees might on every side ascend
freely up the Pipe. I fitted a piece of Wood into this Pipe, to prevent the
Bees from making any Combs therein, until such time as the Swarm put in it
should fill the Hive: then would I place another of the same sort and fashioned
Hives on the top thereof, with his door open also, (having first taken out the
Stoppel fitted to the Pipe) that the Bees from the bottom of their own work
might ascend through that Pipe into the newly placed Hive; which way when they
had once discovered, doubtless they would rather take to, than swarm: by which
means it is most probable you may multiply your Stocks, by placing Hive upon
Hive ad infinitum, and drive your Bees, etc. which I had thoroughly proved, had
not my Removal prevented me; that I can promise you no assurance of the effect,
but hope to give a better account thereof in a few years; discovering thus far
of what I have seen and made experience of, that you might avoid those
difficulties and errors I met withal, and proceed on such ways that succeeded
well, and are in probability to answer what your desire is.

Where your design is for multiplication of your Stocks, there The bigness of
Swarms or Stocks of Bees.
it is best to make your Hives the smaller; and where you aim at great
quantities of Honey, there make them the greater: So that in case you cannot
prevail in the one, it may nevertheless be a considerable and sure advantage in
the other; as is evident in Mr. Mew's Experiment of his Transparent Hive, out
of one of which he took fourteen quarts of Honey; then it is very probable the
Hive held twice as much, for the Wax, Bees, and vacant places: so that his Hive
was of an extraordinary bigness, and yielded an extraordinary advantage.

Also in the other beforementioned Experiment, the Octogonal Boxes or Hives
are of a very great bigness, at least two foot wide, and of about fifteen
inches deep, into which they put two Swarms together, which filled two of them
in the first Summer.

Also in the History (Butler mentions in his Feminine Monarchy) of the Bees
that settled over Vives his Study, having so much room, what an incredible Mass
of Honey was there produced?

Therefore we cannot but urge this as a part of good Husbandry, to have a Set
of well-made Hives transparent, or with lights of a good capacity, or to be
added the one above the other, as we said before; although it be only for the
increase of Honey, and another Set of smaller Hives only for the increase of
Swarms; for a few Hives in a thriving condition, and well ordered, will yield
you Bees enough to stock many of your larger Hives.

If the Spring be mild, calm and showring, then is it good Signs of Swarming.
for Swarms, and they will be the earlier; but if it prove a cold, dry and
windy Spring, such as were 1665 and 1667, then will there be but few Swarms
that year, and those also very backward.

About the middle of May, in an early Spring, you must begin to look after
them, and observe what you can of the usual signs that precede their swarming,
that you may be the more watchful over those that require it when the Hives are
full (before which they will never swarm) they will cast out their Drones, yea,
although they be not quite grown. Secondly, the Bees will hover about the doors
in cold Evenings and Mornings. Thirdly, there will be moistness and sweating
upon the Stool. Fourthly, they run hastily up and down. Fifthly, they lie out
in sultry Evenings and Mornings, and go in again when the Air is clear.

If the Weather be warm and calm, the Bees delight to rise, but Signs of
present Swarming.
especially in a hot Gleam, after a shower or gloomy Cloud has sent them home
together; then sometimes they gather together without at the door, not only
upon the Hive, but upon the Stool also; where when you see them begin to hang
in Swarming-time, and not before, then be sure they will presently rise if the
Weather hold.

To lie forth continually under the Stool, or behind the Hive, Signs and
causes of not Swarming.
etc. especially toward the middle of June, is a sign or cause of not
swarming: for when they have once taken to lie forth, the Hive will always seem
empty, as though they wanted company; then will they have no mind to swarm.

Also much stormy and windy Weather will not suffer them to Swarm when they are
ready, and that makes them lie out; and the longer they lie out, the more
unwilling they are to Swarm.

Another cause of their lying forth, is continual hot and dry Weather,
especially after the Solstice; which causing plenty of honey both in Plants and
Dews, their minds are so set upon that their chief delight, that they have no
leisure to swarm, although they might most safely come abroad in such Weather.

First keep the Hive as cool as may be, by watering and shadowing To make them
Swarm.
both it and the place where it stands; and then enlarging the door to give
them Air, move the Cluster gently with your Brush, and drive them in.

If yet they lie forth and swarm not, then the next calm and warm day about
Noon, whilst the Sun shines, put in the better part with your Brush, and the
rest gently sweep away from the Stool, not suffering them to Cluster again:
These rising in the calm heat of the Sun, by their noise, as though they were
Swarming, will make the other to come forth perhaps unto them, and so they may
swarm.

If this serve not, but they lie forth still, then rear the Hive enough to let
them in, and cloom up the skirts all but the door: If this succeed not, there
is no remedy.

The signs of After-swarms are more certain: when the Prime-swarm Signs of
after-Swarms.
is gone, about the eighth or tenth Evening after, when another Brood is ready,
and again has over-filled the Hive, the next Prince begins to Tune in her
Treble Voice, a mournful and begging note; then in a day or two shall you hear
the old Queen in her base Note reply, and as it were consent. In the Morning
before they swarm, they come down near the Stool, and there they call somewhat
longer. At the very time of Swarming they descend to the Stool, where answering
one another in more earnest manner, with thicker and shriller Notes, the
multitude come forth in great haste, etc.

If the prime Swarm be broken, the second will both call and swarm the sooner,
it may be the next day, and after that a third, and sometimes a fourth; but all
usually within a fortnight: sometimes also a Swarm will cast another that year.

When the swarm is risen, it is the usual custom to play them Ringing of Bees.
a Fit of Mirth upon a Pan, Kettle, Basin, or suchlike Instrument, upon
pretense to gather them together, and make them settle; which Custom seems to
be very Ancient, as Virgil witnesses.

Tinnitusque cie, and matris quate Cymbala circum, etc. And notwithstanding
this has been accounted and found to be needless, yet by Levet in his Treatise
of Bees it is esteemed as a ridiculous Toy, and most absurd Invention, and
rather hurtful than profitable, because all great noise does disquiet and hurt
them; he says he had above forty Swarms in a Year, without the loss of one;
when his Neighbors having a far less number, and using this kind of Juggling,
lost diverse. Also Butler makes no other use of it, than where there be many
Apiaries near, publicly to notify the time and place of their rising, that so
a just and open Claim may be laid unto the Swarm; esteeming the pretended
reason of staying the Swarm to be a mere fancy.

But if they fly aloft, or are like to be gone, cast dust amongst them to make
them come down.

When your Swarm has made choice of a lighting place, you Hiving of Bees.
shall quickly see them knit together, in form of a Cone, Pineapple, or
Cluster of Grapes: when they are fully settled, and the Cone has been a while
at the biggest, then Hive them.

First (having in store several Hives of several bignesses) make choice of a
Hive proportionable in bigness to your Swarm, that the Bees may go near to fill
it that year; but rather under-Hive a Swarm than over-Hive them.

Then rub the Hive with sweet Herbs, as Thyme, Savory, Marjerom, Baulm, Fennel,
Hysop, Mallows, or Bean-tops, etc. and with a branch of Hasel, Oak, Willow, or
any other of the aforesaid Herbs, but rather of the same Tree whereon the Swarm
lighted, wipe the Hive clean, and dip such Sprig or Branch into Mead, or fair
water mixed with a little Honey, or with Milk and Salt, or Salt only, and
therewith besprinkle the Hive.

Then having first drank a Cup of good Beer, and washed your hands and face
therewith, or being otherwise defended, if the Bees hang upon a bough, shake
them into the Hive, and set the same upon a Mantle or Cloth on the ground, as
is usual; or you may cut off the bough if it be small, and lay it on the Mantle
or Cloth, and set the Hive over it, which is the better way.

If they light near the ground, lay your Cloth under them, and shake them down,
and place the Hive over them; and such Bees that gather together without the
Hive, wipe them gently with your Brush toward the Hive; and if they take to
any other place than the Hive, wipe them off gently with your Brush, and rub
the place with Mugwort, Morgan, Wormwood, Archangel, or other bitter or noisome
Weeds or Herbs.

Then set the Swarm, as near as you can, to the lighting place, till all be
quiet, and every one knows his own home.

If the Swarm part and light in sight one of another, let alone the greater,
and disturb the lesser part, and they will fly to their Fellows; but if not in
sight, then Hive them both in two several Hives, and bring them together, and
shake the Bees out of the one Hive, on the Mantle whereon the other Hive
stands, and place the other full Hive on them, and they will all take to it.

If it happen that your Swarms come late, after the middle of Uniting of Swarms.
June, and that they are small, under the quantity of a Peck, then put two or
three of them together, whether they rise the same day, or in diverse: for by
this uniting they will labor carefully, gather store of wealth, and stoutly
defend themselves against all Enemies. The manner of uniting is thus.

In the Evening when it waxes dark, having spread a Mantle on the ground near
unto the Stool where this united Swarm shall stand, and set a pair of Rests, or
two Supporters for the Hives: knock down the Hive out of which you intend to
remove your Bees upon the Rests; then lifting up the Hive a little, and
clapping it between your hands to get out the Bees that stick in it, lay it
down side-ways by the Bees, and set the Stock or Swarm to which you would add
them upon the Rests or Supporters over them, and they will forthwith ascend
into the Hive; those that remain in the empty Hive, by clapping it, will hasten
after their company: then when you have gotten them all in, either that night,
or early in the next Morning, place the Hive on the Stool, etc.

Place the Hive wherein you have newly put your Swarm you A better
intend to drive into another, in a place that the skirts may be uppermost, and
set the other upon him, binding them about the skirts with a long Towel; and so
let them stand till the Morning, and the Bees will all ascend, that you may the
next Morning set the Receiver on a Stool: And thus may you put three or four
Swarms together; but observe to unite them the same Evening, or the next at
farthest, that they swarm; lest having made Combs, they are the more unwilling
to part from them.

In these several ways of dealing with Bees, it is good to defend Defense
against Bees.
ones self as well as may be against their stinging, which to some persons
proves very troublesome, especially if they are uncleanly, or have any ill
scent about them; therefore with caution must they be tampered withal. Some
only drink a Cup of good Beer, and find that sufficient; others wash their
hands and face therewith, which proves a good defense: I have gone amongst them
in their greatest anger and madness, only with a handful of sweet herbs in my
hand, fanning about my face, as it were, to obscure and defend it. Also if a
Be do by accident buz about you, being unprovided, thrust your face amongst a
parcel of boughs or herbs, and he will desert you. But the most secure way of
all, and beyond the compleatest Harness yet published, is to have a Net knit
with so small Meshes, that a Be cannot pass through, and of fine Thread or
Silk, large enough to come over your Hat, and to lie down to the Collar of your
Doublet, through which you may perfectly see what you do without any danger,
having also on a good pair of Gloves, whereof Woollen are the best.

But if the Be happen to catch you unawares, pull out the To cure the sting of
a Be.
sting as soon as you can. Some prescribe to wash the same with your Spittle,
and say that that will prevent swelling: Others commend the rubbing thereon the
Leaves of Marigolds, House-leek, Rue, Mallows, Ivy, Holyhock and Vinegar, Salt
and Vinegar, and diverse other things: But the most sure and Natural Remedy, is
to heat a piece of Iron in the fire, or for want of that to take a live Coal,
and hold it as near and as long to the place as you can possibly endure it,
which will Sympathetically attract the fiery venom that by the sting was left
in the wound, or force it out of the place affected, and give you an immediate
ease and cure. The same it will effect on the bitings or stingings of Snakes,
or other venomous Creatures; and it is probable, on the bitings of mad Dogs: But
of this in another place.

As soon as a Swarm has entered his Hive, they immediately Of the Bees work.
(if the Weather permit) gather Wax and build Combs, that in a few days time
there will be several large and complete Combs; they lie so thick about them,
that it is impossible one quarter of them can be employed at once, until the
Combs are brought to a considerable length; and then a great part of them may
be employed in filling them, the rest in finishing their Cells or Combs.

It Is a difficult matter in our transparent Hives, to discern how these
Admirable Creatures frame their curious Workmanship, by reason they are so
numerous, that they generally cover their whole Work, that unless the Bees also
were transparent (as Butler terms it) it cannot be discerned: But through the
Glass you may observe how they carry up their far-fetcht goods, and what a
mighty stir they make, and how perpetually busy they are, and in a clear day
when most are abroad, especially toward the end of the Summer: Also when their
Young Bees are fit for service, and are abroad, which are those chiefly that
hide so much of the Combs; then may you plainly discern their Combs and Cells
filled with bright and clear Honey.

Their numbers also, toward the end of the Summer, begin The numbers of Bees.
to lessen, which gives you a great advantage of beholding them and their work:
For in their prosperity at Swarming-time, and shortly after, they are far more
in number than in the Autumn or Winter; as you may easily discern between the
quantity and number of a Swarm, and those you kill when you take them; for the
Bees of the last years breed do now by degrees waste and perish; by their
extraordinary labor, their Wings decay and fail them: so that a Year, with
some advantage, is the usual Age of a Be, and the young only of the last
Spring survive and preserve the kind till the next.

There are several things that are injurious to Bees, and much Of the Bees
Enemies.
hinder their prosperity, if not prevented.

1. Noise, which may in part be remedied by the situation of the Apiary, free
from the Noises of Carts and Coaches, the sound of Bells, from Echoes, etc.

2. Smoke; I have known that when Land has been burn-beaten, near unto an
Apiary, and the Wind brought the Smoke toward it, that a great part of the
Bees intercepted by the Smoke in their flight, have been destroyed; which is a
principal cause that Bees thrive not in or near a great Town.

3. Ill Smells also are very offensive to them, as before we noted.

4. Ill Weather; as Winds, Rain, Cold, Heat, etc. prevented by the situation
and fencing the Apiary, and ordering the Stocks as before.

5. The Mouse, Birds, and other devouring Creatures; which are to be destroyed,
as hereafter we shall show you.

6. Noisome Creatures; as Toads, Frogs, Snails, Spiders, Moths, etc. which you
must endeavor to keep out of your Apiary; and also cleanse your Hives ever and
anon from these Vermin.

7. Hornets and Wasps, in such years wherein they abound, prove great Enemies
to the Bees, by robbing them of their wealth; which are destroyed by placing
near the door of the Hive a Glass-Vial half full of Cider, Verjuice, sour
drink, or suchlike, wherein they go and never return.

8. Bees themselves prove the greatest Enemies, both by fighting and robbing.
Several occasions provoke the Bees to fight; which if the Battle be but newly
begun, may be hindered by stopping up the Hive close where they begin to fight;
or if it be so far gone that most of the Bees are out, and that the Conflict is
very great, the casting up of dust amongst them was the ancient way to pacify
them, as Virgil witnesses:

Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.
But Butler condemns this Custom; and also of casting drink amongst them.

To keep and preserve your Bees from Robbers, which are very usual both in the
Spring and Autumn, you must be sure to cloom up the Hives very close, leaving
the doors very small; and, according to the season of the year, to widen and
streighten them, as you may observe in the Calendar toward the end of this
Book inserted.

The best time to remove an old Stock, is a little before, or a Removing of
Bees.
little after Michaelmas; or if you have over-slipt that time, then about the
end of February, or beginning of March, before they go much abroad, lest it
prevent their Swarming: or you may remove any time of the Winter, though not so
well as in the aforesaid seasons.

For the removing of a Swarm, it is best to do it the Evening next after the
Hiving.

Let the Weather be fair, as near as you can, when you remove; and let it be
done in the Evening, when all the Bees are quiet.

The best way is thus: Take a board, about the breadth of the bottom of the
Hive you intend to remove, and in the Evening, or two or three Evenings before
you remove your Stock, lift it up, and brush the Bees that are on the Stool
forwards; or let the board be a little supported by two ledges, to prevent the
death of the Bees on the Stool; on this board set your Stock, and so let them
stand till you remove them: when you come to remove them, stop up the door of
the Hive, and set the board whereon the Hive stands on a Hand-barrow, and
carry them to the place you intend, and there place them: by which means they
are not at all disturbed, nor a Be injured, nor the Hive nor Combs crushed by
the squeezing of the Cloth, nor yet a Cloth used about them.

This of all other things belonging to an Apiary is of least Of the feeding of
Bees.
use: First, because Bees that have not a probable stock of Honey to serve them
over the Winter, are not fit to be kept: And then because they that are
Bee-Masters, and have not care enough of them to keep them from spending that
Stock they have in the Wintertime, must not expect to reap any considerable
advantage by this profitable Creature, nor I presume will ever take so much
pains and care as is required in feeding them.

Yet are there some Stocks of Bees in the Springtime, that may seem worthy our
care to preserve them; viz. such that having but a thin stock of Honey, and a
good quantity of Bees, by means of a cold, dry and unseasonable Spring, cannot
make such timely provision, as in other years they might have done; yet in all
probability may prove an excellent stock. It would prove a piece of gross
neglect of our own advantage, and a piece of cruelty to these distressed
Animals, if we should not lend our assistance.

Which may be several ways applied, but best by small Canes Manner of feeding.
or Troughs conveyed into their Hives, into which you may put your Food you
give them; which must be daily continued, till the Spring-season affords them
easy and sufficient provision abroad, Because at that time their Combs are
full of young Bees.

Of all Food, Honey is the best and most natural; which will Food for Bees.
go the farther, if it be mixed well with a moderate proportion of good sweet
Wort. Some prescribe Toasts of bread sopped in strong Ale, and put into the
Bee-hive, whereof they will not leave one Crum remaining. Some also advise to
put into the Hive dry Meal or Flour of Beans: others Bay Salt, roasted Apples,
etc. which are all very good.

Take a handful of Baum, one dram of Camphire, half a dram An experiment for
improving of Bees.
of Musk dissolved in Rose Water, as much yellow Beeswax as is sufficient, Oil
of Roses as much; stamp the Baum and Camphire very well, and put them into the
Wax melted with the Oil of Roses, and so make it up into a Mass: let it cool
before you put in the Musk, for otherwise the heat will fume away most of the
scent of it.

Take of this Mass as much as an Hazel-nut, and leave it within the Bee-hive,
it will much increase the number of your Bees. You shall also find both in
Honey and Wax three times more profit than otherwise you should have had.
Commonwealth of Bees.

In Kempen-land in Germany (says mine Author) I have seen A singular
observation concerning the food of Bees.
about forty great Bee-hives; which contain, when they are full, about seventy
pound weight in Honey, placed near a great Field sown with Buck-wheat: And it
was related to me of a truth by the Inhabitants, that the Bees did suck such
plenty of honey out of it, that in a fortnights time the said Hives were all
filled therewith.

Also Anniseed sown near the Apiary is esteemed an extraordinary delightsome
food for Bees.

The principal aim of most Bee-masters is advantage; and it Of the fruit and
profit of Bees.
has been the general design of Experimenters to discover which way this most
industrious and profitable Creature may be multiplied and maintained with the
least expense, care and trouble, and also to the greatest advantage; for they
require no more than a house of Straw, unless you can afford them a better:
their food they seek where it will never advantage you, nor any else, if they
have it not: Your circumspection and care only is required to order and
preserve them; which also is but little, if you understand their natures and
temper, and will seem much less, if you make it one of your Exercises of
delight and pleasure.

Yet do they return you an extraordinary recompense and reward for whatever you
bestow on them, as before we have observed.

But that which has been principally designed, is to find out some ways or
means how, or after what manner the fruit and profit of Bees may be taken
without the loss of their Hives; it being a seeming act of cruelty to destroy
the lives of these most industrious Creatures, to rob them of their goods.

The one way that has been used to this purpose, is the driving Driving of
Bees.
of Bees after this manner: In September, or any time after they have done
breeding, else will the honey be corrupted by the Skaddons in the Combs, place
the Hive you intend to take with the bottom upwards, between three or four
stakes, and set the Hive you intend to drive the Bees into over the same, as
before we directed in the uniting of Swarms; then often clap the under-hive
between your hands in the Evening, and so let them stand till the Morning, and
then clap it again; and set the full Hive on the Stool, a little bolstered up,
that the Bees may have free Egress and Ingress: then clap the empty Hive again,
and get as many Bees out as you can, which will repair to the other Hive. This
way is something troublesome to the unexperienced, yet beneficial in such cases
where you have a great stock of Honey, and few Bees in one Hive, and a small
stock of Honey in another; by which means you save the lives of most of your
Bees, which will gladly exchange their hungry habitation for a more plentiful.

This is a way has been practiced by the Ancients, and has Exsection, or
gelding of Combs.
been much endeavored after to be revived again, though not with any good
success; for if you take away any part of their Combs in the Spring, they are
then full of Skaddons, which spoil the Honey, and also destroy the breed of
your Bees: If you take away the Combs in the Autumn, then will they want them
in the Spring following to lay their Young in, which they usually do before any
new matter is to be found to build withal.

So that the new Inventions of making Bee-hives to open with doors to take out
Combs at pleasure, are fruitless and ridiculous Toys, published by such that
know not the nature of Bees, nor their work; who fix their Combs on every side,
that you cannot easily open your door; and if you could, the Bees would prove
too busy for you to meddle with their Combs; whom if you should overcome, yet
the former inconveniences would follow.

Others have advised to make Bee-hives to place the one over the other, and
some to be placed the one at the end of the other successively; that when the
Bees have filled the one, another being added they would fall to work, and fill
the next, and leave the former, and so fill several one after another; and that
you may take the Hive that was first filled away for your use: and have also
described unto us the particular ways of ordering these new-invented Hives, and
how every particular thing is to be done, as though the Authors thereof had had
long experience in it; which has encouraged many to the prosecution of the
design.

Which I find to deceive us in several particulars: for the Bees build Combs
only at the former part of the Summer; and after they have prepared sufficient
Receptacles wherein to dispose their Honey, and answerable to their number,
their matter also being much wasted which they gather abroad for the making of
their Combs, they then fall to work for the storing of their Cells with food
for the approaching Winter: so that whatever room you give them more, seems
superfluous, and rather proves a burden than an advantage unto them. The next
year also it is in vain to give them more room, unless it be to a Young Stock
that could not, or had not time enough to build sufficient the precedent Year,
or to an Old Stock that was straightened in room before, as usually our Swarming
Stocks are.

Also when you expect to take the top or fullest Combs, you will find the Bees
most there: for they will not (as some fondly imagine) desert the more remote,
and lie in the nearer Combs; but on the contrary, as I have often found.

But that which seems to me the most probable way (for I have not yet fully
experienced it) is to make your Hives very small, either the one over the
other, or the one behind the other; and if you find they have a sufficient
stock of Honey to preserve them in the remainder, you may take the most remote
Box or Hive and place it the nethermost, and so drive the Bees into the other:
but this also must be submitted to farther Trials.

To conclude from what we have before treated, I judge it the most prudential
way to have in your Apiary a sufficient stock of Bees kept for breeding and
swarming, and another stock kept in large Glass-hives, whereof we have before
discoursed, for the raising of great quantities of Honey, which they will much
better do in those Hives; and I see no reason why we should judge it a greater
piece of cruelty or inhumanity, to take away the lives of these Creatures (who
have so short and insensible a life, and die so easily) for their Honey, than
to take away the lives of any other Animals to feed on their Carcasses; which
is daily done, and that with very high degrees of torture: Neither can it be
any loss to the Bee-master, who may have an Annual supply by his
swarming-stocks kept for that purpose; as the great Flocks of Weathers are
yearly supplied from the Flocks of Ewes, and the large and vast fatning Ponds
of Carps from the lesser breeding Ponds.

Sed si jam proles subito defecerit omnis, Virgil.

Nec genus unde novae stirpis revocetur, habebit:
Which rarely happens to a careful Bee-master: but if it should, Tempus and
Arcadii memoranda inventa Magistri, Idem.
Pandere. then may you experiment the Invention of the Athenian Bee-Master
Generation of Bees.
in Virgil, wherewith in effect agrees the Experiment of our Modern and great
Husbandman old Mr. Carew of Cornwall, which is thus: Take a Calf or Steer of a
year old, about the latter end of April; bury it eight or ten days, till it
begin to putrify and corrupt; then take it forth of the Earth, and opening it,
lay it under some hedge or wall, where it may be most subject to the Sun, by
the heat whereof it will a great part of it turn into Maggots, which without
any other care will live upon the remainder of the corruption: After a while,
when they begin to have wings, the whole putrified Carcass would be carried to
a place prepared where the Hives stand ready, to which, being perfumed with
Honey and sweet Herbs, the Maggots after they have received their wings will
resort.

Quis Deus hanc, Musae, quis nobis excudit Artem? Virgil.

Vnde nova ingressus hominum experientia caepit?
Or if you are unwilling either to credit or make trial of this Experiment, you
may purchase a new stock of your Neighbors; if not with Money, which is
connted unfortunate, yet with the exchange of other Commodities. But what need
we make provision against so improbable and unlikely accidents?

For the trying of Honey and Wax, we will leave to the Experienced.

There are several ways of making curious Drinks or Liquors Making of Metheglin.
out of Honey; some make it white and clear, not only by the pureness, and
fineness, and whiteness of the Honey, but also by some particular Process or
Art they have: Others make it very good; yet partly by reason of the nature and
color of the Honey, and partly for want of judgment, it carries with it a more
gross and red tincture: but if the Honey be good, the tincture cannot be much
injurious to the Drink.

Concerning the making whereof, we have met with some few Directions, which we
shall here insert.

A Receipt to make a pure Mead that shall taste like Wine.

Take one part of Clarified Honey, and eight parts of pure Water, and boil them
well together in a Copper Vessel, till half the Liquor is boiled away: but
while it boils, you must take off the Scum very clean; and when it has done
boiling, and begins to cool, Tun it up, and it will work of it self: As soon as
it has done working, you must stop the Vessel very close, and bury it under
ground for three Months, which will make it loose both the smell and taste of
the Honey and Wax, and will make it taste very like Wine.

Another Proportion.

Take of Honey Clarified twenty pound, and of clear Water thirty two Gallons;
mingle them well together, and boil that Liquor half away, and take off the
Scum very clean, etc. and if you will have it of an Aromatic taste, you may
add this proportion of Ingredients: Viz.

Flowers of Elder, Rosemary and Marjerom, of each an handful; of Cinnamon two
ounces, of Cloves six ounces, of Ginger, Pepper and Cardamom, each two
scruples: These will give it a pleasant taste.

Another Proportion thus.

To a dozen Gallons of the scummed Must, take Ginger one ounce, Cinnamon half an
ounce, Cloves and Pepper of each alike, two drams, all gross beaten, the one
half of each being sowed in a bag, the other loose; and so let it boil a
quarter of an hour more.

Some mix their Honey and Water till it will bear an Egg; by which Rule you may
make it stronger or smaller at pleasure.

Another Proportion of Ingredients.

To sixteen Gallons of Must take Thime one ounce, Eglantine, Marjerom,
Rosemary, of each half an ounce, Ginger two ounces, Cinnamon one ounce, Cloves
and Pepper of each half an ounce, all gross beaten; the one half boiled in a
bag, the other loose, etc.

Note, That all green Herbs are apt to make your Metheglin flat or dead, and
that Cloves are apt to make it high colored; and that scumming of it in the
boiling, is not advantageous, but injurious, the Scum being of the nature of
Yest, helping to ferment and purify.

Of Silkworms.
THis, though but a Worm, yet Glorious Creature, seems by the Relation of
Credible Historians, to be but a Modern Operator in these Northern Countries,
of that Excellent Commodity Silk; and these Worms also are not so much
increased nor improved (especially here in England) as they might be: every one
almost is willing to undergo the trouble, and enjoy the pleasure and benefit of
feeding and preserving them, were there but Food enough here for them; the
deficiency whereof is the only Remora that impedes this most Noble Enterprise.

The Mulberry-leaves are the principal, and I believe the only Their Food.
Food that will cherish and feed these Worms to advantage, at least in these
Countries, whatever some write to the contrary; as that at Dublin in Ireland
the Worms have fed on Lettuce very readily, and that they grew as big as those
that were fed with Mulberry-leaves, and did spin as much Silk, eating also no
other Food; and that they will eat the Herb called Dandelion. Others have tried
that way of feeding them with Lettuce, and not found the success answerable.
Some also affirm, that they will thrive on Poplar-trees, Plum-trees, and
Apple Trees; the certainty whereof we leave to be decided by experience: But I
see little reason for it, the Silkworm being only an Insect, and that it is
generally the nature of Insects to feed on some certain specifical matter;
therefore the only and principal way that is to be attempted for the
propagating of this design, is for some publick-spirited persons to lay out
some certain places of their Lands for the raising of Mulberry-trees, as before
in our discourse of Fruit Trees we observed.

About the beginning of May, when the Mulberry-tree begins Time and manner of
hatching Silkworms Eggs.
to spread its Leaf, is the time the Silkworms Eggs are as it were by nature
adapted for a release from their long confinement; that if you lay them in some
window in the warm Sun, or carry them in a little Box between some pieces of
Say, in some warm place about you, keeping them also warm in the night, they
will soon appear in a new form: then cut some Paper full, of small holes, and
lay over them, and over that some of your young Mulberry-leaves, and these
small Worms will easily find their way to their natural Food; and so fast as
they are hatched, they immediately apply themselves to the Leaves. After they
are thus betaken to the Leaves, you may place on them Tables or Shelves at
convenient distances, according to the number of your Worms, and proportion of
place you have for them.

They are sick four times in their feeding; the first commonly Their sicknesses.
about twelve days after they are hatched, and from that time at the end of
every eight days, according to the weather, and their good or ill usage: during
which time of every sickness, which lasts two or three days, you must feed
them but very little, only to relieve such of them as have past their sickness
before the rest, and those that shall not fall into their sickness so soon.

The whole time of their feeding is about nine weeks, during The time and
manner of feeding.
which time you may feed them twice a day, by laying the Leaves over them, as
it were to cover them, and they will soon find a way through them; and as they
grow in strength and bigness, so may you feed them more plentifully and often.
It is good to let the Leaves be clear of Dew or Rain, before you give them unto
the Worms: You may keep them spread on a Table, in case they be wet; you may
gather and keep them two or three days without any great inconvenience, in case
you live remote from Mulberry-trees, or the weather prove casual.

You must observe to rid often their Shelves of their dung, and the remainders
of the Leaves, by removing the Worms when they are fast on the new Leaves laid
on them; for then may you remove easily the Worms with the Leaves, the keeping
clean of the Shelves, and the Room, being a principal means to preserve them.
Also remember to keep their Room warm in cold and wet weather, and to give them
a little cool Air in hot weather.

Let not the Room you keep them in be too near the Tiles on the top of your
House, nor in any cold or moist Room below; but be sure to avoid all extremes.

When they have fed as long as they are able, they look of Their spinning.
clear and Amber-colour, and are then ready to go to work; therefore it is then
advised, that you make Arches between their Shelves with Heath made very clean,
or with branches of Rosemary, stalks of Lavender, or suchlike: whereupon the
Worms will fasten themselves, and make their bottoms, which in about fourteen
days are finished.

But the only way that I have seen practiced, and the best way, is to make
small Cones of Paper, and place them with their sharp ends downwards in rows;
in each of which put a Worm, as they appear to you to be ready to go to work,
and there will they finish their bottom more complete, and with les waste than
on any branches whatever.

When they have finished their bottoms, which will be in about Their breeding.
fourteen days, then take so many as you intend to reserve for Breeders, and
lay them by themselves, and the Worms within will eat their way out in four or
five days time; and when they come forth, it is advised that you put them
together on some piece of old Say, Grogeram, the backside of old Velvet, or
the like, made fast against some Wall, or Hangings in your house; but I have
known them succeed very well on Tables, etc.

Then will these Flies engender, and the Male having spent himself dies, and so
does the Female after she has lain her Eggs: then take the Eggs up with the
point of a knife, or suchlike, and put them into a piece of Say, or suchlike,
and keep them in a Box amongst Woollen Cloths, or such other dry, and not warm
place, till the next Spring. One of these Females will produce some hundreds of
Eggs; therefore a few kept for Seed or Increase will be sufficient, the residue
put into an Oven after the baking of bread, etc. that it may be only hot enough
to kill the Worms; for their gnawing their way out is some prejudice to the
bottom.

When you have obtained your bottoms, take off the Bags; The winding of the
Silk.
and having found their ends, put six, ten, or more, in a Basin of water
together, where a little Gum-Tragacanth is mixed, and so you may easily wind
them: The small hairs of Silk seldom break; but if they do, they are easily
found again. If the Worms are not well fed, the Silk is small, and easily
breaks.

Another way to make these Gummy Bottoms wind easy, is this: Take
Soap-boilers Liquor, or Lee which is very sharp and strong, and put therein
your Bottoms, and set them over the fire till the Liquor be scalding hot, and
so let the Bottoms remain therein about half a quarter of an hour, till the
Gumminess be dissolved; then put the Bottoms into clean scalding water, and let
them lie a while therein, then will they unwinde with much facility. A Lixivium
made of Wood-ashes very strong, will do as well as the aforesaid Soap-boilers
Liquor.

There is a kind of Tow, or rough sort of Silk, that will not wind up with
the other; which may be prepared, and good Silk made thereof, and indifferent
also of the Bags themselves.

The fine Skeins, after they have past through the Scowrers, Throsters, and
Dyers hands, may compare with the finest.

CHAP. X.
Of the common and known External Injuries, Inconveniences, Enemies, and
Diseases incident to, and usually afflicting the Husbandman in most of the Ways
or Methods of Agriculture before treated of; and the several Natural and
Artificial Remedies proposed and made use of for the Prevention and Removal of
them.

SInce the Exclusion of our First Parents out of the state of Bliss or
Paradise, all our Actions, Endeavors and Enterprises have been subject to the
various and uncertain dispositions of an Overruling Providence; and also of
Fortune, and unexpected chances and accidents; and more especially the several
Actions and Employments that are incident and belonging to this Noble Art of
Agriculture, and its several branches before treated of, that no one exercised
in Husbandry can promise himself a peculiar Indemnity from the usual
misfortunes that generally attend it; which is the cause that at some time that
very Commodity is dear and scarce, which at another time is cheap and
plentiful; and that some Husbandmen have excellent Crops, and good success at
the same time, when others have the contrary.

These very considerations have not only stirred up the Ingenious to consider
of the Diseases and Injuries themselves, but also to seek after the means to
avoid those that of necessity attend them, and to prevent such that may be
prevented: which we find dispersed in several Authors; and also find to have
been made use of by many of our Modern Ingenious Rusticks, and not yet made
public: And first we will discourse of such injuries and inconveniences that
proceed

SECT. I. From the Heavens, or the Air.
This Island is generally subject to great heat or drought in Great heat or
drought.
the Summertime, which so much exsiccateth and wastes the moisture and
Vegetative Nature of the Earth, that much of our common Field or open Land
yields but a reasonable Crop of In Corn-Lands.
Corn, nor our open and wide Pastures, or dry Lands, much Grass or feeding for
Cattle; yet are these driest Summers most propitious unto us, and in them do we
reap the most copious Crops; but it is because we have so much low grounds
under the Shelter, and so many Enclosures defended from the destructive and
sweeping Summer-Airs, where in those dry years we have our richest Harvests; so
that Nature it self, and common Experience, has chalked out unto us a remedy
for our dry, barren, and hungry Lands and Pastures, whether Common or
Appropriate, against heat and drought, the two principal inconveniences
attending those Lands, if we had but the hearts of men to make use of it. It is
said that in Cornwall they begin to practice this Husbandry, and plant Mounds
and Fences with Timber Trees, which growing tall, do much preserve the Land
from malignant Airs, and yield a great profit besides. See more of this Remedy
before in the Chapter of Enclosures.

Heat or Drought also produces more particular inconveniences In planting
Trees.
or injuries, as to Trees sown or planted abroad in the open Fields, or in
Enclosures, Gardens, etc. which is a very great check or impediment to the
Husbandman in propagating them; the preventions or remedies whereof are several.

1. In the driest and most barren Lands in England, if you sow the same with
the Fruit or Seed of Oak, Ash, Beech, or any other wood whatsoever, you may
also sow the same Land at the same time with Broom, Furze, or suchlike; which
will wonderfully thrive on the worst of Land, and become a shelter to the other
Trees; which when once they have taken sufficient Root, will soon outstrip the
Furze or Broom: or you may raise Banks, and sow them with Furze, which will
soon make a Fence, under the shelter whereof you may Nurse up other Trees; for
it is most evident, that the greatest Trees that grow on the barrenest Lands,
had their Original in the same places where they grow, and is most probable
that they were thus defended by some small Bush or Brake from Cattle, Heat,
Cold, etc. till they arrived to such height that they could defend themselves.

2. For such Trees that are usually planted in Hedg-rows, or other places of
Enclosures, etc. which the heat and drought does either impede their growth, or
totally kill them, to the great discouragement of the Planter; add to the
Roots of them, on the Surface of the Earth, a heap of stones, which is the best
Additament, and will keep the roots and ground about it cool and moist in the
Summer, and warm in the Winter, and fortify the Tree against Winds, etc. but
where stones are not easily attained, heaps of Fern, or any other Vegetable,
Straw or Stubble, etc. will preserve the ground moist, and enrich it withal:
but where neither stones nor Vegetables can be had conveniently, after the Tree
is planted, and good Mould or Earth added to the Roots, raise a Hillock about
it of any manner of Turf, Earth, etc. for it is not the height of the Earth
above the ground about the Tree that injures it so much, as the depth of the
Tree below the Surface or best Earth.

3. In Gardens, and such near places where you may be at hand, and where you
have choice Plants that suffer by heat, Shadow is a principal remedy, as before
we noted, or water in such places where it may be commanded.

In several places Water is the principal thing deficient to make Remedies for
want of Water.
them pleasant and profitable, and the means whereby to procure it very
tedious, costly, and difficult: It is several ways attainable.

1. By sinking of Wells, which where they are very deep, some use a large Wheel
for Man or Beast to walk in to raise it; others use a double Wheel with Cogs,
which makes it draw easier than the ordinary single Wheel; but this is not so
good a way as the double Wheel with Lines, the Line of the Wheel at your hand
being small and very long: this raises a large Bucket of water with very much
ease and security to the Winder; the Method being usual, needs no description
here.

But if you have a desire to raise a great quantity of water out of a Well in a
little time, there cannot be a more expeditious way, than to make at the end of
the Winlace a larger Wheel, that may be two or three times the Diameter of the
Winlace, on which a smaller and longer Rope may be wound than that which
raises the Bucket, after this manner: So that when the Bucket method to pull
water from well is in the Well, the small Rope is all of it wound on the
greater Wheel, the end whereof your Servant may take on his shoulder, and walk
or run forward until the Bucket be drawn up: In which Operation, 1. Your Bucket
may hold twenty or thirty Gallons, as you please, and yet drawn up with more
ease than one of seven or eight the ordinary way. 2. The Bucket may have a
round hole in the middle of the bottom, with a Cover fitted to it like the
Sucker of a Pump, that when the Bucket rests on the water, the hole may open,
and the Bucket fill; and as soon as you raise it, the Cover stops it
immediately, which prevents the diving of the Bucket. 3. On the outer Wheel may
be made teeth, with a ledge of Wood so falling on it, that as you move forward
it may not stop; but when the Bucket is as high as you intend it, then the
ledge bearing against the teeth, stops the Bucket until you come to it, after
the manner of the wheel of a Watch, Clock or Jack. 4. When the Bucket is up,
you may have a Receiver by, and a moveable Trough to slip under the Bucket,
that when the Cover is raised by a small cord fastened to it in the inside, the
water may by it be conveyed into the Receiver. By this means many Tuns of water
may be drawn up in a little time: If your Bucket be large, or your Well deep,
or the way but short you have to go, you may use a Horse.

2. By bringing water in Pipes or Gutters, which is easily done, the Spring or
Stream from whence you bring it being somewhat higher than the place where you
desire it.

3. By raising water by Forcers, Pumps or Water-wheels, many and several are
the Inventions whereby to effect it; but none more easy, plain and durable,
than the Persian-wheel beforementioned in the Chapter concerning the watering
of Meadows.

4. By making of Cisterns or Receptacles for water, either for the Rain or some
Winter-springs to fill them, whereby the water may be kept throughout the
Summer. In this are we very deficient; for on the Mountainous, dry, and upland
parts of Spain, they have no other water than what they so preserve from the
Rain.

It being the Custom in France, where in many places water is scarce, to
preserve their waters in Cisterns, as the French Rural Poet advises.

That if the place you live in be so dry,
That neither Springs nor Rivers they are nigh;
Then at some distance from your Garden make,
Within the Gaping Earth, a spacious Lake,
That like a Magazine may comprehend
The assembled Floods that from the Hills descend;
And all the bottom pave with Chalkie Lome, etc.
Also in Amsterdam and Venice, they keep their Rainwater in Cellars made on
purpose for Cisterns, capacious enough to contain water for the whole year, it
being renewed as often as the Rain falls. Why therefore may we not here in
England, on our driest hills, make places, Pools, or Cisterns sufficient to
contain water enough for our Cattle for our Domestic uses, and also for our
Garden-occasions, if we were but diligent? few years there are but yield us
plenty of showers to supply them, though not enough to supply the defect of
them; much more Rain falling here than on the Continent where those Pools and
Cisterns are more used; for which cause this Island is by them termed Matula
Coeli; and yet have we so many thousands of Acres of dry Lands uninhabited,
untilled, and almost useless unto us from this only cause, and have so easy
means to remedy it.

If you design to make your Cisterns under your house as a How to make
Cisterns to hold Water.
Cellar, which is the best way to preserve it for your Culinary uses; then may
you lay your Brick or Stone with Tarris, and it will keep water very well; or
you may make a Cement to joint your Stone or Brick withal, with a Composition
made of slacked and sifted Lime and Linseed-Oyl, tempered together with Tow or
Cotten-Wooll.

Or you may lay a Bed of good Clay, and on that lay your Bricks for the Floor;
then raise the wall round about, leaving a convenient space behind the wall to
ram in Clay, which may be done as fast as you raise the wall: So that when it
is finished, it will be a Cistern of Clay walled within with Brick; and being
in a Cellar, the Brick will keep the Clay moist (although empty of water) that
it will never crack. This I have known to hold water perfectly well in a
shadowy place, though not in a Cellar. Thus in any Gardens, or other places,
may such Cisterns be made in the Earth, and covered over, the Rainwater being
conveyed thereto by declining Channels running unto it, into which also the
Alleys and Walks may be made to cast their water in hasty showers. Also in or
near houses, may the water that falls from them be conducted thereunto.

But the usual way to make Pools of water on Hills and Downs for Cattle, is to
lay a good Bed of Clay, near half a foot thick, and after a long and laborious
ramming thereof, then lay another course of Clay about the same thickness, and
ram that also very well: then pave it very well with Flints, or other Stones,
which not only preserves the Clay from the tread of Cattle, etc. but from
chapping of the Wind or Sun at such times as the Pool is empty. Note also,
that if there be the least hole or chap in the bottom, it will never hold
water, unless you renew the whole labor.

Some have prescribed ways for the making of Artificial Springs, others for the
making of Salt Water fresh; but those things being not yet fully experienced,
we leave, being not willing to trouble our Husbandman with so great
Philosophical intricacies, tending rather to lead him from the more plain and
advantageous Method, to imaginary and fruitless attempts.

Heat and Drought do not always attend us, nor do they so Great Cold and Frost.
frequently afflict us, especially in the greatest part or proportion of this
Country, but that we have also a share of a superabundant Cold and Moisture:
but seeing that they do not so frequently happen together as Heat and Drought
usually do, we will divide them. The cold that most afflicts the Husbandman, is
the bitter Frosts that sometimes happen in the Winter or Spring, and are beyond
our power either to foresee or prevent; yet that they may not injure us so far
as otherwise they might, we propose these remedies or preventions.

Some Lands are more inclinable and capacitated by their nature or situation
to suffer by bitter Frosts, than others are; as those that lie on a cold Clay
or Chalk, more than those that lie on a warm Sand or Gravel; those that lie
moist, than those that lie dry; those that lie on the North or East-sides of
Hills, than those that lie on the South or West: therefore it is good to plant
or sow such Trees, Grains or Plants, that can least abide the cold in such
grounds that are most warmly seated.

And although that it is not an easy thing to alter the nature of the ground,
yet is it feasible to take away the offensive moisture that does so much cool
the Land, whereof more hereafter in this Chapter; and also to place such
Artificial defensives against the cold, that may very much remedy this
inconvenience; as we see it is most evident, that the Frosts have a greater
influence where the Air has its free passage, than where it is obstructed: To
which end we cannot but propose Enclosures, and planting of Trees as a remedy
also for this Disease; for any manner of shelter preserves the Corn, young
Trees, etc. from the injury that otherwise would happen to them; as we see in
Snows, and drowning of Meadows, that the Snow and water prove defensive against
the cold.

In Gardens, and other nearer Plantations, the Spring-frosts prove most
pernicious; the general remedies whereof, where the site and position of the
place is not naturally warm, are Walls, Pales, or other Edifices, or tall
hedges or rows of Trees, whereof the Whitethorn, but chiefly Holly have the
pre-eminence: but these seem remote, and rather preventions against the wind;
the more nearer are the application of new Horse-dung, or Litter that has lain
under Horses, which applied to the roots of any tender Trees or Plants,
preserves them from the destructive Frosts; and also by covering whole Beds
therewith, preserves the Plants or Roots therein: Also Straw, Hawm, Fern, or
suchlike dry Vagetable, will defend any thing from the Frosts, although the
Litter be to be preferred.

But such things that are not to be touched or suppressed, as
Coleflower-plants, Gilliflower-slips, etc. the placing of Sticks like some
Booth, or suchlike over them, and covering them with a Mat, or Canvas, or
suchlike, does very much defend them; giving them Sun and Air in temperate
days, makes them the more hardy, and preserves their color.

Furze, where it may conveniently be had, is a very excellent shelter and
defense against Cold, being laid about Trees, or over Plants of what kind
soever: It breaks the violence of Wind and Frost beyond any thing else; lying
hollow of it self, does not that injury to Plants that other things do without
support; and proves many times better than a supported shelter.

Preserving them also from Rain, unless as much as is sufficient to nourish
them, is a good prevention of Frosts; for the Frost injureth no Plant so much
as that which stands wet, as I have often observed, that Cyprus-trees and
Rosemary standing on very dry ground, have endured the greatest Frosts, when
others have perished by the same Frosts, standing in moist ground, although
more in the shelter. Also the most pernicious Frosts to Fruits succeed Rainy
days; a dry Frost rarely hurts Fruit.

Gilliflowers, and several other Flowers and Plants, receive their greatest
injury from wet; which if kept dry, endure severe colds the better.

Hot-Beds are much in use for the propagating of Seeds in the Spring, etc.
which when they are covered, prove secure remedies.

Conservatories wherein to remove your tender Plants in the Winter, are a usual
prevention of cold; some whereof are made by some degrees warmer than others
are, suitable to the several natures of the Plants to be preserved.

But the compleatest Conservatories, are large leaves of boards to open and
shut at pleasure over your Orange or other Fruit Trees, closely pruned against
a Wall or Pale, and planted either against your Chimney where you always keep a
good fire, or against some Stove made on purpose. Aprecocks so planted against
an ordinary wall with such doors, must needs avail much in the Springtime, to
defend the young and tender Fruit from the sharp Frosts; and is a much more
practicable and surer way, than the bowing the branches into Tubs, as some
advise: Others hang Clothes or Mats over the Trees in frosty nights; but these
are troublesome.

It is evident, that part of the same Tree being under some shelter from the
Rain will bear plenty of Fruit, when other part of the same Tree, being open to
the Rain, bears but little in cold and destructive Springs, though alike
obvious to the cold and wind: Therefore endeavor to preserve your tender
Wall-fruits from the wet, and you may the less fear the wind and cold.

To lay open the roots of Trees in the Spring to keep them backwards from
springing, is a very proper prevention against the Frosts in Apples, Pears,
etc. for we find a forward Spring that excites the early Fruit too soon,
proves very injurious to it, in case any Frosts succeed.

The freezing of water also proves sometime an injury to the Husbandman, either
by hindering his Cattle from drink, or by destroying Fish that are confined in
a small Pond so frozen: To prevent the latter, if you can, let there be some
constant fall of water into it, though never so small, which will always keep a
vent open sufficient to preserve the Fish, who can as ill live without Air, as
Terrestrial Creatures can without water. Any constant motion prevents a total
Congelation.

If you lay a good quantity of Pease-hawm in the water, that part may lie
above, and part under the water, it is observed that the water freezes not
within the Hawm, by reason of its close and warm lying together; which will
prevent the death of Fish, as well as breaking of the Ice.

Fruit when it is gathered into the house, is subject to be spoiled by Frosts;
therefore be careful to lay it in dry Rooms, either seeled, thatched, or
boarded; for in frosty weather the condensed Air, which is most in such Rooms,
adhering to the Fruit, freezeth and destroys it; which is usually prevented,
covering them with Straw, etc. but best of all by placing a Vessel of water
near them, which being of a colder nature than the Fruit, attracts the moist
Air to its self, to the preservation of the Fruit, even to admiration.

Great Rains prove injurious to such Lands that are of themselves Much Rain.
moist enough: for the remedy whereof, and to prevent such injuries, see more
in the next Section.

In such Lands that lie at the bottoms or foot of Hills, where the great falls
of Rain do annoy the Corn or Grass, care is to be taken for the conveying away
of the water by Channels or Passages made for that purpose.

In the time of Harvest the greatest Enemy the Husbandman usually finds is
Rain, against which the best remedy is Expedition; To make Hay whilst the Sun
shines.

It is a grand neglect, that there are not some kind of Artificial shelters
made in Lands remote from our dwellings, for the speedy conveyance of Corn into
shelter in dripping Harvests; and there to remain, till fair Weather and
leisure will admit of a more safe carriage.

Worthy of commendation is the practice used in Sommersetshire, etc. where they
lay their Wheat-sheaves in very large shocks or heaps in the Fields, and so
place them, that they will abide any wet for a long time; when on the contrary
in Wiltshire, and other more Southernly Counties, they leave all to the good or
bad weather, though far remote from Barns, sometimes to their very great
detriment; so naturally slothful and ignorant are some people, and naturally
ingenious and industrious are other.

Where their Lands lie two or three miles from their Barns, as in some places
in Champion Countries they do, the covered Reekstaval (much in use Westward)
must needs prove of great advantage in wet or dry Harvests, to save long
draughts at so busy a time.

Where Lands lie at a far distance the one from the other, several Barns built
as the Land requires, are very convenient for the more speedy housing of the
Corn, for the better preserving of it, the more easy thrashing it out, the
more convenient fothering of the Cattle with the Straw, and for the cheaper
disposing of the soil for the improvement of the Land; where on the contrary,
one great Barn cannot lie near to every part of a large Farm, nor can Corn be
so well preserved in it, nor with so much advantage disposed into Mows nor
thrashed, nor the fother nor soil so easily dispersed.

High-winds prove very pernicious and injurious to the Husbandman High Winds.
in several respects, to his Buildings, Fruits, Trees, Hops, Corn, etc. as many
in the plain, open, or high Countries, by woeful experience do find: To prevent
which as to Buildings, by common experience and observation we find, that
Trees are the only and most proper safeguard; for which the Eugh is the best,
although it be long a growing. Next unto that the Elm, which soon aspires to a
good height and full proportionable body, and is thickest in the branches, and
will thrive in most Lands; but any Trees are better than none. As to Fruits,
Walls, Pales, or any other Buildings, are a good prevention and security for
Garden-fruits; but for want of that, Hedges and Rows of Trees may be raised at
an easy rate, and in little time.

As to Timber, or other Trees, which are also subject to be subverted or broken
by high winds, to abate the largeness of their Heads, proves a good
prevention, especially the Elm, which ought to have its Boughs often abated,
else will it be much more subject to be injured by high winds than any other
Tree.

Hops, of any Plant the Husbandman propagateth, receives the most damage from
high winds, which may in some measure be prevented. Against the Spring-windes,
which nips the young Buds, and afterward blows them from the Poles, a good
Pale or Thorn-hedge much advantageth; but against the boisterous winds, when
they are at the tops of the Poles, a tall Row of Trees incompassing the whole
Hop-Garden is the best security in our power to give them. Also be sure to let
their Poles be firm and deep in the ground.

As to Corn, winds sometimes prove an injury to it in the Ear, when they are
accompanied with great Rains, by lodging of it: but the greatest injury to it
is in the Grass, when it is young, (I mean Winter-corn) the fierce bitter
blasts in the Spring destroying whole Fields: The only and sure remedy or
prevention against this Disease is Enclosure, as before we noted of Cold.

In Spain, etc. where the Mist of Superstition has dimmed Thunder and Tempest,
Hail, etc.
the Spiritual and Natural sight, the Ringing of Sacred Bells, the use of Holy
Water, etc. are made use of to Charm the Evil Spirit of the Air, which very
frequently in those hotter Climates terrifies the Inhabitants, that he may be a
little more favorable unto them than others: But it cannot enter into my
thoughts or belief, that any thing we can do here, either by Noises, Charms,
etc. or by the use of Bays, Laurel, etc. can prevail with so great a Natural
Power, and so much beyond our Command; Prayers unto God excepted, which are the
only Securities and Defensives against so Potent and Forcible Enemies.

Blighting and Mildews have been generally taken to be the Mildews.
same thing, which has begotten much error; and the ways and means used for
the prevention and cure, have miscarried through the ignorance of the Disease:
For

Mildew is quite another thing, and different from blasting Mildews, being
caused from the Condensation of a fat and moist Exhalation in a hot and dry
Summer, from the Blossoms and Vegetables of the Earth, and also from the Earth
its self; which by the coolness and serenity of the Air in the night, or in the
upper serene Region of the Air, is condensed into a fat glutinous matter, and
falls to the Earth again; part whereof rests on the leaves of the Oak, and some
other Trees whose leaves are smooth, and do not easily admit the moisture into
them, as the Elm or other rougher leaves do; which Mildew becomes the principal
Food for the industrious Bees, being of its self sweet, and easily convertible
into Honey.

Other part thereof rests on the Ears and Stalks of Wheat, bespotting the
Stalks with a different (from the natural) color; and being of a glutinous
substance by the heat of the Sun, does so bind up the young, tender, and close
Ears of the Wheat, that it prevents the growth and completing of the imperfect
Grain therein; which occasioneth it to be very light in the Harvest, and yield
a poor and lean Grain in the Heap.

But if after this Mildew falls, a shower succeeds, or the wind blow stiffly,
it washes or shakes it off, and are the only natural Remedies against this
sometimes heavy Curse.

Some advise in the Morning after the Mildew is fallen, and before the rising
of the Sun, that two men go at some convenient distance in the Furrows, holding
a Cord stretched straight betwixt them; carrying it so, that it may shake off
the Dew from the tops of the Corn, before the heat of the Sun has thickened it.

It is also advised to sow Wheat in open grounds, where the wind may the
better shake off this Dew; this being looked upon to be the only inconvenience
Enclosures are subject unto: but it is evident, that the Field-lands are not
exempt from Mildews, nor yet from Smut where it is, more than in Enclosed Lands.

The sowing of Wheat early has been esteemed, and doubtless is the best Remedy
against Mildews; by which means the Wheat will be well filled in the Ear before
they fall, and your increase will be much more: As for curiosity sake, Wheat
was sown in all Months of the Year; that sown in July produced such an
increase that is almost incredible. In France they usually sow before
Michaelmas.

Bearded-Wheat is not so subject to Mildews as the other, the Fibers keeping
the Dew from the Ear.

Hops suffer very much by Mildews; which if they fall on them when small,
totally destroy them. The Remedies that may be used against it, is when you
perceive the Mildews on them, to shake the Poles in the Morning.

Or you may have an Engine to cast water like unto Rain on them, which will
wash the Mildew from them: And if you have water plenty in your Hop-garden, it
will quit the cost, in such years Hops being usually sold at a very high rate.

SECT. II. From the Water and Earth.
Next unto those Aerial or Celestial injuries which descend upon us, we shall
discourse of such that proceed from the Water and Earth, that do also in a very
great measure at some times and in some places afflict us, proving great
impediments to those Improvements that might otherwise be easily accomplished,
and also great detriments unto the Countryman upon that which he has already
performed.

As the want of water in some places proves a great impediment Much water
offending.
and injury to the improvement and management of Rustic Affairs, so does the
superabundant quantity; either from the flowings of the Sea over the low
Marsh-Lands at Spring-tides and High-waters, or from great Land-flouds, but
principally from the low and level situation of the Land, where it is subject
to Springs, Over-flowings, etc.

It is evident that much good Land has for many Ages yielded Overflowing of
the Sea.
little benefit, by reason of the high waters that sometimes have covered it
over, and destroyed that which in the intervals has grown; and has also
over-flown much good Land so frequently, that it has become useless: but by
the extraordinary charge, labor, art and industry of some publick-spirited
persons, very great quantities thereof have been gained from the power of that
Grand Enemy to Husbandry, as may be observed in those vast Levels of rich Land
in Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire, Cambridgeshire, etc. in our Age recovered. Many
other vast Flats and Levels there are on the Borders of this Kingdom, that are
beyond the power, strength, or interest of a private Purse to attempt, yet to
the public at a public charge would redound to an infinite advantage, and not
only maintain thousands at work, (employment being the greatest check to
factious spirits) but bring in an yearly increase of wealth, one of the
principal Supports of this Kingdom against its Enemies, and that without the
hazards of an Indian Voyage.

Land-flouds in some places, especially on the great Flats and Land-flouds.
Levels, prove a great annoyance to the Husbandman, that it is of equal
concernment to divert the Land-flouds from some Lands, as to drain the water
that resides upon it, and otherwise annoys it.

As we see in the Draining the Great Level between Yorkshire and Lincolnshire
by the Isle of Axholm, where the great River Idle, Navigable of its self, that
formerly passed with its great Land-flouds through the vast Level on the
Yorkshire side of Axholm, by the Art and industry of the Drainers, through a
new Cut, is carried into Trent on the other side of the Isle, that the Draining
of that Great Level, which otherwise might seem impossible to be done, by that
very means became most feasible: So that here we need say no more, but that as
the convenience of the place will permit, you divert the Land-flouds and
Streams before you attempt a through Draining, if it be feasible and requisite,
lest you multiply your cost, and be at last frustrate of your purpose.

The greatest of our Inland annoyances to Husbandry, occasioned Standing
Waters.
by water, is from the standing or residing of water on our flat and level
Marshes, Meadows, or other Lands, whether occasioned from Rains, Springs, or
otherwise.

Where there is any descent or declining of Land, by cutting Drains to the
lowest part, it is most easily performed.

But where it is absolutely flat and level, it is much more difficult; yet are
there few such Levels, but there are places or Currents for the water to pass
out of them, which you must sink deep and wide enough to drain the whole, and
then make several drains from each part of the Marsh or Level, beginning large
and wide at the mouth of the Drain, and lessening by degrees, as it extends to
the extremes of the Land you drain. Be sure to make the Drains deep enough to
draw the water from under the Marsh or Bog, and make enough of them that may
lay it thoroughly dry.

If you cannot make a passage deep enough to take the water away from the
bottom of your Drain, which in many places is a great impediment of this
improvement, either by reason that you cannot cut through another Land, or
that the passage be long, or that some River is near, which will be apt to
revert upon you, or suchlike, then may an Engine commanded by the wind be of
great use and effect, that which by any other way could not be done; the
description whereof see before in the third Chapter. According to the height
you raise the water, may you proportion the greatness or smalness of your
Engine. You need not fear wind sufficient at one time or other to keep your
Drains emyty: for during the greatest Calms, are usually the greatest Droughts;
and in the wettest seasons winds are seldom wanting, especially on Flats and
Levels.

Overmuch moisture proves also very injurious to Corn, and other Plantations;
the usual remedy whereof is to lay the Land high in Ridges, and cut Drains at
the ends of the Furrows to carry away the superfluous water.

In Orchards and Gardens it usually hinders the growth and prosperity of Trees
and other Plants, against which, the best remedy is to double the Land; that
is, by abating the one half thereof about a foot more or less, according to the
nature and goodness of the Soil, in long Walks or Rows about seven or ten foot
broad, as to you seems best and most convenient, and cast it on the other in
banks or borders; so that you will then have those banks lie dry to the bottom
of your Walks, and all of the best of the Mould, on which you may plant your
Trees, etc. where they will thrive as well as on any other drier Land, being
planted shallow.

Take this as a general Observation in Agriculture, that most of the barren and
unimproved Lands in England are so, either because of Drought, or the want of
Water or Moisture, or that they are poisoned or glutted with too much:
therefore let every Husbandman make the best use of that water that runs
through his Lands, and by preserving what falls upon his Lands, as we have at
large before directed in this Treatise, and drain or convey away that which
superabounds and offends; then would there be a far greater plenty of all
manner of Tillage and Cattle, to the great enriching of this Kingdom.

Water is also very offensive in our Dwelling-houses, that we cannot make
Cellars for Beer, etc. which may be several ways cured or prevented.

Either by laying the bottom and sides of the Cellar with Sheet-Lead, and a
Floor of boards thereon to preserve it from injury. Several such Cellars there
are in some Cities and Towns that lie low in the water; but this is too costly
a way for our Husbandman.

Another way is to joint your Bricks or Stone with Tarris, or the Cement before
described in this Chapter for the keeping in of water in Cisterns.

Also you may Bed your Cellar with Clay, and then Brick or Stone it over, after
the same manner as we directed before in this Chapter for the keeping of water,
etc.

Or you may sink a Well or Pit near your Cellar, and somewhat lower than it,
into which you place a Pump, that at such times as water annoys you, it may by
that means be removed.

Sometimes it happens that the Floor of the House you live in, or the Barn you
lay your Corn in, are damp or moistened by certain Springs, that some times or
other do annoy them, to your great detriment, as well to your health, as injury
to your Goods or Corn; which if the situation of the place will bear it, as
most usually it will, the cutting of a Trench or Ditch round about the same, of
such depth as you may drain it dry by the fall that is naturally from it, will
cure this disease. This Ditch or Trench may be paved, walled on the sides, and
covered as you please; so that the Brick or Stone of the Wall on the side next
the House or Barn be not laid with Mortar, to prevent the issue of the Water
from the Earth into it.

Much Land there is in England that is capable of a very great Stones, Shrubs,
etc.
improvement, by removing those common and stubborn Obstacles, as Stones,
Shrubs, Goss, Broom, etc. which are naturally produced in many places; and the
faint-hearted, lazy, and sometimes beggarly Husbandman, had rather let them
grow and suck out the Marrow and Fat of his Land, than bestow any cost or pains
to remove them, and is contented with now and then a bundle of Bushes, etc.
when the removal of them would not only be an improvement of his Land by their
absence, but the materials themselves, by a right and judicious way of ordering
them, might become also an additional improvement.

As first of Stones, which being picked up, and laid on heaps about the roots
of either Fruit or Timber Trees planted on the Bounds, and in Rows on the Land,
is a very great help and advantage to the growth of such Trees, and saves the
labor of carrying them off the ground; which charge usually exceeds the charge
of picking them up: This only where Stones offend, or are injurious.

Shrubs, Goss, Broom, etc. prove a very great annoyance to Husbandry; and the
difficulty and charge in plucking them up, is the principal impediment to their
removal, to such that are ignorant of the most dextrous ways used to that
purpose; the best whereof I find to be this, described by Mr. Plat; Viz. A
very strong Instrument of Iron, like unto a Dung-fork, with three Grains or
Tines, only much bigger, according to the bigness of the Shrubs you use it
about; the upper part thereof is a very strong and long Stail, or handle, like
a Leaver: Now set this Instrument at a convenient distance from the Root
slopewise, and with a Hedging-beetle drive it in a good depth; then lift up the
Stail, and place under it across an Iron-bar, or suchlike Fulciment, to keep
it straight, and that it sink not into the ground.

Then take hold of the Cord that before ought to have been fastened to the top
of the Stail, and by this means may you Eradicate any Shrubs, etc. If it will
not do at once, place it on the other side, etc.

These Bushes, Brakes, and suchlike, though they are of little worth or use for
any other thing, yet are they very necessary and beneficial to improve the Land
by burning them, being dry, either by themselves, or under heaps of Turf,
Earth, etc. as before Chap. 5.
was observed.

Some Lands are more prone and subject to Weeds, and that in Weeds.
some years than other, which is often occasioned by water standing on it,
destroying the Corn and such Seeds that are usually sown in it, and nourishing
such Weeds that most delight in moisture; the only remedy whereof is to lay it
dry, and add some convenient drying and lightning materials or composts
thereon, as Sand, Ashes, etc.

Also some sorts of Dungs or Manures cause Weeds, as Dung made of Straw, Hawm,
Fern, or suchlike, laid on Lands in any great quantity, without any other
mixture of Horse-dung, Sheeps-dung, Lime, Ashes, or suchlike hot Compost, which
do in some measure correct the cold and sluggish quality of it; but in some
years, and on some Lands, any ordinary cold Dung begets Weeds, which injure the
Corn more than the fatness of the Dung advantages; therefore Lime, Marle,
Chalk, Ashes, etc. are to be preferred in most Lands.

Weeds in Pasture-lands are best destroyed by burning of it in Turfs, (as
before we discovered) or by Plowing of it without Chap. 5.
burning.

Rushes, Flages, and suchlike Aquaticks, are best destroyed by Rushes, Flags,
etc.
draining; so that you cut your Drains below the roots thereof, that it may
take away the matter that feeds them.

The Sowthistle proves a great annoyance to some Lands, by Sowthistle.
killing the Grass, Corn, etc. although it be a sure Token of the strength of
the Land: The way to destroy them, is to cut them up by the roots before
feeding-time; the advantage you will receive, will answer your expense, and
more.

The way to destroy this so common and known an annoyance, Fern.
is to Mow it off in the Spring, whether with an Iron or Wooden Sithe, it
matters not, for it will easily break; which work reiterate the same year as
fast as it grows, and it is confidently affirmed, that it will kill and destroy
the Fern for ever after.

Improvement and bettering the Land by Soyling, Marling or Liming, etc. is also
a principal remedy against all manner of Broom, Furze, Heath, and other
suchlike trumpery, that delight only in barren Lands.

Very much differing from Mildews is the blighting of Corn; Blights and Smut.
the Mildews proceeding from a different cause, and happening only in dry
Summers, when on the contrary Blighting happens in wet, and is also occasioned
through the too much fatness and rankness in Land; as is observed that strong
Lands are usually sown with Barley, Pease, or suchlike, to abate the fertility
thereof before it be sown with Wheat, which would otherwise be subject to
Blights or Blasting.

Also Wheat sown on level or low Land, in moist years is subject to the same
inconveniences; for you may observe, that the Wheat that grows on the tops of
the ridges in moist years, to be better and freer than what grows in the
Furrows, which is usually blighted by means of water and fatness lying more
about it than the other; for Wheat naturally affects to be kept dry on moist
and strong ground: Therefore as moisture, and the richness of the ground
together, occasions this disease, by knowing thereof you may easily remedy it,
by laying your Land on high Ridges; which if it be never so rich, the Wheat
growing thereon will hardly be blighted, if not overcome with moisture.

Smut seems to proceed from the same cause; therefore need we Smut.
to say the less.

Only that sometimes smuttiness proceeds from other causes, as by sowing of
Smutty-corn, by soiling the Land with rotten Vegetables, as Straw, Hawm, Fern,
etc.

It is confidently affirmed, that the smutty Grains of Wheat being sown, will
grow and produce Ears of Smut: but I confess I have not yet tried, and shall
therefore suspend the belief thereof till I have.

The sowing (...) Wheat that is mixed with Smut, does generally produce a
Smutty Crop (whether the Smut it self grow or not) unless it be first prepared
by liming of it; which is thus done: first slake your Lime, and then moisten
your Corn, and stir them well together, etc. and sow it.

Or by steeping of it in Brine, either of which are good preventions against
the Smut.

You may also prepare the ground by Liming, or other ways of enriching it, with
sharp or saline Dungs or Soils, and it will produce Corn free from Smut; for it
is most evident, that Land often sown with the same Grain, or much out of
heart, produces a smutty Crop, as may be easily perceived where the same Seed
has been sown on two sorts of Land of different goodness, the one Crop has
been smutty, the other free; so that Smuttiness seems to be a kind of sickness
incident to Corn, which may by the aforesaid means be cured; which if the Smuts
themselves would really grow, and produce Smut again, all Remedies proposed,
and attempts to that purpose, were needless.

SECT. III. From several Beasts.
Against the Trespasses of Domestic Cattle breaking out of your Neighbors
grounds into yours, it is needless to say any thing, every one knowing that a
good and secure Fence is the best prevention, and a Pound the best remedy or
cure, if the other will not serve. But other Beasts there are that no ordinary
Fences will keep out, and will hardly be brought to the Pound.

As Foxes, which usually torment the laborious Husbandman, Foxes.
by taking away and destroying his Lambs, Poultry, Geese, etc. that in some
places near great Forests and Woods, they can hardly keep any thing but under
lock and key: against which Gins are usually made use of; which being baited,
and a Train made by dragging raw flesh across his usual paths or haunts unto
the Gin, it proves an inducement and a snare to excite him to the place of his
destruction.

A Fox will prey on any thing he can overcome, and feeds on all sorts of
Carrion; but the food he most delights in is Poultry. He proves injurious and
destructive to Coney-warrens, and destroys Hares also, whom he takes by his
subtilty and deceit.

They may be taken with Greyhounds, Hounds, Terriers and Nets, as well as Gins.

It is also a very commendable and Noble Exercise in our Nobility and Gentry,
to Hunt these destructive Beasts; and did they prosecute it at their breeding
times, and at other times also, with an intent to destroy the whole Breed or
Kind, there would soon be an end of them.

The Otter is a pernicious destroyer of Fish, either in Pond or Otters.
Brook, and her abode is commonly under the root or stem of some Tree near the
water, whence she expects h^^ food: By her diving and hunting under water, few
Fish are able to escape her.

They are taken either by insnaring them under the water by the Rivers side, as
you may do a Hare on the Land with Hare-pipes; or by hunting them with Dogs,
where you also make use of the Spear.

In several places the Husbandman suffers much by Coneys and Coneys, Hares, etc.
Hares that feed down his Corn, etc. when it is young, especially in hard
Winters; and in many places they have not liberty to secure their own from them.

The Hare is no great destroyer of Corn; yet where there are many of them, the
Countryman may lessen their number as he sees cause; either by Hunting or
Coursing them at seasonable times, or by setting of Hare-pipes where he finds
their haunts, or by tracing them in the Snow.

Coneys are destroyed or taken either by Ferrets and Pursenets in their Buries,
or by Hayes, or by Curs, Spaniels, or Tumblers bred up for that sport, or by
Gins, Pitfalls or Snares, which some Ingenious Countrymen will prepare; the
goodness of the Game, rather than the prevention of the damage, prompting them
thereto.

It is not a little injury these Animals do to Warrens, Dove-houses, Poll-cats,
Weasels and Stotes.
Hen-roosts, etc. but the ways by taking them in Hutches, and in small
Iron-gins like Fox-gins, are so well known, that I need say nothing of it.

Only that to prevent Poll-cats, or suchlike, from destroying your
Pigeon-house, be sure, if you can, to erect it where you may have a Ditch or
Chanel of Water to run round it, and it will keep those Vermin from making
their Buroughs under the ground.

Moles are a most pernicious Enemy to Husbandry, by loosening Moles, or Wonts.
the Earth, and destroying the Roots of Corn, Grass, Herbs, Flowers, etc. and
also by casting up Hills, to the great hinderance of Corn, Pastures, etc.

The common and usual way of destroying them is by Traps that fall on them, and
strike the sharp Tines or Teeth through them; and is so common, that it needs
no description.

But the best and compleatest sort of Instrument to destroy them that I have
yet seen, is made thus: Take a small board of about three inches and a half
broad, and five inches long: on the one side thereof raise two small round
Hoops or Arches, at each, one end like unto the two end-Hoops of a Carriers
Wagon, or a Tilt-boat, capacious enough that a Mole may easily pass through
them: in the middle of the board make a hole about the bigness that a
Goose-quill may pass through; so is that part finished: then have in readiness
a short stick, about two inches and a half long, about the bigness that the end
thereof may just enter the hole in the middle of the board. Also you must cut a
Hasel, or other stick, about a yard, or yard and half long, that being stuck
into the ground, may spring up like unto the Springs they usually set for Fowl,
etc. then make a link of Horse-hair very strong that will easily slip, and
fasten it to the end of your stick that springs: Also have in readiness four
small hooked sticks; then go to the Furrow or passage of the Mole, and after
you have opened it, fit in the little board with the bended Hoops downwards,
that the Mole when she passes that way, may go directly through the two
semicircular Hoops: Before you fix the board down, put the Hair-spring through
the hole in the middle of the board, and place it round, that it may answer to
the two-end Hoops, and with the small stick (gently put into the hole to stop
the knot of the Hair-spring) place it in the Earth in the passage, and by
thrusting in the four hooked sticks, fasten it, and cover it with Earth; and
then when the Mole passes that way, either the one way or the other, by
displacing or removing the small stick that hangs perpendicularly downwards,
the knot passes through the hole, and the Spring takes the Mole about the
neck. Though this description seem tedious, yet the thing is very plain, and
easily performed, and much cheaper, surer and feasible than the ordinary way.

Others destroy them very expeditiously by a Spaddle, waiting in the Mornings
when they usually stir, and immediately cast them up; especially about March
when they breed, by turning up the Hills whereunder they lay their Young, they
usually making their Nests in the greater Hills, and are most easily discerned:
then also will the Old Ones come to seek their Young, which you may presently
take.

The Pot-trap is by some much commended, which is a deep Earthen-vessel set in
the ground to the brim in a Bank or Hedgrow; which wisely set and planted at
all times, but especially in the natural season of Bucking-time, about March,
will destroy them insensibly.

Also where Moles annoy your Gardens, Meadows, or such places where you are not
willing to dig or much break the ground, fuming the holes with Brimstone,
Garlic, and other unsavory things, will drive them out of the ground that was
before infested with them.

But the putting a dead Mole in a Common Haunt, will make them absolutely
forsake it.

Every Countryman almost is sensible of the great injuries and Mice or Rats.
annoyances they receive from these Vermin, both in the Fields where they
raise Nurseries of Trees, in their Gardens where they sow and plant Beans,
Please, etc. and in their Houses, Barns, and Corn-reeks.

In the Fields, Orchards, Gardens, etc. I know no readier way to destroy them,
than by placing an Earthen-pot in the ground, and covering it with a board,
with a hole in the middle thereof, and over the board to lay Hawm or suchlike
rubbish, under which the Mice seek for shelter, and soon find their Trap to
receive them.

The usual way of building Reeks of Corn on Stavals set on stones, is the only
prevention against Mice, and has proved so successful, that in some places
large Edifices are built on such stones, that they supply the defect of Barns,
being covered like them.

Granaries also I have seen built after the same manner: Binnes or Hutches for
Corn may be placed on Pins like the other, and prove secure places for Corn
against these pernicious Vermin; but great caution must be used, that no
Stick, Ladder, or other thing lean against these places, lest the Mice find
the way to come where you would not have them.

In your Flower-gardens, Apiary, or in the several Rooms of your House, Traps
may be placed to destroy them, unless where you can conveniently keep a Cat,
the only Enemy and Destroyer of Mice and Rats.

Arsenick, or the Root of White-hellebor will destroy them, being given with
Sugar, or suchlike mixture: The last is the best, because it destroys only Rats
and Mice.

SECT. IV. From Fowls.
As the best of Contents this World affords has its part or share of trouble
and vexation, so this pleasant and excellent Rustic Life and Employment, is
not free from care and trouble how to preserve it self from those Enemies and
Plagues that daily attend it: Sometimes the Heavens frown, the Waters swell,
the Briars snarl, the Wild Beasts are envious at our Innocent and most
delectable enjoyments; and if these withdraw their evil influence, yet have we
the Fowls of the Air, Insects, and several other Evils to encounter withal;
which without our diligent care and industry, are ready to bereave us of the
best part of the Fruits of our labors.

As we frequently observe that Kites, Hawks, and other Birds of Kites, Hawks,
etc.
Prey, wait for Pigeons, Chickens, tame Pheasants, etc. therefore is it very
necessary, that the Countryman keeps a Fowling-piece ready fitted and charged,
which is the best means to destroy and scare them away.

Also you may place small Iron-gins, about the breadth of ones hand, made like
a Fox-gin, and baited with Raw Flesh, whereby I have caught very large Hawks.

Also by the streining of Lines, or pieces of Nets, over the places where you
keep tame Pheasants, Chickens, or suchlike, will fray them away.

The cutting down of Trees about your Pigeon-house will keep them from haunting
it so much as otherwise they would do.

Crows, Ravens, Rooks and Magpies, are great annoyances to Crows and Ravens,
etc.
Corn, both at Seed-time, pulling it up by the Roots whilst it is young, and
feeding on it also at the Harvest; a good Fowling-piece is the best Instrument
for the present: But the only way to destroy the kind of them, and make their
Flocks a little thinner, were by some Public Law to encourage the destruction
of their Nests and Young, which are so obvious at the building-time, that it
seems to be a very feasible work, and much to be preferred before Crow-nets,
etc.

Several pretty Inventions of Scare-crows there are to keep the Corn free from
them, amongst which this is esteemed the most effectual; viz. To dig a hole in
some obvious place where the Crows, etc. annoy your Corn; let it be about a
foot deep, or more, and near two foot over, and stick long black Feathers of a
Crow, or other Fowl, round the edges thereof, and some also in the bottom.
Several of these holes may be made, if your ground be large; and where these
holes are thus dressed, the Crows will not dare to feed. I presume the reason
is, because whilst they are feeding on the ground, the terrifying Object is
out of their sight; which is not usual in other Scare-crows, wherewith in a
little time they grow familiar, by being always in view.

Dead Crows, etc. hanged up, do much terrify them; but amongst Cherry-trees,
and other Fruits which are much prejudiced by the Crows, etc. draw a Pack-thred
or small Line from Tree to Tree, and fasten here and there a black Feather, and
it is sufficient.

These Fowl that bring so great an advantage to one, prove Pigeons.
a far greater annoyance and devourer of Grain to all the rest of the
Neighborhood. It is an unknown quantity of Wheat, Barley, Pease, etc. that
these devour; not to mention the Prodigious computation that some have made of
the damage committed by them on the Corn, Grain, etc. yet is it most evident,
that they destroy a great part of the Seed and Crop, notwithstanding several
stand for their vindication, alleging that they never scrape, and therefore
take only the Grain that lies on the surface of the Earth, that would otherwise
be destroyed, and not grow. To which I answer, That that very Corn that lies on
the Surface may prove the best Corn, unless (in Winter-corn) the extreme Frosts
destroy it, or (in the Spring) the extreme Drought: It having been of late
found to be a piece of very good Husbandry in some light and shallow Lands,
first to Plough it about August, and then to run the Fold over it, and well
settle it, and afterward to sow and harrow it; which must needs make well for
the Pigeons, and ill for the Husbandman, where they cannot be kept from it.

Also it is to be observed, that where the flight of Pigeons fall, there they
fill themselves and away, and return again where they first rose; and so
proceed over a whole piece of ground, if they like it. Although you cannot
observe any Grain above the ground, they know how to find it: As I have seen
the experience of it, that a Piece of about two or three Acres being sown with
Pease, the Pigeons lay so much upon it, that they devoured at least three parts
in four of it; which I am sure could not be all above the Surface of the
ground. That their Smelling is their principal Director, I have also observed,
having sown a small Plat of Pease in my Garden, (near a Pigeon-house) and very
well covered them, that not a Pease appeared above ground. In a few days a
parcel of Pigeons were hard at work in discovering this hidden Treasure; and in
a few days, of about two quarts, I had not above two or three Pease left; for
what they could not find before, they found when the Buds appeared,
notwithstanding they were howed in, and well covered; their Smelling only
directed them, as I supposed, because they followed the Ranges exactly.

The injury they do at Harvest on the Pease, Fetches, etc. I hope none can
excuse: therefore may we esteem these amongst the greatest Enemies the poor
Husbandman meets withal; and the greater, because he may not erect a
Pigeon-house also to have a share of his own spoils, none but the Rich being
permitted so great a privilege; and also so severe a Law being made to protect
these Winged Thieves, that a man cannot suum defendendo encounter with them.

You have therefore no remedy against them, but to affright them away by
noises, or suchlike. Also you may shoot at them, so that you kill them not; or
you may (if you can) take them in a Net, cut off their Tails, and let them go,
by which means you will impound them; for when they are in their houses, they
cannot bolt or fly out of the tops of their houses, but by the strength of
their Tails; which when they are weakened, they remain Prisoners at home.

The Jay proves a great devourer of Beans, Cherries, and other Jays.
Garden-fruits, and is also a subtle Bird; but is easily met withal, if you are
watchful in a morning early, and have a good Ambush, which you must change
sometimes, lest they discover you: They make but short flights, as it were from
Tree to Tree, that you may easily pursue them.

A very good way to take them, is to drive a Stake into the ground, about four
foot high above the Surface of the Earth: let the Stake be made picked at the
top, that a Jay may not settle on it; then within a foot or thereabouts of the
top, let there be a hole bored through, about three quarters of an inch
Diameter; fit a Pin or Stick to the hole, about six or eight inches long; then
make a Loop or Spring of Horse-hair fastened to a Stick or Wand of Hasel, that
may be entered into the Stake at a hole near the ground, and by the bending of
the Stick put the Loop of Horse-hair through the upper hole, and put the short
Stick a little way into the hole, and lay the Loop round on the short Stick,
that the Jay, when he comes, finding this resting place to stand conveniently
amongst his food, perches on the short Stick; which immediately by his weight
falls, and gives the Spring the advantage of holding the Jay by the Legs. This
is an undoubted way of taking them, if they are placed amongst the Beans, or
suchlike where the Jays haunt, it being their usual custom to hop from Tree to
Tree, or any thing they can meet withal.

These are most pernicious Birds to young Fruit Trees, by Bull sinc^es.
feeding on the young pregnant Buds in the Springtime, which contain the
Blossoms, and are the only hope of the succeeding Year.

They are easily taken off with a small Fowling-piece, only you must be
cautious that your shot spoil not the Young Cions or branches of your Trees.

This Bird is so bold, or rather confident, that no Scarecrow, or other thing,
will frighten him from the Trees he delights to feed on: But on the
Morocco-Plum, or the Damson, notwithstanding all you can do, he will settle and
feed: So that your best way to preserve those Buds, is to Bird-lime the Twigs.

These Birds are also very injurious to the Goosberry-buds, Gold-finches.
coming in Flights, and cleansing a whole Garden of them immediately; as the
Bull-finch will the Buds of the Curran-tree. The remedies against them are the
same with the other.

The Chaffinch, Green-finch, Titmouse, and other small Birds, are injurious to
some Fruits; but not like unto the other beforementioned, who will prey on the
Buds of all sorts of Fruit Trees, under the very Nets that cover the Trees, and
near unto the dead bodies that hang on the Trees, and killed but a little
before.

These, although they are but small, yet are they a numerous Sparrows.
Generation of Corn-eaters: It is unknown how much they devour in this Kingdom,
and what a great damage it proves to the Husbandman, especially in scarce and
dear Years.

Many ways are made use of to destroy them, but none more effectual than the
large Folding Sparrow-net, which will take many dozen at a Draught, they being
so easily induced to come to a Shrape or place baited for them; especially in
the hard Weather in the Winter, and in the Summer before the Corn is ready for
them: at both which times Meat is scarce abroad; and then they flock to Barns.

More, as to the destroying of Fowl, you shall find hereafter in the Chapter
of Fowling and Fishing.

SECT. V. Of Insects, and Creeping Things offending.
Moist and warm Lands, which are usually the most fertile, Frogs and Toads.
are most subject to these Vermin. Frogs are best destroyed and prevented in
February, in the Ditches where they Spawn, by destroying both Frogs and Spawn.
Toads are easily discovered in the Summer-evenings (by a Candle) creeping up
and down the Walks and Passages about your House, Garden, etc.

To Wall-fruit, and several sorts of Garden-plants, there cannot Snails and
Worms.
be a more pernicious Enemy than Snails, which you may in a Dewy Morning easily
find where they most delight to feed; but the surest way is in the hard Winter
to seek out their haunts, and make a clean riddance of them: They lie much in
the holes of Walls, behind old Trees, under Thorn, or other old and close
Hedges. In one Year I caused near two Bushels to be gathered in a Winter in a
Noble-mans Garden, which had in precedent years destroyed the most of their
Wall-fruit, and ever after they had great plenty of Fruit.

Ever observe, not to pluck off such Fruit the Snails have begun to feed on,
but let it remain; for they will make an end of that before they begin on more.

The best way to take Snails, is to set Tile, Brick or Board, hollow against a
Wall, Pale, or otherwise; so that the Snails may seek shelter under them: Then
about Michaelmas the Snails secure themselves in such places for the whole
Winter, unless you prevent them, by taking them in December and destroying
them; which is an easy and sure way to rid your Garden of them.

Worms may be picked up clean by a Candle in a moist Evening: if any escape
you, another Evening may serve to find them.

Your Beds watered with any strong Lixivium made of the Ashes or fixed Salts of
any Vegetable, will not only destroy Worms, but prove an extraordinary
improvement and enriching of the ground.

Lay Ashes or Lime about any Plant you desire to preserve from Snails or Worms,
and they will not come near it, because the hot and biting nature thereof hurt
their naked and tender bodies: therefore as the Rain or other Moisture weakens,
the Ashes or Lime renew it, lest it prove useless.

Rarely do these offend in the Fields, Orchards or Gardens, yet Gnats and Flies.
are they very troublesome Guests in the House, where it stands near any Fens,
Waters, or suchlike places, tending much to the Generation of Insects.

To keep the Windows of your Chambers close in the Summertime, especially
toward the Evening, is a good prevention.

To burn Straw, and suchlike, up and down in the Chamber, in the Evening before
you go to Bed, will destroy them; for either they will fly to the Flame, and be
consumed, or else the Smoke will choke them.

Ashen-leaves hanged up in the Room, will attract them unto it, that you will
be the less troubled with them.

The Balls of Horse-dung laid in the Room will do the same, if they are new.

These usually prove very injurious to some sorts of Fruits; Wasps and Hornets.
to Bees, etc. and are several ways destroyed. First,

By way of prevention; that is, in the Spring or Summer, before they have
increased, to destroy the old ones; for from a few do they increase to a
multitude.

Or you may smoke or stifle them, if they are in any hollow Tree; or scald them
if in Thatch of an House or Barn, etc. or in the ground you may either scald or
burn them, or stamp in the Earth on them, and bury them.

To destroy such as come to your Fruit, Bees, etc. set by them Sider, Verjuice,
sour Drink or Grounds, in a short-necked Vial open, wherein you may catch many.

Also you may lay for them Sweet Apples, Pears, Beasts Liver, or other Flesh,
or any thing that they love, in several places; upon which you shall have
sometimes as many as will cover the Bait, which you may kill at once.

We term those Caterpillars that destroy the leaves of our Caterpillars.
Trees in the Summer, devour Cabbages, and other Garden-tillage, and are
generally the effects of great Droughts.

To prevent their numerous increase on Trees, gather them off in the Winter,
taking away the Puckets which cleave about the branches, and burning them.

In the Summer, whilst they are yet young, when either through the coldness of
the night, or some humidity, they are assembled together on heaps, you may take
them and destroy them.

These in some years prove injurious to Fruits, by the greatness Earwigs.
of their numbers feeding on and devouring them.

And are destroyed by placing Hoofs or Horns of Beasts amongst your Trees and
Wall-fruit, into which they will resort. Early in the morning you must take
them gently, but speedily off, and shake them into a Vessel of scalding water.

By reason of great Drought, many sorts of Trees and Plants Lice.
are subject to Lice: and seeing that they are caused by Heat and Drought, as
is evident in the Sweet-bryar and Gooseberry, that are only Lousy in dry
times, or in very hot and dry places; therefore frequent washing them, by
dashing water on them, may prove the best remedy.

Ants or Pismires are injurious to a Garden, and also to Pasture-lands, Ants.
as well by feeding on Fruits, as by casting up Hills, etc.

To keep them from your Trees, incompass the Stem four fingers breadth, with a
Circle or Roll of Wool newly plucked from a Sheeps Belly.

Or anoint the Stem with Tar.

Also you may make Boxes of Cards or Pastboard pierced full of holes with a
Bodkin, into which Boxes put the Powder of Arsenick mingled with a little
Honey; hang these Boxes on the Tree, and they will certainly destroy them: Make
not the holes so large that a Be may not enter, lest it destroy them.

Also you may hang a Glass-bottle in the Tree with a little. Honey in it, or
moistened with any sweet Liquor, and it will attract the Ants, which you may
stop and wash out with hot water; then prepare it as before.

Watering often of Allies or green Walks, will drive away or destroy the Ants
that annoy them.

Ant-hills prove a very great injury to Meadows and Pasture-lands, To destroy
Ant-hills.
not only by the wasting of so much Land as they cover, but by hindering the
Sithe, and yielding a poor hungry food, and pernicious to Cattle.

And may be thus easily destroyed: Pare the Turf off, beginning at the top, and
cutting it down into four or five parts, and lay it open: then cut out the Core
below the surface, so deep, that when you lay down the Turfs in their places as
they were taken up, the place may be lower than the other ground, to the end
that water may stand in it to prevent the Ant from returning, which otherwise
she will assuredly do; then spread the Earth you take out thinly abroad. Also
the proper season for this is in the Winter; and if the places be left open for
a certain time, the Rain and Frost upon it will help to destroy the remaining
Ants: but be sure to cover them up time enough, that the Rains may settle the
Turfs before the Spring.

The greatest injury these Vermin do us, is in biting Children, Snakes and
Adders.
Cattle, etc.

They affect Milk above any thing; and, as old Authors say, abominate the Ash:
there may you use the one by placing of it hot in any place where they
frequent, to attract them, where you may destroy them and the other, by laying
Ashen-sticks in places where you would not have them come. But this of the Ash
is not to be credited.

But the most proper remedy against these Vermin, is to keep Peacocks, which
prey upon them.

Their Sting or Bite is most easily cured, if you timely apply To cure the
Stinging of Adders, or Biting of Snakes.
a hot Iron to it, hodling it so near as you are able to abide it: And it is by
some Ingenious Persons confidently affirmed, that it will attract the Venom
totally from the Wound.

Travelers relate, that in the Canaries the Natives cure the biting of a very
Venomous Creature (that Iurks amongst the Grapes, and usually bites them by the
Fingers) by a straight Ligature below the Wound; and holding the Finger bitten
upright, for some time, out of which the Venom ascends, it being of a Fiery
Nature, naturally tending upwards, and may therefore be attracted by Fire, it is
like.

SECT. VI. Of some certain Diseases in Animals and Vegetables.
There are several Epidemical and destructive Diseases to Of Beasts and Fowl.
Cattle, Fowl, etc. which sweep away a great part of the Husbandmans Stock
before it cease, or he know how to prevent it; which is esteemed a great
deficiency, that those ways that some have discovered, and found effectual to
prevent, and also to cure such Diseases, are not made public: the general
Stock of the Kingdom may as well be preserved, as some few Cattle, in such
general Distempers; it being not our intent in this Book to say any thing of
common Diseases of Beasts or Fowl, because that Subject is so completely
handled by several others, and is not absolutely necessary for our Husbandman
to know, there being almost in every place Professors and Practisers of that
Art, and that have Materials and Instruments for that purpose: yet for that I
meet with some general and easily-practicable Instructions, perhaps not
familiar with Country Farriers, or Horse-Doctors, I shall a little digress.

This Disease is principally caused from a hot and dry season Of the Murrain.
of the Year, or rather from some general putrefaction of the Air, and
begets an inflammation of the blood, and causes a swelling in the throat,
which in little time suffocateth the Cattle. Also the letting dead Cattle lie
unburied; which Putrefying may cause a general Infection to that sort of
Cattle, as the Learned Van-Helmont observes, that these Infectious Distempers
go no farther than their own kind.

Therefore to prevent this Disease, let them stand cool in Summer, and to have
abundance of good water, and speedily to bury all Carrion.

And if any of your Cattle be already infected, speedily let them blood, and
give them a good Drench, etc. By which means diverse have preserved their
Cattle, when their Neighbors have perished.

In moist Years Sheep are subject to the Rot in the same Of the Rot in Sheep.
grounds, where in drier Years they are not, and that not only from the
moisture, for then would Sheep Rot in all moist grounds, in dry Years as well
as in wet; but from a certain Putrefaction both in the Air, and in the Grass or
Herbs that usually attends them in such moist years; which together with their
moist Food, does corrupt their Livers, and bring this Disease.

The cure whereof is difficult, unless it be done betime before the Liver be
too much wasted: The removal of them to the Salt Marshes, where they may be
had, is a good remedy.

If May and June prove wet Months, it causes a Frimmand frothy Grass; which
together with the bad Air that must necessarily follow, causes the Rot in
Sheep: therefore in such Summers keep your Sheep on the dry and barren Lands,
and fodder them in Winter with the hardest Hay, or most Astringent Fodder.

Some grounds yield a soft Grass, more than other subject to breed the Rot in
the Sheep: therefore feed other Cattle there, and your Sheep in the driest,
hardest, and healthiest Pastures.

If your Sheep be infected with the Rot, which you may discern by the color of
their Eyes; some prescribe to Pen them up in a Barn, or large Sheep-coat, set
about with wooden Troughs, and therein feed them with Oats a day or two: then
put amongst them some Bay Salt well stamped, and after that a greater quantity,
till such time as they begin to distaste it; then give them clean Oats another
day or two, and afterward serve them with Salt as before. This course being
followed until their Eyes have recovered their Natural color, they will then
be perfectly cured. Where you have not a House convenient, it may be done open:
the saving of their Dung (as before we directed) will answer the greatest part
of your expenses. Chap. 5.


Folding of Sheep in May or June, if they prove wet, makes them Rot the sooner,
because they more greedily devour the hurtful Grass in the Morning, than those
not folded; therefore liberty from the Fold at that time is a good prevention.

An Approved Experiment for the Cure of the Fashions in Horses, and the Rot in
Sheep.

Steep the Regulus of Antimony in Ale, with a little of the Spice called
Grains, and a little Sugar; which give to a Horse about half a Pint at a time,
two or three times, with a day or two's intermission between each time; to a
Sheep about two or three ounces after the same manner. The same, or the
following Receipt, may be also given to Swine for the Measles, etc. and to make
them fat.

Give him half a dram of crude Antimony in his Meat, it will For Swine.
make him have a good stomach; and it will likewise cure him of all foulness of
his Liver, and of the Measles. The same is also Sovereign for any other Beasts.

Trees and Plants, and other Inanimate things, are subject unto Of Trees and
Plants.
Diseases that deprive them of, and abate their excellency, worth and duration,
as well as living Creatures; and it does as well require the care, and
industry, and skill of the Husbandman to inspect into their Nature, and make
use of such means as are requisite, as well to prevent, as cure such Diseases.

The Canker, Moss, Bark-bound, and Worms in Trees, prove very pernicious: Their
Cures we have already discoursed of. Chap. 7.


The Jaundies, or Langor of Trees, makes them seem to repine, and their Leaves
to fall off or wither, and proceeds from some hurt done to their Roots, either
by Moles or Mice, or by the stroke of some Spade, or by the Tree standing too
moist or low: according as you find the Disease, so must you make use of a
remedy, either by searching the Root; and if you find any wound or gall, to
cut it off a little above such wound, and lay some Soot there to keep Vermin
off, if the injury came from them; or if water offends, either divert the
water, or remove the Tree: If it be planted too deep, it is better to raise it,
than let it stand where you may be confident it will never thrive.

The general Diseases of Trees, and impediments to their thriving, are, either
they stand too deep, too dry, too cold, too moist, too much in the wind, etc.
according to the diverse Nature and disposition of the Tree.

Therefore if you expect that a Tree should thrive, observe his Nature, and in
what place it most delights; which the sixth and seventh Chapters of this Book,
treating of Woods and Fruit Trees, will sufficiently direct.

SECT. VII. Of Thieves and Ill Neighbors.
There is no more constant, certain, and pernicious Enemy to the Husbandmans
Thrift, than Man himself; Homo homini Demon: they rob and steal from, oppress,
malign, injure, persecute, and devour one another, to the decay of Arts and
Sciences, and even to the ruin of whole Families of Ingenious and Industrious
men; every one striving to build up his house, and raise his Family by the
ruins and decay of his Neighbors. But our only Complaint is against the
common and ordinary sort of vile persons, that live after a most sordid manner,
and seek not Wealth nor Greatness, but only to maintain themselves in a most
despicable lazy kind of life, by filching and stealing from their honest and
laborious. Neighbors; and against such, that though they steal not, yet
oppress, oppugn, and injure those that are more Industrious than themselves.

The severe penalty of death being the punishment for Theft, Against Thieves.
is the principal cause of the infinite increase of Thieves: First, because
many there are, who (if they know or have taken a Thief) will not Indict nor
Prosecute him, because their Conscience will not admit of inflicting so severe
a punishment for so small an offense, but will rather bear the loss of their
Goods, than seek another man's life for it.

Secondly, Some, if they take a Thief, will rather accept of their Goods again,
and Satisfaction, than prosecute him; because in some cases they loose their
Goods, and are also at the charge of Prosecution.

Thirdly, Some also will not Prosecute common ordinary Thieves that live by
stealing Sheep, Corn, Wood, Poultry, Swine, etc. and have Families to maintain
by this very Trade, lest they (being part of the Parish) be bound afterward to
maintain their Families. And thus are the conditions of many places in England.

Fourthly, When Thieves are taken and prosecuted, and come to their Trial; they
being for their Lives, no Evidence will, nor ought to be taken, but what is
very clear: And where it is so against one, either through mistakes, or wilful
omissions, it is deficient against five; by which means most of those few that
come to Trial are found Not Guilty.

Fifthly, When they are upon Trial, and the Evidence clear against them, either
the Jury are tender of their Neighbors life, or else some good Friend or other
appears, that it is found but Petit Larceny; or else the Thief has his Clergy,
or by some such Shift, or Means, or Evasion, he gets off: So that it may be, as
it often happens, a Thief comes five or six times to his Trial, or at least to
Goal, before he is hanged: During which time he grows more subtle, and Educates
many other in the same Profession, and teaches them all manner of Tricks and
Devices, not only to effect their intentions, but to avoid the Punishment.

To remedy which, were to make the Penalty more moderate, and without respect
or favor to be assuredly executed; it would much lessen their number.

As suppose the Penalty of all manner of Theft were, to be Transported to the
West Indies, or to be confined to some certain Mines, or suchlike, at the
pleasure of the Judge; and to have an apparent Brand or Mark in the Face; and
that it should be free and lawful for any man to kill any such person returning
or straying from such employment; and that every one that lost their Goods, and
did prosecute the Thief, should have their Damages and Costs restored: I
suppose none would make any scruple of Prosecution, nor would any endeavor to
preserve these Vipers from so moderate, yet sufficient punishment.

This way, if severely prosecuted, without favor or respect, would in a little
time rid the Country of the Old Thieves, and their very Breed also, that there
would scarce be any of their Blood remaining: But if any should by chance
appear, he would hardly have any time to learn his Trade perfectly.

But until some such Law be established, which we humbly leave unto our Grand
Patriots to consider of, on whom we Ruflicks depend for good and wholesome Laws
to preserve our Interests; which will the better capacitate us to serve his
Majesty, and answer his Occasions with our Fortunes, as well as with our Lives:
and will also the better enable us to pay our Rents unto them, and improve
their and the whole Kingdoms Revenues.

In the mean time (I say) let us endeavor the preservation of our Goods from
these Vermin and Children of Darkness, by such means, and by what Industry we
are capable of, as by diligent and careful watching; Quae enim res quotidie
videntur, minus Varro.
metuunt furem; by making good and secure Fences, and by having our Doors,
Walls and Windows of our Houses, Barns, Stables, Gardens, etc. well fortified
against them.

We shall not here contend with any, whether the Rules of Astrology to discover
Theft, the making or laying of Charms, Spells, or Sigils to prevent Theft, or
the Art of enforcing the Thieves to bring back Goods stolen, be lawful or not:
Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos.

But if I know the certain or probable haunt or way the Thief uses, I may
safely make use of some Gin or Snare to keep him by the Legs, or otherwise,
till I come and release him; or I may place certain sharp Spikes of Iron in the
ground, and strain some pieces of small Brass-Wire athwart the way near the
ground, on either side of the sharp Spikes, (which Wire and Spikes are not
visible by night) that when Mr. Thief walks and thinks not of it, by stumbling
at the Wire, he falls on the Spikes; which give him such marks, that you may
perhaps know him against another day.

Or you may run Wires across your Backside, the ends whereof may be fastened
to some Lock of a Pistol, or suchlike, that by the touch only of the Wire the
Pistol may be discharged, which will give you notice, and also terrify the
Thief; and may be so placed, that it may shoot directly toward him.

Or you may have a Bell to Ring, only by the touch of such a Wire, which may
terrify the Thief, and give you notice.

A good Mastiff is a singular Preservative to a Backside against such that are
not of his Acquaintance, or that know not how to Charm him; which few
Country-Thieves understand: but if he be kept within doors, he is a sure
defense against Burglary, and out of the Charmers power. The small bawling Curs
are the surest Watchers, and are good to rouse up the Mastiffs.

An Ill Neighbor is a very great Evil, and a Good Neighbor Ill Neighbors.
as great a Happiness, said Old Hesiod.

What a grief, loss, and inconvenience it is to be confined to dwell by Ill
Neighbors? how it multiplies our cares, and increases our labors, and lessens
our Stocks and Profits? How are we disquieted at the sight of them? And how are
our Fruits destroyed, and our Corn spoiled by them and their Cattle, who are
continual Trespassers? especially if they think we are so peaceably given, as
to put up small injuries, or that we are unwilling to seek Remedies worse than
the Disease against these Enemies to our good Husbandry, and to our otherwise
most happy life. We have no Remedy but Patience, the best of Virtues.

Yet some policy may be used to Charm these Crocodils, to make these Furies
Friends: please a little their Natures, and feed their Humors in what they
delight; by being their seeming-Friends you may commend them, and they will be
as ready to serve you, as to prosecute another Neighbor that less deserves,
only because he uses not the same Method of policy. If they love their Bellies,
invite them often; Eum potissimum vocato, quicunque te prope habitat; be sure
to please them that are most capable of doing you hurt: whatever they delight
in, please them in it, and you have done enough, for you know not what need you
may have of a Neighbors help; sometimes may Thieves assault you, sometimes you
may want some particular Instrument that your Neighbor has, without which, or
whilst you go farther, you suffer great loss: And what a sad thing it would be
to be denied, as Hesiod in his time observed.

Streighten not your self so, as to ask to borrow of another, lest he refuse,
and you want.

CHAP. XI.
Of the several sorts of Instruments, Tools and Engines incident to this
Profession of Agriculture; and of some Amendments and Profitable Experiments in
Building, either by Timber, Stone, Brick, or any other way.

Dicendum, and quae sint duris Agrestibus Arma; Virgil.

Queis sine nec potuere seri, nec surgere Messes.
IT is impossible to go through the many difficulties in this Art, without many
and several sorts of Tools and Instruments, as Ploughs, Carts, etc. It is also
difficult and unprofitable to make use of such Ploughs, Tools and Instruments
that are troublesome, heavy and chargeable, when the same labor may be as well
performed, if not better, with such that are easy, light, and not so costly:
Therefore I shall in this Chapter discover unto you all the several sorts of
Instruments necessary for the Husbandman, and what inconveniences have been
found in some of them; and the Remedies, and what new ways or Methods have been
of late discovered to facilitate his labors, as I find them dispersed in
several Authors, and have observed the same in several parts of this Kingdom;
this Instrumental part of Agriculture being not of the least concernment: And
shall also discover unto you several profitable Experiments and Directions in
Building, necessary to be known.

SECT. I. Of the several sorts of Ploughs.
And first I shall begin with the Plough, the most necessary Instrument, the
chiefest of all Engines (as Gabriel Plat terms it) and happily found out.

There is a very great difference in Ploughs, that there is scarce any sure
Rule for the making of them; and every Country, yea almost every County
differs, not only in the Ploughs, but even in every part of them.

Ploughs also do not only differ according to the several Customs of several
places, but also as the Lands do differ in strength or weakness, or the
different Nature of the Soil.

To describe them all, is not a work for this place; but I will give some brief
Descriptions of the more principal sorts of Ploughs of the greatest esteem: And
first of the Double-wheeled Double-wheeled Plough.
Plough, which is of most constant use in Hartfordshire, and many other
Countries, and is very useful upon all Flinty, Stony, or hard Gravel, or any
other hard Land whatsoever: It Is esteemed a useful and necessary Plough. These
require a greater strength than other Ploughs, and to be used in such places
where other English Improver.
Ploughs will not to any purpose. It is usually drawn with Horses or Oxen two
abreast: the Wheels are usually eighteen or twenty inches high; in some places
the Furrow-wheel is of a larger circumference than the other that goes on the
solid Land.

There is another sort of Double-wheeled Ploughs, called the Turnwrest-Plough.
Turnwrest-Plough, which surpasses for Weight and Clumliness, and is called
the Kentish-Plough, being there much used.

The One-wheel Plough is an excellent good one, and you may Single Wheel-Plough.
use it on almost any sort of Lands, and is of that shape and form that will
admit of more lightness and nimbleness than the other Wheel-ploughs; being the
same that Mr. Hartlib speaks of to be Legacy.
made near Greenwich, by one who had excellent Corn on barren Land, and yet
Ploughed his Land with one Horse.

This Plough neatly made, and very small, has been drawn English Improver.
with one Horse, and held by one Man, and ploughed one Acre a day at
Sowing-time, in a moist season: There has been with six good Horses, six Men,
and six Ploughs, ploughed six Acres a day at Sowing-time, in light and
well-wrought Land. This seems to accord with the Plough used in Hesiod's time,
where the Plough man did both guide and drive.

There is a sort of Plough made without either Wheel or Foot, Plain-Plough.
described at large by Mr. Blithe, to be the most easy going Plough, and of
least Workmanship, Burden or Charge, called the Plain-plough, fit for any
Lands, unless in irregular extreme Land, either for Stones, Roots, or Hardness;
and there advises to the Double-wheeled Plough, being of strength to supply
extremities and cases of necessity.

Mr. Blithe describes a double Plough, the one affixed to the side Double
Plough. English Improver.
of the other, that by the help of four Horses and two Men you may Plough a
double portion of Land, the one Furrow by the side of the other. This he
esteems not to be of any great advantage above the other plain Plough, yet
may be of good use on some Lands.

There is another sort of Double-Plough much exceeding the Another sort of
Double-Plough.
other, as Mr. Hartlib in his Legacy testifies of an Ingenious Young Man of
Kent, who had two Ploughs fastened together very finely, by the which he
ploughed two Furrows at once, one under another; and so stirred up the Land
twelve or fourteen inches deep.

This is one of the best additions to the Plough, if thoroughly prosecuted; for
most Land requires a deeper stirring than is ordinarily given it by the usual
way of Ploughing, as is evident by those Experiments that have been made in
digging and setting of Corn. This way also comes near that of Digging, and in
some cases excels it, because it only looseneth and lightneth the Land to that
depth, but does not bury the upper-crust of the ground so deep as usually is
done by Digging. It is also much easier to Plough deep with this Double-Plough,
than with the single; because it bears not so great a burden, but the one
part thereof is discharged before the other is taken up.

Some have made a Plough with a Harrow affixed thereto; others Other sorts of
Ploughs.
have designed a Plough, to Plough, Sow and Harrow all at the same time: But
seeing they are of no great advantage to the Husbandman, only invented to
satisfy the minds of some Scrutinists, I leave them.

Of all which several sorts of Ploughs, there is great variation in the several
parts of them; some differ in length and shape of the Beam, some in the Share,
others in the Coulter, and in the Handles. The differences are so many, that no
one Ploughman knows them all.

The Abuses, Faults and Errors incident to the Plough, are Errors of the
Plough.
many; some in the Workmen and Drivers, who when they are wedded to an old
Erroneous Custom, though never so evidently discovered, will not recede from
it; or in the Plough it self, as when it is made too big and cumbersome, and
disproportioned, the one part too large or too little for the other; and when
it is rough, and ill compassed in the Share; when the Handles are too short or
too upright, the Irons dull: And many other faults there are which greatly
hinder the Husbandmans ease and advantage, and which ought to be remedied. And
if you will have your Plough do you service, and gain you advantage, it ought
to have these several good properties, or as many of them as you can obtain.

It ought to be well-proportionated for strength, according to Good properties
of a Plough.
the nature or strength of the ground you are to Plough; that the Irons be
sharped, and wear bright. Also the shorter and lesser any Plough is made,
having it is true Pitch, with it is true cast on the Shield-board, and short
Wrest, and sharp Irons, the far easier.

What else is necessarily requisite in the Plough, you may better find by your
Manual and Ocular Experience, than by all the instructions that can be here
given, (as in Plautus) Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quam auriti december. Yet
if you are desirous to read the large Descriptions of the several sorts of
Ploughs now in use, with all their diversities of Coulters, Shares,
Shield-boards, Wrests, etc. I refer you to the English Improver.

There may be other Ploughs made for several uses not usually known; as lightly
to pare off the Turf of soarded Land, as A Turfing-Plough.
they usually do that most laborious way with the Breast-plough, to be burnt on
heaps after it is turned and dried: This would save the greatest part of the
expense of Burn-beating, and be every whit as well, if not better.

I have heard of Ploughs drawn with Mastiff Dogs; others promise much of
Ploughs driven by the Wind: but these I esteem as fruitless to the Husbandman,
and rather the Products of Superficial Ingenuity.

Concerning Ploughs or Instruments for the making the Furrow, sowing the Corn,
and covering of it with the same Plough; with the several other uses of that
and other Ploughs, you will find discovered in their proper places. Chap. 4.


SECT. II. Of Carts and Wagons.
There are several sorts of Wagons, Carts, etc. some with four, some with two
Wheels; and also for several uses, either for the carrying of Timber, Corn,
Dung, or suchlike; all differing the one from the other, according to the
several places, whether hilly, level, stony or clayie, or to the several
occasions for which they are intended. In some places they are much more
curious in the forming of them, making them neater, lighter and slenderer, as
well in the Wheels, as in the other parts of the Cart or Wagon. The Wheels,
the more upright or square the Spokes are from the Box or Center, the weaker
they are when they come to bear on either side: to that end they make them
concave or dishing, and also to secure the Wheel from breaking in a fall. The
greater the circumference of the Wheel is, the easier Contrary to the opinion
of some.
is the motion, because the Ring or Bond of the Wheel is the more flat, and
does more easily over-pass any stones, or other obstructions in the way, and
sinks not so easily into the Concavities or defective places of the Earth: Its
motion is also slower at the Center; for the greater Wheel of eighteen feet in
the circumference, goes but once round in the same measure of ground where the
lesser Wheel of nine feet in the circumference goes twice; and so according to
the same Rule and proportion, where the difference is greater or lesser:
Therefore the lesser the Wheels are of any Cart, Wagon or Plough, the heavier
it goes, and more unevenly or jogging. The reason why the Fore-wheels are
lesser in a Wagon, is only for its convenience in turning.

The higher a Cart or Wagon is set, the more apt it is for overturning: New
sort of Carts.
but because the setting of it low, and the height of the Wheels, after the
usual way of placing them, cannot consist together; therefore it may prove very
commodious to place the Bed of the Cart under the Axle-tree, at such distance
as the depth or shallowness of the ways or waters you are to go through will
bear; for by this means part of the weight will be under the Axle-tree, which
will so far counterpoise what is above, that it will very much prevent the
over-turning or oversetting the Cart or Wagon: For we evidently see, that the
higher a Load lies, whether it be Hay, Corn, Straw, etc. the easier it
over-sets; and the lower it lies, as stones, metals, etc. the more rarely, if
you make the Tail of the Cart or Wagon turning upwards, I cannot perceive any
inconvenience can arise from this way.

They are much more curious in making of them in some places, than in other; as
in Holland they make them very neat and light; one Horse shall effect as much
with a slender, neat, and light Cart and Wheels, as two shall with a cumbersome
heavy one.

In China, Wagons are made to pass frequently with Sails, like Wagon with
Sails.
Ships, (as Historiographers relate.) It Is probable their Winds are more
certain and constant, and their ways more level than they are here. In Holland
a Wagon was lately framed, which with Hartlib 's Legacy.
ordinary Sails carried thirty people sixty English miles in four hours: I have
seen much done of this nature, and more might be done, as to make a Cart or
Wagon move against the wind; and the more the wind blows, the faster it
shall move against it, by the help of the Perpetual Skrew, etc. But these being
not to our present purpose of advantage, I shall leave to others.

SECT. III. Of several other Instruments used in Digging, etc.
The Trenching-plough or Coulter is a certain Instrument used Of the Trenching
Plough.
in Meadow or Pasture-ground, to cut out the sides of Trenches, Carriages or
Drains; or it is used in cutting out the sides of Turf, for the taking of it up
whole, to the intent to lay it down again in the same or some other place: It
is only a long stale or handle, with a Button at the end for ones hand, and at
the other end it turns upwards, like the foot of a Plough, to slide on the
ground; in which bend must be placed a Coulter or Knife of that length you
intend the Turf to be in depth.

Several fashions there are of them, some with one Wheel, some with two, some
with none; you may make them as you please.

There are many sorts of Spades, according to the diversities Of Spades.
of places, and the several occasions and humors of men.

One sort is made very thin, light and sharp, with a Socket to Turfing-spade.
put the Stail in, like the Hedging-bill; the Bit very short, and not very
broad; in shape much like a Spade in Cards; of very great use to some (though
hardly known to others) to under-cut the Turf after it is marked out with the
Trenching-plough, which it does with much ease and expedition.

For the cutting Trenches in watery, clayie or Morish Lands, Trenching-spade.
they usually use a Spade, with a Langet or Fin like a knife, turned up by the
side of the Spade; and sometimes on both sides, to divide the Clay or moist
Earth, and cut the small Roots that it come clean away.

The ordinary Spade is made several ways; but the most commendable Common
spades.
are the lightest and thinnest wrought, not wanting their due strength: the
cleaner they are kept, the better they work.

The How is an Instrument of very great use, and it is great pity The How.
it is no more used. If the spare-times of the year (except when the Earth is
frozen) were but made use of to How the several creeks, corners, and patches of
your Land, it would undoubtedly prove a very great Improvement. More hereof in
their proper Chap. 4.
places.

Besides the Spade and How, and their kinds, there are several Other
Instruments used in Digging, etc.
other Instruments used by the Husbandman for the grubbing and raising of Trees
both great and small, and Bushes, Brakes, etc. and for the making holes and
passages in hard and stony Lands for several occasions, and for the loading and
spreading of Dung, Earth, etc.

As Mattocks, Pick-axes, or Grubbing-axes; and also the great Instrument
described by Mr. Platt, for the quick riddance of Shrubs, Broom, and suchlike,
mentioned before, Chap. 10. The Iron-crow, or Iron-bar, are not to be wanting:
Also Shovels, the Dung-fork, Mole-spades, or Paddle-staffs, you will sometimes
have occasion for.

SECT. IV. Other various Instruments.
He that goes a borrowing, goes a sorrowing, is an old and true Proverb:
Therefore it behooves our Husbandman that intends to thrive, to possess or
furnish himself with all things necessary, and of present necessity for his
Occupation, that he may not put himself to the trouble of borrowing, nor the
damage he is likely to sustain for want of, nor the scorn or disgrace of being
denied any thing he wants.

That you may not be forgetful of any, or at least of the most useful and
necessary Instruments, besides the forementioned, I will enumerate such as
come into my mind, and advise you to add what you find deficient, and let
them be all placed in their proper places; according to Xenophon's advice:
Supellex and Instrumenta varia Rustica, suo quaeque loco and ordine disposita,
in promptu sint quoties vel promenda vel requisita seponenda sunt.

Belonging to the Arable and Field-land, are Harrows. Drags. Forks. Sickles.
Reap-hooks. Weed-hooks. Pitchforks. Rakes. Plough-staff and Beetle. Sleds.
Roller. Mold-spears and Traps. Cradle-sythes. Seed-lip.
To the Barn and Stable Flails. Ladders. Winnowing-fan. Measures for Corn.
Sieves and Rudders. Brooms. Sacks. Skeps or Scuttles. Bins. Pails. Curry-combs.
Main-combs. Whips. Goads. Harneys for Horses, and Yokes for Oxen. Pannels.
Wanteys. Pack-saddles. Sussingles. Cart-lines. Skrein for Corn.
To Meadows and Pastures. Sythes. Rakes. Pitchforks and Prongs. Fetters, and
Clogs, and Shackles. Cutting-Spade for Hay-reeks. Horse-locks.
Other necessary Instruments. Hand-barrows. Wheel-barrows. Dibbles. Hammer and
Nails. Pincers. Sissers. Bridle and Saddle. Nail-piercers or Gimlets.
Hedging-hooks and Bills. Garden-sheers. A Grindstone. Whetstones. Hatchets and
Axes. Sawes. Beetle and Wedges. Leavers. Shears for Sheep. Trowels for House
and Garden. Hod and Tray. Hog-yokes and Rings. Marks for Beasts and Utensils.
Scales and Weights. An Aul, and every other thing necessary.

SECT. V. Of Amendments and Profitable Experiments in Building.
As the Manners and Customs of Men are in every Age refined, and tend more and
more to Purity and Perfection in these Northern and formerly-rude and salvage
Countries, or rather grow more exact, and imitate the other more Southerly and
first civilized parts in Language, Manners, Arts and Sciences; so do they also
endeavor to reform their most gross, undigested, and ill-contrived Structures
and Edifices, not only in Cities and Towns, but in their Country-Villages also,
that we now compare some of our Cities and Towns with most of theirs, and even
excel them in several; and that not a few of our most suavious and delectable
Rural Seats, as well for their Magnificent, Regular, and Artificial Structures,
and most Ingenious contrivances, as in their most salubrious, convenient, and
pleasant Scituations.

And for the future, were but the Rules of Architecture duly observed, and
those new and complete Methods and Models contrived for Building, and the
Scituations of places, according to the best judgments taken notice of in such
Buildings that may hereafter be raised, either de Novo, or in the restoring or
reedifying of our ancient and decayed Seats in our Country-Villages, our
England in a few Ages would appear a Kingdom beset and adorned in every part
with curious and admirable Habitations, possessed with Noble and Ingenious
Inhabitants; and would at large represent to the view of all, what Middlesex
it is Epitome now does; and would contract the envy of other Nations, as the
Land of Canaan formerly did.

Therefore let me advise all such that are willing or necessitated to Build,
that they sit down and consider of the manner and Method of Building, as well
as of the charge and expense; and that they will make choice of such Surveyors
and Workmen that understand what they go about, and not be guided or persuaded
by such that are wedded to an old deformed Custom, who will in no wise consent
to a more complete way, although it be much more Beautiful and Regular, and
also with less materials, and cheaper, and more convenient than the other, for
no other reason but that it is a Novel, and not as our Forefathers did before
us, yet perhaps are willing to bestow expense enough upon it in enriching it,
although but with little skill or Art. But I suppose it is better to erect that
which will be pleasing to, and content both Wisemen and Fools, then that
though done by the same cost and expense, which will only please Fools.

This is a digression from our intended design, and here inserted only to
persuade such that intend any store of Building, to make use of such Authors
and persons that understand that Art, which in this place we do not undertake
to teach, only shall give the Husbandman a few general Rules and Directions
that I have casually met withal, about the situation and building of a plain
Country-seat, and the building of Walls, Barns, Mills, etc.

Praedium Rusticum bonum Coelum habeat, etc. Let your Country House have a good
Air, and not open to Tempests, The situation of a House.
seated in a good Soil; let it therein excel, if you can; let it stand under a
hill, and behold the South, in a healthy place; let there be no want of Workmen
or Laborers; let there be good water, and let it stand near some City or
Market Town, or the Sea, or some Navigable River, or have a good Road or way
from it. Thus Cato advises.

Little more can be said, but that Woods also as well as water may be near it,
they being the principal things that adorn a Country Habitation: But if you
cannot conveniently seat your House amongst the Trees, yet are there few places
but you may raise speedily Trees about your House, as before we directed; it
Chap. 6.
being far better to have your House defended by Trees than Hills; for these
yield a cooling, refreshing, sweet and healthy Air and Shade, during the heat
of Summer, and very much break the cold winds and Tempests from every Coast in
the Winter. The other, according as they are situated, defend only from some
certain winds; and if they are on the North-side of your House, as they defend
you from that Air in the Winter, so do they deprive you of it in the Summer; if
they are on the South Side, it otherwise proves as inconvenient. Besides, they
yield not the pleasures and contentments, nor the varieties of Oblectations to
the Ingenious Rustic, as the tall plumps of Trees and pleasant Groves do; yet
are Hills clothed with Coppices, or otherwise improved, pleasant objects, so
that they stand not too near your House.

Let not your House be too low seated, lest you loose the convenience of
Cellars: but if you cannot but build on low grounds, set the lower Floor of
your House the higher, to supply the want in your Cellar of what you cannot
sink in the ground; for in such low and moist grounds, it conduces much to the
dryness and healthiness of the Air, to have Cellars under the House, so that
the Floors be good and sieled underneath.

It is very inconvenient to build Barns, Stables, or suchlike places too near
to your House, because Cattle, Poultry, and suchlike, require to be kept near
them; which would then annoy your House. Let your Garden join to one, if not
more sides of your House; for what can be more pleasant for the most part of
the year, than to look out at the Windows of your Parler and Chambers into a
Garden? What sides of your House are not joining to your Garden, let there be
Courts or Yards kept from Cattle, Poultry, etc. and planted with Trees, to
shade, defend, and refresh your House; and the Walls also planted with Vines,
and other Fruits.

Not to speak of the building of Palaces or Seats for the Nobility Securest and
cheapest way of Building a House.
or Gentry, but only of plain and ordinary Farm-houses, I have thus much
observed, that Houses built too high in places obvious to the winds, and not
well defended by Hills or Trees, require more materials to build them, and more
also of reparations to maintain them; and are not so commodious to the
Inhabitants, as the lower-built Houses, which may be made at a much easier
rate, and also as complete and beautiful as the other. In building of a House
long, you loose the use of some Rooms, and it takes up more for Entries and
Passages, and requires more doors: and if it be apiece, there must needs
be light wanting in some part thereof, more than if it be built like an H, or
some other suchlike Figure; which makes it stand better and firmer against the
winds, and Light and Air come every way to it; every Room is near the one to
the other. The Offices, as the Kitchen, Dairy-rooms, Brewing and Baking-rooms,
are near unto the Hall, which only divides between those and the Parlers, etc.
Several Descriptions and Draughts of Foundations could I give you here, were
not the cutting of them too costly for so Rustic a work to bear. The Walls,
where Brick may be had, are best and most securely raised with it, and with
little cost, if you raise firm and strong Columns at the corners of your House,
of strength sufficient to support the Roof or main Beams: you may build them
square, and between them may you raise the Walls with the same materials, and
work them up together with the Corners or Columns, leaving the one half of the
extraordinary breadth of the Column without, and the other within the Wall;
whereby you will save much cost and charges both in materials and workmanship,
and yet your house be firm and strong.

The heavier any Covering is to a House, the greater is the Best covering for a
House.
expense in raising the whole Frame or Building to support it, and the sooner
does it require reparations; therefore healing with Lead or flat Stone is not
to be approved of, by reason of its weight, where Earthen Tile, Slate, or
Shingle may be had: Next unto Lead or Stone, Tiles made of Clay are the
heaviest, and most in use.

Pantiles, such as come from Holland, are the best and lightest covering of any
sort of Tiles; and it is to be admired at, that another Nation can transport so
Earthy a Commodity, and pay all duties, etc. and sell them at our own doors at
a cheaper rate than we can make them; and yet have we as good materials, and
Fuel more plentiful than they.

A Composition of Clay, Sand, etc. is easily made for Tiles, Of Tiles, Bricks,
etc.
that shall make them not only thinner and lighter, but also stronger and more
durable, if Ingenious men would undertake it; which are rare to be found in so
dirty, yet necessary an Occupation; which would save very much charge and
materials in Building, if it were truly prosecuted.

The same may be said of Bricks, etc. and with such a Composition may be made
in Molds, all Window-frames for a House of different work and magnitudes, and
Chimney-pieces, and Frames for doors, etc. in several pieces made in Molds,
that when they are burnt, may be set together with a fine red Cement, and seem
to be as one entire piece; whereby may be imitated all Stone-work now used in
Building, and it will very well supply its defect where Stones are scarce and
dear; and also may save very much Timber which is now used in Brick-building,
and appear much more complete and beautiful, and be of more strength and of
longer continuance than Timber or ordinary Brick, and is very feasible; as we
may perceive by the Earthen-pipes made fine, thin and durable, to carry water
under the ground at Portsmouth; and by the Earthen-backs and Grates for
Chimneys, made by Sir John Winter formerly at Charing-Oross, of a great bigness
and thickness; which are evident and sufficient demonstrations of the
possibility of making work fine, thin and light, for Tiles either plain or
crooked, and for the making of great work in Molds, and the through burning of
them for Doors, Windows, and Chimney-frames, etc.

This is one of the most feasible and beneficial Operations that I know in
England to be neglected.

Where either Tiles are scarce, or Timber not very plenty, that you would have
your House but lightly covered, Shingles Of Shingles.
are to be preferred before Thatch; and if they are made of good Oak, and slit
or cleft out, and then well seasoned in the water and Sun, they become a sure,
light, and durable covering.

Where it may be had, the thin blew Slate seems to be the best Slate.
covering, being very light and lasting.

This is a common covering in most parts, yet is some to be Thatch.
preferred before others; the best that I have seen is that which is called
Helm, that is, long and stiff Wheat-straw (with the Ears cut off) bound up in
bundles unbruised, which well laid lies thin, lasts long, and is much neater
than the common way.

It is an usual thing to see thick and tall walls to fall, either by Of
Building of Stone or Brick-walls.
reason of the weakness of the foundation, the weight of the wall, or the decay
of the Cement or Mortar through Age; which has provoked several to great and
unnecessary expenses in laying deeper and stronger Foundations, and in making
the walls much thicker than usual; when all that extraordinary cost might be
saved, by taking notice of these few Observations.

First, that straight walls, though thick, and seemingly strong, yet either by
the falseness of the ground, or being obvious to high winds, or the decay of
the Mortar, are apt to lean or fall.

Secondly, that walls built crooked, though thin and weak, are yet more lasting
than a straight wall.

Thirdly, that a wall built over a River on Pillars or Arches, stands as firm
as the rest of the wall, whose Foundation is entire; as I have in several
places observed.

Which plainly demonstrates unto us, that a wall built up much thinner than
usual, having at every twenty foot distance (or suchlike, as you think fit) an
Angle set out about two foot or more, according as the wall is in height, or
having at such distance a Column or Pillar erected with the wall six or eight
inches or more on each side over and above the thickness of the rest of the
wall, the Foundation of such jetting out or Column being firmly laid, that it
must of necessity strengthen the wall much more, than if five times the
materials used in these Jettings or Columns were used in the wall being
straight; which most evidently saves you a great part of your expense, and your
wall much more firm and complete: for if it be a wall for Fruit Trees, these
Nooks or Corners in the Jettings out, whether Angular or Semicircular, are
secure places for the more tender Trees; or if they are Columns or Pillars,
they make the wall much the warmer, by breaking the motion of the Wind or Air
that passes by it: And these Foundations laid secure, although at that
distance, support the wall in loose and false ground, as though it were entire;
but if the ground be very loose, you may project an Arch from each Foundation,
though obscurely.

It is a great injury to our Buildings, that our Cement is no Of Mortar.
better: in former Ages, when they built with small and unequal stones, their
Cement or Mortar far exceeded ours, as is most evident in the ruins of old
Monasteries, Castles, etc. where their Mortar is far harder than in any of our
more Modern Buildings.

It is a great error in Masons, Bricklayers, etc. to let the Lime slacken and
cool before they make up their Mortar, and also to let their Mortar cool and
die before they use it; also their stone they let be moist before they use
them: Therefore if you expect your work to be well done, and long to continue,
work up your Lime quick, and but little at a time, that the Mortar may not lie
long before it be used; and also with dry stone, for which the Summer is
principally to be elected.

For Brick, if it be in the Wintertime, let them be laid dry; if in the
Summertime, wet: It will quit your cost to employ a Boy to wet them in the
Summer, for they will unite with the Mortar the better.

The Lime it self also in some places is very weak, being made of soft
Chalk-stones; the other that is made of harder, is much to be preferred.

In former Ages they cut their Timber in the Wintertime, Of Timber.
when the Sap was most out of it: but now, by reason of the scarceness of Oak
(the principal Timber) our Statutes oblige us to fell it in the Summer for the
Bark, being necessary for Tanners, etc. by which means our Timber shrinks,
chaps, and decays much more and sooner than otherwise it would do; which
inconveniences in square-Timber are not so apparent as in Plank, Board, or
suchlike broad and thin work; therefore, in such cases, it requires some kind
of seasoning or other to prevent them: if you lay them in the Sun or Wind,
they chap, or shrink, or cast.

The best remedy in that case, is to lay them in a Pool or Running Stream a few
days, to extract the Sap that remains in them; and afterward dry them in the
Sun or Air, and they will neither chap, cast, nor cleave. Against shrinking
there is no remedy.

When Timber or Boards are well seasoned or dried in the Sun or Air, and fixed
in their places, and what labor you intend is bestowed on them, the use of
Linseed-oyl, Tar, or suchlike Oleaginous matter, tends much to their
preservation and duration. Hesiod prescribes to hang your Instruments in the
smoke, to make them strong and lasting; temonem in fumo poneres: surely then
the Oil of Smoke, or the Vegetable Oil, by some other means obtained, must
needs be effectual in the preservation of Timber. Also Virgil advises the same.

Et suspensa focis exploret robora fumus. In Ancient times they bruised their
Corn in Morters; since Of Mills.
which most tedious and incomplete way, Mills have been invented, some to be
used by hands, as Querns, others to be moved by Horses, others by the Wind,
and others by the Water; which last being maintained with least cost, more
certainty, and most advantage, has gained the Pre-eminence, and is made use of
in every place, where there is water fit for that purpose, and where there is
employment, although a little for the ease and convenience of the near
Inhabitants, and for the particular advantage of the Owner, yet very much to
the detriment and damage of the Kingdom in general, by injurious obstructions
of water, to the spoiling of much Meadow-ground, and by the preventing the use
of the water for that most advantageous improvement of overflowing or drowning
of Land; which upon the removal of these Mills might be done, and the Corn as
well ground to serve every ones occasions,

Either by Windmills, which may be erected on Hills in Hilly places, and in
Plains on any open place, where the wind may as well grind all your Corn in
places where the Water-mills now stand, as in other places where are only
Winde-mills for many miles together.

Or by the Rectification of Water-mills, that a less quantity of water may do
that which now requires a greater; to which end many have made very Ingenious
attempts, and without question may much be done in it, both in the framing and
ordering the Waterworks, (which we will pass by) and in the contrivance of the
Mill it self, which doubtless goes much heavier by the Stone they call the
Runner; its being so large, and its being encompassed with a Hoop or Case that
keeps the Meal to the edge or circumference of the Stone, and much deads its
motion: The larger the Runner is, the heavier it moves; which may in some
measure be remedied, by making four or five vents or passages in several places
of the Hoop, to take off the Meal as fast as it is ground, that none may lie to
clog the Runner.

Or a Mill may probably be so contrived, that the Grinding-stone or Runner may
be Vertical, and of but a small circumference; the flat and square edge whereof
may be fitted into another fixed stone cut hollow, about the half or third part
of a Circle; which Runner, by its first motion, may dispatch as much Corn in
the same time, as a larger the other way. Several also of these Vertical Stones
may be on the same Axis; this may be used in all the said sorts of Mills.

CHAP. XII.
Of Fowling and Fishing.

SECT. I. Of Fowling in General.
FOrasmuch as most Farms and Country-habitations lie near 1 Of Fowling.
unto the Sea, great Rivers, large Fens, Marshes, etc. to which are great
resorts of Waterfowl, or else are well furnished with Land-fowl, either of
which are very profitable to the Husbandman: Wherefore it may not be amiss to
add some general directions for the taking of them; which will redound to his
advantage, not only for their Carcasses, but for that many sorts of the
Land-fowl are somewhat injurious to his Husbandry.

It is generally observed, that Waterfowl are in their own nature the most
subtle and wisest of Birds, and most careful of their own safety; to which end
they do form themselves into an orderly Body or Camp, and have their Scouts and
Sentinels at a distance, to give notice of the approach of an Enemy; which they
suddenly do by a certain Watchword, which will oblige you to be more cautious
and careful than ordinary in your endeavoring to surprise them.

It is needless here to particularize the several Haunts of each The Haunts of
Waterfowl.
sort of Waterfowl, seeing there are few that have Lands haunted with them,
but they know anear in what parts they most usually frequent. The one sort that
are not Web-footed, as the Heron, Bittern, etc. delight most in shallow waters,
and boggy Fenny places. The other sort that swim, as the Wilde-goose, Duck,
Widgeon, etc. delight most in Rivers, large and deep waters, etc. where they
may have plenty of water, and swim undisturbed of Man or Beast; and especially
where the water is least subject to Freeze.

The Wilde-goose delights very much in green Winter-corn: Therefore in such
Lands that are near the water may you find them.

Most of these Fowl have their Day-haunts and their Night-haunts; for in the
Daytime they usually retire to some secure place where they may confidently
rest themselves: In the Evening they take to their best feeding-places, and
small green streams, where they dare not appear in the day.

SECT. II. Of taking the greater sort of Fowl with Nets.
Let your Nets be made of the best Packthread, with great and large Mashes; for
the larger they are, the better, and the more surely do they entangle them; so
that they be not too big to let the Fowl creep through them.

Let the Nets be about two fathom deep, and six in length: Verge your Net on
each side with very strong cord, and extend it at each end on long Poles; so
that the two lower ends of the Poles may be fastened with a piece of Line to
two Stakes driven into the ground, at such place where you have observed to be
the Morning-haunts or feeding places of these Fowl: being there, place your Net
two hours before they come; then at about two or three fathom beyond the Net,
in a right line from the two Stakes, fix one end of the cord that the upper
part of the Net was extended upon, holding in your hand the other end, which
must be at least ten or twelve fathom long; which on the appearance of Game
within the Verge of the Net, you may suddenly pull, and cast the Net over them.
Let the Net be spread smooth and flat on the ground, and strewed over with
Grass, Sedge, or suchlike, to hide it from the Fowl; and place your self in
some shelter of Grass, Fern, or suchlike: If you have a Stale, you may place it
within the Verge of the Net, which will very much conduce to the increase of
your sport, which you may continue till the Sun be near an hour high; for after
that time their feeding in those places is over, until about Sunset again.

draw net The Form of a Draw-Net.


If your Net be large, and set for great Fowl, one of them will be as much as
you can conveniently throw over them; but if you set for small Birds, then two
small Nets may be placed after this manner.

SECT. III. Of the taking small Waterfowl with Nets.
Let these Nets be made of small and strong Packthread, the Mashes
proportionable according to the Fowl you design to take: Let the Net be about
two foot and a half deep, and of length according to the breadth of the River,
or other waters you intend to place them in, and the Net lined on both sides
with false Nets of Mashes eighteen inches square each way; that when the Fowl
strike, they may pass through the first Net, and be entangled between them both.

Slake this Net athwart the River, the bottom being plumbed, that it may sink
about six inches, and the upper part so strained, that it may lie slantwise
against the current of the water, about two foot above the water; but let the
strings which support the upper side of the Net, be fastened to small yielding
sticks pricked in the bank, yielding a little as the Fowl strikes against the
Net, the better to entangle them. Place several of these Nets at several
distances on the River; and in the night, if any Fowl fall near them, you may
be confident of your share.

The better to accomplish your design, deter them from places that lie remote
where the Fowl usually haunt, by shooting at them, which will make them take to
the River you have thus prepared.

SECT. IV. Of taking great Fowl with Lime-twigs.
Besides the Art of taking Fowl with Nets, there is a very ingenious way of
taking them with Bird-lime, which seems to be very Ancient; for Pliny, who
lived above 1600 years since, not only mentions the use of it in liming of
Twigs to catch Birds withal, but the manner how the Italians prepared the same,
of the Berries of the Misseltoe, of Trees gathered in the Summertime before
they were ripe; and then macerating, putrefying, pounding and washing it, until
fit for use; which also they mix with Nut-Oyl, as in his Natural History, lib.
16. you may read. But seeing that that way of making Bird-lime is not in use
with us, I shall not trouble you with the whole Process, especially seeing that
we have here in England a more easy and effectual way of preparing it with the
Bark of that common and so well known Tree, the Holly; which Preparation is
thus: Take the Bark of that Tree about the end of June, at which To make
Bird-time.
time it is full of Sap, and fitter for your purpose; fill your Vessel with it
that you intend to boil it in, then add thereto of clear water as much as the
Vessel will conveniently hold, and boil it so long, until the gray and white
Bark rise from the green; which will be about twelve or sixteen hours: Then
take it off the fire, and gently decant or pour the water from the Barks, and
separate the gray and white Barks from the green, which lay on a Stone, or
Stone-floor, in some Cellar or moist or cool place, and cover it over with
Fern, or other green weeds, to a good thickness, the better to accelerate its
putrefaction; which will be accomplished in twelve or fourteen days time, and
sometimes less, and it reduced to a perfect Mucilage: then pound it well in a
large Mortar with an wooden Pestle, until it be so tempered, that no part of
the Bark be discerned unbruised. After which wash it exceeding well in clear
water, by renewing the water and your pains so often, that no foulness or Motes
remain in it; and put it into a deep Earthen Vessel, where it will purge it
self for four or five days together: Then scum it clean as its filth arises;
and when it has done purging, put it into a clean Vessel, and keep it close
for use.

The Bark of the Birch-tree is by some affirmed to make as good Lime, as that
of the Holly, being the same way to be prepared; so that you may try or use
which is most easy to come by. Also you need not boil either of the Barks, if
you give it longer time to putrify; for the boiling is only to accelerate
putrefaction.

When you intend to use it, take as much of it as you think fit, and put it
into an Earthen-pot, with a third part of Caponsgrease or Goose-grease well
clarified, and set it over the fire, and let them melt together: Stir them
until they are thoroughly incorporated; and so continue stirring off the Fire,
till it be cold.

If you fear the freezing of your Bird-lime, add in your last mixture a quarter
as much of the Oil Petrolium, as you do of the Goose or Capons-grease, and no
cold will congeal it.

When your Lime is cold, take your Rods and warm them; then a little besmear
the Rods with your Line, and draw the Rods the one from the other, and close
them again. Work them thus continually together, until they are all over
equally besmeared.

If you lime Straws or Strings, you must do it when the Lime is hot, and at the
thinnest, by folding and doubling them together before the fire; and fold and
work them, till it be all over thoroughly limed: Put these in Cases of Leather
until you use them.

When you intend to use your Bird-lime for great Fowl, take of Rods long, small
and straight, being light, and yielding every way; Lime the upper parts of them
before the Fire, that it may the better besmear them.

Then go where these Fowl usually haunt, whether it be their Morning or Evening
haunt, an hour or two before they come, and plant your Twigs or Rods about a
foot distance one from the other, that they cannot pass them without being
entangled; and so plant over the place where their haunt is, leaving a place in
the middle wide enough for your Stale to flutter in, without falling foul of
the Twigs; which Stale you do well to provide and place there, the better to
attract those of its own kind to your snares: from which Stale you must have a
small string to some convenient place at a distance where you may lie
concealed, and by plucking the string, cause it to flutter; which will allure
down the Fowl in view.

Prick the Rods sloap-wise against the wind, about a foot above the ground or
water; and if you see any taken, surprise them not suddenly if any more are in
view, for by their fluttering others will be induced to fall in amongst them.

A Spaniel that is at command, will be necessary to re-take them that might
otherwise escape out of your reach, these Fowl being very strong.

If you place your Twigs for the lesser Waterfowl, as Duck, For smaller
Waterfowl.
Mallard, Widgeon, Teal, etc. you must fit your Rods according to the depth of
the water, and your Lime must be such as no wet nor Frost can prejudice; the
limed part must be above the water. Here also it will be necessary to have a
Stale of the same Fowl you intend to ensnare.

SECT. V. Of taking Fowl with Springes.
Most of the Cloven-footed Waterfowl delight in Plashes, Water, Furrows, small
Rivolets, and suchlike places, seeking for Worms, Flat-grass, Roots, and the
like, in the Wintertime, especially in frosty weather, when many other places
are frozen up, and these warm Springly Water-tracts are open; where you must
place Springes made of Horse-hair, of bigness and length according to the
greatness of the Fowl you design to take; for the Heron or Bittern, it must be
of near a hundred Horse-hairs, and above two foot in length; for the Woodcock,
Snipe, Plover, etc. not above eight or ten Horse-hairs, and one foot in length:
the Main Plant, or Sweeper, must be also proportionable to the strength of the
Fowl. For the manner of the making and setting them, I question not but every
place will furnish you with Directors, (if you know it not already) which is
much easier and better than any written Instructions. Observe also, that you
prick small sticks, in manner of a Hedge, crosswise, athwart all the other
by-passages, about half an inch apart, and somewhat above a handful above the
water or ground, sloaping toward the place where your Spring is placed, the
better to guide (which is easily done) the Fowl into the Snare: for such is
their nature, that they will not press over, where they have liberty to pass
through any gap. If the places where these Fowl usually haunt be frozen, you
must make Plashes; and the harder the Frost is in other places, the greater
will the resort of Fowl be here.

SECT. VI. Killing of Fowl with the Fowling-piece.
There are many places where Fowl settle and feed at sometimes, yet so
uncertain, that the former ways are useless: and there are also many places
wherein you may not have the convenience or liberty to make use of the said
ways of taking Fowl; yet there may you at opportune times meet with a good shot
with your Fowling-piece, the length and bore of which ought to be
proportionable the one to the other, and both to your strength, and the place
you use it in.

Let your Powder be of the best sort, as new as you can, for with bad keeping
it loses its strength exceedingly; therefore let it be kept as dry as may be:
Let it be well dried when you use it, and clean from dust; it has the more
strength, and less fouleth your Piece. Let your Shot be well sized, not too
great, for then it flies, but thin and scattering; nor too small, the Bird
being apt to fly away within it, having not weight nor strength to enter far.

Shot being usually above the value of ordinary Lead, and in many places not to
be had of the sizes you have most occasion for; I shall therefore here set down
the true Process of making of it, of what size you please under Mould-shot.

Take Lead of what quantity you please, melt it down in an Iron To make Shot.
Vessel, stir and clear it with an Iron Ladle, taking off all its impurities
that swim at the top: When it is so hot as that the color of the Lead begin to
be greenish, and not before, strew upon it Auripigmentum powdered fine, as much
as will lie on a Shilling, to twelve or fifteen pound of Lead; some will
require more: then stir the Lead well, and the Auripigmentum will flame. Let
your Iron Ladle have a Lip or Notch in the brim, for the more convenient
pouring out of the Lead; and let the Ladle remain in the melted Lead, for the
most part, that it may be of a heat agreeable to the Lead, to prevent
inconveniences that may otherwise happen through its being over-hot, or too
cold: Then take out a little of the Lead in your Ladle for an Essay, and cause
it to drop out of it into a Glass of Water; which if the drops prove to be
round, and without Tails, there is Auripigmentum enough in it, and the temper
of the heat is as it ought to be; but if the congealed drops or shot prove not
round, but with Tails, then add more of the Auripigmentum, and augment the
heat, until you find it right.

Then take a Copper-plate, about the size of an ordinary Trencher-plate, with a
Concavity in the middle about three inches Diameter, perforated with about
thirty or forty small holes, greater or lesser, according as you would have
your shot to be: This Concave bottom should be thin, but the thicker the brim
is, the better will it retain the heat. Place this Plate on two Bars, or other
Iron-frame, over a Tub or Pail of water, about four inches from the water, and
lay on the Plate burning Coals, to keep the Lead melted upon it.

Then with your Ladle take off your Lead, and pour it gently on the Coals on
the middle of the Plate, and it will make its way through the holes in the
bottom of the Plate into the water, and fall into round drops. Thus continue
your Operation till all the Lead be passed through the Plate, blowing the Coals
to keep them alive, that the Lead may not cool on the Plate, and stop the holes.

Whilst you are thus pouring on your Lead, another (Stander-by) may take
another Ladle, and put it four or five inches in the water under the bottom of
the Plate, and catch some of the Shot as it drops down, and see what faults are
in it, that you may stop your hand until they are rectified.

The greatest care is to keep the Lead on the Plate, in so moderate a degree of
heat, that it be not too cool to stop the holes, nor too hot, which will make
the drops crack and fly: if it be too cool, blow the Coals a little; if too
hot, stay your hand until it be a little cooler: the cooler it is, the larger
will be your shot; the hotter, the smaller. As near as you can, observe the
right temper of the heat, and you will have very round shot without any tails.

Then take your shot and dry them over the fire with a gentle heat, always
stirring them that they melt not; and when they are dry, you may separate the
small from the great in Sieves made for that purpose, according to the several
sizes they are of: But if you would have them very large, you may with a stick
make the Lead trickle out of the Ladle into the water without the Plate.

If the Lead stop on the Plate, and yet not too cool, give the Plate a little
knock, and it will drop again. Be sure let there be none of your Instruments
Greasy, Oily, or the like. When you have separated your shot, if any of it
proves too great, or too small, or not round, preserve them for the next
Operation.

Thus having your Fowling-piece, your Powder and Shot ready, with your Spaniel
well instructed, and at command, not daring to stir till you bid him; then are
you fit for a walk toward your Game. If you are directly between the Wind and
the Fowl, they will be apt to scent you; therefore it is best to go against the
wind, or aside it: it is better to shoot at one side of them, than before or
behind them; for if you break a Wing, you are sure of that Fowl.

It Is best to get as much shelter as you can by Hedges, Banks or Trees: for the
sight or smell of a man raises them, whatever danger of Hawks or any thing else
be near.

But if they are so shie, and the place so free from shelter, that
Stalking-horse.
there be no way to come at them fairly, then you must lead forth your
Stalking-horse, being some Old Jade trained up for that purpose, and that will
be led in your hand as you please, and not startle much at the report of a Gun;
behind whose shoulders you must shelter your self, and take your aim before
his shoulders, and under his neck, which is better than under his belly.

If you have not such a Beast ready, you may make an Artificial Artificial
Stalking horse.
one of any old Canvas, in shape like a Horse feeding on the ground. You may
make it double, and stuff it; or single, and painted of a brown color like a
Horse: Let it be made on a sharp stick, that you may fix it into the ground as
you have occasion, when you take your Level.

It must be so light, that you may carry it in one hand, and high enough to
conceal your body from the Fowl. You may also make an Artificial Ox or Cow,
which you may use for a change, that when your Horse is discovered through much
use, you may change for the other, and so make your Sport dure the longer: Or
you may make Artificial Stags or Bucks with their real horns on them, which
will be best in such grounds where those Creatures frequent, and with whom the
Fowl are more familiar.

You may either make the representation of a Tree in Canvas, Artificial Trees.
and painted like one, and so spread with small sticks that it may somewhat
resemble a Tree, or you may with many Boughs so form a Tree, that it may
shelter you from the view of the Fowl, making it with a Spike at the bottom,
that it may stick into the ground when you aim at your Game.

A short Digression concerning Decoy-Ponds.

Falling into this discourse concerning Waterfowl, I cannot omit to give you
some encouragement to prosecute this most engrossing way of taking them by
Decoys; that, which unless seen or known, may seem incredible, how a few subtle
Fowl should be able to draw, decoy, or trapan such multitudes of their own
Kind into a known Snare, and there leave them to their unfortunate ends; such
unnaturalness being not to be parallelled in any other Creature whatsoever.
They are a peculiar Species of that kind of Fowl, and are from the Egg trained
up to come to hand. The manner of doing it, and the making of the Pond, and the
several apartments belonging unto it, requires a skilful Artist, and not
Book-directions.

That they are of considerable advantage, is not to be doubted, there being
many of them erected in the Maritime parts of this Kingdom, the gain whereof is
from the vast numbers of them taken in the Wintertime, which are supplied from
the more Northern Regions, whence the Frost, Ice and Snow, banish them into the
more Southern. The Decoys flying abroad light into their company, and soon
become acquainted with them, and allure them, being strangers; and they willing
to follow them in hopes of good quarters, are by these Decoys brought into the
very place, where they become sufficient reward to the owner of the Decoy, and
great supply to the adjacent Markets.

I may also subjoyn, that in those Countries where the Wilde-Duck To find
Duck-Eggs.
breeds, you may go into the Fens, Marshes, or places with a Spaniel, or
other Beating-dog; and where the Dog puts up any Duck, or you otherwise find a
Nest with many Eggs in it, in the Month of March, before Sitting-time, you may
take them away out of the Nest with an Iron Ladle (lest you handle or breathe
on the Eggs, and the Duck by your scent forsake her Nest) leaving two or three
in it, to encourage her to lay again there; which she will do, it being their
nature to lay till the Nest be full: So once a week you may fetch them away,
taking the oldest away as near as you can. Let the handle of your Ladle be of
wood, about two or three foot long, that you may not go too near. These Eggs
may you set under your Hens or Ducks at home, the increase whereof are much to
be preferred to the Eggs of tame Ducks: only observe, that if they have
opportunity, they will take their leave of you, unless you have places secure
for them to feed in; for the Bird it is of the nature of the Egg, and will be
wild when old enough to take wing, or has the opportunity of a Stream to
carry it away. But if you have convenience to make you a Duck-house and
Duck-ponds, with convenient Receptacles for them to lay their Eggs in, and
secure their Brood, they will never forsake you, but make that place where they
were bred their place of refuge, and constant abode by day, although they prey
abroad in the night. They will also, much after the manner of the Decoys, bring
many to them in the Wintertime.

SECT. VII. Of taking Land-Fowl.
Those that are usually termed Land-Fowl, are such that live and make their
haunts generally in the Woods, Fields, Heaths, etc. as the Pheasant, Partridge,
Poults, Quails, Rails, Wood-pigeons, Black-birds, Throstles or Thrushes,
Field-fares, Larks, Wheat-ears, etc. all which are diversely taken and ensnared.
The most part of them, by the cunning and skill of the Fowler, are shot with a
Fowling-piece, either perched by a Dog, or otherwise, or flying, wherein many
have a very excellent Faculty, more rarely missing that way than perched; which
by practice may be easier attained unto, than by any Rules or Precepts.

Any Fowl that gather together many in a flight, may be taken Of taking Fowl by
Day-Nets.
in Nets by day; as Pigeons, Larks, Sparrows, Crows, Rooks, etc. and that
either by baiting some place for them in their usual haunts, or by laying the
Net in such haunts, and wheedling them in by a Stale, or some other enticing
way. The manner of setting and placing such Draw-net you have before described;
only you must have the Mashes, and the length and depth of your Net,
proportionable to the Game you design to take.

If you place these Nets for Larks, the season is from August Of taking Larks
by Day-Nets.
to November: the earlier you set them in the morning, the better; and the
brighter the Sun, and the milder the Air, the better will your sport be.

The open, plain and Champion-lands, are the places for this sport, especially
on the Barley-edishes.

The only way to entice the Lark into your snare, is to place in the middle of
the Verge of your Net an Instrument made to move nimbly, by plucking it with a
small line or packthread to and fro; on which should be fixed some pieces of
Looking-glass, that by the continual whirring motion of it, the glittering of
the Looking-glass by the reflection of the Sun in the eye of the Lark, allureth
her down to the Net, especially if there be a Stale.

When one or two are in the compass of your Net, let them alone until they
attract more company to them: Preserve some of them alive that you take, for
Stales.

But if you cannot conveniently get a live Stale, shoot a Lark, A dry Stale.
and draw out his Intrails, and dry him in an Oven in his Feathers, with a
stick thrust through him, to preserve him in a posture convenient: This Stale
may serve near as well as a living one. Thus may you make Stales of any sorts
of Birds, and keep them by you without any daily charge or trouble as living
Stales put you to.

There is another way of taking the timorous Lark by a Day-net, Another way to
take Larks by a Day-Net, called, Daring of Larks.
made in form of a Scoop-net that they usually take up Fish withal out of
Stews; which Net you must make of the finest thread; or you may make a small
Trammel-net to draw over them: having either of these Nets ready, then with a
Hobby, either dead or living, (or any other Hawk will serve indifferently well)
go into the Fields, where Larks usually are about Harvest, and beat them up
with a Spaniel, and observe where they pitch: Then hold up your Hawk as high as
you can, the sight whereof will cause the Lark to crouch very close, that you
may cover her with either Net; for she is so fearful of the Hobby, that about
this season preys on that Bird, that she will suffer you almost to take her
with your hand, rather than adventure her self in the Air. This sport lasts
till about Michaelmas, at which time the Hobby leaves this Country, or that
Exercise; and then the Lark is more confident.

If you cannot, through want of time or skill, accomplish To take Birds with
the Low-Bell.
your ends in this Pleasure or Recreation by day, you may more easily do it in
the night several ways: If in Champion and level Countries, then by a Low-bell,
from the end of October, until the Birds begin to couple toward the Spring:
And in the darkest nights, or at least the dark time of the night, your Bell
must have a hollow, deep, and doleful sound. Your Net must be about twenty
yards deep, and so broad as you can conveniently manage it: Then go into the
stubble-Fields, where the Birds usually take up their Night-quarters; the
Wheat-Edish is the best. He that carries the Bell must go foremost, tolling the
Bell very mournfully, and not too hard; then let the Net follow, being
supported at each corner, and on the sides; and when you come where you think
the Game lies, pitch your Net, no noise being hitherto heard but that of the
Bell: then light your Straw, or Torches, at the Coals or Candle carried in a
Dark-Lanthorn, by one to that purpose, and beat the ground, and make a noise;
and the sight of the Fire or light will make them instantly rise, and be
entangled in the Net: Then put out your lights, and keep your usual silence,
and proceed as before. Thus may you take Partridge, Rails, Quails, Larks, etc.

You may also take the same sorts of Fowl by night with a To take Birds with
the Trammel only.
Trammel, being a Net longer than that you use with the Lowbell, the lower part
of it plumbed with Lead loose on the ground, the upper part supported at each
end about three foot high; and so trailed along those grounds you expect your
Game on. At each side of the Net carry Wisps of Straw burning, or Links, and
let some beat the ground with long Poles; which will cause the Birds to rise
against the Net.

There is also a way to take Birds in the Nightime, that Bat-fowling.
roost or perch in Trees and Hedg-rows, which is called Batfowling. The manner
is thus: When you come to the place where you expect your Sport, light your
Straw or Torches, and beat the Bushes or Hedg-rows, and the Birds will
instantly fly toward the flames; where you may take them either with Nets at
the end of Poles, or beat them down with Brushes made with Boughs at the end of
Poles, or by carrying large boughs limed with Bird-lime to entangle them. This
Sport is to be used when the weather is extreme dark, and with great silence
till the lights are burning; for they are amazed at the light, being every way
else very dark, and fly to the very flames; so that you may take them as you
please.

The manner of using Bird-lime you have before in this Chapter; To take small
Birds with Lime-twigs.
but for the taking of small Birds, the best way is to take a large bough of
Birch, Willow, or suchlike Tree; prick and trim it clean from all superfluity,
that the Twigs may be smooth; lime the branches very well, but not too thick
with the Lime: then place this Bough in such place where those Birds usually
resort that you design to take, standing like a Tree; and place your self at
some convenient distance undiscovered, imitating either with your mouth, or
some Bird-call, the Notes of the Birds you aim at, which you must by practice
learn; which will invite the Birds to the Tree you have prepared for them. Thus
from Sunrising to ten of the Clock, and from one till near Sunset, may you
use this Sport.

Or you may lay small Twigs limed, and about three or four inches long, in
places where the Birds haunt; or stick them on the tops of Hemp-cocks or
Wheat-sheaves, or stick small Boughs among Pease, which the small Birds will
suddenly pitch upon; which will be a means to lessen the number of those
destroyers of Corn, Grain, Seed, etc. But if you use a Stale of one or two
living Night-bats, placing them aloft, that the Birds may gaze at them; or an
Owl, which is the better of the two, most sorts of Birds will draw toward her,
and so fall into your Snare: A dried Owl will serve for want of a living one.

Also in the Wintertime the Field-fares and Bow-thrushes, To take Field-fares,
or Bow-Thrushes.
which usually fly in great Flocks, are easily taken, by liming two or three
large boughs, and fixing them on the top of some tall Tree, and placing in them
two or three dried Stales of that kind, and beat the Fields adjacent where
those Birds feed, and they will in great Flights take to that Tree where your
Stales are, to your great pleasure and profit.

SECT. VIII. Of taking Fowl with Baits.
Land-fowl, as Doves, Pigeons, Rooks, Choughs, and suchlike, To take Land-Fowl
with Baits.
may be taken with Baits; as by boiling Wheat, Barley, Pease, or other Grain in
water, with good store of Nux Vomica; and when they are boiled, almost ready to
burst, take them out and let them cool, and scatter this Grain where these
Birds haunt; and it is said, that by eating of it they will fall as dead, that
you may take them with your hand: if you boil smaller Seeds, you may take
smaller Birds by the same way.

They also say, that the said Grains or Seeds steeped in the Lees of Wine, will
work the same effect; which if it does, it is much the cleanlier way, and does
not infect the Bird with that poisonous quality, as does the Nux Vomica.

It is also said, that Bellenge, Leaves, Roots and all, cleansed very To take
Waterfowl with Baits.
well, and steeped in clear running water for twenty four hours, and boiled in
the same water till the water be almost consumed: Then when it is cold, this
Plant being taken and laid in the haunts where Wilde-geese, Duck, Mallard,
Bustard, or any other Fowl affecting the water usually frequent, that these
Fowl will feed on it, and be stupefied or drunk therewith; and the more, in
case you add a little Brimstone in the Concoction. But this is left to the
experience of those that know the Plant it is Virtues, and the enticing quality
it has to invite the Fowl to taste it.

SECT. IX. Of taking some sorts of Fowl.
Thus have I given you a hint of the diverse ways of taking Fowl in general; but
something more may be said as to the particular ways used in taking some sorts
of Fowl, that are not proper for any other: As in taking the Pheasant, much
skill is To take the Pheasant with Nets.
used and employed in taking him, being the best of all Land-fowl that are
wild. The one way is, after you have found their haunts, which are usually in
young Copses, where you must carefully view the several places, and by that
means may find them, Young and Old together. Provide your self with a
Pheasant-call, and learn all their distinct Notes; and having a Net made of
blew or green thread, about sixteen or eighteen foot long, and seven foot broad,
verged with small Cord, go into the Woods where these Fowl are, and make use of
your Call first softly; and so increase your Note, until you hear them answer;
then approach by degrees toward them, until you are in view: then spread your
Net with as much secrecy and silence as you can, at some distance from the
ground, fixing the one end to the ground, and holding the Line in your hand,
withdraw your self to some convenient distance, and use your Call again; and
when you perceive the Pheasant's under your Net, then rise up and show your
self; and as the Pheasants rise, they are entangled in your Net.

When you have found an Eye of Pheasants, and their rode To drive young
Pheasants.
or tract in the Copses where they usually run, then place your Nets hollow,
loose, and circular-wise, that when the Birds are in, the Nets may fall on them
and entangle them: Then with a Driver, being a bundle of Wands or Rods, a
little stir the Bushes or Trees, making some noise, the young Pouts will then
run forward; and as they stand, you must still keep raking with your Driver
gently, only to frighten them forward, until you have driven them under your
Nets. You must be sure to conceal your self from the sight of them, and not
drive them too hastily, lest they struggle abroad, and hide themselves where
you cannot find them.

In the Winter-season, when the leaves are off the Trees, then To take
Pheasants with Lime-twigs.
may you take these Birds with Lime-twigs, either stuck fast in the ground, or
laid loose in the Paths where they usually frequent; then with your Call,
keeping your place where you first set your self, you may induce them to come
toward you, and be entangled in the Twigs: when one is entangled by her
fluttering, she will go near to entangle all the rest by their coming to assist
her. It will be necessary to have a Spaniel at hand, lest any of them escape
with the Twigs.

The most usual Method of taking this Fowl, is by a Spaniel To perch Pheasants.
that is brought up to the Sport, which will hunt after them; and when he has
discovered a Pheasant, she will immediately take to a Tree, at which the
Spaniel will bay; whereby you have notice (if within hearing) where the
Pheasant is, whose nature is to eye the Dog, knowing her self to be out of his
reach, and not to regard any other danger, though never so near, that you may
command her at pleasure with your Fowling-piece.

Next unto the Pheasant the Partridge is preferred to any To take Partridges.
Land-fowl, and is to be taken diverse ways: Their haunts are easily known;
scarce a Carter or Day-labourer that uses the Fields, but can tell you where
these Birds usually resort; but to find the Covey in such haunt, is the
difficulty: some are so ingenious they can do it by the eye, only
distinguishing their color from the earth; others by a Call, imitating their
Notes at their Juking-time, which is usually in the Morning, and in the Evening.

Having discovered them, draw forth your Trammel-Net, and With the Trammel-Net.
take a large circumference, with a good round pace and careless eye, nearer
and nearer toward the Birds, until your Nets are trimmed and fitted for your
purpose, and you within the Nets length of them; then prick down the stick to
which one end of the Net is fastened, and walk round till you cover them; then
let down your Net, and rouse them up, that they may be entangled.

Having a good Setting-dog well taught and at command, he To take Partridges
with the help of the Setting-dog.
will soon discover to you where the Covey lies: then trim your Nets, as before
is directed, and cover them. If there are two of you together, the one may hold
one end of the Line, and the other the other end of it; and so draw the Net
over them.

There is a very pleasant way of driving Partridges into a Tunnel-net; To drive
Partridges.
which when you have discovered the Covey, you must place beyond them, having
the wind with you, that you may drive them with the wind. The Net must have
two long wings, extending each way wide and upwards toward the Birds, a little
hovering over: then take your Artificial Stalking-horse, and covering your face
with something dark blew, or green, you may easily drive them before the wind
into the Net; the sides whereof will direct them into the Tunnel, where you are
sure of them.

As you were directed for the Pheasant, so may you lay limed To take Partridges
with Birdlime.
straws, cut off between knot and knot, in the haunts of these Birds; and with
your Call draw them toward you, that in their way they may fall foul of your
limed straws: As soon as the one is entangled, all the rest will be quickly
after; for they run together like a Brood of Chickens, and will so besmear one
the other, that few of them will escape.

The usual way of insnaring any manner of wild Creature, To take Wood-cocks.
is to understand what they most delight in, either for food or exercise; and
therein to place your design in betraying or insnaring them. As for the
Wood-cock, he is a Bird that is somewhat troublesome to discover, whereby to
command him by a Fowling-piece; and in his place of feeding tedious to take, by
reason there goes but few in a Company: Therefore where they usually haunt, it
is observed, that they take a great deal of pleasure in flying in the
Nightime through open places in tall Woods, especially in a dim
Moon-light-night: So that several persons where they have thick Woods standing
on some brow To take them in a Cock-road.
of a Hill, have cut a passage straight athwart the Hill, through which the
Cocks in the Nightime fly to and fro for their pleasure, and will, if any
near, draw to that place on purpose for that Exercise: Between which Trees if
you place a large and fine Net before Night, you will be sure in the Evening to
have them entangled in your Net, as they endeavor to fly through their usual
Road, where one ought to attend to take them as soon as in the Net.

There is scarce any Bird that flies, but there is some peculiar way of
discovering or insnaring him, different from another: as the Quail, or Rail, by
Pipes or Calls; the Moor-poot, or Health-poult, discovered by their eye, and
several others. Which several ways we leave to the more Experienced, and to the
several practices of the several places where they usually frequent.

Of Fishing.
AS the Art of taking Fowl is very necessary to be known of most Countrymen; so
also is the Art of Fishing, especially to such as live near to great Rivers,
where they are bred and fed without any charge, labor or damage to the
Countrymen that inhabit by such Rivers; and so become very profitable to those
parts through which such Rivers run, and to those that have the privilege and
skill to take them.

Fish are diverse ways taken; either by Nets, Pots, or Engines, by Angling, or
by stupifying Baits, enticing or alluring objects; and these ways are used
either by day or by night: Also at different seasons of the year, the Fish as
well as Fowl having their seasons; of all which we shall give you some hint.

SECT. I. Of taking Fish by Nets, Pots, or Engines.
The usual way of Fishing by Nets is of the greatest advantage, To Fish with
Nets.
and so of greatest destruction to those watery Animals, which if not moderately
used, destroys whole Rivers of them; to prevent which, there are several good
Laws made, though seldom executed. And could all men that are concerned in this
Exercise agree to neglect the use of Nets but for two or three years, the Fish
would increase innumerably, that in many years after they could not be
destroyed; which being very unlikely, yet it were feasible to compel all
Fishermen that they take no young Fish, nor Fish in their Spawning Months: for
if they were permitted to Spawn but once before they are taken, they would
sufficiently stock the Rivers where they are; for the destruction of Fry and
Spawns is the ruin of the Fishing in most Rivers.

The most useful Nets in great Waters are the Trammel and With the Trammel or
Sieve.
Sieve; which, according to their Mesh, may be used for most sorts of Fish: The
making and manner of using them are known to most Fishermen.

The most pleasant and recreative way is with the Casting-net, With the
Casting-Net.
spreading like a Cloak, and verged round with Plummets, that over whatsoever
Fish it is thrown, it brings them to your hand. This Net is either thrown off
from the Banks side, or from a Boat, according as the water will give you
leave: If the remarkable places that you intend a fling at were baited
beforehand, your Sport would be the better.

In smaller Rivers, where there are Roots or Stems of Trees, With the
Shore-Net, or Poke-Net.
under which the Fish usually seek for shelter in the daytime, the Net
vulgarly called the Shore-net, which is a Net broad and open before, about five
foot, and ending backwards in a long and narrow Cod. The forepart of this Net
is fixed to a semicircular Rod, and to the string that strains the two Extremes
of that Rod, in form of a Bow-string: In the use of it, you pitch the straight
side of the Net downwards against the place or shelter where you suppose the
Fish are; which Net you hold strongly against the place, by the help of a Stail
or handle that is fixed athwart the Bow, and extends down to the String.
Whilst you thus hold the Net, your Companion with a Pole stirs in the place of
refuge; and what Fish are there will suddenly bolt out into your Net. By this
means, not only Fish in small Rivers, as Trouts, Humbers, etc. are caught, but
Salmon also in great Rivers, where the water is thickened by the Tide; the
Fisherman standing against the water with the Cod of the Net between his legs,
and as soon as he perceives the Fish bolt into the Net, he forthwith lifts it
up.

In several great Rivers where shelter is scarce, many have set With Fish-pots.
large Pots made of Osier, with bars in them, that when the Fish are in them,
driven either by the Current, or seeking therein for shelter, they could not
get out again. They are also laid in swift Currents, and at Mill-tails, and
suchlike places, for the taking of Eels, which in dark nights, warm weather,
and thick waters, run down with the stream in great plenty.

In great Rivers, the greatest destruction of Salmon, and also With Wears.
advantage, is made by Wears erected in the Main Stream, that when those Fish
whose nature is to swim against the stream, and to spring or leap over any
natural obstacle that shall oppose them, by their endeavor to raise themselves
over these Wears, try to leap over, they fall short, and are taken in Grates
set at the foot of them for that purpose. Many other Engines there are to
intercept their passage up against the waters, none of which are very injurious
to the increase of that Fish, were they discontinued in the Autumnal season; at
which time those Fish stem the swiftest Currents, that they may lay their Spawn
in the small shallow streams, which Nature has instructed them to do, it being
the sweetest meat other Fish can feed, and so consequentially the best bait for
a nimble and greedy Angler: At which season those that do escape these
destructive Wears, are too often met with by the ignorant Rustic, who with his
Spear commonly assaults them int he Shallows; and after these Fish have
Spawned, and their Spawn converted into the young brood, the Spring following
they naturally descend with the stream, and by greedy Millers and others are
commonly the greatest part of them intercepted in their Pots; yea, sometimes in
so great quantities, that for want of a present Market they have given them to
their Swine. All which are the principal causes of the great scarcity of that
Fish in these parts of England.

There is a sort of Engine, by some termed a Hawk, made almost With Hawks.
like unto a Fish-pot, being a square frame of Timber fitted to the place you
intend to set it in, and wrought with wire to a point almost, so that what Fish
soever go through the same, cannot go back again. These placed the one where
the River enters into your Land, the other where it runs out, with the Points
of each toward you, any Fish whatsoever that moves with or against the water,
when they are once within the Hawks, cannot get back again. In case the River
be broad, you may place two or three of these at an end in it; a frame of
Timber being set in the water that it break not out on either side, nor under,
lest your Fish escape. These Hawks ought to be made moveable, to take off or
on, as you see occasion.

But in case you are in danger of Land-floods, or that you have The way of
making a Piscary.
not the command of the Land on both sides, or of suchlike impediment; then may
you cut a large Channel out of the sides of the River, and as deep as the
bottom of the River, with some part of the Current through it, and place these
Hawks at each end of it, the better to entice the Fish into it. At some
convenient distance from the River, and in the Piscary, on the top of a stake
pitched in the midst of the water, and a little above the water, fix a
Laton-case, in form of a Cylinder, about three or four inches Diameter, and
twelve inches long, in which set a Candle burning in dark nights, the light
whereof shines only upwards and downwards: it must be open at the top, because
it preserves it burning: the downward light intices the Fish into your Piscary;
so that no Fish passes up nor down the River, but will seek their way through
the Hawk into the light. By this very means I have known a Piscary well stored
in a few nights.

There is a Net made round, and at each end a Hawk, that being A Hawk-Net.
set in the water and depressed by Plummets or Stones, and having in the
inside thereof shining shells, or red cloth, or suchlike inticements, the Fish
will seek their way in, but cannot get out.

As for Fishing in the night by fire, and stupifying of Fish with unwholesome
Baits, or with Lime, or suchlike, being ways used by evil-minded persons, that
rather destroy the properties of other men, than lawfully use them for their
necessary subsistence; I shall decline any advice or directions in that kind,
and prosecute that most lawful, just, and honest way of Angling, so much
celebrated by the Ingenious of every degree.

SECT. II. Of Angling.
There is not any exercise more pleasing nor agreeable to a truly sober and
ingenious man, than this of Angling; a moderate, innocent, salubrious, and
delightful exercise: It wearieth not a man overmuch, unless the waters lie
remote from his home: it injureth no man, so that it be in an open large water;
he being esteemed a Beast rather than a man that will oppose this exercise:
neither does it any wise debauch him that uses it: The delight also of it,
rouzes up the Ingenious early in the Spring-mornings, that they have the
benefit of the sweet and pleasant Morning-air, which many through sluggishness
enjoy not; so that health (the greatest Treasure Mortals enjoy) and pleasure go
hand in hand in this exercise. What can more be said of it, than that the most
Ingenious most use it?

When you have any leisure days or hours from your ordinary Observations in
Angling.
Profession or employment, you cannot better spend them than in this Innocent
Exercise; wherein observe that your Apparel be No bright Apparel.
not of any bright or frightning color, lest that drive the Fish out of your
reach, or make them timorous.

That you bait the place you intend to Angle in, with such Bait the stream or
place.
things the Fish you aim at generally affect, for several days before you
Angle, if it be a standing or quiet water; but if a swift stream, there is no
great need of any; but if you do, let it be but a few hours before, or just at
your Angling-time, and that above your Hook.

The best time to provide Rods and Stocks is in December or Provide good Rods.
January, before the rising of the Sap; when gathered, dry them by degrees, in
a smoaky place is best; they are better to use at sixteen months old than
sooner. To preserve them, rub them over with Linseed-oyl, or Sweet-butter never
salted, twice or thrice a year: If your Stock be hollow, fill the bore with
Oil, and let it stand twenty four hours, and then pour it out again; this will
preserve it from injury.

If the top of your Rod be brittle or decayed, you may whip on a piece of
Whalebone made round and taper, which will be better than the natural top.

In making your Lines observe, that for most sorts of Fish the The Line.
Hair-line is the best, because it is not so apt to snarl as other Lines, and
will yield to the streining of the Fish very much before it will break; which
is a very great advantage in the taking of a stubborn Fish. Let the hair be
round you make your Line withal, and as near as you can of a size: Also you may
color your hair of a sorrel, gray, or green color; but then they are a little
weakened by the coloring.

It is good to provide your self with all sorts of Hooks; the The Hook.
smallest to take the smaller Fish withal, and the greater the greater Fish.
Also with hooks peculiar for the Jack or Pike, and hooks to lay for Eels.

Your Flotes may be made of Quills, or of Cork and Quills, The Flote and
Plummet.
which are the best, and least offensive. Let your Plummet wherewith you sound
the depth of the water be of Lead, about the weight of a Musket-bullet; which
is very convenient to know the depth of the water by.

According to the nature of the Fish, so you must provide Baits.
your self with baits. Herein observe, that if you open the first Fishes Maw
that you take, you may see what that Fish most delights in for that season. If
you use Pasts for baits, you must add Flax or Wool, to keep the Paste from
washing off the hook. The Eyes of the Fish you take are good baits for many
sorts of Fish; for the Trout, flies and Palmer-worms made Artificially, are the
best baits in clear water, the season being observed wherein each of them is to
be used: Any baits anointed with Gum of Ivy dissolved in Oil of Spike, or with
the Oil of Ivy-berries, or the Oil of Polypodie of the Oak mixed with
Turpentine, will be great inticements to Fish to bite.

It is best fishing in a River a little disturbed with Rain, or in Seasons for
Angling.
Cloudy weather; the South-winde is the best, the West indifferent, the East
the worst: but if the weather be warm, and the Sky Cloudy, they will bite in
any wind. Keep your self as far from the Waterside as you can, and fish down
the stream. In a swift stream where the bottom is hard, and not too deep, if
you go into the middle of it and cast your Fly up against the stream, the Trout
that lies upon the Fin in such strong Currents, and discerns you not, being
behind him, presently takes your bait.

In March, April and September, and all the Winter-moneths, it is best fishing
in a clear, serene, and warm day; but in the Summertime, in the mornings,
evenings, and coolest Cloudy weather.

After a clear Moon-shiny night, if the day succeeding prove Cloudy, is a very
good time for Angling: for it is the nature of most Fish to be fearful to stir
in bright nights; and so being hungry, if the weather in the morning prove
Cloudy, they will bite eagerly.

To the intent that you may not labor in vain, I shall give Seasons not to
Angle in.
you a hint of such times that Fish delight not in biting; though some that
have more than ordinary skill, may possibly take a few at any time.

In the extremity of heat, when the Earth is parched with Drought, there is
little sport to be obtained; nor in frosty weather, the Air being clear, unless
in the Evening; nor in high winds; nor in sharp North or East-winds; nor
immediately after Spawning-time, their hunger being abated, and the Fish not
worth taking: Nor yet after a dark night, for then the greater Fish have been
abroad, and satiated themselves; but the little Fish will then bite best,
having absconded themselves all night for fear of the greater.

The greatest Fish bite best in the night, being fearful to stir in the day:
Therefore that is the best season to Angle for them.

SECT. III. Of Angling for Salmon and Trout.
The Salmon and Trout are Fish much of a Complexion and Nature, different in
their seasons from other Fish: The way of Angling for them is much after the
same manner.

The Salmon biteth best in the Summer-moneths, about three Salmon.
of the Clock in the afternoon: He keeps not to one haunt, but swims generally
in the deepest and broadest parts of the River, near the ground; and is caught
with Worm, Fly, or Minnow. The Garden-worm is an excellent bait for a Salmon,
if kept in Moss about twenty days; which will scour them, and make them tough
and clear.

You may also troul for a Salmon as you do for a Pike, with a Trouling-rod and
line.

Your Artificial Flies for a Salmon must be larger than for a Trout, and the
wings and tail long.

In Angling for a Salmon at ground, put two or three Worms at a time on the
Hook, and give him time to gorge the bait.

The Trout is also taken with Worm, Minnow, or Fly. To Trout.
fish for them in the night, which is the best time for the great Trouts, take
two great Worms of equal length, and put them on your Hook; cast them at a good
distance from you, and draw them to you again on the top of the water, not
letting them sink, and give the Trout time to gorge his bait. Instead of these
Worms, you may use a black Snail, or a piece of black Velvet, which is as well:
They bite in the night best in the still Deeps, but then unusually in the
Streams.

If you bait with a Minnow, you must place it so on the Hook, that the Minnow
must run round as you draw it toward you; and to that end you must have a
Swivel on your line, lest the running round of the Minnow over-twist your Line.
The same may you do for a Salmon or Pike.

If you bait with Flies, or Palmers Natural or Artificial, be sure to observe
the season what Palmer or Fly they most delight in at that time; that take, or
imitate it as near as you can.

SECT. IV. Of Angling for the Pike and Perch.
These are two sorts of white Fish that Spawn in the Spring early, and are
greedy Fish of Prey, especially the Pike, which will prey on its own Kind.

You may take the Pike by hanging your Line to a Tree on the Pike.
side of the River, with a living bait on the Hook, as a Minnow, Dace, Roach,
or yellow Frog; but let not the Line hang at the full length, but contracted
into a cleft stick, that when the Pike bites he may easily draw it out, and
have time and scope enough to pouch his bait.

Or you may Trowl for him; which must be with a very long Line wound up at the
handle of your Rod on a small Winch or Windlace; and at the top of the Rod,
which is stubbed, the Line must go through a Ring, that when the Fish has
taken the bait, he may, by your letting him have Line enough, gorge his bait,
and hang himself. Your Line must be strong, and armed with small Wire next the
Hook, about seven or eight inches.

You may Fish at Snap with him as with other Fish, if you please; but your
Tackling must be very strong.

A Pike bites at all baits except the Fly, and bites best at three in the
Afternoon, in clear water, with a gentle Gale, from Midsummer to the end of
Autumn. In Winter he bites all day long: In the Spring he bites in the Morning
and Evening.

The best time to take the Perch, is when the Spring is far Perch.
spent; for then you may take all near you at one standing.

His baits are the Minnow, little Frog, or a small Worm: He bites well all the
day in cloudy weather, but chiefly from eight to ten, and from three to six. He
also bites at almost any bait.

SECT. V. Of Angling for standing water, or Pond-fish.
The Fish that are most usual in standing waters or Fish Ponds, are the Carp
and the Tench: Some there are that are common to both, as the Bream, Dace,
Roach, Eel, and Perch. Angling for Pond-fish is the most easy of any way; and
where there are a good stock, much sport there is.

The Carp is the best of all fresh water Fish, and will live the Carp.
longest, except the Eel, out of the water. This Fish is very subtle, and
biteth but seldom; and that in warm weather, cloudy; early in the morning, or
late in the evening.

The baits for a Carp, are either Worms or Pasts. A Paste made up of
Bean-flower, Honey, and a little Assafetida, has proved very well. Others have
prescribed Bean-flower, mingled with the flesh of a Cat cut small, and beaten
very well in a Mortar with Honey, so long, till the whole is so tough to hang
on a Hook without washing off. A little Wool added in the making of it up,
will make it hold the better.

Gentles anointed with Honey, and put on the Hook with a piece of Scarlet dipped
in the same, is esteemed the best of all baits for the Carp.

The Tench, for his sliminess, accounted the Physician of Tench.
Fishes, delights only in standing waters, and especially amongst Weeds, Flags,
etc. In the hottest weather, early and late, and all the night, this Fish
delights most to bite.

He delights in the same baits as does the Carp. The stronger the Pasts are of
Assafetida, or other Gums or Oils, the sooner he will bite.

The Dace is commonly a River-fish, yet does very well in Dace.
Fish Ponds, if any think it worth their costs and pains to keep them there:
But in either place, the best baits for them are flies, whereof they affect the
Ant-fly above the rest. For ground-baits, the Grub that is found in plowed
grounds, Gentles, and the young brood of Wasps, or suchlike, are very good:
Small Worms, Pasts, and suchlike, they will not refuse.

The Roach is much of the same nature as is the Dace, but Roach.
more usual in standing waters than the other: Worms, and other ground-baits,
are most proper for them.

Though the Bream be found in some Rivers, yet is most usual Bream.
and best in Ponds or standing waters. The best time for Angling for them, is
from the end of July until Autumn; for in June and beginning of July they
Spawn, and are not in their season. The best bait for them is the Red Worm that
usually lies at the root of the Dock: They also bite at Pasts, Wasps, Flies,
Grasshoppers, etc.

As for the Perch, you have directions before concerning the taking of him in
Rivers, the same will serve in Ponds.

The Eel is a Fish that delights in obscure places, whilst any Eels.
light either of the Sun or Moon appears, being a sweet Fish, and a prey to
Fowl as well as Fish, but in the night time, and the darker the night the
better. This Fish wanders abroad out of her lurking places, and preys on any
bait that is fleshie, either Worms, Snails, raw Flesh, Frogs, young Birds, or
the like.

You may Angle for them in the night in standing waters, as By Angle.
you do for other Fish, and they will bite, so that you lie near, or on the
ground.

Also you may bait many Hooks overnight with Worms, and With Bank-books.
fasten them on the Bank-sides: Let the bait lie in the stream on the ground
all night, and you will have almost on every Hook an Eel, so that you be there
at daybreak in the morning to take them; for as soon as daylight appears they
will unhook themselves, though it be to the tearing to pieces their own
Intrails. You must be sure that your Hooks be strong, and your Lines may be of
good, fine and strong handle-bound Pack-thread.

Eels commonly abscond themselves under stones in stony waters, By Sniggling.
and under Timber, Planks, or suchlike; about Mills, Wears, Floodgates,
Bridges, etc. in the daytime, where you may take them by this way of
Sniggling; that is, by baiting a strong Hook on a short but strong Line with a
large Garden-worm: Then with a stick cleft at the top, fasten therein the Line
near the Hook, and guide the stick into the places where you think the Eels
are, and thrust it up and down, and you shall be sure, if any Eel be there, as
soon as she feels the stick, she will turn and bite; but be sure you pull not
too hard, lest you tear out your ^old.

There is a way of taking Eels by Bobbing; which is thus: By Bobbing.
Take of the large Garden-worms well scoured, and with a Needle run some strong
twisted Silk through them from end to end, and wrap them oftentimes about a
board; then tie them together with the ends of the Silk, that they may hang in
Hanks, and fasten them at the end of a small cord, with a Plummet of Lead,
about three quarters of a pound, a little above the Bob: The other end of the
cord fasten to a long Pole, and therewith may you fish in muddy water after a
Rain. When you perceive by moving of your Bob that the Eels do tug at it, then
gently raise them to the surface of the water, and so bring them to Land; for
the Eels being greedy of the Worms, swallow them, and the Silk hangs in their
teeth, that they are easily taken, five or six at a time. Some make up a bundle
of new Hay and Worms together, and so let it down into the water; which the
Eels readily come to, and thrust their heads into the Hay after the Worms, and
by that means are taken. Others take a round Net made fast to a small
Iron-hoop, and let down into the water with a bundle of Worms in the midst;
which when the Eels come unto, by a sudden raising the Hoop, are taken in the
Net: for in some gravelly Tide-waters, Eels, especially the small Grigs, will
seek abroad in the daytime, and give you excellent sport.

SECT. VI. Of Angling for the Barbel, Grailing, Umber, Chevin and Chub.
These Fish are not so Universal as the other before discoursed of; therefore
the less shall be said of them. As for the Barbel, Barbel.
it is a Fish very plentiful in the Trent, and comes in season about the end of
May, and so holds it till near Michaelmas, and has his haunts amongst weedy
and hollow places, amongst Piles and Stakes; is a strong Fish, and must be
taken with very strong tackling: His bait is a very well-scoured Worm, Gentles,
or Cheese steeped in Honey.

The Grailing and Vmber are near alike; they are in season Grailing and Umber.
all the Summer, and are then taken with a large Grasshopper, (the wings being
taken off.) After the Grasshopper is on the Hook, at the point put on a small
Cadworm, and keep your bait in continual motion: Let the Hook be shank't with
Lead, and covered with the bait.

The Vmber is taken with a Fly, as is a Trout.

The Chevin and Chub are common in the Trent, but no very Chevin and Chub.
pleasant Fish: They are in season all the Summer, and are taken with Worms,
Flies, Snails, Cherries, Grasshoppers, Grain, Cheese, etc.

There are many other sorts of small Fish, as the Bleak, Flounder, Small Fish.
Gudgeon, Ruff, Minnow, Loach, and Bullhead: The ways of taking them, for
brevity sake I shall omit.

In the Isle of Wight, and other places Westward, in the Rocks Cormorant
Fishing.
on the Seashore, are great numbers of Cormorants bred, being a large Fowl,
and live only by preying on Fish; and are so dextrous at it, that in the open
Seas they will dive, and swiftly pursue their game, and take and carry them to
their Nests; that the Inhabitants near adjacent do often go to these Rocks, and
furnish themselves with Fish brought thither by them at their breeding-times.
These Birds may be so brought up tame, that they will in our ordinary clear
Rivers dive, and take you as many Trouts, or other Fish, as you please, or the
place affords, putting but a small Collar over the neck of the Fowl, that the
Fish may not pass into her stomach. When you intend for your game, you must
carry her out fasting: put on her Loop or Collar, and let her go into the
water, she will dive, and straightly pursue the Fish she has most mind to,
forward and backward; and when she has caught her game, she gives it a toss
into the Air, and receives it end-wise into her mouth; which will stretch like
the head of a Snake, and admit of a large Fish into her throat, which will stop
at the Collar. Then hold out an Eel to her (which you must carry alive or dead
with you to that purpose) and she will come to your hand, and will by your
assistance disgorge her prey immediately, and to her sport again; and will so
continue, till she has furnished you with as much as you can desire. By this
means may you take more than any other way whatsoever, and exceeds any of the
Sports of Hawking or Hunting.

Kalendarium Rusticum: OR, MONTHLY DIRECTIONS FOR THE HUSBANDMAN.

Being CHAP. XIII.

SHOWING The most Seasonable Times for the performing of his Rural Affairs
Throughout the YEAR.

Operum memor esto tempestivorum
Omnium -- Hesiod.
LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Tho. Dring, in the Year 1675.

THE PREFACE TO THE CALENDAR.
RUri, sicuti in urbe, singula opera sua habent peculiaria tempora: There is a
peculiar time for most Affairs in the World, but more especially for such
Labors and Actions that depend upon the mutable seasons of the Year; which
being duly observed, is no small advantage to the Husbandman: Ephemeridem
habeat quid quoque tempore faciendum, is Florentines advice; that every
Countryman may have his Draught before him to direct him, and reinforce his
memory, that his multitude of occasions may not so far obliterate those things
to his loss and disadvantage, but that he may here daily revive and renew his
necessary intentions, and take Time by the Fore-lock; as Pliny observed,
Frontem Domini plus prodesse quam occipitum; for Time is a thing so precious,
and Occasion so precipitous; and where many things are to be done, Time let
pass, prevents the success of our endeavors, and loss and confusion succeeds;
Semper autem dilator operum vir cum damnis luctatur: It is a very great neglect
in Agriculture to be too late, it brings a considerable damage; like a backward
year that produces a bad Crop, so does a backward Husbandman meet with small
gains. You very rarely find a thriving Husband behind with his Affairs, or a
declining Husband so forward as his Neighbor.

Nudus serito, nudusque arato,
Nudus quoque metito, si quidem tempestiva omnia voles,
Opera far cereris: ut tibi singula
Tempestiva crescant, ne quando interim egens,
Mendices ad alienas domos, nihilque efficias.
It was Hesiod's advice, to Plough, Sow, and Reap in good time, if you expect a
complete reward of your Labors.

But if it be not in every ones power, though he knew the seasons for all
things, to observe them, by reason of the multitude and variousness of business
that flows upon the laborious Husbandman, at some certain times of the year
more than at other, many casualties also intervening; to such it is advised,
that they make use of the next opportunity convenient, to do what before they
have omitted: Yet Cato tells you, Res Rustica sic est, si unum sero feceris,
omnia opera sero facies; neglect one, neglect all.

There are two sorts of Times and Seasons prescribed by the Ancients to be
observed in Agriculture, viz. of the Year, being only of the motion of the Sun
through the Twelve Signs of the Zodiaque, which begets the different Seasons
and Temperatures of the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; and of the Aspects
and state of the Moon and Stars: whereof, and also of several Prognostics of
the mutability, state and condition of the several Seasons, and their Natural
Inclinations, I shall give you at the end of this Calendar a Breviat, and of
such Observations as I have found in several Ancient and Modern Authors
treating of that Subject.

As for the Times and Seasons of the Year, from the beginning to the end
thereof, every day something is to be done by the Husbandman; as was said of a
Gardener, that his work is never at an end, it begins with the Year, and
continues to the next: Annus in opere Rustico absolutus est: yet is it not
every year alike, neither is every place alike; some years, or at least some
seasons of the year, prove more forward by two or three weeks, or more, at one
time than at another: Also the situation of places, either better defended
from, or more obvious to the intemperature of the Air, begets some alterations.
In these, and suchlike cases, the subsequent Rules are to be seasonably applied
by the Judicious Husbandman, according as the season happens to be earlier or
later, or the different situation of places requires.

This Method in general is the same that has been used by the most Ancient
that (I have understood to) have written of Agriculture; and also our Moderns,
as you may observe in Hesiod, Columella, Palladius de Serres, Augustino, Gallo,
Tusser, Markham, Stevenson, and others; and last of all Mr. Evelin his
excellent Kalendarium Hortense, at the end of his Sylva.

I shall endeavor herein to be as brief as I can; I shall add nothing more
than what is necessary, and shall leave out such things that are but little to
our purpose, and shall begin with the major part of our Presidents in the like
case: although the year, in respect of the Suns entrance into Aries, and the
Commencement of the date of the year, begins in March; yet Tusser declines
both, and begins at Michaelmas, it being the usual time for the Farmer to enter
on his Farm, the ground being then more easily cleared of its former stook,
than at any other time. But seeing that it is no very material thing when we
begin, our labor having no end, we will tread the most usual Path, decline
both Extremes, and begin when our days do sensibly lengthen, our hopes revive
of an approaching Summer, and our Almanacks give us a New-years-day.

JANVARY.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 New Years day 2 3 Castor and Pollux rise
in the evening. 4 8 00 4 00 5 6 Twelf-tide. 7 8 Lucida Corona, or the Crown, is
with the Sun. 9 10 Sun in Aqua. The Dog Star rises in the evening. 11 12 13 14
15 16 7 45 4 15 17 18 19 20 21 22 Vincent. 23 24 7 30 4 30 25 Paul's day. 26 27
28 29 30 K. Charles his Martyrdom. 31 7 15 4 45

Mensis difficillimus hic Hybernus; difficilis ovibus, difficilisque hominibus.
THis Month is the rich man's charge, and the poor man's misery; the cold like
the days increase, yet qualified with the hopes and expectations of the
approaching Spring: The Trees, Meadows and Fields are now naked, unless
clothed in white, whilst the Countryman sits at home, and enjoys the fruit of
his past labors, and contemplates on his intended Enterprises. Now is welcome a
cup of good Cider, or other excellent Liquors, such that you prepared the
Autumn before; moderately taken, it proves the best Physic.

A cold January is seasonable: Plough up or fallow the ground you intend for
Pease: water Meadows and Pastures: drain Arable grounds where you intend to sow
Pease, Oats or Barley: rear Calves, Pigs, etc. lay Dung on heaps, carry it on
the Land in frosty weather; on Pasture-land hedge and ditch.

Plant Timber Trees, or any Coppice-wood, or Hedge-wood; and also Quick-sets:
cut Coppices and Hedge-rows; lop and prune greater Trees.

Feed Doves, and repair Dove-houses; cut away Ant-hills, and fill up the holes
in Meadow and Pasture-grounds; gather stones, etc. have special care to Ews and
Lambs; house Calves; Geld young Cattle soon after they are fallen: sow Oats, if
you will have of the best, says old Tusser.

In Janivere Husband that poucheth the Grotes, Otes.

Will break up his Lay, or be sowing of Otes.
Otes sown in Janivere, lay by the Wheat;
In May by the Hay, for Cattle to eat.
PLant Vines, and other Fruit Trees, if the weather be open Garden and Orchard.
and mild; dig and trench Gardens, or other ground for Pease, Beans, etc.
against the Spring: dig Borders, uncover roots of Trees where need is, and add
such Manure to them as they require: you may also, if the weather prove mild,
set Beans and Pease. As yet Roses may be cut and removed.

Prune Orchard-fruits and Vines, so that it be not frosty; nail and trim
Wall-fruits cleanse Trees of Moss in moist weather.

Gather Cions for Graffs, and stick them in the ground; for they will take the
better, being kept some time from the Tree; and at the latter end, if the
weather be mild, you may begin to Graff.

Make your Hot-bed, and sow therein your choice Sallads; sow Colleflowers;
secure your choice Plants and Flowers from the injury of the weather, by
Covers, by Straw, or Dung: Earth up the roots of such Plants the Frosts have
uncovered.

Set Traps to destroy Vermin, where you have or sow such Plants or Seeds that
they injure.

Take Fowl, destroy Sparrows in Barns, and near them; kill the Opes or
Bull-finches that feed on the buds of Fruit Trees.

Dig a Weedy Hop-garden. Hop-garden.


Turn up your Bee-hives, and sprinkle them with warm and Apiary.
sweet Wort dexterously. Also you may remove Bees.

FEBRVARY.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 2 Candlemas. Cor Leonis rises in the
evening. 3 4 5 6 7 8 7 00 5 00 Sun in Pisces. 9 10 11 12 13 14 Valentine. 15 16
6 45 5 15 Cor Hydrae rises in the evening. 17 The Tail of the Lion rises in
the evening. 18 19 Fomahant is with the Sun. 20 21 22 23 6 30 5 30 24 Matthias.
25 26 27 28

Vt sementem feceris, ita and metes. THis is a principal Seed-moneth for such
they usually call Lenten-Grain. This Month is usually subject to much Rain or
Snow: if it prove either, it is not to be accounted unseasonable; the Proverb
being, February fill Dike, with either black or white.

Now sow all sorts of Grey-pease, Fitches, Beans and Oats: Carry out Dung, and
spread it before the Plough, and also on Pasture-ground; this being the
principal Month for that purpose.

Plant Quick-sets newly raised; the Spring being so near, they will not keep
long.

Set Willow-plants, or Pitchers; and also Poplars, Osiers, and other Aquaticks.

Sow Mustard Seed and Hemp Seed, if the Spring prove mild; feed your Swans,
and make their Nests where the Floods reach them not.

Soil Meadows that you cannot overflow or water; catch Moles, and level
Mole-hills.

Also this is the only time for plashing of Quick-sets, and a very good season
for the shrouding or lopping of Trees, or cutting Coppices.

YOu may yet prune and trim Fruit Trees, and cleanse them Garden and Orchard.
from Moss and Cankers. Now is a very good time for grafting the more forward
sort of Fruit Trees, if the weather be temperate.

Your tender Wall-fruit cut not till you think the hard Frosts are over.

Plant also Vines, or any sorts of Fruit Trees in open weather: trim up your
Pallisade-hedges and Espaliers: set Kernels, Nuts, or stones of Fruit, and
other hard seeds.

Lay branches to take root, or place Baskets, etc. of Earth for the branches to
pass through.

Sow Annise, Beans, Pease, Raddish, Parsnips, Carrots, Onions, Parsley,
Spinach, and other hardy Herbs or Seeds, and plant Cabbage-plants: plant out
Colleflowers into warm places: Also plant Liquorice. Yet you may destroy
Sparrows. Now is the time the Bull-finch does the greatest harm to the buds of
Fruit Trees.

Make up your Hot-beds for Melons, Cucumbers, etc. Sow Asparagus. Continue
Vermine-traps, and pick up all the Snails you can find, and destroy Frogs and
their Spawn.

A good time to few Fish Ponds, and take Fish; the most Fish being now in
season.

Now you may, if the weather prove mild, plant Hops, and Hop-garden.
dress them that are out of heart.

Half open your passages for Bees; and now may ye remove Apiary.
them.

MARCH.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 David. 2 6 15 5 45 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 6 00
6 00 Sun in Aries, Equinoctial. 11 Arcturus rises in the evening. 12 13 14 15
16 17 18 5 45 6 15 Calf of the right leg of Boots rises in the evening. 19 20
21 22 Spica Virginis rises in the evening. 23 24 25 5 30 6 30 Lady Day. 26 27
28 29 30 Second Star in the left wing of ^ rises in the evening. 31

Titan does by his presence now revive
Things Sensible, as well as Vegetive.
THe beginning of March usually concludes the nipping Winter, the end initiates
the subsequent welcome Spring; according to the Proverb, March comes in like a
Lion, and goes out like a Lamb. If it prove cold, it is seasonable to check the
pregnant Buds, and forbid them till a more safe and opportune season near
approaching. If this Month prove dry, the Countryman counts it Ominous of a
happy Year for Corn.

March-Dust to be sold, Tusser.

Worth Ransom of Gold.
Let Cattle no longer feed on Meadows nor Marshes you intend to Mow: have
special regard to the Fences, both of Meadow and Corn.

About the end of this Month you may begin to sow Barley, earlier in Clay than
in Sand. You may now roll Wheat, if the weather prove dry: make an end of
sowing all sorts of Pulse. You may now shroud or lop old Trees, and fell
Coppice-wood better than at any other season in the year.

This is the only time for the raising the best brood of Poultry.

It is a good time to set Osiers, Willows, and other Aquaticks: sow the Rye
called March-Rye.

In this Month, and the next, you may sow all sorts of French-Grasses, or new
Hays; as Clover, St. Foyn, etc. Also now sow Hemp and Flax, if the weather be
temperate.

The principal time of the year for the destruction of Moles.

Sow any sort of white Pease, or Hastings.

This is the principal Month in the year for grafting all sorts of Garden and
Orchard.
Fruit Trees. Now cover the roots of all such Trees you laid bare in the Winter
preceding, and remove such young Trees you omitted to remove in the better
season.

Carry Dung into your Gardens, Orchards, etc.

Turn your Fruit in the Room where it lies, but open not yet the Windows.

You may now transplant most sorts of Garden-herbs, Sweet-herbs, and
Summer-flowers; make Hot-beds for Cucumbers, Melons, etc. Saffron also may now
be planted, and Madder.

Now sow Endive, Succory, Leeks, Raddish, Beets, Parsnips, Skirrets, Parsley,
Sorrel, Bugloss, Borrage, Chervil, Sellery, Smallage, Allisanders, etc. Also
Lettice, Onions, Garlic, Orach, Purslain, Turnips, Pease, Carrots, Cabbage,
Cresses, Fennel, Marjerom, Basil, Tobacco, Leeks, Spinach, Marigolds, etc.

Dress up and string your Strawberry-beds; uncover Asparagus-beds, and
transplant Asparagus; slip and plant Artichoaks and Liquorice.

Stake and bind up the weakest Plants against the winds: sow Pinks,
Carnations, etc. In this Month sow Pine-kernels, and the Seeds of all
Winter-greens.

Plant all Garden-herbs and Flowers that have fibrous roots.

Sow choice Flowers that are not natural for our Clime in Hot-beds this Month.

You may now plant Hops; it is a very seasonable time to dress Hop-garden.
them.

Now the Bees sit, keep them close night and morning, if the Apiary.
weather prove ill. You may yet remove Bees.

APRIL.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 2 5 15 6 45 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 5 00 7 00 10
Sun in Taur. 11 12 13 Cauda Leonis sets in the morning. 14 15 16 17 4 45 7 15
18 19 20 21 22 23 St. George. 24 25 Mark Evang. 26 4 30 7 30 Vergiliae, or
Pleiades, rise with the Sun. 27 28 29 30

Diluculo surgere saluberrimum est. THe Mornings now seem pleasant, the Days
long. The Nymphs of the Woods in Consort welcome in Aurora.

Hail April, true Medea of the Year,
That make all things young and fresh appear:
When we despair, thy seasonable Showers
Comfort the Corn, and cheer the drooping Flowers.
A dry season to sow Barley in is best, to prevent Weeds. If April prove dry,
Fallowing is good.

Fell the Timber you intend to barque; if the Spring be forward, cleanse and
rid the Coppices, and preserve them from Cattle: keep Geese and Swine out of
Commons or Pastures.

Pick up stones in the new-sown Land; sow Hemp and Flax.

Cleanse Ditches, and get in your Manure that lies in the Streets or Lanes, or
lay it on heaps.

Set Ofiers, Willows, and other Aquaticks, before they are too forwards.

You may throughout this Month sow Clover-grass, St. Foyn, and all French or
other Grasses or Hays.

YOu may yet Grass some sorts of Fruit in the Stock the beginning Garden and
Orchard.
of this Month.

Now sow all sorts of Garden-seeds in dry weather, and plant all sorts of
Garden-herbs in wet weather.

Plant French-beans, Cucumbers, Melons, Artichoaks and Madder, and sow such
tender Seeds that could not abide the harder Frosts: set French-beans.

Gather up Worms and Snails after evening showers, or early in the morning.

Sow your Annual Flowers that come of Seed, that you may have Flowers all the
Summer; and transplant such Flowers with fibrous roots you left unremoved in
March: sow also the seeds of Winter-greens.

Now bring forth your tender Plants you preserved in your Conservatory, except
the Orange-tree, which may remain till May.

Transplant and remove your tender Shrubs; as Jasimines, Myrtles, Oleanders,
etc. Toward the end of this Month also in mild weather, clip Phillyrea, and
other tonsile Shrubs, and transplant any sort of Winter-greens.

Plant Hops, and pole them in the beginning of April, and Hop-garden.
bind them to the Poles.

Open the doors of the Bee-hives, for now they hatch, that Apiary.
they may reap the benefit of the Flowery Spring; and be careful of them.

MAY.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 Phil. and Jac. 2 Cor Scorpionis sets in
the morning. 3 The Greater Dog Star sets in the evening. 4 5 6 4 15 7 45 7 8
The Goat-star appears. 9 10 Aldebran sets in the evening. 11 Sun in Gem.
Fomahant rises in the morning. 12 13 Middle-star of Andromeda's Girdle sets
with the Sun. 14 15 16 4 00 8 00 17 18 19 20 21 Cor Scorpionis rises in the
evening. 22 23 24 25 26 3 50 8 10 27 28 The Bulls Eye rises with the Sun. 29
K. Charles his Return. 30 31

Cuculus canit, quercus in frondibus
Delectantque-mortales in immensa terra.
THis Month Ushers in the most welcome season of the Year. Now gentle Zephyrus
Fans the sweet Buds; and the Celestial Drops water fair Flora's Garden.

The Lofty Mountains standing on a row,
Which but of late were Perriwigg'd with Snow,
D'off their old Coats, and now are daily seen
To stand on Tip-toes all in swaggering green.
Meadows and Gardens are prankt up with Buds,
And Chirping Birds now Chant it in the Woods:
The Warbling Swallow, and the Larks do sing,
To welcome in the glorious Verdant Spring.
The Countrymans heart is revived (if this Month prove seasonable) with the
hopes of a happy Autumn; if it prove cold, it is an Omen of good for health,
and promises fair for a full Barn: the pleasure of Angling is now in its
splendor, especially for the Trout and Salmon.

Now wean those Lambs you intend to have the Milk of their Ewes; forbear
cutting or cropping Trees you intend shall thrive till October; kill Ivy.

If your Corn be too rank, now you may Mow it, or feed it with Sheep before it
be too forward: weed Corn. In some places Barley may be sown in this Month.

Now sow Buck-wheat or Brank; sow latter Pease. Also Hemp and Flax may yet be
sown.

Weed Quick-sets; Drain Fens and wet Grounds; Twifallow your Land; carry out
Soil or Compost; gather stones from the Fallows; turn out the Calves to grass;
overcharge not your Pastures, lest the Summer prove dry; get home your Fuel;
begin to burn-beat your Land; stub or root out Goss, Furze, Broom or Fern; and
grub up such Coppices, or other shrubby woody places you intend should not grow
again.

Sell off your Winter-fed Cattle.

About the end of this Month Mow Clover-grass, St. Foyn, and other
French-grasses. Now leave off watering your Meadows, lest you gravel or rot
your Grass.

Look now after your Sheep, if this Month prove Rainy, lest the Rot surprise
them.

Plant all sorts of Winter-greens. Garden and Orchard.


Sow the more tender Garden-seeds; as Sweet-Marjerom, Basil, Thime, and hot
Aromatic Herbs and Plants: set Sage and Rosemary.

Cover no longer your Cucumbers, Melons, etc. excepting with Glasses: sow
Purslain, Lettice, etc.

At the end of this Month, take up such Tulips which are dried in the stalk.

Bind Hops to their Poles, and make up the Hills after Rain. Hop-garden.


Watch the Bees now ready to swarm. Apiary.


JUNE.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 2 3 4 3 45 8 15 5 6 7 8 The Head of
Castor rises in the morning before the Sun. 10 3 43 8 17 11 Barnabas. Sun in
Cancer, Solstice. 12 13 Arcturus sets in the morning. 14 15 16 Hydra's Heart
sets in the evening. 17 18 19 20 3 45 8 15 21 22 23 24 John Baptist. 25 26 The
Right Foot of Gemini sets in the morning. 27 28 29 Peter Apostle. 30 3 50 8 10

Humida Solstitia atque Hyemes Orate Serenas Agricolae. A Shower at this time
of the year is generally welcome: now Phoebus ascends the utmost limits of the
Zodiaque toward the Pole-arctick, and illuminates our most Northern Climes;
and makes those Countries that within a few Months seemed to be wholly bereft
of pleasure, now to resemble a Terrestrial Paradise; and gives unto them the
full proportion of his Presence, which in the Winter-past was withdrawn, that
they partake equally of his light with the more Southern Countries. The
glorious Sun glads the Spirit of Nature, and the sweet showers now refresh the
thirsty Earth: the Grain and Fruits now show themselves, to the joy of the
Husbandman: the Trees are all in their rich array, and the Earth it self laden
with the Countrymans wealth; if the weather be calm, it makes the Farmer smile
on his hopeful Crop.

This Month is the prime season for the washing and shearing of Sheep; in
forward Meadows Mow Grass for Hay.

Cast Mud out of Ditches, Pools or Rivers: this is the best time to raise Swine
for Breeders.

Fallow your Wheat-land in hot weather; it kills the Weeds. Arrationes eo
fructuosiores sunt, quo calidiore terra aratur itaque inter solstitium and
caniculum absolvendae, says Varro.

Carry Marl, Lime and Manure, of what kind soever, to your Land; bring home
your Coals, and other necessary Fuel fetched far off, before the Teams are
busied at the Hay-harvest.

Weed Corn, sow Rape and Cole-seed, and also Turnep-seed. Now Mildews or
Honey-dews begin to fall.

Mind your Sheep, as we advised you in May.

NOw begin to Inoculate: beware of cutting Trees, other Garden and Orchard.
than the young Shoots of this year: pluck off Buds where you are not willing
they should branch forth.

Water the latter-planted Trees, and lay moist weeds, etc. at the roots of them.

It is a seasonable time to distill Aromatic and Medicinal Herbs, Flowers, etc.
and to dry them in the shade for the Winter: Also to make Syrrups, etc.

Gather Snails, Worms, etc. and destroy Ants, and other Vermin.

Set Saffron, plant Rosemary and Gilliflowers; sow Lettice, and other Sallets,
for latter Salleting.

Gather seeds that are ripe, and preserve them that are cool and dry: water the
dry Beds; take up your bulbous roots of Tulips, Anemonies, etc.

Inoculate Jasumines, Roses, etc. Also transplant any sort of bulbous roots
that keep not well out of the ground. Now plant slips of Myrtle, sow latter
Pease.

Dig ground where you intend a Hop-garden, and bind such Hop-garden.
Hops to the Poles the wind has shaken off.

Bees now swarm plentifully; therefore be very vigilant over Apiary.
them, they will requite your care.

JVLY.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 First Star of Orions Belt rises with the
Sun. 2 Visit. of Mary. 3 4 5 6 7 8 4 00 8 00 9 10 11 12 Lucida Corona rises in
the evening. 13 Sun in Leo. 14 15 Swithin. 16 17 18 4 15 7 45 19 Dog Days beg.
Lesser Dog Star rises with the Sun. 20 Margaret. 21 22 Mary Magd. 23 24 25
James Apost. 26 27 28 4 30 7 30 29 30 Greater Dog Star rises with the Sun. 31
Syrius rises in the morning.

Tempore Messis, quando Sol corpus exsiccat
Tunc festina, and domum fruges Congrega
Diluculo surgens.
IN thirsty July would the parched Earth be glad of a moistening shower to
refresh and revive the scorched Vegetable. Now is there an equal care taken to
avoid Phoebus his bright and burning Beams, as in the Winter the furious blasts
of cold Boreas. Tempests now injure much the laden Fruit Trees and standing
Corn, to the great detriment of the Husbandman.

Now is the Universal time for Hay-making; loose not a good opportunity,
especially if fair weather be scarce.

Mow your Head-lands; they fallow where the Land requires it: gather the
Fimble, or earliest Hemp and Flax.

At the latter end of this Month, Corn-harvest begins in most places in a
forward year.

Still carry forth Marl, Lime, and other Manure: bring home Timber and Fuel,
and other heavy materials.

Wheat and Hops are now subject to much damage by Mildews.

Sow Turnep-seed in this Month.

IT is a principal time for the Inoculation of choice Fruits, Roses, etc.
Garden and Orchard.


And for the Summer-pruning of your Wall-trees for the making of Cherry-wine,
Rasberry-wine, etc.

Cut off the stocks of such Flowers that have done blossoming, and cover their
roots with new fat Earth.

Sow Sallet-herbs for latter Salleting; and also Pease.

Take away the Snails from your Mural Trees.

Slip Stocks, and other lignous Plants and Flowers, and lay Gilliflowers and
Carnations for increase, watering them, and shadowing them from the fervent
Sunbeams. Lay also Myrtles, and other curious Greens: clip Box, and other
Tonsile Plants.

Graff by approach, and Inoculate Jasimines, Oranges, etc.

Transplant or remove Tulips, and other bulbous roots: some may be kept out of
the ground, others immediately planted.

If the Season prove very dry, the watering of the Hops will Hop-garden.
very much advantage them, and make them the more fruitful: if it prove moist,
renew and cover the Hills still with fresh Mould.

Now Bees cast their latter Swarms, which are of little advantage; Apiary.
therefore it is best to prevent them.

Streighten the entrance of your Bees: Kill the Drones, Wasps, Flies, etc.

AUGUST.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 Lammas. Orion appears in the morning. 2 3
4 5 6 4 45 7 15 7 8 Cor Leonis rises in the morning with the Sun. 9 10
Laurence. 11 12 13 5 00 7 00 Sun in Virgo. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 5 15 6 45 22
23 Cauda Leonis rises in the morning with the Sun. 24 Bartholomew. 25 26 27
Dog Days end. 28 5 30 6 30 29 30 31

Non semper aest as erit facite Nidos. NOw bright Phoebus, after he has warmed
our Northern Hemisphere, retires nimbly toward the Southern; and the fresh
Gales of Zephyrus begin to refrigerate the scorching Sunbeams: The Earth now
yields to the patient Husbandman the fruits of his labors. This Month returns
the Countrymans expenses into his Coffers with increase, and encourages him to
another years adventure. If this Month prove dry, warm, and free from high
winds, it rejoices the Countrymans heart, increases his gains, and abates a
great part of his Disbursements.

You may yet Thryfallow: Also lay on your Compost or Soil, as well on your
Barley-land, as Wheat-land.

Carry Wood or other Fuel home before Winter.

Provide good Seed, and well picked against Seed-time.

Put your Ews and Cows, you like not, to fatting.

This is the most principal Harvest-month for most sorts of Grain; therefore
make use of good weather whilst you have it.

About the end of this Month you may Mow your after-grass; and also Clover, St.
Foyn, and other French Hays or Grasses. Geld Lambs.

THis is a very good time for Inoculation in the former part Garden and Orchard.
of this Month.

You may now make Cider of Summer-Fruits; prune away superfluous branches from
your Wall-fruit-Trees, but leave not the Fruit bare, except the red Nectorine,
which is much meliorated and beautified by lying open to the Sun.

Pull up Suckers from the roots of Trees; unbinde the Buds you Inoculated a
Month before, if taken.

Plant Saffron, set slips of Gilliflowers, sow Anise. Now is beginning a second
season for the increasing and transplanting most Flowers, and other
Garden-plants; as Herbs, Strawberries, etc.

The Seeds of Flowers and Herbs are now to be gathered: Also gather Onions,
Garlic, etc.

Sow Cabbages, Colleflowers, Turnips, and other Plants, Roots and Herbs for the
Winter, and against the Spring.

Now sow Larks-heels, Canditufts, Columbines, etc. and such Plants as will
endure the Winter.

You may yet slip Gilliflowers, and transplant bulbous Roots about
Bartholomew-tide: some esteem the only secure season for removing your
Perennial or Winter-greens; as Phyllirea's, Myrtles, etc. It Is also the best
time to plant Strawberries, and it is not amiss to dress Rose-trees, and plant
them about this time.

Prop up the Poles the wind blows down: Also near the end Hop-garden.
of the Month gather Hops.

Toward the end of this Month take Bees, unless the goodness Apiary.
of the weather provoke you to stay till the middle of the next: destroy Wasps
and other Insects, and streighten the passages to secure them from Robbers.

SEPTEMBER.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 Giles. 2 3 4 5 6 5 45 6 15 7 8 Not. of
Mary. 9 10 11 Arcturus sets after the Sun. 12 13 6 00 6 00 Sun in Libra,
Equinoctial. 14 Holy Cross. 15 16 17 18 19 20 6 15 5 45 21 Matthew Ap. 22 23
Spica Virginis is with the Sun. 24 25 26 27 6 30 5 30 28 Pleiades rise in the
evening. 29 Michael Ar. 30

IT is now the Equinoctial, that bids adieu to the pleasant Summer past, and
summons us to prepare for the approaching Winter: the beauty and luster of the
Earth is generally decaying; our Countrymen and Ladies do now lament the loss
of those beautiful Objects, Ceres, Flora, and Pomona, in their Fields, Gardens
and Orchards, so lately presented them withal; but that their minds and hands
are busied in preparing for another return, in hopes of a better Crop. Gentle
showers now glad the Ploughmans heart, make the Earth mellow, and better
prepare it for the Wheat, which delights in a moist Receptacle: still weather,
and dry, is most seasonable for the Fruits yet on the Trees. The Salmon and
Trout, in most Rivers, go now out of season till Christmas.

This Month is the most Universal time for the Farmer to take possession of his
new Farm: get good Seed, and sow Wheat in the dirt, and Rye in the dust.

Amend the Fences about the new-sown Corn; skare away Crows, Pigeons, etc.

Geld Rams, Bulls, etc. few Ponds: put Boars up in Sty.

Beat out Hemp Seed, and water Hemp; gather Mast, and put Swine into the Woods.

Carry home Brakes; saw Timber and Boards; manure your Wheat-lands before the
Plough.

YOu may now make Cider and Perry of such Fruits as are Garden and Orchard.
not lasting, and gather most sorts of Winter-Pears, and some sorts of
Winter-apples; but gather not long-lasting Fruit till after Michaelmas.

Sow Cabbages, Colleflowers, Turnips, Onions, etc. Now transplant Artichoaks,
and Asparagus-roots, and Strawberries, out of the Woods: plant forth your
Cabbages and Colleflowers that were sown in August, and make thin the Turnips
where they grow too thick.

Now plant your Tulips, and other bulbous roots you formerly took up, or you
may now remove them: you may also transplant all fibrous roots.

Now retire your choice Plants into the Conservatory, and shelter such Plants
that are tender, and stand abroad.

Toward the end of this Month may you gather Saffron.

Now finish the gathering and drying of your Hops; cleanse Hop-garden.
the Poles of the Hawm, and lay up the Poles for the next Spring.

Take Bees in time; streighten the entrance into the Hives; Apiary.
destroy Wasps, etc. Also you may now remove Bees.

OCTOBER.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 2 3 Spica Virginis rises in the morning
with the Sun. 4 6 45 5 15 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 7 00 5 00 13 14 Sun in Scorp. 15
16 Cauda Leonis sets in the evening. 17 18 Luke Evan. 19 20 7 15 4 45 21 22 23
24 25 Crispine. 26 27 28 Sim. and Jude. 29 7 30 4 30 30 31

Phoebus withdraws his Luster, and his Rays
He but obliquely on the Earth displays.
NOw enters October, which many times gives us earnest of what we are to expect
the Winter succeeding: that I may say;

The Sun declines, and now no comfort yields
Unto the fading Offspring of the Fields.
The Tree is scarce adorned with one wan Leaf,
And Ceres dwells no longer at the Sheaf.
If it prove windy, as it usually does, it finishes the Fall of the Leaf; and
also shatters down the Mast and other Fruits, leaving neither Leaf nor Fruit.

Lay up Barley-land as dry as you can: Seed-time yet continues, and especially
for Wheat.

Well water, furrow, and drain the new-sown Corn-land: now is a good time for
the sowing of Acorns or Nuts, or other sort of Mast or Berries for Timber,
Coppice-wood, or Hedges.

Sow Pease in a fat and warm Land: you may plant Quicksets, and also all sorts
of Trees for Ornament, or for use; and also plash Quick-sets.

Wean the Foals that were foaled of your Draught-Mares at Spring: put off such
Sheep as you have not wintering for.

Follow Malting; this being a good time for that work.

MAke Cider and Perry of Winter-fruits throughout this Garden and Orchard.
Month.

Now is a very good time for the planting and removing of all sorts of
Fruit Trees, or any other Trees that shed their Leaf.

Trench the stiffer grounds for Orcharding and Gardening, to lie for a
Winter-mellowing. Now lay open the roots of old and unthriving Trees, or such
that spend themselves too much, or too soon in blossoms.

Gather the residue of the Winter-fruits; also gather Saffron.

Sow all sorts of Fruit-stones, Nuts, Kernels and Seeds, either for Trees or
Stocks.

Cut and prune Rose-trees. Many of September-works may yet be done, if the
Winter be not too forward.

Now plant your bulbous Roots of all sorts, and continue planting and removing
several Herbs and Flowers with fibrous roots, if the former and better season
be omitted.

This Month is the best time to plant Hops: Also may you bag Hop-garden.
or pack those you dried the last Month.

Now you may safely remove Bees. Apiary.


NOVEMBER.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 Alhallontide. 2 3 4 5 Powder Plot. 6 7 45
4 15 Leonard. 7 8 9 Virgiliae, or the Seven Stars set in the morning. 10 11
Martin-mas. The Bulls Eye sets in the morning. 12 Sun in Sagit. 13 14 15 16 8
00 4 00 Edmund. 17 18 19 20 21 22 Cor Scorpii rise in the morning. 23 24 25
Last three bright Stars in the middle of Scorpio rise in the morning. 26 8 10 3
50 27 The Bulls Eye rises in the evening. 28 29 The Middle-stars of
Andromeda's Girdle rise in the morning. 30 S. Andrew Ap.

-- Hyems Ignava Colono. Virgil.
NOvember generally proves a dirty Month, the Earth and Trees wholly
uncloathed. Sowing of Wheat and Rye on a conclusion: the Countryman generally
forsakes the Fields, and spends his time at the Barn, and at the Market. A good
fire begins to be welcome.

Wheat may yet be sown on very warm and rich Lands, especially on burn-baited
Land.

Fat Swine are now fit for slaughter: lessen your Stocks of Poultry and Swine.

Thrash not Wheat to keep until March, lest it prove foisty.

Lay Straw, or other waste Stuff in moist places, to rot for Dung: Also lay
Dung on heaps.

Fell Coppice-woods, and plant all sorts of Timber, or other Trees: fell Trees
for Mechanic uses; as Plough-boot, Cart-boot, etc.

Break Hemp and Flax.

Now may you begin to overflow or drown your Meadows that are fed low.

Destroy Ant-hills.

PEase and Beans may now be set; some say Garlic: also Garden and Orchard.
trench or dig Gardens.

Remove and plant Fruit Trees; furnish your Nursery with Stocks against the
Spring.

Yet may you make Cider of hard fruits that are not pulpy.

Prune Trees; mingle your rich Compost with the Earth in your Orchards against
the Spring.

Some very hard Fruits may yet be gathered.

Lay up Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, Cabbages, Colleflowers, etc. either for
your use, or to transplant for Seed at the Spring: cover the Asparagus-beds,
Artichoaks, Strawberries, and other tender Plants, with Long-dung,
Horse-litter, Straw, or suchlike, to preserve them from the bitter Frosts. Also
dig up Liquorice.

Now is the best season to plant the fairest Tulips, if the weather prove not
very bitter.

Cover with Mattresses, Boxes, Straw, etc. the tender Seedlings.

Plant Roses, Lilac, and several other Plants and Flowers, the weather being
open.

As yet you may sow Nuts, Stones, etc.

Now carry Dung into your Hop-garden, and mix it with Hop-garden.
store of Earth, that it may rot against the Spring.

You may this Month stop up your Bees close, so that you leave Apiary.
breathing vents; or you may house them till March.

DECEMBER.
Day Sun rise. h. m. Sun set. h. m. 1 2 3 8 15 3 45 4 Right foot of Gemini sets
in the morn. 5 The Lesser Dog Star sets in the morn. 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 8 17 3 43
Sun in Capricorn, Solstice. 13 Arcturus sets in the evening. 14 15 16 Cor
Hydrae sets in the morning. 17 18 19 20 8 15 3 45 21 Thomas Ap. 22 23 24 25
Christmas. Right shoulder of Orion rises in the evening. 26 St. Stephen. 27 8
10 3 50 St. John Evangelist. 28 Innocents. 29 30 The left foot of Gemini rises
in the evening. 31

PHoebus now leaves us the shortest Days and longest nights, is newly entered
Capricornus, the most Southern Celestial Sign, and begins his Annual Return;
which very much rejoices the Countrymans heart, to see a lengthening of the
day, although accompanied with an increase of Cold. The Earth is generally fast
locked up under its frozen Coat, that the Husbandman has leisure to sit and
spend what Store he has beforehand provided.

Frigoribus parto agricolae plerumque fruuntur,
Mutuaque inter se laeti convivia curant.
Now is it time to house old Cattle: cut all sorts of Timber and other Trees
for Building, or other Utensils: fell Coppices.

Plant all sorts of Trees that shed their Leaf, and are Natural to our English
Clime, and not too tender.

Let Horses blood: fat Swine, and kill them.

Plough up the Land for Beans; drain Cornfieldsd where water offends, and water
or overflow your Meadows.

Destroy Ant-hills.

YOu may now set such Fruit Trees as are not very tender, Garden and Orchard.
and subject to the injury of the Frost.

Also transplant any sort of Fruit Trees in open weather: Plant Vines, and
other Slips and Cions, and Stocks for Grafting.

Prune Vines if the weather be open.

Cover the Beds of Asparagus, Artichoaks and Strawberries, etc. with warm
Horse-litter, Straw, etc. if not covered before.

Sow Beans and Pease if the Winter be moderate: trench ground, and dress it
against the Spring.

Set Traps for Vermin, and pick out Snails out of the holes of walls, etc.

Sow or set Bay Berries, Laurel-berries, etc. dropping ripe.

This Month may you dig up Liquorice.

Dig a weedy Hop-garden, and carry Dung into it, and mix Hop-garden.
it with Earth.

Feed weak Stocks. Apiary.


Annus in Angue latet.
CHAP. XIV.
Of the Prognostics of Dearth or Scarcity, Plenty, Sickness, Heat, Cold,
Frost, Snow, Winds, Rain, Hail, Thunder, etc.

WE have in the precedent Discourse discovered unto you the Reasons of, and the
best, newest, and most Rational Methods and ways, for the better improvement of
any sort of Lands capable thereof; and have also given you a Calendar of the
most select Times and Seasons in the Year, for the performance of most of Rural
Affairs abroad; and also an account of the Rising, Setting, etc. of several of
the Fixed Stars, formerly observed by the Ancients in ordering their Rustic
Affairs. Yet remains there a more peculiar Art or Science, equally necessary
with (if not more than) any of the former; and that is to foresee or understand
what shall or may probably be, before it comes to pass; which is of so great
concernment, that could men but attain to it, that alone were Art enough, not
only to raise their own Fortunes, but advantage the whole Kingdom, by laying up
stores in time of plenty, to supply the defects of scarcity.

That there is such foreknowledge in some measure attainable from the Natural
Significations or Prognostications of Comets, unusual Meteors, etc. is most
evident, because they are either Providentially placed as Signs, which must
signify somewhat to come; or they are natural or accidental causes of some
extraordinary and unusual effects that always succeed such rare Appearances. If
we should deprive Man of this Spirit, or Art of foreseeing or judging of
future things from evident Signs and Tokens, we should instead of making him
more excellent, set him a degree below the Beasts, and other Animals; who not
only foresee the different changes of the Times and Seasons, but also prepare
for them, as in the subsequent discourse will be made appear.

Solers Natura, and rerum genitabilis Ordo, Avien*

Certa suis studiis affixit signa futuri.
So that we are not naturally incapable of foreseeing what is to be, but we are
prejudiced against the thing it self, because superstitious people (and blind
as to things Divine) have in several Ages doated so much upon their own
seize in this Art, that instead of making a lawful use thereof, they have
Religiously interposed it between themselves, and the true and living Spirit,
which has begotten so great a prejudice against the thing it self, because of
the abuse thereof, that it is generally deserted and neglected; and those that
have any the least judgment or insight therein, much scorned and slighted by
the vulgar and ignorant sort of people.

Which notwithstanding, (leaving the more Sublime Method of Predicting things
to come in the greater Sphere, not at all conducing to our intentions, nor
within our Rustic capacity to write of or apprehend) we will give a brief
account of the common and natural significations of usual signs and tokens of
Heat, Drought, Cold, Rain, Tempests, etc. on which depend, and from which
usually proceed Plenty, Scarcity, etc. of Corn, Hay, etc. or the sickness or
welfare of Men, Beasts, etc. All which are very necessary for our Countryman to
understand; and, I hope, free from any thing of Superstition or Irreligion.

-- Qui haec omnia
Sciens operatus fuerit, inculpatur diis,
Auguria observans, and delicta evitans.
SECT. I. Of the different Appearances of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Meteors, or any
other thing in the Air, or above us.
The most principal of natural causes of all changes and variations Of the
motions, colors, and appearances of the seven Planets.
of the seasons of the year, and of the different degrees of Heat, Cold,
Dryness, Moisture, etc. in those seasons, are first the Sun, then the Moon, and
other of the moveable Stars or Planets; but more especially the Sun, whose
distance or nearness unto us, or rather whose Obliquity or Perpendicularity, in
respect of any part of this Globe, does beget that most apparent variety in the
different seasons, which indeed would be certain, were there not intervening
causes that did divert the general influence of the Sun, and sometimes
aggravate, and sometimes impede the extremes of weather, etc. occasioned by it:
But let those alterations in the Air, or above us, be what they will, there are
some certain Prodromi that give us to understand thereof, and none more than
the Sun, as principal in the Heavens: next unto it the Moon; as Virgil:

Si vero Solemn ad rapidum, Lunasque sequentes
Ordine respicies; nunquam te crastina fallet
Hora.
The Sun does indicate unto us the true temperament of the Of the Sun.
Air, through which we receive its beams; and according to its density or
rarity thereof do we perceive that Luminous Globe; as if the Air be serene and
clear, then do we most perfectly receive the beams of the Sun: the weather is
then most inclinable to dryness, and according to the wind, so is it either
hot or cool; which if it be either East or North-East in the forepart of the
Summer, the weather is like to continue dry; and if Westward toward the end of
the Summer, then will it continue also dry: but upon the approach of Rain, the
Air is usually repleat with moist Vapors, which are not of themselves so
evidently discernable to the eye, and yet are plainly demonstrated by the Sun.

Sol quoque and exoriens, and cum se condet in undas Virgil.

Signa dabit: Solemn certissima signa sequentur.
Before Rain, the Sun appears dim, faint and watrish; which presageth Rain to
follow.

At the rising of the Sun, if it appear red or pale, and afterward dark, or
hid in a black watery Cloud, Rain follows; or if the Sunbeams appear before the
Sunrising, or a watery Circle about the Sun in the morning; or if the Sun
appear hollow, or have red or black Clouds about it at the rising; or if the
Beams be faint, or short, or watrish; Suspecti tibi sint Imbres -- Rain usually
follows: For the Air being pregnant with moisture, which usually precedes
Rains, etc. does represent the Sun and Sunbeams, different in form and color
from what it appears to be at other times; as some sorts of Glass being
interposed, does represent Objects different from what they are.

At si cum referetque diem, condetque relatum, Virgil.

Lucidus orbis erit; frustra terrebere nimbis.
The setting clear and red, and rising gray, and afterward clear of the Sun,
indicates a fair day to follow.

The appearance of the Sun being very red at any time, but especially in the
evening, Wind succeeds.

Caeruleus pluviam denunciat, Igneus Euros. Virgil.
Any redness in the Air precedes winds; which color is caused from the more
coagulated or digested viscous moisture, than that which causes Rain, from
which coagulated or digested moisture winds are usually generated; but the
cause of the redness above any other color, is the same as it is in some
Glasses and Transparent Stones, which although perfectly white, represent
Objects (also white) yet red unto our eyes, as well as other colors: The
reasons thereof I leave to the more Learned to discuss.

The same density or coagulation of the Air also represents the Matutine or
Vespertine Sun or Moon larger unto our sight than at other times, and usually
precedes wind; and the reason why these Orbs appear greater in the morning or
evening than at other times is, because there is more of this dense Air
interposed between the object and the sight then, than at any other time.

The most principal Significator of the varieties of weather, Of the Moon.
the Countryman esteems the Moon to be, not only from its Configurations and
Aspects with the Sun and other Planets, which old-fashioned Astrologers and
ignorant Philosophers have put into their heads; as that the Change, Full, etc.
being in such and such Signs, such weather shall follow; which if true, then
should we have the weather every year alike, (the same Aspects falling out very
near the same time every year) which every Country -Coridon can contradict.

But also from its Prognostics of the several changes of weather from its
color and appearance to our eyes, which are more certain and useful for us to
follow: the same Rules concerning the different appearances of the Sun, may
also serve for the Moon, being all from the same cause.

If one Circle appear about the Moon, it signifies Rain.

But if more Circles appear, they signify Winds and Tempests to follow.

Also if the Horns of the Moon appear blunt or short, it signifies a moist Air,
and inclinable to Rain.

But that Vulgar Error of the hanging or tending of the Horns this or that
way, to presage any alteration of weather, is wholly to be rejected, every year
they tending the same way, at the same time of the year: and also that error
of judging the weather for that Moon, by what it is two or three days after the
Change; which only demonstrates the Natural inclination of the Air at that
time: the same Rule may be observed at any other time of the Moon.

The different Aspects of the Planets one with the other, and Of the other
Erraticks or Planets.
also Eclipses, do undoubtedly either occasion or predict various Mutations and
changes in most of our Sublunary Affairs, and more especially in this of the
weather: But the ignorance and sordidness of men is such, that they only rely
upon the Rules and Precepts of the Ancients, and conceive them to be perpetual,
when the Aspects of these Planets vary ad infinitum, and so of necessity must
the effects. Also, those Authors made those Observations in such Countries
where the seasons and variations of weather more exactly followed the Celestial
Configurations, than in these more oblique Climates, where there are other
concomitant causes intermixed: so that men ought rather to study and observe
the different effects in these parts and times from those in other Countries,
and also the occasions of such differences, rather than to presume too much
upon uncertain Rules and Methods; which begets scorn and derision in the
Ignorant, who are the only Enemies to Art.

Scientia non habet Inimicum, praeter Ignorantem. And frustrates the
expectations, and discourages the Ingenious: For undoubtedly Eclipses,
Conjunctions, Oppositions, etc. have some influence on this Globe, though we
apprehend them not as we might.

These unusual and extraordinary appearances above us, are Of Comets, or
Blazing-stars.
undoubtedly engendered or formed of some Vapors and viscous matter congealed
or coagulated, and congregated together into a certain Mass or Lump; which
being more remote from us than the Clouds, are represented to our sight through
the perspicuous Body of the Air, to be round. Their motion is always irregular
and uncertain; and according to their substance, whether more or less gross or
subtle, so do they appear either clearer or dimmer to the eye: they are never
so dense or gross, but that the Beams of the Sun penetrate them; which are
evidently conspicuous in the clear and dark nights, except the light of either
Sun or Moon be near it; then the tail (as they usually term it) or Beams of the
Sun penetrating it, are lost or much diminished.

The matter whereof they are compounded or formed is various, according to the
part or places of the world from whence they were extracted: also their
digestion or Coagulation is more in some than in others, which manifestly
appears by their different colors and substances, and also from their effects,
which only operate in those parts of the World where they resolve themselves
again.

They neither flame nor burn, as is fabulously supposed, but move as other
Meteors do, from a certain expense of their own substance the one way, which
inforceth their motion another.

When they are spent, the matter whereof they are compounded does tend to this
Globe, as all other substances do within the Magnetic or Attractive power
thereof: so that on what part or Country of this Globe the matter resides,
there may they expect the effects thereof, which are various.

Sometimes great Rains succeed, as it was after the Comet in 584. that it was
then believed a second Deluge or Universal Flood to have been prepared for the
drowning of the whole World.

Sometimes also great heat and drought, as did the next Summer after the Comet
in 1472 in January; which was of such strength and vehemence, that in some
places the fire burst out, etc. Also there followed mortal Maladies, loathsome
Sicknesses, most noysom and infectious, etc. (in Germany:) of which nature that
Comet seemed to be, that appeared to us in England, in December 1664. after
which succeeded great drought, heat, and want of Rain, and that great and
terrible Plague in 1665. and great heat and drought, and Pestilential Diseases
in 1666, and 1667. and that never-to-be-forgotten Fire or burning of London.

At si contigerit plures Ardere Cometas, Avien.

Invalidas segetes torrebit siccior Aer.
More might be said, both as to their Causes, Motions and Effects; but as it
belongs to higher Capacities than our Country-Reader to apprehend, so it
requires the able Pens of more Sublime Philosophers to treat of.

There are certain lesser Meteors that never attain to the magnitude Of the
Shooting of Stars.
of Comets, yet seem to be composed of the same matter, and to produce like
effects, though in a far less degree: they are visible only in their motion,
and seem as though streams of fire issued from them: As the Poet says;

Saepe etiam stellas, Vento impendente, Videbis
Praecipites Coelo labi, noctisque per umbras,
Flammarum longos a tergo albescere tractus.
Which are no otherwise fire than the dashing of Salt Water in a dark night, or
the moist light of several Marine Creatures, or of shining wood, or of the
scraping of Loaf-sugar in the dark.

The light proceeding from these Meteors, is merely from the expense of their
matter by the swiftness of their motion; which matter being dissipated,
descends nearer unto this Globe, and afterward becomes the cause from whence
Winds, Rain, Mists, or Fogs proceed; according as the matter is more or less in
quantity, or more or less gross or subtle in substance; as is evident from
every Countrymans Observation and Experience.

The Ancients relied much on the rising, setting, and appearing Of the Fixed
Stars.
of the Fixed Stars: Virgil.

Praeterea tam sunt Arcturi sidera nobis,
Haedorumque dies servandi, and Lucidus anguis, etc.
On which days depended their most principal Rules of Agriculture; but it was
in those parts, or Climates, as we said before, where times and seasons were
not subject to so great a variation, as in these.

We therefore need observe no more than their appearances, as they are visible
unto us; that is, whether they be clear or dim, or whether they seem to be more
or fewer in number than they usually do, etc.

If any of the greater Stars seem to have a Circle about them, or twinkle, or
appear greater than usual, or appear dim, or their Rays blunt, or appear fewer
in number, you may expect Rain, the Air being inclinable thereunto.

Also if they appear very thick, and more in number than usual, it indicates
the Air to be rare and thin, and the more capable of Rain; and also
Prognosticates tempestuous weather to follow.

From the same cause as Comets or Shooting-stars, may also Of Fire, or other
casual appearances.
flashes of fire in several forms be produced; which may also presage or
signify the same things to come.

But they are usually more terrible, and from more strong causes, and do
usually produce more violent effects; as fierce Tempests, etc.

Quod si diversis se passim partibus ignes Avien.

Excutiant: Verret pelagus sine fine modoque
Turba procellarum. --
If these flashes appear in the form of Lightning, without either Clouds or
Thunder, Winds and Rain usually succeeds from that Coast the light is observed;
if from several Coasts, great Tempests follow.

If the Air seem to be lighter than at other times, the Sun and Moon being
remote, it denotes Winds and Rain to follow.

Before Great Sicknesses, or Pestilential Diseases, lights in the Air, etc.
have been observed.

Also the Clouds themselves, as they vary in form and color, Of the Clouds.
or motion, do indicate unto us the weather we are to expect.

In a clear evening, certain small black Clouds appearing, are undoubted signs
of Rain to follow; or if black, blew, or greenish Clouds appear near the Sun at
any time of the day, or Moon by night, Rain usually follows.

In a fair day, if the Sky seem to be dapled with white Clouds, (which they
usually term a Mackarel-Sky) it usually predicts Rain.

If great black Clouds come out of the North, and appear whitish when nearer to
you, and the season be cold and dry, it signifies Snow or Hail.

If Clouds be very high, and move another way than the wind blows, or than the
other Clouds move that are lower, the wind either rises or turns.

If they appear like Flocks of Sheep, or of a red color, wind also follows.

If small watrish Clouds appear on the tops of hills, Rain follows, as they
observe in Cornwall.

When Hengsten is wrapped with a Cloud, a shower follows soon after.

The like they observe of Roseberry-topping in Yorkshire, and many other places
in England.

If Clouds move toward the Sun, it denotes Wind and Tempest.

If Clouds rest over the Sun at Sunrising, and make as it were an Eclipse, it
portendeth Winds; if from the South, Winds and Rain.

If in a clear day single Clouds fly apace, Winds are expected from that place
whence they come.

If Clouds grow or appear suddenly, the Air otherwise free from Clouds, it
signifies Tempests at hand, especially if they appear toward the South or West.

Mists and Fogs are of diverse natures; some are the effects of Of Mists and
Fogs.
Shooting-stars, and other Meteors; and these are more general: sometimes they
are very gross and stinking; they are then to be avoided as much as you can:
their significations, as to the change of Air, are various; if they vanish or
fall without a Wind, fair weather usually succeeds.

The white Mists that usually ascend in a morning from the low grounds in a
clear Air, if they vanish, or settle again in the Valleys, fair weather
succeeds: but if they take to the Hills, or Mount aloft, it demonstrates the
watery inclination of the Air; therefore expect Rain.

In the more Southerly Regions, the Winds are much more Of Winds.
certain than in these, and the effects of them also more certain: For
notwithstanding the Rules and Observations of our English Philosophers, as to
the strict place of the Wind, expecting thence a certain effect, you will
find such Fancies to deceive you: For although the Wind being exactly in the
South South-East Point, it Rains to day, yet another day the Wind may be in
the same place, and it be fair weather. Also that Wind that brings Rain to the
one part of this Island, may not to another: for I observe the Propinquity of
the Sea is to be considered, every place lying nearer to some one part of the
Sea than another; and on which Coast the Sea is nearest, that Wind more
frequently brings Rain to that place, than to another where the Sea is more
remote: Therefore I desire all such that expect any success to their
Observations, that they quadrate the Rules to the places where they live, and
not trust to the Observations of other places.

Winds also are of different qualities, according to the several places they
either proceed from, or pass over; as the East-winde is counted propitious
neither to Man nor Beast, which I judge partly to be from the Fens or moist
Countries; as Holland, the Fens in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire,
etc. from whence Winds usually proceed, and must of necessity prove
unwholesome both to Man and Beast, except to those that inhabit on the Western
Coast; for the Wind has sufficiently purged it self by passing over so much
Land, as to leave its noxious quality behind it.

Also the Northern Winds are more serene with us than the other: one cause, I
suppose, is from the quantity of Land in Scotland and England it comes over
unto us, as is observed in other Countries, that from the Continent the coldest
and most serene Winds proceed.

If the Wind turn to the South from any other Coast, or remove from the South
having been long there, it usually brings alteration of weather.

Winds do produce several and various alterations and effects in the Air, in
the Water, and in the Bodies of Men and Beasts; as the South and West-windes
are usually more hot and moist, and not so clear as the other; the North and
East are more clear, dry and cold.

When the South-winde blows, the Sea is blew and clear; but Bacon deventis.
when the North-winde, it is then black and obscure.

The Eastern-windes usually make our fresh waters much clearer than the West.

The North-winde is best for sowing of Seed, the South for Grafting or
Inoculations.

The South-winde is the worst for the bodies of men; it dejecteth the appetite,
it brings Pestilential Diseases, increases Rheums; men are more dull and
slow then, than at other times: Beasts also are not to be exempted from these
influences.

The North-winde makes men more cheerful, and begets a better appetite to meat;
yet is injurious to the Cough, Ptisick, and Gout, and any acute Flux.

The Eastern-winde is drier, more biting, and deadly.

The West-winde is moist, mild and calm, and friendly to all Vegetables. The
East-winde blowing much in the Spring, injureth Fruits by breeding Worms.

All Winds blowing much cleanse the Air; still and quiet Summers being the
most unwholesome, and subject to Pestilential and Epidemical Diseases.

If in great Rains the Winds rise or fall, it signifies that the Rain will
forthwith cease.

If the Wind vary much in few hours, and then be constant to one place, it
signifies the Wind to continue long in that place.

If at the beginning of the Winter the South-winde blow, and then the North, it
is like to be a cold Winter; but if the North-winde first blow, and then the
South, it will be a warm and mild Winter.

The blowing of the Winds from several Coasts (other concomitant causes
concurring) are the truest Presignificators of Thunder.

The blowing of the Winds aloft, with a murmuring or hollow noise more than
below, commonly presageth Rain.

The blowing or compression of the Winds downwards causing smoke to descend,
etc. more than usual, signifies Rain to follow.

If the Winds blow directly downward, and cause a motion Of Whirl-windes.
on the water several ways, or force the dust to arise with the Wind, which is
repercussed by the Earth; if they also enforce the Hay, Corn, or other things
in the Fields, up aloft into the Air, which denote unto us the crassitude of
the Vapors in the Air, which by the heat of the Sun do emit such casual
blasts; for they rarely happen but in the Summer, and the daytime, (yet
sometimes when no Cloud is near) they signify Wind, and sometimes Rain to
succeed, other causes concurring, or otherwise extreme heat.

But if these Whirl-windes are very great, they presage Tempests to be very
nigh; as Virgil.

Omnia Ventorum concurrere praelia vidi;
Quae gravidam late segetem ab radicibus imis
Sublime expulsam eruerunt; --
-- Immensum Coelo venit agmen aquarum, etc.
This watery Meteor, and the greatest Miracle in Nature, (besides Of the Rainbow.
its Divine signification) being produced of natural causes, has also its
natural effects. In some Countries more Southward, it is an ordinary Presage of
great Tempests at hand; but here various weather succeeds, according to it is
various appearances and colors.

It is the lowest of Meteors (says Bacon) and when it appears in parts, and
not whole or conjoined, it produces Winds and Rain.

If it appear double or triple, it usually presageth Rain.

If the colors thereof tend more to red than any other color, Wind follows;
if green or blew predominate, then Rain.

The Audibility of Sounds are certain Prognostics of the Of noise and stilness
in the Air.
temper of the Air in a still Evening: For if the Air be repleat with moisture
over us, it depresseth Sounds, that they become Audible at a far greater
distance than when the Air is free from such moisture or vapors; as you may
observe in Building, the lower and more ponderous the Roof or Floor next you
is, the farther and plainer may you hear any thing therein; which is the true
cause of the quick hearing, at the whispering-place in Gloucester-Catherdral;
which is not only from the closeness of the passage, as is generally conceived,
but from the weight and Massiness of the building over it. The like I have
observed in Rooms covered with Lead, Stone, etc. and in places under large
Cisterns of water.

From whence you may conclude, that in such nights or other times that you hear
sounds of Bells, noises of Water, Beasts, Birds, or any other sounds or noises
more plainly than at other times, the Air is inclinable to Rain, which commonly
succeeds.

The same may be said of Echoes, as of other noises and Of Echoes.
sounds.

When it Thunders more than it Lightens, it signifies great Of Thunder and
Lightning.
Winds; but if it Lighten oftener than it Thunders, it signifies great and
hasty showers.

Morning-Thunders signify Wind, Noon-Thunders Rain, roaring or distant
Thunders signify Wind; but cracking or acute Thunders, Winds and Rain.

According to the Opinion and Rules of others, and our own Of the rarity and
density of the Air.
Observations, we have given you the best and most probable indications of the
future changes of the Wind, Weather, etc. from the several and usual
appearances above, either certain or uncertain, or accidental. Now it remains
that we say somewhat in relation to the temper or qualification of the Air it
self, deducted from its own being more rare or expanded, or more dense or
contracted.

We shall not take any further notice of the nature of the Air in this place,
than it serves to our present intention, which is only to demonstrate unto you,
that the Air is an absolute Body fluid and transparent, and in several
particulars like unto the water, both being penetrable alike by their several
Inhabitants; the Fish with an equal facility piercing the waters, as Fowls do
the Air: they are both Nutriments to their several Animals residing in them;
they both obstruct the Visual Faculty alike, as they are more or less dense;
they are both subject to Expansion or Contraction, but the Air more; they are
both subject to Undulation, as they are fluid.

The Air is also capable to support great burdens, as the vast quantities of
water that flow over our heads in stormy or rainy weather, which, according to
the rarity and density of the Air, do gradatim diffuse themselves upon the
Earth; as is most evident in the more hot and Southerly Countries, where the
Air is more hot and thin, there Rain falls with that violence, as though it
were water poured forth; when in the more Northerly, where the Air is more
dense or gross, it distills in minute drops, as it were cribrated through the
thick Air. We also may discern a manifest difference; for in the warmer seasons
of the year, the Air being then most thin, the Rain falls in greatest drops;
and in the colder seasons, when the Air is more dense, the Rain distills in
smaller.

So that when the waters are above us, or that Clouds or Floods of water are in
being in the Air, we have only to judge whether they incline toward us, or
that they are for some other place.

This rarity or density of the Air cannot be judged by the sight; for it is
usual when the Air it self is most rare, then is it most repleat with vapors,
etc. as water, the more it is heated, the less transparent it becomes.

Neither can it be judged by its weight, as many do imagine and affirm from
Fallacious Experiments; for the Air is not ponderous in its own proper place,
no otherwise than water is in the Sea in its proper place; although it be
asserted by High-flown Philosophers, and Learned Pens, with whom it is besides
our Primary intentions to contend in this place, it being enough here to
discover to our Country-Reader these mysterious Intricacies of Nature (as they
would have them esteemed) by familiar Examples and Demonstrations.

For the true discovery of the nature and temper of the Air Of Thermometry or
the Weather-glass.
as to its density or rarity, we have not met with a more certain or complete
Invention than the Weather-glass; the various and intricate Descriptions
whereof we will not insist upon, but take our Observations from the most plain
and ordinary single Perpendicular-Glass, being only as follows.

weather glass

Procure at the Glass-house, or elsewhere, a Globular-glass, with a Tube or
Pipe thereto proportionable, whereof there are many sizes; but be sure let not
the Head be too big, nor the Pipe too long, lest there be not rise enough in
the Winter, or fall enough in the Summer. You must also have a small Glass or
Vessel at the bottom, that may contain water enough to fill the Tube, or more.

Then having fixed them in some Frame made for that purpose, heat the Globe of
the Glass with a warm Cloth, to rarifie the Air within it; and then put the end
of the Tube into the lower Vessel, and it will attract the water more or less,
as you warmed the Head.

You may also add numbers on the Glass, to show you the degrees.

The water you may make blew with Roman-Vitriol boiled, or red with Rose-leaves
dry, and imbibed in fair water, wherein a little Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of
Salt is dropped. With this water fill the under-Vessel; which being rightly
placed on the North-side of your house, where the Sun rarely or never shines
against it, and in a Room where you seldom make fire, lest the sudden access of
heat, or accidental alteration of the Air, might impede your Observations.

The Air included within the Globe or Ball of this Glass, does admit of
Dilatation and Contraction equally with the Ambient Air, that whenever the
Ambient Air is dilated or expanded, either through the heat of the season, or
before the fall of Rain, etc. the Air in the Glass is the same; and as by its
Expansion it requires more room, so does it let the water in the Tube descend
gradually; and as it is more dense or contracted, either through the coldness
of the season, or the serenity or inclinability to drought of the Ambient Air,
so also does the Air within the Glass contract it self into a less compass, and
sucketh up the water in the Tube gradually, as it condenseth or contracteth:
whence you may at any time exactly know the very degree of Rarity or Density of
the Air Ambient, by that which is included in the Glass, and thereby inform
your self what weather is most likely to succeed at any time.

Be sure to Quadrate or Contemporize your Observations or Numbers of Degrees
with the season of the year; for that Degree of Rarity that signifies Rain in
the Winter, may be such a Degree of Density that may signify fair weather in
the Summer.

The differences betwixt the highest rise and lowest fall in one day in the
Summer, is much more than in the Winter; for you shall have a cold night, and
very serene Air, which contracteth the Air in the Glass into a little Room;
after which usually succeeds a very hot day, which dilateth it very much; when
in the Winter no such great difference happens in one day.

Yet in the Winter, in several days, will the difference be as great as in
several Summer-days.

Although the Air appear serene and cold to your Senses, yet trust not to that,
if the Glass signify otherwise.

We shall not give you any sure Rule by which you may judge of the weather, but
leave it to your own observations; that is, draw on a paper a certain number of
lines, as many as you think fit, as Musicians draw lines to prick their Tunes
on; at the end whereof, as they place their Key, so number your lines according
to those numbers that are next unto the top of the water in the Tube of the
Glass, whether seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, etc. Over this Scale
mark the day of the Month, and point of the wind: in the Scale make a dot or
prick at what line or number the water in the Glass is at, and by it the hour
of the day, and under it the inclination of the weather: At night draw a line
downright like the Musicians full time or note; the next day mark as before,
until you know and understand the nature of your Glass, and the place it stands
in, and the season of the year: so that then you shall be able at any time to
give a probable conjecture of whatsoever is to be known or signified by that
Instrument, which otherwise you shall hardly do.

This new-invented Instrument, which is termed the Baroscope, Of the Baroscope.
by which the Authors thereof pretend to discover the temper and inclination of
the Air from its weight, (in brief) is thus described: Seal a Glass-tube
Hermettically at the one end, fill it almost with Quick silver, and invert it,
resting the open end in a Vessel of Quicksilver; then the Quicksilver in the
Tube, by its weight, presses downwards into the Vessel, and so distendeth or
streineth the Air (which is but little) remaining in the Glass, that the
summity of the Tube is for a small space void of Quicksilver, so far as that
small portion or remainder of Air is capable of distention; which is much more
by Quicksilver, the most ponderous of Fluid Bodies, than by water in the
Weather-glass. But they pretend that this Column of Quicksilver in the Tube, is
supported by the weight of the Air Ambient, pressing on the stagnant
Quicksilver in the Vessel; and that as the Air becomes more or less ponderous,
so does the Quicksilver in the Tube rise or fall more or less accordingly:
which if it were true, then in case the stagnant Quicksilver were broader in a
broader Vessel, would the greater quantity of Air press harder upon it, and the
Quicksilver in the Tube rise higher; but it does not. Also if the Quicksilver
in the Tube were supported by the pressure or weight of the Air on the stagnant
Quicksilver in the Vessel, then would not the Quicksilver descend by the making
of some small hole on the top of the Tube, which we evidently perceive to do.

Also when the Air is most rare, and by consequence less ponderous, (if any
weight thereof should be supposed) then will the Column of Quicksilver in the
Tube be higher; and when the Air is more dense or burdened with moisture, then
will it be lower: The contrary whereof would happen, if their Hypothesis were
true.

But most evident it is, that as the Ambient Air becomes more or less rare or
dense, so does the Air in the Tube contract or dilate it self; which is the
sole cause of the rise or fall of the Quicksilver.

Much more might be said herein, and also of the Weather-glass or Thermoscope;
but I hope this may suffice to induct inquisitive, and not exact or perfect
Artists: The full discourse and discovery of the various effects, observations
and conclusions of these Instruments, requiring rather a Tract peculiar and
proper for them only.

There is also another Instrument that may be made more exact for any of the
aforesaid observations or intentions, and fit for further discoveries; but my
occasions will not at present give me leave to perfect it.

SECT. II. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from the Earth and Water.
If the Earth appear more dry than ordinary, or if it greedily Of the Earth.
drink in Rains lately fallen, or Floods suddenly abate, it signifies more Rain
to follow.

If the Earth, or any moist or Fenny places yield any extraordinary scents or
smells, it presageth Rain.

If the Water, being formerly very clear, change to be dim or Of the Water.
thick, it signifies Rain.

If Dews lie long in a morning on the Grass, etc. it signifies fair weather,
the Air then being more serene, and not of an attractive or spungy nature.

If Dews rise or vanish suddenly and early in the morning, it presages Rain.

If Marble-stones, Metals, etc. appear moist, it indicates the inclination of
the Air to be moist, and subject to Rain.

But if in a morning a Dew be on the Glass in the window, and on the inside, it
signifies a serene and cool Air, and inclinable to drought.

If the Sea appear very calm with a murmuring noise, it signifies Of the Sea.
wind.

If on the surface of the Sea you discern white Froth like unto Crowns or
Bracelets, it signifies wind; and the more plainly they appear, the greater
will the Wind and Tempests be.

If the waves swell without winds, or the Tide rise higher, or come ashore more
swift than usual, it presageth winds.

SECT. III. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from Beasts.
It is a thing worthy of admiration and consideration, how the Beasts of the
Field, Fowls of the Air, etc. should be capable of so great a degree of
knowledge and understanding, as to foresee the different changes and varieties
of seasons; and not from common observations, as man does, but from a certain
instinct of Nature, as is most evident.

Several significations of the change of weather are taken Of Beeves or Kine,
etc.
from the different postures of these Beasts; as, if they lie on their right
side, or look toward the South, or look upwards, as though they would snuff up
the Air; according to the Poet:

Mollipedesque Boves spectantes lumina Coeli, Cicero.

Naribus humiferum duxere ex Aere Succum.
Or if they eat more than ordinary, or lick their Hoofs all about,

Convenit instantes praenoscere protinus Imbres, Avien.


Rain follows forthwith.

If they run to and fro more than ordinary, flinging and kicking, and extending
their Tails, Tempests usually follow.

If the Bull leads the Herd, and will not suffer any of them to go before
him, it presageth Wind and Rain.

If Sheep feed more than ordinary, it signifies Rain; or if the Of Sheep.
Rams skip up and down, and eat greedily.

If Kids leap or stand upright, or gather together in Flocks or Of Kids*
Herds, and feed near together, it presageth Rain.

If the Ass bray more than ordinary, or without any other Of Asses.
apparent cause, it presageth Rain or winds.

If Dogs howl, or dig holes in the earth, or scrape at the walls Of Dogs.
of the house, etc. more than usual, they thereby presage death to some person
in that house, if sick; or at least tempestuous weather to succeed.

If the hair of dogs smell stronger than usual, or their guts tumble and make a
noise, it presageth Rain or Snow; or they tumble up and down.

The Cat by washing her face, and putting her foot over her Of Cats.
Ear, foreshews Rain.

It has been anciently observed, that before the fall of a house, Of Mice and
Rats.
the Mice and Rats have forsaken it.

The squeeking and skipping up and down of Mice and Rats, portend Rain.

-- Parvi cum stridunt denique Mures, Avien.

Cum gestire solo, cum ludere forte videntur,
Portendunt crasso consurgere Nubila Coelo.
Of all Creatures, the Swine is most troubled against wind or Of Swine.
Tempests, which makes Countrymen think that only they see the wind.

They usually shake Straw in their mouths against Rain: As Virgil:

-- Ore solutus
Immundi meminere sues jactare Maniplos:
If they play much, it signifies the same.

SECT. IV. Of Observations and Prognostics taken from Fowl.
As Beasts, so have Birds a certain foresight of the change of Of Waterfowl.
weather, and alteration of the seasons, and especially Waterfowl; which if
they fly or gather together in great flights, and from the Sea or great waters
hasten to the banks or shore, and there sport themselves, it denotes winds;
more especially if in the morning.

If the Breast Bone of a Duck be red, it signifies a long Winter; if white, the
contrary.

Ducks and Geese, etc. picking their wings, washing themselves much, or
Cackling much, signifies Rain.

Also Sea-fowl seeking after fresh waters, signify an open or wet season.

Jam varias Pelagi volucres, and quae -- Virgil.

Dulcibus in stagnis rimantur, etc.
If they betake themselves to great waters, it presageth cold; if Waterfowl
forsake the water, it signifies that Winter is at hand.

If Land-fowl gather toward the water, and shake their wings, Of Land-fowl.
making noises, and washing themselves, it portendeth Tempests at hand.

If small Birds gather together in Flocks, it signifies cold and hard weather
at hand.

If Birds seek shelter in Barns or houses more than usual, it presages cold and
hard weather.

If Birds fly hastily to their Nests, and forsake their meat, it foresheweth
Tempests.

If in frosty weather Birds seek obscure places, and seem dull and heavy, it
signifies a sudden Thaw.

The early appearance of Field-fares, or other foreign Winter-fowl, presageth
a hard Winter.

Rooks, Owls, Jays, or suchlike wild Fowl, frequenting a Town more than usual,
presage Mortality or Sickness to that place.

If the Heron soar high, seemingly even to the Clouds, it signifies Of the
Heron.
wind.

If the Heron stand melancholy on the Banks, it signifies Rain.

If the Heron cry in the night as she flies, it presageth Wind.

If the Kite soar high, it signifies fair weather. Of the Kite.


If they make more than ordinary noise or crying for Prey, it presageth Rain.

If the Crow has any interruption in her Note, like the Hiccough, Of the Crow.
or Croak with a kind of swallowing, it signifies Winds and Rain.

Rooks or Crows gathering together in Flocks, and forsaking their Meat,
signify Rain.

The Raven or Crow Creeking clear, and reiterating her Note, signifies fair
weather.

If Sparrows chirp earlier, or more than usual, it signifies Of Sparrows.
Wind and Rain.

If Jays gather together in Flocks, it signifies Rain and tempestuous Of the
Jay.
weather.

If Bats fly abroad after Sunset, it signifies fair weather. Of Bats.


If Owls whoop at night, it signifies fair weather. Of the Owl.


The early singing of the Wood-lark, signifies Rain. Of the Wood-lark. Of the
Swallow.


If the Swallow fly low, and near the waters, it presageth Rain. The coming of
the Swallow is a true presage of the Spring.

If Cocks crow more than ordinary, especially in the Evening, Of the Cock.
or if Poultry go early to Roost, it signifies Rain.

SECT. V. Of Observations and Prognostics from Fishes and Insects.
If Porpises, or other Seafish leap in a calm, it signifies Wind Of Seafish.
and Rain.

If great numbers of the Fry of Fish are generated in Lakes Of Fresh Water Fish.
or Ditches where Fish rarely come, it presageth great scarcity of Corn, or
death of Cattle.

If Fish leap more than ordinary in Ponds or Rivers, it presageth Winds and
Rain.

Great quantities of Frogs, small or great, appearing at unusual Of Frogs.
times, and in unusual places, presage great Dearth of Corn, or great
Sicknesses to follow in that place where they appear.

The Croaking of Frogs more than usual in the Evening, signifies Rain.

The early appearing of Snakes, signifies a dry Spring, and a Of Snakes.
hot Summer.

If they play much in the water, it signifies Rain.

If the Ant brings forth her Eggs, it presageth Rain. Of Ants.


If Bees fly not far, but hover about home, it presageth Rain; Of Bees.
or if they make more haste home than ordinary, a Storm is at hand.

If Gnats, Flies or Fleas bite more keenly than at other times, Of Gnats, Flies
and Fleas.
it signifies Rain.

If Gnats or Flies swarm or gather together in multitudes before Sunset, it
presageth fair weather.

Swarms of Gnats or Flies in the morning, signify Rain.

If greater numbers of them appear more than ordinary, it signifies Sickness
or Mortality to Man or Beast, and also scarcity of Corn and Fruits.

The early appearance of these, or any other Insects in the Spring, presageth a
hot and sickly Summer.

If the Spiders undo their Webs, Tempests follow. Of Spiders.


-- Si solvit Aranea casses, Avien.

Mox tempestates and nubila tetra cientur.
If Spiders fall from their Webs, or from the walls, it signifies Rain.

If strings like Spiders Webs appear in the Air, it signifies Wind.

If Spiders spin and weave their Nets much, it presageth Wind.

The great appearances of Chaffers, or other Insects, although Chaffers, etc.
they denote a present time of Plenty, yet are they Omens of a future time of
Scarcity; and if in very great numbers, of Mortality and Sickness to Man and
Beast.

SECT. VI. Promiscuous Observations and Prognostics.
Leaves of Trees and Chaff playing or moving without any Of Trees and
Vegetables.
sensible Gale or Breath of Wind, and the Down or Wool of Thistles and other
Plants flying in the Air, and Feathers dancing on the water, presage Wind, and
sometimes Rain.

If the Herb Trefoyl close its leaves, it foreshews Rain.

If the Oak bear much Mast, it foreshews a long and hard Winter.

If Oak-apples engender or breed Flies, it is said to presage Plenty; but if
Spiders, Scarcity.

If Trees bear but little Fruit, it usually presageth Plenty; and if much,
Scarcity. But this Rule is not always certain.

If the Broom be full of Flowers, it usually signifies Plenty.

The sudden growth of Mushrooms presageth Rain.

Et si nocturnis ardentibus undique testis Avienus.

Concrescunt fungi -- protinus Imbres.
If Coals of Fire shine very clear, it presageth Wind. Of Fire.


If the Fire in Chimneys burn whiter than usual, and with a murmuring noise, it
denotes Tempests.

If the Flame wave to and fro, it signifies Wind. The same does the Flame of
a Candle.

-- Si flammis emicet ignis Avienus.

Effluus, aut lucis substantia langueat ultro,
-- Protinus Imbres.
If Bunches like Mushrooms grow on the wick of the Candle or Lamp, it presageth
Rain.

If fire shine much, or scald, or burn more than ordinary, it presageth cold:
the contrary denotes the contrary.

If Wood crackle or breath more than usual in the fire, it signifies wind: If
Flame cast forth many sparkles, it signifies the same.

If the Oil in the Lamps sparkle, it signifies Rain.

If Ashes coagulate or grow in lumps, it signifies the same.

If the Fire in cold weather burn violently, and make a noise like the treading
of Snow, it usually presageth Snow.

If Salt become moist, it signifies Rain: The same if the Rain Signs of Rain.
raise bubbles as it falls, or if the heat of the Sun be more than ordinary, or
Worms come out of the Earth, or Moles dig more than usual.

If after Rain comes a cold wind, it signifies more Rain.

If in time of great cold the Air grow thick, and the cold abate, Signs of Snow.
or if there be a dry cold without Frost, or if there appear signs of Cold in
signs of Rain, it presageth Snow.

It is usual that a dry Autumn precedes a windy Winter; a windy Winter, a rainy
Spring; a rainy Spring, a dry Summer; a dry Summer, a windy Autumn.

It is observed, that how far the Frost penetrates the Earth in the Winter, the
heat shall in the Summer.

Many are of opinion that the Air and time of the Moon is to be considered in
several Rural Affairs: As that the Increase is Increase of the Moon.
the most fit and best time for the killing of Beasts; and that young Cattle
fallen in the Increase are fittest to wean; and that it is the best time to
plant Vines, and other Fruit Trees; to graft and to prune lean Trees, and cut
Wood; to sow Herbs, and gather Tillage, and cut Meadows.

That at the Full-Moon it is best to fly Hawks, take Marrow, Full.
and take Shellfish, etc.

That at the Decrease it is best to geld young Cattle, to fell Decrease.
durable Timber, to gather Fruits, sow and cut Corn, and lay up Corn; to prune
gross Trees, to gather Grafts and Seeds, and to sow Cucumbers, Melons, Onions,
and Artichoaks.

Dictionarium Rusticum;

OR, THE INTERPRETATIONS AND SIGNIFICATIONS OF SEVERAL RUSTIC TERMS Used in
several places of ENGLAND: And also the Names of several INSTRUMENTS and
MATERIALS Used in this MYSTERY of AGRICVLTVRE;

And other Intricate Expressions dispersed in our Rural Authors.

London: Printed in the Year 1675.

TO THE READER.
THis Dictionary, above any other part of this Book, may be thought
superfluous, because it being intended only for the use of Husbandmen, they
above all others best understand the Terms, and their several Significations;
so that herein we seem to instruct those that are best able to teach us; which
might be true, if they all spoke the same Language: But there is such a Babel
of Confusion, as well in their Terms and Names of things, as there is in the
Practice of the Art of Agriculture it self, that remove a Husbandman but sixty
or an hundred Miles from the place where he has constantly exercised his
Husbandry to another, and he shall not only admire their Method and Order in
Tilling the Land, but also at their strange and uncouth Language and Terms, by
which they name their several Utensils, Instruments, or Materials they use, so
much differing from those used in the Country where he dwells.

Also our several Authors that have written of this Subject, very much differ
in the Appellation of several things, they generally speaking in their Writings
the Language of the Place and Age they lived in; that their Books read in
another part of the Country, or in succeeding times, seem either Fabulous or
Intricate. Wherefore, that our Authors and this present Tract may be the better
understood, and also that one Countryman may understand what another means in a
remote place; I have here given you the Interpretation and Signification of
such Words and Terms that I remember I have either read or heard; which I hope
may satisfy and supply that defect of such a Dictionary that has been so long
complained of. If any Terms are wanting, or not rightly Interpreted, I desire
you to consider the place you live in, where perhaps may be some Terms used, or
so Interpreted, that are not so in any other place of England, which may I hope
sufficiently excuse my ignorance of them; or else they may be Terms so
Universally understood, that they need no Interpretation; as Wheat, Rye, Cart,
VVaggon, etc.

DICTIONARIVM RVSTICVM: OR, The INTERPRETATIONS and SIGNIFICATIONS Of several
RUSTIC TERMS, etc.
A
A Anes, or Awnes; the Spires or Beards of Barley, or other Bearded Grain.

Ablactation is one of the ways of Grafting; that is, weaning the Cion by
degrees from its Mother; being not wholly to be cut therefrom, till it be
firmly united to the Stock on which it is grafted.

Ablaqueation is the taking away the Earth, or uncovering the Roots of Trees.

An Acre is one hundred and sixty square Lug, or Perch of Land, at sixteen foot
and a half to the Perch; but of Coppice-wood eighteen foot to the Perch is the
usual allowance. But an Acre sometimes is estimated by the proportion of Seed
used on it; and so varies, according to the richness or sterility of the Land.

An Acreme of Land is ten Acres.

A Welsh Acre is usually two English Acres.

An Adds is a sharp Tool made different from an Axe, and more convenient for
the cutting of the hollow side of any Board or Timber; such as the Coopers
generally make use of.

Agriculture, the Tilling or Improving of Land.

Alveary, a Hive of Bees.

Apiary, a place or Court where Bees are kept.

An Aquaduct, a Watercourse, or Carriage for water.

Aquaticks, Plants delighting in the water.

To Are, to Plough.

Arders, Fallowings or Ploughings of Ground.

Aromaticks, Plants odoriferous, or having a Spicy smell.

Avenues, Ways or Passages, or Rows or Walks of Trees.

Aviary, a place where Birds are kept, or do resort unto.

Axletree, or Axis; that which the Wheel of a Cart, or suchlike, moves on.

B
BAg, the Udder of a Cow, in some places is called the Cows-Bag.

Balks, Ridges or Banks.

Barth, a warm place or Pasture for Calves or Lambs, etc.

Barrow, is of two sorts; either a Hand-barrow, or a Wheel-barrow.

Barton, a Backside.

Baven, Brush-faggots made with the Brush at length.

Beestings, the first Milk from the Cow after Calving.

Beetle, or Boytle, a wooden Instrument wherewith they drive VVedges, Piles,
Stakes, etc.

Beverage, Drink, or mingled Drink.

A Bill is an Edg-tool at the end of a stale or a handle; if short, then it is
called a Hand-bill; if long, then a Hedging-bill.

A Binn, a place made of Boards to put Corn in.

Blast. Corn is said to be blasted when it is poor and thin in the Ear, with
little Flour in it.

Blight. See Mildew.

Blithe, Yielding Milk.

Bole, or Boale, the main body of a Tree.

Boot, necessary Timber or wood for necessary uses; as Plough-boot, House-boot,
Fire-boot, etc.

Boreas, the North-east wind.

Bow, an Oxe-bow, or Yoke.

Bragget, a Drink made with Honey and Spice, much used in Wales.

Brake, Fern.

Brank, Buck, or French-wheat; a Summer-grain, delighting in warm Land.

A Breast-plough, a sort of Plough driven by main force with ones breast,
commonly used in paring the Turf in Burn-baiting.

A Breck or Brack, a gap in a Hedge.

Brim. A Sow is said to go to Brim when she goes to the Boar.

To Brite or bright Barley, Wheat, and other Grain; and Hops are said to Brite
when they are over-ripe, and shatter.

Browse or brouce, the tops of the branches of Trees that Cattle usually feed
on.

To Burn-beat, or burn the Bait. Vide Denshire.

Bulchin, a Calf.

Bullimony, a mixture of several sorts of Grain.

Bushel; in some places it is taken for two Strike, or two Bushels, and
sometimes for more.

C
ACartwright, one that makes Carts, Wagons, etc.

To Cave, or Chave, is with a large Rake, or suchlike Instrument, to divide the
greater from the lesser; as the larger Chaff from the Corn or smaller Chaff.
Also larger coals from the lesser.

Ceres, the Goddess of Corn, Seeds and Tillage: Also the Title of one of the
Books of Mr. Rea, treating of Seeds.

Chaff, the Refuse or Dust in winnowing of Corn.

Champion, Lands not enclosed, or large Fields, Downs, or places without Woods
or Hedges.

Cheese-lip, the Bag wherein Housewifes prepare and keep their Runnet or Rennet
for their Cheese.

Chitting, the Seed is said to chit when it shoots first its small root in the
Earth.

Cider or Cider, a Drink made of the juice of Apples.

A Ciderist, one that deals in Cider, or an Affector of Cider.

Clogs, pieces of wood, or suchlike, fastened about the Necks, or to the Legs
of Beasts, that they run not away.

A Cock, is of Hay or Corn laid on heaps to preserve it against the extremities
of the weather.

Codware, such Seed or Grain that is contained in Cods; as Pease, Beans, etc.

A Colefire, is a parcel of Firewood set up for sale or use, containing when
it is burnt a Load of Coals.

Collers about the Cattles Necks, by the strength whereof they draw.

Come, The small Fibers, or Tails of Malt.

Compass, or Compost, Soil for Land, Trees, etc.

Coniferous Trees, are such that bear Cones or Clogs, as the Fir, Pine, etc.

A Conservatory, a place to keep Plants, Fruits, etc. in.

A Coom, four Bushels.

Coppice, Copise, or Copse, The smaller sort of wood, or Underwood.

A Cord of wood is set out as the Coalfire, and contains by measure four foot
in breadth, four foot in height, and eight foot in length.

Covert, a shady place for Beasts.

A Cradle, is a frame of wood fixed to a Sithe for the mowing of Corn, and
causes it to be laid the better in swarth; and it is then called a Cradle-Sythe.

A Cratch, a Rack for Hay or Straw. Vide Rack.

A Croft, a small Enclosure.

Crones, old Eaws.

A Crotch, the forked part of a Tree, useful in many cases of Husbandry.

A Crow, or Crome of Iron; an Iron-bar with one end flat.

To Cultivate, to Till.

Culture, Tilling.

A Curry-comb, an Iron-comb wherewith they kemb Horses.

A Curtilage, a Gate-room or Backside.

A Cyon, a young Tree or Slip springing from an old.

D
DAllops, a term used in some places for Patches or corners of Grass or Weeds
among the Corn.

Darnel, Cockle-weed, injurious to Corn.

To Denshire, is to cut off the Turf of Land; and when it is dry, to lay it on
heaps and burn it.

To Delve, to dig.

A Diqble, an Instrument wherewith they make holes for the setting of Beans,
etc.

A Dike, a Ditch.

Dredge, Oats and Barley mixed.

Drought, a long time of dry weather.

Dug of a Cow; that is, the Cows Teat.

A Dung-fork is a Tool of three Tines or Pikes, for the better casting of Dung.

E
TO Ear or Are, to Plough or Fallow.

Earning, Runnet wherewith they convert Milk into Cheese.

Eddish, Eadish, Etch, or Eegrass, the latter Pasture, or Grass that comes
after Mowing or Reaping.

To Edge, to Harrow.

Edifice, Building.

Egistments, Cattle taken in to graze, or be fed by the Week or Month.

Espaliers, Trees planted in a curious order against a Frame, for the bounding
of Walks, Borders, etc.

Exoticks, Foreign Plants, not growing naturally in our English Soil.

F
TO Fallow, To prepare Land by Ploughing, long before it be ploughed for Seed.
Thus may you fallow, twifallow, and trifallow; that is, once, twice or thrice
Plough it before the Seed-time.

A Fan is an Instrument that by its motion Artificially causes Wind; useful
in the winnowing of Corn.

A Farding Land, or Farundale of Land, is the fourth part of an Acre.

A Fathom of Wood, is a parcel of Wood set out, six whereof make a Coal-fire.

To Faulter. Thrashers are said to faulter, when they thrash or beat over the
Corn again.

To Ferment; that is, to cause Beer, Cider, or other Drinks to work, that the
dregs or impurities may be separated upwards or downwards.

Fermentation, such working.

Fertile, Fruitful.

Fertility, Fruitfulness.

Fetters are usually made of Iron, and hanged about the legs of Cattle, that
they leap not, or run away.

Fuel, any combustible matter wherewith a fire is made.

Filly, a She-colt.

Fimble Hemp, that is the yellow early Hemp.

Flayl, a thrashing Instrument.

Floating, or drowning, or watering of Meadows: Also Floating of a Cheese, is
the separating the Whey from the Curd.

Flora, the Goddess of Flowers. Also the Title of Mr. Rea his Excellent
Treatise of Flowers.

Fodder, Hay, Straw, or suchlike food for Cattle.

Foison, plenty of Riches.

Foisty, Musty.

Fork. There are several sorts of them; some of Wood, some of Iron; some for
Hay, others for Corn, etc.

To Foyl, That is, to fallow Land in the Summer, or Autumn.

Fragrant, Smelling pleasantly.

Frith, Underwood, or the shroud of Trees.

A Frower, An Edg-tool used in cleaving Lath.

Furrow, The low fall or drain in Land, either left by the Plough, or otherwise
made.

G
A Gap, An open place in a Hedge, or suchlike.

A Garner, A Granary to put Corn in.

Georgicks, Belonging to Husbandry or Tillage; as Virgil's Georgicks, his Books
of Husbandry.

Germins, Young shoots of Trees.

Germination, A budding forth.

Glandiferous, Bearing Mast.

To Glean, To pick up or gather the shattered Corn.

A Goad, A small staff or rod with a sharp Iron-pin at the end thereof, to
quicken Horses or Oxen in their motion.

A Geoff, or Goffe, A Mow or Reek of Corn.

To Gore, To make up such Mows or Reeks.

Goss, or Gorse, Furzes.

Groats, Oats after the Hulls are off, or great Oatmeal.

Grubbage. See Mattock.

H
TO Hale, or Hawl, To draw.

Harneys, Ropes, Collers, and other Accoutrements fitted to Horses, or other
Beasts, for their drawing.

Hatches, Floodgates placed in the water to obstruct its current.

Haws, the Fruit of the White-thorn.

Hawm, The stalks of Pease, Beans, or suchlike.

Head-land, That which is ploughed overthwart at the ends of the other Lands.

Heckle, An Instrument used in the trimming and perfecting of Hemp and Flax for
the Spinner, by dividing the Tow or Hurds from the Tare.

Helm, Is Wheat or Rye-straw unbruised by thrashing or otherwise, and bound in
bundles for Thatching.

Heps, The Fruit of the Black-thorn.

Herbage, The Feeding, Grazing, or Mowing of Land.

Heyrs, Young Timber Trees that are usually left for Standils in the felling of
Copses.

Hide-bound, A Disease whereunto Trees as well as Cattle are subject.

A Hind, a Servant in Husbandry.

Hillock, A little Hill, as a Hop-hill, etc.

Hogs, In some places Swine are so called; in some places young Weathers.

Hook, Land Tilled and Sown every year.

Hopper, Wherein they carry their Seed-corn at the time of Sowing: Also the
Vessel that contains the Corn at the top of the Mill.

How, An Instrument made like a Coopers Adds, for the cutting up of Weeds in
Gardens, Fields, etc. and between Beans, Pease, etc.

Hovel, A mean Building or Hole for any ordinary use.

Hoven, Cheese that is raised or swelled up.

Hull, or Hulls, the Chaff of Corn.

Hurds of Flax or Hemp, are the worser parts separated from the Tare in the
Heckling of it, whereby may be made Linnen-cloath.

Hutch, A Vessel or Place to lay Grain, or suchlike thing in: Also a Trap made
hollow for the taking of Weasels, or suchlike Vermin alive.

Hut, A small Hovel, or Cottage.

I
A Jack, A term sometimes used for a Horse whereon they saw Wood.

Isles, or Oiles. Vide Aanes.

An Imp, a young Tree.

Infertile, Barren.

Inoculation, The grafting or placing of the Bud of one Tree, into the stock or
branch of another.

Irrigation, Watering of a Meadow, Garden, etc.

Irroration, A bedewing or besprinkling of a Plant.

Junames, That is, Land sown with the same Grain it was sown with the precedent
year.

Juter, A term by some used for the fertile coagulating saltish nature of the
Earth.

K
KArle Hemp; That is, the latter green Hemp.

Kell, or Kiln, whereon they dry Malt or Hops.

L
LActary, A Dairy-house.

Laire, Layer, or Lieare, Places where Cattle usually repose themselves under
some shelter, the ground being enriched by their Soil.

A Lath, a Barn.

Laund, or Lawn in a Park, Plain and untilled ground.

To Lease, or Leaze. Vide to Glean.

Lentils, A sort of Grain less than Fitches.

Litter, Straw, or suchlike stuff for Cattle to lodge on.

To Lock, is a term used by Drivers in moving the Fore-wheels of a Wagon to
and fro.

Log, A term used in some places for a cleft of Wood, in some places for a long
Piece or Pole, by some for a small Wand or Switch.

To Lop, To cut off the head-branches of a Tree.

A Lug. Vide Perch.

Lynchet, A certain line of Green-sword or Bounds, dividing Arable Land in
Common Fields.

M
MAds, a Disease in Sheep.

Manger, The place wherein beasts eat Corn, or other short Meat.

A Mash, or Mesh; Ground-corn, or suchlike, boiled in water for Cattle to eat.

Mast, The fruits of wild Trees, as of Oaks, Beech, etc.

Mattock, A Tool wherewith they grub Roots of Trees, Weeds, etc. by some called
a Grub-axe, or Rooting-axe. Mature, Ripe.

A Mayn-Comb, wherewith they kemb Horses Mayns.

A Meak, wherewith they Mow or Hack Pease, or Brake, etc.

Mere, The same as Lynchet.

Mildew, A certain Dew falling in the Months of June and July; which being of a
Viscous Nature, much impedes the growth or Maturation of Wheat, Hops, etc.
unless a shower of Rain wash it off. It is also very sweet; as appears by the
Bees so mightily enriching their stores thereby.

Mislen, or Maslen; Corn mixed, as Wheat with Rye, etc.

Mogshade, The shadows of Trees, or suchlike.

Mold, Earth.

Mounds, Banks or Bounds.

Muck, Dung or Soil.

Murc, The Husks or Chaff of Fruits, out of which Wine or other Liquors is
pressed.

Must, The new Liquor or Pressure of Fruits, before Fermentation.

N
NEat, A Heifer, or any of the kind of Beeves.

A Neat-herd, A Keeper of Neat, Beeves or Cows.

A Nursery, A place set apart for the raising of young Trees or Stocks.

O
OLlet, Fuel.

Olitory, An Olitory-garden is a Kitchen-garden, or a Garden of Herbs, Roots,
etc. for food.

Ost, Oost, or Eest; The same as Kell or Kiln.

P
A Paddle-staff; A long Staff with an Iron Bit at the end thereof, like a small
Spade, much used by Mole-catchers.

A Pail, The same as a Bucket.

Pallisade; A sort of slight open Pale or Fence, set to beautify a place or
Walk.

Palms, The white Excrescencies of Buds of Sallies or Withy coming before the
Leaf.

Pannage, The feeding of Swine or other Cattle on the Mast, or other Herbage,
in Forests, Woods, etc.

A Panel, Pad, or Pack-saddle; Kinds of Saddles whereon they carry burdens
on Horseback.

Parterre, or Partir; A name proper to a Garden divided into Beds, Walks, and
Borders for curious Flowers, Herbs, etc.

Pease-bolt, Pease-hawm, or Straw.

Pedware, Pulse.

Penstocks. See Hatches.

A Perch, or Lug, is sixteen foot and a half Land-measure, but is usually
eighteen foot to measure Coppice-woods withal.

A Pike, A Fork or Prong of Iron.

A Pile, A parcel of Wood, two whereof make one Coal-fire.

A Piscary, A liberty of Fishing, or a place where Fishes are confined.

A Pitch-fork, or Pick-fork; the same with Pike.

A Plough, A term used in the Western parts for a Team of Horse or Oxen.

A Plough-wright, One that makes Ploughs.

Podds, The Cods or Shells of Cod-ware, or any other Seed.

Pollard, or Pollinger; An old Tree usually lopped.

To Polt, To beat or thrash.

Pomona, The Goddess of Fruits: Also the Title of several Treatises of
Fruit Trees.

Pregnant, Full as a Bud, or Seed, or Kernel ready to sprout.

A Prong, The same as Pike.

To Propagate, To increase or multiply any thing.

A Propagator, A Planter.

To Prune, To trim Trees, by cutting off the superfluous Branches or Roots.

Puckets, Nests of Cater-pillars, or suchlike Vermin.

A Puddock, or Purrock; A small Enclosure.

Q
QVincunx, Is an order of planting Trees or Plants, that may be in order every
way.

R
A Rack, A place made to contain Hay, or other Fodder, for Beasts to feed on.

To Ree, or Ray; To handle Corn in a Sieve, so as the chaffy or lighter part
gather to one place.

Reed, is either the long grass that grows in Fens, or watery places, or Straw
bound up for thatching, by some called Helm. See Helm.

A Reek of Corn, a Mow or Heap of Corn, so laid for its preservation out of
any Barn.

A Reek-staval, A frame of Wood placed on stones, on which such Mow is raised.

Resinaceous, Roseny, or yielding Rosin.

Rice, The shrouds or tops of Trees, or fellings of Coppices.

A Ride of Hazle, or suchlike Wood, is a whole plump of Sprigs or Frith growing
out of the same Root.

The Ridge, The upper edge of a Bank, or other rising Land.

A Rock; an Instrument generally used in some parts for the Spinning of Flax or
Hemp.

A Rod. See Perch.

A Roller wherewith they roll Barley, or other Grain.

A Rood, a fourth part of an Acre.

Rough, The rough Coppice-wood, or Brushy-wood.

Rowen, Rough Pasture full of Stubble or Weeds.

Rudder, or Ridder, The widest sort of Sieves for the separating the Corn from
the Chaff.

Runnet; A certain sour matter, made use of by Country-Housewives for the
Coming (or coagulation) of their Cheese.

Rural, Of, or belonging to the Country.

Rusticities, Country-affairs.

Rustic, Country-like.

S
A Seed-lop, or Seed-lip; The Hopper or Vessel wherein they carry their Seed at
the time of Sowing.

A Seminary; a place where you sow seeds for the raising of Trees or Plants.

To Sew, To drain Ponds, Ditches, etc.

Shake-time; The season of the Year that Mast and such Fruits fall from Trees.

A Shard. Vide Gap.

A Shed, a place erected and covered over for shelter for Cattle, or any other
use, against a wall, or other Edifice.

To Sheer, is used in the Northern parts for to Reap.

Shock, Several sheaves of Corn set together.

A Shrape, or Scrape; a place baited with Chaff, or Corn, to entice Birds.

To Shroud, To cut off the head-branches of a Tree.

A Sickle, a toothed Reap-hook.

A Site, or Site; a principal Manor, or Farm-house.

A Skepe, or Scuttle; a flat and broad Basket, made to carry Corn withal.

A Skreyn is an Instrument made of Wire on a Frame, for the dividing of Corn
from Dust, Cockle, Ray, etc. Also it is usually made of Lath for the skreining
of Earth, Sand, Gravel, etc.

Slab, The outside sappy Plank or Board sawn off from the sides of Timber.

A Sled; a thing without Wheels, whereon to lay a Plough, or other ponderous
thing to be drawn.

A Sluice, a Vent or Drain for water.

Sneed, or Snead; The handle of a Sithe, or suchlike Tool.

Souse, The Offal of Swine.

Soutage, Course Cloth, or bagging for Hops, or suchlike.

A Spade, or Spitter, wherewith they dig or delve: Also a Cutting-Spade
wherewith they cut Hay or Corn-Mowes.

Stack of Corn. See Reek.

Staddles, Standils, or Standards; Trees reserved at the felling of Woods for
growth for Timber.

Stail, The handle of a Tool.

Stale, a living Fowl, put in any place to allure other Fowl, where they may be
taken.

Stercoration, Dunging.

Sterile, Barren.

Stover, Straw.

A Strike of Flax, so much as is heckled at one handful. Also it signifies an
Instrument wherewith they strike Corn in the measuring. Also it is used in the
Northern parts for a Measure containing about a Bushel.

Structures, Buildings.

A Sturk, a young Beeve, or Heifer.

A Sty, a place for fatting or keeping Swine.

Succulation, a Pruning of Trees.

Succulent, Juicy.

A Sull, a term used for a Plough in the Western parts.

A Sull-paddle, a small Spade-staff or Instrument to cleanse the Plough from
the clogging Earth.

To Summer-stir, To fallow Land in the Summer.

A Sussingle; a large Girt that Carriers use to bind or fasten their Packs
withal.

Sward. Ground is said to have a Sward, or to be swarded, when it is well grown
or Coated over with Grass, or other Vegetables.

Swath, or Swarth; Grass, Corn, or suchlike, as it is laid by the Mower from
the Sithe.

Swill, Used in the Northern parts for shade, or shadow.

To Swingle Flax, a term used by Flax-dressers.

A Swine-herd, a Keeper of Swine.

A Sithe, wherewith they Mow Grass or Corn.

T
TAre of Flax, the finest dressed part thereof ready for the Spinner.

Tares, A sort of Grain.

To Ted, To turn or spread new-mown Grass.

A Teem, or Team; A certain number of Horses, or other Beasts, for the Draught.

Terrasse, a Walk on a Bank or Bulwark.

Tet; The Cows Dug by some is called the Tet.

A Thrave of Corn contains four Shocks, each Shock consisting of six Sheaves.

A Tike, a small Bullock or Heifer.

Tills, Lentils, a sort of Pulse.

Tylth, Soil, or other improvement of Land.

The Tine, or Grain of a Fork.

Tits, Small Cattle.

A Trendle, a flat Vessel, by some called a Kiver.

A Trough, a Vessel to hold water, etc. to feed Cattle in, etc. or for the
beating of Apples for Cider, or the like.

A Trundle, a thing made and set on low Wheels to draw heavy burdens on.

A Trunchion, a piece of Wood cut short like a Quarter-staff.

A Tumbrel, a Dung-cart.

V
AVat, a Vessel to contain Beer, Ale, Cider, or any other Liquor in its
preparation.

Valor, or Vallow, or Vate; a Concave-Mold wherein a Cheese is pressed.

Vindemiation; The gathering of Grapes, or reaping the Fruit of any thing; as
of Cherries, Apples, Bees, etc.

To Vindemiate, To gather the same Fruits.

Vinous, Winy.

Underwood; Coppice, or any other Wood that is not esteemed Timber.

Vrry; The blew Clay that is dug out of the Coal-mines, and lies next the
Coal, being crude and immature, and used for soyling of Land.

Vtensils, Instruments used in any Art, especially Husbandry.

W
AWantey. Vide Sussingle.

Wattell, The naked fleshie matter that hangs about a Turkeys head.

A Weanel, a young Beast newly weaned.

Whinnes, Furzes.

A Wind-row, Hay or Grass raked in Rows, in order to be set up in Cocks.

Winlace, or Winch; that by which any burden is wound up, or drawn out of a
Well, or other deep place.

To Winnow, to separate by Wind the Corn from the Chaff.

To Winter-rig, to fallow Land in the Winter.

Wood-land, Places where much Woods are; or it is generally taken for Countries
enclosed.

Y
A Yate, or Yatt; A Gate.

A Yoke, is either an Instrument for Oxen to draw by, or to put on Swine, or
other unruly Creatures, to keep them from running through Hedges.

Z
ZEphyrus, The West-winde.

An ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF The Principal Matters before treated of.
A
OF the Abele Tree Page 83 Agriculture, what it is 1 The Air, it is diverse
signification 298 Of the Alaternus 86 Of the Alder-Tree 83 Almonds 103 Anise,
the ordering thereof 154 Ants, and Ant-hills to destroy 216 Angling 253 The
Apiary, its form and manner 170 Apples 99 The Apple Tree id. April's
Observations 269 Aprecocks 107 Aquatic-Trees 83. 92. 93 Arable Land, it is
improvement 31 Arbor Vitae 87 Artichoaks 151 Artichoaks of Jerusalem 155 The
Ass 160 Ashes, their use 66 The Ash, it is propagation and use 79 Asparagus 151
The Aspen 83 Augusts Observations 279
B
BAuk-hooks to lay 257 Barbel to take 258 Barley 36 Its Use 51 Barberries 103
Bark of Trees a good Soil 71 The Bay Tree 86 Bat-fowling 246 Beasts 160 Beam.
See Horn -Beam and Quick-Beam Their signification in change of Weather Several
Beasts injurious to Husbandry 208 Beans of diverse sorts 38. 149 The Beech, it is
propagation and use 78 Beans called French or Kidney-Beans 150 Bees, the
several ways of ordering them, from page 168. to page 188 Beets 154 Small Birds
to destroy 213 The Birch 81 Of making and using Bird-lime 238. 246 The
Black-thorn 89 Blight to prevent 207 Bobbing 258 Box 87 Bream to take 257 Brick
and Tiles to make 232 Buck-wheat 37 Building, profitable Experiments therein
229 Burning of Land, or Burn-baiting 58, 59, 60 Of Rushie and Mossie Ground 23
Of Stones, Chalk, etc. 61
C
CAbbages and Coleworts 153 Carp to take 256 Carriages in Watering Meadows 21
Carts and Wagons, the several sorts 226 Carrots 154 Cedar 86 Cherries 101
Chestnut, it is propagation and use 80 Chevin and Chub to take 258 Chalk, the use
thereof 61 Cider, the making thereof 126, 127 Cignet, to fat 167 Cisterns, or
Pits for Water to make 196 Clay and Cold Land, its use 32 Clay, its use 63
Clouds, their signification 295 Clover-grass, its improvement and use 25 Cold
and Frost, remedies against it 197 Coleflower 153 Coleseed, its use 42. 52
Codlings to plant 118. 121 Coneys to destroy 162. 209 Cormorant-Fishing 259
Corn, its preservation 52 Cows and Oxen 161 Cow Dung 66 Copses, the planting of
them 91. 95 Crows to kill 211 Cucumbers 150 Currants 104. 107 Cyprus-Tree 86
D
DAce to take 257 Decembers Observations 287 Decoy-Ponds 243 Digging of Land 34
Dictionarium Rusticum 313 Street-Dirt, its use 65 Diseases of Trees 125. 219 Of
Beasts and Fowl 217 Dividing of Land an improvement 13 Dogs 162 Draining of
Land 21 Drowning of Land. See watering of Land Drought its prevention 193
Dueks, and Decoy-Ducks 165 Dunging of Land, and the time thereof 24. 58. Dungs
of Beasts, Fowl, etc. 66, 67, 68 Dyars Weed 148
E
EArth, its use in soyling of Land 64. 71 Fullers Earth 63 Its Prognostical
signification 302 Echoes, their signification Eels to take 257 Eggs, their
increase and artificial hatching 164 Elder-Tree 89 Elm, its propagation and use
76 Enclosure, an improvement 10. 23 Impediments to Enclosure 12 Enemies to Bees
183 Enemies to Husbandry 193 Engine for stubbing up Shrubs, etc. 23 For setting
of Corn 44, 45 For sowing of Corn 47 Advantages thereof 49 Esparcet 29
Eugh-Tree 86
F
FEbruary's Observations 267 Felling of Trees and Coppices 95, 96, 97 Fences,
the making 88 Fern to destroy 207 Fertility Causes of 6 Fetches 38 Figs 107
Filberts 103 Fire, its signification Fir Tree 85 To take all sorts of Fish 250
Fish for soil 66 Their significations Flax, its manner of sowing and ordering
39, 40 The use of its Seed 52 Of Fowl 163 Of taking all sorts of Fowl 236
Several to destroy 211 Of the Fowling-piece 241 Several predict the change of
Weather S. Foyn, its improvement and use 28 Foxes to take 208 French Wheat 37
Fruit Trees, their profit and pleasure 98 Fruits, their use and benefit 98, 99,
etc. 126 Furzes 89
G
GArden-Tillage 132 Preparing the Ground 157 Garlic 156 Geese 164 Several ways
of fatting 165 Goats 162 Gooseberries 104 Goose-Dung 68 Grafting-Trees 108,
109, 110, 111, etc. Grafts choice and keeping 111 Grailing to take 258 Grain,
the different Species thereof 35, 36, 37, 38 Of some Grasses 29 Grass long in
Wiltshire 30
H
HAir, a good Soil 71 Hay, or Grass, several new Species thereof 24 Hasel-Tree
82 Hedges the best 89 Hemp, its manner of sowing and ordering 39, 40 The use of
its Seed 52 Impediments to its improvement 39 Highways impediments to Enclosure
12 Hives for Bees 173 Wooden 174 Of Glass id. Holy-Tree 88 Hops, and the ways
of ordering them, from page 133. to page 146 Horns, a good Soil 71 Horn-Beam 82
Of the Horse 160 Dung 66 Chesnut-Tree 85 Hot-beds to make 158 House, its
convenient situation 230 The How, and its use 228 Howing of Corn 46
I
JAnuary's Observations 265 Inoculation of Trees 116 Insects 168 Their
signification Insects to destroy 214 Instruments of Agriculture 223, 227, 228,
229 Juniper-Tree 87 Juices of Fruits. See Wines 130 July's Observations 277
Junes Observations 275
K
KAlendarium Rusticum Kilns for the drying of Hops, their several Descriptions
142
L
LA Lucern, its improvement, and the manner of sowing thereof 29 Larch and
Lotus Trees 85 Larks to take 244 Laurel-Tree 86 Leeks 156 Lentils 38 Lettuce
154 Lime, and the use thereof 61 Lime-Tree 84 Liquorice, its Plantation and use
146 Low-Bell to use 245 Lupins 38
M
MAdder 148 Manuring of Land 58 Maple-Tree 82 Marl, the use and the different
kinds thereof 62 Marches Observations 269 Mays Observations 273 Maslin 37
Medlars 103 Meadows, their profit 15 Several ways of watering them id. 16, 17
Impediments to Drowning 16 Meadows dry, their improvement 22 Melons 150
Mercury, one of the principles of Vegetables ^^2 Metheglin, the different ways
of making thereof 188, 189. Mice to destroy 210 Mildews the cause 814 Remedies
against them 201 Mills to amend 234 Mists, their signification 295 Moles to
destroy 209 Moon, its various signification 292 Mortar the best 233 Mud 66
Mulberries 102 Mule 161 Myrtle-Tree 87
N
Neighbors ill, remedies against them 222 The form of a Draw-Net 237 Novembers
Observations 285 Nursery for Trees 90, 91
O
OAk, its propagation and use 75 Oats 37 Their use 51 Observations about
Fruit Trees 123 About Cider 129 Octobers Observations 283 Onions 155 Osier 83
Otters to take 208 Oxen. Vide Cows Oyster shells, a good Soil 66
P
PArsnips 155 Pasture-lands, their improvement 22 Partridges to take 248
Peaches 107 Peacocks 167 Pears 100 Pease 37 Garden-Pease 149 Perry, the making
thereof 128 Perch to take 255 Persian-Wheel 18 Pheasants 167 To take 247
Phillyrea 86 Pigeons, and the several ways to order and increase them 166 To
keep them from Cornfieldsd 212 Their Dung 68 Pikes to take 255 Pine, Pinaster,
and Pitch-tree 85 Piscary to make 252 Pyracantha 88 Platanus-Tree 8 Plough, the
invention thereof, and its use 31 The several sorts of Ploughs 223 Plums 103
Poor and barren Land, its improvement 33 Poplar 83 Potatoes 155 Poultry, their
profit and manner of ordering 163, 164 Privet 86 Principles, or matter of
Vegetables. 3. 6 Prognostics 289 And Observations Promiscuous 289 Pruning of
Trees 95. 122 Pulse 38 Their use 51 Pompians 150
Q
QVick-Beam 82 Quick-set Hedges 89 Quinces 102 Quincunx to plant 121
R
RAdishes 155 Rags, a good Soil 70 Rain much; remedies against it 200 Rainbow,
its signification Rape and Cole-seed 42 Their use 52 Rasberries 104 Removing of
Trees 92. 119 Rye 37 Its use 51 Roach to take 257 La Romein, or French-tares 29
Roots of Trees, the ordering 123 Rot in Sheep to prevent and cure 218 Rushes,
Flags, etc. to destroy. 206 Rushie Land, its improvement 59
S
SAffron 147 Salley 83 Salmon to take 255 Salt, one of the principles of
Vegetables 3 Salt, a good Soil 70 Saltness of the Sea the causes thereof 5
Sand, its use 64 Water-Sand, its use 64, 65 Sandy-lands, its improvement 24
Savoys 154 Saxifrage 30 Sea, significations therefrom 302 Seeds; the
preparations of all sorts before they are sown 53 Septembers Observations 281
Sowing of Garden-Seeds 158 Seeds of Trees, the manner of sowing and ordering
90, 91. 117 Service-Tree 81. 104 Setting of Corn 43 Sheep 161 Sheeps-Dung 67
Rotting to prevent and cure. See Rot Shot to make 241 Silkworms, their manner
of ordering 190 Sycamore-Tree 84 Skirrets 155 Slips and Suckers of Trees 118
Smut to cure 207 Snail, Cod, or Snag-greet 65 Soyling of Land, and the several
sorts of Soyls 24. 58. 69 Spades several sorts 227 Several new Species of Hay
or Grass 24 Of Grain, Corn, or Pulse 35 Spirits out of Grain* 55 The Universal
Spirit, or Mercury 2 Springes to make 240 Spurry-seed 29 Stales for Fowling 245
Stars, their various significations 292 Staking of Trees 93 Stalking for Fowl
242 Sting of a Be to cure 182 Stocks, what to graft and Inoculate on 108
Strawberries 152 Stones and Shrubs enemies to Husbandry 205 Stubbing up of
Shrubs 23 Sulphur, one of the Principles of Vegetables 2 Sun, its various
significations 290 Swans 167 Swarming of Bees 176 Swine 161 Dung 67
T
TAmarisk 87 Tares 38 Tench to take 256 Thieves, remedies against 220 Thunder
and Tempest, remedies against 201 Timber the best for building 234 Advantages
of Timber 72, 73, 74 Tillage, improvement of Land 132 Tobacco 156 Trees, their
propagation and advantage 72 To Transplant 92. 119 Trefoyl 30 Trenching-Plough
227 Trout to take 255 Turkeys 165 Turnips 42. 155
V
THe true matter of Vegetables 3 Vine 103 Vmber to take 258 Vrins, good for
Land, etc. 69 Vrry, a good Soil 71 Uses of Corn, Grain, Pulse, etc. 51
W
WAlls the best way to build 233 Wallnut-Tree 80. 101 Wall-Trees 104 Water, its
signification 302 Water, to prevent overmuch 203 Want of Water, its remedies
195 Watering of Land 15 The times for Watering 22 Bad Water for Lands 22
Watering of Trees 93 Watering of Gardens 158 Weather-Glass 299 Sea-Weeds, and
Weeds in Rivers 65 Weeds to prevent 206 Wheat, the diverse kinds thereof 35, 36
Its use 51 The White-Thorn 88 Winds, their signification 296 High Winds,
remedies against them 200 Defending Trees from Wind 124 Wind mill for watering
Meadows 20 Wines, or Juices of Fruits 130 The Withy and Willow 83, 84 Woad, its
manner of ordering 41 Woodcocks to take 249
FINIS.

