Orbilius Vapulans OR A Juniper Lecture FOR A Moth.eaten Sch^^^

By the Author of the Coffee Scuffle.

Torva-Mimalloneis implerunt Cornua bombis,
(...) rapium vitulo caput ablatura superbo
Bassaris, and lyncem Maenas flexura corymbis,
Evion ingeminat, reparabilis adsonat Echo:
Persii. Sat 1. (...): When I do well, Fanatics ill do prate:
Each Loyal soul must still expect my fate.
London, Printed in the Year, 1662.

Orbilius Vapulans
A Riddle.
Unfold this Riddle Corydon or Jynx,
Who Is He that is both Oedipus and Sphynx?
The Solution.
It is the Doubty Paedagogue I ween
With Flounder's face, Hogs snout, and Grinders keen,
Who Coffee drank, and then disgorg'd the Scum
In Verse, preferred to many a Loyal bum;
Evans ap Shone's, ap Morgan, are his names
He flew from Penmen-maure to th'banks of Thames
HOld good Knock sergus! but have Drones their stings?
May Pedagogu's, and such inferior things,
Thus play the Tyrants, stamp upon the Stage,
Outstorme an Hector, and like Bravoes rage?
Rods into Scepters Bloom, Peasants, commence
Dictators now, Quintilian act's the Prince;
School's Flourish into Courts, and each bold wight,
Is a Fanatic or a Parasite.
Hark how he greets me, ho! at what a rate
He complements! I challenge Billings gate
From the crab Trull, unto the Oyster Queen
To forge a name more ugly and obscene,
Than are the best, the most refind of these;
Mephytis sink of all scurrilities!
The ^^^sty Lyrick in feverer rimes
Never lash't the Drolls, and bablers of the Times;
Nor Caesar's Favorite with greater rage
Kick't the Grammarians off the Roman Stage,
Then this proud Sciolist, absurd Pedant
(But that he does their wit and learning want)
Gib's his Antagonist: Good Gaffer hold!
So the poor Cuckold did in Plautus scold.
Avaunt Jack Cleaveland! see you come not nigh,
By forty foot! E. is too hard for I:
You whose each Verse could discipline a Drab,
That bite like Scorpions, like Stillettos stab;
You that could with a Drop of Ink, no more
Make Adoniram run, and Marshall roar;
You that could murder with a single shot
The motly Synod, and the Rebel Scot;
Fell Monster born with teeth, strung all with wire,
A Woolf thy Nurse, a Dragon was thy Sire!
Here is the Poet Jack, ay! here is he
None of the fudling gang, whose fantasy
Floats with the liquour, does augment and grow,
Fall, dwindle'as the Goblets ebb and flow.
Such Greek and Latin lines the fool does draw
As Virgil never scanned, nor Homer saw.
But tell me good Sir Knight, pray why is it
You thus engage your self sans fear or wit?
What Windmill, Umbra, May Pole, Zealous sir
Offends your Gizzard, that you thus bestir
The Weapens of your Warrfare? when by chance
It Is but the Spectre that does frisk and dance
In your own fancy; Anagrams declare
Yet him conceal whose name the letters bear.
Fie wretched Codrus! thus to fret and vex
For nothing! Brawles so well become your sex?
Knave, Rascal, Villain, Helhound, Hector, Sor,
Groom, Hangman, Scullion, Pick-thank and what not?
Smooth Epethits in truth, so women use
For Recreation sake to disabuse
Themselves, so the meek and dissenting Saint
Does Loyal Levy brand and represent:
Britannicus, Cretensis breath in you
The Youngling Elder, and Smectymnuus too*
It Is one thing Sir to punish and chastise
A stubborn boy whose immoralities
Call for severer censures, but withal
Another thing to Scuffle for the Ball.
You smite his lewd posteriours, he poor thing
After one stroke about your knee's does cling,
Kisses the rod: while the bold enemy
Kicks at the hand, and spurn's the penalty.
Suppose young Phaethon crack his Father's Whip,
Scourges Pyroeis, mak's old Phlegon skip,
Wot you the angry steeds will softly go,
And not the waine and Giddy Guide overthrow?
If Beasts, if Worms, and Flies disdain, abhor
Affronts and Injuries, sure men much more.
I cannot bear it (Lord) I cannot do it,
Say every lash did slay a sin to boot,
A mortal sin; suppose this instant were
Good Friday, and the man my confessor;
Faith were I stripped of flesh, were I refined
Into a shadow, were the spright and mind
The bigger half, had the Promethean fire
Rarified nature from its dreggs and mire:
A ring, a ring (Brave Boys) I neither fear,
His frown, nor Court his smile, the Wooden Bear,
Rod, ferula, slight poor and trivial Tools
Made for to fray and scare chitts, changlings, fools;
Be still a while, nor me in the least annoy,
I am resolved to act the Stubborn boy.
And yet methinks what ever the vixen says,
It Is some small comfort to be lash't with Bays,
Smart Rods but sweet! a Satyrist both claws
And bites at once! Black Monday makes white boy's.
Instruction is like Physic, less or more
May be received at the Postern door.
Me thinks I could even strip my self, expose
My naked loins unto the stripes and blows
Of an Ingenious hand, could hear him crack
The threefold cord, Plow furrows on my back;
But to be bastinado'd by a base
And forbid Rascal, to expose my face
To slaves, to have my Groom (whose villainies
The skittish Colt did with his hoof chastise)
To cuff and kick me, to o'reheare a sot,
A Tyro, Dunce, a Fool, call Idiot;
This, this would eve'n enrage, provoke, incense
A man of Marble, try the patience
Of Job, make Socrates himself to mutter
An Israelite repine, and Moses stutter.
Nor say Ingenious Souls can'er be led
To curse, to slander, and molest the dead;
Kick bones about the streets, rifle the Urnes
Of Priests and Princes, clip the Flame that burns
In the still grot, blow ashes here and there,
As Winds whiff meteors to and fro in the air:
If Grotius be an Heretic, a son
Of the old Whore, he was a Learned one;
If not, let nothing that is vile be said;
Speak well behind his back, the Lyon's dead.
They Are Wolves and Tigers will not wink, and spare
The quiet Trunks, and silent heaps that are
In Tombs, whom Searcloths do defend and keep,
And on whose locks, Stones, Clay, and Marbles Weep:
And he that shall display the nakedness
Of a dead father, not at all confess
A blush, deride scoff at the modest man
That turn's his head, cal't superstition,
This wretch transcends the Devil and his Dam
May he be son and heir to cursed Cham!
And thou Religious soul how could thou choose,
But bleed to see the Miscreant abuse
Those sacred Crumms? and in a holy rage
(For passion thou have none) ascend the Stage
Chide the Sacrilegist? who now defies
Thee and the Goblin, tells a thousand lies.
How could thou suffer an indignity
From such a Worm, a Mirmidon as he
And not have gi'n the Crow's him presently?
Come forth thou son of Mars, unsheath thy blade,
Send his black Soul into the Stygian shade;
Where grizly firends with sharp and flaming rods
Preach justice, and submission to the gods.
Know you that were spectators at that time,
None held their peace but did abet the crime:
Call it not Peccadillo* little, small;
'Twas gross, 'twas divellish, it was national.
Say had the Combat been twixt thee and I,
The Latin Moth, and the poor English fly;
The Frog and Mouse that in the Fable were,
The Humble be, and the incensed Bear;
Woe worth thy days, poor Taffee, splutternayles,
Her would have sent her packing into Wales
With a blind Gypsy and a pass: for all*
Her pettigree and monthly vailes not small.
But oh the Pamphlet! oh! the monstrous ragg
Blown to and fro, 'twould make one break his Cragg
To read the Libell, faith it seems to me
No other than a sucking prodigy.
Did ever London see, good Gossip speak
A Romish bantling with an English Beak?
Brekekekex, the Empusa appears,
Runaway Jack and he that lost his ears,
Old Hugh, blind Milton, Jeamy, Zepheniah
The Savoy Woolf, lewd Ned great Obadiah
Never Fathered such a mome, the Son and Heir
Of some light wanton Incubus I swear.
The two legged Puppy that the elders made
Kenel'd: for lusty swash forsooth had laid
His tail in Jeanys lap, the shagged Moore
That a fair Maddam by a Monkey bore;
The Scotch spread Eagle which (the Legends say)
A holy Sister hatched the other day,
Add Filly foal to boot, the hopeful Heir
Of Green the Quaker, and old Roan his Mare;
None of all these a sweeter Moppet was,
Trust me it is a dainty babe of grace.
Was ever man so gross, so damned a fool!
An English Title and a Latin Scroll?
Right Sturbridg Ware, a Linsy Woolsy pack,
Party perpale, Tiffe dashed with nobler Sack;
Greek, Latin, English, jumbl'd in one sheet,
Bombolobombaxe and Alastor meet.
A Learned Weaver (if I ha'nt mistook)
Fixed a Greek Title to an English Book;
The Whipping Presbyter though much to blame
Christen's a Scotch Barn with a Romish name;
But never any man played such a trick
As this (without a scoff) a cuff, a kick
Is thy desert; it had been well if you
Had wrote the Prologue in red letters too.
The Coffee Scoffer cuff't and kicked, a bold
And odious Title! Skittish jades of old
Kick harmless passengers: but then I fegs
They clap bolts, padlocks, trammells on their legs.
O thou mischeivous Beast, plague worse than froggs
And lice, kick me no kicks! go kick your dogs
Your slaves, your boys, get to your school there you
Are Tyrant Tray tor, Judge and hangman too.
Think then proud Caitiff any man will be
So much a dolt? as to be spurned by thee?
By thee base worm! proud Pedant, Mushrome, Slave
To every shit- breech boy and pistay'l knave?
No no pimp, prickear, villan, dandeprat,
(An Object fitter for contempt then hate)
I scorn thy threats (by Kate and Ixions wheels)
Kick once more Sir: I Will lay you by the heels:
And leave you no more ears, (by Bucer's bones)
Then it is reported Captain M. d has stones.
But had the Romans such good hands and hoofs,
Played they at football, and at fisticuffs?
Sure no! The sword, the bow, the warlike spear
Become the camp, the Amphitheatre:
Yet heels do not amiss, what ever you say
First they offend, and then they run away.
But oh it is not enough (bold knave) for thee
To kick thy foe but he must slandered be;
Dirt, Ordure, filth is thrown in every part;
As if so be you would studied the black Art;
Had vowed, resolved to render me deforme,
And ugly as thy self, vile worthless worm!
I am a scoffer! thou a liar art!
And though five thousand devils take thy part
I Will prove the charge; the place and company
No Gentleman does more revere than I:
There the accomplished and ingenious Knight
Gives Oracles; there do the sonns of light
And peace meet in a convocation; there
The subtle and profound Philosopher
Reads Lectures; there the Learned Doctors meet
Discourse the Patient to his winding sheet;
There the pale Chemist, waking with the Cock
Tells how he stripped dame Nature to her smock;
There the dark Statist in a corner sits
Talks Matchivell, condemns the vulgar wits;
There the grave Lawyer stroak's his beard and talks
Not of Spring* Garden or of Grayes-Inn Walks,
But of old Records; Archimedes son
Numbers the sands, and spans the Horizon;
There the rich Merchants one another please
With news of loss and gain, of winds and seas;
Dons, Mounsieurs, Segneours, in their language speak,
The sullen Jew salutes the merry Greek;
And there the pevish Pedagogue intrude's
Himself, breed's quarrels, distances and fewds.
The Company I love, nor do I less
Applaud the Liquour: none but will confess
The worth of Coffee: Pagans, Turks and Jews
This sovereign drink as food and Physic use.
The Boon Companion whom the wine deprives
Of Reason, drinks a Dish and straight retrives
His wonted sense; the Studious Scholar keeps
Hereby his Eylids from incroaching sleeps;
This tunes the tongue, strikes on that sacred Lute,
While other liquids render persons mute.
Who Is now the Coffee Scoffer? who derides
This Panacaea? is it not he that prides
Himself in Bugbear terms, in crabbed names,
Riddles, Aenigmas, Problems, Anagrams?
Right John Pontaeus, so the knave delights
To call his Papers by hard Epethites.
Sphynx, Sybill, and Medea, none of these
With all their Mistick knotts, and subtilties;
Nor all the cunning women you can find
Can play the Midwife to the Authors mind:
Riddle the Riddle, it is worth my pains
For to transcribe it, O they are lofty strains!
A Riddle.
What man and matter tell me friends with speed
Does scribble lies and filthy flies does feed?
The Solution.
Woolen breeds Moths (a wretch whom I did name
That has no wit, no worth, no grace, no shame)
And in such have, a galloper in'deed!
Must you be answered and with so much speed?
Are flies, and Moths, such little things as they
Matters of such importance, no delay?
Is scribbling Treason? is to tell a fibb
So great a crime? for so the Pygotrib
Insinuats; to feed such dorrs as the
Worms, Creepers, Trencher Flies such villainy?
Grant that I am a Moth, 'twould be a shame
For you to cope with me, but little fame
Results from such a fight, each fool I faith
Can brush a Garment, whisk a Moth to death.
O thou mischievous wretch, thou wicked one!
Maligner of a reputation
Too large for thee to grasp! my nature, name
Bold Ignoramus cross thy Anagram:
Woolen breed's Moths, I pity thee poor fool!
My name and calling neither Moth nor Wool,
Me thinks you might have found an Elogy
More pertinent, Waspe, Lyzard, Gold fly;
Why not the prodigal, the Widows Groat
Young Annanias, something made of naught;
Lo these are Scripture names and would have done
The feat, Moth fitts not my Vocation.
But wit's a parlous ape! and Poets may
Have Licenses sometimes to go a stray:
A Pegasus may trip, the Delphian Quire
May sing a wrong tune to the Sacred lyre:
Lies are but fables, fables the effect
Of a good fancy: Pish 'twas a neglect!
Although I do excuse the little faults
And frieks of Scholars, fancy great assaults
By lesser Brawls, yet I abominate
A Rabsheka: a Gods name let them prate,
Wrangle till domes day, to eternity
Bar they base Names, and filthy Ribaldry.
Say he is a fiend, a Devil that shall go
Not only to debase, but damn his foe;
First in a Joke insinuate his name
Than say he has no wit, no grace, no shame.
Ambitious Mortal that shall make himself
Searcher of hearts! base, vile blasphemous elf!
Are you and Heaven such good friends I wiss?
Be Frogs fit Cronies for great Hercules?
What Pidgeon has been billing in your ear?
Who told thee so? thou son of Lucifer!
To say I have no wit is as I live
An injury that I could never forgive:
Did I not reflect on the Author, He
Is but a wittall that does censure me.
To say I have no grace, if not a flam
A bold Assertion, Grace is like a dram
Of Mustard seed, too small, minute I ween
To be by such an Owl and Buzard seen.
Were you ingenious, you would be loath
To gire a person that is devoid of both:
A graceless fool is the most sad, forlorn
Person, object of pity not of scorn.
Ingeniously I cannot but thank you Sir
For this your charitable character:
And would retort the like but that insooth
I should thereby constrain you to speak Truth.
Know herein lies my wit, thou prating pie!
That I can hear thy scoffs so patiently;
Herein my modesty is manifest
I blush to read thy lines, although the best;
And for mygrace, lo hence it does appear,
All my revenge shall be an honest prayer;
O thou that look from the Starry place
Send Him more wit (good Lord) and I more grace!
And yet he does but jest, but gratifies
A pleasant humor, these are Moths and flies
Puns, quibles quillets, trifles, tricks and toys
The sport of wise men, and the pride of boys:
But now he rails down right, in earnest flings
Brands about streets, cuts, Carbanados, stings;
Was ever Whelp so fierce? his looks would put
A woman to the squeak, disperse and rout
A file of Red-coats; how his tangl'd mane
Stares on his crest! his eyes transmit a flame
Fatal as Basilisks, his bloody beak
Wars, Massacres, and desolation speak;
Forth with he gripes his fist, bites, gnaws the rod
Kicks boys like footballs, now he calls on God
To clear his innocence, in the next breath
Invocates hell, and all the fiends beneath.
Fury, Frenetick, Cycophant, the source
Of vice, Mad-cap, old, Plutos Hobbyhorse,
Brazen-face, meal-mouth, pale Megaera's rod,
Young Thracian, the scourge and Plague of God;
Base Cutthroat, Rake-hell, Wild-asse, Gally slave,
Ripe for the Hang man, Puppy, Cocks-comb, Knave,
Wolf, Monkey, Lion, Leopard, Beast of Prey,
Kite, Fly, Dor, Droane, Mouse, Creeper such as they;
Jack-puding, Glutton Hang by, Conjuror
Dreamer, Groom, Dung-hil, Serpent, Barking curr;
These are the protty names ('sides fool and rogue)
This is the manners of the Paedagogue!
Say not that he is ho Poet, that the man
Has a bad fancy 't cannot be! who can
Invent so many names? but Welsh-men be
Well read we say in Genealogy*
What you a Master? I a wretched one!
A Hang man, (every beggar is a Don
In Spain, I do confess,) you govern, guide
Untoward boys, who cannot rule your pride!
But bold Pedant, if the assertions true
Your Belly is the Master and not you:
And all the Art you have, is how to crambe
That endless gut, and all devouring womb.
Say not you honor Grotius, least hereby
You make your self to be the prodigy.
A double Tongue is like a Cloven Foot
Both monstrous are, alas it is to no boot
For thee to talk of Tully, not a line
Of his thou understand'st base Cataline!
Corderius, Textor, Cate, such as these
Are books for thee; if Tully's Offices
Be not too hard, you might do well to read
Them also, for good manners you much need.
Nor gratify your self with splended names
Presumptuous Epethites: his worth and fame's
But small, who is constraind! unhappy elf
To live unknown, or to applaud himself.
Fancy thy self no Swan, or Turtle, neither:
Borrow your honor from a plume, a feather
Batt's, Ravens, Screetch-oules, night* birds, Pellicans,
A gagling Goose among a flock of Swans,
Even such Art thou proud fool, I do presume
You will when dying sing another tune.
The melancholy man that did conceit
Himself an ass, thought that his hands were feet,
Was tentime's more excusable than thee
For that he had at least humility.
If I break Priscians pate, a rods in piss
For poor Peel* garlic, and forsooth it is
His ignorance: He plucks him limb from limb
What Is folly in his boy, is wit in him.
Was ever Meore, Mohammedan, or Jew,
So barbarous, to cut a man in two?
Saw him assunder, Priscian thou shall be
Styld Martyr hence, another Jeremy,
Pox on your Malmsy Nose, a beastly sight
You cannot see for it it, obstruct's your light:
I did not say you had the Crincums, no
Or that you snuffl'd or did stradling go;
Who would be plagued with his conscience thus?
You say your self your Citheriacus:
'Twere very sad indeed if every one
That ronch't was frenchefy'd, no pox but one?
Yet's not impossible, the de'il wait's for
The backsome Girl and doting Bachelor,
Angles for such as these, a David may
Have a bad fall, a precious Lambkin stray,
An Ephrim wax stiff, Tabitha fail,
Lidy, and Prisse may have an itching Tail,
Than do not blame me 'twas my love to thee
My tenderness, a holy jealousy.
You King it in the Scufflle, climb a Throne,
And to your Scepter, Diadem, and Throne
You ha since annexed a palace and a Queen,
An ample Study and your book I ween;
I wish the issue and posterity
That spring and do derive from them and thee
Mae be more Beautiful, Fair, Virtuous too
Than any of thy brats were hithertoo.
May they be sons of strength, of joy and mirth
May no more kick and struggle in the birth!
I Will say but this: I never saw a heap
Of viler things* odd numbers; only speak
Envy, and hatred, fury, passion, rage,
But as for wit and fancy, scarce a Page
A line, of all the scroll: Alas poor Poet,
So mere a droll a dunce and yet not know it.
One while he plays the thief, anon the liar
Now he condemns the Doctor, then the Squire;
Sometimes he claws the Knight, with odious Names
Pelts me; anon he slights and spurns Sir James:
In the same breath he railes and does cologue
Calls pretty youth, and rope deservign rogue:
I cant but grieve, methinks I could condole
With the poor boys that suffer the control
Of such a furioso, wretched Maevi!
His pens no sharper then his hand is heavy.
If he does lord and dominere ore one
That scorns his rule, and domination,
How much a Tyrant is he over ye
Whom he can punish by authority?
Though I never played the Orator, nor may
I ever hope (could I) to beg a play
For you poor Lads, I am resolved to
Lash the cursed pedant as he scourges you:
And make him know for all his cracks, and lies,
That Moths have stings as well as Gnats and Flies.
Paean Triumphalis
JO libemus merum Coprio Jovi,
Et dijs minorum Gentium;
Cloacinaeque matri pandamas Sa^rum,
Quippe occidit pedantius;
Jacetque pueri dextra confossus Dares
Mordens arenam dentibus:
(...),
Magister ignorantiae;
Qui semi paganus sacra Vatum polluit
Lacinioso carmine;
Et puriores rivulos immi scuit
Smectimnianis sordibu^.
Circumforaneum vah mendicabulum
Labes popelli Cambrici!
Quem Campis faetidum gurgustidonijs
Enixa fertur spurca sus:
Triobolaris histrio; metri suitor
Flagri Dynastes pessime;
Hircine maevi; terrae ac caelorumodium,
Cerberi fastidium;
Speras te curru considentem eburneo
Ferire summo Vertice
Stellas, easque Evantis (proh quanti viri)
Umbram sequaces lambere!
I, licet ad urbem cuculorum in nubibus
Mortalium stultissime!
Et tandem consors factus istius chori
Effunde nugas, Naenias:
I candidate crucis, ostentans, leve and
Febriculo sum ingenium:
I literator, longa fias litera
Cum fune collum obstrinxeris,
Quid variaris crebro clunes verbere
Mores tuos nec corrigis;
Quid rudis adhuc erudito in pulvere
Invisa nobis bellua?
Jactasve cum te sanus quisque despicit
Maccique soli palpitant.
Absisle Momenota ab Academia
Solitumque hiatum comprime,
Nobis dicaces psittaci bilem movent
Et capulares Daemones;
Et qui nefando risu subsannant preces
Ritusque sacrae ecclesiae;
Et inficeti paedagoguli gregis
Ore strepentes turgido:
Absiste ne si te baubantem audivero
In sole Gibbum refricem;
Neve ascia illidatur cruribus tuis
Quam tute succensam geris.
Ferate mur mur ore forsan putrido
Tuoque mox exaudiam,
Me probri accusans quod famam lacero tibi
Cui fama nulla est aut erit:
Ast tuas querelas non morabor tetricas
Quam nemo sit quin noverit
Tuas non posse traloqui impurici^
Nec ter trecentis versibus.
Durahem Carmina ais, non sat sunt
Dura; sed opto
Saxa loqui and silices, cum tibi
Mome loquor.
Bauhus. Epi. Lib. 1. FINIS.

