WORSE and WORSE: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THEIR DESPERATE condition who shall
presume to Take the NEW OATH OR COVENANT.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed, 1643.

CONCERNING THE OATH AND NEW COVENANT.
What is Lawful Swearing.
NOthing is manifested in Scripture to be more sacred then an Oath; which
though made to Man and proceeding from Man, yet being made with relation to God
is called The Oath of God, Exodus 22. as a Principal part of Gods Worship, Thou
shall worship the Lord and swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 10. And it is most justly
called a Worship of God, since thereby the just swearer glorifieth God, by
professing, First, his Omniscience, as the only searcher of his heart to know
whether he swears rightly or not. Secondly, his inviolable justice to condemn
the unjust swearer; and Thirdly, his omnipotency and unresistable power, to
take vengeance upon every Godless violator of an Oath: and Godless he must
needs be, who observes not all the properties of an Oath which God himself
has prescribed; even these three recorded, Ierem. 4. Thou shall swear in
Justice, in Judgment, and in Truth. First, in Justice, that the case be
necessary and just, whereunto I am to be sworn. Secondly, in Judgment, that I
know it to be such; because whosoever does it doubtfully condemns himself.
Romans 14.5, 22, 23. Lastly in Truth, abhorring from all deceitfulness of
speech; either by verbal equivocation, or (which is the Art of lying) by any
mental reservation. For although it be the easiest thing in the World to
delude Man, yet the Apostle will have us know, that God is not mocked, Gal. 2
7. Thus much of the substance and circumstances of Lawful swearing.

We are to bring the new Oath to this divine Test, to try it whether it be
true coin or counterfeit.

I A.B. in humility and reverence of the divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved
the calamities and Judgments that now lie upon it: And my true intention is by
Gods grace, to endeavor the amendment of mine own ways.] Well then. Therefore
must we take heed, least by multiplying our sins by perjuries and false
swearing, we do provoke God to aggravate and multiply his judgments against
us; because Rash swearing is a guiltiness, Lev. 5.4. and a false Oath is one
of the greatest profanations of God's name that can be, as all Scripture
shows; and whereof God gave a document even in the new Testament, by his
visible Judgment upon two perjured wretches at once, as was seen before out of
Act. 5.

The Oath with an exception.
And that I do abhor and detest the said wicked and treacherous design
lately discovered: And that I never gave, nor will give mine assent to the
execution thereof, but will according to my power and vocation oppose and
resist the same, and all other of the like nature.] Which is not yet discovered
unto me of what nature it is; whether it be not the same intended from the King
for the Array, which is exacted by the Parliament for the Militia. And how
far the chief discoverer is to be believed, is a matter of great
uncertainty; seeing, after His impeachment of diverse, none as yet has been
sufficiently convicted.

The Oath with its exception.
And in case any other like design shall hereafter come to my Knowledge, I
will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best conduce to the
preventing thereof.] None can give any assurance of that which is Like, before
he know the color of the ensample, which hitherto is not represented, but only
in general terms, and therefore invisible and unknown to my conscience.

The Oath and the exception unto it.
And whereas I do in my conscience believe, that the Forces' raised by the two
Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just defense.] Namely,
of Parliament; which I cannot do, if I may believe His Majesty's often,
public, and deep avouchments, that he intends not the dissolution of this
Parliament: nor until my Conscience be persuaded against Scripture to swear I
ought not give credit to such expressions from so Royal a mouth of my
Sovereign, especially engaging his Sovereignty and Royalty for the Truth of
his Declarations in that behalf.

The Intention and Reason of the Oath from the Preamble of it, and the
exceptions against it.
A Popish Army has been raised against the Protestant Religion.] The intention
and reason of an Oath is (as it were) the soul thereof, and concerns the
very soul of the swearer. The reason here pretended is (as the denomination
shows) The Popish Army of the King; now the denomination of every thing is
taken either from that which is greater in Quantity, or in Excellency for
worth, and value. But if I should think that the Army of the Kings is therefore
more excellent because Popish, this were to denominate my self unworthy in
opposing them, or if it be meant in respect of the Quantity, as if in the Army
against the Parliament the greater number were Papists; this is as dissonant,
because the whole host at Oxford, both Captains and inferior Soldiers (as is
divulged) have taken the Oath, for defense of the Protestant Religion
established. And scarce any one Troop of Papists has been named in all the
rest of the Armies on this side Trent. As for the Northern parts (if the
asseverations of some may be credited) not two Regiments of sixteen can be
accounted which profess themselves Popish. Therefore with what justice will
they have me to swear that Army to be Papisticall, and yet will not permit me
to call their Army Anabaptisticall, which yet consists mainly of men of that
Faction? We are now to enter into the Religious consideration of this Oath.

The Oath is respect of Religion and the exceptions.
And I do in my Conscience believe, that those Forces are raised by the
Parliament in defense of the true Protestant Religion.] But what is signified
by the true Protestant Religion, we are not certified by this Oath, and must
therefore borrow a light from the former Oath of Protestation, authorized by
this Parliament, both in the Preamble and explication thereof by the House of
Commons. In the Preamble thus, The true Protestant Reformed Religion
established. In the Oath it self thus; The true Protestant Religion expressed
in the doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popish innovations. The
Exposition thus; meaning so far only as it is opposite unto Popery and Popish
Innovations, and not to be extended unto any form of Worship.

The first Exception.
But to take up Arms against Sovereignty in pretense of defense of Religion is
against the very doctrine of the Church of England; as is to be collected out
of the 35. and 37. Article of our Church of England, having express relation
unto the Homilies against Rebellion.

The second Exception.
Secondly, If I swear against all Popish Innovation in Doctrine; then assuredly
against those of taking up Arms in opposition to Princes in pretense of
defense of Religion. Which is so uncouth an Innovation, as that it was
condemned by the Universal Primitive Church of Christ for above 350. years;
not only by their doctrine but also their suffering for the defense of the
Faith; and so testified by their public Apologies and glorious Martyrdomes.
And that indeed this is a Popish doctrine is herein most evident, because that
the now Schismatic Preachers for defense of this War, use and urge the
very same objections against the Army on the one side, and answers for
confirmation of the others, by the same distorted expositions of Texts and
Examples in holy Scriptures, which the Romish Sophisters have done, from point
to point: notwithstanding they could not be ignorant of the learned and
irrefragable Confutations made by Protestant Doctors and published to the World.

A third Exception.
Thirdly, the exposition of the Protestation, professing by that Oath to oppose
only the Popish Doctrines and Innovations: and the continued practice of not
only connivence, but even indulgence also to the Brownisticall and
Anabaptisticall Faction, (which threaten nothing more then the destruction of
the now professed Protestant Reformed Religion) do seem to prejudice the
intention of this Oath; and give occasion to suspect that it may fall out
against the doctrine, as has done to our Service-booke; which has been by
Sectaries torn in pieces, as it was at Durham by Papists in their insurrection
in the North. And what difference can there be, whether this our Vineyard of
Christ, the Church of England, be rooted out by the Romish Boar, or by other
wild beasts of new and naughty Factions? From this part of defense for
Religion, the Oath returns as again to the part Politic.

The Oath and the Exceptions against it.
I A. B. In my Conscience believe, that the Forces raised by the two Houses of
Parliament, are raised for their just defense, and Liberty of the Subject,
against the Forces raised by the King.] In this, three circumstances are
considerable; Who, Against whom, and What; ingendring as many doubts and
obstructions unto the Consciences of them that are required to take this Oath.

The first Exception.
When we would know who it is that takes up Forces for War, they tell us the
Parliament, and that by their own Ordinance; whereas Subjects of every
Kingdom are taught by the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, that this
Authority is proper to Him who is Supreme. According to the profession also of
the Old Testament, and examples of their Judges and Kings; excepting only where
God himself did expressly interpose.

The second Exception.
The second Exception is Against whom; The Oath names not the King, but the
Kings Army, as though that were not against the King; which is to speak,
Sibbeleth instead of Scibboleth. And what Conscience will not be jealous when
severe execution is that the King being in Camp it is both against the Power
and Person of the King as Edgehill can witness; and the Oath of Protestation,
saying, I A. B. Protest according to my Alleagiance to His Majesty, His Royal
Person, Honor, Crown, and Dignity, etc. when as our learned Schismatics think
to dawbe up men's consciences with their untempered mortar, by distinguishing
between the Natural and Politic Person of the King. The most of England can
now laugh at their fond subtilty; knowing that he who killed Saul, the then
King of Israel, did thereby kill the same King named Saul. And the Apostle
shows that they who resist the powers sent by the King as Supreme, do
thereby resist the power of the King himself. Therefore these contradictory
Oaths cannot well lodge in any sincere Conscience.

The third Exception.
The matter For what, the Forces are raised expressed to be for Liberty of
Subjects against Arbitrary Power contrary to Law etc. Notwithstanding the power
of Parliament in raising these Forces is done merely by an Arbitrary power,
and against all prescription of Law; and to the highest oppression of the
Subjects that has been, even unto the loss of both livelihood and lives. Alas
our misery!

A fourth Exception.
When as the whole pretense for defense of Religion, Liberty of Subjects, and
Privileges of Parliament, are no other then the King himself does (I not say
subscribe, but rather superscribe unto, avouching still that his taking up
Arms is for the defense of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the
Privileges of Parliament, and against all tyrannical Arbitrary government:
must I then swear that they are just Forces raised for that which is so freely
offered and yielded unto them?

The Oath and the Exception against it.
I will likewise assist the Persons who shall take this Oath, in what they
shall do in the pursuance thereof. These words [What they shall doe] have a
great latitude, and may leave the Actors unto a liberty or rather license to
urge men to take it by what means soever, be it fas or nefas.

A Coroslary to the former.
It may not be omitted to advertise how the Ministers and Trumpeters, sounding
Alarums for War, and for the Authorizing of this Oath, do symbolize and
jumpe with the Irish Papists in the self same three reasons which make for the
justifying their Rebellion. 1. It is in the power of our People (say they) as
to create a King, so to dissolve the Royal Government upon occasions seeming
good to themselves. The second is Salus Populi, the Peoples general and
necessary good, as they pretend. Thirdly, the establishing of their own
profession of Religion. These so many exceptions may prove so many Corrosives
to the heart of the Swearer; whether he take it with a conscience wilful or
doubtful.

Three QuaeREES or Cases of Conscience touching the late OATH.
1. Q. How it consists with the threefold Conditions of an Oath in general,
1. of Truth, 2. Judgment, 3. Righteousness? Ier. 4.2.
2. Q. How with the threefold Oath taken in particular; 1. Allegiance, 2.
Supramacy, and the 3. Protestation?
3. Q. How with it is own, 1. Introduction, 2. Limitations, and 3. Expressions
in special? and a threefold. Cord is not easily broken, Eccles. 4.12.



For the first Quaeree and first Condition of Truth, Falsehood, Doublings,
Fictions, mental Evasions, Equivocations, Reservations, etc. and requires
simplicity and sincere correspondence to the sense and purpose of the Imposter,
(i. e.) liquido jurare.

For the Second, of Judgment,

For the third, of Righteousness,

He that takes it in his own private sense or reservations (and not agreeable
to the plain sense and purpose of the Imposer of the Oath,) offends against
the first Condition.

He that takes it rashly or timorously for fear or favor of men; offends
against the Second.

He that takes it out of misguided-Zeal, or spirit of revenge upon his brother,
offends against the third.

For these and the like causes S. Austin concludes, that Falsa iuratio est
exitiosa, vera iuratio periculosa, nulla inratio secura. False swearing is
pernicious, true swearing is dangerous, D. August: Ser: 28. de verbis Apost.
not at all swearing is secure.

Now for the second Q. How it can consist with a threefold Oath taken in
particular? and

First, how with the Oath of Supremacy?
For, if he be Supreme over all persons in all causes Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, how can I swear to subject him, or (which is all one) his
Commissioners, and Power sent by him to any persons in any cause whatsoever? 1.
Pet. 2.14.


Ob. 1. But you will say the occasion of that Oath was only to exclude the
Popes Supremacy.

Sol. True, though that were the chief occasion, yet it was not the only
intention: but was purposely made to involve and shut up all his Subjects under
the same Conditions of unresisting Obedience.

Ob. 2. But the Ooth only binds so long as the King observes the Condition of
his own Oath for the true Religion. etc.

Sol. A lawful Oath taken is of good force to bind us to Obedience even to a
bad King; (much more to an eminently good Pious and Religious King) as appears
by that of Solomon, Eccles: 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment,
and that in regard of the Oath of God: And by example of Zedechiah's perjury
and breaking of his Oath made to a Tyrant, an Enemy of the Church. Ezech: 17.1,
15.20.
Shall he prosper (says God) shall he escape that does such things? Or shall
he break his Covenant, and be delivered? As I live (says the Lord) Surely MY
Oath which he has despised, and MY Covenant that he has broken, even it will
I recompense upon his own head. In like manner Saul his bloody house was
visited because he sought to slay the Gibeonites (aliens to the Commonwealth
of Israel) though in ZEAL to the Children of Israel and Judah. Hitherto of the
first Ooth, 2. Sam. 21.1, 2.
which is of Supremacy.

The second follows of Allegiance,
Q. How can it consist with it? For I am bound by it to defend the King's
Person to the uttermost of my power; and speedily to discover and resist all.
Treasons and Conspiracies against his Person, Crown, or Dignity; All which seem
to be endangered by taking or partaking with Arms raised against him, or the
Power, Army, or Lifeguard commanded by Him for His defense, and that no person
whatsoever has power to absolve me of, this Oath.

And for -- The third Oath. Of the late Protestation.
How can it consist? For, I Protest, Vow, and promise to maintain the
Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, See the
preamble of the House of Commons to the Protest:
against all Popery and Popish Innovations.

But this Assertion of the new Oath that (In my Conscience I do believe that
the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for
their just defense, and for the defense of the true Protestant Religion) seems
to contradict the late Protestation; For, first it is against the established
Doctrine of the Church of England; which is in the 37. Article which says that
The Kings Majesty has the Chief power in this Realm of England; unto whom the
Chief government of All Estates, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, in All
causes, does appertain -- To rule All Estates, and degrees committed to Their
charge; and to restrain with the sword; None of which can the King do, if the
Sword or Militia be taken from Him. Item, That a man may take up Arms or take
an Oath when The Magistrate (i. e. Supreme Power) commands; implying that no
man ought either to take Oath or bear Arms without the Injunction of The
Magistrate. Item, Article 35. that the two Books of Homilies, (the Homilies
against Rebellion amongst the rest) contain a Godly and wholesome Doctrine, to
be read in Churches by the Ministers (that is, Preachers, not only Reading
Ministers) diligently and distinctly; that they may be understood by the People
as the Doctrine of the Church of England: For though there may be many Doctrins
and many Churches in England, yet there is but one Doctrine and one church of
England, contained in the 39. Articles, and Common Prayer Book confirmed by Act
of Parliament. Thus far of the first particular of the Protestation The Second
is how it can consist with that part of the Protestation, which binds me to
oppose all Popish Innovations, etc. for to take up Arms in case of Religion
against a Supreme Power is a plain Popish Innovation, and a new Invention
taught and maintained only in this last Age. And thirdly; how can it consist
with the last particular? Wherein I vow and grotest to maintain with my Life,
Power and Estate (according to the duty of mine Allegiance) His Majestius
Person, Honor and Estate. Now the Queeree is, how I main came first His Person
with my Life, Power, and Estate, if I swear to assist an Army of men, whom He
has often Declared (and are so accounted by many pious and sudicious men) to be
utter Enemies to His Person, Honor, and Estate? Or, secondly, how can I be
said to maintain His Honor, when by this Oath I profess (expressly contrary
to the word of God. Eccles. 10.20. Exodus 22.28.) not only in mine heart to
curse and accuse Him, but openly with my mouth to revile, and blaspheme Him;
and in effect, say in mine heart, (which is Nefandum, horrendum, and far from
the thought of an obedient Son, that honors his Father). He is an utter
Enemy of Gods true Religion, a violator of all sacred Vows, Oaths, and
Covenants? And can I yet be said to maintain His Honor? Can I be thus
presumptuous to judge Him? Am I not afraid to speak evil of Dignities? and
yet maintain the Kings Honor, or the Christian Protestant Religion? 2. Pet.
2.10, 11.
Did Cham honor his Father when he discovered his real nakedness? and do
they honor their Father that impute a lying and false nakedness, and cover
his real Virtues and Glory by casting on foul and fained aspersions? A Son
honors his Father, and a Servant his Master; If he be a Father where is his
honor? If he be our Master, where is his fear? If this be the honor and
fear, Malach. 1.6.8.
go and offer it to thy Father, to thy Master, and see if they will take it at
thy hands?

Nor will the after exposition serve to heal this breach; by saying, It was
not to be extended to the maintenance of any discipline or government of the
Church of England. For, first all the ordained Ministers of England have
subscribed and sworn to the Kings Supremacy, and all the doctrine of the Church
of England; and therefore they cannot be absolved from this lawful Oath by any
power whatsoever.

And Secondly, though it should not be extended to Church Government, yet it
will reach to the Civil Supremacy and chief power of the Sword, See the a^^^^
said (...) 37.
which the express doctrine of the Church of England avoucheth to be only in
the King.

Or thirdly, how can I be then said to maintain his Estate, when I take part
with them that withold and withdraw it from him? or that put him into such
an Estate and condition as does exhaust and consume His Estate, by maintaining
an Army to guard and protect His own Person and His Loyal Subjects? And
hitherto of the two first Queries concerning the three Oaths of Allegiance,
Supremacy, and protestation; now follows the third Querie, how this late Oath
can consist with its own Introduction, limitations and expressions.

First, How with the Introduction, viz. That there has been and now is in this
Kingdom a POPISH AND TRAITOROUS PLOT for the subversion of the true Religion,
etc. First, how can I believe this, and believe the Kings Protestation to the
contrary? And Secondly, how can I honor the King and not believe Him. And
thirdly, how can I call it a Popish Army, when the more principal part must
give the denomination? when it is confessed and manifest, that the better part by
much, and the greater by far are Protestants, and sworn contrary to all
Popish Plots. Secondly, In declaring my sorrow for my sins past, and purpose
to amend, etc. How can it consist, if in this very Oath I commit greater sins
of Pride, Slander, Envy, and all Uncharitableness, Blasphemy, Perjury, and
Disobedience? And if the Repentance it self be such a sin, it is a
Repentance to be repented of.

Again, how can it consist with the Limitation, i. e. In Order to the securing
the true Protestant Religion? when as it is clear by what is above said, It is
directly contrary to Our Protestant Religion, or the Doctrine of Our Church
(though there may be many other strange doctrines in our Church) which
evidently asserts the King to be supreme over ALL Persons, in ALL Causes; and
plainly denies any power of Arms to be used by Subjects against their King,
under color of Religion. Now, what our Lord and Master said to one desiring
him to divide the inheritance, we his servants may answer in the like case,
Man, who has made me a divider or Judge over you? See Luke 12.
If any speak to us to take up Arms to vindicate the present cause as just, in
raising Forces against the King, Must answer and ask, Who has made us Judges
over our Sovereign? Or dividers of the Kings Inheritance betwixt Him and His
Subjects? Especially when he has protested so often by all that is Sacred, and
engaged all that is dear to Him, that He will maintain and defend the true
Protestant Keligion, and Liberty of the Subject, etc. Am I not rather silenced
by that of Solomon, My Son, fear God and the King; See Prove. 24.21.
and meddle not with them ((...)) viz. That are 1. Detractors, 2. Seditious, 3.
Given to change or Innovators (for so the word signifies all three.)

Or are we not rather disarmed, by that of our Savior, Put up thy sword, for
he that takes the sword will perish by the Sword.

Thirdly and lastly the Expression; which is, To maintain and assist All
persons in whatsoever they shall do in pursuance of the same. Which is of a
vast and large extent; and seems to maintain, 1. Those that hazard and oppose
the Kings Person, Honor and Estate. 2. Those that go contrary to the doctrine
of the Church of England (in taking up Arms under color of Religion.) 3. And
that In all which they shall do in Pursuance of the same. What if I should be
required to help to kill mine own Father, Natural, Civil, or Spiritual, if
the King or my Parents or any Ministers shall oppose their Forces by word or
deed, it seems I may and ought by virtue of these words [In pursuance of the
same] assist any one that shall pursue them or any of them unto death. And we
have cause to fear it will be so extended, when it is taken up or offered by
some for good doctrine, that every man ought (as the Levites commanded by
Moses) go out and slay every man his brother, See Exodus 32.27, 29.
and consecrate your selves every man upon his Son or upon his Brother,
Companion, or his Neighbor, if he judge him an Idolator, or Enemy of God;
(which is not very hard for malice to do.) And that the Levites by that severe
and bloody execution, did expiate their slain of their fathers transgression.
But far be from us that (...), to partake of the transgression of Simeon and
Levi brethren in iniquity; (except he had the same infallible commission, and
the same idolatry to oppose) under an hypocritical pretext of circumcision,
and furious zeal of Religious Reformation, did really affect not the
conversion but the destruction; not the Circumcision but excision of the
Shechemites.

But Pray we rather and conclude with the true Israel of God; Oh my soul, come
not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united.
(...) 49. ^ 7.
For in their anger they slew a man, and (saving their Persons) cursed be their
anger for it was sarce, and their wrath, for it is Cruel; divide them in Jacob
and scatter them in Israel. AMEN.

FINIS.

