THE WORK OF AFFLICTION Opened in a Sermon. preached at the Funeral. OF MRS
ELISABETH HARVEY.

LONDON. Printed in the year 1658.

The Work of Affliction.
2 Cor. 4.17. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.

18 While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen.


THis whole chapter spend's it self in three things: 1 First of all, the
Apostle set's forth his diligence and faithfulness in the Ministry of the
Gospel: We faint not v. 1. there is his diligence: Suum Ministerium
Corinthiis co^mendatum esse vult, maxim propter adver sarios suos, and
obtrectatores pseud apost. Estius. Chrysostom. 8. Hom. in loc.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, v. 5. there is his
faithfullness. Nor does this self-praise, (opposed to the detractions of some
malignant spirits too too active in those days) misbecom the humility of an
Apostle: especially his expressions being seasoned and sweetened with so much
piety, and modesty: his piety appears in that he attributes all to
mercy: Hemingius in loc.
that he had this Ministry, it is a mercy: that he fainted not in this
Ministry, it is likewise a mercy: his modesty is manifest, in that he does
not single out himself as the solitary subject of this commendation, but
points at others, 2 Cor. 12.18.
who wrought the work of the Lord even as he did, Ideo scribit haec omnia
numero plurali. Estius.
and walked in the same Spirit, and in the same steps with him. Therefore is it
that he speaks plurally; we faint not, we preach not our selves.

2 In the second place he removes the scandal of the Cross, which is the
constant Genius of the Gospel: insomuch as the preaching of the Gospel may
for this cause (among others) be called the preaching of the Cross. when
Melanchou had said that the preaching of the Gospel was Ars artium, scientia
scientiarum, the Art of Arts, the Science of Sciences: Luther told him, he
might rather say, that it was miseria miseriarum, the misery of miseries; yet
is not the misery so great as to overwhelm us; nor the Cross so heavy as to
sink us: for says the Apostle, though we be troubled, and troubled on every
side, yet not distressed. v 8.

3 In the third place he furnishes us with sundry Arguments exciting us;
which (if you pleas) you may likewise call grounds of comfort, enabling us to
bear the Cross, with patience, alacrity and chearfullness. Two of these
arguments you have in the two verses I have read unto you, which I am defired
to recommend to you at this time, because the worthy Gentlewoman, whose funeral
we now attend on, made great use of them, and received much comfort from them
in her life time.

Her Life was a checkerworth of prosperity and adversity; in this she fainted
not, because here was her cordial, she knew that her afflictions were light
and transitory, and that they wrought for her, a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of Glory: in that she swelled not, because here was her
Antidote, She looked not at the things that are seen, but at the things that
are not seen. Besides the two arguments in the text, there be diverse others
(as I hinted) in the Context, they are closely and artificially woven together:
the time will not permit me to unravel them. Only this I would note, that this
congeries, this heap of arguments, to confirm our Faith and Patience under the
Cross, does insinuate a propensitie in our nature to shrink from it; Weakness
in our nature ready to sink under it. A man will not put himself to the cost
and trouble to underprop an house, till he discover something, that makes him
distrust the strength of it, and fear it is ruin. 2 Cor. 5.1.
The Apostle no doubt had observed that our earthly house has a bowing wall,
and that causes him to pitch up these buttresses against it. Prove. 24.10.
If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small, Romans 15.4.
says the wise Solomon. So small would the strength of every living man be
found to be, if he were not shoared up by the patience and comfort of the
Scriptures. We can be content to sit down with Christ in Tabor, Corregnare
cupiunt, sed non compati. Bern. in loc.
the mount of his Transfiguration, and say it is good for us to be here. But
if we once see him on Calvarie, the mount of his passion, then we think it
high time to forsake him, at least a point of prudence to stand aloof from him:
then is base, cowardly, corrupt nature ready to cry out with the servant of
the man of God, 2 Kings. 6.19.
when he saw the City encompassed with Horses and Chariots, Alas, my Master
how shall we do? or with Peter to Christ, Master pity thy self; Christ's
harms are not the less for thy hazards; neither will the service thou do
unto Christ, be the greater by thy sufferings for him. is it not good sleeping
in a whole skin? this I suppose is the language of weak nature, till it be
both better instructed, and fortified by Grace. But to com to the Text. Therein
I have told you, we find two arguments of comfort to afflicted Saints.

1. The first is drawn from the glorious effect of their afflictions: they work
their Glory, and here the comfort is much advanced 1. by opposing Glory to
Affliction, 2. a weight of Glory to light affliction, 3. an Eternal Glory, to
Momentanie affliction.

2 The second is drawn from the gracious disposition of the persons afflicted,
we look not at the things that are seen etc. and that you may see the
disposalls of grace are most rational, he annexeth a very good reason why
the Saints look not at the things that are seen etc. For the things that are
seen are temporal. I begin with the first, and the Doctrine upon which I shall
insist is this.

Our afflictions work our Glory. Other things I shall touch upon in the use of
this. Our Afflictions (I say) Work our Glory. A strange paradox! an absolute
riddle! which flesh and blood can never prove an Oedipus to unfold. what? can
bitterness work sweetness? can clouds and gloomyness work serenity and
clearness? can storms and tempests work a blessed calm? can darkness work
light? can death work life? can hell work heaven? so it is; so in effect our
Apostle affirms: Our affliction works our Glory. To a clear apprehension of
this truth, I shall endeavor to lead you by several steps.

1. Loquitur tantum de afflictione filiorum Dei Hemingius.
They are only the Saints afflictions that work their glory. As for the Wicked,
affliction comes upon them armed with the sting of divine vengeance, and it
works not glory, Impiorum afflictio veluti praeludium est ad aeterna
supplicia, nisi refipiscant. idem.
but shame and confusion for them. I verily beleev there be many poor souls
that fall under this sad delusion; they think that because they suffer
affliction here, they shall not incur damnation hereafter. Surely, say these
fools in their heart, God is more merciful than to inflict a double hell upon
us: to whom I would reply, surely God is more pure, holy, and righteous than to
admit an impenitent, unbeleeving sinner into heaven. It is a mercy far
exceeding thy desert, Romans 2.4.
that God has reprieved thee from hell so long: Know thou not (O man) that
his patience and long suffering leads thee to repentance? the which if thou
hardenest thy heart against, continuing in thy sin and unbelief, all thy
sufferings here, if they were ten thousand times more, shall not save thee from
hell hereafter. It may be you will say, Doubt.
it is confessed that the wicked have no part nor lot in the comfort of this
doctrine; but may it not be doubted whether the afflictions of all the Saints
shall work their Glory? is this a general privilege? or is it Paul's Peculiar?
or such eminent Christians as he was? if we should suffer for Christ, for the
Gospel, for righteousness, then might our afflictions work our Glory: but non
cuivis contingit. It is not vouchsafed to every one so to suffer.

We need go no further than the text for the resolution of this doubt: Resol.
The Apostle says not My affliction works for me; but our afflictions work
for us. He excludes not any believer from the like comfortable effect of
affliction with himself. All the Saints may challenge a special propriety in
affliction; 1 Cor. 3.22.
according to their charter they may say, all things are ours: Phil. 1.29.
and as for sufferings they are expressly set down as a part of the portion
which Christ has bequeathed them: To you it is given not only to believ, but
also to suffer: Romans 8.28.
and with the portion he always gives grace to improve it: Heb. 12.11.
hence all things work together for our good: and our chastisements yield us
the peaceable fruit of righteousness: sweet fruit may spring from a bitter root.

2. It is not from the nature of affliction it self, that glory is wrought by
it for the Saints: alas, what can affliction do of it self? it cannot work a
man's conversion, much less can it work a man's Glorification; it cannot open
the heart to God, yea rather it exasperate's, and shut's the heart against God;
how then can it open Heaven to man? The Ordinances are othergates things, than
afflictions are: yet it is not in them, of themselves, to save us.

3. Non debetur afflictionibus nostris gloria quasim erces meritis Muse. in lo.
It is not from the merit of affliction that it works our Glory: for the
Apostle present's it not as an uncertain opinion, but as an undoubted
Conclusion, that there is no comparison between our affliction and our Glory.
(...), I reckon says he Romans 8.18. I that have tasted both of present
sufferings, and of future Glory, I reckon that the sufferings of this present
life, are not worthy to be compared to the Glory that shall be revealed in
us. What is a storm in our voyage to the infinitely rich treasure we shall
gain at our landing? Non tanti sunt afflictiones ad pondus gloriae collatae
quanti aquae guttula immenso pelago. idem ibid.
what are the waters of this landflood, though they swell never so high, to
that Ocean of blessedness wherein we shall be swallowed up? what is a cloud
to the Sun? Though at present it darken the face of our whole horizon: what is
present light, momentany affliction, to the future weight of Glory? here is
nothing then that our Romish Sophists can rationally improve to the
establishment of Merit.

4 Afflictions may be said to work our Glory, ita Calvinus. ita Beza. and
Heming: significatur quo itinere ad gloriam perveniatur Psalm. 84.6.
as they are the unavoidable way, that we must pass through to Glory, the way
to Canaan lies through the red sea, and a vast howling wilderness; the way to
Zion lies through the valley of Baca, that is, of Mulberry-trees, which
delighting in a dry soil, that place by reason of drought, became (as the
Greek render's it) a valley of tears to the weary, fainting passenger: and
really our life is a very Baca, a valley of tears. That valley the Psalmist
speake's of was not so thick set with Mulberrytrees, as our life with
difficulties, (...). Theod. in psalm.
which we must pass through, before we can arrive at the heavenly Mount.
through tribulation, Act. 14.22.
and much tribulation (it is not we may, but) we must enter into the kingdom
of heaven: Straight is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life:
if we decline the Cross we shall miss the Crown: Mat. 7.14. Lu: 24.26.
Christ himself went to heaven no other way; He suffered and so entered into
his Glory: He drank of the brook in the way, therefore did He lift up his
Head. Psalm. 110. last verse.

5. Afflictions for Christ (which are mainly intended here) may be said to
work our Glory, not only because they are the ordinary way, through which we
must pass to Glory; but because Glory is a necessary consequent of affliction
for Christ: a man may sometimes be in the way to this or that place, and yet
never com there: but in the way of affliction for Christ we shall never tire;
we shall never com short: when the seed of the word has taken such root, that
the scorching of the Sun will not cause it to wither away, but rather ripeneth
it, you may be sure there is something for the barn.

Mat. 5.11. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. I would have you to take
great notice of that little word, is; it signifies as much as if he had said,
you that suffer in this way, you are as sure of heaven, as if you were in
heaven already. By the way forget not this, That Hypocrites and wicked persons
cannot be truly said to suffer for Christ. They may pretend to it, See this
whole business excellently stated by Mr An: Burgess in spir. refin: sermon. 24.
and we may imagine they do so, but really there is no such thing: Judas no
doubt suffered much with the rest of the Apostles. but who dare say his end was
as pure, his affections as holy in his sufferings, as theirs were? no, no, it
was his interest that he suffered for: He had an office, he dearly liked and
loved, he bore the bag; he could be content to suffer much rather than let
go that: he was not likely to gain the like preferment in any other society:
it was the bag, not Christ or his truth that he suffered for. The like may
we say of all hypocrites, but the time will com when they shall be uncased,
and those, that have too good an opinion of them for the present, undeceived.

Now I suppose you apprehend the point, in a good measure cleared; yet me
thinks the Emphasis of the word is not drawn forth: (...).
it is the same word used by the Apostle in that famous exhortation, Phil.
2.12. Work out your own salvation. Com: in loc.
It carries in it something of efficiencie: the meritorius efficiencie which
Aquinas and Estius pitch upon, we have justly rejected: (and to do Estius no
wrong upon the matter he does reject it himself. O how great is the
prevalencie of truth, Non ex natura passionum, sed ex Dei voluntate etc.
her adversaries are forced to speak for her many times, when they are designed
by the Father of lies, and their own carnal interest to speak against her.)
nor can we attribute to it (which would be more than that) the principal
efficiencie, Ephesians. 2.5.
for that is only the free grace of God; By grace are ye saved; but an
isntrumental efficiencie we may with safety, yet here too we must take it as
an instrument of the meaner sort (for who knows not that there may be
instruments of diverse sorts, useful in a different degree to the producing of
the same work) for faith is the prime instrument, Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace are ye saved, through faith; but (I say) an instrumentality in some
sort we may, we must grant it, how else can it be said to work?

6. Therefore affliction may be said to work Glory, as an instrument in the
hand of grace, praeparantur ad beatam resurrectionem communibus humani generis
miseriis Calv. 1. 1 Pet. 2.4. Rev. 3.12. bonos probat purificat, eliquat Aug.
de Civi. lib. 1. cap. 8.
whereby God fit's and prepare's us for Glory. The word amongst the seaventy
Interpreters, signifies (rem expolire) to smooth or polish a thing; we are
the living stones which God smootheth and polisheth with affliction, that he
may make us pillars in his house. With affliction he fileth off our rust;
purifieth us from our dross; beats us out of the husk; racketh us from our
lees; purges us from vicious humors: in a word, without afliction we can
hardly be sanctified here, and then I am sure we can hardly be saved
hereafter. This being the main thing, it would be spoken to with more
distinctness therefore.

1. Afflictions have a work in reference to the world, from which they wean us;
just, as the tender mother lays wormwood upon her nipples, when she would
wean her child, so our heavenly Father embitter's the breasts of our earthly
comforts, that we may not overlove them.

2. Afflictions have a work in reference to sin, 1. they discover sin, Jo. 9.6.
Oculos quos culpa claudit, poena apetit. Greg. Job. 36.8.9.
they are like the clay and spittle, which our blessed Lord made use of in
opening the eyes of the blind man, pain opens those eyes, which sin shuts.
if they be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, then he
shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded. 2.
they restrain sin: they are as an hedge of thorns in the way of iniquity. I will
hedge up thy way with thorns, Hos. 2.6. what way, but the way of their sinful
conversation; with what thorns, spinas vocat calamitatum
but some hard, sharp, heart-piercing calamities? these God bring's thick and
threefold upon upon an obstinate sinner: ingentem duritiem: neque inquit,
spina, sed spinis, ut multitudinem pungentium dolorum detegeret. Guadalup in
loc.
thus God hedgeth in the way of the proud with some shameful dishonor: the way
of the covetous with losses in his estate: the way of the prodigal with
extreme poverty: the way of the drunkard and adulterer with decay in their
reputation, wealth, health, strength: or it may be he sends some more
spiritual afflictions, and hedgeth up the way of all these sinners with the
pricking, stinging horrors of an accusing conscience.

3. They convert us from sin: how many can say with David, it is good for me
to be in trouble, Psalm. 119.71. Psalm. 119.67.
that I may learn thy righteous judgments! and again, before I was afflicted I
went astray: but now have I kept thy word. Eze. 34.23. Jo. 10.11. 1. Pet. 2.25.
God is pleased to style himself the shepherd of his people, Christ is the
great and good shepherd. Now affliction is his hook, or rather his Dog, which,
when we listen not to his whistle, he sends out to fetch us in from our
wanderings. He had whistied long to Manasseh, and he regarded not, at last he
sends out his Dog, causes a great affliction to fasten upon him, and that
reclaimeth him.

3. Afflictions have a work in reference to our graces, as Faith, Patience,
Self-denial, humility: all which were exercized by them, when it was revealed
to St John, that the beast having seven heads and ten horns ( Rev. 13. v. 7)
had power given him to make War with the Saints, and to overcom them; (which
some apply to those many bloody persecutions of the Christian Church under the
heathenish Roman Empire) immediately he cries out (v. 10.) Here is the
patience and Faith of the Saints, as if he had said, here, here is matter for
those excellent graces to be exercized about.

4. Afflictions have a work in reference to our duties, unto which they quicken
us; for instance; when our prayers are empty, cold, formal, and not very
plentiful, God sends an affliction, and that makes us seek him both early
and earnestly: when persons are in a swoun, we nip, and pinch them; cast cold
water into their faces, and make a smoke under their noses, and this brings
them to themselves again; thus when we are in a spiritual swoun, God sends
some affliction or other, and that instantly fetches our breath again, and
makes us cry out Lord help. A most remarkable place for this we have Is.
26.16. Lord in trouble have they visited thee they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them: Mr Jer. Burr. in his Moses choice.
they did but drop a prayer before (as one excellently glosseth it) but now
they pour out a prayer; and now it is a prayer indeed, which they pour out:
Expertus loquor.
a prayer full of life, spirit, efficacy: a prayer that carries cut the very
heart and soul of a man to God with it.

5. Afflictions have a work in reference to Death, to which they reconcile us,
Ecclesiastic. cap. 42.1.2.
and make us stand with open arms ready to embrace it. O death how bitter is
thy remembrance, to him that lives at ease in his possessions, unto the man
that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all things! See Dr
Tuckny in his death disarmed sec. 3
O death acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy. When a man has the world
at his will, he is loath to leave it; when he is warm here in a wel-feathered
nest, he has no mind to be on the wing to fly hence; but when he is
plucked out from his warm nest, and his feathers are dispersed, when he is
placed with Job upon the dunghill, with Jeremie in the dungeon. O then wellcom
death! Job. 14.13.
who will hide me in the Grave?

6 Afflictions have a work in reference to our Glory, not only preparing us for
it by all the forementioned particulars, but also improveing it, and that both
directly and accidentally, 1. directly: the doctrine of degrees of Glory is
something controverted in these later times, among Divines of the reformed way.
Zanchius. Martyr. Camero.
I find One positively asserting it; another propounding arguments on both
sides, and then modestly dismissing it; a third absolutely determining against
it. His reasons let others examine; for my part I cannot see any inconveniencie
attending, nor any advantage given to the adversary by the first opinion. Now
supposing that there are degres of Glory, I do verily believ, that such as both
do well, and suffer for doing well, Sic patri coelesti visum est, ut Doctores
plus laborantes faciat magis fulgere aliis. Flacius ad lo.
shall shine brightest in Glory: the hardest service shall have the highest
recompense however. 2. Our Glory cannot but receiv an accidental improvement
from our afflictions; and the sharper the labor, the sweeter the rest must
needs be. When a man comes out of the cold, piercing, cutting aer, into a
close warm room, it much advances the comfort of it: when a man is taken out
of a dark dungeon, it is much the more pleasant to him that his eyes behold the
light of the Sun; in like manner when a man is taken from afflictions to Glory,
it will then be Glory indeed. Thus have I cleared the Doctrine. Tell me now,
beloved, Use.
is not here a solid argument to excite our patience, a firm ground of comfort
in all our afflictions? who would not endure cutting for such a cure? who would
not be content to sail through a troublous sea, for the gaining such a
treasure? who would not readily swallow the bitterest pill to procure eternal
health? when you fret and foam under affliction, do ye not forget your selves,
Heb. 12.5.
and the Consolations the Scriptures affoard you? or do not these consolations
seem small unto you? Job. 15.11.
the one argues your negligence, the other your ungratefullness; both, your
extreme vanity and folly.

Consider I pray you, 1. what the affliction is that works your Glory: 2.
what the Glory is that is wrought by affliction. 1 Consideration.
First consider what your affliction is that works your Glory: (...). Cooper
on Romans
is it any thing but (as the word imports) a pressure? it is indeed God's
wine press, you are his precious wine-berries: and what does the grape lose by
the pressing, besides a skin of no value? as for the noble blood thereof, it is
carefully preserved, and preferred to higher services: it com's to be served up
in Crystal, and run's in the veins of Princes. Tribula est instrumentum quo
fruges maturae in area teruntur. Lu. Vives in Aug. de civ. lib 1. c. 8.
Our English word Tribulation, seems to me to be of Latin extraction; it
comes from a word that signifies a threshing instrument: what does the wheat
lose by the flail besides the husk? affliction may press and drive us out of
our houses, estates, countries,; the very worst it can do is but to press our
souls out of our bodies; and what are all these things but films and husks of
no value? the wine, the wheat, the precious and immortal soul, when it is
quite stripped of these husks, is in a better condition than ever it was before.
You see what affliction is in it self; now consider it in it is adjuncts 1. It
is light affliction, (...) so Musculus.
light as a feather, exceeding light. Light to what it might be: our heavenly
Father, might (it he so pleased) double his strokes, he might throw away rods
and chastize us with scorpions. Again, it is light to what we have deserved
it should be: any thing less than hell is less than we have deserved: Eusebius
Nierem bergius de adoratione in spi. lib. 2. cap. 18.
if a traitor that has deserved the gibbet, should be made only smart a
little with a whip, or suffer some small pecuniary mulct, would he not look
upon his punishment as light? thou art a traitor, O sinner, thou have rebelled
against heaven, fire and brimstom may justly be thy portion for for ever: if
therefore God judge thee now, that he may not condemn thee with the world
hereafter, have thou not cause to look upon this as a very light affliction?
yet further; It is light to the spirit, though burdensome to the flesh; and that
upon a double account. 1. because we suffer for Christ whom we love in
sincerity; and love makes hard things easy, heavy things light.

But my sufferings, may some good man say, Du.
are not for Christ; they are for sin.

Yet then are they not intolerable; Sol. Heb. 12.7.
they are laid upon thee by the hand of a Father, and that for thy good, that
thou may be brought out of love with thy sin, and be made partaker of his
holiness. v. 10.
In such a case thou should be sorrowful for thy provocation; sensible of
his displeasure; but there is no reason why thou should either fret or faint
under his hand: Jeremiah's frame would much better become thee; Lam. 3.31.32.33.
I will bear the indignation of my God, because I have sinned against him. The
Lord will not cast off for ever: but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. For he does not afflict
willingly nor griev the children of men. 2. Because we suffer with Christ, who
is sensible of all our sufferings, will support us under them, and in due time
deliver us from them; Hence though we be troubled on every side, we are not
distressed; though we are perplexed, yet we are not in despair; though we
are persecuted, yet we are not forsaken; though we be cast down, yet we are
not destroyed 2. Cor. 4.8.9.

2. It is affliction that endures but a moment; it is called elswere the
afliction of this present time: Romans 8.18. 1. Cor. 7.29. (...).
and the Apostle tells us time is but short, contracted, wrapped up like the
sails of a ship when she com's near to harbor; and therefore thus he argues,
those that weep should be as if they wept not. I remember what Athanasius, the
jewel of his age, said touching the Arrian persecution that it was nubecula
cito transitura, a cloud that would soon be blown over: and what our jewel,
whom I may justly term the Athanasius of his age, Non durabunt
said of those Marian days that they would not last long, the like may we say
of our afflictions. And that this troublous stream will soon be dried up, we
may assure our selves, whether we consider

1. The spring from whence they rise, that is the wrath of God; but a Father's
wrath with his childen will not last long Isa. 54.7.8. For a small moment have
I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee, In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness I will have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

2. The channel in which they run: it is the life of man: and what is our
life? Jam. 4.14.
it is even a vapor that appears for a little time and then vanishes away.
There cannot be long affliction in a short life. Thus much of the first
consideration.

2. Consider the Glory wrought by your affliction. 2. Consideration.
1. it is Glory simply, and absolutely. No glory to be compared with it.
Gerard in loc. Com: de vita aeter. Coelum non patitur hyperbolen.
It is such a glory as admits no hyperbole. 2. It is a weight of glory: and
that for the preciousness of it. It is very rare: few there be that find it.
And it can never be bought too dear. Gold, we say, may, but glory cannot. Dr
Ha^mond in his Annotations upon the place. Hic Grotius in loc. 1 Pet. 1.
For the plenteousness of it, each Soul shall be a vessel brim full of glory.
For the substantialness of it, it is not like the glory of this world, flashy
and frothy; but it is solid and substantial, a Kingdom that cannot be moved,
a Crown that fades not away, an inheritance incorruptible. Hence: 3. It is
called an eternal weight of glory. O Eternity! a vast gulf that swalloweth up
all expressions, al conceptions! eye has not seen, nor has ear heard, nor
has it entered into the heart of man to conceiv what is the surpassing
excellency of that glory which the afflictions of the Saints work for them.

O vain worldlings! that pursue, Conclusion.
like Children empty bubbles, and neglect solid and substantial comforts. O
fools! that choose sin rather than affliction, when they see plainly that the
pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11.25.
and that the glory of affliction holds out to eternity.

Do you (O ye Saints and servants of the most high God) do you think on these
things: Phil. 4 8. 1. Tim. 2.25.
take a daily prospect of your heavenly glory, carry this Text in your bosom,
as a cordial against your fainting fits: and if the Text be too much, keep
but one word in your mind, Una voce qua Quirites cos pro militibus appellarat,
facile circumegit, and flexit Suet^n in Juli^ cap. 70.
to wit, Glory. Caesar stilled the tumults of his Soldiers with one word,
Quirites. this one word Glory seriously thought upon, will still a legion of
tumultuous thoughts within you. Glory will answer all afflictions: if your
affliction be loss of reputation, Glory will honor you with a new name: if
your affliction be loss of goods, Glory will enrich you, and that with durable
riches; if loss of friends, Glory will bring you to your godly friends again;
and above all to your best friend Jesus Christ; if it be hunger, Glory will
feed you with hidden Manna: if it be nakedness, Glory will cloathe thee with a
long white robe: if sickness, Glory will restore thee to perpetual health: if
sin (which is really the greatest affliction to a Saint) Glory will present
thee perfect in Holiness. In a word what comfort can be wanting to that man;
whom Glory has lodged in the bosom of God? I have done with the first
argument in the Text drawn from the comfortable effect of the Saints
afflictions: I should come to the second, drawn from the gracious disposition
of the Saints, we look not at the things that are seen; but I have already
spent too much upon your patience.

I need not crave your leave to speak a word or two of the Worthy Gentlewoman,
whose mournful hers we see before us; I know you expect it, I am sure she
deserved it. A good woman she was, and that is commendation enough for any
mortal, seeing the word of God which endures for ever, is honored with no
higher Epithet, than the good word of God.

She was known to me only in her Widowhood, and therefore I shall draw all
my speech from a passage of the Apostle Paul concerning widows 1. Tim. 5.3.
Honor Widows that are Widows indeed. Mrs Elisabeth Harvey was a widow indeed,
she trusted in God, yet so as not to tempt him, she looked not upon earthly
things with an eye of confidence; but she did wisely look after earthly things
with an eye of providence. Christianity and good huswifery may well stand
together yea, if any provide not for their own they are wors than Infidels.

She continued in supplications and prayers night and day: her closet was
morning and evening perfumed with those sweet odours. She lived not delicately
(as many do that are dead while they live) but devoutly, but soberly, but
temperately, and so she lives now she is dead. She was the wife only of one
man, she was well reported of for good works: and if the world had buried them
in silence, though don without any the least affectation of praise, the backs
and bowels of the poor that she covered and refreshed, would have spoken for
her, and have reproved it is envy. She was vigilant and careful in bringing up
Children, and blessed be God we see the fruits of it. She was very
hospitable, very humble, and could be content to submit to the meanest office
to which charity directed her: if it had been to wash the Saints feet, I dare
say she would not have refused it.

As she lived, so she died in the faith (which is the commendation given by
the Apostle to those Ancient worthies Heb. 11.) the last words I heard her
utter were these, Lord I believ, help my unbelief.

What remains now but that we bless God for her; Prove. 10.7. Psalm. 112.6.
and give her the honor due unto her 1. the honor of Commemoration. The memory
of the just is blessed, Heb. 13.7.
and the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. 2. the honor of
imitation. whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. To
conclude all, I know it is a great affliction, to forgo such a mother, such a
sister, such a friend, such a neighbor: but let this be our comfort, she
has exchanged earth for heaven; her body feel's none of those pains,
sicknesses, weaknesses, none of all those inconveniences which our mortal
condition is subject to; and her Soul feel's that blessed weight of Glory,
which we all groan for. She is gone before, and we (if we follow her steps)
shall not be long after: Haste, Haste, to heaven Come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20.
come quickly.

FINIS.

