THE Most Easy METHOD FOR MAKING The BEST CIDER.

By J. W. Gent.

Licensed,

June 16. 1687. Rob. Midgley.



LONDON, Printed for George Grafton, at the Mitre in Fleetstreet, near
Temple Bar, 1687.

THE Most Easy Method For Making The Best Cider.
IT is generally known, That few Foreign Drinks as they are handed to us, are
comparable to our English Cider well made: Those being so adulterated in the
several hands through which they pass, that they corrupt instead of repair, the
Natures of them that drink them. By Cider well made, has been found to be a
much more excellent and salubrous Liquor, and more suitable to our English
Bodies, than any of those corrupt and adulterated Wines that are daily
consumed. Nevertheless, the different and erroneous Methods that are used in
making of it, (which like Medicines for Agues, are become innumerable, and
rather confound than inform the Judgment) through the Ignorance of some, and
the Covetousness of others, have very much impaired its Reputation; and rendered
this Liquor not so universally acceptable as it might be, if made of the most
proper Apples for that purpose, and duly prepared.

Wherefore, to undeceive the too credulous, and gratify the Curious, and such
that are willing to promote so good a Work as the improvement of so excellent a
Liquor, and so great a part of our English Husbandry. I intend here to give you
such an easy Method for making the best Cider, as Experience the Mistress of
Arts has taught; that instead of a laborious and difficult way of compounding
and corrupting, you may naturally and easily make it: And if rightly observed
and followed, will cause this Liquor to be so generally esteemed, that in a
little time it may supplant the shallow credit of the sophisticated exotic
blood of the Grape.

I. The Choice of the Fruit.
1. APples that are hard and lasting make good Cider, although their
parenchymous or fleshy parts are White, as the Deux-Ans, or John-Apples,
Oaken-pins, Westbury Apples, etc.

The Reasons are, that they hang long on the Trees before they are Ripe, which
digesteth their Juice the more, and are or ought to be, kept longer than softer
Fruit after they are gathered, before they are ground, for the same intent: And
their tough Skin preserves their copious Spirits from perspiration, more than
in tender Fruits.

2. Such whose Parenchymous, or freshy parts are Yellow and Firm, yield very
good Cider, whether they be Ripe early or late; although the later they are
Ripe, the richer Liquor they yield: As Pippins of all sorts, especially the
Golden, Orange Apple, Golden Rennets, etc.

The Redness is caused by the heat of the Sun digesting the Liquid matter on
the extreme parts of the Fruit. It also gives a Tincture to the Cider; as the
red Skin of the Grape does to Wine. The outside of any Apple yields the best
Cider; but the more colored the better.

II. The Times for Gathering and Grinding Apples for Cider.
1. MAny Judge of the ripeness of Apples by the blackness of the Kernels.

This holds in Fruits that are not long lasting, but in some Apples that hang
long on the Trees, they must be taken before the Frosts hurt them, although the
Kernels are not through Black.

2. The maturity of some Fruit is discerned by their yellow Color; which with
the blackness of their Kernels, is a good indication.

But some Apples are white when through Ripe, and improve not their Color till
they have lain sometime gathered; and some are yellow before they are Ripe.

3. Most Apples discover their maturity by their Scent; for if they have a
Mellow smell, they are undoubtedly ripe enough to gather.

Some Apples nevertheless, yield no Scent, or very little, whilst on the Trees:
but these have other indications of their Maturity.

4. When Apples are apt Spontaneously to drop from the Trees, they are
undoubtedly Ripe: For then the Tree cease to give any more nourishment to the
Fruit, by means whereof, the Ligaments by which the Fruit is united to the
Tree, and receives its nourishment, grow feeble, and in a little time are
dissolved.

Some Winter-Fruits there are, that are so strongly united to the Trees, that
the Fruit is many times prejudiced by Frosts before their Ligaments are
dissolved; therefore they must be gathered before the extreme Cold invades them.

5. Therefore by these indications, or some of them, it is not difficult to
know when it is fit to gather your Fruits. When they are gathered, it is
convenient to let them lie on heaps, or in Vessels within Doors, or elsewhere
out of the Rain, for some time before they are fit for the Mill; for the lying
of Apples sometime after they are taken from the Trees, begets the expense of
the more phlegmatic Juice by Sweating, and ripens and meliorates that which
remains; and also weakneth (by a degree of putrefaction) the Branchery or Veins
that so strongly unite the Parenchymous parts of the Fruit, making them more
easily to be broken in the Mill, and more freely yield their Juices.

Such Fruits that are ripe before, or about Michaelmas, may lie two or three
Weeks: And those that are not ripe till after, may lie till November, as
Gilliflowers, Marigold Apples, etc. Some till December, as Deux-ans, Westbury
Apples, Oaken-pins, etc. And then will they yield the more and better Cider,
which if they should be ground soon after their gathering, they would yield a
thin acid Juice not fit for use.

III. The manner of grinding and pressing of Apples for Cider.
1. THe best Mills for grinding are those described in Vinetum Britannicum,
being the most expeditious and advantageous way for the good of the Liquor,
that has been yet discovered.

One Man may grind as many Apples in a Day by one of these Mills, as are
usually ground in two or three Horse-Mills in the same time.

A Horse-Mill will cost near 20 l. the setting up, with the Room wherein it is
to be used. One of the least of these Mills, wherein may be ground near 20
Bushels in an Hour, will not cost above 3 l. The larger and swifter more.

A Horse Mill is fixed, and will take up a great deal of room, and must remain
so from year to year. But either of these Mills stand in a little Room, and is
moveable and portable from place to place with ease.

2. After the Apples are ground, if they were mellow, it is good to press the
Pulp the same day they were ground, or the next day after. But if the Apples
were hard or tough, then let the Pulp stand two or three days.

For the Pulp of Mellow Apples is apt to heat sooner than other, and thereby
contract an ill Savor; but that of harder Fruit is not; and the standing some
time after they are ground, makes it yield the more Liquor, by dissolving the
more obdurate Particles, and weakening the Branchery or Veins that pass through
the whole fleshy parts thereof, by an advantageous degree of Putrefaction: By
which means it is Gust is improved, and it is Tincture exalted, especially if
made of colored Fruit.

3. If you desire a rich colored Cider, take of the reddest sort of through
ripe Gilliflowers in November, and pill about a third or fourth part of them
you intend to grind, and when you have ground and pressed your Cider, add the
pillings to the Cider, and so let it stand Fourteen days more or less, then
decant or draw off the Cider, and press the pillings to it, and order it as
hereafter is directed, and you will have the finest, best colored Cider, and
richest in substance and taste that can be made of Apples: More especially if
you pill all your Gilliflowers, or deep colored Apples about the thickness of
a Crown-piece, and grind those thick Rinds very fine (laying by the Insides you
left, to make a meaner Cider) and then digest that Cider on some of the thin
Pillings.

For all Vinous Fruits have their purest part next the skin or pill, and there
is the richest Juice contained, the Sun or Air maturating such Juice more
perfectly on the extreme parts, than near the Core: The Pores are also much
finer there than toward the middle, as appears in a dissected Apple by the
help of a Microscope; which is the reason that Wines proceeding from Grapes
lying in large Vessels without any other Pressure than their own Weight, are
much more excellent than those that are forcibly expressed, which by all are
found to be the poorest. Therefore if you intend to have good Cider of any sort
of Fruit, press not your Pulp too hard, as it is usually done in the great
Screw-Presses, some of them being made with Iron Screws, by force whereof the
Murc is sometimes left so dry, that it will burn. This Cider so expressed, is
ill colored, and not well tasted, for the last run is poor, and carries with
it too much of the lignous part of the Apple (the inside or coary part of the
Apple, as well as the stony part of the Grape being the more rough and harsh)
therefore it is better to leave a part of that behind, than to impoverish ten
times as much of that which is more pure and rich. Besides, it confounds the
Specific Gust and Flavor that Cider ^ould have of the Fruit its made of,
making all Cider almost taste alike. And when you intend to make Ciderkin, an
easy Pressure leaves the more behind to improve that, which is none of the
meanest Drinks.

IV. The Ordering of Cider after it is Pressed.
1. WHen your Cider is pressed, put it into a large Vatt, or Tun, with a Tap
near the bottom, and after it has stood two or three Days, draw it off from
the gross Settling or Lee into Barrels, Hogsheads, or other Vessels, which
place in your coldest Cellars, Vaults, or places, and there let them stand with
their Bungs open three or four Weeks, or more, till the Feces or Lee
precipitate, and your Cider become indifferently fine.

If you have not a Vatt or Tun fit for your purpose, you may strain it from its
Trash, and Barrel it up immediately from the Press; but besure to set it in the
coldest places; for Cold conduces very much to the purifying of this Liquor,
Warmth occasioning the solution and detention of those Particles of flying Lee,
that spoil the Color and Taste of Cider, which otherwise would precipitate.
The leaving the Bung open does not only add to the cooling of the Liquor, but
gives way to the expense of the wild Spirit that is in it, which being pent,
would continue the Solution of those Particles, and detain them, so that they
would not easily precipitate, but on every occasion beget reiterated
Fermentations, until at length not only the more gross, but also the most pure
colored, and desirable parts would precipitate, and the Cider left pale,
jejune, and ill tasted: Or which oftentimes happens, the Solution is so
forcible, that it remains thick, pale, eager, and ill tasted, unless it be by
Art refined, which spoils all Cider that otherwise would be good.

As for the time of it standing open, that must be proportioned according to
the Nature of the Fruit, and their Circumstances. For if the Fruit were hard
that the Liquor came out of the Press indifferently clear, the less time may
serve; for then will it let fall its Feces the sooner: But if the Fruit were
mellow or pulpy, or the Weather mild and warm, then will it with more
Difficulty part with its gross Particles, and so the longer time is required;
and therefore it will be convenient sometimes to inspect your Cider, to observe
in what state or condition of Fineness it is, from time to time; for as soon as
it is Fine, it is best forthwith to draw it into Bottles, or rack it into other
Vessels, lest a new Fermentation happen.

2. You may try its fineness by taking a Glass Pipe of a Foot or more in
length, that is open at both ends, by stopping the upper end of the Pipe with
your Thumb, and letting the other end down into the Cider as deep as you think
fit, then open the upper end by raising your Thumb, the Cider will rise in the
Pipe; then stop the upper end again with your Thumb, and elevate the Pipe, so
may you let it run into a Drinking-glass, or return it into the Vessel, after
you have viewed it, as you think fit.

By this means you may know the different Degrees of Fineness, in the upper,
middle, and lower parts of the Vessel, without tapping in several places; for
the Cider may not be all alike fine at once; and it is best to let it be alike
fine before you draw it off.

V. The Ordering of Cider in the first Racking.
4. AFter you have drawn your Cider from its Lee, as is before directed, which
you may call its first racking; and may be done into large Glass Bottles of one
or two Gallon apiece more or less; let it stand in such Bottles a Month or two,
or more; let them be loose stopped, that there may be a free admission of Air
though not of Dust or other Filth; set these Bottles in your Cellar, or cold
Repository, (yet so that they may not freeze) and there will your Cider undergo
a second degree of Fineing, and other Feces will precipitate, which when you
observe to be thoroughly settled in the bottom, and your Cider very transparent,
which you may call Superfine, then is such Cider fit for use.

For it is observed, that the coldness of the Glass very much accelerates the
precipitation of the remaining Lee or Feces, leaving only the true Balsamic
transparent Juice of the Apple, which by any other ways or means is hardly
separable without impairing the Cider: Therefore if your quantity of Cider be
so great, that you cannot easily obtain a sufficient number of large Glass
Bottles, you may instead of them make use of Stone Bottles, or glazed Earthen
Vessels, the larger the better, which may be placed in Rows in your Cellars or
Vaults, and covered with Boards, or the like, to keep your Cider from the Dust,
etc. but not from the Air; but in these Vessels you cannot so well discern the
fining of your Cider, as in Glass Bottles; so that now you must use your Glass
Pipe to try its Fineness.

VI. The Ordering of Cider after it is Superfine.
1. WHen your Cider has attained its utmost Degree of Fineness, which is known
by its exceeding Transparency, then with a Crane or Siphon draw it off from its
last Feces into your smaller Bottles, and there stop it close, and keep it in
cold places for your Use.

The best Cranes or Siphons for this Use, are those that are turned of the
Glass Pipes that are made for Barometers, or Quicksilver Weather-glasses,
usually sold at the Glass Shops in London, being made of the Flint Glass very
transparent, and show the true Color of the Cider as it runs through it; and
every Atome of Filth or Nubecula that shall happen to rise. These Siphons you
may easily make your self, according to the Directions given in Vinetum
Britanicum.

2. The use of them is plain and easy; Let the straight Leg of the Siphon sink
into the Bottle or Vessel out of which you extract your Cider, gently, till it
touch the bottom; then place your Mark or Ring of Yarn on the outside of that
Leg, to the height of the Bottle or Vessel; then raise it so that you the the
lower end of that Leg is above the Feces that are a^ the bottom; then draw at
the other end of the Siphon, and all your Superfine Cider will arise from the
Lee, and descend into such Bottles you intend to preserve it in.

When one Bottle is full, you may with your Finger stop the outward end of the
Siphon, till another Bottle be applied: Thus may two Persons run off a great
quantity of Cider in a day, which Cider thus refined, may be close corked
without any danger of breaking the Bottles, or flying of the Cider at the
opening of them.

If you design any of it for present drinking in the Winter time, set it two or
three days thus stopped in an upper Room, not so cold as your Conservatory, but
inclining to Warmth, and it will become brisk and nitty in the Glass.

Cider thus prepared becomes of a most delicate, pleasant, luscious taste,
without any Addition of Sugar or any other thing whatsoever to edulcorate or
refine it; and will so continue for several Years (that matter being wholly
separated from it which otherwise would make it degenerate to the worst of
Drinks:) And although it may appear somewhat pale at the first, yet time alone
will raise it to so high a perfection, that it will become of a deep yellow,
and continue of so Oriental a Brightness, that herein the richest and finest
Canary Wines surpass it not; and this is produced of the bare Juice of the
Apple, without the least Addition of any matter or thing whatsoever, and only
by a Mechanic Operation, and Natural Observation.

So that by observing only these few short and easy Rules, without any Charge
(other than Vessels) or extraordinary Labor, may you extract the true and
natural Vinous Liquor out of ^y sort of Apples, preserving its specific Nature
and Gust, that you need not any Invention or costly Engine to extract the
Spirits, out of the one half, to improve, or rather spoil, the other; nor any
Compositions to beget pernicious Fermentations. This being such Cider that no
Art can mend.

FINIS.
This Subject will be treated of more at large in Second Part of Vinetum
Britanicum, now ready for the Press.


