Behold a Virgin and Matthew. 1. 2^ This Jesus Which is taken up into Acts. ^.
^^. A Collection of Private Devotion Composed by Thomas Wolley for ye use of
his Child ^^

engraved title page

A COLLECTION Of Private Devotions, Fi^^ed for Every Day in the Week.

By THOMAS WOOLLEY.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Twyford and Timothy Twyford, Middle Temple. 1670.

To the most Virtuous Lady Dame Anne How, Wife of the Right Worshipful Sr.
Richard Grobham How Knight. now High Sheriff of the County of Wilts, one of the
Kings Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace of that County.
Madam,
THe necessitous Melancholy hours that I have sustained in this place, have
been the Author of the Collecting this small Method of Devotions which I
intended only for the private use of my Self and poor Children but being
instigated by some Reverend Persons, to commit the same to public view; I
humbly beg leave of your Ladyship to let some luster be added to it by setting
your worthy Name to the Frontispiece thereof, being very confident, that so
Illustrious a Person as your Self, being named at the beginning of this small
Tract, will give great encouragement to all that shall see it, to believe that
certainly there is something more in it, than in truth it is (had it come from
the most Learned and Pious Prelate) especially when your Ladyship is considered
to be the Daughter of so Reverend, Learned and Pious a Prelate as the Reverend
Father in God John late L. B. of London, deceased; and Sister of that most
Reverend, Learned, and Pious Prelate Henry now L. Bishop of Chichester; besides
your most worthy, pious, and virtuous Relations, who when you meet together,
are under that Ecce of the Kingly Prophet; Behold how for good and joyful a
thing it is Brethren to dwell together in unity, etc. for truly, Madam, a
worthy Gent, who told me he had once the happiness to see your Ladyship, and
great part of your own Relations together, which was as pleasant to him as the
Dew of the sweetest Morning, and could not resemble you better to any thing,
more than to the true Family of ^ov^. Madam, I have seen very much my self, and
know what a great blessing God Almighty sent that worthy Family where your
Ladyship now is, when you came amongst them in your most pious and discreetest
Government in all your Domestic affairs, besides your learned and great
Reading, Madam, I do once more humbly beg your Ladyships pardon for this great
presumption, and in doing that, Madam, you will add a great favor of Charity
to him who has been a very large sharer of your Ladyships Munificence, and
shall ever pray for your honor and happiness, and the honor and happiness of
that Family where you are now and continue,

Most virtuous Madam, the meanest of your Ladyships most obliged, and obedient
Servants, THOMAS WOLLEY.
Castle at Gloucester, the Feast day of the Annutiation of our Blessed Lady St.
Mary the Virgin. 1669.
PRIVATE DEVOTIONS. Collected and Composed in this ensuing Method By THOMAS
WOLLEY Gent.
For my two Sons John, and Thomas Wolley, now at School at the Free School in
Cyrencester, in the County of Gloucester, under the Care of their most
Indulgent, Worthy, and Learned Master, Mr. Nathaniel Gwinn: And to my other
(...) (...), Edward (...), and (...), when it shall please God they shall
attain to the age of understanding.
My dear Children,
WHen I consider the great Calamities and horrid Accidents that have lately
befallen me, and in me also upon your dear Mother, and your selves, I cannot
but with great sorrow look back and consider the Cause of all Evil, which is
Sin; and by those reflections upon my self, consider the great grace and mercy
of God, who by the Afflictions of this present life, which in comparison of
Eternity, is but a moment, does many times bring those nearer unto him* that by
a great and (...) Prosperity, may ^^ the more estranged ^^om him, and those
good things that lead to Life eternal. I must truly confess, that my heart was
set upon your dear Mother, and your Selves, in whom and whose Company I took (I
cannot say, too much) but a very great delight; which God thought fit to
deprive me of, ^y suffering me to be committed to this Prison; the meditation
whereof does make me consider the words of the Prophet in the 39. Psalm. and 11.
verse. When thou with Rebukes do correct man for Iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a Moth: And now God rebuking and correcting me for
sin, does deprive me of my beauty, which is the thing I most delighted in,
which was, the society of you, my dear Children: but when that great God of all
Mercies, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace in his due
time shall be pleased to make a Reconciliation between me and those who have
taken displeasure against me; and that I may enjoy my former Liberty and your
Societies, I hope we shall make use of that great blessing to the glory and
praise of his most holy Name. And since I cannot be so happy to enjoy you, nor
you me at present, yet let our Prayers meet at the Throne of Grace, although
our Bodies meet not here on Earth; And that they may so do, I have by the
gracious assistance of Almighty God, Composed into Order some private Devotions
for you, not but that I know there are many excellent Methods of Devotions
composed by many holy, learned and pious men already in Print, which I might
have sent you at an easier rate, than to have taken this trouble upon my self:
Yet I considered your dutiful Obedience at all times toward me, and did
believe that something of my own would make a deeper impression into your
hearts; however I hope I shall offend none herein, for that I have not
attempted any new thing of my own, but Collecting out of the Church Liturgy,
with other pious Devotions, into this Order. And truly it was upon the occasion
of your dear Mother her coming hither unto me upon Thursday last, and
discoursing with me concerning your selves in relation to the supplying you
with some necessaries that I fear you stand in need of, which my present
Condition will not admit me to furnish you with so fully as my heart is
inclinable to do. I therefore bethought my self of supplying you with this
little Manual of Devotions, that although I cannot so fully accommodate you
with the things of this life, yet I may by this little means direct you into
the paths of Eternity, which truly followed, will bring you to life
everlasting. And now let me charge you by all the dutiful obligations that are
due from you to me, that you carefully consider these Meditations, and
effectually put them in practice: And let your Prayers for me not be wanting,
as mine never were (nor I hope) never shall be for you. Thus committing you to
the Fatherly care and preservation of the great God and Father of Heaven and
Earth, that he would be pleased to Command his holy Angels to take charge of
you, and to preserve you both in Body and Soul from all evil visible and
invisible; I rest,

Your most affectionate and Loving Father T. W.
From the Prison at the Castle in Gloucester, 9 Novembris. 1668.
For my Worthy Friend Mr. Nathaniel Gwinn, Master of the Free School at
Cyrencester, these humbly present.
Most worthy Sir,
IT is said, That if it had not been for Aristotle, Alexander had not been
Alexander; although the Simile may not well hold, yet truly what my poor
Children have attained unto, They and my Self, must be very ungrateful if we do
not acknowledge it to come from you; And therefore Sir, I do with all the
Offerings of a free heart, in all humility return you my humble and hearty
thanks for your unheard of Civilities to my poor Sons, hoping that your
Indulgence to them will not be forgotten, when ever it shall please God they
may be Capacitated to return those thanks that are due for Obligations of so
large a magnitude; I must now beg you to contract another trouble upon your
self, viz. That you would he pleased to peruse the following Meditations, and
as you shall approve of them, ^o give encouragement unto those ^hey are
designed for to use them. Thus beseeching your Prayers to ^he God of all
Recompenses for me a poor Prisoner in this Goal. I remain

Reverend Sir, Your most obliged, and faithful Servant T. W.
From the Castle in Gloucester, 9 die Novembris. 1668.
Devout MEDITATIONS For the Morning, for every Day in the Week.
When you awake in the Morning say,
O Savior of the World, who by thy Cross and precious Blood have redeemed us,
save us and help us we humbly beseech thee, O Lord. And afterward, before you
stir out of your Bed, because the first thoughts ought to be offered to
Almighty God, say

O Lord open thou our lips,
And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins,
Neither reward us after our iniquities.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver u^ from evil; For thine is the
kingdom, and the power and the glory for ever and ever. Amen.

GLory be to God on high: An^ in Earth peace, good will to wards Men. We praise
thee, we bles^ thee, we worship thee, we glorif^^ thee, we give thanks to thee
for thy great Glory: O Lord God, heavenly King, God the Father Almighty: O Lord
the only begotten Son Jesu Christ: O Lord God Lamb of God, Son of the Father
that take away the Sins of the World have mercy upon us; thou that take
away the sins of the world have mercy upon us: thou that take away the sins
of the world receive our Prayers; thou that sit at the right hand of God
the Father have mercy upon us: For thou only art Holy, thou only art the Lord,
thou only O Christ with the Holy Ghost art most high in the glory of God the
Father. Amen.

And when you arise out of your Bed, make a reverent bow with your body and say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end* Amen.

When you are putting on your Apparel, let your thoughts be truly toward God,
and of his most bountiful goodness toward you at all times, and say,

O Sweet Jesu, that the shame of my sinful Soul may not be seen, cloth it with
the robes of thy Justice, and cover it with the Ornaments of all manner of
grace and virtues. Amen.

And before you stir out of your Chamber, prepare your thoughts for Prayer;
repairing to some convenient place of the Room, and with great reverence bow
your body, and say the eighth Psalm following.

O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world: thou that
have set thy glory above the Heavens. Out of the mouth of very Babes and
Sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies: that thou
might still the Enemy and the Avenger. For I will consider the Heavens, even
the works of thy Fingers: the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained. What
is Man that thou art mindful of him: and the Son of Man that thou visitest him?
Thou made him lower than the Angels: to crown him with glory and worship.
Thou make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou have put
all things in subjection under his feet, all Sheep and Oxen: yea, and the
Beasts of the field. The Fouls of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea: and
whatsoever walks through the paths of the Seas. O Lord our Governor: how
excellent is thy Name in all the world?

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

Then kneeling down upon your knees with your heart and hands lift up to
Almighty God, say,

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now, and for ever, Amen.

O Lord save the King.

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

OUr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil; For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

O Everlasting God, who have ordained, and constituted the services of Angels
and Men in a wonderful order, mercifully grant, that as thy holy Angels always
do thee service in Heaven, so by thy appointment they may succor and defend us
on Earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen*

ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; Create and make in us new and
Contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all Mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls, that
we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the body, and from
all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O Almighty God whose dwelling is in the highest Heavens, and yet vouchsafest
to regard the lowest Creature upon Farth; I humbly adore thy Sacred Majesty,
and with all the forces of my Soul exalt and praise thy holy Name for the
infinite blessings thou have so freely bestowed on me: for electing me in thy
Love, and Creating me after thine own Image, for Redeeming me by thy Son, and
Sanctifying me with thy holy Spirit, for preserving me in all the chances and
encounters of this Life, and raising up my thoughts to the hope of a better:
And particularly for thy gracious protection from the dangers of this night*
and bringing me safely to the beginning of this day. Continue, O Lord, thy
mercy to me, and as thou have awakened my Body from sleep, so raise my Soul
from sin, that I may walk soberly and chastely as in the day in all holy
obedience before thy face. Deliver me, O merciful God, from the evils of this
day, and guide my feet in the ways of peace. Strengthen my Resolution to
embrace with gladness the opportunities of good, and carefully avoid all
occasions of sin, especially those which I by experience do most endanger my
Soul with And when through frailty I forget thee, do thou in mercy remember,
that as I often fall by the evil inclinations of my nature, I may always rise
again by the good assistance of thy grace: make me diligent in the duties of my
Condition, and not too solicitous for the success of my Affairs: but in all the
miscarriages and crosses of this world absolutely submit to thy divine
pleasure, and wholly rely on thy merciful providence: Let thy Blessings be upon
my Actions, and thy grace direct my intentions, that the whole Course of my
life, and principal design of my heart may always tend to the advancement of
thy glory, the good of others, and the eternal salvation of my own Soul;
through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, who with thee and the Holy
Ghost, lives and reigns one God world without end, Amen.

I Adore and glorify thee O blessed Trinity, God Omnipotent, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. I offer my self to thy divine Majesty, humbly beseeching thee to
take from me, and from all thy faithful, what ever displeases thee, and give
us that which is grateful in thy sight, grant that we may here do what thou
command, and hereafter receive what thou promisest.

To thee O Lord I commend my Soul and Body, my Father and Mother, my Brethren
and Sisters, my Kinsfolks, and Benefactors, my Friends, and Familiars, and all
those for whom I am any ways bound to offer up my Prayers: To thee I commend
the holy Catholic Church; Grant O Lord all may know thee, all may honor and
reverence thee, all may love thee, and be loved by thee, those that err reduce
and bring into the way: destroy Heresies, Convert all to the true Faith who as
yet do not know thee, grant us O Lord thy grace, and conserve us in thy peace:
May thy holy Will be done and not ours: comfort all those that lead their lives
in Sorrow, Misery, or Temptations, and mercifully relieve their Afflictions,
whether Spiritual, or Corporal: Lastly, I commend all universally to thy holy
Protection, that thou would vouchsafe unto them forgiveness of all their
sins, and life everlasting.

INto the hands of thy unspeakable mercy, O Lord, I commend my Soul and Body,
my Senses, my Words, my Thoughts, and all my Actions, with all the necessities
of my Body and Soul, my going forth, and coming in, my Faith and Conversation,
and the course and end of my Life, the day and hour of my Death, my rest, and
Resurrection with thy Saints and Elect for ever, Amen.

O Lord hear our Prayers.
And let our Supplications come unto thee.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name* Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

ACcept, O most gracious God, for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, this
Office of my Service, and if by thy grace I have performed any thing according
to my duty, in thy Clemency regard it, and what I have done with negligence,
mercifully pardon, who live and reignest one God in perfect Trinity world
without end, Amen.

THe Imperial Majesty of God bless me, the Regal Divinity protect me, the
everlasting Deity keep me, the glorious Unity comfort me, the Incomprehensible
Trinity defend me, the Inestimable Goodness direct me, the Power of the Father
govern me, the Wisdom of the Son quicken me, the Virtue of the Holy Ghost
illuminate me and defend me from all mine enemies, visible and invisible, and
be with me and preserve me this day and for evermore.

This being performed arise from off thy knees with reverence, making an humble
bow with your body and saying.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

At your going forth of the House where you did lodge the night before, say
privately to your self.

Show me O Lord thy ways and teach me thy paths, direct my steps according to
thy Word, that no Injustice rule over me: by the guiding of thy holy Angels
make perfect my goings in thy paths, that my steps be not moved from the ways
of thy Righteousness.

Devout MEDITATIONS At the time of your going to Bed.
WHen you have entered your Chamber, and your thoughts are retired from your
worldly Affairs, repair to some convenient place, and with great reverence bow
your Body, and say the thirteenth Psalm.

HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever: how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my Soul, and be so vexed in my heart? How
long shall mine enemies triumph over me? Consider and hear me, O Lord my God:
lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Lest mine enemy say, I have
prevailed against him: For if I be cast down, they that trouble me will rejoice
at it. But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is joyful in thy Salvation. I
will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt so lovingly with me: yea, I will
praise the Name of the Lord most Highest.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now and for ever.

O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.
And grant us thy Salvation.
Our Father, etc.
ALmighty God, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and
put upon us the Armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life (in which
thy Son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility;) that in the last Day
when he shall come again in his glorious Majesty, to judge both the quick and
the dead, we may rise to the life immortal, through him who lives and reigns
with thee and the Holy Ghost, now and ever, Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God which art always more ready to hear than we to
pray, and art wont to give more than either we desire or deserve: Pour down
upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our
Conscience is afraid, and giving unto us that, that our Prayer dare not presume
to ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

ALmighty and merciful God, of thy bountiful goodness keep us from all things
that may hurt us: that we being ready both in body and soul, may with free
hearts accomplish those things that thou would have done, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

O Eternal God, Almighty Father of Men and Angels, by whose mercy, care and
Providence I have been preserved, blessed, comforted, and assisted; I humbly
beg of thee to pardon the sins and follies of this day, the weakness of my
service, the strength of my passion, the rashness of my words, and the vanity
and evil of my actions. O just and dear God, how long shall I confess my sins
and pray against them, and yet fall under them, O let it be so no more, let me
never return to the follies of which I am ashamed, which bring Sorrow and
Death, and thy displeasure worse than death: give me a command over my evil
Inclinations, and a perfect hatred of sin, and a love to thee above all the
desires of this world, be pleased to bless and preserve me this night from all
sin and all violence of Chance, and the malice of the Spirits of darkness,
watch over me in my sleep or wake, and whether I sleep or awake, let me be thy
Servant, be thou first and last in all my thoughts, and the guide and continual
assistance of all my actions, preserve my Body, pardon the sins of my Soul,
sanctify my Spirit, let me always live holy, justly, and soberly, and when I
die, receive my Soul into thy hands, O holy and ever blessed Jesus, that I may
lie in thy Bosom, and long for thy coming, and hear thy blessed sentence at
doomsday, and live in thy Kingdom, singing praises to God for ever and ever,
Amen.

Save me Lord waking, and keep me sleeping, that I may watch with Christ and
rest in peace, Amen.

Preserve me as the Apple of thine Eye, and protect me under the shadow of thy
wings.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me this night without sin.

Have mercy on me, O Lord, have have mercy on me.

Thy mercy be upon me, O Lord.
As I have put my trust in thee.
O Lord hear my Prayer.
And let my Supplication come unto thee.
VIsit we beseech thee O Lord this Habitation, this Country and Township
wherein I live, and repel far from it, and them all, the snares of the wicked
Enemy of Mankind, and let thy holy Angels dwell therein to preserve us in
peace, and thy Blessing be upon us, and all that we have, and all that belongs
unto us, both now and for ever, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

God the Father bless me, Jesus Christ defend and keep me, the virtue of the
Holy Ghost illuminate and Sanctify me this night and for ever, Amen.

Concluding.

Into thy hands O Lord I commend my Spirit, Lord Jesus receive my Soul.

When you are in your Bed and cannot sleep, exercise your self in some
Spiritual Meditation.

If thou chance to awake in the dead of the night, forthwith imagine thy self
present amidst the Quires of Saints and Angels, and with sudden Acclamation cry
out with them, reciting that Himn which they incessantly sing both day and
night, saying

Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, etc. Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven
and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

WHen I had ended these Devotions for the Morning and Evening for your private
use, I thought to have proceeded no further, but when I considered the
difference holy Church makes of Days, some for holy Feasts, and others for
holy Fasts, I thought it convenient to set you out some other Devotions for the
great weekly Feast of the Church being the Lords day, upon which he did rise
from the Grave, and that weekly Fast of the Church being Friday, upon which he
was Crucified, besides the Public; I, mean those appointed by the Church, for
those days, and your other private Devotions: For as those days are great in
the esteem of the Church, so they bring a greater duty with them.

DEVOTIONS For Sunday Mornings before the Church Prayers begin.
The fifth Psalm.
1. POnder my words, O Lord: consider my Meditation.

2. O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King, and my God: for unto
thee will I make my Prayer.

3. My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the Morning will I
direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.

4. For thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall
any evil dwell with thee.

5. Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hate all them
that work vanity.

6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor both the
blood-thirsty and deceitful man.

7. But as for me, I will come into thine House, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

8. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine Enemies: make thy
way plain before my face.

9. For there is no faithfulness in his mouth: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

10. Their throat is an open Sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

11. Destroy thou them, O God, let them perish through their own imaginations:
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness; for they have rebelled
against thee.

12. And let all them that put their trust in thee rejoice: they shall ever be
giving of thanks, because thou defendest them; they that love thy Name, shall
be joyful in thee.

13. For thou, Lord, wilt give thy Blessing unto the righteous: and with thy
favorable kindness will thou defend him as with a shield.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Then humbly kneeling upon your knees, say,

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now and for ever, Amen,

Our Father, etc.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Jesu, receive our Prayers.
Lord Jesu, grant our Petitions.
BLessed Lord, who have caused all holy Scripture to be written for our
learning, grant that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy Word, we may
embrace, and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Lord Jesu Christ, who at thy first Coming did send thy Messenger to
prepare thy Way before thee, grant that the Ministers and Stewards of thy
Mysteries, may likewise so prepare and make ready thy way, by turning the
hearts of the disobedience to the wisdom of the just, that at thy second coming
to judge the world, we may be found an acceptable People in thy sight, who
live and reignest with the Father and the holy Spirit, ever one God, world
with out end, Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, God of Patriarks, and Prophets,
God of Apostles and Martyrs, God of Virgins, and of all Believers: I beseech
thee have mercy on us, thou who did send thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ,
to redeem us, thy Son, born of the Virgin Mary by the operation of the Holy
Ghost, by the Annunciation of the Angel, deliver us from eternal death.

I beseech thee, O Lord, have compassion on thy Servant, judge me not according
to my works, for I have been disobedient to thy Commandments, but thou, who
love Repentance, have mercy on me, who before thy face make confession of all
my sins, and for the love of thy holy Name, wipe away all my offenses.

Make me to abide in thy holy Catholic Church, with an undefiled Faith and
pure Heart, with a firm devotion, and continual love of thee, and perseverance
in good works to my lives end. Deliver me from the eternal pains and
everlasting torments which thou have prepared for the wicked: Grant this for
our good and blessed Saviors sake, by whom, and in whom, be ascribed to thee,
all Honor, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

O Almighty and most merciful Father, we most humbly beseech thee that we may
keep this Day according to the commandment of thee and thy holy Church: Give
me, O Lord, true contrition of all the sins I have committed against thee, and
my neighbor, by thought, word, or deed, or by omission of good works which I
ought to have done.

And I most humbly beseech thee, most sweet Jesus, not to consider the
multitude of my sins, but remember thy infinite mercy, grant me grace to spend
this week following without offending thee; and for thy death and Passion sake,
give to all sinners knowledge and grace, to be penitent in this world, and
particularly we entreat thee, have mercy on all those; for whom thy holy Church
commands we should this day pray; that with her we may be made partakers of the
infinite merits of thy sacred Passion, Amen.

The Litany.
O God the Father, Creator of the world. Have mercy on us.

O God the Son, Redeemer of Mankind Have mercy on us.

O God the Holy Ghost, Perfecter of the Elect. Have mercy on us.

O Sacred Trinity, three Persons and one God. Have mercy on us.

Behold we were Conceived in sin, and in Iniquity our Mothers brought us forth:
Have mercy on us.

As we have grown in years, we have multiplied the number of our offenses, and
every day thy goodness adds to our lives, our wickedness increases the heap of
our transgressions; Have mercy on us.

The Law of our body makes War against the Law of our mind, and brings us into
subjection to Sin, that the good which we would, we do not, and the evil which
we would not, that we do; have mercy on us.

We have sinned in the vain thought and unlawful desires of our hearts, in the
idle talk, and perverse words of our mouths, in the wicked works and fruitless
course of our lives; have mercy on us.

We have sinned against thee by our Ingratitude for thy Blessings, and
impatience of thy Chastisements, by preferring our selves, and the satisfaction
of our own inordinate desires before Thee and the observance of thy holy
Comandments; have mercy on us.

We have sinned against others, in not doing to them, as we would they should
do to us; and against our own Souls, in pursuing more eagerly the things of
this life, than those that belong to our eternal felicity; have mercy on us.

We have sinned in delaying our Repentance, and breaking the solemn promises of
amending our lives, in exposing our selves to the danger of temptation, and
often omitting the opportunities of thy Service, and even our best endeavors
are full of imperfections; have mercy on us.

We have sinned in not profiting with the talents of Grace and Nature which thy
bounty has committed to our improvement, but idly spent that precious time, and
unthankfully neglected those gracious means, which thy goodness allows us for
the work of our Salvation; have mercy on us.

Have mercy on us most merciful Father, and according to the multitude of thy
tender Compassions, pardon the multitude of our grievous offenses: Remember
what our substance is, that we are but as the grass of the field, or a vapor
that passes away and returns not again; Remember what thou art, Infinitely
glorious in thy Self, and Infinitely good to the least of thy Creatures:
Remember thy gracious Promises in Jesus Christ, and for the Merits of his
sacred Passion, from all our sins, O Lord deliver us.

From the Evils of this present world, from War, Pestilence, and Famine, from
all disastrous mischances in our Bodies, Minds, or Estates, from sudden Death,
and all other thy heavy Judgments, O Lord deliver us.

From the Evils of the world to come, from the dreadful Sentence of
condemnation, and the chains of everlasting darkness, from the Worm that dies
not, and the Fire that shall never be quenched, O Lord deliver us.

From the evil of Sin, which is the only cause of all Misery, from the
temptations to which by nature or custom, we are most exposed; from ignorance
of thy Will, and neglect to perform what we know to be our duty, O Lord deliver
us.

From Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury, from Envy, Gluttony, and Anger, from a
slothful Coldness in what concerns our Salvation, and from those enormous sins
that cry to Heaven for Vengeance, O Lord deliver us.

From Slander, rash Judgment, and Flattery, from self-love, vainglory, and
hypocrisy, from stubbornness and irreverence toward those that are above us,
from disdain and oppression of such as are below us, from the great guilt of
inducing other to sin, and from the unhappiness of being perverted by them our
selves, O Lord deliver us.

From Error, Schism, and Heresy, from denying thee before men, for worldly
respects, from new and factious interpretation of thy Word, and from proudly
preferring our private Conceits, before the Judgment of thy Church, O Lord
deliver us.

In the first motions to sin, and the renewed assaults of any temptation, in
the time of our trial, when thou seeemest to withdraw from us thy Grace, in
health and prosperity, in sickness and adversity, in the hour of Death, and in
the day of Judgment, O Lord deliver us.

Deliver us, O Lord, and in all our Necessities, when we call on thee, in the
Name of thy beloved Son, and for the Merits of our only Savior Jesus Christ,
who sits at thy right hand to make Intercession for us sinners, We beseeh thee
hear us.

That it would please thee to govern and defend thy Catholic Church, to bless
and preserve all Ecclesiastical Persons in unity of truth and holiness of
life; We beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee to endue all Christian Princes and Magistrates, with
the Spirit of Justice, Piety, and Wisdom, and all Subjects with a true
reverence of their Superiors, and cheerful obedience to their just Commands,
that all the World may live in the beauty of Order, and the blessings of Peace;
We beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee to reduce into the union of thy Church, all those
whom Malice, Passion, or Interest, have divided from thy Faith. And with a more
particular tenderness, to Compassionate all simple and Unlearned People, who
by misinstruction are seduced into Error, and by unhappy Education settled in a
prejudice against thy Truth; We beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee to convert all Jews, Turks, and Infidells, to thy
holy Faith, and all dissolute Christians to a virtuous life: That none of
those, whom thou have made may perish, but all the Nations of the Earth adore
thee here, and be happy with thee hereafter; We beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee to have compassion on the Miseries of humane life,
and especially on the Afflictions of such as suffer for a good Conscience; Let
thy pity lighten their burdens, and thy grace strengthen their weakness, that
every sad dejected Soul may praise thee, either for releasement from their
pressures, or enablement to bear their crosses; We beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee, to enlarge our hearts with true Charity one toward
another, to Feed the Hungry, and Cloth the Naked, to visit the Sick, and
Comfort the distressed, to forgive our Enemies, and pray for our Persecutors;
and in all occasions to do good to every one according to our Capacities; We
beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee, to open thy full hand, and mercifully bestow on us
the necessaries of this life, with grace so to use all thy temporal Blessings,
that we rest not in the Convenience or Pleasure, derived from any Creature, but
apply them as Instruments to cultivate our minds, and prepare us for thee, and
thy eternal joys, We beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchasafe us the grace to know thee; that we may fear and
hope in thee, as absolute Master of Punishment and Reward; that we may serve
and worship thee, as Sovereign Lord of Life and Death, that we may love and
praise thee, as a most Indulgent Father, and bountiful Benefactor; We beseech
thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace to know our Selves, that remembering
we are but dust and ashes, subject to a thousand infirmities, temptations, and
miseries, we may humble our proud thoughts, and sincerely acknowledge our own
unworthiness, yet being created after thy Image, and capable of eternal
happiness, we may aspire to Heaven, and value our Souls above all the
transitory enjoyments of the earth; We beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace, frequently to examine, and clearly
to see the state of our Consciences, humbly to confess, and earnestly to repent
us of our sins, carefully to avoid all occasions of relapse, and diligently
practice those Virtues which most avail to the Cure of our Infirmities; We
beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace to keep a strict watch over our
Senses, lest they solicit our hearts to sin, to remember continually thy
presence with us, wheresoever we are, especially in the offering up our Prayers
with a reverend gesture of our Bodies, and devout attention of our Minds; We
beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace to attend with diligence the
employment of our Callings, yet every day to set apart some time for thee and
our Souls, to live in peace and Charity with all the world; freely forgiving
their injuries to us, and readily satisfying our trespasses against them; We
beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace to remember always the end of our
Creation, and the vanity of this world, the shortness of our lives, and the
incertainty of our deaths, the misery of such as die in their sins, and the
unspeakable joys of those, who with their last breath, give up their Souls
into the hands of thy Angels; We beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace, to live and die in the Faith and
Communion of thy Catholic Church, to enjoy the benefit of thy holy Sacraments,
and participate in the Prayers and good works of all thy Servants throughout
the world: We beseech thee hear us.

That thou would vouchsafe us the grace in the last hour of our lives,
willingly to render our Bodies to the Earth from whence they came, and joyfully
return our Souls to thee that gave them; that in the blissful vision of thy
Glory we may for ever adore thy Majesty, and in the happy Company of thy Saints
and Angels for ever sing praises to thy Name; We beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, We beseech thee hear us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:

Spare us O Lord.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:

Hear us, O Lord.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:

Have mercy on us.

O Lord hear our prayers: And let our Supplications come to thee.

MOst gracious God, the Fountain of all Mercy and Blessing, who desire not
the death of a Sinner, nor despisest the tears of the penitent, favorably
receive this free Confession of our sins, and efficaciously move our hearts to
a true Contrition for all our offerces, that being pardoned the evils we are
presumed to do, we may be delivered from the evils we deserve to suffer, and
obtaining of thy Bounty the Graces petitioned in our Prayers, we may bestow the
short remainder of our days in a more perfect denial of our own corrupt
Inclinations, and more constant tendance to thy glorious Promises; through our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and
reigns, one God, world without end, Amen.

The Blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, descend upon us,
and remain in our hearts for ever, Amen.

A Prayer in Tribulation.
O God, who despisest not the tears of the Contrite, nor contemnest the Sighs
of them that mourn, attend to the Prayers which we pour out before thee, in our
distress and tribulation, and clemently hear them, that whatever the malice of
Man, or subtilty of Satan can work against us, may, by the wisdom of thy Piety,
be dashed and brought to nothing; so as being hurt by no Adversities, but
delivered from all Affliction and sorrow, we may joyfully yield thanks to thee
in thy Church. Forgive, O Lord, our sins, and bestow on us thy mercy, look down
upon our low and sad condition, pity our many miserys, and break asunder the
bonds that lie heavy on us, and in all our necessities graciously hear thy
Suppliants: through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who with thee, and the
Holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God, world without end, Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy on us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Lord Jesu hear our Prayers.
Lord Jesus receive our Petitions.
Our Father, etc.
ALmighty God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, who know our necessities before
we ask, and our ignorance in asking, we beseech thee to have Compassion upon
our Infirmities, and those things which for our unworthiness we dare not, and
for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us, for the Worthiness of
thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the felloship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.

I Shall not undertake to trouble you with the particular Opinions concerning
the keeping of this day holy, since some are of one Opinion and some of
another; and many Learned Treatises being thereupon already written, to which
when you shall by the good pleasure of God attain to a more mature judgment, I
shall refer you; but rather advise you to sollow the Order of holy Church
therein, and withal to assure you of my own Experience and observations of that
day, which have been, that when ever I have been so unhappy, either by the
persuasions of others, or my own evil Inclinations, to undertake or meddle with
any Affairs of the World upon that day, any more than of necessity, they have
always had a very ill Success, and a most unhappy Conclusion; therefore,
since it is the Command of God and holy Church, that this day should be kept
holy, I would advise you not to be singular in neglecting your duty upon that
holy day: which the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the great
God of all the holy Saints and Angels in Heaven, who keep a holy and perpetual
Sabbath, grant you may perform with all holy devotions, and pious works. Amen.

DEVOTIONS for Friday.
FRiday being the Day of the Week upon which our blessed Lord and Savior by
most cruel hands was Crucified for the Redemption of the whole World, has by
the Christian Church in all times been observed as a day of Fasting; yet some
Countries have herein made some difference: As first, not to fast upon Friday
within the twelve days of Christmas and Easter week. Secondly, others not to
fast upon any Friday that happens to fall upon any holyday observed by the
Command of the Church. Thirdly, others not to fast upon any Friday between
Easter and Ascension, from that saying of our Savior, Mat. 9. 15. Can the
Children of the Bride Chamber mourn as long as the Bridegroom is with them? But
you may use your discretion herein: having a special regard to the Order of
your holy Mother the Church of England, who commands all Fridays in the year to
be observed as Fasts, except Christmasse-day when it shall happen to fall upon
a Friday.

Fasting days ought to be days of Repentance and abstinence from sin, as well
as from meat and drink.

And being days of Repentance, you shall do well that day to recite the seven
Penitential Psalms which are these, the 6. the 32. the 38. the 51. the 102. the
130. and the 143. dividing them in your Devotions as you shall be hereby
directed.

First when you prepare your self for your duty of Fasting, standing before the
place where you intend your devotion, which may be so early as this Office may
be ended by you before the Church Morning Service begin; and say,

The sixth Psalm.
1. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

3. My Soul is also sore troubled: but Lord, how long will thou punish me?

4. Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my Soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

5. For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
Pit?

6. I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my Bed: and water my Couch
with my tears.

7. My be^uty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

8. Away from me, all ye that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

9. The Lord has heard my petition: the Lord will receive my Prayer.

10. All mine enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The 32. Psalm.
1. BLessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is covered.

2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin: and in whose Spirit
their is no guile.

3. For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily
complaining.

4. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night; and my moisture is like the
drought in Summer.

5. I will knowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hid.

6. I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin.

7. For this shall every one that is godly, make his Prayer unto thee in a time
when thou may be found: but in the great water-floods they shall not come
nigh him.

8. Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

9. I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye

10. Be ye not like to Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: whose
mouths must be holden with bit and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.

11. Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but who so puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

12. Be glad O ye Righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye that
are true of heart.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Then say,

By the sign of the holy Cross, O Lord deliver me.

Then kneeling devoutly upon your knees, say,

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now and for ever.

O Lord hear our Prayers.
And let our Supplications come unto thee.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Jesu hear my Prayers.
Lord Jesu grant my Petitions.
Our Father, etc.
The Collect for the first Sunday in Lent.
O Lord, who for our sakes did fast forty days, and forty nights: give us
grace to use such abstenence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we
may ever obey thy godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thy
honor and glory, which live and reignest, etc.

The Collect for the third Sunday in Lent.
WE beseech thee, Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble
Servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty, to be our defense
against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Collect for the fourth Sunday in Lent.
GRant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we which for our evil deeds, are
worthily punished, by the Comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

O Merciful Jesu, Redeemer of the World, whose sacred Head was Crowned with
Thorns, whose Hands and Feet were extended on a Cross, cruelly bored with
Nails, whose Side was pierced with a Spear, and immediately there gusht out
Water and Blood; whose whole Body was ignominiously Crucified between two
Thieves: What tongue can express those Innumerable pains which thy Innocence
suffered, we beseech thee for these so exceeding great torments illuminate our
Souls with the light of thy knowledge, and moderate our unruly passions,
strengthen our hands to good works, and convert our footsteps into thy ways,
direct our thoughts words and deeds according to thy holy Law, and in the end
of our lives bring us to thy everlasting Kingdom, where with thy holy Angels we
may praise thee for ever, who live and reignest with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, ever one God wo^ld without end, Amen.

BEhold, O holy Father, thy dearly beloved Son so cruelly tormented for me.
Behold most merciful King who it is that suffers, and remember for whom he
suffers. Is it not, O Lord, thy most innocent Son whom thou have given to Death
that he might Redeem thy Servants? Is it not the Author of Life, who being led
as a Sheep to the Slaughter, was made obedient even to death, and that the most
cruel kind of death?

Call to mind, O eternal Author of all goodness, that this is he, whom thou
have begotten of thy Divine Power and virtue, yet have thou made him partaker
of my Infirmity and weakness: Verily, this is thy Son, the Son of the living
God, who being clothed with my nature, ascended the Gibbet of the Cross, on
which he suffered a most dolorous Death.

O Lord, cast the eyes of thy Majesty on the work of thy ineffable bounty;
behold thy most sweet Son, with his whole Body stretched out, behold his
innocent hands besprinkled with his precious Blood, and mercifully pardon those
faults which my hands have committed: Look upon his naked Side pierced with a
Spear, and bath my Soul in that sacred Fountain which I believe issued from
thence: Consider his holy Feet, which never stood in the way of sinners, but
always walked in thy Law, with sharp and long Nails fastened to the Cross, and
guide my steps in the path of thy Commandments: O my God make me hate the ways
of Iniquity, and always choose those of truth and Piety.

O King of Angels and Saints, I beseech thee, for this Holy of Holies, for this
my Redeemer, make me continually remember his excessive love, that I may be
united to him in Spirit, who has not disdained to be clad with my flesh.

Blessed Father, feast thou not the Head of thy dear Son, with his Neck bending
to die: behold most meek Creator, the Humanity of thy beloved Son, and have
mercy on the frailty of thy Creature, his white and innocent Breast is naked,
his Side red in his own Blood: his extended bowels dried up, his fair and
beautiful eyes grown dim and faint, his royal Visage pale, and the streams of
his most precious Blood water his pierced Feet.

Behold, O glorious Father, the torn Body of thy beloved Son, and graciously
remember what my substance is: behold the sufferings of Jesus thy Son, and
release the miseries of Man thy Creature: behold the punishment of the
Redeemer, and forgive the offenses of the Redeemed: This is he, O my Lord, whom
thou have smitten for the sins of thy People, although he was thy beloved, in
whom thou wast well pleased: This is that Innocent in whom there was found no
guilt, and yet was he reputed among the wicked.

O Benign Lord, pour, we beseech thee, thy grace into our hearts: that we
restraining our sins by voluntary Chastisement, may rather be afflicted
temporally, then deputed to eternal Punishments: through our Lord Jesus Christ,
thy Son, who with thee, and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God, world
without end, Amen.

The short LITANY Of our Blessed Savior JESUS.
LOrd have mercy on us.

Christ have mercy on us.

Lord have mercy on us.

Jesu receive our Prayers.

Lord Jesu grant our Petitions.

O God the Father, Creator of the World: have mercy on us.

O God the Son, Reedeemer of Mankind: have mercy on us.

O God the Holy Ghost, Perfecter of the Elect: have mercy on us.

Holy Trinity, one God: have mercy on us.

Jesu, Son of the living God: have mercy on us.

Jesu, the express Image of thy Fathers glory: have mercy on us.

Jesu, the bright Candor of eternal Light: have mercy on us.

Jesu, the increated Wisdom, by whom all things are governed: have mercy on us.

Jesu, the Eternal Word, made Man for our Redemption: have mercy on us.

Jesu, most blessed Son of the Virgin Mary: have mercy on us.

Jesu, most powerful: have mercy on us.

Jesu, most Glorious: have mercy on us.

Jesu, most Humble and Meek: have mercy on us.

Jesu, most Patient and Obedient: have mercy on us.

Jesu, most Chaste and Holy: have mercy on us.

Jesus, lover of Poverty: have mercy on us.

Jesus, lover of Peace: have mercy on us.

Jesus, lover of us ungrateful: have mercy on us.

Jesus, who came down from Heaven to teach us with thine own sacred mouth the
truths of Salvation: have mercy on us.

Jesus, who Conversed so long on Earth, to show us by thine own holy Example,
the way to Heaven: have mercy on us.

Jesus, who diedst even the death of the Cross, to take off our aversion from
whatever passage into Life: have mercy on us.

Jesus, who ascendedst into Heaven, to confirm our belief, and raise up our
affections to the sure joys of Eternity: have mercy on us.

Jesus, Author of our Faith, and Finisher of our Hope; have mercy on us.

Jesus, Supreme Object of our love, and over flowing satiety of all our desires:
have mercy on us.

Jesus, our God blessed for ever: have mercy on us.

Have mercy, O Jesus, and spare us.

Have mercy, O Jesus, and hear us.

From all evil, deliver us O Jesus.

From all sin, deliver us O Jesus.

From everlasting death: deliver us O Jesus.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, and humble Nativity: deliver us O Jesus.

By the sanctity of thy heavenly Doctrine and miraculous Life: deliver us O
Jesus.

By the Merits of thy bitter Passion, and All-reviving death: deliver us O Jesus.

By the joys of thy victorious Resurrection, and triumphant Ascension: deliver
us O Jesus.

By the glory of thy eternal Kingdom and Incomprehensible Majesty: deliver us O
Jesus.

We Sinners beseech thee hear us.

That it would please thee to protect and govern thy holy Church, which thou
have purchased with thy precious Blood: We beseech thee hear us.

That looking continually on thy admirable Life, we may faithfully endeavor to
follow thy steps: We beseech thee hear us.

That denying all vicious and inordinate Inclinations, we may live soberly,
justly, and piously: We beseech thee hear us.

That through thy love, the World may be crucified to us, and we to the world:
We beseech thee hear us.

That whatever we ask in thy holy Name, we may receive through thy infinite
Merits: We beseech thee hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee hear us.

Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world: Spare us O Jesus.

Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world: hear us O Jesus.

Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world: have mercy on us.

Lord have mercy on us.
Christ have mercy on us.
Lord have mercy on us.
Our Father, etc.

EVery day will we repeat thy Perfections, O glorious Jesus; that every day we
may grow in our esteem of thee. Every day we will attentively reckon over thy
Mercies, that every day we may still increase in thy love.

All that we have and are, we received from thy Grace. Alleluia.

All we desire, and hope, we expect in thy Glory. Alleluia.

O Lord hear our Prayers.

And let our Supplication^ come to thee.

ALmighty God, and most merciful Savior, the Light of this World, and glory
of the next; vouchsafe, we beseech thee to illuminate our understandings, and
inflame our wills, and sanctify all the faculties of our Souls, that whilst
with our lips we recite these Prayers, we may inwardly with our hearts adore
thy Person, and admire thy goodness, and conform our lives to thy holy
example, till at length, by frequent meditation of the Bliss thou have
prepared for us hereafter, we break off our affections from all irregular
adherence to this world, and place them entirely on the enjoyment of thee, who
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, live, and reignest one God, world
without end; Amen.

GLory, honor, and praise, be to our Lord Jesus Christ; may all the world
adore thee, blessed be thy holy Name, who for us sinners vouchsafedst to be
born of an humble Virgin; and blessed be thine infinite goodness who diedst on
the Cross for our Redemption.

O Jesu, Son of God, and Savior of Mankind, have mercy on us, and so dispose
our lives here by thy grace, that we may hereafter rejoice with thee for ever
in thy glory, Amen.

ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our Supplications and Prayers, and
dispose the way of thy Servants, toward the attainment of everlasting
Salvation, that among all the Changes and Chances of this mortal life, they may
ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help; through Jesus Christ our
Lo^d, Amen.

The Blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, descend upon us,
and dwell in our hearts for ever, Amen.

And then devou^ly rising up and say,

The 38. Psalm.
1. PUt me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy
heavy displeasure.

2: For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

3. There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is
there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

4. For my wickednesses are gone over mine head: and are like a sore burden,
too heavy for me to bear.

5. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, through my foolishness.

6. I am brought into so great trouble and misery: that I go mourning all the
day long.

7. For my loins are filled with a sore Disease: and there is no whole part in
my body.

8. I am feeble and sore smitten: I have roared for the very disquietness of my
heart.

9. Lord, thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

10. My heart pants, my streng^h has failed me: and the sight of mine eyes
is gone from me.

11. My Lovers and my Neighbors did stand looking upon my trouble: and my
Kinsmen stood afar off.

12. They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that
went about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and imagined deceit all the day
long.

13. As for me I was like a deaf man and heard not: and as one that is dumb,
which does not open his mouth.

14. I became even as a man that hears not: and in whose mouth are no
reproofs.

15. For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shall answer for me, O
Lord, my God.

16 I have required that they (even mine enemies) should not triumph over me:
for when my foot slipped, they rejoiced greatly against me.

17. And I truly am set in the plague: and my heaviness is ever in my sight.

18. For I will confess my wickedness: and be sorry for my sin.

19. But mine enemies live, and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully
are many in number.

20. They also that reward evil for good, are against me: because I followed
the thing that good is.

21. Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou far from me.

22. Have thee to help me: O Lord God of my Salvation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The 51. Psalm.
1. HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

2. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

3. For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

4. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying and clear when thou art judged.

5. Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my Mother Conceived me.

6. But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

7. Thou shall purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter than Snow.

8. Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

9. Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

10. Make me a clean heart (O God) and renew a right Spirit within me.

11. Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy Holy Spirit from me.

12. O give me the Comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free
Spirit.

13. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and Sinners shall be
converted unto thee.

14. Deliver me from Blood guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my
health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

15. Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall show thy praise.

16. For thou desire no Sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.

17. The Sacrifice of God is a troubled Spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise.

18. O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

19. Then shall thou be pleased with the Sacrifices of Righteousness, with the
burnt offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young Bullocks upon thine
Altar.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, upon every Friday, repair to the
place of your Devotions, and standing up, say,

The 102. Psalm.
1. HEar my Prayer, O Lord, and let my crying come unto thee.

2. Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: incline thine ears
unto me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

3. For my days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are burnt up as it
were a Firebrand.

4. My heart is smitten down and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat
my bread.

5. For the voice of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

6. I am become like a Pelican in the Wilderness: and like an Owl that is in
the desert.

7. I have watched, and am even as it were a Sparrow that sits alone upon
the house top.

8. Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me.

9. For I have eaten Ashes as it were Bread: and mingled my drink with weeping.

10. And that because of thine Indignation and wrath: for thou have taken me
up, and cast me down.

11. My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grass.

12. But thou (O Lord) shall endure for ever: and thy remembrance throughtout
all generations.

13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea, the time is come.

14. And why? thy Servants think upon her stones: and it pittieth them to see
her in the Dust.

15. The Heathen shall fear thy Name, O Lord: and all the Kings of the Earth
thy Majesty.

16. When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glory shall appear.

17. When he turns him unto the Prayer of the poor destitute: and despises
not their desire.

18. This shall be Written for those that come after: and the People which
shall be born, shall praise the Lord.

19. For he has looked down from his Sanctuary: out of the Heaven did the Lord
behold the Earth.

20. That he might hear the mournings of such as be in Captivity: and deliver
the Children appointed unto death.

21. That they may declare the Name of the Lord in Sion: and his his Worship at
Jerusalem.

22. When the People are gathered together: and the Kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.

23. He brought down my strength in my journey; and shortened my days.

24. But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my age; as for thy
years, they endure throughout all generations.

25. Thou Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth; and the
Heavens are the work of thy hands.

26. They shall perish, but thou shall endure; they all shall wax old as does a
garment.

27. And as a Vesture thou shall change them, and they shall be changed; but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

28. The Children of thy Servants shall continue; and their seed shall stand
fast in thy sight.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The 130. Psalm.
1. OUt of the deep have I called unto thee (O Lord:) Lord hear my voice.

2. O let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaint.

3. If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O Lord, who may
abide it.

4. For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

5. I look for the Lord, my Soul does wait for him: in his Word is my trust.

6. My Soul flees unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say, before the
morning watch.

7. O Israel, trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is Mercy: and with him
is plenteous Redemption.

8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Then devoutly kneeling upon your knees, say,

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
O Lord, hear our Prayers.
And let our Cry come unto thee. Our Father, etc.

O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who have Compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the death of a Sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved: Mercifully forgive us
our trespasses, receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is always to have Mercy; to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins; Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy People
whom thou have redeemed. Enter not into judgment with thy Servants, who are
vile earth, and miserable Sinners; but so turn thine Anger from us, who meekly
acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults, and so make have
to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Collect for the Sunday next before Easter day.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who of thy tender love toward Mankind, have
sent thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our flesh, and to
suffer Death upon the Cross, that all Mankind should follow the example of his
great humility; mercifully grant that we may both follow the example of his
Patience, and also be made partakers of his Resurrection; through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Collect for Easter even.
GRant, O Lord, that as we are baptized into the Death of thy blessed Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, so by continual mortifying our corrupt affections, we may
be buried with him: and that through the Grave and gate of Death, we may pass
to our joyful Resurrection, for his Merits, who dyed, and was buried, and rose
again for us, thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Most sweet Lord, and my Redeemer Jesus Christ, who by thy heavenly Father
was sent down into this world, and willingly, of thine own accord, sufferedst
most cruel and bitter Pains on the Cross, and carried it on thy blessed
Shoulders, that thy Patience might be to us Salvation, and a most perfect
Example; and finally, thou did consent upon that tree to die, and by thy
Death to Redeem us. I humbly beseech thee, for the incomparable patience thou
shewedst in the whole course of thy Life, and then especially, when thy
malicious Enemies so raged against thee; when they mocked thee, and spit upon
thy Face; when they hood-winked thine eyes, and with their most impure hands,
buffeted thy Cheeks; when they cruelly scourged thee fast bound to a Pillar;
when they did thrust upon thy sacred Head a Crown of Thorns, and pressed their
sharp points into thy Temples; when with Iron Nails they pierced thy blessed
Hands stretched along upon the Cross; when thy blessed Side was transfixt with
a Spear; when in thy great thirst and extreme Agony, they offered thee a sponge
full of vinegar and gall; when with thy Head inclined down, thou said, It is
Consummate; when thou did commend thy Spirit into the hands of God the
Father; and in the end, gave up thy last breath, for the Redemption of
Mankind.

For all these Pains and Passions, O most gracious Lord Jesus Christ, I poor
and miserable sinner, humbly beseech thy infinite Majesty, not to forsake me,
nor suffer me to be Condemned in thy terrible Judgment; but let thy dolorous
Passion so help me, that I may be brought to everlasting felicity; let thy holy
Angels always be in my Company, and specially at the hour of my death, that
they may protect, defend, and keep me, so that the cruel ^nfernal Enemy may
never have any power over me; Amen.

O Jesu, who for the Redemption of the World, patiently enduredst so many
Injuries, Calamities, and Afflictions, and even Death it self: We humbly
beseech thee, by all thy Sufferings, and by the effusion of thy precious Blood,
deliver us from the dangers of this Life, from the pains of Hell, and from
sudden and everlasting death, Amen.

O Holy Jesus, who for our sakes did suffer Incomparable anguish and pains,
Commensurate to thy love and our miseries, which were infinite, that thou
might purchase for us Blessings upon Earth, and an Inheritance in Heaven;
dispose us by love, thankfulness, humility, and obedience, to receive all the
benefit of thy Passion, granting unto us and thy whole Church, remission of all
our sins, integrity of mind, health of body, competent maintenance, peace in
our days, a temperate air, fruitfulness of the Earth, unity and integrity of
Faith, extirpation of Heresies, reconcilement of Schisms, destruction of all
wicked Counsels intended against us; and bind the hands of Rapine and
Sacrilege, that they may not destroy the Vintage, and root up the Vine it
self. Multiply thy Blessings upon us, sweetest Jesus, increase in us true
Religion, sincere and actual Devotion in our Prayers, patience in troubles, and
whatsoever is necessary to our Souls health, or conducing to thy glory, Amen.

O Holy and eternal Jesus, who did for our sakes Fast forty days, and forty
nights, and have left to us thy Example, and thy prediction, that in the days
of thy absence from us, we thy Servants and Children of thy Bride-chamber
should Fast: teach us to do this act of discipline so, that it may become an
Act of Religion. Let us never be like Esau valuing a Dish of meat above a
Blessing, but let us deny our appetites of Meat and Drink; and accustom our
selves to the yoke, and substract the fuel of our lusts, and the incentives of
all our unworthy desires, that our bodies being free from the intemperances of
nutriment, and our Spirits from the load and pressure of Appetite, we may have
no desires but of thee; that our outward Man daily decaying by the violence of
time, and mortified by the abatements of its too free and unnecessary support,
it may by degrees resign to the entire dominion of the Soul, and may pass from
vanity to piety; from weakness to ghostly strength, from darkness and mixtures
of impurity, to great transparencies and charity in the society of a beautiful
Soul, reigning with thee in the glories of eternity, O holy, and eternal Jesus,
Amen.

O God the Author of peace, and lover of Charity, give to our Enemies peace
and true Charity, grant them remission of all their sins, and deliver us from
all their deceipts, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Almighty, everlasting God, the eternal Salvation of them that believe, hear
us for thy Sick-Servants, for whom we humbly crave the help of thy mercy, that
health being restored to them, they may yield thanksgiving to thee in thy
Church, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Almighty everlasting God, the Consolation of the sorrowful, and the strength
of those that travel, let the Prayers of all that call upon thee out of any
tribulation, distress, or calamity whatsoever, come to thy ears, that they may
rejoice to find thy mercies present with them in their necessities; through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned; be favorable, O Lord,
be favorable to thy People, who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying:
For thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long-suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath think upon
Mercy. Spare thy People, good Lord, spare them, and let not thine Heritage be
brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy merty is great, and after the
multitude of thy mercies look upon us; through the Merits and mediation of thy
blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord hear our Prayers.
And let our Cry come unto thee.
O God whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, receive
our humble Petitions, and grant that the tender mercy of thy piety may mildly
absolve us, whom the chain of sin does bind, through thy sweet Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.

Then devoutly rise from your knees, and say,

The 143. Psalm.
1. HEar my Prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy
truth and righteousness sake.

2. And enter not into judgment with thy Servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

3. For the enemy has persecuted my Soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

4. Therefore is my Spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

5. Yet do I remember the time past: I muse upon all thy works: yea I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

6. I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my Soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land.

7 Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my Spirit waxes faint, hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

8. O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my Soul
unto thee.

9. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I flee unto thee to hide me.

10. Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
loving Spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

11. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: and for thy righteousness sake
bring my Soul out of trouble.

12. And of thy goodness slay mine enemies: and destroy all them that vex my
Soul, for I am thy Servant.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was, etc.
You are not to eat any thing upon Friday, or other fasting days, until the
time of the Evening Service of the Church be past.

And if it should please God that at any time you shall be so unhappy as to
fall into any Calamity, affliction, or trouble, or lie under any oppression, to
all which as long as we are in this troublesome world we are subject (as my own
unhappy experience does too much (if it had pleased God it might have been
otherwise) manifest.

Therefore against that day of Calamity, I thought fit to provide you a short
Office fitted for your private use; as follows.

The 54. Psalm.
1. SAve me, O God, for thy Names sake: and avenge me in thy strength.

2. Hear my Prayer, O God: and hearken unto the words of my mouth.

3. For strangers are risen up against me: and Tyrants, which have not God
before their eyes, seek after my Soul.

4. Behold, God is my Helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my Soul.

5. He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth.

6. An Offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy Name, O Lord:
because it is so comfortable.

7. For he has delivered me out of all my trouble; and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Jesu receive our Prayers.
Lord Jesus grant our Petitions.
Our Father, etc.
IN the midst of life we are in death, of whom may we seek for succor, but of
thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased; yet O Lord God most Holy,
O Lord most Mighty, O holy and most merciful Savior, deliver us not into the
bitter pains of eternal Death. Thou know Lord, the secrets of our hearts,
shut not thy merciful ears to our Prayers, but spare us, O Lord, most Holy, O
God most Mighty, O holy and merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal,
suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of death to fall from thee, Amen.

O Most powerful, and glorious Lord God, at whose Command the Winds blow, and
lift up the Waves of the Sea, and who stillest the rage thereof; we thy
Creatures, but miserable sinners, do in this our great distress cry unto thee
for help; save, Lord, or else we perish. We confess, when we have been safe
and seen all things quiet about us, we have forgot thee our God, and refused to
hearken to the still voice of thy Word, and to obey thy Commandments. But now
we see how terrible thou art in all thy works of Wonder, the great God to be
feared above all; and therefore we adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy
Power, and imploring thy goodness. Help, Lord, and save us for thy mercies
sake in Jesus Christ thy Son, our Lord, Amen.

Lord be merciful to us sinners, and save us for thy mercies sake.

Thou art the great God that have made and rulest all things, deliver us for
thy Names sake.

Thou art a great God to be feared above all, O save us that we may praise thee.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon our Afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy People.

Favorably with mercy hear our Prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, have mercy upon us. Save us
now and evermore, Amen.

Our Father, etc.
O Lord hear our Prayers.
And let our Cry come unto thee.
ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have
made now our Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked according to thy Will, may effectually be
obtained to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore.

The 70. Psalm.
1. Have thee, O God, to deliver me: make have to help me, O Lord.

2. Let them be ashamed and confounded, that seek after my Soul: Let them be
turned backward, and put to confusion, that wish me evil.

3. Let them for their reward be soon brought to shame: that cry over me,
There, there.

4. But let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all
such as delight in thy Salvation, say always, The Lord be praised.

5. As for me, I am poor and in misery: have thee unto me, O God.

6. Thou art my helper, and my Redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
HAving now finished these private Instructions for your use, you must remember
that I do not deliver this with any Intention, that by your using of these
private Offices you should in the least kind neglect the glorious Service of
your Mother the holy Church; but be very conversant in your attendance at the
Altar, for there you may receive greater satisfaction than is possible to be
had elsewhere. It is true, there is amongst those who are enemies to the Peace
of the Church, or else are ignorant, and do not understand the Reasons of her
several Offices; who usually say, What shall they go to Church to hear
Common Prayer? they may read that at home. A very absurd objection, and not
worth the answering; but the advantages you may receive there are many; but
especially, when you come to that holy place, there you meet with the People of
God in holy Worship there, if you truly Confess your sins, you receive
Absolution from the Priest, there the Priest is ready to give you such
Benedictions as the Church directs, which holy Communion, and the power of the
Priest, observe the Learned Dr. Tailor in his great Exemplar in his Prayer
after his Meditation of Death, and the due Preparation to it; for there he has
these expressions, which for brevities sake I divide into parts. First, That
God would preserve the Supplicant ever in the Communion and peace of the
Church. Secondly, bless his Deathbed with a holy and Spiritual Guide, which is
a Priest. Thirdly, with the assistance and guard of Angels. Fourthly, with
perception of the holy Sacrament. Fifthly, with patience and dereliction of his
own desires. Sixthly, with a strong faith, firm and humble hope. Seventhly,
with just measures of Repentance, and greater treansures of Charity to God and
all the world; therefore never neglect those means that God has been so
graciously pleased to empower his Priests to communicate unto you until the
second Coming of his Son, until which day after you shall depart this
transitory world, the great God of Heaven grant that your Souls in the Arms of
the holy Jesus may be deposited with safety and joy there to expect the
revelation of that day, and then to partake of the glories of his Kingdom, Amen.

ANd since I am gone thus far, I will proceed a little further, to give you a
few particulars both of the Church, and your behavior in Public Assemblies.

It is impossible to be in this world, and to be without Enemies, for it was
the lot which befell our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, so the Church cannot
be without them: Some especially there are that strike at the very Root of all,
and say, that upon the death of Queen Mary, none of the Bishops of the Church
of Rome could be prevailed with to Consecrate the Bishops appointed by Queen
Elizabeth, but that she appointed them by Act of Parliament, and so the
Succession of Consecration of Bishops from our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles, failed, which could not be continued by Act of Parliament; and their
succession failing, the Successive Power of Ordination of Priests must likewise
fail; so no Bishop no Priest, no Priest no Church; but certainly this was but a
device of Saunders, and some others; for Matthew Parker who was Archbishop of
Canterbury, was the first Bishop Consecrated in Queen Elizabeth her time, and
was Cannonically Consecrated by Coverdale, Scory Barlow, and Haskins, who were
likewise Cannonically Consecrated in the time of King Henry the eighth, and
Edward the sixth, of all which you may more fully satisfy your self in the
Learned Treatise of Mr. Mason upon the Institution of the Bishops of England,
to which, when it will be time for you to be satisfied in the question, I refer
you; and likewise to the learned Dr. Heylin, in his Ecclesiastical History of
the Church of England; both which Books you may find in my Custody.

And as for the Government, Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church of England,
I can only let you know my weak judgment therein, and the observations I have
made by the reading of many learned and pious Authors, that the Frame is as
Apostolical, and according to the Primitive Institution as possibly could be
imagined. Two things I observe out of Dr. Heylin, speaking of the Opinions of
Calvin, Luther, and Zwinglius; how in other Countries they did receive the
Reformation of the Church tumultuously, but was in England retained with more
moderation, bearing no respect to any other; but abolishing such things as were
dissonant to Gods Word, and retained such Ceremonies as without offense the
liberty of the Church might establish, wherein certainly, says he, they dealt
more advisedly then their Neighbors, who in mere detestation to the Church of
Rome, abrogated such things altogether which their abuse had defiled, though
never so decent in themselves, and allowed in the Primitive times: And
certainly, says he, I persuade my self, had the Reformed party abroad
continued an allowable correspondency in some things with the Romish Church, as
the Church of England does now, it had been to their advantage far greater, and
less stomacked. And this was the Censure of Monseur de Rhosney Duke of
Sicilly, at such time as being Ambassador here for the King of France, he had
observed the Majesty and decency of our Church Service in Cathedrals. I have
also heard it, says he, reported, that when Peter du Moulin that great Light
of the Church of France, heard how indiscreetly some of our English Clergy had
silenced themselves, because the Cap and Surplice was Commanded, he replied,
That would the King of France give him a general license to Preach in Paris,
though it were in a Fools Coat, he would most willingly accept the condition,
and that he never would deprive the Church of those gifts wherewith God had
blessed him. But it is very true, as the said learned Dr. Heylin very worthily
observes, that the Jesuits, and the Puritans, are the very Disturbers of our
Peace: And a long Experience has found it so to be; For, says he, until the
Jesuits are taken out of the Church of Rome, and the peevish Puritan Preachers
(now called Presbyterians) out of the Church of Great Britain, there would
never be any peace in Christendom: For very true it is, that in the beginning
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, those that continued Members of the Church of
Rome, and yet would not acknowledge the Queens Supremacy, yet for the glorious
Orders sake, of the Service of the Church of England, did constantly repair to
the English Service, and never left the same out of any dislike they had to it;
but rather in regard of a Decree set forth in the Council of Trent, prohibiting
all resort to the Churches of Heretics, which notwithstanding the far greater
part continued in their first obedience, until the coming over of that roaring
Bull from Pope Pius the 5. who being instigated thereunto by means of the
Jesuitical Faction, by which Bull the Queen was excommunicated, the Subjects
discharged from their obedience to the Laws: And their going, or not going to
Church, made a sign distinctive to difference a Roman Catholic from an English
Protestant: And truly it is very probable that they might have stood much
longer to their first Conformity for all the Decree of Trent, and this Bull,
had not the true Disturbers of the Peace of the British Church come into their
Aid which were those Presbyterians of the Zwinglian, and Calvinian Opinion, who
about this time brought in their multitude of Innnovations, both in Doctrine
and Discipline; which Faction were then called Puritans, or rather a Name they
did appropriate to themselves, because of their pretending to a greater Purity
in the Service of God, than was held forth unto them: (as they gave it out) in
the Common Prayer Book, and to a greater opposition to the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of Rome, than was agreeable to the constitution of the Church of
England. But this purity was accompanied with such Irreverence, and drew along
with it so much Licentiousness, as gave great Scandal and offense to all sober
men: And these last thirty years has given the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, a very perfect account and Experiment of the sad and
Hellish effect^ of their Schismatical, Pragmatical, and most diabolical
opinions, so directly opposite to the doctrine of the Prince of Peace, that
they can never march under his Banner without a sad, and serious Repentance:
Therefore beware the Jesuit with one hand, and them with the other; for if the
Jesuit seize you by one hand, or the Presbyterian by the other, you shall be
then certainly led either into Rebellion, or Apostasy, or into both; for indeed
they seldom go asunder: From which good Lord deliver you, and all good people,
Amen.

WHen ever you hear the Bell toll for the public Prayers of the Church,
presently take into your thoughts the great goodness of God in Redemption of
the World by his blessed Son, and your own unworthiness occasioned by your
evil Custom of sin, and with this Meditation repair to the Church.

But if it should happen that you are in such a place that you cannot go to the
Church (as my unhappiness is at this present, and I pray God deliver you from
the like) then if opportunity will give you leave, upon your knees beseech God
that you may partake of the benefit of the Prayers of the Church.

When you are come to the Church, and entering within the Gates thereof, make a
reverend bow toward the East end, and say,

GLory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

When Prayers are beginning, make a reverent bow, and be very ready in all the
Responsals of the Church Liturgy.

If it shall so happen that you may hear a Sermon and not the Service of the
Church, or the Church Service and not a Sermon, rather make choice to hear the
Service of the Church than a Sermon, although if your occasions will permit
you, neglect not the other.

When you are in the Church, where you meet with God and his holy Angels, never
behave your selves irreverently, but attend your duty there with all reverent
postures, as your head being uncovered, and not sitting at any part of the
Divine Service; considering the business you have there, is either to hear God
speak to you by his Priest, or you speaking to God in your Prayers.

As we ought to take all opportunities of serving of God, so I would advise you
when ever you come to any place where you never were before, privately to your
self at your entrance, desire God to bless your coming thither, and say,

OUr Father which art in Heaven, etc.

And if you come to any place where you have been before, then privately to
your self desire of God pardon for the sins you have committed, and praise his
holy Name for all his Mercies you have received since you were last there, and
say,

OUr Father which art in Heaven, etc.

When ever you come to any Town or other place, about any business where you
may hear the public Prayers of the Church, so order your affairs as to do that
before you go about your other business, that God may give a greater blessing
to your endeavors, and the better success in what you came about.

When any poor person shall beg of you, meditate with your self what a great
blessing God has bestowed upon you, that you are not the person begging of
him, and what you can spare, freely, but privately, give.

Remember to hold your peace in such things as appertain not to you, use no
extravagant speeches or gestures at any time, but especially in open or public
Assemblies; but in all things observe a grave modesty and discretion.

In all things desire and prefer that which may most redound to the greater
service of God, as to comfort the afflicted, to reconcile the discentious, to
visit the Imprisoned, and relieve the poor.

Observe the learned and pious Dr. Tailor in his History of the Life and Death
of the holy Jesus, in his Discourse of Prayer, says he, That Prayer in public
or private, in the Communion or Society of Saints, or in our Closets, these
prayers have less temptation or vanity than others have, more advantage of
Charity, example, fervor and energy: In public Offices we avoid singularity,
in the private we avoid hypocrisy, those are of more edification; these of
greater retiredness and silence of spirits, those serve the needs of all the
world in the first Intention, and our own by consequence, these serve our needs
first, and the public only by a secondary intention: these have more pleasure,
they more duty: these are the best instruments of Repentance, where our
confessions may be more particular, and our shame less scandalous: the other
are better for Eucharist and Instrustion, for edification of the Church, and
glorification of God.

The Postures of our Bodies in Prayer had as great variety as the severi^ies
and Civilities of several Nations came to: The Jews most commonly prayed
standing, so did the Pharisees, and the Publicans in the Temple: so did the
Primitive Christians in all their greater Feastivals, and Intervals of Jubilee,
In their Pennances they kneeled: the Monks in Cassia sat when they sung the
Psalter: and in every Country whatsoever by the Custom of the Nation was a
Symbol of Reverence and humility, of silence and attention, of gravity and
modesty: that posture they transl^ted to their prayers, but in all Nations
bowing the Head, that is, a laying down our glory at the feet of God, was the
manner of Worshippers.

And this was always the more humble and the lower, as their devotion was
higher, and was very often expressed by prostration or laying flat upon the
ground: And this all Nations did, and all Religions. Our deportment ought to be
grave, decent, humble, apt for adoration, apt to edify, and when we address
our selves to Prayer, not instantly leap into the Office, as the Judges of the
Areopage into their Sentence, without preface or preparatory affections: but
considering in what presence we speak, and to what purposes, let us behave our
selves with reverential fear: And when we have done, not rise from the ground
as if we vaulted, or were glad we had done, but as we begin, with desires of
assistance; so end with desires of pardon and acceptance, concluding our longer
Offices with a shorter mental prayer of a more private reflection and reference,
designing to mend what we have done amiss, or to give thanks and proceed if we
did well and according to our powers.

In private Prayer it is permitted to every man to speak his prayers, or only
to think them, which is a speaking to God, Vocal or Mental prayer is all one to
God; but in order to us they have their several advantages, the Sacrifice of
the heart, and the Calves of the lips, make up a Holocaust to God: but words
are the arrest of the desires, and keep the Spirit fixed, and in less
permissions to wander from fancy to fancy: and mental Prayer is apt to make the
greater fervor if it wander not, our Office is more determined by words: but
we then actually think of God when our Spirits only speak: Mental prayer when
our Spirits wander is like to a Watch standing still, because the spring is
down, wind it up again and it goes on regularly: but in Vocal prayer, if the
words run on and the Spirit wanders, the Clock strikes false, the hand points
not to the right hour, because something is in disorder, and the striking is
nothing but noise; in Mental prayer we confess Gods Omniscience, in Vocal
prayer we call the Angels to witness, in the first our Spirits rejoice in God,
in the second the Angels rejoice in us; Mental prayer is the best Remedy
against lightness and indifferency of Affections; but Vocal prayer is the
aptest Instrument of Communion, that is, more Angelical, but yet fittest for
the state of separation and glory, this is but humane: but it is apter for our
present Constitution, they have their distinct proprieties and may be used
according to their several accidents, occasions, or dispositions.

You must often call to mind and examine your self of all your actions:
especially after much business, speeches, etc.

You must live as though you had nothing, and yet possess all things, and
remember that meat, drink, and cloth, are a Christians riches.

Yield your selves wholly to God, and though you have nothing to requite him
with but your self, yet he gives all that gives himself: the Apostles left
their Ship and their Nets, the poor Widow gave only her two Mites to the poor
man's Box, and her Oblation was preferred before those of the richest persons:
he easily dispenses all things that always thinks he must die.

You must never go to Bed disquieted or troubled in mind, but be at peace with
God and Man as much as in you lies, and daily use Jaculatory Prayers, thereby
to prevent the deceipts of the Devil.

Take special care in your reading of the Psalms of David, for in them you will
find much comfort toward your Service of God, and praising his holy Name.

Since singing of Praises, giving of Thanks, and offering Oblations to the
Throne of Grace is very acceptable unto Almighty God: and since I have before
Composed an Office for your use, when you shall be so unhappy to fall into any
Calamity, Affliction, or trouble. I have thought fit that when it shall please
God you shall be delivered out of any Calamity, etc. to provide for you a short
Office of Devotions, whereby you may give God thanks by praising him for your
deliverance as follows.

As you are standing, say,

The Te Deum Laudamus.
WE praise thee (O God:) we knowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the Earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens and all the Powers therein.

To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry:

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.

The glorious Company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly Fellowship of the Prophets praise thee.

The noble Army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the world: does knowledge thee.

The Father: of an infinite Majesty.

Thine honorable: true, and only Son.

Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the King of glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the Virgins
Womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Believers.

Thou fittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee help thy Servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious Blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy People: and bless thine Heritage.

Govern them, and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee.

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us; as our trust is in thee,

O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

Then kneeling upon your knees devoutly say,

IN the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Jesus hear our Prayers.
Jesus receive our Petitions.
Our Father, etc.
The Collect for the 3. Sunday after the Epiphany.
ALmighty and everlasting God mercifully look upon our Infirmities, and in all
our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend
us, through Christ our Lord.

The Collect for the 24. Sunday after Trinity.
LOrd we beseech thee assoil thy People from their offenses, that through thy
bountiful goodness, we may be delivered from the bonds of all those sins which
by our frailty we have committed. Grant this, heavenly Father, for Jesus
Christ's sake our Lord.

The Collect for the 18. Sunday after Trinity.
LOrd, we beseech thee, grant thy People grace to avoid the infections of the
Devil, and with pure heart and mind to follow thee the only God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

O Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all men; I acknowledge and bewail my manifold sins and wickednesses which I
have from time to time most grievously committed by thought word and deed
against thy divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy Wrath and Indignation
against me. I do earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my
misdoings, the remembrance of them is grievous unto me, the burden of them is
intolerable, have mercy upon me: have mercy upon me most merciful Father, for
thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake: forgive me all that is past, and grant
that I may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ Amen.

WIth all the faculties of my Soul I bless and praise thy Name, O my Lord Jesu
Christ, who vouchsafedst to creat me of nothing to thy Image and Similitude, to
Redeem me with thy precious Blood, to associate me by holy Baptism among thy
Children of Adoption, and to feed me with the most blessed Sacrament of thy
Body. To thee I render humblest thanks, for expecting me from my Infancy, to
this time, that through thy great patience I may come to amendment of my life:
I praise thee, I glorify thee, who have often delivered me from many
tribulatiors, distresses, calamities, and miseries, and especially, that thou
have kept me from eternal punishment. I praise thee and glorify thee, that
thou have bestowed on me so many common Blessings, equal with others, and so
many particular benefits which others have wanted, and whereof I have not
deserved the least.

I beseech thy unspeakable goodness, my Lord God, that thou will so perfect
these thy gifts in me, as to expel out of my heart, whatever displeases thee,
and deliver me from all iniquities, troubles; and evils, in which I am
encumbred. Dispose all my thoughts, words, and deeds, agreeable to thy Will.
Preserve me in all Conditions, both of Adversity, and Prosperity, and bring me
at last to the happy and most desired joys of thy sight; who live and
reignest, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end, Amen.

O My Sovereign Lord Jesu, Son of Almighty God, and of the most pure and
glorious Virgin Mary, who sufferedst that bitter Death for me, and all Mankind,
and did rise again the third day: I beseech thee, Lord, have mercy on me a
Sinner, yet thy Creature: And for thy Passions sake, preserve me from all
perils of Body and Soul, especially those that may turn to thy Displeasure.
With all my heart I thank thee; most gracious Lord, for the great mercies thou
have showed me in the imminent dangers to which I have been exposed: and as thy
grace has always kept me from the hour of my birth, to this day; so Lord, I
beseech thee, that thy mercy may continue my safety.

And for my great offense, ingratitude, and all my sinful life, humbly I ask
thy pardon. And since I cannot lead such a life as becomes thy Servant, I
meekly prostrate my self, and say, God be merciful to me a Sinner: I bless
thee most gracious God, for all the benefits thou have so largely bestowed on
me, rendering all honor and praise to thy holy Name, who live and reignest,
one God, world without end, Amen.

LEt Heaven and Earth join together with joy, and the Quires of Angels with the
voices of Men, to sing eternal praises to God, in Trinity and Unity, for the
mercies received in the admirable work of our Redemption, Amen.

WE thank thee, O Lord God, merciful Father, for vouchsafing to send thy only
begotten Son Jesus Christ, to dye for us sinners, the most shameful Death of
the Cros^* that he might offer himself to thee a most pure, holy, and
acceptable Sacrifice for our offenses, and thereby purge our wicked Consciences
from all spots of uncleanness: By this thy exceeding great love unto us, and
by these most bitter torments of thy Son, our Savior, we humbly beseech thee,
impart to us continually the fruits of his Redemption, and make us daily dye to
the World, and be crucified to the lusts and desires of the Flesh, and to live
to thee only all our life, that in the end we may rejoice everlastingly in thy
Kingdom; where with thy eternal Son, and the Holy Ghost, thou live and
reignest, one God for ever and ever, Amen.

THe Soul of Christ sanctify me, the Body of Christ save me, the water of the
Side of Christ wash me. O good Jesu hear me, within thy wounds hide me, suffer
me not to be separated from thee, from the malignant enemy defend me, and bid
me come to thee, that with thy Saints I may praise thee for all eternity, Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
O Lord hear us.
O Christ hear us.
Our Father, etc.
Lord hear our Prayers.
And let our cry come unto thee.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore.

The 56. Psalm.
1. BE merciful unto me, O God, for Man goes about to devour me: he is daily
fighting, and troubling me.

2. Mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up: for they be many that
fight against me, O thou most Highest.

3. Nevertheless, though I am sometime afraid: yet put I my trust in thee.

4. I will praise God, because of his Word: I have put my trust in God, and
will not fear what flesh can do unto me.

5. They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine is to do me evil.

6. They hold altogether and keep themselves close: and mark my steps, when
they lay wait for my Soul.

7. Shall they escape for their wickedness: thou (O God) in thy displeasure
shall cast them down.

8 Thou tellest my flittings, put my tears into thy bottle: are not these
things noted in thy Book?

9. Whenever I call upon thee, then shall my enemies be put to flight: this I
know, for God is on my side,

10. In Gods wo^d will I rejoice: in the Lords Word will I comfort me.

11. Yea in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto
me.

12. Unto thee (O God) will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

13. For thou have delivered my Soul from death, and my feet from falling: that
I may walk before God in the light of the living.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Devotions for every FRIDAY in LENT, More especially for GOOD FRIDAY.
Psalm 120.
WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord: and he heard me.

Deliver my Soul, O Lord, from lying lips: and from a deceitful tongue.

What Reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue: even mighty
and sharp Arrows, with hot burning Coals,

Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Meseck: and to have my habitation
among the tents of Kedar.

My Soul has long dwelt among them: that are enemies to peace.

I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them ready
to Battle.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
OUr Father, which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

WHat have thou done, sweet Jesus, that thou should have this Judgment?
What have thou done, that thou should be thus straightly dealt with? What is
thy offense? What is thy guilt? What the cause of thy death? What the occasion
of thy Condemnation? I truly am cause of thy trouble, my fault has made thee
been slain; my wicked life has brought thee to this death, vengeance is taken
of thee for my crimes: Thou art thus tormented for me, and I the occasion of
all thy smart.

O mervellous order of Judgment! O strange and mysterious proceeding! the
Wicked sins, and the Just is punished, the Guilty offends, and the Innocent
is chastised, the Sinner transgresses, and the Godly is condemned; that which
the Bad has deserved, the Good suffers; what the Servant has done amiss, the
Master undertake, to recompense; and where miserable Man has committed the
trespass, the Son of God lays down his own life to satisfy the debt. Whither
has thy humility descended? What has thy fervent love enforced thee to do? How
far has thy mercy extended it self?

To what a point is thy compassion come? I have done wickedly, and thou art
punished; I have committed a grievous fault, and it is laid to thy charge; I am
the offender, and thou art put to the torture; I was puffed up with pride, and
thou art made of no reputation; I was disobedient, and thou sufferedst the
punishment of my rebellion; I have pampered my self with delicacies, and thou
were often afflicted with hunger and thirst; my inordinate affections have made
me to do things unlawful, thy perfect Charity has brought thee to suffer an
ignominious death; I presumed to do what I was forbidden, and thou submittedst
thy self to rebukes, even for thy good works; I delight in liberty and
pleasure, and thou art fastened to the Cross, with intolerable grief; I live
at ease, and thy hands and feet are pierced with Nails; I taste the pleasant
apple, and thou the bitter gall; Eve laugheth and rejoices with me, blessed
Mary laments and sorrows with thee.

Behold O King of Glory what mine iniquity is, and what thy mercy! how
excessive my wickedness* and how infinite thy goodness! O my King and my God,
what may I possibly offer thee in acknowledgment of thy Bounty? man's heart is
not able to think, much less can his poverty furnish a worthy Oblation for so
great benefits. I beseech thee therefore, for thy mercies sake, cause me from
henceforth to renounce all the enticements of the World, and for love of thee,
not to fear any adversities by it: but despise even Death it self, and having
perpetually in remembrance the blessedness of Heaven, make no account either
of the pleasure or afflictions of this transitory life.

Let nothing please me, but that which is acceptable to thee, nor any thing
offend me but that which is disagreeable to thy Will: let all things besides
thee seem tedious to me, and may I never be wearied in seeking after thee; let
no joy delight me that is without thee, and let me rejoice in all afflictions I
suffer for thee: may the remembrance of thee be my consolation, and turn my
tears into nourishment, whilst I seek thy Righteousness: let the Law of thy
mouth be more precious to me than thousands of gold and silver: let it be my
chief delight to obey thee, and greatest grief to displease thee.

I humbly beseech thee (my only hope) that thou will be propitious to me and
pardon all my iniquities; open my ears to hear what thou Command, and suffer
not my heart to decline from thee, nor through words of wickedness, to seek
excuse for my sins, but always to keep my self in the paths of thy
Commandments, that at my death I may be found in the true way to thy Felicity;
who live and reignest for ever and ever, Amen.

LOrd have mercy on us.
Christ have mercy on us.
Lord have mercy on us.
Jesu receive our Prayers.
Lord Jesu grant our Petitions.
O God the Father, Creator of the World, have mercy on us.

O God the Son, Redeemer of Mankind, have mercy on us.

O God the Holy Ghost, Perfecter of the Elect, have mercy on us.

O Sacred Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy on us.

Jesu, eternal Son of the living God, have mercy on us.

Jesu, most blessed Son of the Virgin Mary, have mercy on us.

Jesu God and Man, in two Natures one divine Person, have mercy on us.

Jesu, the increated Wisdom of the Father, by whom all things were made, and by
the Word of whose Power they are sustained, have mercy on us.

Jesu, who for us sinners, descendedst from thy Throne of Glory, and tookest
upon thee the form of a Servant, choosing a poor Stable for the place of thy
Birth, have mercy on us.

Jesu, who in thy holy Circumcision receivedst that blessed Name, and after
wast declared for the Worlds Redeemer by the Tribute and adoration of Kings,
have mercy on us.

Jesus, who in the tender age of a new born Child, was forced to save thy life
by flying into Egypt, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who becamest subject to thy Parents, so much inferior in dignity to
thee, and disdainedst not to serve them in their humble life, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who after a long concealment of thy self, did publish to the world thy
admirable manner of life, traveling on foot, in poverty, hunger, and thirst,
and begging, as an alms, even a Cup of cold Water, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who healedst every where the diseased, both in Soul and Body, and
weariedst thy self to relieve our Infirmities, passing the day in Works of
Mercy, and watching whole Nights in Prayer, often retiring alone, and Fasting
many days together, to teach us the way and practice of Contemplation, have
mercy on us.

Jesus, who for our encouragement, vouchsafedst to be tempted in the Desert,
where having there subdued the Enemy of Mankind, thy Victory was celebrated by
the adoration of Angels, have mercy on us.

Jesus, whose sacred Life was a continual course of suffering evil for us, and
doing good to us, opening by thy Doctrine an easy way to Heaven, and
soliciting by thy Miracles our acceptance of Salvation, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who for our Example did wash thy Disciples feet, and for our Comfort
did Institute thy blessed Sacraments, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who prostrate with thy face upon the Earth, prayedst thrice to thy
Father for deliverance, and in the fervor of thine Agony, swettedst drops of
Blood, till thou were relieved by an Angel, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who wast betrayed by one of thine own Disciples, and forsaken by all the
rest, who forbadst the resistance of Public Authority, and restoredst to thine
Enemy the Ear he had lost in assaulting thee, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who for our Redemption deliveredst thy self to the violence of thine
Enemies, freely suffering them to bind thy hands, which even for them had
wrought so many Miracles, and to spit on thy Face, which the Angels behold with
joy and adoration, have mercy on us

Jesus, who for us enduredst their malicious impiety, to blindfold thy eyes, and
strike thee on the Cheeks, to accuse thee falsely, and condemn thee unjustly, to
compare Barrabas to thee, and prefer him before thee, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who for us enduredst their barbarous insolence, to strip thee of thy
Clothes, and mock thee with a purple Vestment, to wound thy Head with a Crown
of Thorns, and all thy Body with cruel Scourgings, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who for us enduredst their insatiable fury, to load thee with a heavy
Cross, and shamefully Crucify thee between two Thieves, to affront thy thirst
with Vinegar and Gall, and blaspheme thy meekness with bitter reproaches, all
which thy incomparable patience cheerfully received, and offered to thy Father
even for thy Persecutors, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who having Conquered the power of Darkness, releasedst thy Servants from
their long Captivity, and overcoming Death, did raise thy crucified Body to a
glorious Life, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who by thy Triumphant Ascension openedst the Kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers, and Seated at the Right hand of thy Father, vouchsafedst to become
our eternal Mediator, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who in thy tender Providence did send miraculously the Holy Ghost, to
lead thy Church into all truth, and comfort thy Servants in all their
tribulations, have mercy on us.

Jesus, who at the great and general Day shall judge severely every one
according to his works rewarding thy Servants with Eternal Life, and Condemning
Sinners to everlasting Death, have mercy on us.

Be merciful O Jesus, and pardon our sins.

Be merciful O Jesus, and hear our Prayers.

O Sovereign Lord and blessed Savior of the World, who by the sole motive of
thy Mercy, humblest thy self to Death for our Redemption, and Ascendedst to thy
Father for the full accomplishment of our peace, graciously apply to our Souls
the infinite merits of thy sacred Passion, and with thy precious Blood cleanse
us from all our sins; nail them to thy Cross, and bury them in thy Grave, that
they may dye in us, and we live in thee, the life of Grace here, and be united
to thee in thy Kingdom of Glory hereafter, where with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost thou live and raignest one God world without end, Amen.

The 121. Psalm.
I Will lift up mine eyes unto the Hills: from whence comes my help, my help
comes even from the Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that helps thee will not
sleep.

Behold he that keeps Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord himself is thy keeper: and the Lord is thy defense upon thy right
hand:

So that the Sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the Moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea, it is even he that shall keep
thy Soul

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in: from this time forth
for ever more.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

