The Worlds VVonder.
Giving an Account of Two Old Men, Lately known and seen in the City of
Tholouze in France, who declare themselves to be above a Thousand Years old a
piece, and Preach Repentance to the World; telling what shall happen for these
Nine Years following, and when the World shall end.

Tune of, My Bleeding Heart.




STrange News to England lately came,
the like I think was never known;
And if it proves a certain truth,
'twill terror strike to hearts of Stone.
A City great there is in France,
and Tholouze is it called by name;
Two Prophets there was lately found,
invisibly they thither came.
No Man nor Child could-ever tell
Which way these Prophets they came in,
They say that they were sent from God,
to reprehend the World for Sin.
A Thousand Years of Age, and more,
each of them do declare to be;
Methuselah never lived so long,
as by the Scriptures you may see.
Gods Holy Spirit they declare.
into their Breasts inspired is;
In this our Age a thing so rare,
I think there is none more strange then this.
Strange kinds of habit they do wear,
the like never seen by mortal Eye;
And their department is as strange,
although they Preach continually.








Good Admonition they do give,
advising all Men to Repent;
They say this is the only cause,
that they into the World were sent.
Gods Wrath against the Romans they.
do now declare is kindled hot;
And if with speed they don't Repent,
their Crimes shall never be forgot.
The City of Tholouze, they say,
to Sodom may compared be,
And in three Months shall be consumed
by Flames of Fire undoubtedly.
Except they do their lives amend,
and quite forsake Iniquity;
Which do the People much amaze,
for this is their continual cry.
The Magistrates offended were,
at the strange Doctrine they did Preach:
But they replied they came from God,
the sinful People for to teach.
At length there was an Order made,
that they should close confined be;
With Jesuits they did discourse
in several Tongues, most perfectly.
Their Diet also was most strange,
on Delicates they never fed;
Their Drink was only Water clear,
their greatest Banquet was dry Bread.
And then the Magistrates did ask
these Prophets strange, from whence they came?
Their answer was, from Gallilee,
Galladium was their Cities name.
The Jesuits did then persuade
the Magistrates, that they should go
To Rome to see his Holiness,
that he the truth of all might know.
At this they nothing daunted were,
for they declared they knew their doom,
And seemed to be mighty free
for to go see the Pope at Rome.
But being Fettered then with Chains,
at which they seemed to make a scoff;
They much amazed the People all,
for with great ease they shook them off.
They Prophecy in Eighty-One,
there shall be Troubles over all:
In Eighty-Two they do declare,
the Pope of Rome shall have a Fall.
In Eighty-Three throughout the World,
they do declare, that Preach they shall:
In Eighty-Four, that Jesus Christ
shall without doubt be known to all.
In Eighty-Five there shall arise,
one that shall mighty be with Men:
In Eighty-Six an Earthquake shall
much terrify the World again.
In Eighty-Seven, Africa
shall quite consumed be by Fire;
In Eighty-Eight, the World amazed,
in Eighty-Nine, the World expire.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T.
Passinger.


