A SONS PATRIMONY AND DAVGHTERS PORTION;

Payable to them at all times, but best received in their first times, when
they are young, and tender: Laidout without expense of money, only in the
improving time and words with them, Contained (in an answerablenesse to their
Ages) in two VOLUMES:

In the first, The PARENT is taught his duty, to teach it his child betimes, To
hear, To speak, To do; when and where to put him to school; after that to a
Calling, which must be fitted to his inclination, as a garment to his back; for
the childs inclination makes the surest indenture to bind him to his Trade.
In all this he may be taught in a way (if the Parent will apply his mind to
understand, and to put the more observation upon it) as plain, easy and
familiar as the way he walks in.

In the second, The CHILD is taught to know himself and God; To take
direction from His mouth, for his safe passage here through all his Ages, and
therein how to answer all his relations, that when he cease to live here, he
may live for ever with the LORD.

PSALM. 34. 11. DEUTERONOMY. 12. 28. Come ye children harken unto me, I will teach you
the fear of the Lord, that it may go well with you, and with your children
after you for ever, when thou do that which is good, and right in the sight
of the Lord thy God.

CHRYSOSTOM. As our Seminaries or seed plots, are, such are the Land and Nation:
As the Parents, house and school are, such are the Town and City.

Published in the year of hope and expectation, that the private house and
school shall be reformed, much out of order now, and quite besides the Rule.

Printed for T. Underhill, and are to be sold at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1643.

A Premonition to the PARENT.
TO undeceive you herein (for we hate deceit in any thing) know, That this book
was published 3 years ago; but, through a mistake in the Author, not acquainted
with the mystery of Stationing, or selling books, it was pent up in a chamber
ever since; and there it had lain still, had not he been moved about it (by a
zealous well-wisher to the good of parent and child both) To give the purpose
and intendment of all that in the Title, which is largely treated on in the
book. This the Author has done in truth and sincerity, not making show in the
Title of more, then is not truly in the book. Some passages there are in the
book, perhaps too high, raised above thy reach and capacity; but wherein thy
duty lies, and that is all along, there it is as plain as is the beaten way, if
you come with a resolution to observe, and mark it: if not, I know not what is
easy, but our own way, and that tends directly to destruction. Truly, to speak
my mind what I think, this is it; That this time is the season for this book;
for probable it is, we will harken to it now, because we smart now; pain and
sorrow is upon us from what we fear, yea and from what we feel too: likely it
is we will harken now, or never: And if we do so, we must needs learn, That all
this evil is from our little house within the breast, and the greater house
without. Let every man do his own work, his duty, reform there, where God has
made him overseer, then the work is done, the sword will be still. And this is
the scope and purpose of the book. A word is enough to the wise, especially
such, who are made wise by blows.

WE, whose names are under-wrirten, well acquainted with the scope and
purpose of this Book, Tending to an an orderly proceeding in a well-Timed
Reformation of our selves first, and our children betimes, do give our
attestation thereunto heartily and in all faithfulness.

Edm: Calamy John Goodwin. Joseph Caryll. Ier. Burroughes. Will. Greenehill.


A CHILDS PATRIMONY LAID OVT UPON THE GOOD CVLTVRE OR TILLING OVER HIS WHOLE
MAN.

The first Part, Respecting a Child in his first and second Age.

Whom thou have borne unto me. Ezekiel. 16. In the fear of the Lord is strong
Confidence, and his Children shall have a place of refuge. Prove. 14. 26. Filium
pater, etc. A Parent must offer his Child to the Lord, he must not defer;
that as he has been a means to give it a life here, he may confer something
toward the obtaining for it a better life hereafter. Chrysolog. Sermon. 10.
(...). Nazianz. orat. 20. p. 323. London, printed by I. Legatt. 1640.

Imprimatur

June 28. 1639. Tho. Wykes.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND MUCH HONORED Knight, Sr. ROBERT PIE.
SIR,
A Trivial Business has made an Intrusion upon yours of weight: A very
School point (so in account) but worthy a very Wise Man's Consideration, even
yours. I need say little of it, it is big-enough and can speak for it self.
An old and ordinary subject it is, but newly handled, and in no ordinary way. I
will say no more of it but this, and it is enough; It concerns a Parent
Infinitely: Infinitely? yes; It directs a Parent, To Tender the Child
Seasonably; To love it Truly; To Resign it Humbly; To Train it up
Faithfully; so, as it may be of much use In and To his Generation, promoting
the Glory of his Great Master as becomes, heartily; That Parent and Child may
rejoice together here, and here-after for ever with the Lord: of high and
Infinite use this, for it leads to an happy Eternity.

The doubt is, how you will take the prefixing your Name hereunto: I cannot
resolve that; But what induced me thereto, you shall hear, and I hope, allow.

It is not to seek your patronage (as the manner is) for it has license to go
abroad; and whether it finds kind entertainment or no, is not the Burden of
my Care.

Nor is it to beg your hand (as the great Ambition is) to set me higher in the
World, wherein, when Time was, and my thoughts were much above my worth, you
showed your readiness, and I forget it not: The Truth is, I have lived in so
low a Station, and so long (and I thank God heartily for it, that it is so low,
and for that known weakness, which forced, and molded my mind to it, and at
length framed my mind so contentedly in it, for a great providence concurred
here) that I have not so much as a thought, or mind, had I the opportunity,
to rise higher. Nay I ever thought, since I could think to purpose (but it was
once a sad thought) that I was as incapable of preferment here in the World, as
a piece of Earth is to become a Star; so I thought, and it was no vain
thought, for it made me, I hope, the more ambitious after that world, where, if
my weight keep not down, I may be above the Star in Glory.

It was not then either This or That; what then? I am now telling you.

I am a worthless parcel of that house, whose chief Supporter fell first
from the best part of his estate, and then, (which was the fall Indeed) from
himself: very ominous this to younger Brothers (says a Noble Verul. Essay.
Scholar) who are commonly fortunate, but seldom or never when the Elder are
disinherited.

Your hand was put forth to uphold this pillar, that was not Substantive enough
to stand of himself, nor had so much wisdom as to cleave to a Another; so,
though he had your hand, yet he stood not, he is fallen: So it must needs be
sooner or later with every man, who has not a single eye to that invisible
Hand, who is the Great Supporter of a Man, and only makes the house a
Blessing: The low Cottage, as well as the high Throne, is established by
Righteousness Prove. Chap. 16. verse. 12. 20. verse. 28. 25. verse. 5. 29. verse.
14.
, it is spoken more then once, nay Twice doubled, as the Genesis 41. 32.
Dream, for the thing is certain.

Since he fell we have been in our Ruins, and in them, some of us, having
recourse to your self, found you as ready and active as you were able; you
said you would do it, and what you said was done, your word was your deed.
This and more, whereof none can speak more then can my self, renders you
honored, I think of all, that in a fair and clear way (else you will not
hear of it,) have had occasion to use you: And my intendment here, is but to
tender my acknowledgement thereof, and you cannot be offended that I show my
self thankful.

I could give you Titles of respect, etc. and not flatter neither, as the
manner is, and as some do, who fear not their Maker Job. 32.
. But what are Man's eulogies in a wise Man's esteem? Nothing: They, whom the
King of Kings will honor, are honored indeed; and they who honor Him, shall
be so honored, that is certain. You will give me leave then to leave the common
way of complements, a way I could never comply with, and to be your
Remembrancer in two things; they are very grave and weighty both.

1. God has given you a rich portion in things below; It is a point of your
excellent wisdom, not to think these The portion (It was, and is the Righteous
Man's Sin He received his good things not as he should, as a pledge of Gods
further favor, but as a full and complete reward: as a propriatory not as a
Steward and an Accountant: he accounted his life as his, and as if there had
been no other; Bish. Andr. page 316.
) either during or satisfying: not During; of such portions it will be said, as
once it was, In the Time-past, Thou had*st them; pleasures, profits, honors;
They were, now they are not; And when they were, and thou had them, They
were not satisfying; They filled, They wearied thee, They did not satisfy, no
more then the East wind does satisfy an hungry stomach. There are three
marks upon the Rich-mans folly, which makes it very remarkable.

1. He said to his soul, Thou have much goods; That was a great mistake; They
were the goods of the Body, not of the soul: Barnes full, and Coffers full,
and yet the soul not the fuller, not the richer; perhaps the poorer, the
leaner; The more emptiness, the more of that fullness.

2. Laid up for many years; A clear mistake that too; for, that Night, the
soul was plucked away. But grant a continuance for many years, a thousand twice
told; yet an end comes at last; They must be eternal good-things, which an
eternal soul can relish and enjoy, being suitable and proportionable thereunto.

3. Take thy ease; That was a third deceit exceeding all; for suppose, The
soul continue with the Body, and the Body with the Goods: Soul with Body;
Body with Goods, wife, children, riches, health, honors, all continued
together, there were no parting: suppose it so; yet we know, for so we read,
that the Mountain (it contains all the forementioned) may be strong, yet the
Man weak upon it; The Mountain may continue, yet the Man may be troubled; It
was David's case: All is in Gods face toward us: if that shine upon a Man, all
is well and Lightsome; it that be clouded or hid, all is nothing; The Man will
be troubled. God can, without Taking the soul away, or goods away, He can put
the Spirit of a Man into such a condition of darkness, as that all those
comforts shall be to a Man, but as the white of an egg, no more relishing. As
there be joys the world gives not; so are there afflictions, the world
inflicts not, says a Learned Divine Mr. G. Child of Light. 6.
There is a breaking of the bones, whereof David complained, when there is not
a bone in the body out of joint: The soul may be broke with sorrows, when
there is a confluence of vvorldly comforts round about us. And this requires
our Mark for mighty reasons: for it is as difficult a thing to goe-out of our
selves to God a-alone for comfort; as to goe-out of our selves to Christ alone
for Righteousness. The Rich man's Tower is as strong now as ever it was, in his
coneeit Prove. 18. 11.
, and he is as firmly bottomed upon his Mountain; and he speaks as confidently
now to his soul, Take Thy Ease, as ever he did; for though the History be
old, the practice is new. But this is our wisdom, and for this we shall be
counted understanding Men, if looking for ease and Comfort, we look up to God
with a single eye and trust perfectly on Him; for enquire from one end of the
heaven to the other: Ask of the Barnes and Winepresses, they are the fullest
and fattest places under the Sun, ask them or any Creature else, whether
they can give ease to the soul? They will answer, no, it is not in them:
though yet they can contribute a great deal, But then the light of Gods
countenance must shine through them, if not, they contribute Nothing; That He
may be known and acknowledged to be the God of all comfort and the Father, not
of some, but of all consolations. What ever outward comforts we have, the
comfort of our spirits is from God. So then we are driven to this conclusion;
God only makes the soul to Rest, and gives it ease; and that is never, till
He deals bountifully with it Psalm. 117. 7.
, till He satisfies it with Himself a suitable and proportionable-good both
During and Satisfying.

The soul is scattered and lost, when it is parcelled-out to variety of
things: It cannot fix now, It does but roll like a Ship at Anchor in a
Tempest; It must be brought to the Unity of one Desire and one love; Till then,
it will be as unstable as the water; as restless as a Meteor, still tossed,
and in doubtful suspense: So Truth it self Assures by that very Metaphor
(...). Luke 12. 29. Psalm. 9. 112.
. But, o the peace, the security of that person, whose heart is fixed trusting
in the Lord! he has left Cisterns, Creature Comforts, and is gone to the
Fountain, where he shall be satisfied; he is got to the Rock of his salvation,
where is an abiding; and now he shall stand fixed and firm upon his
foundation, like the Rock, against which the raging waves may beat, but shall
be broken; Nay, more fixed is he then so, faster he stands then the hills or
mountains, yet, because of their settled standing, are they called perpetual
hills, everlasting Mountains Hab. 3. 6.
. So fixed is this person; and it must needs be so, for he finds underneath
the everlasting Arms Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
.

I know, I have transgressed my Rule at this point, for I have been too long
upon it; Yet I pray you, do not think so, because it is an high point, and I
should say yet more unto it, because it is so high, and of such mighty
concernment; for this is it which, being well observed, will hold-up a man's
Spirits, when the body must fall asunder from it self; and make the heart
rejoice, when the eie-strings must break: But I consider your person and place,
therefore I will wind up all and your thoughts together in one word, which you
often meet with; I will only annex Selah here, a word, which sounds high and
gives an elevation to the mind answerable to the matter; so your thoughts are
raised now, reaching after good-things, which shall endure as long, as
Eternity is long, for ever; And this is to be Truly exalted; This, in a True
sense, to be high-minded.

II. God has given you a Name upon earth: He has given you to know too (and
you bless His Name for it) that herein is the least degree of your glory. A
Name upon earth is nothing, though it should endure while the earth endures;
Nothing that, to eternity, after which the soul is Biased.

You may read of one, who had a Crown set upon his head, consisting of many
Crowns, for he was an Emperor Aug. de Civ. dei lib. 5. 26.
, yet he would not make that the Crown of his rejoicing; but this was it, That
the Name of Christ was called upon him; that he accounted his honor. An honor
indeed, which reaches from earth to heaven, there to be perpetuated; and such
honor have all His Saints. And this Name you account your chief honor also,
for it is called upon you; And you must count it your chief work too: For I
must tell you this with it, and then I have told you all; It is the hardest
thing in the world, To be a Christian indeed, and Indeed to answer that Name,
for it is an hard thing for self to crucify self; To offer a holy violence
to ones self, even to the plucking out, or cutting off that, which is most
pleasing to Nature: yet so we must do (says one (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Stro.
li. 7. page 500.
) if we will be Christians Indeed: And we must believe him, for he assures us
so, from the mouth of Truth it self, The violent take it by force. We must
labor here, if we look to rest hereafter; if any think other wise, he is
deceived: We cannot think to goe-in at a narrow gate, and find no straitness.
A harder matter it is to tread the way of virtue, then to keep a narrow path in
the darkest night Book of providence. chap. 4. 5. (...), etc. The flesh must
not live now that it may live hereafter: It must die now, that it may not die.
Chrysostom. on Rom 8. Hom. 13.
. These are Chrysostomes words englished, and they make clear demonstration,
That, though it be a matter of ease and no labor to be a Christian In Name;
yet it is a point of difficulty requiring labor and strife both, to be such
an one Indeed. Herein then is your strife, and work (wherein you will be
Abundant, because of the Abundant reward) to answer this worthy Name worthily;
And I pray heartily to the God of power to lead you by the hand, and strengthen
you in the work, for it is a Mighty work; But if He put forth His hand, and
your eye be upon the recompense of reward, you will break through all
difficulties (as is said of Abraham Chrysostom. upon Genesis Chap. 12. Hom. 31.
) like Spiders web's: for you are called, not, as was he, from one Land to
another, but from earth to heaven, yet he plucked up his feet and so ran:
That you may do so, even so run, that you may obtain the end of your race,
your Crown, is the prayer of him, whom you have engaged, Sr. to print my self

Your much obleiged kinsman: EZEKIAS WOODVVARD.

To the Reader.
THis Treatise tends to the erecting of fair Edifices to the Lord, which are
the children of children of men. The Au^hor shows himself herein, a skillful
builder: in that he first lays a sure, solid foundation, and then reareth
thereupon his goodly edifice. This the Lord Himself noted to be the part of a
prudent builder (Luke 6. verse. 48.) He wisely shows, when, and by whom
especially, this foundation is to be laid, even by Parents so soon as their
children attain any competent capacity. Young and tender years are flexible,
and may easily be bowed this way, or that way. They are like -- A^gilla quidvis
imitab^ris uda. Hor.
the moist potters clay, which may readily be fashioned into any shape: and
like soft wax, which soon receives any print; Nor so only, but also long
retains what it first receives: like Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit
odorem Testa diu -- Idem.
a vessel, which long holds the savor which it first took while it was new.
Old men are said to remember in their elder years, what they learned in their
younger. I shall not need to press this further, it being so plentifully and
pithily pressed by the Author himself, who lays his foundation very deep, even
in the mothers womb: and goes along from infancy to childhood, thence to
youth, and so on, till he bring his child to a grown, yea, an old man, full
of days, going to the grave in a full age; like as a sheafe of corn comes
in, in his season Job 9. 26.
.

In every estate and degree of these Ages, even from the womb to the grave, he
prescribes pertinent and profitable directions, not to children only, but also
to Parents, Guardians, Schoolmasters, Tutors, Governors of all sorts of
Societies, yea, and to Ministers too, whom he fitly styleth, Instructors of
Instructors. So full he is, as he has passed nothing over in this long journey
without a due observation, whether it concerns the mothers care of the child
in her womb, or after in the infancy, or both Parents care about a new birth,
or initiating it in piety, good manners, good literature at home, at school,
at University, or any other good Seminary; Yea also about calling, marriage,
carryage to Parents, to their superiors, equals, and inferiors, in all ages,
times, and places. This is that fair Edifice, whereof intimation was made
before: fairer then the Edifices which have formerly been erected by Xenophon
in his (...).
Institution of Cyrus; by Plutarch in his Treatise (...).
of training up children; by Clemens Alexandrinus in his (...).
Instructour of children; by Hierome, in his Epistle to Laeta concerning the De
institutione fi^iae.
educating of her daughter; by Erasmus, in his Discourse De pueris statim and
libe aliter instituendis.
of timely and liberal training up of children, or by others in like Treatises.

This Author has more punctually and pertinently, handled all kind of duties
from ones first entrance into this world, to his going out thereof, then any of
the forenamed Authors, or any other that have written of the like subject.
Such variety of matter is here couched, as it will prove useful to all of all
sorts, that will read and heed it. The Lord give a blessing to this and all
other like labors of his faithful servants. Amen.

William Gouge.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
CHAP. I.
WHat the Parents duty; when it begins; Gods gracious work upon the Child,
framing it in the womb, and giving it its due proportion of parts; what thanks
therefore, page 1. 2. How Sin defaceth Gods Image; How repaired. Of Baptism
and the solemnity thereof; The Mother, the Nurse, to page 4. The Mother is
most employed about the head of the Child (my head, my head, says the Child;
carry him to the Mother, says the Father, 2 Kings 4. 19.) The Mother is
charged with the head, Father and Mother both with the heart, and this work is
for the closset: page 4. What Infancy is: called an Innocent Age, but
miscalled. Something may be done even then for the rectifying the Childs body,
and his heart too. Grave considerations pressing to that Duty, from page 5. to
page 9.

CHAP. II.
Childhood and youth; how they differ; wherein they agree; unhappy Ages both.
The period of this Age; not easily defined: The Parent makes it longer or
shorter, as their care is more or less, page 10. Parents not discharged in
point of care, when they have charged the School with their child; how vain
that thought, page 12. How preposterous the Parents care; How much Father and
Mother both, do cross their own ends. What a point of wisdom it is, well to
Time our beginnings. When the Seed-Time, what their employment there, to page
15.

CHAP. III.
A Twofold employment, which lies in the order of Nature and right reason:
Lets hindering this twofold duty, two; fondness, fierceness; extremes, yet
ordinarily in one and the same Parent. I. Of fondness, what causes it; Youth
more profitable, Childhood more delightful Fructuosior est adolescentia
liberorum, sed Infantia dulcior. Sen. epist. 9.
. What hurt fondness does. The Devils murdering engine, to page 18. Four
mighty considerations to fortify us against it, from page 19. to page 22.
Three examples evidencing how destroying it is, to page 24. Repeated, concluded
in Mr. Boltons words, with some use of the whole to all Parents, to page 26.
II. Fierceness, whose fruit it is, and how much it hinders, to page 27. It
helps not to unroot evil, but rather roots it more in: to page 29. It hinders
much the Implanting of good: to page 30. Considerations, which may help to
calm a Parent, when in heat of spirit he is about to unroot evil, are three,
very worth his consideration, to page 33. Considerations, which may arrest a
Parents hand, when he is about the implanting of good, are four, which, being
considered, will command an answerable practice: to page 35.

CHAP. IIII.
Our nature like a soil fruitful of weeds, what they are, and how unrooted.
1. Pride, the heart-string of corruption: Chrysostomes note upon it, how
cherished; how the contrary grace may, and ought to be instilled, to page 38.
2. Frowardness, a spice of the former; The Parents duty here; how the
contrary grace may be enforced, to page 40. 3. The way of lying; and the way
the Parent must take to prevent the course of it; a great work, if it may be
done; if not, the Child is fit for no society, to page 41. 4. Idleness, how
corrupting and provoking. Labor, how natural to a man, how he is provoked
thereunto, to page 43. 5. A bad Malignus comes quamvis candido and simplici
rabiginem suam suam affricuit. Sen. epist. 7.
companion, how infectious and corrupting, he will defile the best and most
candid nature, with his foul example, page 44. 6. The evil of the Tongue,
prevented by teaching the Child silence, and this the Parent must teach
himself, and his Child under five notions; The brief of that, which concerns
the Childs Instruction, is; while it is a Child, let its words be answers.
Nature teaches much at this point, and they more, who walked by an higher
light, page 47. 7. An oath; a word clothed with death in a Childs mouth; the
Parent, as in all, so here, very exemplary; yea, yea; nay, nay; The Friars note
upon those words. No more must be heard from a Child, page 48. 8. The Child
must be taught, what weight there is in those words, yea, yea, etc. A good hint
therefrom, to teach the Child to abhor that religion, which gives no weight
to words, nor oaths neither, page 51.

9, 10, 11, 12. Nicknames and abuses that way, are ordinary with Children, and
a fruit of corrupt nature: so quarrelling, uncovering their nakedness,
mocking, scorning the meaner sort, Great evils to be corrected, and prevented
in Children betimes; a notable example to press us thereunto, to use our
Inferiors kindly, to page 53.

13. Cursing; a great evil, so imprecations against our selves. Four great
examples full of instructions, who spoke rashly, and were paid home, in that
they spoke, to page 57. 14. As Childrens Tongues must be watched over, for the
Tongue is a world of wickedness, so must their hands; They will spill more
then they eat, how to teach Children to prize the good creatures, page 59. 15.
Children delight in the pain and vexation of those weak creatures, that are in
their power; A great evil to be looked unto and prevented betimes, considering
our natures what they are, page 61. 16. Nature fruitful of evils, more then
can be pointed at or prevented: but that is the true and genuine order of
nature, to prevent the evils thereof first, page 62. 17. Teaching by examples,
the best way of teaching and the shortest; they make the deepest impression,
page 64.

CHAP. V.
THe implanting of good, the order therein, The four seasons in the day
seasonable therefore. 1. How uncomfortable darkness is, how comfortable the
light; A notable lesson therefrom: wherein our light, and the true light
differ, to page 67. The Sun knows his appointed Time, what that teaches; The
Sun is glorious in his rising and refreshes, how that instructs, page 68.
Sin and sorrow will sour the sweetest earthly Blessings; where the root of our
comfort, page 69. The Sun a public servant, teaches man so to be, even to
serve his brother in Love; and to show to him the kindness of the Lord; what
the Idol of the world; what makes man an abomination, from page 69. to page 71.
The Morning the first fruits of the day; our season; what a Mercy to have it,
but a greater to take it; what our first work, and with whom; what our
engagements to set about it; what may be instilled by continual dropping, from
page 71. to page 77.

CHAP. VI.
VVEeat bread at Noon; What that implies; how frail our bodies; what our use
therefrom. page 78. Our right to the Creatures, how lost; how regained. page
79. In eating we must use abstinence: Intemperance how provoking to God; how
hurtful to man, and unbeseeming the Lord of the Creatures to page 81. When the
fittest season to teach and learn abstinence; how necessary a grace, specially
in these times, when so much wrath is threatened. What use a Parent must make
hereof to Children. Their lesson before and at the table, to page 85. When we
have eaten, we must remember to return Thanks; The threefold voice of the
Creatures; what the Taxation or Impost set upon every Creature. If we withhold
that homage we forfeit the blessing. The memorable words of Clemens
Alexandrinus. A strange punishment upon one, who seldom or never returned
thanks, so concluded page 90.

CHAP. VII.
THe Method in reading the Book of the Creatures. Four Objections, with their
Answers out of the Lord Verulam, to page 93. How to read the Book of the
Creatures. Extremes corrected and accorded. Two primitive Trades. An Apocrypha
Scripture opened and made useful, to page 97: How to teach the Child to spell
the Book of Nature. What is the compendious way of Teaching, to page 100.

Essays or Lectures upon the creatures, beginning at the Footstool. Three
enquiries touching the earth: 1. What form or figure: 2. Whence its dependence:
3. What its magnitude. Instructions therefrom, very grave and useful all, from
page 100, to page 107. A view of the Creatures: In their variety, delightful
and useful. Two Creatures only instanced in; From a little Creature a great
instruction. What a mercy to be at peace with the stones and creeping things.
From page 107. to page 114.

The Waters; their Surface, bars, or bound; Their weight; Creatures therein;
the ship thereupon: Great lessons from all; from page 114. to page 122.
repeated, and man's ingratitude convinced. 123.

The Air. The ways and operations thereof, admirable. winds; Their circuit;
Their womb, to page 125. The winged Creatures; Their provision, and
dependence, greatly instructing man and reproving his distrust, to page 126.
The Clouds, the ballancing of them; The binding the waters within them; The
making a course for the Rain out of them; All these three, the works of Him
that is wonderful in working, to page 127. Of Lightning, But the Thunder of
His power, who can understand? Job ^6. 14.
The Snow and the Hail, and where their Treasure, to page 128.

The wonderful height of the starrie Heaven. Of the Firmament, Firmament of
His Psalm. 150.
power. The eye a curious Fabric, of admirable quickness. How excellent the
eye of the soul, when cleared with the True eye salve. The heavens outside
shows what glory is within. Chrysostomes use thereof, and complaint
thereupon, to page 134. Of the Sun; Why I descend again to that Creature.
Three things in that great Light require our Mark. Grave and weighty lessons
from all three. Concluded in Mr Dearings and Basils words to page 144.

CHAP. VIII.
THE Day and Night have their course here; But after page 147. Our senses are
soon cloyed. We are pleased with changes. What Darkness is. The use thereof. A
little candle supplies the want of the Sun. How that instructs. How we are
engaged to lie down with thoughts of God, to page 153.

CHAP. IX.
A Great neglect in point of education. Mr Galvines, Mr Aschams, Mr Perkins,
and Charrons complaint thereof. The ground of that neglect, to page 156. The
Parent must fix upon two conclusions: Of the School. Whether the Child be
taught best abroad or at home, 157. The choice of the Master. Parents neglect
therein. The Masters charge, 159. His work, His worth, if answerable to his
charge, to page 160. The Method or way the Master must take. How preposterous
ours. Who have appeared in that way, to page 164. The School must perform its
work througly. The childs seed-time must be improved to the utmost, before he
be promoted to an higher place. The danger of sending Children abroad too soon.
When Parent and Master have promoted the Child to the utmost, then may the
Parent dispose of the Child for afterward, to page 165.

CHAP. X.
OF Callings. Some more honorable, as are the head or eye in the body; But not
of more honor then burden and service. Elegantly pressed by a Spanish Divine:
and in Sarpedons words to Glaucus, to page 169. The end and use of all
Callings, page 171. Touching the choice of Callings. How to judge of their
lawfulness. To engage our faithfulness. No excuse therefrom, for the neglect
of that one thing necessary. Our abiding in our Callings, and doing the works
thereof. How Nature teaches therein. The designing a Child to a Calling.
Parents too early and preposterous therein, 177. Parents may aim at the best
and most honorable calling (The Ministry, a ponderous work, 178) But he must
pitch upon the fittest. In the choice thereof the Parent must follow Nature,
and look-up to God.

THE PREFACE, SHEVVING the necessity and worth of a virtuous education, and
may serve as an introduction to Duty.
OUr great Advancer of Learning, notes an opinion of Aristotle, which is this;
Lib. 7. p. 375. In English Book 2. p. 263.
That of those things, which consist by nature, nothing can be changed by
custom, using for example; That, if a stone be thrown up ten thousand-times,
it will not learn to ascend; and that by often seeing and hearing, we do not
see or hear the better.

That Noble Scholar noted this for a negligent opinion, so he calls it (I know
not why, because the Philosopher does instance in Peremptory nature) and he
took pains to inform us touching the same; It is true, says he, In things
wherein nature is Peremptory; Man cannot make massy bodies to hang in the Air
like Meteors; he cannot make an Ox to fly: That which is crooked, says the
wise man, Eccles. 1. 15. (...).
man cannot make straight. There is a Peremptory bent of nature, which man
cannot turn, no more then he can turn back a Springtide, or a Rushing wind;
This is a work for Him, and peculiar to Him, Who turned Jordan back; Who made
the Iron Swim; Makes the Clouds, those massy bodies, to hang in the Air, as
if they had no weight; Who makes Mountains Valleys, and rough things even;
Raises children of stones (stony hearts) and made dry Bones live. And the
Parents work, in this case, is to sit still (I mean not any slacking of their
endeavor) that is, to go into his closet, and spread this Peremptory bent of
nature, he sees in his Child, or not subdued in himself, as the King the
Letter, before the Lord 2 King. 1^. 14.
, and to say (it is Luthers Counsel) Poeaitendum mihi praecipis, sed talis sum
ego miser, quod sentio me nolle neque posse; quare this prostratus pedibus,
etc. Concio de poen^tent. Anno Dom. 1518.
Here is an Heart that cannot turn, that will not turn; turn it, Lord, it is
Thy Work, Thine only; Turn it, as Thou did the Rivers in the South. Thus
where Nature is Peremptory; and what we are to do in that case: Nothing, but
look up to Him, Who caused the Sun to go back, and so the shadow in the
Dial.

But it is otherwise in things wherein nature admits a latitude; for we may
see that a straight glove will come more easily on with use; And that a wand
will, by use, bend otherwise then it grew; and by use of the voice, we speak
louder and stronger; and that by use of enduring heat and cold, we endure it
the better See a Treatise of Use and Custom. p. 26. and 39. and 69.
. And here in the God of Nature (Who only can change Nature, and supply, what
man cast away, and is wanting) would have Man active and stirring, and admits
him as a fellow-worker with Himself.

By this I would gain but thus much; That I might evince the necessity of a
virtuous education, and inhance the worth of the same; I mean, that we might
set a price upon it, and no ordinary one neither. It were an easy task here
to enter into a common place, and to give a Laudative hereof, which would fill
the margent and the lines. Suffices it to know, first, Read Hist. of the
World, first Book, 4. Chap. Sect. 11. p. 14. Quint. declaris Orat. Isocrat.
Areopag. 217. in sol.
That Nothing (after Gods reserved power) does so much set things in or out of
Square and Rule, as education does. Secondly; That we have no other means to
recover our sickly and crasie nature (I know my words are too short, but I mean
not in things that are high, concerning God, for in them she is not sick but
dead) no other means to pull it out of the Rubbish of Adams and of our own
Ruins, and to smooth over the face of it again, beautifying the same and
making it comely; no other means, I say, left us then to apply the Georgicks p.
236.
of the mind; (as that Noble Scholar Phraseth it) he means the husbandry and
Tillage thereof. The effects we see in the husbanding our grounds: and they are
great and admirable. The good Tillage of the mind produces as great effects,
and concerns man more, as he thinks himself of more worth then a clod of
earth. It has such a forcible operation, as hardly any length of time or
contention of labor can countervaile it afterward: we remember the old
saying, the truth whereof is more ancient, then is the verse:

Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts, etc. This Culture and manurance of the
mind, takes away the wildness and barbarism, and fierceness of men's
minds; it subdueth savage and unreclaimed desires; But then, as the great
Scholar notes also, The accent had need be upon fideliter p. 82.
; that is, The Culture and manurance of the mind must not be superficial: We
deal not so with our ground; but it must be labored in faithfully, heartily,
continually; so the husbandman does in his ground; it finds him work all the
year long. And he does his work thoroughly; he does not plant here a spot, and
there a plat of ground; but he tils the ground all over, that what he can, and
as the nature of the ground is capable, he may make all fruitful. And so we
must intend this business, as we would that thing, which concerns the Parent
and the Child, more then any thing in the world besides; yea, more then a
World is worth; Being confident of this; That all things by labor and industry
may be made better then Nature produced them; And that God so ordained it, That
the industry of man should concur in all things with the Works of Nature,
both for the bringing of them to their perfection, and for the keeping of them
therein, being brought unto it. See Dr. Hack. Apol. lib. 2. cap. 9. Sect. 3. p.
143.
.

Having now concluded the worth of a virtuous education, and the necessity of
the same; it follows, That my own practice be somewhat answerable to the Rule:
Therefore have I penned mine own Duty, with mine own hands; which may serve for
a parent at large, to direct and teach him, his.

This I have digested into two parts, each entire of themselves; but yet as
different in the subject matter, and manner of handling, as is the subject I
would inform: In the first part, a Child in its minority and younger years;
the second, a Child grown up: Both the one and the other, the subject of a
Parents care, and charge, which in the first part is largely treated on with
the manner or way, how he may discharge the same: The way is, to make the
Child know himself, then to know that, which may be known of God Rom 110.
(...).
, which is manifest: for God has showed it unto him, by that he sees and
feels of Him, so happily he may feel after Him, and find Him Acts 17. 27.
.

This then is my subject now, even The good culture of the Child; an old
Theme, whereto little that is new can be added either for form or matter: Yet
because it is a work daily repeated and of Infinite concernment to the Child;
And being a parent my self, I obtained of my self (naturally very indisposed
to my pen) to set down out of some continued experience and some conversation
with Children, and Books concerning that Theme, what I thought pertinent to
that business; The furthering and improving that great work.

What now remains as an introduction thereto, I branch under these heads.
First, making this my wants and Deficiencies therein, I shall first, briefly
observe such defects as my riper years have discerned in my own education, the
trayning up my younger years, which may be of some use to others for
prevention. Secondly, I shall note a

First then, (for so I make way unto it with some digression) I had naturally
Linguam impeditam, a stammering tongue: my Mother, who could love her Child,
and yet be wise (two things, they say, incompatible Non conceditur sumul amare
and sapere.
, but she could do both, as all knew that knew her) was tender of me, and the
more tender, the more my imperfection was. And such discretion she used in that
case, as indeed she did in all points touching her Children; A true Eunice,
though having five sons, She had not one Timothy; for instructions and
prayers both, are too short for that work; Such discretion, I say, she used
toward me, that, had I found the same under those hands, whereto I was
committed, I persuade my self I had every way thrived better then I did, and
in point of pronunciation (a chief point in a Scholar) I had not found so
great discouragement, as afterward I did.

I mention my Mother here, not my Father, because that Stay and Staff, the Lord
took away from her head, and our Tabernacle in a needful time, when I was
little more then a year old, the youngest of nine, but one was not, and another
there was, newly laid in the cradle: A sad stroke, and as sad a widow, A Widow
indeed (...). 1 Timothy 5. 5. and verse. 3.
; and that suffices for her honor. Then her charge was double, She was Father
and Mother both, and so she discharged both parts, as that thereby she had
double honor. No Children in that Country, of what rank soever, did owe more
to a Mother for her precepts, her prayers and her Practice, then we did (it is
our engagement,) and no parent expected, and had a more honorable observance
from her Children, then She had. Mothers may hold their Authority and
maintain the same, say what they will to the contrary; It is their fault, if
they do not maintain their Right, and it will be their sorrow. She lived to
see her Childrens Children, and a greater blessing then that too, Peace upon
Israel, peace and truth all her days; And when her Day came, even her
appointed Day, then was she taken away from seeing the evil to come; She died
as She lived (I mention but the practice of her widowhood) like Jacob, blessing
her children; so she fell asleep, and was brought to the grave, that silent
place, like a Sheafe of wheat to the barn, as full of graces, as of years.

I have digressed a little here, but I could not remember a Mother, and such a
Mother, barely so and no more.

From under her genttle and wise government I Iunius, has done before me.

I spent six years and an half in the Grammar School, trained up according
to the bad fashion (for we say, as Pravo nostri aevi more. Cent. Misc. Epist.
87. p. 494.
Lipsius says) of most Teachers, then and now. The understanding of a Child
is left to its own information; (which will be long first) and its memory is
first dealt with, and Tasked; a burden though not so felt Neque ulla aelas
minus fatigatur. Quintil. 1. cap. 12.
, yet a burden, and heavier then we would have to be imposed upon our selves,
for we will understand first, and then commit to Memory, which is the order of
Nature: for in true order and place, the Memory comes the last of three; The
understanding should be a leading hand to it, and the sense to the
understanding; and then the Memory has its due place, and will do its due
office, when first the sense and understanding have done theirs; such a
reciprocation, reflux or mutual working there is betwixt them if they work in
order. It requires special observation.

In all this time spent in Grammar (six years is a great length in our span) I
know not which lost me most time, fear or Play. I know I played away much of
the time (for all the sorrow) but, I know also, fear hindered me most, and cast
me farthest back. I remember the noble Knights words in his feigned Arcadia,
His page 11.
mind, says he, was fixed upon another devotion, so he minded the speech no
more then a Boy does his lesson, when he has leave to play.

Fear works the same effect that play does. If the Master be as ready to
smite, as he is to speak (as too many such there are) the Boys mind is fixed
upon another devotion, how he may save himself; his eye is upon the rod or
hand, and all his observation is how he may award the blow. As for other
observations, which his lesson would yield, they must stay a fitter season for
admittance, when the Master and Scholar both are better fitted and tuned, the
one to give, the other to take instruction. And let him, whom it does concern,
well consider this: for it concerns him very much, and the Child, whose good
he would promote, as much and much more, whereof more in a fitter place, only
this I add here.

A Boy will find out many shifts; it is the Masters wisdom not to put the
Child to it, for it will show its wit in nothing more, then to hurt it self;
I know it, for I was witty enough that way, and so, amongst other defects, I
made my tongue the more imperfect, which may teach the Master now to deal
tenderly and gently with the Child upon point of instruction.

A Master must maintain an awefulnesse in the Child, else little will be
done; and he must be as careful to suppress fear, and the working of it,
specially then, when he would give instruction, else no good will be done; We
may note what Wisdom says, certainly it holds true in so tender years; fear
Wisd. 17. 12.
betrayeth the succors, which reason offers. If the Child deserve to smart,
let it smart afterward when the lesson is done; And then neither will it be
Discipline Recte vocatur castigatio disciplina qua delinquens una dolet and
discit. Bright Rev. 3. 19.
, unless as it smarts from the rod, so it learnes by it also. Hence Teachers
may learn a principal lesson, in due observation whereof they may help many
defects, as, in the neglect of the same, they may cause not a few, and such,
perhaps, as after time cannot help nor redress. And so I have observed two
maine defects in the Grammar School, one in point of Instruction, the other in
point of Correction. I will observe no more, for present, there (for it will
fall in my way again in a fitter place) but that from thence I was sent to the
University soon enough and raw enough: So my Master advised, and then my
Mother was persuaded, for he was counted an Oracle. It remembers me how Iunius
his Grandfather did sometimes indorse his letter to his son, who, he thought,
at that time, might have spent his time to better purpose; To Dionysio dilecto
filio misso ad studendum, pro eo, quod alii vulgo inscribunt studenti. Vita
Junii praefix. Oper. Theol.
Dionisius my beloved son sent to study. And to study I was sent also, as a
means tending to a farther end, which failed, and though little I did, yet I
sat at it; what awed me so (for there was a providence in it) I shall tell
anon. And such was the good providence also, I was disposed to a Tutor, the
ablest amongst many, and most conscientious of his duty, and as skillful to
teach his Scholars theirs. Touching some Tutors, and their proceeding with
their Pupils then and now (if according to the old and most ordinary fashion)
as I think it not a pattern for imitation, so I know it to be above my Censure.

I shall note a Defect which I may be bold to censure; A fundamental one it
is, yet not so properly mine, as that it is not common to the most, now, as it
was then, sent to the College as I was, before I was fitted. There we shall
find helps from other Arts which will give Form to Matter; But if we want
Matter, what should we do with our Form?

I was put to Logic and Rhetoric before I was prepared or fitted for either.
Those grave Sciences, (as the Noble Scholar 2 Book. 99. lat. page 75.
says) the one for judgment, the other for ornament, do suppose the Learner
ripe for both; else it is, as if one should learn to weigh, or measure, or to
paint the wind. Those Arts are the rules and Directions how to set forth and
dispose Matter: And if the mind be empty and unfraught thereof; if it has not
gathered that, which Cicero calls Sylva and supellex, stuff and variety to
begin with those Arts, it does work but this effect; That the wisdom of those
Arts, which is great and Universal, will be made almost contemptible, and
degenerate into Childish Sophistry. So said that noble Scholar, who has not a
word too light.

But empty, and unfraught though I was, yet to these Arts I was put, and my
benefit therefrom was answerable; so little, as that I shall never recover
those Defects. For Defects, which grow up with us in youth, are as hardly
amended in after time, as the error in the first concoction is corrected in
the Second. And yet, if I should say, that many were then, and now are, sent to
the Universitie more empty and unfraught then I was, I should say but the truth.

I did not cast away my hours there, though for want of good order and method
in my studies, I spent not my time there to much purpose. I fleeted Read the L.
Cokes advise before his second part of Reports, which he borrows (part of it)
out of Sen. ep. 108.
and fluttered from book to book, variously tasting off many, but digesting
none; some rude notions I had of the Arts; but was not acquainted at all with
the bodies of Disciplines. I gathered some ends together, so as that my
collections that way, and provision of learning was (as our Advancer page 222.
compares it) like a Frippers or Brokers shop, that has ends of every thing,
but nothing of worth. I have noted this also as my own Deficiency, for so it
was; more there are, who proceed as inorderly as I did, and that they may be
better advised and directed, I have noted it; A defect they shall find it, and
no ordinary one.

The next defect I shall note, (for there is use in it also) is this; I lost
the fruit of disputation quite; The benefit whereof is no little to a Boy, if
he be not (through the default of the Moderator) a right Sophister, contending
about Goats hair, which is Childish Sophistry, a vain jangling about nothing;
and of nothing comes nothing: or if they contend not with blows, and bad
language, I mean, as once it was with hard iron, in stead of solid arguments.
Let the folly and abuses hereof be prevented by the wise oversight of the
Governors, so shall the dispute be wisely carried, and then, assuredly much
Advantage shall accrue thereby, both to them that dispute, and them that hear.
I durst not put my self forth therein, for then my tongue was very imperfect,
when I was not ready, in what I was to speak, as in Disputations I could not
be: but in other exercises, Declamations, and the like, I was best, because
most exercised therein, and those I had so perfect, that I could see my self
speak.

Another defect there was, and deserves Censure; I charged my paper book with
many notes, my memory with few, or none at all; and had I gone on so, The
Scholar had lost, if not quite his Treasurer; yet he had put it out of office;
The most faithful Servant in the world, if it be called to an account
constantly, if not, the very worst, a very Slug Nihil aeque vel augetur cura,
vel negligentia intercidit. Q^intil. l. 11. cap. 2.
. Let there be a Recognition of what we hear or read, a chewing of it again
(for, as conference with others is the life of study; so meditation is the
life of reading) then we may book it (we may and must take some brief heads of
it at first Certissimum est quod in librum ref^rtur, sidel s^imum adjutorem
memoriae, cum id quod sola recordationenitatur, facile possit d^uturnitate
temporis, vel penitus extingui, vel saltem corrumpi. Bright in Revel. cap 5, I
allow not of those who make memory their storehouse* for at their greatest
need, they shall want of their store, L. Coke. ep 1. before his first part.
) but charge the memory rather then the book, Call it to an account; so may a
man prove as famous for memory as our Jewel Read his life.
was, who had the Artindeed; or if not so, (for that was extraordinary) and
there is a different strength of memory, as of other faculties (not in all
alike) yet this recalling of things and charging of memory, so as it may be par
oneri not overcharged, will prove a sure Art, and most useful Si quis unam
maximamque a me artem memoriae quaerat, exercitatio est, and labor, Quintil.
ibid.
.

I could give here a full Tale of my Defects, for I know many, and I could
censure them too, none better; but I shall reserve them for a fitter time and
place; these are fittest for public, and serve best to correct others: for
from these I had most disadvantage, as others shall find also, though yet they
discern it as little, as once I did.

Another defect I had, nay I have, and that was

I must speak it, because I conceive there is much use of it: I disquieted my
self about my imperfection in speech very much, so much, as more cannot well
be imagined; and all that, But a disquieting in vain. But yet this good was in
it; The Sour yielded me this Sweet: It kept me close within, when others were
without, perhaps merrier, but not so well employed. It made me look up the
oftener unto Him (for I saw I had need of Him) Who made man's Mouth Exodus 4. 11.
, the Dumb and Deaf, etc. The very thought of my Infirmity kept me low,
every way low, in my thoughts also; it kept me from aspiring, and it was well
so, else I had been perking too high; I had stretched (...). 2 Cor. 10. 14.
and tentered my self beyond my Scantling and proportion. Assuredly, I could
not have wanted this defect; but it was long before I thought so, long before I
could cast Anchor upwards; I had first tempted God ten times, saying, Can God
provide in such a wilderness? I almost sunck down under that thought, so
heavy it was: for thus I thought.

I was now a Scholar, intended for one; Six years and more were spent in the
College; my speech little mended: I must bend to some course; I must not be as
one that follows crows An passim sequeris Corvos testaque lutoque vita sine
proposito lanquida and vaga est. Ignoranti quem portam petat nullus secundus
est ventus.
with a potgun, or that shoots at Rovers; I must tend to some mark: What may
that be? A Divine, Lawyer, or Physician? I was designed for the first, but too
soon, as others are, that was the great error. A Lawyer? his knowledge is most
excellent, I speak of humane; and a right true Lawyer is a right honest man, as
a great Sage L. Coke second epist.
of the law Reports it, and he has good law and reason for it both. But a
Lawyer sells his Causidicus vendere verba selet. Owen. page 15. l. 22.
words, and they are his current money; I knew mine could find no quick
market. I was fitter for the last of the three, for a sick man likes a silent
Physician, who has skill to cure him, not words to weary him; he is in pain,
words put him to more pain. The truth is, I could think upon no course, but
either to dig or to beg, so I resolved on that, which had most labor and
least shame, to labor with my hands; but that should be in a strange land; and
thither I went twice, wherein, though I labored not with the hand, yet I was
fed. All this while, God took a gracious way with me, if I could have seen it:
even to make me nothing, and to make me know it; but that is a mighty work for
an Almighty hand; and I was framing to it, for I looked upon my self, as upon
the most helpless fellow in the world; My Tongue, I thought, was as the Rudder
to the Ship, which must bring in and carry out all my Commodities, and that was
broken. So I lay like a Ship, that had neither Wind nor Tide; Sedit dum metuat
ne non succedat. I sat still, because I thought it to no purpose to go
forward. How much of my precious sand run out, while my thoughts were
troubled about nothing, or that, which was quite out of my reach! how was I
tossed, like a Ship, in a Storm of my own raising! and (as Seneca says)
though tossed much, I sailed nothing: my fear of success was the Remora, and
hinderance to stay and slugge the Ship from further sailing: it was the great
Arrest and prejudice of further progress or discovery. So while I was seeking
my self (the great sin of the World, selfe-seeking) I lost my self; and
when I would guide my own steps, I fell into a Maze, whence I could find no
issue; and for provision I thought it unpossible, when I thought on my
Wilderness, and I could not but think of it, for in a wilderness I was.

While I was thus moyling, and troubling my self about Gods Charge (so it was)
how I should be fed to morrow, and clothed to morrow, that had sufficient for
the day; The Lord beheld the wrigling of the worm, and forbear to crush it,
notwithstanding my intermedling with His charge (which is to keep and feed his
people) and the neglect of my own, which is to give all faithful diligence;
And so, as in Paul's passage, He brake the Ship, yet brought safe to land; He
crossed my friends designs, and dashed all our projects, and placed me in such
a calling, and in that place, which was least thought of. And in all this,
there was nothing but Grace and goodness; A gracious hand, a good providence,
and now I can track it.

That very instrument has brought in a competency, which I thought impossible
to be; And in such a place has God provided for me, that is of the best note;
whereas, if I could have found the way, I would have crept into a mouse-hole.

That is a happy Infirmity, which makes a man stick and cleave to God; that
depresseth man, no matter how low, so it advances God: An happy weakness
that makes the creature lean, cling, and roll it self upon Him, in Whom is
everlasting strength. There cannot be so much want in Man, as there is help in
God; and help He will, if we can depend and wait upon him; And in the
conclusion we shall see and say, He has done all things well Mark 7. 37. When
we know the power and wisdom of our Physician, we doubt not of his
prescriptions. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis Cap. 17. Hom. 40. o.
. We may read an observable answer, from a grieved mother, to the demand of a
Prophet: It went very ill with her (so to sense,) and with her husband too, for
God had taken away their dear and only child, his breath was newly departed,
and then the father and mother both were sadded to the heart, we may be sure.
And yet when the question was, is it well with thee? with thy husband? with thy
child? She answered, it is well 2 King. 4. 26.
: Well indeed, which God does; For as He made all things very good at the
first; so what He does is very good still. And therefore, though it be not well
(to sense) neither with the Father, nor with the Mother, nor with the Child,
yet (to Faith) it is well, for God has done it, and he does all things well:
And if parents and children can wait in silence and expect with patience, they
shall say, it is very well, and now they shall say as the Mother said, it shall
be well. I speak not this, as if verse 23.
so I had done, so depended, so waited; it is my shame, that I have profited so
little by so fit a correction. But therefore I speak it, that we may learn
under any affliction whatsoever, To wait without weariness; And the more
weary and weak we are, the faster to cling to The Almighty: For weakness with
such a support, shall do and suffer great things, things beyond expression or
imagination (...), etc. Abimelech said well to Isaac, Thou art much mightier
then we, he was indeed, and needs he must be so, for an Almighty Hand went
along with Isaac, hand in hand, in all things, in all places. Nothing is of
more power then he is, who is assisted from above: as Nothing is weaker then is
he who is forsaken of that Almighty help: Chrysostom. in Genesis 26. 16. Hom. 52.
Cant. 8. 5.
: Of such consequence it is; To be Nothing in our selves, All in God; To feel
our own weakness, and in sense thereof to lean the more strongly upon the
Beloved. The instructions, I would give from hence, seasonable for a parent,
and as useful for a Child, are these; First, Let the parent give the Child
his breeding; what ever imperfection lies upon it, yet let the Child be
taught, what it is any way Capable of. Capable, will the Parent say, what can a
poor weak stammering child be taught, or what can he do with his teaching?
This is the common Accent, which Parents put upon their childrens defects; The
child is wanting, the parent will make him more wanting; and he will busy,
and vex himself about Gods charge; and in the mean time neglect his own.
Let the Parent do the work of the day upon the day, and leave the morrow to
God; And let him do it cheerfully and in hope. Camerarius cap. 37.
tells of one, who did write with his feet very exactly, and made his Pen
without his hands, for he had no Arms. He tells us also, in the same Chapter,
of two, a brother and a sister, both deaf and dumb, but strange things of
both: They could hear with their eyes, and speak with their hands: So
solicitous (says my Author Adeo Natura, veluti fidelis matter, compensando
solicita, etc. quod enim in aliquibus sensibus adimit, in aliis restituit. Ibid.
) Nature is to recompense and make up what is wanting, restoring that to one
sense, which it took away from the other: And we know many, who have learned
without their eyes, and have proved no ordinary Proficients, not in the Arts
only, but in the tongues also, wherein the least jot or tittle must be taken
notice of. The ear is that great Instrument of knowledge. A Parent knows not,
whither that quality, which is easily taught, may bring the Child: David's
Harp set him before his King; And we know of what use ordinary qualities have
been to great Scholars, they have supplied their necessities, when the Book
could not: So Ramus tells us, so Alsted. I have heard a Parent say upon
observation of some defects in his Child (whereof many times the Parent is the
worst judge) that his Child is fit for nothing; for nothing? Then make him a
Parson or a Vicar, he is not so wanting, but you may make him either the one or
both. This was the old conceit, and I doubt it is not old enough to die. But we
must be serious, speaking the words of truth and sobriety. If the Child be so
deficient, as the Parent thinks him, fit for nothing, then the rather give him
Instruction; Certainly that will make it good for something. If the Child be
not monstrously deficient, and Gods Image doubly defaced in it (whereat, and in
which glass, the Parent may behold himself, and be greatly humbled at the
sight) some instruction may fit its capacity, and fit it for some employment
in afterward. I know well there are some, whom nature and parts have fixed in
a lower Sphere, as incapable of rising higher, or being greater, as the earth
is of becoming a Star in Heaven. But Nemo reperitur qui sit studio nihil
consecutus. Quint. 1. 1.
yet, where a Parent sees all this wanting, he must not be so far wanting to
the Child, that he suffers Breeding to be wanting to it also: For if so, this
will fall out; That the Child, who could not, for the lowness of Parts, be
framed to do much good service, will frame it self to do none at all, but
the contrary, much hurt; as we see in experience. Suppose then, for so we may,
that a Child be framed by nature, and for Parts but to drive the Cart, or hold
the Plough Natura servus ad stivam natus.
; why yet if he be fit for either of these two employments, (Servill we call
them) before he had strength for that labor, in that empty space of Time
before (for so the Parent makes it) which lies betwixt 6. years and 13. which
runs forth like water, whereof is no use, to waste, the Child might have been
fitted, by good culture and Tillage, to have known the nature of the work he
should afterward be set about, which yields many excellent instructions, no
profession more then Husbandry does, this working in the Earth; It is an
ancient, and it was an honorable Plin. not. Hist. lib. 18. 3. Dr. Hack. Apol.
B. 3. sect. 3.
profession also; (though now Cooks are in more esteem (...). Clem. Alex.
poed. 2. 1 p. 106.
) and the Lord condescended to the capacity of none more, then to the
capacity of the Husbandmen, which sets much upon their score; But for want,
not of nature, or parts, but of this culture Manifestum est non naturam, sed
curam defecisse. Quint. 1. 1.
of the mind, which should fill up the empty space of time before mentioned,
and the mind too, your Husbandmen, many, or the most of them, understand no
more concerning the lessons, which the holding of the Plough, the tearing up of
the ground, the casting in of the seed, the dying in the earth, the growing of
the same, the cutting, the gathering, the housing and threshing thereof; no
more do they understand of all these things, or of the lessons therefrom,
then their Ox or Horse does, whom they follow. And all this, for want of this
culture of the mind, the season being neglected, because the Child was
designed for the field. For my part had I a Child to design thither, to the
Plough I mean, or to the Sea, or to some less stirring trade (in all these
cases or courses of life, learning is neglected, as a thing of no use) I should
as faithfully (for it were my duty) bestow upon him the culture and manurance
of his mind first, and as readily I should do it, and I should think to very
good ends, as another Parent would do, that had designed his to the College.

The purpose then I tend unto, and that I would conclude from hence, is, but
this, What ever is wanting to the Child, Let not education or instruction be
Wanting (...), etc. Clem. Alex. stro. 1. p. 209. Children, who have been no
way apt by Nature, have been made Apt by education. And they who have been
very Apt by Nature, to good, have proved very bad, by neglect and carelesnes.
Translated out of the same Author, the following page. 210.
. Fill up this empty space, which commonly Parents make so, with some
seasonable instructions: And the more unfit and unapt the Child is, the more
the Parents care and pains must be. Nor must the Parent be hartlesse in the
business, but, as the Husbandman, (their work is like, sometime they meet
with hard and stony places, which by good culture they make fruitful) he must
labor in hope. And how unserviceable soever the Child seem to be, yet He,
that had need of an Ass, can make use of him; whereto, though the Parent
cannot design him, yet his Lord can. I remember that Noble Scholar Morneus
tells us, That his Maid, would sweep out of his study, and into the
Dust-basket, such little pieces, as he could make very good use of, and could
not spare; so by his appointment, in She brought them again; wherein he taught
both the Maid and us not to despise Small things: there may be, for ought we
know, a blessing in them; nor neglect the poorest, weakest creatures; What know
we, what the Great God intends them for. Let the Parent do his Duty: He shall
find great satisfaction therein, in giving his utmost care and pains. A Pilot
(says Quintil.) has a satisfying plea, though his ship miscarry, that he was
watchful at the Stern, and employed his best care and skill there: If Parts
be wanting and Grace too (a Commodity the Parent cannot stow in the Child,
yet he must be lading it as he can) yet the Parent has this comfort, in case
of miscarriage, That he he has steered his course according to the Rules of
Right Reason, and by the Compass of Gods Word.

In case of defects and wants in the Child; we Potsheard strive with the
Potsheards of the earth. What weakness or imperfection there is, we must think
it good, because the Lord sees it best. As we must not question His power, no
not in a wilderness, so not His work, because, if it be deformed, sin has
done it. The work must not say to the workman, why have thou made me so? God
made us well, we unmade our selves. Sin causes this double decay of Gods
Image, on us.

We may note this with it; That a good man may have a bad house, yet the man
never the worse: And a good wit, and a good mind both (though it is none of
the best signs Natura ubi peccat in uno, periclitatur in al^^ro.
) may have a bad dwelling: And if so, we must comfort our selves in this; That
God can supply the want of eyes, hands, feet; He can give some inward special
gift, which will countervaile that want, what ever it be: The want of the
outward-eye shall intend the mind, perhaps further the inward and more noble
light; and so in the rest. It may be also, if those had been open, they had
been guides to much evil, and the hands as active that way, and the feet as
swift, which now are maimed or imperfect.

And as we must learn to submit unto Him, not questioning His work; so also
to depend upon Him, not questioning His power; no, not in a wilderness. An
happy weakness, as before was said, that puts us off from our own bottom,
and rooteth us on God, Who can provide there and then, when man is at a stand.
The less likelihood in the creature, the greater should be the creatures
trust. The Lord many times crosses the stream and course of means, to show
his own Sovereignty, and to exercise our dependence. He sets aside more
likely and able means, and blesses weak means to great purpose. Things or
instruments, by which God will work, may have very mean appearance, as
worthless they may be in show, as a dry Exodus 7. 17.
stick, an Oxes Judge. 15 16.
goad, or the jaw bone Judge. 3. 31.
of an Ass, yet of singular efficacy, when God will be pleased to work by
them, Who (as one says Maxima e miaimis suspendens. Adv. 132. and 112.
) does hang the greatest weights upon the smallest wyars: which may teach us a
patient submission unto Him, and a quiet dependence on Him. The sum is, and
our lesson; If the Child have great parts (signs thereof there may be) be
greatly thankful; but boast not of thy self, nor Child, as many do (a
commodity quickly changed, as a forward Spring is quickly blasted.) If the
Child have weak parts, be thankful too, and rest content; Crave wisdom the
rather to improve them, to make them stronger, as too few do; but so we should
do, and it is all we can do, when we have spread our selves and our Child,
as the King the letter, before the Lord.

3. The Parent must forbear, and forbid all reproachful scorning words; they
are too ordinary from Masters, servants and others, yea and from Parents too,
in case the Child have any noted imperfection, or uncomelinesse. There must be
great care taken here. Vilifying words hurt much and sad the spirits. As we are
taught touching the Parts of our body, so touching our Child (I suppose it to
be infirm and defective) The more deformity and uncomelinesse it has, the
more weakness of parts; the more honor and encouragement let it have; for, we
shall find the poor Child apt to discouragement. A Parent must see to it
also, that his weak Child be not slighted, by his Brothers or Sisters, which
is too ordinary. How deep soever Children are in our affections, and one
deeper then the other, yet is it a point of discretion to balance Non debent
fratres lancium instar, etc. Plut. defrater: Amore.
them outwardly, as even as possibly may be. One must not be like a scale, at
the top, another at the bottom. He that is apt, nimble and ready, must not
have all the encouragement, and he that is heavy and dull, none at all. Nay, a
Parent must look to it that his weak Child (so I suppose the case) has in
praise and commendation, above his merit and proportion; He must employ him
sometimes and commend Rogetur and laudetur: saepius vincere se putet. Quint. 1.
1.
him too, in such things, whereof, perhaps, the Child cannot skill at all. We
must deal with our Children, as with our fingers (it is Plutarchs De fraterno
Amore. p. 360.
comparison, and he says, it makes much, for maintaining the bonds of love
betwixt brethren) at writing, and at our music, whether of voice or
instrument; so likewise in other employments, we bring all five fingers. All
do help, and the very least finger comes in with its grace, and has its
share, as well as the foremost, though it has not the like strength, nor can it
add much to the furthering the work: Just so with Children; and then we have
the scope of the similitude, which tends but to this; That we use all
gentleness toward the weak Child, and that we give it no discouragement,
but praise and encouragement rather above its proportion. This is the third
lesson.

We have observed both from former and latter experiences; That Parents and
Children both, are great troublers of themselves, because great projectours,
and able well enough, they think, to guide their own course. He that will
tell his observation must say thus; That Parents do ordinarily design their
Children, being yet young, (whereof more in a fitter place) one to this
profession, and another to that; The third and youngest (the weakest also both
for Nature and parts) to the Ministry, as if it were as easy a matter to make
the Child a Minister (I speak in the Parents Dialect) as to teach him the art
of cobling shoes. But so he has designed them, and accordingly projects for
them, and ordinarily as cross, as he ordered his Dinner, who put his pottage
into a Sieve, and his bread into a platter: not according to their nature and
ingeny, which must be looked unto; but as the Parents purse is, and the way
toward preferment leads. The Child also will be but little behind the
Parent, short spirited and all for the present, He has been drawing Maps of
his desires, and has calculated his own inclination, and sees his fitness
for that condition of life, his Parent has cut him out, and designed him unto:
And if all things were as ready, as the Child thinks himself; if the place,
whereof the Parent has the Advousion, were but vacant, that he might step in,
how well he could fit it, and discharge it also in his conceit? Such bubbles
these young folk are, specially if they have tasted of the Arts, and are put
into good Clothes; then they think all things else are answerable to the vanity
of their minds, which fills them, and pleases them, making them think of
themselves, above that which is meet; That they are some great ones Act. 8. 9.
.

This is the folly, which we may too ordinarily observe both in the Parent and
the Child, both imitating Children: For what else are these things which they
have fained to themselves, and drawn such fair pleasing Maps of, but like
clay-castles, and Pies, which Children have set up now, and will down anon?
And yet about these follies, these windy speculations, does the Parent, perhaps
the Child too, pierce himself with many dividing, distracting, cares; And all
this (...).
disquieting in vain, is, because they think, they are able to order their own
steps, to cut their own course. Note we this then, for this is the lesson. 4.
He that sits in the Heaven, and whose eyes run through the earth, He it is,
Who is the great Pilot, Who steers our course through the Sea of this World:
And though we think least of Him, because we think our selves wise enough and
Something, yet when we have thought all we can think, and wearied our selves
out with thoughts, and tumbled about the batches, yet our course must be, as
He, that sits at the Stern, will have it. And assuredly they that can look up
to that Hand (not slacking their endeavors, nor letting their hands hang down
Descriptio hominis inertis and animum despondentis. Jun. Heb. 12. 12. If we can
be patient, God will be profitable: but the Times and means we must leave to
Him, not challenge to our selves. Felth. Res. 60. p. 186.
) they, who can quietly resign themselves to that all disposing eye, they
shall at the end arrive, if not where they desired, yet where they shall say is
best for them. For He only knows His compass, and will steer such a course,
as shall be best for the Parent, and Child both, if they can expect, and wait
the Lords time and Answer. And for the better staying the Parent from making
haste, and persuading with him to pluck down these high and vain thoughts,
like Castles in the Air without any foundation, wherewith he troubles and
disquieteth himself in vain, touching his Child, Let him take these
Directions, which are brought to my hand touching this point.

1. We, who are Parents, must take special care about our General Calling,
how we answer that great and honorable name, which is called upon us, so
likewise for our Children. Thoughts hereof must busy us: And herein we should
remember this rule; Christianity is a matter rather of Grace then of Gifts; of
Obedience then of Parts. Gifts, may come from a more common work of the spirit;
and more for others then our selves: Grace comes from a peculiar favor of God,
and specially for our own good. And so if the Parent direct the Child also,
he shall teach it a Trade, which is surer then house or Land.

2. For a particular Calling, we must be very wary, as in behalf of our
selves, so of our Children, That we walk not above the parts and Graces we see
in them, for then we shall put them into another condition, then ever God
ordained them for: The issue whereof will be discouragement in themselves, and
disgrace from others. As a warranted Calling, warranted, I mean, by the Word
of God (where of in a fitter place) is no small warrant for comfort: so the
fitness of our parts for this Calling, what ever it be, is the best warrant
that any man has, that he is Called thereunto. And he must remember, That no
Calling is so mean, but a man may find enough to give account for: And mean
though it be, yet faithfulness will commend a person in the lowest condition
of life; And unfaithfulness will pour contempt upon the height of Dignity, as
a spewing upon that Glory. Our Master in Heaven, regards not how high a man is,
but how faithful he is God has given thy Brother a great gift, to thee a
little one: He has proportioned the work accordingly and so spares thee.
Bless His Name therefore, and be faithful in thy little, so may thou
receive a great Reward. His great and thy little came out of the same Treasury,
and was dispensed by the same Hand. Do not call God to an account, why He gave
thee little and thy Brother much: but labor thou to be accountable for thy
Measure. Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 12. Hom. 29.
.

The maine work then of a Parent with his Child at this point, is, to take a
right Scale and measure of his Childs parts, and so answerably to fit it with
a fit Calling. The Parent must labor by all means to hide Pride from the
Child, I mean, The Parent must beat it off from vainglory and self-conceit
(young folk have the best opinion of themselves, because they discern
themselves worst) and to shake it off from sloth, that Moth and Canker of our
Parts. The one (Pride) will make the man and Child both, to lay open their
weaknesses; The other (Sloth) will make them not to know Qui se nescit, uli se
nescit.
their strength, or not to put it forth.

And let the Parent, having done his endeavor, comfort himself with this,
That how weak or unserviceable soever his Child seems to be (if not doubly
deformed) in respect of his parts; yet, there is no member, but it is fitted
with some abilities to do some service in the body, and by good nurture, and
manurance, may grow up to a greater measure. And let him consider this with it;
That, as in the body natural, the most exalted part, the Head, has need of
the lowest, the foot: so there is not the greatest person, but may have use,
both of the parts and graces of the meanest in the Church. I say more, though I
may not say, The head more needs the foot, then the foot the head: nor will I
say, though so it is concluded (...). Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 13. Hom. 34. Aristop.
(...). Act. ^. Sc. 5.
, That the poor man, who is as the foot, does not so much need the Rich, who
is as the head, as the rich man needs the poor man; for who needs more, or who
less, that is not the point: but one needs the other, that is certain: Nay,
one cannot be without the other. And this, that the poor man may not be too
much cast down, nor the rich overmuch exalted, but that the one and the other
may glorysie Him, that has so disposed them, so as in the body there should be
no lack.

But now in the last place, for maintenance for the Child, how he shall live
hereafter: The thoughts whereof so take up and tire out the Parents thoughts,
so stuffs his heart, and disquiets his Rest and peace: For this is the great
enquiry, who will show us any good? Where is this preferment to be had? How
shall I make my Child rich and high in the World? Where shall I find a place
where he may have great wages and little work? This is the great enquiry: All
the Parents Travels hither and thither is but to make discovery of this point,
where this fortunate Island is, where is gold, and there he would land his
Child; and no other reason can he give of all his dangerous adventures, but
this (and this carries him, and dasheth him upon rocks also) because the gold
of that Land is good. This is the sore Travel and one of the great evils under
the Sun; And a folly it is exceeding that of the simplest Idiot in the World,
for it is, as if the Parent should lay out all his whole stock of wealth and
wit, to purchase and furnish a Chamber for his Child, in a Through fare, and
provide it no house in the City, where it is forever to dwell. I cannot take
off this veil of false What madness is it to spend all our labor to possess
our selves of the Cislerne, when the fountain is offered unto us? S. C. p. 642.
opinion; But assuredly, if we would follow the counsel of the wise, we might
shorten our sore Travel at this point, and make our way to Comfort more
compendious. The Counsel is this; Our S. C. p. 249.
care must be to know our work (touching our selves, touching ours) and then to
do it; and so to do it, as unto God, with conscience of moderate diligence,
for over-doing, and overworking any thing, comes either from oftentation, or
distruct in God: And negligence is so S. Con. ^49.
far from getting any blessing, that it brings us under a curse. That which
belongs to us in our calling, is care of discharging our duty: That, which God
takes upon him, is Assistance, and good success in it. Let us look to our
work, and leave God to do His own. Diligence and Trust in Him is only ours,
the rest of the burden is His Let us make good our ends, and the means we
use, and God will make good the issue, and turn all to the best. Dr. Feat. p.
103. We must part our care so, as to take upon us, only this care of Duty, and
leave the rest to God. S. Con. 85.
. In a Family the Fathers and the Mothers care is the greatest; The Childs
care is only to obey, and the servants to do his work; Care of Provision and
Protection does not trouble them. Most of our disquietnesse in our Calling, is,
that we trouble our selves about Gods work, whereas we should Trust God and be
doing, in fitting the Child, and let God alone with the rest. He stands upon
His credit so much, that it shall appear we have not trusted Him in vain,
even when we see no appearance of doing any good, when we cannot discern by
all our spialls, the least show either for provision, or Protection. We
remember who were very solicitous for their Children, and because they could
not provide for them, nor protect them neither, therefore perish they must in
the wilderness: We must remember also; That the Lord took care of those
Children, and destroyed those distrustful parents, who thought there was no
path in a wilderness because they could not discern any: nor meat to be had
there, because their hand was too short to provide it. It is dangerous
questioning the power of God in the greatest strait. If He bring any person
into a wilderness, it is because He may show His power there for provision and
protection both. God works most wonderfully for, and speaks the sweetest
comfort to the heart, in a wilderness.

Note we this then, and so I conclude. There is much uncertainty in the
Certainty of man, and all Certainty in the uncertainty of God: I term it so,
by allowance of the Spirit 1 Cor. 1. 25.
in respect of man's apprehension. There is no uncertainty in God, but all
Certainty, as in Him is all Wisdom, all Strength: We apprehend that there is a
Certainty in man and an Uncertainty in God, for, if we observe our hearts, we
Trust Him least; but that is our Foolishness and Weakness. There is all
uncertainty in men, even in the best of men, in Princes, place no Certainty
there: There is all Certainty in God, as in Him is all Wisdom and Strength;
put we confidence there; Cast we Anchor upwards, Commit we all (but in
well-doing) all we have, and all we are, into his everlasting Arms, Then
assuredly, we shall find a stay for our selves, and a portion for ours,
Provision and Protection both: He is all to us, and will be so, when we are
nothing in our selves.

And so much touching my Wilderness, and Gods providing for me even there,
though I tempted him ten times. I call it a wilderness; for so I may, because
so, my foolishness in my wayfare made it: And Gods provision for me was very
remarkable, and therefore to be remembered for the Parents sake and Childrens
too; of great use and concernment to both. Indeed, he that can say no more of
his Travels, but that he passed through a Wilderness, has said little to
commend his Pilgrimage, but much to magnify the power of That Hand, whereby he
had a safe Convoy through the same. It is a poor and worthless life, such
mine is, that has nothing worthy to be remembered in it, but its Infirmities:
But yet there is nothing so magnifies Gods power 2 Cor. 12. 9.
as man's weakness does. When I shall give account of my life, and cast up the
sum thereof (says Iunius Miserationes Domininarrabo, quumrationes narrabo
miserae vitae meae, ut glorificetur dominus in me, qui fecit me. vita Junii.
affix. Oper. Theol.
, and so he begins) I shall tell of the mercies of the Lord, and His loving
kindness to me ward: And then he goes on reckoning up the infirmities of his
body, some of his mind too: but that he puts a Mark upon, is, what extremity
he was in at Geneva, and how graciously the Lord disposed thereof, for that was
remarkable indeed. Beza also spares not to tell us, nay he fills his mouth
with it, how troublesome the Itch was to him (not so easily cured then Deuteronomy.
28. 29.
as now) and what a desperate way the Smart the Chyrurgeon put him to, and bad
Counsel put him upon; Such it was, that there was but a step betwixt him and
death; but God wonderfully put to His Hand, inter Pontem and fontem. Beza could
not but confess that Mercy as we find it in his Epistle before his
Confessions. And so far, That the Parent and Child both may learn to
account Gods works, and, if it might be, to call His mercies by their names,
and to rest upon Gods providence, as the surest inheritance.

Now I come to give the reason of my pains, in all this which follows, and
what ingageth a Parent unto this Duty.

1. I considered my years declining apace: When the Sun is passed the
Meridian, and turned toward its place where it must set, then we know, the
night approaches, when man, ceasing from his work, lies down in the Dark. It
is the Wisemans Counsel Eccles. 9. 10.
, and it is his wisdom, to do that, which is in his hand, with all his might
Prima Actionum Argo Committenda sunt, extrema Briareo. de Aug. l. 6. 41.
, before he goes hence; for there is no working in the grave. The putting off
this Day, and the next, and half a day, cost the poor Levite and his
Concubine very deer, as we read, Judge. 19. And it teaches us in our affairs,
concerning our selves, or ours, in setting our house in order, That, it is
dangerous triflng away the Daylight. I cannot say with Isaac, I am old, or
mine eye is dim; but I must say, in the following words, I know not the day
of my Death. God may spare me among mine, yet longer; for my building is not so
old, but it may stand. And yet so unsound the foundation is, (for it is of
Clay) it may sink quickly, as my good Father before me: I may lie down, turn
to the Wall, and to the earth, all at once; though yet I have scarcely felt,
and so also my Father before me, the least distemper.

If this consideration come home and proves seasonable, I shall then set all in
a readiness, and in order, that when Death comes, I may have then, no more to
do, but to welcome it, and shut the eye, and depart tanquam Conviva Satur, as
one that has made an improvement of life, and has hope in Death. That was my
first consideration.

2. I considered my Children, all three young, the eldest but peeping into the
World, discerning little: the second, but newly out of the arms, the youngest
not out of the Cradle. I considered also, they are not so much mine as the
Lords, Whom thou have borne unto me, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 20. And
therefore in all reasonable Construction, to be returned back again unto Him,
by a well ordered education, as himself has appointed. These thoughts so
overruled me at length (for I am not easily drawn to take my Pen in hand) and
prevailed with me to pen some instructions, which might treat with them at more
years, and tell them their Parents Will concerning them, in case either he or
she should be taken from them, before they were grown up: It is but a dead
letter, yet somewhat it may work, through Him, That works all things, being
as I said, the Parents last Will and Testament concerning the Child. My Will
otherwise, is almost as quickly made, as Luthers was, wherein he could commend
nothing to Wife, and three Children but Gods blessing and Melch. Adam vita
Luth. ^. 134.
protection. And that is a rich legacy indeed, a mighty portion; but it is not
transmitted from the Parent to the Child: This portion, the Parent cannot
bequeath, the Child cannot receive; And yet the Parent and Child must intend
this, above all things, even the committing all unto God, and expecting all
from Him, so as to say, and to say heartily, Thou art my Portion, says my
soul. Thou art a God in covenant with us, with ours: our God, and the God of
our seed. Children I have, for thou have given them me. They are Thine, more
then mine: I was a means to bring them into the World, and by Thy appointment,
to be as a Nurse unto them, here. They are thy Charge for provision and
protection. I beseech Thee, Answer this Trust, now specially, when, it is Thy
pleasure so, that I can take no care of them my self; Thou slumbrest not, Thou
dyest not, I must. So Luther teaches us to draw our will, and so another as
precious, has put it into See Dr. Sibs. P. 647. S. C.
form. And we are sure, the Lawyer can find no flaw here, There is no error
in the Draught.

And though this may make the Parent rest secure, for he has chosen a
faithful Over-seer, or Executor of his will, yet it must not make him
careless and negligent.

I have, according to my rule, and Gods gracious supply, layed-up for my
Children, though very little, in comparison of what some may think, I might
have done, considering my time of gathering; yet something it is, and I wonder,
that little is so much. A little riches are hardly got, a great deal easily
Essays. Facilis ad divitias via quo die poenituerit bonae mentis. Sen. not.
Quest. lib. 4. cap. 1.
; It is the Lord Ver. Riddle, but easily read. He that is in employment, and
lives as a parcel of the World cut off from Lucullus Caenat cum Lucullo.
others, Nemini fructuosa. Trem. Hos. 10. 1.
bearing fruit to himself, and Indulgeas. Psalm. 49. 18. Trem.
making much of himself, such a one may lay up more, then his heir shall have
cause to joy in. They, who know me well, will say, I was not the worst husband
of my time or purse: I disposed of both so, as one, who was not wholly
ignorant, that I must be accountable to God for both.

I had no Friar-like contempt of outward things, nor could I much esteem them,
though perhaps too much, for the more we have of them, the more our Cares; and
the more we love them, the more our sorrow will be Quo plus amas plas dolebis.
, when we must leave them, or they us. Too little pincheth, too much ensnareth,
the mean betwixt both, is the safest proportion In rebus necessariis est
salus, in supersluis laqueus, etc. Salv. de Eccles. Cathol. lib. 2. p. 404.
Lege Isi^. pelus. lib. 2 ep. 146.
.

They that are in a depending Condition, waiting upon God for their daily
bread, having neither Barnes, nor Coffers, nor Cupboards to go unto, as some
such there are, they can speak of Gods provision for them, His strange ways
to bring things about, when they knew not which way to turn; and they can
trust perfectly: whereas they who have all the forementioned full stored, do
pray for their daily bread, but trust themselves, and Sacrifice to their own
nets. God will provide, is more to a faithful heart, then all the treasure in
the World, for that provision comes forth of a Treasury, that will never be
exhausted. It is good to be at Gods finding, and to wait upon him, which we
cannot do, but by using all diligence in our lawful Callings. And this I
mention here, That we may not, neither the Parent, nor the Child spend our
strength, as usually we do, even all our stock of time and parts, in seeking
great things; Call them by what name we will, Honors, Preferments, etc. and
hasten we after them, as fast as we can; They that spoke, as they were inspired
by the Holy Ghost, do tell us, under the metaphor, whereby they use to set out
the nature of all things under the Sun, That, what we so hastily run after,
runs away as fast from (...) Jam. 3. 6. 1 John 2. 16.
us. And the Wiseman Prove. 23. 5.
gives this censure of them; They are nothing, or presently, they will be, as
if they had not been. We cannot say properly, That Riches, Are See Hist. of
the World. B. 2. C. 3. Sect. 4.
, for now they are and straightway they are not. It is but a man's own and
earthly wisdom, that makes him think better of them, then indeed they are;
for they are Nothing, and he is of no account, who makes account of nothing
Nihil est, qui nihil amat. Plaut. pers.
. Cease from thine own wisdom; Will thou let thine eyes fly (with such
greediness) upon that which is nothing? Nothing? Are Riches nothing? Rather a
man is nothing without them, or nothing accounted of; he lives in obscurity,
which is the Death of his name and Parts, and burieth a man alive, as one says
Dr. Featley.
. And so it is indeed, and hence such struggling after riches, as for life,
there being in humane nature more of the fool then of the wise. It is then but
the fruit of our own wisdom, which must be Ceased from: If we stay a little,
we shall see plainly Riches are not: For when a man is brought to a straight,
and that may be before next morning; and when these should prove something, and
come in for his help, then they are not: They are as far from his help, as
an Eagle soaring in the Air, out of his reach: They were in the eye but now,
and now again they are Passed, as some Rocks, Steeples, or Castles on a
Pageant, and the heart is empty, more unsatisfied then the eye with seeing.

I might remember here, and it might be to great purpose, even to take us off
from our eager pursuit after the World, That they, who were the greatest
purchasers of Land, of any we read of, could hardly by their Executors,
purchase so much earth, as to interre their bodies in, witness Alexander V.
Patercul.
and Pompey, both great, and the richest in Land: And William the Conqueror,
who, of all He killed one man after he was dead with the stench of his Brains.
S. I. H.
he attained to by his sword, after Death, had not a room to contain his
Corpse in, without being purchased at the hand of another; Men esteeming a
living Dog, more then a dead Lion, says Sam. Dan. I might remember also, how
Philip the Second of Spain lessoned the Prince his son, when he thought of a
great Treasure spent, and when his own spirits were spent also; And how
Charles Grimst. Hist. of the Netherl.
the Father in the Waine of his greatness, left alone, and carrying the Candle
before his Ambassador, instructed the same Ambassador; The instruction
Medull. Hist. prophanae. p. 899
is but short; Go speak of what thou have seen me do, who had so many
Princes waiting on me, and learn the state of humane things.

The sum of all rises to this; Those things, which we so greedily graspe
after, and lay out our precious stock of time and wit upon, are no enduring
Substance; But yet that is not the worst; They are passed and gone, and many
times there remains but Sighs behind, when a man remembers the getting and
expending of them, that he was unrighteous in both. But take them at the best,
They cannot keep the heart from trembling, or the knees from smiting one
against another. All outward strength cannot keep out, shall I say an
Armed-man; nay, not a silly frog out of the Chamber, where the God of Hosts
will bid it go. The greatest Pomp cannot prevent a Consumption by the basest
Vermin; of which truth, Pharaoh, Herod, more lately Philip of Spain, before
mentioned, and others nearer home, are very great Examples. The serious
consideration whereof, may prevent the bewitching of profit, the great
Enchantresse of Mankind; so as we shall not be ensnared by deceitful riches,
which make us believe that they can satisfy, and stay the heart in the day of
wrath, whereas they are no strong Wall Prove 11. 4.
, but only in a man's own conceit. But righteousness delivers from death.
Chap. 18. 10, 11.
. All things are nothing without this, This is all without them: Therein is the
substance, the Kernel, the quintessence of all. The 1 John. 2. 16.
World passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of God
abides for ever; fast, like mount Sion, an everlasting foundation. Godliness
1 Timothy 6. 6. and 48. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis 48. Hom. 66. o.
is great gain, it is profitable for all things, having the promise of the
life that now is, and of the life that is to come. And therefore if the Parent
had but one request to put up for the Child it should be, That the Lord would
be its portion, That He would bless him indeed, for whom He blesses are
blessed 1 Chronicles. 4. 10.
: And if he had but one instruction, it should be, for the getting the
principal thing: Get Wisdom, and withal thy getting, get understanding
Prove. 4. 7.
.

The last Consideration contains in it the very pith of reason and equity,
and mightily engages the Parent to give All diligence at this point touching
the good Nurture of his Child; when I have cleared so much, I have done.

3. A Child is the Parents Image right; A branch from a sinful stock; An
offspring from a corrupted fountain: The Parent is the Channel, which
conveyeth unto it Sin and Death. This is that hereditary evil, which is
truly and really stated, and feoffed upon every Child of Adam: But if we will
see the first original of the conveyance, we must descend as low as Adam, who
was the son of God; made (as every thing else) very good, with this
excellency and prerogative royal above other things, in Gods Image, that is,
in Holiness and righteousness: But being in this honor, he understood not,
but sought out many inventions Eccles. 7. 29.
; that is, They would find out something beyond God, and so (for it was not
possible to be otherwise) they found out their own finddings, Sin and
Sorrow. They reached forth their hand unto the forbidden fruit, and did eat,
so they fell from their steadfastness and glory. Then they knew both good and
evil; Good, if they had obeyed; Evil, that they obeyed not. Now they had
experience and feeling of their good they lost, and the evil they brought upon
themselves.

Thus sin entered into the World, and by sin death; that is, more evils and
weightier then we can think them: For we must note, That the Actual sin of
Adam determined not the bound of Misery; but brought a second Misery with it,
the Misery of our whole Nature. While Adam stood, we stood in him, his
obedience kept his whole estate and Nature entire: But when he fell, we fell in
him; for, though the sin were a limited thing in act of eating; yet, it was
an unlimited excess in respect of the Committer, and the frame of his
revolting heart; and therefore it was just with God to plague his whole Nature
for that sinful Act. So then; The same hand, that was reached forth to this
fruit, reached it also to the fruit of their loins, wherein that fruit was,
seminally, as branches in a common stock. And thus the Childrens teeth were set
on edge; so the next verse tells us; And Adam begat a son in his own
likeness, his own indeed; that is, With that generation, Sin was also
derived: for he begat now not the Body only, but a Man in his receptivenesse
of the soul, and in those bands and ties, which knit body and soul, to wit,
these spirits of reasonable Nature; and by the infection of these spirits, the
soul is also corrupted.

We cannot with sobriety enquire further into this thing. I know the dispute
(how this sin is propagated from the Father to the Child) is very large; But
we may say of it, as the Philosopher of that Dispute, touching that supposed
void place, It is an empty and vain Dispute (...). Arist. phys. de vacuo.
, void of use, and to none effect. It was a wise and seasonable reproof,
which a Mariner, in a dangerous tempest, gave to the Philosopher troubling him
with a Dispute touching the Winds, We (...). Aul. Gell. lib. 1. cap. 2. o.
are at the point of sinking, and you trifle out the time with a vain
discourse. Enquiries touching this point have blotted much Paper, and spent
much precious Time, and all to little purpose; for so we give time to a growing
mischief. It is as if, while the fire rages on the sides and tops of houses,
a man should hold his hand, and moove his tongue, not join force to quench it;
but only, ask, how it begun, where and when? It was a good answer to one,
who would know, by what Chinke sin entered into the Child? Hist. of the
Couns. of Trent. l. 2. p. 174.
That Chinks were not to be sought, where a gate stood wide open. The Apostle
says, That by Adam sin entered into the world. It suffices to know; That
God, by just imputation, realizeth the infection into the whole race of Adam;
in whom we were as in a common Lump, and in his leaven sowred: In his Loins
we were, and there we sinned, and so did partake of his guilt, which like a
common infection, worse then a leprosy, we took from our Parents, and
transmitted it to our Children: a Seed of evil doers; So we sprang up, as the
seed does with stalk and husk, though the fan made the same difference,
betwixt the wheat in the heap, and the other fitted for the seed, as grace
does betwixt the Parent and the Child: Though the Parent be accepted in the
righteous one, and his sin covered, the guilt remitted, yet sin and guilt
are transmitted to the Child.

Hereby the Parents see matter of great humiliation Book page 32
; they feel a tie also, and an engagement upon them to do their utmost to
prevent the evil, whereof they have been a Channel of conveyance unto their
Child. It is their Image, They its debtors: It is very equal, and a point not
so much of mercy, as of justice, That we should (for I am a Parent too) labor
by all means, and take all occasions, whereby, through Gods blessing, our own
and bad image may be defaced; and the New, which is after Christ, formed on,
and in the Child. This is that we should endeavor with all our might, giving
All diligence: It is an heavy and grievous judgment which we read threatened
against Parents and Children, I will recompense your iniquities, and the
iniquities of your fathers together Esa. 65. 7.
: That is; Because the Fathers have committed an abomination, and ye their
Children have done according to the same abomination, therefore the wickedness
of the wicked shall be upon him Ezech. 18. 20.
: I will lay your sins together as upon heaps, visiting you both Children
and Fathers in your heaps of sin. O pray we, in our prayer pray (...). James
5. 17.
, wrestling and weeping, pray we earnestly Hosea 12. 3. 4.
, Remember not against us former iniquities Psalm. 79. 8.
: Recompense not our iniquities, and the iniquities of our Children together,
nor measure out unto us our old Work into our bosom. This Mercy we should
pray so for, and long-after, even from the heart-root we should long. For if
the curse was heavy and sore, which we read of, Psalm. 109. 14. then is the
mercy great, and greatly to be sought after from the Lord; Let not the
iniquity of the Father be remembered with the Lord against the Child; and let
the sin of the Mother be blotted out. Whenever the Lord visits the Child
for Sin, certainly it should call the sin of the Parent to remembrance 1
King. 17. 18.
; and so it will do, if the conscience be not asleep, or seared: Then he will
discern, that there was a great, and weighty reason, that made the Woman of
Canaan thus to petition Christ Matt. 15. 22.
: Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil: She counted the Childs vexation hers, so would she, the
mercy. We have filled our Childrens bones with sin, which will fill their
hearts with sorrow; It is our engagement to do all we can, though that All be
two little, to root that sin out, which we have been a means to root so
fast in. I shall in another place, the Second Part Chap. 2.
, speak more unto this root of bitterness, and the fruits springing thence,
whereby all are defiled: Here I have only pointed unto it, as it engages the
Parent upon this so necessary, and principal a service touching the good
culture, and breeding of the Child: And we see what an engagement it is, the
greatest and strongest, that can be thought of. And so much as an Induction to
Duty, what this Duty is, comes now to be handled.

A CHILDS PATRIMONY. Laid out upon the good Culture or tilling over his whole
man.
CHAP. I.
Wherein the Parents duty does consist, and when it begins. Of Infancy.

A Parents duty begins where the child had its beginning, at the womb. There
the Parents shall find that, which must busy their thoughts about it, before
they can employ their hands. And this work lies specially, in considering Gods
work upon the child; and how their sin has defaced the same First, they
consider Gods work, and the operation of His hands, how wonderful it is, and
how curiously wrought in the secret parts of the earth (so the Prophet calls
the Womb; because Psalm. 137.
curious pieces are first wrought privately, then being perfected, are exposed
to open view). It was He, that made the bones to grow, we know not how, then
clothed them with flesh; He, that in the appointed time, brought it to
Deformity, where ever we see it, admits of nothing but our Pity and our
Praise.

2. Thus they see Gods handy-worke, and it is wonderful in their eyes; but
still they see their own Image also, and cause enough to bewail the
uncleanness of their Birth. What the Pharisees once spoke of him, whose eyes
Christ had opened, is true of every mothers Child; Thou wast altogether borne
in sins; which should Joh. 9. 34.
make every Parent to cry out, as that mother did; Have mercy on me, O Lord,
thou son of David; my Child is naturally Matthew. 15. 22.
the child of wrath; Except it be borne again of water and of the spirit, it
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Joh. 3.
The Parents see evidently now, that they are the channel conveying death unto
the child. The mother is separated for some time, that she may set her
thoughts apart, and fix them here: The father is in the same bond with her,
and in this we may not separate them. God has made promise to restore this
lost Image, this, not took, but throwne-away integrity: And this now their
thoughts run upon, and they pray; That the Lord would open their mouths wide,
and enlarge their hearts toward this so great a Mystery. They have a fruit of
an old stock, it must be transplanted, and out they carry it, and into the
Church they bear it; as out of old Adam, whence was transmitted to it sin
and death, into the second Adam, whence it may receive Righteousness and Life.
Then at the fountain they hold it, blessing God, Who has opened it for sin,
and for Uncleanness; And there they present it, not to the sign of the
Cross, but to Blood, Sacramentally there; that is, Righteousness purchased by
the death of Christ, and now on Gods part appropriated, and made the childs.
And the Parents bless His name, and exalt His mercy, who has said, at such a
time, as this, Live, Who has found out Ezekiel. 16. 6.
a Rausome to answer such a guilt; A righteousness to cover such a sin, so
big and so fruitful; A life to swallow up such a death, with all its issues.

This the Parent sees in this poor element Water, appointed by God, set apart,
fitted and sanctified for this end. With it the child is sprinkled, and for it
the Parent believes and promises. Then home again they carry it, It is a
solemn time, and to be remembered; and the vain pomp takes not up much time,
where wiser thoughts, from truer judgment, take place. Friends may come, and a
decency must be, to our place suitable; but the Pageant like carriage of this
solemn business by some, speaks out plainly, (...), A fancy. Act. 25. 23.
, that the heart is not right, nor is that vain pomp forsaken, which yet is
now upon their lips to say. They, who have better learned Christ, do better
understand the nature and solemnity of the action, they are about; so their
great business is with God, before whom they spread themselves, and their
child; Who can work by means, as secret, as is the way of the spirit; and
can set this water closer to the soul, then He has set its bones; which yet
no man understands, nor can tell when or how. To Him they offer it, before
Him they lay it, praying, That this water may ever lie upon the heart of
theirs, as a fruitful seed, quickening, renewing, sanctifying. That that water
may, as the Rock, ever 1 Cor. 10. 4.
follow the child. The rock removed not, but the waters, there-out followed
them: so the Parents pray, That this water may ever follow the child, as a
fresh spring, still Chapter 1. sect. 3.
quickening, washing, refreshing, until the day of refreshing shall come. This
is their duty now, and this is all they can do (beside the tending of it); and
this their duty, and their life must end together. Now the child lies at the
mothers breast, or in the lap, she is the nurse without question, or so she
should be, though it is a resolved case, that in some cases, she cannot, and in
some she may not; mercy must be regarded before this sacrifice. But look we
still, That mercy be not the pretense and ease the thing, that is pleaded for;
that alters the case very much, and will not prove a sufficient excuse,
wherewith to put off so bounden a duty. The Aul. Gel. lib. 12. cap. 1. Macrob.
lib. 5. cap. 11. Erasm. puerp.
Heathen have spoke enough to this point, and more then all the Christians in
the world can answer; for the deserting and putting off (unless in the cases
before pointed at) this so natural and engaged a service. At the mothers
breast then, we suppose the child is, and the eyes are open, abroad it looks,
nothing delights it, they shut again, as if it would tell the Parent, what
they should be now, and it self hereafter, both crucified to the world, and
the world to them.

3. The child is yet so little, that here is little for the father to do yet;
All that is, and it is no little work, is in his closet. But besides that (for
it is the mothers work too) here is work for the mother enough. It must be
tended though it sleep, much more when it is awake. And here is the
observation; It is hard to say, which is more, the mothers tendernesle, or the
childs frowardness, and yet how they agree, how they kiss one the other: as
if the parent were delighted with it. It is an affection somewhat above nature,
implanted for the preservation of man (so the Heathen could say) by the God of
mercy, otherwise it might not be so; for the more froward it is, the more she
tenders the little thing. And it much increases the childs score, which he
can never pay. The Parent, and the child, can never cut scores, or strike
tallies: for they will never lie even.

4. Infancy, is a dream (we say), The most part of it is Chapter 1. sect. 4, 5.
spent in the cradle, and at the breast, the remainder in dressing and
undressing; Little can be said to it; And yet something may be done, even the
first two years, for the framing of the body (as Nurses know best, but
something it is) and the fashioning of the mind too; and the younger it is,
with the better success. I have read of a great Conqueror, yet not so great,
as that he could overcome his passions, or an ill custom, (it is a second
nature) he learnt an unbeseeming gesture at the breast, and showed it on his
throne. If I remember, his Nurse was blamed for it, for she might have remedied
it, while the parts were tender.

Something may be done also for the fashioning of the mind, and preventing of
evil. It is much what they, who are below Christians have spoken and practiced
this way, which I pass over. Note we; The first tincture, and dye has a very
great power beyond ordinary conceit, or my expression. And therefore observe
well, what they do, who are about this child not yet three years old, and what
the child does. It may soon learn some evil, and that evil may grow past
helping quickly. Look to the eye and ear, all goes indifferently in, as well
as at the Mouth; and you shall smell the Caske presently, just what the liquor
was. Keep the inward and hid-man, as you should do the outward, neat and free
from contagion and corruption; as young as it is, it may receive a bad
tincture, and that enters easily now, which will not depart without
difficulty.

5. I have heard a child swear, before he could creep; Qui jurat cumrepit,
quid no^ adultus faciet? Quin. Aug. Confess. lib. cap. 7.
hereupon the heathen man has asked, what will such an one do, when it is
grown up? I have seen a child threaten, yet it could not strike, and scratch,
before it could hurt; and pale with anger (it was Augustines observation)
because another did partake of its milk. And this corruption, which so soon
will show it self, is strangely furthered by a foolish practice; Give me a
blow, child, and I will beat what has offended. This teaches revenge betime,
that daring and presumptuous sin, for it disthrones God, and puts the law out
of office. I say, that practice leads unto it, as we might Time is not yet; it
is yet too soon to be so watchful over the child; But by this neglect and
putting off, we suffer matter of trouble to be prepared. We neglect not a
spark because it is little, but we consider how high it flies, and how apt
things about it are to take fire. There is no greater wisdom (said that great
Scholar) then well to Lord Verul. Essays 21. 125.
Time the Beginnings and on sets of things. Dangers are no more light, if they
once seem light. Our duty is to look to small things, they lead to great.
Is custom no small matter? said one, who was short of a Christian. Shorten the
child in its desires now, specially, if it be hasty, and cry, and will have
it. Then, say some, the child must have it; say I, no, but now it should not.
Shorten it here, and the rather, because it cries: if he have it, give him it
when it is still and quiet, Correction rather, when it cries. Let it not have
its will by froward means; Let it learn and find, that they are
unprofitable, and bootlesse. A child is all for the present, but a Parents
wisdom is to teach it to wait; Much depends on it, thereby a Parent may
prevent eagerness, and shortness of spirit, which else will grow up with the
child, and prove a dangerous and tormenting evil.

We shall help this hereafter, and soon enough say some; Let the child have
its will now, it is but a child. And be it so, but that is the way to have a
child of it as long as it lives, As Sr. Thomas More said to his Lady, after
his manner, wittily, but truly. They might as well say, they will bend the
child hereafter, when it is as stiff as a stake, though they neglect it at
the present, when it is as tender as a Sprig. I will tell my observation; I
have known some children, who might not be shortened, least it should shorten
their growth; what they would have, they should have, for they were but
children; these have lived to shorten their Parents days, and their own, and
to fill all with sorrow: for afterward, they would not be shortened, because
they were not while they might. Siquid moves a princip^o move. Hip.
Hippocrates has a good lesson and of good use here; If thou would remove an
evil, do it at the beginning. As the spring of nature, I mean, (says the
Considerations touching the Church.
Lord Ver. applying it to the rectifying the politic body) the spring of the
year is the best time, for purging and medicining natural bodies; so is the
first spring of Childhood the most proper season for the purging and
rectifying our Children.

To come then to the maine instruction I intend here, which is this; As we
observe Adams ruins, appearing betimes in the child, so must we be as timely
in the building against these ruins, and repairing thereof. It is a great
point of wisdom, as was said, well to time our beginnings; And this a parent
will do, if he show but the same care about his child, as he does about his
house or ground; if he observes the least swelling or crack in his wall, or
breach in his sense about his ground, he is speedy and quick in repair
thereof; for it gains him time, and saves him a great deal of cost and labor
both. That may be done with a penny to day, that will not hereafter with an
hundred pound; And that now mended in a day, which will not hereafter in a
year; And that in a year, which will not be done in our time: So King JAMES,
so famous for his sayings, pressed the speedy repair of breaches in highwayes.

We cannot borrow a speech that is more full, I mean, we cannot take a
metaphor that is fitter to press home this duty; it is low, and descends to
the lowest capacity, and teaches the Parent to be quick and expedite in
repairing the ruins of old Adam in his young Child; for, though it seems as
a frame but newly reared, yet, unlike other buildings, it presently falls to
decay; and if our eyes and hands be as present to repair the decays thereof
(which is our duty) it would save us much time, cost and labor. Faults may be
as easily corrected at the first, as a twig may be bent; but if they grow, as
the body does, they will be tough and stiff, as the body is, they will knit
and incorporate, as the bones do; and what is bred in the bone, will not easily
out See Camerar. chap. 16.
of the flesh, as that sturdy beggar said; A neglect toward the child now,
tends to such a desolation hereafter, as the Chapter 1. sect. 5.
Prophet speaks of; Thy breach is great like the Sea, who Lam. 2. 23.
can heal thee?

There is nothing works more mischief and sorrow to a man (I give my pen the
more scope here, because parents give and take so much liberty) then does
that, which he minds least to prevent, and that is the beginnings and first
growth of evil. There are little Motions thereof at the first, but they grow,
as Rivers do, greater and greater, the further off from the spring. The first
risings are the more to be looked unto, because there is most danger in them,
and we have least care over them, though yet they will quickly over-cast the
soul. Therefore that we do at the beginning, Dimidium sacti, qui b^n^, coepit,
habit.
is more then half we do afterward, says the Poet, and he speaks not without
great reason: so forcible continually is the beginning, and so connexed to the
sequel by the nature of a precedent cause. The Bishop has a good meditation
upon the sight of a bladder; Every thing must be taken in his meet time; Let
this bladder alone till it be dry, and all the wind in the world cannot raise
it up, whereas, now it is new and moist, the least breath fills, and enlarges
Meditat. 106.
it; It is no otherwise in ages, and dispositions; Inform the child in
precepts of learning and virtue, while years make him capable, how plyably he
yields! how happily is he replenished with knowledge, and goodness! Let him
alone till time and ill example, have hardened him, till he be settled in an
habit of evil, and contracted and clung together with sensual delights, now
he becomes utterly indocible; sooner may that bladder be broken then distended.

Quintilians first Chapter shall put a close to this; It is very useful all,
and tends to this purpose. If we look to reap comfort from our children, we
must lay the ground work of virtue and religion betimes in them, while as yet
they are without any tainture at all. We mould and fashion the mould of the
head then, when it is sostest: so must we the mould of the heart and
affections. This is the sum of that Chapter: The conclusion is. We are
curious what we put into a new vessel, and what mould Chapter 2. sect. 1.
we lay about a young plant, for the weakest Terms, and Times See Advanc. lib.
1 p. 25.
of all things use to have the best applications and helps.

And so much may teach us what infancy is, and that those innocent years (as
some have called them) are not innocent; Min selix. p. 1. verse. 20. in sol.
vide Com.
They do show forth many ill and peccant humors lurking within, like poison in
a chilled Non desunt ei venena, sed corpent. Sen.
serpent, which must be looked unto betimes by keeping our eyes wakefull over
the first three and four years. An allowance of years large enough for that
Age, yet some have allowed more, following the notation of the word, because so
long it is, and sometime longer, before the child can speak articulately, and
so as it may be understood. Though we be not so exact in observing our distinct
periods, it matters not, if we can time our beginnings.

CHAP. II.
Childhood and youth how neglected by Parents, though their seed-time: The
maine business therein twofold.

I Suppose now; This Infancy, this harmless Annis adhuc innocentibus Min. Fell.
p 1. and Tert. Simplices Annos. Hilar. Insontem insantiam. Cyp. Innocent^m
aetatulam. Prud. Simplicem turbam. Martial.
innocentage, as some have called it, in the simplicity of their hearts, and
in reference to the next age, wherein our hereditary evil more declares it
self, and is more Active and stirring; this I say, I suppose passed over. And
as one Age passes, so another succeeds, none stays. Childhood and youth
come next into the place thereof. I put them together, because they differ but
in some degree of heat. And they agree, because what may be said of each (which
is but little) agrees to both; and that is, That the childs ear (as we say of
the horse, his Equi fraenati est auris in ore. Hor.
ear is in his snafflle) is in his governors hand, as he holds the Chapter 2.
sect. 2, 3
reins, so it goes; or as he lets them loose, so it runs, like a wild Colt
that has cast his Rider. And for the Youth, it knows ^o other Law, but the
Law in his members, leading him captive to the Law of sin. So we may know
these Ages to be more unhappy, and less innocent then the former Age, for so
the usual saying is, and we find ours, as we were, unhappy children, it is
not to be doubted. So I am slipped into another Age, and what is the just period
and limit thereof, I cannot define.

The time of Childhood and Youth, is much as the Parents can time the
beginnings, as was said: As they order and handle the child, so they shall
find it. As it is disciplined, it may quickly and seasonably, with Gods
blessing, outgrow Childishness, and then, Childhood; and as it may be
neglected, you may know that by its Childishness, it is a Boy still. So the
limits of this age, I count, are in the Parents hand; according as their care
is, more or less, according will this time of child hood be, longer or
shorter. It matters much therefore how the child is disciplined, and taught.

2. Here then is work for the Father also, whom we have not hitherto exempted;
and for the Mother, no less work then she had before. Father and Mother both
little enough, and, for the fathers spare hours, a full employment; but none
more necessary, or whereunto he can be more engaged. The child is now out of
hand, as we say, and quickly out of sight, and as busy as an Ant in the
Summer, but it is not out of mind; The Mother is quickly calling after it, and
seeking for it, for she knows the child will be in harmes-way; for though it
be a little more out of the Mothers hand, it was never less in its own.

3. I cannot question the Parents care concerning the childs outside, the
body; and there care does well, but there may be too much, and preposterous
that care may be, and inordinate. We adorn the outside commonly (says Clem.
of Alexandria) as the Egyptians their Temples, outwardly Paed. 3. cap. 2.
very specious and beautiful; but if you look inward, Chapter 2. sect. 3.
there was an ugly beast: so we adorn the body, when the soul, the All of a
man, is neglected. The soul calls for its due also; we cloth the childs body,
the soul should not be naked; we feed the body and cherish it; the soul should
be cared for and cherished also, and in the chief place; for the soul is the
cause that the body is regarded: suppose the soul taken from the body but one
hour, and how loath are we to cast an eye toward the body, which before was so
lovely in our eye. A great reason this (though there is a greater then that, as
the preciousnesse of the soul, and the price was paid for it) why the soul
should be regarded, and in the first place. All is then, what the Parents care
is, concerning that which is the man indeed; And therein the care is commonly
too little, no way answerable to the hopes they have of their child. They will
say yes; They intend the childs good, nothing more; and the way they intend
also conducing thereunto. But what ever they say, it must appear by what they
do; for good intents are no better then good dreams, except they be put in
execution. So their care is upon trial; what they do, in way of promoting the
childs good, must evidence it as the surest witness.

Now that the child can go and speak, it can employ its mind and body; now
the faculties of both are awakened, and declare themselves; Now must the
Parents be doing, if they will evidence their care; and they must consider well
what they do. The child imitates strangely, it is taken, like an Ape, wholly
by example. The Parents practice (I mean the Parent at large, him or her that
has the oversight of it) is the childs book, it learnes by it, so it speaks,
so it hears, it is fashioned after it; it is chatechized by it; It is its
School, and the Church. The Parents house must promote the child in point of
information, more then can School or Church, though well provided in both; yet
Parents be too ready to refer all thither, and so put all off from themselves.

Assuredly, it is the cause of much mischief and sorrow in the world, that the
parents think themselves discharged Chapter 1. sect. 3.
of their duty toward their child, when they have charged the School with it.
Yet thus it is commonly, for so experience tells us, which is the Oracle of
Time, and makes all wise, that observe it. The mother thinks that the School
must ^ook to the washing her child's hands, putting on the girdle, its
attendance at the table, and his manners there, and if there be any other
faults, as there will be many, then we know, who shall hear of them all, and
we know as well, that none will be mended, when there is no better care at
home. But so the mother thinks, that she shall do her part; for she is resolved
that to the Master or Mistress she will go, and the childs arrand she will
do, and she swears it too, if she live to the next morning; If it please God
(^ relate her words being well acquainted with them) the Master shall know the
rudeness of the child, how unmannerly and undutifull it is, and how slovenly
too; Nay the Master shall know, it will neither give God thanks, nor say its
prayers. This is her errand, and when that is done, she takes it, that she has
done her duty. In the mean time (I mention no other decay) the child grows so
nasty, that you would scarce take an egg out of its hand. So much the Mother
commonly neglects the child, whom she loves so dearly well, and so much
desires its well doing.

And for the Father, he is upon such designs, as may enlarge his heaps, or
possessions, which he means to cast upon the child, like so many loads of Muck
thrown together L. Ver. Essay. 15. 85.
upon an heap; though money (as one says) is like muck indeed, not good except
it be spread. But so the Father enlarges his desires, and his means, he knows
not well for whom; and so he intends his mind, and for himself only Essay. 8.
37: (...); Chrysostom. Genesis 33 Hom. 59 a.
he intends it; For Charity will hardly water the ground, when it must first
fill a poole. And little does the Parent think, how much he does, in so doing,
cross the rule, and the end, he seems to carry in his eye, his comfort in his
child's well-doing. For those designs do trouble and hurt the welfare of the
child, they do not serve it at all. That, Chapter 1. sect. 3.
wherewith the parent would load himself now, and his child after him, usually
makes the child forget it self, and the parent both. The bladder is so blown
with the windy conceit of that inheritance, the Father has purchased, and is
the childs in reversion, that he can think of nothing but that, and his
Fathers years, which he can roll in his mind betime, as a piece of sugar
under his tongue. His mind is so stuffed with the thoughts of what he is heir
to, that by his look, speech, gesture, he shows plainly, that he is not
tractable, not counsellable. The Father has laid up enough for it, as he
thinks; and the child takes it, as the Parent means it, for portion, and
proportion both. And what folly there is in the child (which must needs be a
great deal, where no means has been used to let it forth) Riches will
Stultitiam patiuntur opes, Iuvenal. Nimia felicitate so^ors. Tacit. de S^jano
Annal. 74. cap. 9.
cover well enough. Folly will not appear under a rich Covering. But this will
appear, which is more unnatural (yet too ordinary, such is the corruption)
that the child is well content, that the same head should be laid low, which
contrived so much to set the childs head so high. I observed a child once (so
he was, though a man grown) and I know him now, a rich man's son, and his
only heir, who could not frame and set his countenance (for that was as much
as was looked for) for so short a time, Haeredis luctus sab larva risus.
as while he prepared his hood (he was close mourner, and it was well he was) to
follow his Fathers corpse to Church: I was present the while. A sad, but just
judgment upon those parents, who are sad and serious almost in all their
designs, excepting this one, which is the maine, the well ordering, and good
education of their child. Herein that, which is, at the best, but (...), etc.
Chrysostom Tom. 4. Vit. Monast. lib. 3. cap 6.
an accessory, liberal maintenance, is made a principal; and that, which is a
principal, the childs good and wholesome nurture, is made an accessory, and
scarce that. And this is To sell the horse, to get some hay, as Charron
phras^th it. In every thing else the Parent is wiser; he will not build in a
City, or in a place which is instable and ruinous ready to fall; nor will he
lay a foundation upon a sand; And yet so he builds and contrives for himself
and his continuing or abiding (...). Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Heb. ca. 12. Hom.
32.
City. And this is a folly exceeding that of the simplest idiot in the world;
for it is as if the Parent should lay out all his whole stock of wealth and wit
to purchase and furnish a chamber for his child in a thorough fair, and
provide it no house in the City, where it is for ever to dwell. Again, the
Parent is so wise, that he will till and manure the field, he looks to reap a
good crop from; but here he thinks to reap though he sow not: and that the
child will be good, how bad soever the fathers example be, or how little
soever his care which he takes, in the well nurturing of his child. It is a
soloecisme in Power, says the Lo Ver. but we are sure it is an inordinate,
rude, and perverse conceit, that prevails with the most parents against all
sense and reason, To think to command the end, yet not to endure the Essay.
19. 108.
means. They will expect comfort, ye cannot beat them off from it; but for the
way they take, they may as well expect a grape from a thorn, or a fig from a
thistle; for look upon the child they expect it from: observe its looks,
speeches, gesture; mark it from the head to the heel, and you shall see it like
the sluggards field, and in no better plight, to yield comfort, in true
judgment, then is that field to give fruit; or then the parched places of the
wilderness, or a salt land not inhabited. Note we this, for the close hereof,
and to instruct father and mother very much. The child had, anciently amongst
the Romans, three set over him, the master to instruct; the governor to
correct; the parent to do both, Preceptor, Padagogus. Parens.
or to see carefully that both were done. So the parent was principal, and his
work the chief: Now it is otherwise; the parent commonly does just nothing,
the Master must do all, look to the child's book, and manners both; he must
instruct and correct also, faults done without the verge of his jurisdiction;
which hinders instruction very much: for he that must instruct, should have as
little occasion to correct, as may be. I would it were in the Philosophy of
parents to note this; for it is certain, parents must do their parts as well as
masters theirs, else not half the work will

4. Learn we then, while there is time, before we smart under this folly, to
account childehood and youth our seed-time, so these ages are; we must not let
slip our season, we must not sleep, nor let our hands hang down; we must know
that our harvest, which is but the reaping of our hopes, now like the seed in
the blade, or under ground, depends upon our care and diligence in this
ploughing and sowing season. And this let me say once again, That were our
Schools such as they should be, as far promoting the good of the child
every way, as, in true judgment, we could think they ought to do, which is a
thing we in our generation may hope to see, but we shall not see it, the next
may; But, I say, were the Schools generally such as they ought to be, yet they
could do but their part, and this not half the work, to such, I mean, who are
one hour with the Master, and two with the Parent; And that work also, as
Masters know very well, is for the most part in unteaching what the child has
unhappily learnt. And if the Master can unteach that, he has done a good work
indeed. Therefore the Parent must know, that while the child is in his house,
the principal and chief work about the promoting the child is his; while the
child is under the parents eye, it is properly their charge: and as they
discharge it, so the child thrives, and proves every way. It is their
business, and of the greatest weight and consequence that can be thought of,
whereof they must give an exact account, yea of every part and parcel of this
seed time. And when all is done, humane sufficiency is insufficient to provide
against the evil that hinders; or to use all the means that may promote the
childs good; but yet we must do our utmost in these two principal points;

1 In preventing, and hindering evil. 2 In ingrafting, and increasing good.
CHAP. III.
This twofold employment lies in the order of nature and right reason: But the
Lets which hinder this twofold duty, must first be removed. What these lets
are, how much they hinder and block up our way to comfort, how we shall be
prepared and armed against them.

THese two points, which take up the maine employment of this seed-time, lie in
the order of nature and right reason Nihil proderit dare praecepta nisi prius
amoveris obstantia praeceptis. Sen. Ep. 95.
, for we plough up the ground, and pluck up the weeds, before we cast in the
seeds; but before I shall come to them, I must first set down such lets and
hindrances which will cross the way very much in the performing this twofold
duty.

These lets are (all that I need mention) but two, fondness, and fierceness.
They are two extremes, and being so, they must needs do much hurt; and yet so
contrary though Nihil in vulgo medium. Tac. 1. ca. 7.
they are each to other, and as much crossing the chil^es good, and the parents
comfort, as we need to imagine; yet are they very incident to parents; nay,
many times, for so experience tells us, one and the same Parent is both sometime
too fond, then again too fierce; now all honey, as we say, anon all dirt; like
some, whom I have known; who at one time have been so indulgent, that they
could set the child in the lap (but that the child was ashamed) and then
again so eager upon it, that they could trample it under feet.

It is not to be questioned but these extremes or faults (call them what we
will) are to be found in Parents. I shall in the first place severally and
apart make clear, what lets they are, and how much hindering the good of the
child; and then I shall set down some considerations, which may Chapter 3. sect. 1.
fortify us against them; for we may all say we are very (...). i. e. pro suo
arbitrio non semper satis justo. Pisc. Heb. 12. 10. Essays 12. 62.
weak this way, ready to dote upon our little image sometimes, and then as
ready to strike it after our own pleasure, not as reason, but as will carries
us, not always just: there being, as one notes, in humane nature generally
more of the fool then of the wise.

Touching fondness, 1. How it arises. 2. How it hurts. 3. How we may be
fortified against it.

1. The child has cost the Parents dear; they see their image in it, and in
it they look to live when they are gone; Dimidiata verba. M. Felix.
and it makes them pretty sport besides. It has delightful gestures, pretty
antic postures; and the less articulate words it has (as Minutius phraseth
it) and perhaps, the Gaudemu^ siquid licentius dixerint, and verbane Alex. etc.
and ris^ and osculo ex cipimus. l. 1. ^ap. 2.
more unhappy and licentious also, as Quintilian says, the more delight and
mirth it causes. Whence else it comes I know not (but from corrupted nature it
is, which too readily idolizeth the creature) that this child is crept into
the mother again, and lies so close to the father, that his life is bound up in
the childs life; if the child leave the parent (as now, that it is lapt so
close it is like to do) the parent will die; such is the strength and
impetuousnesse of affection, if we give scope and rains unto it. Like a child
set at liberty, so is affection set at liberty, it will shame us and trouble us
both. For this fondness is always accompanied There is no heat of affection
but is joined with some idleness of brain. A Spanish proverb. Gravis est
omnis disciplina puero. Prud. Ante palatum quam os instituimus. Quint. l. 1. c.
2.
with a strange indulgence, which is against all fitting discipline; hereafter
will be time enough, in the mean time, it shall have any thing else, what it
will; it is at its own choice, and then we know what it will choose, that which
will most hurt it self in the end: so provident the child is; ever careless
of to morrow, prodigal of the present. And yet it is commonly left to such a
self-pleasing humor, that it is sensible of every restraint, so that it goes
near to think its girdle and garters to be bonds and shackles. Its palate is
better instructed also then its mouth, so that it can make better choice of
dishes then of words.

2. And now we may easily read without the book, what hurt this fondnes does,
this strange cockering of children. Chapter 3. sect. 1.
It is a strange expression I shall use, but the experience of twenty years
tells me it is true, the devil does not so much hurt (I know he will do as
much hurt, as he is suffered to do, to the very utmost extent of his chain) but
so much hurt he does not to poor children, as does this fond indulgence. It
choaks their natural parts, otherwise very good and hopeful, so that no more
can reasonably be exspected Corporis cura mentem obruerunt. Quintil. l. 1. ca.
11.
from them, then from a marish ground; we know what grows there. It undoes the
family, Town and City. A foolish pity may we call it? rather a cruel pity;
like yvie, it kills and makes barren the tree that it embraces; or like the
ape, it kills the young, with hugging them; it lets the child rather sink
under water, then it will hold it up by the hair of the head, for fear of
hurting it. Indulgence is the very engine of the Devil, like that I have read
of, made See Hist. of the world. B. 5. Chapter 4. Sect. 10. p. 532.
only to torment poor creatures with those very Arms which opened toward
them, as it were for embracement. The experience of all ages tells us, that
this indulgent cockering has turned many children up the hill or the Cause. de
cloq. li. 3. ca. 8.
hedge, to beggary or worse. And hence their complaints, the same now, as we
read they were in Cyprians days, Parents nostros sensimus parricidas. Illud
grave quod in aeternitate jugulahit. Salv. ad eccl. li. 2. o.
Our Fathers and Mothers have proved our murderers, soulmurtherers; worse then
they who murder the body, as Chrysostom, says usefully in his 3. book of
Monastic life, Chap. 4.

3. We have seen this strange humor of cockring, what it is, and whence it
grows; what mischief it causes. These considerations following may help and
fortify us against so destroying an evil. The first is:

1. Then parents take a ready way to rob themselves of their children, when
they idolize them, and dote upon them.

The heart should be kept as a chaste Virgin, espoused to one husband. That
should lie closest there, which can satisfy; the creature cannot, there is a
vanity upon it, no more then ashes or the East-winde can satisfy the stomach:
till the soul be pointed to God, as the needle to the North Pole, it is still
in a shaking trembling posture, much like an inhabitant in Chapter 3. sect. 1.
the Land of Nod; still as the waves of the sea, in agitation, Genesis 4. 16.
(...). etc. Chrysostom. Ibid. Agitatio and vexatio. Trem.
tossed between hope and fear, for being turned from God to the creature, it
lies open as a fair mark, for every incomfortable accident to strike it at the
heart: for from thence the heart shall find the sorest griefs, where it
placed its chiefest joy and contentment, being not placed where it should be,
in God; that, which we make our God besides the true one, that will prove our
tormentor; the heart and the creature do close together too well, and agree
they do as two friends, too inwardly, as if they could fill up and satisfy
each other; whereas the better agreement there was, and the more complete
riviting of the one with the other, the more falling out and bitterness there
will be, when the parting day comes, which we must look will be quickly, if we
set up the gift in our heart, instead of the giver; certainly if God loves us,
He will hide from us this idol, which we so much dote upon. He feels the
pulse of our affection, where it beats most strongly, and to what part the
humor is carried most fully and eagerly, and there we shall certainly bleed;
for, He can strike us in the right v^i^e. If a Parent be inordinate in his
affection, if his Joseph and his heart lie like a bundle close wrapped up
together, then it is very likely, that Joseph must leave his Father; that the
Parent may learn to sacrifice the child in affection, which is the readiest
way to keep the child: for commonly it falls out, that the Lord sna^cheth away
that comfort, which we made such store of, locking it up too close.

Peter saw the glory of Christ in His transfiguration; It is Luke 9. 33, 34.
very observeable, that while Peter was speaking of building Tabernacles (for
some continuance) a cloud over shadowed them, and they feared. If God show us
that, which does content and please us, we would presently build Tabernacles
upon these outward comforts: I mean, the heart would settle, and six upon
them, it is so good being with these comforts; but now, while we are projecting
and providing for this continuance, then commonly comes some cloud and
over-shadows this comfort, and sometimes then, Chapter 3. sect. 1.
when we are but speaking and thinking of it, then the cloud comes, and then
follow fears. In the story of Jonah it is read, That the Lord God prepared a
Gourd, that it might be a shadow over Ionahs head, and deliver him from his
grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd: Exceeding glad; mark that I
pray you, and that which follows, But God prepared a Worm the very next
morning, and it smote the gourd, that it withered. The Lord is graciously
pleased to grant unto us some comforts here, whereby to sweeten our sorrows,
and to refresh us in our weary pilgrimage; But if we shall be exceeding glad of
them, being but of the same nature and constitution as was Ionahs gourd, then
look we to it; for then commonly the Lord is preparing a worm, which will
quickly sinite that gourd, so that it shall wither; and then, which is next to
be considered,

2. We shall be troubled as much at the withering of out gourd, as we were
joyed before in the having of it, which was Ionahs case; exceeding glad of our
gourds, exceeding Quicquid mirabere, pones invitus. Hor. epist. lib. 1. 10.
sorrowful and disconsolate at the smiting and withering of the gourds: It
ever follows by the rule of proportion Ipse ut laetitie, ita maeroris immodicus
egit. Tacit. Of Nero hury ing his beloved daughter, Augusta. An. 15. Psalm. 30.
6, 7.
. We are apt to think that our gourds do cast a greater shadow, then indeed
they do or can. And answerable is our delight in them, and our sorrow for them,
when they wither. Therefore we should know, what ever our mountain or gourd
is, I mean, our comfort, in what kind soever: it is Gods favor, His
influence through it, that gives strength unto it, and us comfort in it. And if
He withdraw His favor, and restrain His influence (as doubtless He will, if
we are too confident of our settling, and firm standing thereon, as if we could
never be moved) then trouble follows; and the more our trouble will be, the
stronger our confidence was, and our contentment in the same. It is the
greatness of our affections, which causes the sharpness of our afflictions:
They that love too much, will always grieve too much. The presence of a
comfort is not more comfortable then will be the absence thereof grievous.
If we suffer the child (that is the creature we are now upon) to shoot too
far into our hearts; when the time of severing comes, we part with so much
of our hearts by that rent. Oh how good is it, and how great a (...). Naz
epist. 125.
point of wisdom, to carry the creature, as we do a loose garment, apart and
loose from the heart, easily parted with! That when God calls for it (as He may
with more liberty, then we may fetch our child from nurse, yet we take
liberty there) we may willingly part with it, saying; here Lord, thou gave
it to me, Thou may fetch it from me; Blessed be thy name in taking as in
giving. The Heathen gives a Rule and it is of easy construction. Love so, as
thou may hate. Amatanquam osurus.
That is, Love your friend so, that if hatred should grow betwixt you, yet no
hurt can follow: for you have not so unbrested and opened your self unto him,
that he can hurt you. It is a good rule for a Parent; Love thy child so, as
one Amatanquam amissurus.
that is parting with it. That is, love thy child so, that if thou losest it,
yet thou do not lose thy treasure, nor thy heart; Thou have not so opened
thy self toward it, nor is it laid up so close: Then thou can be content
with thy loss; and submit to His mighty hand, That took it from thee. He was
a wise Heathen, and one instruction from him comes double to a Christian. I
kiss my child to day, and then I think it may M. Aur. An^. Med. lib. 11. 21.
30. p. 148.
be dead to morrow. It is ominous, some will say; No, that remembrance keeps it
loose and apart from the heart, and the surer in our possession; whereas the
common conceits and opinions that our comforts shall not be taken from us, nor
we moved, are, as one says, the common lamiae or bug bears of the world, the
cause of our trouble and sorrow.

That we may not be carried by conceits and opinions; our desire should be the
same that Agurs was, That God Prove. 30. Souls conflict, page 48.
would remove from us vanity and lies; That is, from a vain and false
apprehension, pitching upon things, that are vain and lying, and promising
that contentment to our selves from them, which they cannot yield. Confidence
in vain things makes a vain heart, and fills it with sorrow; for vexation
ever follows vanity, when vanity is not apprehended to be where it is. This
the second consideration; The third this.

3. That child, whom we do inordinately set our hearts upon, does seldom or
never answer our wished for expectations, no not in any measure. As the Parent
has widened and opened his heart toward it, in a largeness of expectation
and hope; so does that child commonly, contract, straiten, and close up it
self toward the Parent. God does often strike that child, of whom we fondly
conceive the greatest hope, with the greatest barrenness; Cain proves lighter
then vanity, and Abel a possession.

I have observed (and much I have observed) when the parent has carelessly
neglected one child, and, like the ape, hugged and fondly cockered another; I
have observed too, that the hated child proved fruitful, and the fondling
barren; and withal, that child, which the parent did tender most, regarded
the parent least. God ever shortens our account, when we reckon without Him:
and as He commonly blasteth our bold and confident attempts; so does He wither
extraordinary hopes in earthly things, That we may open our mouths wide
toward Him, that can fill them. We may note the connection we find. Genesis 29.
30, 31. Jacob loved Rachel more then Leah: When the Lord saw that, He made
Rachel barren. The more love the more barrenness. To make differences betwixt
child and child is not safe, Genesis 37. 3, 4. Accidebat invid^^ quod mal^ pro
(...) Ner^^ ess^^. Tacit An. 4. 13.
It causes great differences; and to make fondlings of any, is a dangerous
presage; That this fondling is the child, who will prove as a barren soil,
like a parched heath, or a salt land. I could wish that were the worst; It is
commonly much worse; for, which is the last consideration,

4 It commonly falls out, That the child we so doted upon, prov^s the heavie^t
cross. That Is the hilde commonly, which, like a back wind, hastens the
Parent to the pit; making him speak in very bitterness of soul: Why dyed it
Job 3. 11.
not from the womb? etc. They, whose experience is but as yesterday can tell
us; That the bloody knife (it is Mr. Boultons o^pression) of Parents
unconscionable and cruel Direct. p. 19, ^^.
negligence in training up of their children religiously, does stick full deep
in their souls; Nay, they can tell us more then so; even that these children so
loosely trained up, have cut their parents hearts with sorrow, yea and their
throats too, they have stuck the knife in their own parents bowels: such
bloody and unnatural acts might be instanced in and urged. I shall only
relate three examples, two whereof fell under mine own observation; (I could
relate two and twenty, so ordinary they are, as we in our way find them) the
third example is extraordinary and yields a sad story.

The first was the mothers only child, therefore her darling, as fondly
handled by her, and disordered, as we need imagine. To school he came, that he
might be out of the dirt. So the rod was spared, the mother had her desire and
expectation. The child proved accordingly, not answerable to the mothers hope,
but very answerable to her manner of breeding. About a year after, the child
angered the mother, and the mother struck the child; he runs to the fire, and
up with the fire forke, and at the mother he makes, at least he threatened. The
mother hastens to me, as much displeased with the child, as ever before she
was pleased with it. It was well for the child, for it made him stand in awe,
though in no great fear of the mother. More depends on it, but I must not set
it down; we have as much from it, as we need to make use of; The mother would
not have her child struck with a rod, to let out his folly; the child offers
to strike the mother with a fire forke. Such was the Retaliation, and so just.

2. Another there was, and the mother had the same humor; and much like was
the issue at the first, but since, much worse, for she would have sent this
son to the remotest Islands; any where, so he were on shipboard (that would
keep him in compass, which a prison did not) or out of her sight. But of him
no more, for he did not live out half his days, his intemperance killed him;
and, they say, he dyed penitent. We have enough from this example also, whereof
to make much use, which is this: That child, the Parent so doteth upon; that
he would not have it out of his sight, nor willingly suffer the wind to blow
on it, is the child, that will be an eyesore, and the hearts grief, unto
whom the Parent is most likely to say, Stand out of my sight, thou art a grief
unto me, the greatest that can be thought of.

3. The third is as follows, a short relation, but full of bitterness; as I
find it in Austin. Sermon 33. Where thus we read. There was one Cyrillus, a
man mighty both in word and work, but a very indulgent father. One son he had,
and but one, Ad fratres in Eremo.
and because but one, he must have his will, ke must not feel the rod, he must
not be crossed. He might have what he would, and do with it what he listed, he
took his liberty, and more; More then an inch was given him, he took an ell,
as Indulgent sibi latius. Iuven.
the manner of youth is; that will not satisfy, which the Parent allows,
though that may be too much. He might have money, and he might spend it how he
listed: Plautus tells us, we may more safely put a knife into a childs hand
then money; And he that allows the child money, least the child be put to
base shifts, will allow the Parent to stint the child, and to call it to
account, where and how it spent its allowance. But this child gave no account
either of his purse or time, he might go forth and return when he pleased; such
liberty he had, and so left to himself. We read on in the story, That he
brought his mother to shame. Prove. 24 1* 5.
But those words are too short. We read more then so, even that the Devil did
rule mightily in that child of disobedience, for thus we read. This child
came home drunk, and in the day time; he violently and shamefully abused his
mother great with child; he killed his father out right, and wounded two
sisters mortally. Hereupon, so it is related, a great assembly was called: That
all Parents hearing so sad and weeping a Tragedy, might for ever, beware of
this loose and sottish indulgence, which breeds the childs ruin and the
Parents woe. Th^se are the considerations, and because they are of such
importance, we will give the sum of them, which is this.

5. If our affections be too in ordinately set upon any earthly thing, it
commonly causes a loss of the thing so doted upon; if Joseph lie to close to
the Parent, Joseph shall be hid from the Parent.

2. Then the sorrow will be as much in losing, as the comfort was in
possessing, in an even proportion.

3. Or if the child be not hid; yet, comfort shall be hid; There will be
barrenness.

4. And then a cross follows, perhaps a curse. We may make a recognition of
what was last said, in these words.

God provideth some Gourdes to refresh us in our Pilgrimage: we must not be
exceeding glad of them; That were to set up the Gift as an Idol in the heart,
and to shut forth the Giver: and if so then God prepares a worm, He withers
the Gourd; and then that very root, which yielded so much sweet before, yields
so much sower after; for as our gladness did exceed, so will our trouble be
exceeding, when the thing, we took so much comfort in, is withered. Or if not
so, then worse then so, for that so indulged comfort proves commonly a cross;
it is the very root of gall and bitterness; the very stock, on which commonly
the Lord does graft the sorest misery, and sharpest sorrow.

Look we then to our affections, that they be not too exceeding and exorbitant:
Remembering still, That affections set at liberty, are like children left to
themselves, they will make us ashamed, and work our sorrow. I conclude with
Mr. Boltons words; if they be well considered, they will be as Banks to turn
our affections back, and hold them in, that they do not overflow their just
bounds.

Our Righteous and holy God, when He sees the current of His Direct. p. 216.
creatures affections, to be carried inordinately and preposterously from the
Fountain of living waters, upon broken cisterns that can hold none; from the
bottomless treasury of all sweetest beauties, dearest excellencies, amiable
delights, upon painted shadows; from the Rock of eternity, upon a staff of
Reed, I mean, from the Creator, upon the creature; He wisely and seasonably in
the equity of His justice, and out of the jealousy of His own Glory; Nay, it
may be said, in the sweetness of His mercy also, takes away that earthly
Idol, that, the occasion of such irregular affection removed, He may draw the
heart, in which He principally takes pleasure, to his own Glorious self, the
only load-starre of all sanctified love, and boundless Ocean of happiness
and bliss.

So much to the first extreme, but too little to make it know a measure; The
Lord teach us here, for to Him we look, who can restore the years, that the
Locusts have eaten, Jocl 2. 25.
the Canker-worme, and the Catterpillar; So can He also, all the harms and
losses, which we have caused to our children by our extreme folly, or bloody
negligence. Assuredly, these harmfull Beasts, that Northern Army, do not so
much Jocl 3. 20.
hurt and prejudice the field, as our indulgence does our harvest of hopes,
which yet we look to reap from ours. The Lord pardon our iniquity, and add
more grace.

The other extreme follows, hurtful also, but not so hurtful.

2 There is a fierceness in our nature, as far from knowing a mean as the
other; for it is another extreme. Whence it arises (for I follow the same
method as in the other) needs not our enquiry; A fruit of corrupted nature it
is, and a distemper thereof; and in distempers we neither know a mean, nor can
distinguish of persons. We fling about us in distempers, whether child or
servant is before us, all are one, while we are in the drunkenness of passion.
It is not to be doubted, but this distemper is to be found in Parents. And we
may note, That they, who are most indulgent, are, if provoked, as they will
soon be, most severe and violent in their correction, as if they had that
absolute and universal power over their children, which once the Parent had,
and much power yet they have, all the craft is in the wise using of it. But
they do not use it well now in their passion, they will miscall the child
strangely, and strike they know not where, and kick too; I set down, what mine
own eyes and ears have told me. They do punish, perhaps, not Laudabat se non
sine causa, sed sine modo.
without cause (as was said of one in another case) but without all measure, as
if they were not children but slaves. And then (as was said in the other
extreme) we may read without book, that no good can be done, but much hurt
rather, while the Parent is so eager upon the child, it is not then teachable,
not counsellable, for, as was said, fear betrayeth all its succors; nor is
the Parent in a fit case to teach or counsel it: for, what can be expected
from a man in a frenzy; Anger is fitly called so. A Parent carried in a
passion, cannot mingle his corrections with instructions, and where that
mixture is not, there is no Discipline; for that is true Discipline, when the
child smarts from the hand, and Sim ul sunt haec duo conjunge^da, Argutio and
castigatio. Inutilis est castigatio. ubi verba silent, and verbera saeviunt:
unde recte vocatur castigalio, Disciplina, qua delinquens una dolet, and
discit. Bright on the Revelat. chap. 3. verse. 19. p. 72. (...). Not possible to
put out fire, with fire, Chrysostom. in Genesis 32. hom. 89.
learnes from the tongue. We must first convince a child of his fault, and
then punish the same, if the fault deserve it; These two must ever go
together, correction, and instruction. Correction is to no purpose, where words
are silent, and stripes outrageous. Correction, is truly called Discipline,
because the dilinquent smarts and learnes, both together. This then is my
conclusion, wherein I shall a little enlarge my self; That roughness and
fierceness, does not help in the rooting out of evil, though there it does
best; but much hurt it does in the planting in of good; there it lets
exceedingly. It furthers not in the unrooting of evil, but rather sets the
work back, and roots it more in; That is the first thing I shall make clear.

1. Man is a noble creature and lord-like, of a good house (as we say) though
fallen into decay. But this remainder or relic, there is yet of his
nobleness; you may easily lead him, when you cannot drag him; you may
persuade, when you cannot force, and the more force, the less good. Mildness,
and Meekness, and sweetness in carriage, wins much, 1. Voluntas c^gi non
vult, doceri expetit. A soft tongue breaks the bone, Prove. 25. verse. 12. and
15. to be observed both.
even sometimes with a crooked disposition, when as roughness hardneth; It is
not the way to pluck down a stubborn heart, nor to fetch out a lie, though in
these cases, a Parent must be very active, and if he spares his child, he
kills it.

It is a great fault in parents, says one, for fear of taking down of the
child's spirits, not to take down its pride, and get victory over its
affections, whereas a proud unbroken heart raises us more trouble, then all
the world beside. And if it be not taken down betimes, it will be broken to
pieces by great troubles in age. I shall consider this evil, and some others
in fit place; now in this place, I am removing that which hinders.

The parent is bound to teach the child how to bear the yoke from its youth.
This duty the parent is engaged upon. Lam. 3. 27.
But the parent must use a great deal of discretion in the putting on this
yoke. The parent must not stand in a menacing posture before the child, as
ready to strike as to speak, and giving discouraging words too. When we would
back our Colt, or break a skittish Heifer to the yoke (the comparison holds
well) we do not hold the yoke in one hand, and a whip in the other; but we do
before them, as we know the manner is, else there would be much ado, in putting
on the yoke, and in breaking or backing the Colt; they would be both more wild
and less serviceable: It is much so with children, if our carriage be not
ordered with discretion before them, we may make them like those beasts more
unruly, and, perhaps, all alike; or if they learn any thing by such froward
handling, it will be frowardness.

When we would work upon a child, our carriage before it should be quiet, and
as still as might be, just in the same posture, that a man stands in before the
live mark, which he would hit; he does not hoot and hollow when he takes his
aim, for then he would fright away the game by his rudeness; but so he
stands, as we well know the manner, like one who means to hit the mark. Our
aim is the good of the child, we must look well to our deportment before it,
else we may fright away our game. There are some natures (says Clem. Alex.)
like iron, hardly flexible, but by the fire, hammer and anvill, that is, as he
expounds it, by reproofs, Paed. li. 2. c. 10. page 97.
threats, blows: and all this may be done, and must, if done well, intermes of
mildness, and pleasing accent, with force of reason rather then hardness of
blows, and if it might be in the spirit of meekness; remembering still Mr.
Tindals Letter Martyr. pa. 987.
words, As lowliness of heart shall make you high with God, even so meekness
of words shall make you sink into the hearts of men.

I have observed a child more insolent and stout under a rigorous and rough
hand, but calmed after the heat was over on both sides, with a mild and gentle
persuasion, that workt; force and violence hardens, when as a loving and gentle
persuasion wins upon the heart, thaws and melts the same. Harshnesse loses the
heart, and alienates the affections; (...). Chrysostom Hom. 26. in 1. Cor. 11.
but mildness gains all. Proud flesh (as experience tells us) is taken down
by lenitives, the most gentle and soft applications: So the pride and
roughness of our nature is subdued by lenitives, and not by another
roughness, as the Father speaks elegantly.

We may note too, the more rigor the child apprehends, and the more the rod
is threatened, which is the only thing a child fears, the more the child
will hide it self; like that unwise man, who standing at the entry of an
unlawful, but too much frequented place, and finding himself eyed by a friend,
whom he would not should see him there, shrunk in his head and in he went. If a
man had no more wit, what expect we from a child? He was ashamed Non sum adeo
aetatum imprudens, ut instandum teneris protinus acerbe p^tem. etc. Quint.
Instit. l 1. cap 1.
to be seen at the door, he helped himself well to go within the doors, then
(as his friend said) he was within indeed, and the further he was, so much the
more within: so a child will do, he will hide himself in the thicket, at least
he thinks so, further and further, if he apprehend much rigor: there is much
wisdom to be used here, and mercy also, and great reason there is to incline
us to both, as we shall hear in due place. For the present, that which has
been said may assure us, that fierceness helps not in the unrooting of evil,
it hinders much the implanting of good. There it hurts very much, which is the
second.

2. If ever mildness, gentleness, calmnesse, and sweetness of carriage do
good, and do become; then more especially, when we would win upon the
affection, and sink into the understanding; when we would lodge some precepts
in the mind, draw the heart and set it right. Now while we are instructing,
handle the child freely and liberally, in a sweet and mild way; speak kindly
to it we must now, and then we may have its heart for ever; if we be rough and
harsh now, we fright away our game. The instruction which we enforce into the
mind by a kind of violence will not long continue there; but what is
insinuated and fairly induced with delight and pleasure, will stick in the mind
the longer. (Trem. Preface before Job.) If Moses be to instruct, he is
commanded to speak, not to smite: and it teaches us, That a sweet compellation
and carriage wins much upon the heart; but we suppose we are dealing with
children. It is a mad behavior and no better, to suffer the hand to move as
fast as the tongue, and to strike at the head too, the seat of understanding.
The head is to our little worla, as man is to the great world, the very
abridgement or epitome of a man: spare the head of any place, else you may
drive out that little, which is, and stop the entrace for coming in of more.

The Lord make all teachers understand this truth, and pardon our failings
herein: and the Lord teach parents also, whose duty more peculiarly we are
upon, to correct and instruct their children in all meekness. That we may all
learn, I will set down some considerations which may calm the parent, and take
off from his hastiness, (when he would unroot evil) a great enemy to that
good he ows and does really intend the child.

3. I suppose now such a parent, who has been fierce and eager upon the
child, striking, flinging, kicking it, as the usual manner is, because of its
stomach toward the parent, which he will pluck down; and because it stands in
a lie, which he is resolved to fetch ont; such a Parent I suppose (for such
there are) and this I would have him consider, it may make him wiser against
the next time. First,

1. Who is that, upon whom he has bestowed so many hard blows both from hand
and foot too? (I tell but my own observation) who is it he has used so
disgracefully with such contumelious words? It is no other, then the image and
glory of God. A strong consideration to cause the 1. Cor. 11. 7.
parent to carry himself comely and reverently before the child, which he may
do, and yet make the child both to know and keep its distance, else it cannot
know its duty. A Parent cannot conceive the child's condition to be more Maxima
d^betur pueris Reverentia. Iav. Major e longinquo Reverentia. Tacit. (...);
etc. de prosper. and Adver. Hom 5. o.
deplorable then was the Rich-mans in the Parable; yet (says Chrysostom. and he
makes it very useful) Abraham called him Son; a compellation still be fitting
a Father; so also, words and actions well becoming that sweet name; Jud. 9. a.
and most likely to win upon, and to convince the child; whereas bitter and
vilifying words become not, though we did contend with the Devil. a Kind
words make rough actions plausible: The bitterness of reprehension is answered
with the pleasingnesse of compellations. Son, let that be the name; for so he
is, though never so bad. And as a child has no greater argument to prevail
with a Father, then by that very name of love: so, nor has a parent any
stronger argument, whereby to prevail with his child, then by that very name
of duty; whether we respect his Father on earth, whose child he is, or in
heaven, whose image and impresse he bears, though now much defaced. This is
the first.

. 2. And it is his own image too (that is the second consideration) his very
picture, even that child, whom, in the rage and rore of his anger, he has
thrown and battered so. He is a mad man that will kick and throw about his
picture, specially if the picture does fully and lively show forth his
proportion. This child is the parents picture right, and never so fully the
parents image as now, that it is in a stubborn fit. It is a certain truth, a
parent never sees his own revolting and stubborn heart more expressed to the
life, then he may do in a stubborn child; then he may see it, as plainly as
face in water answers face: this is a weighty consideration, if it be put home.

A Parent must consider whence had the child this, who put this in, which the
parent would now, in all haste, fetch out: Sinful peremptory nature runs in
a blood, it is (...), 1. Pet. 1. 18.
by tradition, the child received it of the father. This the Parent must not
forget, and then his carriage will not be such, as may lose the childs heart,
and alienate his affections; such an effect harshnesse and roughness may work,
it may make the child think, that the parent hates his own flesh In ^mendando
ne accrbus, etc q^idam sic objurgant quasi oderint: Quint. 2. 2.
.

3. Is the child thus stiff and stubborn, thus confirmed in evil? Does it
stand against all the parents knocks and threats, like a rock, immovable?
Consider then he must, whence was that Rock hewn? The parent is the quarry or
pit whence it was taken, and whence it contracted this Tanquam dura sil^x, aut
stet. Vi^g.
rockinesse. It cannot be too often considered, but it was the former
consideration; the parent must consider this here, and it suffices to calm
and quiet him, to take off from his eagerness, that the time was, when the
child was not so stiff and so tough; it was tender like a twig, so as a twig,
or the sight of it would have moved and stirred it; but then the parent would
not, it was too soon; the time was not yet, afterward would be soon enough:
Now if it be too late, he must thank himself; the parent might, but would not;
he would now, but cannot Aegre reprehendas, quod sinis consuescere. Hieron ad
Gaudent. de Pacat. l. 2. ep. 16. Difficulter eraditur, quod rudes animi
perbiberunt. Ad Laetam. l. 2. ep. 15.
. Through the parents fault and connivence it is, that the child is become as
stiff as a stake, as unmovable as a rock. If a parent can thus consider of
himself and his child, his instructions will be more then his stripes; (so
they should be always, and then they may save that labor and Quo saepius
monuerit, hoc rarius castigabit. Quint. l. 2. c. 2.
pain) his tears will fall faster then his hands; his passion will be turned
into compassion, and his prayers before and after will exceed all, for this
peremptory nature is a crookedness, which man cannot make straight. Oh how
good and how comely is it for a parent to water his plants (by help of a
metaphor I mean his children) not as one did those in his garden, and as too
many do those in their house with wine, but, in imitation of the Prophet, with
tears! I will water thee with my tears, O Hesbon. An Hortens. vino irrigavit.
Macrob. Isa. 16. 9.
excellent water to make fruitful, for a child of many prayers and tears
cannot perish if we may believe the Fathers words to Aug. Mother. This may
teach us, how to Aug. vita.
carry our selves in the unrooting of evil. Other considerations there are
which may instruct the parent, when he is implanting good. Parents commonly
teach their children the book and the needle, at least the beginnings in both.
But they will say, They are the unfittest of many, for they have not the
patience to hear the child read three words. So I have heard some say, and
those not of the worst. The inconvenience here-from is great; therefore to cool
their heat, and to arrest their hands while they are instructing, let them take
upon trust these considerations till they can suggest better. The first is,

1 That the beginning in any kind of learning seems strange and hard to all,
young and old, but specially to young folk; The Father must expect to see an
aukwardnesse, an unaptnesse in the child, at his first entrance. The Arcadia
tells us (it is a pretty fiction) that a Prince, the better to mask himself that
he might not be known, took upon him a Shepherds weed, and the Shepherds hook
he takes into his hand also. The right Shepherd, who will hold his thumb
under his girdle, and, lying along upon the ground, will point you out this way
with his leg, this Shepherd indeed, observing his instrument the hook
nothing well managed, came to this Prince, whom he knew not, and gave him some
directions touching the managing of his hook, but finding his instructions did
not take, he went away in a fume, telling him, he was the aukwardest fellow at
the hook that ever he met withal.

A shepherds hook was a strange instrument in a Princes hand, he could have
held a Scepter better, and with better grace, but there must be a time to learn
the well managing of both. And a little time will not serve to learn this
((...)) (...), Xenoph. l. 8. p. 613. Hom. Il. a De Cyri. Instit. l. 1. a.
shepherd how to feed and govern men; that wild cattle, the hardest to
govern of any, says Zenophon too. I remember here what is reported of that
Valiant and right noble King of Sweden, of fresh and bleeding memory, He was
trained up for Government, being employed by his Father, as a Secretary to the
State, and a Commander in the Wars, when he was but 18. But I recall my self to
that I was speaking.

Letters or a needle, to children are stranger things, then a Shepherds hook
in a Princes hand; they wonder what they are, and what they must do with them;
play with them they think, and so they may, and learn too; an easy way of
learning, but very expedite. It is a rule of one, and that was an Irritande ad
discendum infantiae gratia eburneas literarum formas in lusu^ offerre, etc.
Quint. l. 1. c. 1. Fiant literae vel buxea, vel eburneae, etc. ludat in eis ut
and lusus ipse e^uditi^ sit, and ^ Hi^r ad L^t^m. l. 2.
ancient Teacher, Give children the letters of the Alphabet, fairly drawn or
carved in Ivory, or any other solid or delectable matter, to play withal,
that, by their sports, those forms might be imprinted in their memories,
whereby we express all the notions of our mind in writing. And so Hier.
counsels also.

What ever our customs are this way (they are none of the best) this we are
taught by it, That we must make things as familiar to children as may be, and
that we must draw them on with all pleasingnesse, I mean, in point of
instruction. In learning any thing, they seem to pull, as it were, at a dead
thing: It is a great point of wisdom, in the Teacher to put some life into
it, that the child may see it stir, and coming onward, else the work may
seem so hard to them, that they can better bear the smart of the Rod, then
the labor of the work See Aug. de Civit. l. 21. c. 14 Id inprimis cavere
oportebit, ne studia amare nondum potest, oderit. Quint. 11.
; then discouragements follow, such as make them hate the book before they know
it. A parent must be very gentle and patient, specially when he is upon the
beginnings of things, for they are hardest; it is the first consideration.

2. He must consider, that now the child is entered, it must be taught the same
thing, again and again, and yet again, for yet it is not learnt; The first
impressions are weak Quicquid incipit, rude est. Nemo non errat, nisi qui
saepissime non erravit. Rumpat saepe stamina, ^t aliquando non rumpat. Hier. ad
Gaud. d^ Pacat. ep. 16. lib. 2.
, the lesson is not firm, nor will it be kept without continual repetition;
and yet, the parent must have patience, a necessary virtue and well becoming
the Teacher, and as much promoting the learner, whereunto this, I conceive,
would be very conducible.

3. Let a Teacher consider how unapt he finds himself to that Science he is
newly entered upon: if a Teacher would learn something he knows not whilst he
is teaching the child, what himself knows, he would see his own unaptnesse,
and pardon the childs. As put case, while I teach the child Greek, I my self
learnt Hebrew. Whilst the mother

4. Lastly, let the Parent consider how long he has been a disciple, and how
little he has learnt. It may be an Elephant, or some imitating creature may be
taught more in one month, then he has learnt in a whole year, in matters most
necessary; this consideration, if it be put home, would calm him sure enough.
And so much for the removing of the Lets.

CHAP. IIII.
Our nature, like a soil fruitful of weeds: What her evils are: How unrooted
or prevented.

NOw we look to the preventing of evils, which, while they are but in the seed,
may be crushed, as it were, in the egg, before there comes forth a flying
Serpent or Cockatrice: and I begin with that, which is most radically in us,
and first shows it self; that is 1. Pride; it is the sin of our nature and
runs forth to seed, rank and luxuriant the soonest of any. It is the first
sin which declares its life in a child, and last dies in a man. We read Tom.
6. ser. 1.
that Abimelechs skull was broke with a millstone thrown down upon him by the
hand of a woman; then he called out hastily unto his Armor-bearer, Slay me,
Judge. 9. 34.
that men say not, A woman slew him: Observe, says Chrysostom, a The man was
dying, yet his pride would not die. Indeed it is the very heart-string of our
corrupt Nature; cut it, and that beast will die: but, like the heart in the
body, it will hold out the longest. I shall speak more hereof in my second
part, where we shall see the root of this sin and the fruit of it too. In
this place, being upon the duty of a parent, I shall only show how far we
parents fall short at this point, and what our folly is: for what we should
soonest suppress in children, we first cherish and maintain. Indeed, all that
are employed about them Quint. de claris Orat.
, are, for the most part, teachers of vanity unto them, but of nothing more
then of priding themselves, and over-valuing their worth, which is nothing:
whereto, I conceive, this makes a way very ready and compendious.

1. If a child have some portion in the world above its fellows, then it is
presently a master or mistress, and others its servants. He (I include both
sexes) is taught to command, when he should learn to obey; and has titles of
respect given unto him, before he knows how to deserve them, or give them where
they are due; he has others under him, when he should be under others, and not
differ from a servant Gal 4. 1, 2.
, (in point of subjection and obedience, it is the old and standing rule)
though Lord of all. This inhanceth our nature above the worth of it, and makes
the child think it self some body, (...). Acts 8. 9.
some great one, when it is a very little one, to that he thinks himself, a
very nothing. I have observed, they, that have been masters, when they were but
Boys, and in their season to learn subjection, have proved the basest servants
afterward, and boys all the days of their life.

2. Another way there is to blow-up this little bladder, which is, by putting
on the child such ornaments (so the parent intends them) as serve, neither for
necessity, nor ornament, nor decency, and then bidding the child, look where
(...). etc. Chrysostom. hom. 41. in Genesis 18.
it is fine; An ordinary custom, and very effectual to lift up the mind; To
teach the child so much to look on it self, that afterward it cannot look
of.

I remember a merry fellow, if he did intend hurt to any person, would then
give him a rich suit of apparel: A Eutrapolus, cuicunque nocere volebat,
vestimenta dabat pretiosa. Hor.
strange kind of injury, a man would think, but he found it a sure way and
certain to hurt; He should find his enemy looking work enough; he would so
look upon his fine costly clothes, that he would forget the vileness of his
body; And, for the mind of this man, so prancked-up now, it would be as new
and as gay as his clothes, and then he would hurt him, sure enough: For, this
is a compendious way to take hurt, or a fall; To look upon the clothes, and
forget a man's self, and his first principles. Sr. Thomas More tells us of a
country, wherein the men went very plain; but the children were as gay, as
jewels, bracelets, and feathers would make them; It was his fiction, but it
finds some realitie and truth amongst us, with whom children are so decked up,
and some also, who pass for, and walk as men; of whom, we may say, as the
Prophet in a case not very different (for, they also lavish gold out of the
bag, to adorn their Idol) Remember this, and show your selves men. But sure
enough Isa. 46. 8.
our rule teaches us otherwise, touching our children; That they are worse
trusted with superfluities, till they have learnt from us, the nature, use and
end of apparel; why it was first put on, and since continued.

In the mean time, an handsome, neat, but plain dress does best, and is the
safest garb. A wise man can see his way here, and guide himself and his
child, between a cynicall affected plainness, scanting themselves; and a
pageant like ostentation, fomenting pride, and strange conceits; Read
Chrysostom. upon Genesis 3. 1 verse. 2^. Hom. 18.
Abusing that most fearfully, to most contrary ends, which God has given to
make us humble and thankful. Our Proverb forbids us to stir up a sleeping
dog; and the Greeks have another to the same purpose; We must not cast up
fire with a sword; Both the one and the other teaches us, not to foment, or
stir up corrupt nature, but, by all fitting (...). Plut. de Educat.
means, to keep it down, so may we prevent this evil. But we see the contrary
is practiced, we do stir fire with a sword, we do foment corrupt nature, by
vain and fantastical fashions; such, as, if the Devil were in man's shape
(they were the words of a grave and learned Divine) he D. G.
could not be more disguised then now, in man's cut and garb. A great and a
provoking evil, this; our duty is to prevent it, what may be, and betimes.

Here is a fit place to plant in the Grace of humility, lowliness of
carriage, how the viler a man is in his own eyes, the more gracious he will be
in every man's eye besides. The lower his deportment is (so it be in truth and
sincerity, and not below himself) the higher he is in true judgment. With
the lowly is wisdom; and the eye of the Lord is toward him for good. More
fully this in the second part.

But here, let the child, have some old lessons, with his new clothes, for
that is all, besides his sports, he takes delight in. It may be told, That as
the man must honor the (...), etc. Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant Hom. 19. We commend not
an horse for his trappings, nor must we a man for his clothes; what avails a
body well clad, and a soul naked? 1 Pet 3. 3. Aug. confess. lib. 1. cap. 7.
house, not the house the man; so the person must put a grace upon his
apparel, not the apparel upon the person. It is a poor ornament, and not
worth the looking on, which is put-on, and off with the clothes. The inward
ornament is the grace indeed. And if the Parent shall intend principally, the
beautifying of the inward man, his own, and his childs, he shall reap the
comfort of both. And so much to the first, which shows my scope, to propose a
way only, not to determinate the same.

2. There is a spice of this pride, which shows it self in children before
their teeth, in a froward stubborn carriage. The Parent must be as speedy in
observing what signs the child gives hereof, either in words or gesture
(thereby it is declared very much): And he must leave nothing remaining (so
far as he can help) of this iron sinew; out with it, and spare him not; The
childs future good, and the Parents comfort depend upon it. Let him see and
feel, that it is very unprofitable and bootlesse, to be sullen, froward,
obstinate: leave him not till he be as soft as a pumpion, that is the counsel,
and the way to prevent this evil, which will make him as unfit to rule
hereafter, as he is to obey now.

The Parent must be very watchful and active here; but now remembering he looks
upon his own picture, as was said, his own Image right. Now heart answers
heart, as face to face in water, or in Crystal; And therefore, we shall the
less fear the fathers passion. All compassion will be used, which is
necessary and required; And so the stubborn spirit, which works all our woe,
as was said, may be taken down, through Gods blessing, who is looked up unto;
for that, Which is crooked, no man can make straight: And the contrary, grace may
be instilled and enforced, I mean, gentleness of Vt ameris ama. Mar.
carriage, meekness of behavior; oh how winning, how commendable it is! Love
is the whet-stone of Love, an attractive thereof Ego tibi monstrabo amatorium,
sine medicamento, etc. Si vis amari, ama. Senec. epist. 9. If we would be
believed, we must live honestly: If we would be beloved, we must love heartily;
Isid. Pelusit, lib. 2. epist. 148.
; I will tell thee, said one, how thou may make another love thee without a
love-potion; Be pleasing and loving to others, and thou shall have love again.
A meek and loving carriage, will win the love, and draw the eyes of all unto
us (as a clear Sunshine upon a fair Dial) where as, a rough, stout, and boy
sterous nature, does thrust out a rough and hasty hand against every man, and
will find every man's hand as boisterous, and rough against him; but
gentleness sinks into the heart and wins it, makes the clearest Demonstration
of a Gentleman. Others may assume the name, but it is the Gentleman's right,
his, whom gentleness, calmness, sweetness of carriage does denominate.

There are other means to work and mould the spirit this way, which I cannot
think of, but we must remember still, that there is no way like this; The
looking up to the Lord, the spreading this crookedness and peremptory bent of
nature, before Him, who only can subdue it, and set it straight. But the
Parent must do his part, else God is lookt-up unto in vain. He must set the 21
chapter of Deuteronomy. before the child, there to read the punishment of a stubborn
child. He must inform him, how unsociable a Nabal-like disposition is 1. Sam.
25. 17. Latrant, non loquuntur; Cic. Brut. page 161. fol. Stridet non loquitur.
Call. epist. 339.
; 2. Sam. 23. 6, 7. Vt spina, ex quacunque part conspexeris, habet aculeos:
Sic servus Diaboli. Chrysostom. in Matt. 7. Hom. 9. lat. aut.
untractable such a person, who is of the nature of a thorn. But above all
things the Parent must bid the child behold; how God raises valleys, and
takes down hills; Represseth the presumptuous, and gives grace to the modest.

3. Spare not the child for his lie; children are strangely addicted to it,
because they are children and understand not; he is a child, though a man
threescore years old, that uses it. It is the winding crooked course; the very
going of the serpent, which goes basely upon the belly, and eats the dust.
There is no vice does more uncover a man to the world, and covers him with
shame; It out-faces God, and shrinks from man; and what can be more childish?
It unmans a man, debasing his glory, and making it his shame: It makes a man
most unlike God, most like the Devil. I know not how a Parent can dispose of a
lying child; he is unfit for any society. We take more content with our Dog,
then with one, whose language we understand not, says De Civit. lib. 18. cap.
7.
Austin; I add, And then with one, whose words we cannot trust: A Parent must
labor hard for the rooting out of this evil. He may tell the child; That God
is truth, And that He commands and loves the same in His creatures, and in our
converse one with another; That He sees the secrets of man's heart, and will
bring every secret thing to judgment: The Parent may show the child, as on a
theater, Gods judgments on liars; how quick and sharp God has been against
this abuse of the Tongue, punishing it with Leprosy, and sudden death. And
that He has allotted to liars a place without, amongst Dogs: because they have
abased themselves Reve. 22. 15.
below men, etc.

But perhaps the rod is the only thing, which yet the child fears, and
understands, and let him feel it now for the preventing of this great evil,
but yet so handle the child that it may not run further into the thicket, and
shift the more, as he, we spoke of, did into the house; Thereby the child will
be the more hardened against the next time. A child has no more wit but to
think as too many old folk do, That an evil is cured with an evil; which, as
one chapter 4. sect. 4.
says, is a most absurd conceit, there being no remedy against Isid. Pelus.
lib. 2. epist. 145. (...), etc. Isid.
the evil of sin, this specially, but confession, and repentance; Therefore
handle the child with great discretion at this point. And let the child find
some profit in speaking the truth, and encouragement that way; that, if
possibly, it may be prevailed with by gentle means. Children that will not
lie, so He was their Savior, Isa. 43. 8. A parent may hit on a better way then
I can point unto him; many ways he must try; and I am confident, nothing will
more pose him, then the way to take, whereby to pluck down the childs
stomach, and to fetch out his lie. And yet, in case he cannot do both,
specially the latter, he will be posed as much, how to dispose this child for
afterward. The Lord direct the Parent, and bless the child.

4. Suffer not the child to be idle, nor vainly employed; keep him in
exercise and in breath. Accustom him to fitting and moderate labor in the
morning of his life, and of the day. Labor is the pickle of virtue, it keeps
our faculties of body and soul, sweet and fresh, as the pickle keeps fish
Labor muria virtutum.
or flesh. Idleness and sloth, like standing waters, putrifies. It is the very
rust and canker of the soul; The Devils cushion, Hic motus aquas maris a
putrefactione tuetur, Magir.
his very Tide-time of temptation, wherein he carries with much ease, the
current of our corrupt affections, to any cursed action: The very hour of
temptation, wherein Satan joins with our imaginations, and sets them about his
work to grind his greese: for, the soul, as a mill, either grindes that, which
is put into it, or else works upon it self, our imagination, is the souls
first wheel, ever turning, and naturally, it is evil continually; and yet, as
that moves, so the other wheels stir; we are ever weaving Spid^rs webbs, or
hatching Cockatrices Eggs, that is, naturally, we are always imagining vanity
or mischief. Therefore it is good and safe to find the mind employment, and
employment to good purpose: for an unimployed life (like a Serving-man, whose
only work is to hold a trencher, and carry a cloak) will prove a burden to it
self, or to the earth that supports and

We must look to this betimes in children, by giving them fitting work, and
using them to some hardness, else the inconveniences will not be small. I have
observed, when a child, put forth to learn a Trade, could not endure the
toil (for every labor is a toil to him, whose chief work was to lie by the
fire, or in the street, and field taking his pleasure) so home he returns, to
his pottage, and bread and butter, whence he had his growth, and the worst part
of his breeding. This kind of Culture, will cause an infection, which, if it
takes the child now, will not out of the bone hereafter: it is the disease,
the sturdy beggar complained of, but when he was searched (for so he was) it
was found to be idleness. Camerarius has that pleasant Story (so he calls it)
in his 16 Chap. and it may teach us so much in earnest; That, if we employ not
our children when they be young, they will make head against our designs, when
they are grown up; and choose rather to beg then to work. Let the child
hear often that of the Wiseman, He that is slothful Prove. 18. 9:
in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster. And that also, cap. 22.
29. See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before Kings: he
shall not stand before mean men. And it will not be amiss, if the father take
the child by the hand, and so go together unto the Ant, that they may consider
Prove. 6. 6. Parvula, nam exemplo est, etc. Hor. Ser. lib. 1. Sat. 1. See
Chrysostom. ad pop. Antio. Hom. 12.
her ways and be wise, for so they are commanded. Let the child often hear
the Apostles rule, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. If any will not work, neither should he
eat. And let him understand, what the Apostles meaning is. Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him
that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor, etc. Remembering still;
that the childs calling, is, to fit him for a calling; and his work, to fit
him for both, for his calling, and labor in his calling, where to he is borne,
as the sparks fly up-ward. Other notes Job 6. 7.
there are of ordinary observation, which a child may observe, from himself
and the creatures about him; All the members of the body are active in their
places, for the good of the body; and all the creatures (...), etc. Chrysostom.
Tom. 6. in vet. Test. page 54 2.
in their courses serve for slug, amidst so many monitors, which call upon him
for diligence? Besides, God is a pure Act always doing, I and my Father work
hitherto; And the liker we are to Him, the more we are versed in well-doing.
But remember this, and you have all; That Math. 25. 26.
wicked and slothful go together.

5. Look well with whom the child does converse; There is a companion Lege
Isid. Pelus. lib. 3. epist. 124. and lib. 4. ep. 35.
, whose words fret like a gangrene, and corrupt like a plague sore, from whom
the child receivesan impression quickly, which will not quickly out again. If
the Air be infectious; if the place not wholesome, we will remove our children
quickly: we are not so careful for their souls, says Chrysostom. De Vit. Mon.
lib. 3. cap. 7.
but that is our great blame, for the breath of a wicked companion is more
contagious, then is unholsome Air. Above all things avoid that pest or plague
of the mind, bad company says Lyp Ante omnia pestes illas animorum sodales
malos. Cent. 1. ep. 78. and 82.
. The companion of fools (that is of wicked men) shall be destroyed Prove. 13.
20.
. A wicked man (he is ever the foot in Scripture phrase) continuing a foot,
that is, in his wickedness, shall be destroyed, that is out of doubt. But why;
The companion of fools? that is the doubt and All the question. The answer is
easy, for, The companion of a fool, will be a fool, he will learn folly, it
needs no question, for wisdom has spoken it. It is an old saying and true,
we cannot come fairly off, from (...). Epict. (...) etc. Theog.
foul company. We must still remember, Evil words corrupt good manners. Evil
soakes into the heart by the ear, and eye, as water into wool; like a tear
Removenda ab aspectu ne tanquam lachryma ab oculis in pectus cadant. Strad.
lib. 1. Prolus. 3. p. 719.
it falls from the eye downward upon the breast. (...), etc.
Plutarch in the life of Demetrius has an excellent observation; I note it,
because it comes double to a Christian. The old Spartans were wont, upon
festival days, to make their servants drunk (whom they called Ilotae) and to
bring them in before their children, that to their children might beware of
that distemper, which takes away the Man, and leaves a Swine in the room. The
Author Censures this custom, and that in the observation: (We do not think
this an humane correction of a vice, which is so preposterously taken, from so
depraved a fashion and distemper. It cannot become a man; It is not a man-like
conceit, to think, that a child will learn temperance, by observing
intemperance, so far out of Plutarch. Wickedness is both more insinuative,
and more plausible then virtue; especially, when it meets with an untutored
Judge, etc. says Bishop Hall. It is certain, A bad a Censure of Travel. sect.
3. see sect. 4.
example has much more strength to draw unto sin, then a good example has
to draw unto virtue, as one will draw faster down-hill, then four can draw up,
which tells us the reason also; our natural bend and weight tends, and does
Bias us, that way Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit. Juv.
. And thence it is, that one bad companion (which was the old complaint)
teaches more evil, then four instructors good Plus no^et Gorgias quam
prodest Cratippus. Our nature is like unto fire, which if there be any
infection in a room, draws it strait to it self: or like jet, which omitting
all precious objects, gathers up straws and dust. Dr. H. Censure of Travel.
sect. 21. Corrupt dispositions, out of a natural fertility, can both beget
and conceive evil alone, but if it be seconded by examples, precepts,
encouragements, the Ocean it self has not more spawn; Ibid. Vt aqua in areo a
digitum sequitur praecedentem: ita aetas mollis flexibilis, and quocunque
duxeris, trahitur. Hier. lib. 2. epist. 16. p. 201. Vix artibus honestis pudor
retin^tur, nedum inter certamina vitiorum. Tacit. An. 14, 4.
. Servants teach children much hurt, I mean, such (for I have no low esteem of
any office in an house, be it never so low and drudging) who cast off their
Lords service, and serve the basest master in the world; such, who (as Sr. Tho.
More says) are worse then old lumber in an house; They do not fill up a room
only, but do much ill service; A child with such foul companions, fits as
ill, as the Fuller with the Collier, it will be blackt with them; They will be
always opening their rotten wares before it, so impoysoning the child with
language as black as Hell: The child is not safe in the Kitchen with these,
but if the servant, he or she, be good and faithful; of a grave and wise
deportment: Then the parent has a Treasure; and a good Spyall; He shall the
better watch over his child, and see into his disposition.

6. There is a sickness of the fancy as well as of other faculties, and the
distemper thereof is quickly shown by the tongue, which is but one member, but
a world of wickedness; it quickly runs out and commits a riot, and leaves us
to wishing, that we could recall our selves, which (now the word is out) is as
impossible, as to recall a bird upon her wing. It is good to look to this
betimes in children; and, because it is a child and cannot speak, teach it
silence. And this the parent may teach himself and the child under these
notions.

1. That the tongue is called a man's glory; and, that it may be, as it is
called, he must make his watch strong. He must examine his words before they
have leave to pass their bars, pale, or inelosure, (a minute after is too
late) to what purpose they would out.

2. God must be looked up unto here; man has made wild creatures tame; but
the tongue no man can tame. It is the Lord that must shut and seal this graves
mouth (the throat is, naturally, an open sepulcher) it is He that makes the
watch strong; if He keep not the mouth, as well as the City, Psalm 141. 3. See
Trem.
then the watch is set in F^agil^s sunt nostrae serae, nisi De^^ ill as
servaverit, etc. Chrysostom in Matthew. 24. Hom. 51. lat tantum.
vain.

3. And as we must look up to God, so must we into our selves; this abundance
is in the heart, as we read after Second part. Pro, 4. 23.
; the heart is the well or cistern, whence the mouth fills and emptieth it self.
The heart must be kept with all diligence; We must keep that springhead
clean, as we would do the fountain, whence we do expect pure and wholesome
water Psalm. 141. 3. Trem.
; as the heart is the fountain of life, so is it of well-living, and of
well-speaking: with all observation keep the heart.

4. And this considering, how quickly a man's tongue ensnares him, exposes him
to trouble, even to the will of the adversary, who lies at the catch, and
lays snares, and makes a man an offender for a Isa 29 21. (...), E^r^p. Bac.
page 14.
word; that man who has no command of himself here, will be still in the Prove.
19. 19. Trem. reads it otherwise.
briars; if you help him out to day, (says the wiseman, and it deserved our
mark) he will need your help again to morrow. If you deliver him, yet thou must
do it again. Such snares our words are, which must be considered.

The wise man's saying is to be noted, Prove. 14. 3. Trem.
In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: that is, a foolish man carries
still about him, his feruler or lash, which will put him to pain enough,
because he will speak in the pride of his heart: And it is observable which
follows; A fools mouth is his destruction, Chap. 18. 7.
and his lips are the snare of his soul. A slip with the foot does not offend
us so much, as may a slip with the tongue. And yet a slip of the foot has
slipped the leg out of joint, and caused much pain; but a slip with the tongue
has caused shame and sorrow both. Therefore he wrote well to his friend, that
told him; You had better fall in your floor, or pavement, Isid. Pelus. 1.
Epist. 459
then by your tongue. An hurt by a sudden fall may be quickly cured; but a fall
by a rash word has so broken a man, that he could never be restored, set
straight and in joint again; his rashness has been his ruin; not his rod
only, as we heard, but his destruction, as we have read, and known: which may
be wisely considered by the wise in heart, for it is not in the Philosophy of
fools to consider, that an unbridled tongue is storme-like, sudden, violent,
and devowring, which sinks our ship quickly, or precipitates us upon the rock
of offense. It is an ordinary expression in Homer, but of no ordinary use,
What a word has passed, the bars, rampire, or pale of (...) Vallum aut
claustrum dentium.
thy teeth? employing thereby and teaching, That our teeth are set, not so much
to chew our meat, as for a trench, wall, or double pale of Ivory about our
tongue, to restrain, compresse and stop our words, lest we utter them rashly,
before right reason and judgment have given a worthy pass unto them.

5. We must consider also, that we must give an account Est aliquid quod ex
magno viro vel tacente proficias. Aliquis vir bonus eligendus, and ante oculos
habendus, ut sic tanquam illo spectante vivamus. Sen. Epis. 11. l^g. Cl. Alex.
Paed. l. 3. c. 5. o St^om. l. 7. 523. 2. Chro. 16. 9.
of every idle word, and that to Him, who sees not as man sees, therefore set
we our selves still as in His presence; the maine and chief help. The Heathen
man would say, It were good for a young man to think some sage and grave Cato
were at his elbow, over-looking his actions, and hearing his words, that would
awe him; How much more then, should the eye of the Lord awe us, which runs
too and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf
of them, whose heart is perfect toward Him? That Is very moving, which Laban
said to Jacob: we are now upon parting, no man is with us, here is none to
witness what has passed betwixt us, but this heap, and that is but a dead
remembrancer: but the Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one
from another; if thou shall do so man is with us, see God is witness hetwixt
me and Genesis 31. 49.
thee. Nothing should so much awe us, as that God is witness of our words, if
we consider he does watch over us, we will make our watch strong, and not
lightly offend with our mouth. And so much to teach us silence till we know how
to speak. The brief of that, which concerns the instruction of the child, is
but this short lesson. Suffer not thy child to speak vainly, much less
wickedly, where-to it is very prone. Loose words will quickly produce loose
actions (...). Cl. Paed l. 2. c. 6. (...). Stro. l 1. p. 205.
. Therefore give not liberty to much babbling, there will be much folly; a sea
of words (as the proverb is) but not one drop of reason b; and it leads to a
very bad custom. Remember the Preachers lesson; Speak, Eccles 327. (...).
Paed. lib. 2.
young man, if there be need of thee, (that's the Rule to judge, when speech is
better then silence) and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked. If then it be
a daughter, let her words be answers; silence d is a woman's virtue, and there
is no danger (...). Strom. l. 2. p. 285.
there. So she may learn to open her mouth with wisdom Prove. 31. 26.
, and then she shall have joy by the answers of her mouth: for a word spoken in
due season, how good is it Prove. 15. 23.
?

7 A parent must look to it, that an oath be not heard from the mouth of a
child; he will learn it sooner then he will his prayers. From his mouth, it is
like a word clothed with Eccles. 23. 12.
death. Here the Father is, as he is in every thing, very exemplary, the child
must honor the father, and the father owes a reverence to the child Maxima
debetur pueris reverentia Juven.
, the elder sort must carry themselves reverently before youth; and in this
point very circumspectly, or else there is no hope but that the child will
practice, as he hears and sees. Therefore our Lords prohibition must hold in
the parent, else the child will be loose and run out. Swear not at Matthew 5.
34.
all; not at all willingly, but forced by Vel authoritate deferentis, vel
duritie non credentis.
authority, or incredulity; not at all, rashly or lightly; not at all by the
creature, we cannot make the least that is, and if we use any thing in a vain
and light manner, whereby God has made Himself known to man, we take His name
in vain, and we know what follows. I cannot but remember how often that
golden-mouthed Father warnes That they swear not, that they beware of oaths.
It is the close almost of every Homily. And in one place, he speaks very
plainly, and to a childs capacity, Away, away with this wicked custom of
oaths, and let us give but so much honor to Gods Name, as we do unto our best
clothes; it is our manner to reserve them for solemn times, for special
service: Good friends, let us not so far contemn our own souls, and their
everlasting welfare; as that we use the terrible Name of God more
dishonourably, then we will our clothes. So that Father. All means must be
taken, whereby Hom 9. o.
the child may conceive the Name of God aright, to be, as it is, dreadful and
terrible. And lesser things must be avoided, though they were not evil in
themselves, to prevent an evil, whereto they lead. Our Lords following words
yield us our lesson; Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay. I think of
the Friars note here, it is a good one; When the heart says yea, then the
tongue must say yea, that is yea, yea: and when the heart says nay, then the
tongue must say nay, that is nay, nay. Quod affirmatis nude, ^ffirmetis, quod
negatis, nude negetis.
Bezaes note is to that very purpose, What ye do affirm, ye must affirm
heartily, clearly, without reservation, (a Popish slight La^chra perjurio
Cic^i. 3. page 143. Quae dixeris jurasse ^uta. (...). Isid. Pelus. l. 2. Ep.
146. (...). Clem. Alex. 7. p. 527, 528.
) in all sincerity; and what ye do deny, deny it so too.

An c honest man's word is as good as his oath, and of more credit. For a man to
use his faith and troth (two ordinary words) shows a man has no credit, for
he sets his jewels to pawn; if he had faith indeed, or truth either, or knew
how precious they were, he would not be so lavish of them. Yea, yea, must be
enough; Nay, nay, sufficient, unless the cause be weighty, and before a Judge,
as was said, and if so to a parent, much more to a child. Assuredly, for
Christ has said it, Whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil.

8. And here I do not hold it any impertinency, to teach the child (for the
Fathers sake) as before, to hold his tongue, till he has examined his words,
and their errand; so here, to give words their weight, that being spoken, they
meant what they said.

A wise man looks (...). Hom. Iliad. g.
before he leaps, and well advises before he speaks but when he has spoken,
he will not think he has done: We hold it a foul disgrace if a man shall give
us the lie; we must not put that disgrace upon our selves, suffering our
actions to disagree with our words, which is to give our selves the lie. Lelius
passes a short censure upon Cato and Socrates, but he makes a wide difference
in their commendations. We have heard much from the mouth of the one, we have
observed more from the hand of the other. Hujus enim facta, illius dicta
laudantur.
The one man's words are commended, the other man's deeds. Bodin gives a shorter
censure, but no commendations upon that holy-father, Pope Alexander the sixth,
and Borgias his son, The father never spoke what he meant, The son never
did what he spoke. Their Maxim was, Give thy word to all, Keep touch with
none; And this was Dare verba indeed, in plain English, Knaverie by your leave.
An honest man will not pass his word lightly, no not for himself, much less
for another, for then he takes the ready and rode-way to need the same
courtesy from another. But when his word is passed, he holds it as firm as his
oath. Show me a man, that makes light of his words, and I will show you the
same man, that he puts no weight in his oath: if he breaks his word with you,
no bands (...) Pind.
will hold him, except one, that has his hand in it; and the reason thereof is
plain, because he knows that is a manuduction to the prison; he will hold with
you there, because he knows, if he do not, that the prison will hold him, for
that is a strong hold. Remember we, that we hold it the greatest indignity in
the world, if a man can do to us, as some-time he will threaten, if he can make
us Eat our own words; Beware we, that we do not put this dishonor upon our
selves, which we could not brook from another. Of all beasts, we have them in
greatest detestation, who devour their own young (such beasts there are;) our
words, what are they, but the issue of our own mouth? And if we resume and
recall them, what do we other then eat and devour our own offspring? And
hence a child will learn (it is not too subtle for him) to detest their
Religion, who doctrinally Qui dogmatizant mendacia.
teach; That words, how solemnly so ever pronounced, are like Gypsies knots,
fast or loose at the Churches pleasure, no faith, no keeping touch with any,
but as it makes for advantage: Nulla sides nisi prout expedit.
No; what say they to the three years famine? That is a resolved case. 2. Sam.
21. so is that also, Ezekiel. 17. 16. 17, 18, 19. very worth the nothing. And we
learn too, what Pharaoh teaches by the light of nature, saying thus to Joseph,
Since thy Father has made thee swear concerning the place of his burial, by
all means go up and bury thy Father Gen 50. 5. 6.
. But let us mark that, which is most remarkable, that, which is to be wished
were forgotten, but it cannot be. How God has reproved this breach of covenant
from heaven, witness that sad, sore and grievous stroke, which by a Divine
hand, was inflicted upon that King Lewis King of Hungary. Vladislaus.
, and his whole Royal army, who made an oath, taken upon the holy Evangelist,
for the concluding a peace with the Turkish Sultan Hist. profan. Medul. p. 823.
, but a broker to unworthy ends; yet is an oath the greatest security that can
be given, the only chain on earth, (as one says S. Dan. Henry third p. 167.
) besides love, to tie the conscience of a man and humane society together.
Mark we must also, in that stroke, that the like vengeance was remarkably
executed upon the Cardinal, who absolved the said King from the said oath: for
being wounded unto death, he was found lying in the high way by Gregory Sanose,
ready to give up the ghost, and seemed but to stay to take with him the bitter
curses of such as passed by, flying from the battle, as the due reward of his
perfidious absolution. What will the Pope now (for the league was disannulled
by power from the Pope) or his Cardinals, that now are (for it was by
persuasion of Julian a Cardinal) what will they say to this vengeance? to this
sad stroke? for as that breach of covenant was to the reproach of the
Christian Lege Barcl. Euphor. 4. p. 360. and Asch. Tox. p. 26. Psalm. 15.
name ever since; so was that vengeance to the infeebleing the Christians arm
to this very day. Besides all this, we must remember the words that are so
plain, A good man speaks the truth from his heart, and though he swear to his
changes not; what say they to all this? Nay, I cannot tell, nor themselves
neither: But this we can tell, It is as familiar for them to eat their words,
as it is to drink blood; they are infamous all over the world for both; See Mr
Bolton direct. page 232.
therewith they are filled as a bot^le with wine; Drunk with the blood of the
Saints. Tell the child this, he may understand it, and so understand it, that
he will never look back to this Sodom, never return to that Egypt; for a silly
fish (the Naturalists say) will not come to a bloody hook.

Now for us men, if we show our selves men, we have from hence made David's
conclusion; I have sworn and I will perform Psalm. 119. 106.
it: when we have sworn, when our words are within that enclosure, we dare not
break-out, we will perform, we are fully purposed so to do, if in licitis;
Juramentum non debet esse vinculum iniquitatis. Zanch. de Spons.
if not, we know the rule: Remember we must still what the Lord says to David;
for as to David, so to us, He has sworn to do His people good, yet do they
provoke Him with many unkindnesses and much hard usage every day; and though
they do so, so often break covenant with Him, yet will not He break covenant
with them, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips Psalm 89 34.
. This we must observe for our imitation, for they keep us from perishing. And
thus much, that parents may learn, and that they may teach their children how
sacred a bond an oath is.

9. We may observe children very abusive one with another; they will seem not
to know one the others name. Prevent this evil quickly in teaching them better
manners; they have no excuse for that fault, the child knows his name, and who
gave him that name, and wherefore? for distinction sake he knows that he might
call others, and be called by the same name. If a parent hear a Nickname from
a childs mouth, let the child feel the parents hand. Trust me, the abuse is
not light.

10. We may observe them very quarrelsome, striking one the other, and very
commanding over servants, though, during their minority, or nonage, they differ
not. Their words One commander is enough in a house, and the child must be
taught awfully to observe that one, whether him or her; Remember still, that
Aug. decivit. 14. 12.
Obedience is the best lesson, that a parent can teach the child. And look he
must that the child learn it, as he looks to have him prove a peaceable man
here-after; else, he will prove a great troubler of the house, perhaps of the
whole state.

11. We may observe children very ready to uncover that, which Nature has hid;
no point of their innocence this, at these years, to show their nakedness,
which heathen have shamed to do. Cic Offic. 1. p. 53. Aug. de Civil. 14. 17.
Clem. Alex. paed. l. 2. c. 6. p. 125. etc. 10 p. 141. and lib. 3. p. 187.
Zanch. cap. 1. Gen 1. 21.
Nature has taught us so much at this point, and they, who had no other light,
that I need but point at it, and refer to the margent; But believe me,
children must have instruction and correction at this point, they will need
both.

12. Children will mock, scorn and scoff very ordinarily, especially such as
are poor, impotent or deformed, as if such had not the same flesh with them;
or, as if God made not the difference. We see it daily thus; If God does
afflict any, laying them low, such these children will have in derision, they
will, as Job Effraenate in me invecti sunt, quasi immissis vel excussis
habenis. Job 30. 11.
says, let loose the bridle before such poore-ones, speaking reproachfully
with their lips. We know the danger and our duty, let them not escape by any
means, it is very evil in it self, and it tends to more.

I would children were only faulty here, and that they did not learn it of
their Elders, who, not only too (...). We must use our servants as we would be
used, for they are men as we are. Clem. Alex. paed. 3. cap. 11. A noble man was
wont to make his servants drudge like horses: and when they were at their
drudgerie, his manner was to curse them, and to call them by no other name then
dogs. Not long after, falling sick, his voice was taken from him, and when he
would speak he barked. Camer. tells this story. (chap. 86. p. 436.) as a
judgment wrought amongst them, and which he saw, which may teach us so to
speak to, and so to use our servants, as fellow servants, for so they are; (as
one says) Inferiors to us, but men with us; servants, but fellow servants.
Macroh. Sat. lib. 1. cap. 11.
imperiously command those, that are in subjection to them; but also, too often
abuse some poor silly creatures, yet of the Samson, fetching them out to make
them sport. Assuredly, the lowest of men is too high and noble a creature, for
the highest man on earth, to vilify or trample upon. Though yet (not to speak
of some in a lower orb) so the proudest man on earth (for he says, he is as
high above Princes, as the Sun is above the Moon) has dealt with those, whom
God had exalted, putting them under his foot; and he said he has Scripture for
it, (Psalm. 91. 13.) But there is a Scripture fits him better, and will hold
him; Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who delights in proud wrath,
Prove. 21. 24.

Note we this, That as in the body natural, so in the body politic; God has
set no one higher then the head, and no one lower then the foot; he must not be
set under, he must not be slighted, scorned, or contemned. He that made him,
made thee, He does thee service here, contemn him not for that, but bless God
that made thee the head. Remember also, we have all one Master in heaven,
before whom we must appear, after we have layne together in the earth.

13. We may observe children very ready to curse others, and wish the plague
and pox upon them; They consider not, what a devourer the one, nor how
loathsome and defacing, the other. Indeed, they know no other plague, but the
rod, so they account it, and let them feel, how sovereign a remedy that is,
against the plague of the tongue (for it is a plague indeed) there is no more
to be said to it, but what has been said, that must be done.

We may observe also, that children are very apt to curse themselves; for they
know not what they say. A child will ordinarily say; I would I might never
stir hand or foot; They will wish, I would I might never speak; I would I
were dead; and yet worse then these; I would I might be hanged; and yet worse,
The Devil take me. All this these poor children will say; who sees them, and
hears them not, saying even so? They consider not, how soon God can wither
the leg, as well as the hand; The King shall stretch it forth, but cannot get
it in again. They know not, how soon He can stop the mouth, and hold the eye,
and restrain this little vapor, our breath; and then, where is man, that
speaks so proudly? They know not how soon, God can say, Be it so, as ye have
desired. Children must be taught, That in God they live, move, and have their
being: In His hands is their breath, and all their ways Dan. 5. 23.
, Him they must glorify. And for the better enforcing hereof, the parent may
note, for the childs instruction four examples of those, who spoke rashly,
and were paid home in that they spoke against themselves.

1. We read, Numb. 14. There in a discontent the people murmured, and wished
themselves dead, verse 2. At the 28. verse The Lord says, As ye have spoken in
mine ears, so will I do unto you; so their carkeises fell in the wilderness.

2. We know who answered and said, His blood be upon us and our children Matthew.
27. 25.
, even so it was; An heavy imprecation, and most heavy it lies upon them, even
unto this day. It pursues them (says Tanquam attonitos and terrefactos.
Aretius upon that place) so as we may know the Jews and distinguish them from
all others in the world; for they look as men affrighted and astonished, They
are an astonishing example of Gods smoking wrath, and written for our example,
who come the nearest to that Mother Church in our receipts and returns, I
mean, in mercies and in sins.

And this may teach us also, that we speak not rashly against our selves, nor
reject the Counsel of God against our souls Joh. 7. 30.
; nor trample under foot the Son of God, counting the blood of the covenant
an unholy thing Heb. 10. 29. Chrysostom. speaks sadly, touching this abiding
wrath upon the Jews, and the cause of the same. 1. Tom. Him. 37. orat. 4.
; for as that blood, being sprinkled on the upper doore-post, that is, on our
hearts, speaks better things then the blood of Abell; so, being rejected and
despised, as blood cast on the threshold and under foot Mr. Ainsw. Exodus 12. 7.
, it speaks the sorest wrath: witness the example we are now upon, I mean the
judgment of the Jews, which is become a sign, conspicuous to every eye, as a
Banner displayed, or as Ensigns lifted up Numb. 16. 10. Exemplum omnium oculis
expositum, ut est e^ectum signum. Trem.
.

3. There is a third example of a Knight, who suffered above twenty years
since on Tower Hill. I will note what he spoke to the people at that time, when
it was time to be serious; for he was taking his last leave of them, and of the
world; Thus he spoke, I was a great gamester, and still haunted with ill suck;
once and it was in France, having lost a great sum, I solemnly wished, would I
might be hanged if ever I played again: I quickly forgot what I had so
solemnly promised, and fell to my game again; But now, you all see, how God
has paid me home; a man, not likely to breath my last here, in so open a
place: so sadly spoke, that sad Gentleman, at a sad time, and as sad a
spectacle: And, with many good admonitions, and savoury expressions, he yielded
his body to the justice of the Law, and his spirit to Him who abundantly
pardons; and so dyed, as one, that had hope in his death.

4. Dietericus, in his Postills First part imprinted, 1631. p. 410. C^lum. 2.
, tells us a yet sadder example; not of his own knowledge, but from another
Relation, of much esteem and credit with him, The Relation is this, A young
Gentlewoman of good note and breeding, portion and proportion answerable, had
set her affection upon a Gentleman, but too low for her rank, or not rich
enough, in the friends esteem; yet, to assure the young man to her, and her
self to him, she solemnly wish^d, The Devil take her, if she married with any
other. The parents shortly after found out a fitter match for their daughter of
their own choosing, for the other liked them not. I remember not well, how the
maid was pleased, but the parents were, so the match was concluded: This we
may note by the way; If the question were put to parents, what sway reason does
carry in the making of matches, I believe they that go for wisemen might be
posed, or else ashamed to answer the truth: Affections do sway most with young
persons; Money, and such by-respects, with the old; so the match is adversary,
who, like a roaring Lion, seeks whom he may destroy, and waits but his
commission; when that is granted, he will be as quick, as he was with Job, to
the uttermost extent of his chain. And yet, as if we never read any of all
this, not how he has tormented the body; not how he delights in the vexation
and pain of the creature, in proud wrath; as if we had neither heard nor read
this; both young and old, speak as lightly of the Devil taking them, as if he
were their familiar friend, and would use the creature kindly: And they speak
as lightly of damnation, as if perishing for ever were nothing; and everlasting
burnings but a light matter, it Lege Comerarium oper. succ. cap. 86. page 482.
had no more heat in it, then a glowworm: we have heard that, which bids us
beware, and instructs the father and the child very much. I have done with the
tongue, that unruly member, which causes our trouble, and commands our watch;
Childrens hands must be observed also, as we partly heard, and now follows.

14. We may observe children spoiling much more then they eat, like calves,
that make many orts. They cannot understand what a blessing they have in their
hands, therefore they cannot prise it. But look to them herein, so shall you
prevent a great evil, and a great provocation, the treading under foot Gods
good creatures: In an house, where I once lived, the children had their
trencher full, and their hands full, and mouths full, all at once: Some was
spilt on the ground, and some upon the trencher, for commonly childrens hands
are so foul, that none will eat after them. The parents did not well observe
it, and servants worse. There was plenty, and where that is, it is hard to
pick up crumbs; sickness came, and took away the parents; and the Parish the
children, one friend takes one, and the second another; at home was nothing,
there had been too much spilt.

This may mind us of Christ's rule, and practice, That the broaken meat be
taken up, and nothing kept so ill, that it is not fit for the prisoners basket.
We may also consider, If God send us cleanness of teeth (which we may fear)
it will add much to our smart, That we now want, what we once spilt, or
suffered so to be, or worse; That, when the fuller furnished our tables were,
the fuller of vomit and filthiness they were; The fuller our pastures, the
more, like beasts, we trod down with our feet, and kicked with our heel; The
more Gods blessings were, the more we forgot the Giver; The more slightly we
esteemed, the more carelessly we cast away the fruits of His bounty toward us:
The parent must remember, and he must remember the child of it often; That the
hungry stomach calls out for bread, bread, and accounts it for dainties; Yea,
unto that soul, every bitter thing is sweet Prove. 27. 7.
. Water out of the rock is Psalm. 81. 16.
honey to him. So Chrysostom enterprets those words of the Psalm, Ad pop.
Ant. Hom. 2. But bread is dainty indeed, that's the staff of life, it is All.
If bread be dear, that makes a dear year, how cheap so ever other things
are, Though what is cheap, when bread is dear, unless it be the needy-mans
household stuff, his dish, or his stool, etc. his cloth, or his bed, or his
millstone; any thing he has, all he has, shall go for bread Vbipanis de^^cit
ibi omnia sunt venalia.
. Where you find no bread in a house, there look to find nothing, but thin
cheeks, hollow eyes, and a black visage. All goes out there, that bread may
come in. A man will sell himself for bread, Genesis 47. 19.
Man has eat the off all Ingluvies cum interaneis. 2 King. 6. 25. Trem.
or garbage of Doves, that which we cast to Dogs, but they will scarce eat it;
Nay, man has eat his own flesh for want of bread. All these the sacred
Scripture tells us, and it is good to tell it the child. It is proper also to
tell the child what our Chronicles do report; That in King William the
Conquerours Read Dr. Gouge D. D. p. 170.
days, 1069. there was a dearth, which eat up the inhabitants, so that some
part of the land was wasted without people, none left to till the ground for
the space of nine years: In that time of distress we read, they did eat man's
flesh. In King Henry the thirds days, in the eighteenth year of his reign
1234, many perished for want of victuals. In the ninth year of Edward the
second, 1315. the extremity was such, that hors-flesh was accounted great
cheer, and some eat their own children; and the thieves in prison did pluck in
pieces those, who were newly brought in. In the year 1440. bread-corne was so
scarce that the people made bread of Fern-roots. This dearth was in the
eighteenth year of Henry the sixth. In the eighteenth year of Henry the
eighth, Cornfieldsd and pasture were destroyed by the much rain, which fell in
November, and December: then it was dry till the twelfth of April, and from
that day, it rained both day and night, till the third of June, whereby the
famine was sore the year following.

Many such sad stories there are, touching the extreamitie of famine; Lipsius
de Constant. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Lipsius has some, so has Eusebius cited by Mr. Brightman on Revel. 6. 8. Dr.
Apolog. lib. 2. sect. 4.
Hackwell has some of these before mentioned, with an addition of some other;
But we have all summed up together, in that sad Relation out of the Palatinate.
If this be laid to heart, many things will be reformed, which are now quite out
of order; and amongst many, this one; Parents or Governors, will take care, so
far as is possible, That there be an humble, thankful, sober, If we take what
suffices nature, it is nourishment, pleasure, health; if more then suffices,
the contrary. Chrysostom. ad Heb. cap. 12. Hom. 29.
temperate use of the creatures, so as they may refresh,

15. We that are by nature children of wrath, have in our nature so much
fierceness, as that we cannot credit nor believe it, though another should
shed tears over 2 King. 8. 11. Virtutes and vitia non sunt priusquam
lacessantur.
it, until the foundations of our natures are discovered; The occasion
offered; and the restraint taken off. A swine will keep clean in a meadow; Lime
will not smoke till you put water to it; A Lion sleeps waking, with his eyes
open; and wakes sleeping, with his eyes shut: To look to, he is as gentle as a
Lamb, but if you pluck him by the ear, he will pluck you by the arm, though
he seems to wink; stir him, or let him loose, then you shall know what he is
Solve Leonem and senties.
. I mean by all this; That we know not our natures, how fierce they are, till
we are tempted by the occasion and so tried. Therefore we should look to it
betimes, and be jealous over our own hearts; and restrain in children,
whatsoever leads that way, I mean, to cruelty and fierceness.

And then we shall not suffer children to delight themselves, as commonly they
do, in the vexation and pain of the creature, which, the more it is in their
power, the more children will vex the creature, to show their power in the
torture and pain thereof, witness that rude custom on Shrove-tuesday;
witness also our flies, birds, Cats and Dogs, tossed up in blankets, or set on
furiously to encounter, mangle and enter-teare each other. Children consider
not by how weak supports, man's life is upheld; nor, how serviceable, the flesh
of some of them is, the blood of othersome, and the excrements of a third, the
most approved remedy for a sore throat; This children consider not, nor can
they think, what ill blood such bloody exercises do breed; They consider not,
that such sports lead to cruelty, whereby we come nearest to the Devil, who
delights in the pain of the creature.

It is a known story, and to be observed; That a very proud King, delighted
much in his child hood, to put out the eyes of Quails; This King carried
himself afterward, with such pride and insolency, that he had his
denomination from it; and delighted himself so much in cruelty and blood,
that the people expelled him out of their City and Country, with protestation
never to receive any King again: so they changed the name of their Government.
An Emperor after him, delighted as much to see the entralls of flies, he
killed as many as he could catch, and took his times for it: So the proverb
was, The Ne musca quidem. Suet. Dom.
Emperor had not so much as a fly near him; This man (or rather beast in
shape of a man) delighted as much in the shedding of Christians blood, and as
cruelly abused Gods Image, which he had shamefully cast off. Indeed there are
some men, who are cruel to Christians, and kind to Beasts: But they have but
the shape of men, they are Lege Dialog. de bello sacro p. 339.
Beasts indeed, and therefore do they esteem more of Beasts, then of
Christians. It is Lo. Ver. Essay. 13. p. 67.
reported; that a Christian Boy in Constantinople, Had like to have been
stoned, for gagging in a waggishnesse, a long billed foul b.

I would persuade but this from hence, That children be not suffered to bathe
their recreations in blood, (as Mr. Bolton phraseth it) Not to refresh their
tired minds with spectacles of cruelty, nor inured to behold rufull objects
without horror. No beast, they say, takes content, in the hurting of any
other, except in the case of hunger or anger. They satisfy their appetite, and
rage sometimes with cruelty and blood, but their eyes and fancies never.

It is a debasing of humanity below beasts, to please the eye, I say not, in
beholding one man tear and mangle another, but to see poor beasts encountering
each other, and mangling each other, being set on by man; we must not make Gods
judgments and punishments of sin (for we made the beasts wild, our sin put
the enmity betwixt the Woolfe and the Lamb Quis seras fecit nisi tu. Mor. de
verit. religionis. cap. 12.
) the matter and object of our recreation.

Alas, sinful man (it is Mr. Direct. 156.
Boltons patheticall expression) what an heart have thou, that can take
delight in the cruel tormenting of a dumb creature? Is it not too much for
thee to behold with dry eyes, that fearful brand, which only thy sin has
impressed upon it? but thou must barbarously also press its oppressions, and
make thy self merry with the bleeding miseries of that poor harmless thing,
which in its kind, is much more, and far better serviceable to the Creator
then thy self? Yet, I deny not, but that there may be another lawful use of
this Antipathy, for the destroying of hurtful, and enjoying of useful
creatures, so that it be without any taint, or aspersion of cruelty on our
part, or needless tormenting of the silly beasts.

It is a sure note of a good man, He is merciful to his beast. And it is worth
our mark, That the Lord commands a mercy to a creature, perhaps not worth two
farthings, and for this He promises a great mercy, the like blessing, which is
promised to them, who honor their father and mother: Deuteronomy. 22. 6, 7. If thou
find a birds nest, etc. Thou shall in any wise let the Dam go, and take the
young to thee; That thou may prosper and prolong thy days. This is to lead
to mercy, and to take out of our hearts cruelty (says Mr Ainsworth) It is the
least of all in Moses law, and yet such a promise is annexed thereunto, as we
heard; so true is that, which the learned Knight has, The debts of mercy and
cruelty shall be surely paid.

Think we on this, so we have our duty, and we shall teach our children theirs:
and then, though the blood of the creature be not spared, for we have dominion
over it, yet it shall not be abused, nor shall we delight our selves in the
pain of it, which tends to much evil, which we must by all means, and all too
little, prevent, and at the first, while the mind is tender, and does easily
receive any impression.

15. It is not possible to point at all the evils, whereof our corrupt nature
is fruitful; nor at all the means, whereby to prevent the growth of the same.
I remember how Ad D^m. (...) etc. o.
Isocrates concludes his oration so full of instructions; With all our
diligence, we cannot overcome the pravitie and corruption of our nature. And
yet, we must not sit still therefore, and do nothing at all, because all we do,
is too little. We must with the husbandman cast up the ground, and cast out the
stones, and thorns, that is the order; and then cast in the seed, that is our
duty: And we must look up to an higher hand, who makes the seed to grow, that
is a parents wisdom. We must not forget the order, this plucking up these
weeds first, where with our nature, like the sluggards field, is overrun;
which will so choke the seed, as that no fruit can be brought to perfection.
The Greeks have a proverb, somewhat homely, but it teaches very much, you must
not put (...) Plut. de educat.
meat into a chamber pot. This teaches, that good instructions to a stubborn
and corrupt heart, are as good meat to a foul stomach, the more we put in, the
more we increase the distemper: We must look to the cleansing the heart in the
first place, the keeping that fountain clean, as we would the Springhead,
whence we would fetch pure water. I remember the reproof that was given to a
very loose companion, who yet would sit very close and attentive at a
Philosophers lecture It (...). Aul. Gell. 17. 19.
will come to nothing, (young man) which you take in, nay, it will rather hurt
then do good, because you have not looked to the cleansing of the vessel. And
this reproof is the same in substance with that prohibition, which we find
Ier. 4. 3. 4. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 1. p. 203.
.

When there is no pains taken for the cleansing of the heart first, but we
bring our old corrupted hearts, to new and holy lessons, they agree no better
then new wine and old bottles; all is lost, the instructions spilt, and if any
good purposes were, they vanish, like the morning dew, and the heart returns
again, like the swine or the dog: And the very reason thereof we have heard.

16. We may note now in the shutting up hereof; that we may abridge our way,
and make it shorter, by leaving precepts, and proposing examples: for these
take best with children, and it is the more compendious and certain way. So the
sober master reproves his drunken servant; he bids him lead his horse to the
water; when the horse had drunk and had sufficient; he bids his servant make
the horse drink again, which when he assayed, but could not do, he thereby
corrected his servant, as the verier beast. And so the old man in Lib. 1. Ser.
Sat. 4. insuevit pater optimus hoc me etc.
Horace deals with his young son; for, dissuading him from the vices, and
sins of the time, he proposes such unto him, whose sin had been their
ruin. See, child, yonder poor ragged fellow; it is very truly observed of
him, that he was a very bad husband of his time and purse, he cast away his
time, as a worthless commodity, and his money as if it could never be spent;
now he would recall both, but cannot. Learn thou by his example to account time
precious, and well to husband both it and thy purse. Learn also to put a
fitting esteem upon those creatures, which are appointed for thy nourishment
and refreshing; for this fellow, whom you hear crying out for one bit of bread
and one drop of drink, was wont, having plenty of both, to tread his bread
under foot, and to cast his drink in the street. Behold another, he goes
creeping by the wall, nothing but skin and bone, a loathsome carkeise, he rots
above ground; It is truly observed of him, that he minded nothing but his
pleasure; he would do whatsoever was pleasing in his eyes, and now, that his
light is consumed to the socket, and going out in a snuff, and pains are upon
him, he mourns. But now behold a third; see how well furnished he is; every way
accomplished, a companion for the best man in the parish; he hearkened to
instruction and was wise. After this manner the old man instructed his son by
way of example, and that way Exemplis vitiorum quaeque notando.
we may take, nay we must, if we intend the information of children.

Thus much touching a parents first work with his child, which is, the
watching over him, for the rooting out of evils; what these evils are; and the
way to prevent them.

CHAP. V.
The implanting of good, The order therein; four seasons in the Day very
seasonable for this work.

THe child is yet in his flower, and first spring; And that is the season of
sowing and planting the seed of instruction, which is the next work and now
follows.

The Preacher gives us a good lesson and encouragement both: In Eccles. 11 6.
the Morning sow thy seed, and in the Evening withhold not thine band, for thou
know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both
shall be alike good. In this hope the parent proceeds, and according to his
rule and charge, Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Four seasons there are in the day, very
seasonable for instruction: according as they shall minister matter, so a
parent may fit his occasional instructions. These seasons are, as we find
them lie in the Text, though not in the same order.

I. In the morning, when thou risest. II. At noon, or the season when thou
sit at the table. III. When thou walk by the way. IIII. At night when
thou lie down.
1. In the morning when thou risest; There is no season in the day fitter for
instruction, then is the morning, nor fuller thereof. Now the Sun is
returning and begins to appear on this our side of the Globe, making all light
and lightsome about us, oh how comfortable is it to see the light, and how safe
to walk by it! Before, darkness covered the earth, and masked the face of the
same; and then we could not discern in what order things lay; nor what way to
settle about them; Many doubts we have, and fears in darkness, some real,
though the most imaginary; for it is our nature in darkness, if we find them
not there, to frame them there. Our way in the dark is uncertain and hazardous,
full of danger. Learn hence, What darkness is to the outward man, so is
ignorance (the key of some men's Read our Jewel. 27. Art.
Religion) to the inward; I know not whereat I may stumble, nor wherein I may
fall; nor, falling, how dangerously I may fall, nor how irrecoverably; Only
this difference there is, and it is a great one, betwixt him that walks in
darkness, and him that lives in ignorance, the darkness of the mind; He that
walks in darkness, walks charily and cautelously, feeling his way with one
hand, and fencing his face, and the choice ornament thereof, with the other,
because he has no light to guide himself by, and he knows he is in darkness,
and is sensible of the danger. Therefore it falls out ordinarily, that he
scapeth and preventeth danger, because he is so sensible of the same; what I
fear most is like to do me least hurt, for it is likely I am prepared for
prevention.

It is not so, with a man walking in ignorance, and darkness of mind; He goes
on boldly and confidently, according as the proverb is, he discernes no danger,
he cannot fear it. The former by his carfulness may not fall; The latter, by
his ignorant carelesenesse must needs fall; it is not possible to be otherwise:
The former, if he fall, he will surely rise again; for he knows, he lies not
where he would; The other falling lies still, and can never rise again till a
light appear unto him; the one knows where he is and what he does, the other
knows nothing as he ought to know.

There is one, and we may call that one, as Satan called himself, Legion, for
that one is many, who holds ignorance to be the mother of devotion; but that
one is the mother of fornications, and thence it is, that she prevails with
them, and deceives so many, for, as she has gained, so she holds all she has
gained, by the tenure of ignorance.

There is a far greater difference betwixt a well knowing and conscientious
man, and an ignorant person, then is betwixt a man walking in the Sun and
working by it; and another walking in the night when neither Moon nor Star
appears. The one clearly sets forth the other; he that works by the
Sun sees all clear about him; where he is, and what he does, and why he
does it; he that is in darkness, discerns nothing, nor can do any thing as
he ought to do; and yet, which is much worse, living in the darkness of
ignorance, he discerns not his danger.

He that does in any part understand what ignorance is, and the fearful
effects of the same (this ignorant man does not) will pray for himself and his
(as they who were upon the sea, and in great danger, They wished for the day
Acts 27. 29.
) Send forth Lord, thy light and thy truth, through thy tender mercy, let the
Dayspring from on high visit us. Thus he wishes for the day. And now, This
Dayspring from above has visited us; we, that once walked in darkness have
seen a great light, and the glory thereof we have seen, as the glory of the
only Son of God: upon us who dwelt in the shadow of death has this light
shined. Oh happy are the people then, that are in such a case? how blessed are
they to whom the Sun of righteousness has appeared? they are children of the
day, and of the light; it is day with them, always day, though neither Moon
nor Stars appear, that is, though they find no influence from the earth, or
regions bordering thereupon.

But clean contrary it is with them, to whom this Sun of Righteousness
appears not, or against whom they shut their eyes (as some will do though, as
the proverb is, we should show them the Lact. 7. 1. Nec si Solemn in manibus
gestemus, fidem commodabunt ei doctrine.
Sun in our hands) seeing, but will not see. How miserable are the people, that
are in such a case! they sit in darkness, as they do on the other side of the
globe, when the Sun is with us: nay worse then so, they dwell in a land dark as
Egypt was, even in the land of the shadow of death; For, though they have the
Moon and Stars upon them, I mean the confluence of all outward things, yet
they sit in darkness, in deep darkness. For as the Sun is to this outward
world, so is the Lord Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, to the world of
believers; without Him it is all dark, with Him, it is still light, like the
land of Goshen; happy are the people, that are in such a case; blessed are the
people, whose God is the Lord; Send forth thy truth, Lord, and thy light, and
through the tender mercy of our God, let the Dayspring from above visit us.
This may take up our thoughts very seasonably, when the darkness of the night
is past, and the comfort of the day is come; And it may set an edge upon our
desires after the principal thing, Eccles. 2. 13.
knowledge, wisdom, understanding: For wisdom excels folly, as light
excels darkness: And the wise-mans eyes are in his head; but the fool
walks in darkness. Knowledge in the mind is as the eye in our little world,
or as the Sun in the great. Thus much by way of Analogy or agreement betwixt
the eye, or great light of the world, and the true light. Note we now, wherein
they disagree and their operation is contrary; for it yields a great lesson.
The great eye of the world does lighten those, who have eyes, and by a natural
power can apprehend that light: They whose eyes are dark have no benefit by it.
But the true Light lightneth them Lege Call. Inst. 2. 2. 25.
, who have no principle of light within them, them, and them only, who are all
darkness, and know themselves so to be; and for such who think themselves
lightsome, and seeing men, they are left to the vanity of their own thoughts.
If John 9. 41.
ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, we see, therefore
your sin remains. It is of high g use, and specially requires our
consideration.

2. The day is come, and the sun appears; so the Creator thereof has
appointed, that it should know its rising, and thereby to renew and and refresh
the face of things. The instruction is, touching the might of His power, and
the riches of His grace, creating light in the Soul, who at the first, brought
it out of the womb of darkness; and causing the light of comfort to arise
unto His servants in the darkest night of affliction; for it is He also, that
curneth the shadow of Death into the Morning Amos 5. 8.
.

And this affords a righteous people, an hint for a glorious dependence; they
know, that as sure as the morning follows the night; so the Sun of
righteousness will appear with healing under his wings: for, if the Sun know
his appointed time, much more the Lord knows His; and the Sun of
righteousness His season, when and how to comfort those, that wait for Him, as
they that wait for the morning.

3. The appearance of the Sun instructs us touching the glory of His
appearance, and the exceeding joy, the righteous shall be filled with all at
that Day: For, if it be so comfortable to see the light; how comfortable will
it be to see Him, that is the Light of that light? If this elementary Sun, be
so glorious and full of light; what then is the Sun of Righteousness? And if
it be so comfortable to see this light; how ravishing Lege Basil. Hex. Hom. 6.
will that joy be in beholding His face in that Day, when we shall know Him as
He is, the Lord of glory.

But for the wicked, it is not so with them; for the morning is now unto them,
as the shadow Job 24. 17.
of death; what then will be the morning of their resurrection? when the hidden
works of darkness shall be brought to light, and the secrets of all hearts
opened, and made clear, before all Israel and before the Sun.

4. We learn again, how sin and sorrow, can sower our blessings, and make
us disrelish the greatest earthly comforts; Amongst them, the chiefest is the
light, yet to him, that is hurried or oppressed with his sin, this light is
grievous; And to him, that is in pain, the day is dolesome: as he is wearyed
with tossings in the night, so is he tired in the day, complaining thereof;
for, In the Deuteronomy. 28. 67.
morning he shall say, would God it were evening. God can cause the Sun to go
down at noon, and darkens the earth in a clear day (Amos 8. 9.) That is, (as
the Chrysostom. Ad Pop. Ant. Hom. 2 (...). Ibid.
Father expounds the place) He can so cloud the spirit of a man with sorrow,
that it cannot see the light, or if he see it, it shall not be lightsome to
him. Our cisternes of comfort are below, but they are filled above. All my
springs (of my life) says David (Psalm. 87. 7.) are in Thee. Some fruits of
comfort we gather from the earth; but the root of our comfort is in heaven. And
this, That our heart may have no dependence but on Him; and that we may fear
before Him: Who can turn our Amos 8. 10.
feasts into mourning, and our songs into lamentations; A pleasant morning into
a bitter day; And a day of mirth, into a night of sorrow, as He can also turn
the shadow of death into the morning.

5. The Sun, though it be in an infinite distance from us (to our finite
understanding) yet does it send its influence downward (clean contrary to the
nature of light or fire) unto the lowest of creatures; Thus, This great light
does: as if the Great Creator thereof had charged it thus to do; Send forth thy
light against the nature of the same; cast thy beams down toward Man, to
guide and direct him there; do so, for, for him thou wast made: His candle Ad
Popul. Antioch. Hom. 9.
cannot do so, it is against its nature, whose flame tends upward; but so shall
Thou do, that Thou may serve man, for whom Thou wast made; thy light shall
tend downward, so Chrysostom. It teaches those, that are highest in place and
gifts, to have an eye (as the eye of the body has to the foot) to those that
are lowest in regard of both, and to be the more servant unto all; we see, That
the Sun rises not for it self, but to be the common candle of the world,
that we may see by it, and work by it; It teaches, (as before) that whether
we labor in our callings, or to fit us for a calling, we should in all intend
the public, rather then our private interest.

This self is a poor and an unworthy Center, for our actions to tend to, or
rest in: yet is it the great Idol Self-love builds the city of the Devil,
etc. Aug. de Civit. lib. 14. cap. 28. o.
of the world (as self pleasing, so self seeking) the measuring the public
good by private interest. And this sin is clearly evinced and reproved by
the language of the Sun and all those creatures, that in their ranks obey
their Maker and serve us. They serve man, not themselves, to teach man not to
serve himself, only or principally, but in subordination to God, and in due
reference to his brother. The Sun, as the great eye of the world, is so divided
by the Lord of the same, that all parts partake of it in their season. Nay, the
eye of our little world, has sight not to enjoy, but to lighten the members:
so the wise man has wisdom, not for himself, but for those of simple and
shallow conceit. The Clarke has wisdom, but for the ignorant; The rich man
wealth, for the poor man's sake, that there may be no lack: All teaches man,
That he must carry himself as a Citizen of the world, and, as if his heart were
a continent joined to other Lands, that as many as may be, may receive fruit
and comfort from him; and not to live as turned in upon himself, or as if his
heart were an Island cut off from others; so one phraseth it L. Verul. Essays.
13. p. 70. Quam bonum est orbs mentis habere concentricos universo! De Aug. 6.
25.
. I remember an elegant conviction of this self-seeking, which is in these
words; If ever you saw either an hand, or a foot, or an head lying by it self,
in some place or other, cut off from the rest of the body (which were but a
ghastly fight) such must thou count him to make himself, who only regards his
own intrest, neglecting the public, and deviding himself from the common
society, and general unity; so said one M. Aur. Ant. Med. lib. 8 sect. 32.
p. 122.
, who did and spoke many excellent things, but yet below what a Christian
should in both.

That man, who brings forth fruit to himself, is as an empty vine Hosea 10. 1.
Nemini fructuosa. Trem.
, which is good for nothing; he thrives but as some overgrown member depriving
the other of their proportion of growth. Nay; he that seeks himself, making
himself his end, is the greatest Idolater in the world: For we must note, There
is one thing, and but one, which we must seek above our salvation, and that is
the glory of God, the ultimate, the highest end. Now he that makes himself his
end, he that only seeks himself (as many do, yea the most, for its the idol of
the world) he does, in so doing, what he thinks not, he knows not what, but
this he does; he makes a God of himself, and that's the way to make himself an
abomination in the end: So monstrous a thing it is, so dangerous also, for a
man to make himself the end of his actions.

6. The Sun, which distributeth his light to all nations, has not the less
light in it self. The more communicative we are of our gifts, the more they are
increased. We are like (...), etc. Al. cl. Str. 1. page 201.
wells, the fuller, the more drained; whereas if we lay up our talent, in what
kind soever, like the Manna, it corrupts.

7. God makes Matt. 5. 45. Clem. Alex. 7. 543.
His Sun (it is His Sun) to rise on the evil and on the good; To teach us, to
show the kindness of God to our brother; that is, to do good for evil, which
is the kindness of God, And that, which David would 2 Samuel 9. 3.
show to the house of Saul.

8. We cannot command Joh. 38. 12.
the morning, nor stay the outgoings of the same; The morning comes, and also
the night Esaias 22. 12.
; they know their appointed time: And it teaches us to know ours, which is our
season, the smallest (...). H^p. praecep. page 273. (...). Pind. Pyth. ode. 4.
point of time; now it is, and now it is not. The Time past is gone; that to
come is uncertain; Time present is mine, and the Time acceptable, the Day of
Salvation; when is that? Samuel tells us as he does Saul; Now was the Time 1 Samuel 13. 13.
; The Apostle answers also, Behold, now is the day of salvation 2 Cor. 6. 2.
, which should stir us up, so to husband the present Time, that it may
appear we had Time, and Grace to use it both together. Opportunity is a great
favor even to have it; a greater to discern it, the best grace of all to
discern and take it. It is as the joint in the member, hit it, and the labor
will be nothing; but there is all the cunning Vigilantis est occasionem
observare properantem. Itaque hanc circumspice: hanc, si videris, prende and
toto impetu hoc age. Sen. ep. 22.
, to hit upon this Article, or little joint of Time, the tempestivitie thereof.
Now if there be a tempestivitie, a set convenient (...). Act. 24. 25.
season (which Felix had, but discerned it not, for the convenient time was
then when Paul was speaking, and himself trembling) if, I say such a Time there
be, then is the morning, the tempestivitie thereof. That is the convenient set
time, when God is orderly sought and found: early will I seek Thee Psalm. 63. 1.
, before the morning watch, etc. And they that seek me early, shall find me
Prove. 8. 17.
, says Wisdom; early in the morning of their life, offering up their
strength, the first fruits unto God; early in the morning of the day too, that
is a convenient Time, the set Time, that is certain.

The morning is the very marrow Mr. Bolt. Direct. p. 205.
and fat of time, as one says, the flower and first fruits of the day, and
they were to be given unto God. The night is for sleep, which must serve, as
other creatures, to strengthen and refresh our bodies, not to satisfy ease,
sloth, and a sluggish humor Plus vigilare plus vivere est. Indalgendum somno
est, ut corpus reparet non resolvat; and vires revocet non enervet. Chrysol. de
servo vigili. Ser. 24.
; we must beware, least that great Devourer (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Paed. 2.
cap. 9.
and waster of time (sleep) rob and bereave us of those precious and golden
hours in the morning, when we are freshest and fittest for employment; we
should often remember (says the same Divine) Indecens est Christiano si radius
solis eum inveniat in lecto. posset enim dicere Sol, si potestatem loquendi
haberet, An plius laboravi heri quam tu; and tamen cum jam surrexerim, tu adhuc
dormis.
when we see the Sun up before us, that saying of Austin: It is an uncomely
thing for a Christian to have the Sunbeams find him a bed: And if the Sun
could speak, says he, it might say, I have labored more then thou yesterday,
and yet I am risen, and thou art still at rest.

And yet, as good rest, as to move and to no purpose. We must not so much as
eat in the morning: certainly, it does concern not those of the higher sort
only, which we read, (...). Hom. Iliad. 2.
A governor ought not to sleep all night long, And it is a forerunner of a
woe, when Princes eat in a Eccles. 10. 16.
morning. It cannot be conceived, that the meaner sort have more privilege
then their betters, to eat unseasonably, or intemperately; so Tremellius
expounds that place. These precious hours of the morning are for precious
employment, the serving of God, as becomes, with reverence and fear, and
then our selves, and our brethren in love: These are the services, which must
take up the whole day: But more especially in the morning, we are fittest for
them, when we are wholly our selves, as the saying is; The powers and faculties
of the outward and inward man being awakened, and refreshed. But first we must
address our selves to God, and set our souls in order before Him, that we may
strengthen and perfume our spirits with some gracious meditations, specially of
the chief end and scope, wherefore we live here, and how every thing we do may
be reduced, and ordered to further the maine.

This is first to be done, and a necessity there is, that it be done first,
else that, which follows to be done, will be done to little purpose; It follows
now, That we consider briefly, how we stand engaged to this principal service,
even to call upon all to awake, as the Prophet says; All without us and within
us, to return unto the Lord according as we have received, and to give praise
unto His Name, for now praise is comely.

1. It is He that kept us, when we could not keep our selves: He kept our
houses, which the watch did not keep, from those, who Job 24. 16, 17.
marked them forth in the daytime. Our security is, as Noah's was, in Gods
shutting our doors. He it was, who preserved that spark of mankind alive, in
the midst of the waters, as the Father (...) Chrysostom. Tom. 5 Ser. 6. in medio.
elegantly; for so we read, And the Lord shut him in Genesis 7. 16.
. The Lord shut in our doors upon us also, kept us in safety, kept out danger,
else we had not been alive. The destroying Angel (I mean danger in any kind)
waits but his commission from the Almighty, and when he had it, we heard what
havoc he makes. From this destroyer the Lord kept us, though our hearts were
not so besprinkled as they should have been, nor did we keep our selves,
according to our Exodus 11. 22. See Mr Ainsw.
charge, under the safe, and secure protection of that Blood; as we should have
done; yet notwithstanding the Lord kept us. The Lord is the great wing of our
protection; our castles, towers, houses, doors, chambers etc. but the small
feathers thereof: These nothing without Him; He All without them. We may read
of Atloanasius. Cent. 4.
one, who had a safe convoy, himself alone, through a troop of enemies five
thousand in number, all and every one appointed for his destruction: And of
another H. 3: Charron.
we may read murdered by a Monk, when he lay entrenched with an Army of
friends about him, 40 thousand strong. Safety is from on high; from the Highest
is our protection; He is our Sun and shield. He kept us this night, which is
now past: But behold His goodness yet further; He has renewed the face of the
earth unto us; given us a new resurrection with the day, lengthened and
stretched out yet further our span of time, renewing our strength and making us
fresh like the ^agle, crowning us with loving kindness and tender mercies,
such mercies, as whereby our hearts are cheered to see the light, which
thousands cannot say: great reason we should call upon all to praise the Lord,
and this right early, for now praise is comely.

2. We must now every one to his work in his lawful calling, or to that, which
fitteth for the same, if children; we are not made, as it is said of the
Leviathan, to take our pastimes in the world, and to pass our days in vanity.
The Sun rises, and man goes to his labor, every man his several way, and in
those several ways so many snares: great cause to fence and guard our hearts,
and as was said, to perfume our spirits from above, that we may avoid these
snares from below The first fruits of our lips and hearts are to be offered
unto God. Amb. (...), Why will thou suffer thine adversary to surprise thy
castle or strong holds first in the morning? Basil. de jejunio. p. 285.
; for we shall meet with them, it is not possible to be otherwise. We draw
along with us such a concatenation, a chain of business, as that we must needs
be fettered and puzzled with them, if a gracious hand lead us not the way into
them, and help us out of them.

In the commerce betwixt man and man, which drives the great trade of the
world; There sin sticks as close, as a nail sticks betwixt the joining of
the Ecclus. 27. 2.
stones; which consideration engages us, to fear always, and to walk close
with God, that our ways may be established; lest going beyond our brother in
bargaining, we exchange the favor of God, for some poor advantage from the
world.

3. Now that we are going every man his way, as the way of our calling leads
us; now we must know that God, and He only, opens our way to all our
occasions, leads us unto them and gives us an issue out of them; we labor in
the fire, if God restrain His influence from above; we ^ Endeavor without
prayer is presumption; prayer without endeavor is temptation.
may be early up, and never the near, as the proverb is, we may gather, and
put our gatherings in a broken bag: Therefore as in all our gettings, we must
get wisdom, so in all our ways, we must seek to and for wisdom; so shall our
ways be established g.

It is the strength of the Almighties hand, that inables us; It is His wisdom,
that instructs us; His blessing, that crowns all with success. To Him we must
go in all conditions of life, for direction and guidance; And in all our
necessities for supply, as being the fountain and springhead of every good
and perfect gift, Iam. 1.

He that would obey well, must seek to God, He subdueth the spirit, and makes
it subject; He makes the mountain a valley, and the rough way, smooth.

He that would govern well, must seek to Him; He gave Solomon an
understanding heart, 1 King. 3. 12.

He that would carry himself valiantly in a just quarrel, must seek to God
(as that victorious Ante bellum in oratione jacuit ad bellum de oratione
surrexit: priusquam pugnam manu capesseret supplicatione pugnavit, Salv.
d^guber. lib. 7. p. 251.
Commander did, who always rose from off his knees, to go to fight) for He
teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight, Psalm. 18. 34.

He that would have understanding and knowledge in his Trade, must bind
himself a servant unto God; for He enableth us this way. Exodus 31. 3. And this
we must know for our encouragement; That there is no greater glory, no, not to
His Angels, then that, they serve before Him. If the husbandman would (...);
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. page
plough, and sow, and thresh, etc. and all i (...), etc. They who think, they
can do or speak any thing without God, think also, that they can go without
feet. Clem. Alex. ad Gentes. p. 36. (...), Chrysostom. L^ge orat. 1. and 2. de
precatione. Tom. 1.
in season; ordinary things we think, and yet the more prayerfull he is, the
more successful he will be: for this God does teach him; He instructs to
discretion, Esaias 28. 26.

We must not ascribe any thing to our own power: Remember we must the Lord God
still, for it is He, that gives power to get wealth. Deuteronomy. 8. 17.

And for our wants, there is a sweet comfort, Phil. 4. 19. My God shall supply
all your need; no good thing shall He withold, etc. That man is as bold as he
is ignorant, who dares attempt the smallest business without acquainting God
with it, and craving His assistance in it, and blessing upon it. It is very
notable, which we read, Nehem. 2. verse. 4. Then the King said, for what do
thou make request? so I prayed to the God of heaven. Mark here, we would have
thought, that Nehemiahs answer was easy, and in a good readiness, and yet
before he gave it, his heart was lifted up to the God of heaven, from whom, the
answer of the tongue is Prove. 16. 1.
. It teaches us very much, and what it teaches, is very plain, which is; I
must not only begin the day with prayer, so perfuming my spirits, for it is
the key that unlocks the Treasure of heaven and earth; It is as the morning
star, it must usher in the day; And as the evening star too (it is one and
the same) it locks up the night; not only, I say, begin the day with prayer,
but have my eyes intent to Him, as I look to prosper in my private and special
affairs; for, what I have not gained, as well by my prayers as my pains, will
not prove a blessung to me. Looking up to God, gives me power to employ my
parts, and to improve them; it gives a better slde into businesses.

For Application of all this; I know these things may seem somewhat sublime,
and too high for the conceits of children; But I intend not their information
only. I know also, that prayer, being one of the great engines, whereby to
raise the dead heart, and to effect great and mavelous things, is an
instrument too grave and weighty for a child to manage. But yet, we must be
dropping into children as we can: A drop makes the stone hollow not with once,
but with often dropping. The Ant Silices itinere earum attritos videmus, and in
opere semitam sactam, nequis dubitet qualibet in re quid possit quantulacunque
assiduitas, Plin.* 11. 30.
makes a path by her assiduitie and continual traversing the way: so if by
continual pains with them, often prayer for them, good example before them,
you instill and drop upon your children as you can, you shall see Gods work in
them Martyr. page 1444.
, at length, says Mr. Bradford in his letter to Io. Careless. If the child
be a young Timothy, I mean such an one, who is instructed from a child to
know the holy 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Scriptures, he may prove, there is great likelihood so, a Mnason, an old Act.
21. 16.
Disciple. Lectione assidua and meditatione diuturna pectus suum bibliothecam
fecerat Christi, lib. 2. ep. 22. 267.
Hieron tells us of one, who, by continual exercise this way, had so wrought
the word upon his soul, that it became indeed an ingrafted word, and his heart
was the very library of Christ. This may assure us, that according to our
childrens years, something they may be taught; And by much (...), etc. I will
never leave speaking; he that hears not to day, may hear to morrow, Chrysostom. in
Ioh. Hom. 65. o.
teaching some thing may stick, as will the smell by standing in a perfumers
work, must command a blessing upon the work, else it will be a vain work;
And that He, who commands a blessing, must be waited upon and served in truth,
and in truth called upon, etc.

Such like instructions as these, may take up our thoughts, and find us work
in the morning, when we rise; And direct us to, and set us in the way of a
blessing, upon that we do afterward. And so much to the first season, In the
morning, when thou risest. Now that we have, as children of the day, acquainted
our selves with God, and done the works agreeable to the light in serving
others, we may now serve our bodies too, that they may be serviceable. That
season now follows, and the instructions therefrom.

CHAP. VI.
The second season seasonable for instruction, and yielding a great deal.

AT noon; we eat bread at noon, which implies, that we have done our work
before: we are not content to feed an unprofitable servant, nor a Lord-Dane, an
idle drone: nor does the great Housekeeper of the world, make any allowance
here, for idle and lazy servants. That pattern Genesis 24. 33.
of servants, does his work first, and eats after. Joseph returns home at
noone from his necessary affairs, then eats bread with his brethren Genesis 43.
25.
. It is supposed and granted, That the servant, sitting down to eat, came from
the field, plowing there, or feeding cattle Luke 17. 7.
. He that like an idle Serving-man, can find no good employment for his hand
or mind, should be kept fasting according to the Apostles rule; He that does
not labor must not eat. He that labors not, lives like a mouse Quasi mures
semper ed^re ali^num panem* Plaut. Pers. Act. 1. Scen. 2.
, he eats not his own bread: Nay, he is a thief, because he works not the
thing, that is good. Ephesians. 4. 28.

And now that we have labored, see our frailty, and what it is: weariness is
a fruit of the curse, and now a kind of sickness, Rest cures that: hunger, a
sickness, also meat cures it. But behold how little a satisfaction here is in
it, and for how little awhile, we are refreshed now, with rest and repast,
presently again we are weary and faint. Our bodies need continual repairing;
we are still falling toward our earth; dust is turning to dust, before our last
glass be turned, and the last sand run out. Every day there is a spending of
the vitalls, some dilapidations in our building, which these comforts of meat
and drink, through Gods blessing, prop and make up again, but with some loss
in the principalls. A consideration, which may assure us, that we are but men,
frail, decaying men; and mind us of that state, where is constancy; and to
seek Him, who is fullness, and only satisfies. Here below, our comforts and
refreshments lie scattered, some here, some there, some in this, some in that;
we go to the fire for some, to the cup board for other some; to the eisterne of
water for other, but they are indeed, but cisterns quickly sucked up and
emptied, and then are we as before; God is the ever springing-fountain, All
comforts are summed up in Him, as the drops in the ocean: They are divided here
below, but united in Christ, get Him and we have all in Him. Oh, say then, Give
us evermore from that fountain; That, though we do come to these cisternes to
draw, yet we may know them to be but cisternes, and Him to be the Fountain,
from whom we may receive fulness and satisfaction, and so wait for His
appearance, when we shall be ever with the Lord, where we shall hunger no more
nor thirst any more etc.

3. And this instructs also, that we have no true right to All are yours (1.
Cor. 3. 21 23.) that is the churches in order to comfort and happiness; but for
propriety, so all things are not ours. Religion takes not away the distinction
of master and servant. And therefore it takes not away distinction of goods,
which is the lesser Doctor Sibs on that Text. Non fundatur dominium nisi in
Imagine Dei. Imago laec quid ^st, aut quomo^o deletur? Respondebunt spiritus
sanatici, Imaginem Dei esse puritatem; id autem, quod delet, esse peccatum,
Verum hoc ad eve^sionem imperii omnis spectat. Interpretes igitur saniores,
banc imaginem interpretantur, esse rationem naturalem; Quae si in toto, aut
maxima ex part, deformetur, jus imperii extinguitur. L. Verul. de bello sacro.
p. 3. 345. In Engl. p. 122. 123. Lege Clem. Alex. Ad Gentes. page 44.
, which is not here a place to dispute) but no true nor comfortable right, but
in our Head, the Lord Jesus Christ. By sin we have forfeited them all; and
more then so; we have brought a curse upon them, and a vanity; In Christ they
are restored, and through Him the curse taken off: I will cite Mr Dearings
words here, on Heb. the first chapter verse 2. They are these, and yield us
profitable instruction. We must learn, of our selves we have nothing: but being
ingrafted in Him, we are owners of all things. In mine own right, I am naked
and void of all, I have no meat to feed my hungry body, no drink to comfort my
faint and thirsty spirit, no clothes to keep me warm, no house to harbor me
etc. for the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. I may have from man
my warrant here in earth, that my house is mine, and my land is mine, and he is
a thief and a robber that takes it from me: But all the men in the world
cannot give me my possession before the living God, but only his Son Christ,
who is Heir of all; Then, that our lands may be our own, our goods our own,
yea and our meat ours, let us be Christ's; that in Him, we may have the good
assurance of all our substance. Take not thy meat, but as the gift of Christ,
who has sanctified it unto thee; nor any thing thou have, but with
thanksgiving to Christ, that has sanctified it for thee.

4. And the consideration hereof should be a means, to lift up our hearts, as
well as our hands, and eyes, to Him, that spreads our table, prevents the
snare, feeds us with the finest wheat, when others are fed with the bread of
affliction, and water of affliction: or if our bread be course, or not that,
but pulse instead of bread, yet He can nourish by it, and make the countenance
Dan. 1.
ruddy; whereas the more dainty fare, may tend to leanness. So the parent
must teach the child, not to eat with common hands or mouth, that is, not
before the hands be lifted up, and the mouth opened to Him, Who opened His hand
to the parent first, before the parent could open his to the child: And now
only commands a blessing, and gives the bread power to nourish, making it a
staff of bread, both to parent and child: which must mind the parent, that
it is not a childs work, to bless the table, but according to the ancient
custom, the masters duty to pray for a blessing, who should best understand,
that all things are sanctified by the word of God and prayer. And so much to
raise our hearts, before we take our meat toward Him, who only commands a
blessing upon our meat, and strengthens with strength in our souls. Psalm.
138. verse 3.

5. And now that we suppose we are set down to feel and taste how good the Lord
is, who has so furnished our table; we must consider well what is set before
us, else we are as he, who puts a knife to his throat Alioquin Trem. Prove 23.
2. Lege Clem. Alex. paed. lib. 2 cap. 1.
, says the wiseman, What means he by that? If we do not moderate our selves
in a sober temperate use of the Creatures, as men not given to our appetites,
we do then turn that, which was ordained to maintain life, and to refresh the
spirits, the clean contrary way, as a means to destroy life and to suppress
and damp the spirits, which is a great provocation: for thereby we fight
against God with His own blessings; and against our selves with our own
weapons, and so are as they, who, instead of putting their hands to their
mouths to feed them, put both to their throat to cut it: For by intemperance
this way, in meat and drink, by feeding without fear, we transgress the set
bounds, Chrysostomes observation touching the use of wine is very useful, for
it tells us the use of all the creatures given for our nourishment; wine
glads the heart; there you have the use of it, says he: gladding and
refreshing is the very bound and l^mit set unto us in the use of the creatures;
if we transgress that bound, we abuse them. (...). Ad Romans 15. Hom. 28. o.
and our heart thereby is made as heavy as a stone, our spirits quite flat and
dead; whence the proverb is, An intemperate man digs his grave with his
fingers: so that, although life be within him, yet his body is his prison, and
the grave of Gods mercies; and his life serves him to little other purpose,
then to dishonor that God, who has provided so bountifully for him. And this
kind of intemperance, I mean, this lifting up the heel in our full pasture and
exalting the heart; this unkind requital of the Lord, puts man, that
reasonable creature one degree below the (...) etc. Tom. 5. de Laz^ro concio 1.
unreasonable: The ox, the horse, and the ass, These, says the Father
usefully, when they are fed, go on their way, carrying their burdens and
performing their service; but man so overchargeth himself, that his meat proves
his burden, if not this surfeit, and makes him unfit to return any service, but
such as shows him to be a debtor only to the flesh; which indeed we must
nourish, that it may be serviceable, but further we owe it neither suit nor
service. Think then how ill we do requite the Lord, when fed by Him, we spurn
against Him; loaded with His mercies, we load Him with our sins; refreshed
with His comforts, we grieve His Spirit, by a contrary and unsavorie walking.

Here then is a fit place and season to teach and learn abstinence, one of
those virtues so much commended, and that may help much to the learning of the
other, patience; (so I invert the order (...). Epi^t. Aul Gell, lib. 17. cap.
19.
) He that has gotten command over himself at his Table, in moderating his
appetite, and can deny himself, what his stomach eagerly craves, will be able
to command himself in great matters, and bear hard things. It is unseemly for a
man, the Lord over the creatures, to be brought under the power of the
creature; and if he would not, which is his wisdom, he must consider as well,
what is expedient, as what is lawful. 1. Cor. 6. 12.
And so he teaches his child by his own example, as well as by precept, and
much better, and now is his season; for abstinence is best taught and learnt at
the first, and no where better then at our meat Comeditur quantum ad famem;
bibitur quantum satis pudicis and castis: sunt omnia quasi comed rint and
biberint disciplinam. Tert. in Apoll cap. ^9.
.

It is Mr Perkin^ On Gal 5. 2^. p. 181.
rule; That man must deny his desires at the table, he mus^ command himself
there, as one under his own power, and not under the power of the creatures, if
he look to be able to deny goods, good-nam^, wife children, self and all; All
which must be parted with, when they stand in competition with the truth, else
we lose our selves. These are sweet bits indeed; and he, that cannot deny
himself his sweet bi^s at his table; wtll very hardly (...). Mark 8. 34.
deny himself in these. If a man must needs swallow that bit b^c^use it is
sweet, and that cup of wine, because it is pleasant: if he has so far lost
the command over himself, that this he must needs do, when yet his stomach
needs it not: It is very probable then, that the same man will strain at the
cup of sorrow, as at a cup of trembling; it will no more down with him by his
will then will a Camel; but if down it must, it is because it must be so, there
is no remedy, for God has put the cup into his hand, and he must drink
thereof.

The lesson then is, At our tables we must begin this denial, so we shall
frame unto it the better in other things of greater importance. We may note
here; that naturally we are very short spirited, all for the present; we are
impatient of waiting, soon tired there, even almost before we begin, though the
Lord has said, The waiting of the meek shall not be forgotten; And though the
Lords manner is to make His children wait, putting a long date to the
performance of His promises, when yet His deferring is no empty space, for in
that space much good is done, even a fitting for the promise, as, while the
seed lies in the earth, the time is not lost; for the hard winter fitteth for
the more hopeful Spring. But I say, so the Lords manner is, to inure unto a
patient waiting, to stay, as in the case of Lazarus John 5. 6.
, and with those, He most loves, two days longer, when the extremity seems
greatest; so long, as we may think, with Martha, that the season for help is
quite past. We may take notice how short our spirits are, by that we read of
the two sisters, but especially of the three disciples Luke 24. 21.
. The third day was come, and not fully over, and yet but so long deferring
their hopes, weakened their trust; And to day is the third day. By them we may
learn how short our spirits are, and how impatient in waiting. But the
shortness and eagerness of our spirits appears in nothing more, then in
those things, which press upon the necessities of nature. We see ordinarily
the bread and the cup are put to the mouth before so much as a thought (the
quickest thing that is) is conceived of Him, who has ordained both for our
comforts. And we may remember how hard it pressed upon Esau; yea and upon the
good old Prophet 1. Kings 13. 15.
, who was easily seduced upon the mention of bread, which shows us the
eagerness of our appetites; and how peremptory the demands of an hungry
stomach are, which a man can no more rule, then he can his tongue; but He, who
restrained the ravenous lion from tearing the ass and the Carkeise, (mark it)
can restrain our eagerness this way, and give us the command of our selves,
for the better performing His command in cases extraordinary, and in suffering
great matters, when He shall call us unto it. I think now of the extremities
which famine drives unto, and they are scarce utterable by them, that never
felt them: I think also, how soon our very necessaries, which we have riotously
abused, and carelessely cast at our feet, may be taken from us. But then I
think withal; that in these extremities, wherewith Gods dearest children may
be exercised and pressed, they do so look up to Gods hand and so rest upon it,
that they certainly find the same hand as gracious toward them in sustaining
them, as it was powerful in holding the mouth of the lion, in the
forementioned case: So as, though the extremity be great, yet they do not put
forth their hand to wickedness, not to such horrid and bloody dishes, as we
read and hear that some in their extremities have done. If God take away the
meat, He can take away the stomach also, as the Martyr said; or restrain the
rage of it, so as it shall not touch the carkeise, or such unclean things. But
we cannot tell what delicate wanton persons may do in their straits; nor how
far our unmortified lusts may carry us. If we are in no part crucified to the
world, and have the world in no sort crucified to us, the extremity may prove
unsupportable; want of necessaries will press sore upon those, who always
have lived at the full, and fed themselves without fear; and could never part
with so much as any of their superfluities. They who feed themselves like
beasts (says Clem. Alex) very likely will walk and do like beasts (...)* paed.
2. 11.
: wants to such are more disrellishing then dead beer after the sweetest
banquet. They that live in pleasure, and lie at ease, cannot endure a change We
are hardly brought to change from soft beds to hard boards. Hist. of the World.
4. 2. 11. p. 158.
. And therefore, as we expect the support of the Almighties Hand in our
fainting time, when we have nothing to support us from without; we must look up
humbly and thankfully to the same Hand, now that we have plenty; And we must
accustom our selves, now that our tables are spread, to a sober temperate use
of the creatures, and to all fitting abstinence, holding command over our
spirits (in His strength we are able to do it, who over powered the lion) that
we be not brought under the power of the Creature.

The body has some preparatives before a purge, and when we would come out of
a sweat kindly, we cast off first one cloth, then another: so should we do in
the rankness and sweat of our prosperity Vitia longae pacis and opulentae
securitatis. Salv.
. And now the time calls upon us: famine, and the extremities thereof we have
Chap. 4. 14.
read and heard of, and what has it taught us? Our tables are as full of
excess as before, and fuller of surfeit. So the fool goes on and is punished,
he cannot lay things to heart; but they that are wise, do hear the voice of
the rod, and do fear before it, walking humbly with the Lord: They have got
command over their spirits, and are got from under the power of the Creature,
by denying themselves a little in this, and a little in that: Now in this
lesser thing, so making way for greater, so as, when the rod of their
affliction shall bud out again, which they expect, nay when the Lord shall turn
the former rod (which wrought no reformation) into a serpent, so that it stings
like a scorpion; they may feel the smart thereof, but the poison thereof shall
not be deadly.

And so much to teach us abstinence; and to get command over our selves, that
we be not brought under the power of the creature, which will help us much to
possess our souls in patience in the day of trouble. They that have not learnt
to wait, are not fitted to receive the fruits from the James 5. 7.
earth, or the accomplishment of the promise from heaven.

Now touching our children, the lesson is this; we must not give them always
when they ask, nor so much as they would have, let them feel sometimes the
want of it, and the biting of an hungry stomach: It sweeteneth the creature,
when they shall have it, and puts a price upon the same when it is in their
hand. It is rare amongst those, that are grown up, to find a stomach full of
meat, and an heart as full of praise. The empty stomach feels the comfort,
and is in likelihood more enlarged. Let the child abstain from all sometimes;
but not often, it is their growing time; yet sometime altogether from all, at
all times from part. They must not taste of every dish, nor look so to do (it
is not good for the (...). Cl. Al. Paed. 2. 1. page 103.
parent, less wholesome for the child, there is a drunkenness Plures cum sint
vino sobriae, ciborum largitate sunt ebriae. Hier. lib. 2. ep. 17.
in eating as in drinking:) Accustom children to wait now, they will wait
with more patience hereafter. But more specially teach them a fit and reverent
behavior both before and at the table. Though they sit at a common table, yet
it is Gods table; He spread it for the parent and the child; Though there we
receive common blessings, yet we must not put upon them common esteem, nor
return for them common thanks; children must not, by their rude and uncivil
deportment before, and at the table, make it a stable, or an hogs-stye; nor
must they drown themselves there in an eager fulfilling their appetite, like
beasts (...). Cl. Mex. Pop. 2. 7. page 127.
at their manger, or swine in their trough; like beasts, I say, that have their
manger before (...). Loco laud. page 128.
them, and their dunghill behind them: hereof Clem. of Alex. makes very good
use, and that is all I tend to here.

6. And now that we have eaten, we must remember to return praise. Our great
Master is our great example; Before He gave common bread, He gave thanks; and
when He administered the Sacrament of His blessed body and blood, He concluded
with an Hymn Matt. 26. 30.
. Hearken to this, says Chrysostom (...), etc.
upon those words, all ye that go from your common table like swine, whereas
ye should give thanks, and conclude with a Psalm; And hearken ye also, who
will not sit out till the blessing be given. Christ gave thanks before He gave
to His disciples, that we might begin with thanksgiving; And He gave thanks
after He had distributed, and sung a Psalm, that we might do so likewise; so
Chrysostom. Now then, that we are filled, it is the very season of
thanksgiving, says the (...). etc. Chrysostom. de Laz. Ser. 1. Tom. 5.
Father; And he that is now to address himself to return thanks, is supposed
to have fed temperately, and to be sober. They that have fed without fear, and
are filled with their pasture, are more like to kick with the heel, then to
return praise: and in so doing are worse then the most savadge creatures, who,
to show their thankfulness, will be at the beck of those that feed them. We
must remember that with us men, every favor requires a Omne beneficium exigit
officium. Lege Chrysostom. in Genesis cap. 12. Hom. 32. Man must not be like his
belly, what it receives to day, it forgets to morrow, and when it is full it
thinks of temperance. Translated out of Basil. de jejunio. p. 281. Psalm. 154 10.
return, much more when we receive these comforts of meat and drink from Gods
hand, we must return, in way of homage, our thankfulness. If it should be
thrice asked (as one in another case) what is the special duty or grace
required in a Christian? I should answer thrice also (supposing the season)
Thankfulness; Thankfulness at our sitting down; Thankfulness at our
receiving the blessing; Thankfulness when we are refreshed. Thankfulness is
as good pleading in the Common Law, the heart string Lord Cook Pref. Littlet.
thereof; so of Religion: It is the very All of a Christian, if it be with all
the heart: And hearty it should be, for, as it is for beasts to eat till they
be filled: so is it beast-like to look downward when they are filled. If God
had made me a Nightingale, I would (says on) have sung as a Nightingale does;
but now God has made me a man, I must, as a man, sing forth His praise; All
Thy works bless Thee, and Thy Saints praise Thee. Now that we have received
mercies, we must think to make return, else every bit we have eaten, will be an
indictment against us.

There is a vanity in our natures, for sometimes we stand upon exactness of
justice (as one says) in answering petty D. 5. 563.
courtesies of men, and in showing our selves thankful for favors received
there; when yet we pass by substantial favors from God, without taking
notice of them. But we can easily consider, that, if it be a sin in
civilitie, carelessly to pass by the favors from men; much more in Religion,
to receive from Gods hand, and not to return our thanks I^a semper ^omedendum
est ut cibum oration sequatur, and Lectio. Hier. epist. lib. 1. ep. 35. page 47.
. And if it be a rude and uncivil fashion, to rise from our common tables,
where we receive common bread, to play: much more then, so to rise from our
seat at Church, where the bread we are fed withal, is so much more precious as
the soul is above the body.

We suppose then, we are now rising from our common table, where every man has
put in his thanks, as into a common stock, and so jointly offered unto God:
Cyprians words are seasonable here (I find them in Vrsinus) touching the order
and connection of the fourth with the fifth petition; After our supplication to
God, for supply of food and sustenance, (Give us) we say, forgive us; that is,
we pray for pardon of sins and offenses; That He, who is fed by God, may live
to God Vt a Deo pasti, in Deum v^vant.
: Thankfulness (and that is the spring of a kind obedience) must presently
follow the receipt of mercies. It is good to take the advantage of the
freshness of a blessing: He will not be thankful anon, who is not thankful
now, he has newly felt, and found the sweetness of a mercy; what we add to
delay, we take from thankfulness; If the heart be closed now that the Lord
has so newly opened His hand toward it, it is like, it will be as hard and dry
as a flint afterward; And what an unkind requital is it, when, in stead of
being Temples of His praise, we become graves of His benefits? They lie buried
in us.

It is an old tradition, but instructs very much, which is; That every creature
has a threefold voice to man; take, return, beware: In more words, the
meaning is this; when we take the creature into our hands, be it bread, or be
it water Isa. 33. ^^. Calv.
(under these two all is contained, says Calvin) we must remember that it
speaks thus unto us;

1. Take the benefit and comfort, which the Lord has ordained thee, from me.
2. Return the duty of praise and thanks, which is due to the Lord, for me. 3.
And beware thou forget it not, least the Lord deprive thee of me, or curse His
blessings.
Our goodness Job 35. 6, 7, 8.
is nothing to the Lord, nor can we add unto His glory, by making return of
our thankfulness, any more, then we can give to the fountain f where at we
Aug. de civit. 10. 5.
drink; or to the Sun whereby we see; but yet, we must note, That there is a
taxation or impost set upon every thing we enjoy, which is this, God the
supreme Lord must have His tribute of glory out of the same: And from man, who
has these things to trade withal, God must have the tribute of thankfulness:
It being the easy task, tribute or impost, which the supreme Lord of All,
lays upon all the goods we possess, and blessings we receive; and if we be
not behind with Him in this tribute of our lips, He will see that all
creatures in heaven and earth, shall pay their tributes unto us: But, if we
keep back His homage, we forfeit and endanger the loss of all; Man will not
sow his best seed but in a fruitful ground: God intends His glory in every
mercy L^ge S. Basi^. in He^. Hom. 7. o.
; and he that praises Him, glorifies Him. Remember then we must, ^hen we
receive Gods mercies, what we read, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now, O Israel, what does
the Lord thy God require of thee? All errors, says one Bp. And.
, who said much in a little, are tolerable save two, about the first beginning,
and the last end; we err against the first, when we derive things amiss, not
acknowledging all to come from God: Against the second we err, when we refer
things amiss, when we return not all to Him giving Him the tribute of praise.

I must remember here-with, the memorable words of Clemens, which are these.
Behold, O man (...) etc. Pro^re^t p. 53.
, for how small a matter the Lord does give thee land to till; water to drink,
another water, whereby to send forth, and to return thy commodities; air,
wherein to breath; A house, to cover thee from the injury of the weather; fire,
whereby to warm thee, and where at to employ thee; A world, wherein to dwell:
all (...), loco laud.
these things, so great, so many, Thy Lord has as it were rented out unto
thee, at a very easy rate, a little faith, a little thanks, so it be true, so
they be hearty: And most unkind thou, if thou denyest Him, that rent, The
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; if then, thou do not
acknowledge thy Lord, being compassed round with His blessings; He will then
say unto thee (...), etc. loco laud. p. 48.
; Get thee out of my land, and from out of my house; Touch not my water,
partake not of my fruits. If I have rented these out unto thee for so small a
matter, a little thanks, and thou do deny me that little, thou have, in so
doing, forfeited the whole, and I shall require the forfeiture at thy hands. So
usefully spoke Clemens of Alexandria, worthy all men's knowledge.

This Theme is large, I will conclude it with a story, which I find related
by Mr. Downam in his Guide to Holiness Lib. 3. ^a. 24. page 281.
; which is this;

If the Lord curse His blessings for our ingratitude, we shall either have no
power to feed upon them, or in stead of nourishing us, they will be the cause
of weakness, sickness and death it self: of the former, not long since, my
self, with many others saw a fearful example in one, whom I visited in his
sickness, of which he dyed; whose strength being little abated, and his
appetite very good to his meat, would often and earnestly desire to have some
brought unto him: but no sooner did it come into his sight, but presently he
fell into horrible shaking and trembling, distractions and terrible convulsions
of all his parts, so as the bed would scarce hold him whereon he lay; all which
presently ceased, as soon as the meat was taken away. And this was done so
often, till at length he grew weary of so many attempts in vain, and prepared
himself for death, giving unto us all, many signs of earnest repentance:
Among others, he penitently confessed, that this punishment was justly
inflicted upon him, for his abuse of Gods good creatures, especially, because
he would neither of himself, nor by the persuasion of his friends, give thanks
unto God when he received his food, which he conceived to be the cause, why now
God would not suffer him to have the use of his creatures, which he had so
often abused by his gross ingratitude; and earnestly desired that he might be
an example unto all men in this Remember this story when thou sit down to
meat, and forget it not, when thou risest up; for, remembering such an example
as was this, we cannot forget to return our tribute of thanks and praise. So
much to the second season.

And now having so done, and being risen from our table, we may take a walk
and view the fields with the creatures there: This season follows, and the
observations therefrom.

CHAP. VII.
The third season. The method in reading the Book of the creatures. Essays or
Lectures there-upon. I. The earth and creatures thereon. II. The waters and
creatures therein. III. The Air, and creatures therein. IIII. The firmament,
and wonderfulnesse thereof.

3. WHen thou walk. Here is a large field to run over, and hard it is to
keep within compass. Which way soever we look, we have the great Book of the
creatures in our eye, and from every one, more then one instruction. If we
walk no further forth then into our garden, we see what variety that yields,
and the same variety of instructions. If in our grove, we may remember what
the Father said thereof. That he learnt more Divinity (more of God) in his walk
therein, then in his study amongst his paper-books. Which way soever we look,
whether below, Leg. Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioch. Hom. 9.
or above, or about us, we may behold those Texts, which Job, Jonah, Paul made
choice and great use of. The Rooke of the creatures every man may come by; and
he that runs may read it. Their language is easy to be understood; They open,
as I may say, the freest schools; and are the fittest to give instruction, of
any. My scope or intent here is

1. First, to deliver this kind of knowledge, which the book of the creatures
helps to furnish us withal, from the discredit and disgraces, that ignorance
and misinterpretation have put upon the same.

2. And this leads us to the second, for it will point out the way to the
parent, how to make this walk profitable to himself; I mean, how he may
receive benefit, by perusing the book of the creatures; And then, which is the
maine end of the walk,

3. How to teach the child to spell nature, and, by degrees, to read the
volume of Gods works; which will better be done in the fourth place, when,

4. I shall give some Essays herein, beginning at the footstool, the
lowermost of Gods creatures, and so rising higher, etc. For the first then,

The objections, I find cited by our noble and learned Advancer Advancement.
page 6.
, and his answers unto them there.

1. That the aspiring to overmuch knowledge, was the original temptation and
sin.

2. That it has somewhat of the serpent, for when it enters into a man, it
makes him swell, nature being easily blown up; for nature, and the pride of
nature are near (...).
of kin.

3. That Solomon gives a censure, That in spacious knowledge, there is much
contristation.

4. And Paul gives a caveat, That men be not spoiled through vain Philosophy,
as some have been, who, poring upon the second causes, have lost the light of
the first, and dependence on God, who is the first cause. To these he answers.

That it was not the pure knowledge of nature, and universality creatures in
Paradise) which gave the occasion to the fall; but it was the proud knowledge
of good and evil, with an intent in man to give law to himself; It was (says
the learned Author in another place Page 56.
) not the natural knowledge of the creatures, which induced the fall, but the
moral knowledge of Good and Evil, wherein the supposition was, that Gods
Commandments or prohibitions were not the originalls of good and evil, but
that they had other beginnings which man aspired to know, to the end, to make a
total defection from God, and to depend wholly upon himself. So he answers the
first objection.

2. Neither is it any quantity of knowledge, how great so ever, that can make
the mind of man to swell; for nothing can fill, much less extend the soul of
man, but God, and the contemplation of God, etc. (for he goes on very
usefully.) There is such a capacity and receipt in the mind of man, so as
there is no danger at all in the proportion or quantity of knowledge, that it
should make it swell, or out-compasse it self; no, but it is merely the
quality of knowledge, which be it in quantity more or less, if it be taken
without the true corrective thereof, has in it some nature of venom or
malignitie, and some effects of that venom, which is ventositie or swelling.
This corrective spice, the mixture whereof makes knowledge Haec Antidotus,
sive aroma, etc.
so sovereign, is charity; and so he goes on in answer to the second
objection.

3. And as for the censure of Solomon concerning the anxietie of spirit, which
redounds from knowledge; It is certain, That there is no vexation of mind,
which resulteth thence, otherwise then merely accidental, when men fall to
framing conclusions out of their knowledge, so ministering to themselves, weak
fears, or vast desires, whence grows that carfulness and trouble of mind;
for then knowledge is not a dry light, but steeped and infused in the humors
of the affections; This is the sum of the answer to the third objection.

4. For the Apostles caveat it must not lightly be passed over; for if any man
shall think, by view and inquiry into these sensible and material things, to
attain that light, whereby he may reveal unto himself the nature or will of
God, then indeed is he spoiled by The soul has no more nourishment from this
kind of philosophy, then the body has from nuts. transl. out of Clem. Alex.
Strom. lib. 1. p. 199.
vain Philosophy; For the contemplation of Gods creatures and works, produce
(having regard to the works and creatures themselves) knowledge, but having
regard to God, no perfect knowledge, but wonder, which is broken knowledge: And
therefore it was most aptly said by one of Platoes School, That the sense of
man carries a resemblance of the Sun, which, as we see, opens and reveals
all the terrestrial Globe; but then again it obscureth and concealeth the
Stars and celestial Globe: So does the sense discover natural things, but
it darkeneth and shuts up Divine. And hence it is true, that it has
proceeded, that diverse great learned men have been Heretical; whilst they
have sought to fly up to the secrets of the Deity, by the waxen wing of the
senses: So he goes on in his answer, and thus concludes; Let no man upon a
weak conceit of sobriety, or an ill applied moderation think or maintain, that
a man can search too far, or be too well studied in the book of Gods word, or
in the book of Gods works; Divinity or Philosophy; But rather let men
endeavor an endless progress, or proficience in both: only let men beware,
that they apply both to charity, and not to swelling; to use, and not to
ostentation; and again, that they do not unwisely mingle, or confound these
learnings together.

So far the answers, which serve to deliver this kind of knowledge (we call
natural) from the misconceits and exceptions against the same.

This points us the way to the second thing; How we may make our walk
profitable, and subservient to higher matters; That, though we walk low and
upon the ground, yet we may be raised in our thoughts to heaven, like the wise
and skillful pilot, whose hand is upon the rudder, but his eye upon the star:
to apply this then to our present purpose, thus;

2. There are in this our walk, I mean, in the view of the creatures, two
extremes; and two sorts there are, who fall foul and stumble at them: The one
sort are they, who think to rise higher by the sight of the creatures, then the
creatures can carry them; and so, by prying too far with their own light,
they make their philosophy vain; and become vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart is darkened; nature cannot rise above nature, it cannot
elevate herself above herself. Though yet, if we track and eye her well; if we
Advancement. 106.
hound her (as the noble Scholar phraseth it) she can lead us, and must needs
do so, from the footstool on earth, to the Chair in heaven; but when she has
done so, and when in our curious pursuit and disquisition our understanding is
wound up so high, yet is it but a natural understanding still: so as we do in
this search and enquiry tumble up and down, like a ship at anchor in the waves
of our own reason and conceits, for it is not possible, as the same Noble
scholar says, for us to make a perfect discovery of the more remote and
deeper parts of knowledge, standing the while, but upon the flat or level of
this natural knowledge.

There is another sort, and they are the most, who stumble at the other
extreme; They behold the creatures, the works of nature, of God rather, but do
no more but behold them; they stay and dwell upon the superficies, or outside
of the work, further they pass not, either to what is within, or to what it
tends unto. There are two most simple and primitive trades of life, ancient and
once honorable trades both, though now, as was said Preface page 21.
, Cooks are of more esteem because the old simplicity of life and livelihood
are out of fashion: Two trades I say, and they maintain the state of the world,
The one of shepheardie, the other of husbandry: They who are versed herein,
should be, if they are not truants, well instructed men, for their books, which
are full of instruction, are still in their eye; and they are still poring upon
them: They live still in the view of heaven, and of the earth; the one tending
his sheep, the other driving his ox and horse: and yet, though thus they do,
yet have they gained no more true understanding, from their observations in
either, then the sheep or ox have, which they tend and drive.

Experience tells us, that the shepherd and the husbandman are the most
ignorant persons in the world. Though yet I know very well, that both these do
know what sheep, and which ground yields them most profit, and the way they
know how to make them most serviceable that way; and all this they may know and
yet remain most ignorant notwithstanding, as for the most part they are; no
more understanding have they in those chief things, and lessons, which the
beholding the earth and the heaven might yield them, then the ox or the horse
have which they follow (which was Mr Dearings complaint long since.) And whence
this stupiditie or gross ignorance? There can be no other reason hereof but
this; that they do behold the creature and no more; as (so says the proverb)
An ox looks on a gilded gate: Their senses report no more to the mind, but
that they have seen it; no more. A fault carefully to be avoided, for he that
is unfaithful in earthly things, shall never have greater matters committed
unto him; and he, who carries a negligent eye or ear, toward the works and
voice of nature gathering no instructions thence, though the characters are
most legible there, and her voice clear and audible, shall find no more
capacity in himself for higher truths.

There is a place in the Apocrypha, which is worth our taking notice of, it
will help to lead us the way betwixt those extremes, it meets also with that
stupiditie even now mentioned, and corrects the same.

The wise man in the 38 chapter of his book verse 26. (I Eccles. 38. verse. 26.
^^ Eng. 25.
read after Iunius his translation, for our English, verse 25. may deceive us)
puts a grave and weighty question; and it is concerning him, who holds the
plough, and such persons, who maintain the state of the world, the question is;
Whereby shall a man be made wise? At the last verse of the chapter, in the
Latin Translation he answers; By nothing unless Verse. 39. nisi qui adj^cerit
animum suum. etc.
he be such an one, who will apply his mind and meditation on the Law of the
most High. It is a place not lightly to be passed over. The husbandman, in that
place, may seem to have (as he reads and so pleades his ease) a dispensation
for his gross ignorance; but it is nothing so; That Scripture tells us thus
much, and it is worth the noting; that though he holds the plough, which
shows him the Luke 9. 62.
constancy of an holy profession, for he looks straight before him, he does not
look back, much less take off his hand; though he ploweth up the ground, which
shows him as in a glass, the soreness of afflictions, how the wicked plow
upon the Psalm. 129. Micah 3. 12.
backs of the righteous; and what pains he should take with his own Jer. 4. 3.
heart also, So preparing it for the true seed the word of life: though he
casts in the seed still in the season, and that he might understand his own
season, looks to see again the very same seed, which he sowes, the very same
Job 4. 8. Hosea 8. 7. and chap. 10. verse. 12. 13. Galat. 67. 8.
, and with a large increase, but it rots and dies in the earth 1. Cor. 15. 36.
John 12. 24. Chrysostom. in locum Hom. 41. a.
first; which answers the great objection, and cuts the knot as I may say, with
its own sword; The body cannot rise again, because it dies and rots in the
earth; nay, because it dies and rots, therefore it shall rise; and he is a fool
in the Apostles sense who sees not so much in the sowing and reaping his
grain. Though this husbandman sees all this, yet he sees not, he
understands nothing thereby; he is not made the wiser by it: By what he
speaks, we may know what his heart does indite, no songs of praise unto his
God. He will notwithstanding glory in his goad; all his talk will be of
bullocks; for he gives his mind to make furrows, and all his diligence is to
give the kine fodder; all is for the earth, there on he lays out the precious
stock of time and strength, thither to he bends himself, he entertaineth not a
thought, whereby to raise himself higher; and it must needs be so, unless he
shall apply his mind another way, and meditate on the law of his God; when he
shall do so, then every thing shall instruct him, and make him wise, and not
before.

Here now we have our lesson, and the way to make our walk profitable; we must
apply our mind to that we see; and we must meditate on the Law of our God.
That is the man, who will learn by every thing, that has inured and accustomed
his heart to compare earthly things with heavenly; to trade his spirit to
heavnely things by earthly occasions. He shall be made wise, who has a gift
(it must be given from above) to be heavenly; that is, to make every creature
(which is the work of a sanctified fancy) a ladder to heaven; to turn ordinary
properties of the creature, or common occasions to heavenly meditations: This,
I say, is the man, who will profit by his walk; being now in the open view of
the heaven and the earth, and observing Gods great works in both.

To conclude and to instance, so making the thing plain, that man shall gain
much by his observations, who has but so much understanding, as seeing a sheep
before the shearer, to see also the meek-abiding and patience of the Saints;
seeing an ant, a lilly, a raven, to think on a providence; seeing an ox
knowing his owner and his crib, to think, what is the duty of a reasonable
creature; observing the stork and the swallow, and our household cock, all
exactly observing their season, and I think, the last observing it almost to a
minute, To learn from these, and to get (as was said of the children z of
Issachar) understanding in the times, and to know what Israel 1. Chron. 12. 31.
ought to do; He that can do so much (through Him that strengthens all, and in
all, he can) he shall be made wise by his observation of the creatures, for he
sets his mind to the thing, and the Law of God is in his heart; he will
receive profit by every thing, and teach others how to profit also: so I come
to the third particular; How to teach the child to spell nature etc.

3. Childehood and youth, are ages of fancy. Therefore the Father (I mean a
father at large, master or teacher, he has the relation of a Father) must make
great use of the childs senses, for they have the best agreement with its
fancy: hereunto the book of the creatures is very subservient. They speak to
the senses, and the senses make report to the mind. So in this way every place
will be the childs school, for every where it will meet with its lesson, and
no lesson plainer and more legible to a child, then what he finds in the
volume of the Creatures.

This is a truth not to be doubted of; That parent teaches best and soonest
attaineth his end, the promoting his child, who verseth the child most in the
open view of the creatures; So he cannot always do, but this he must do
always, as he intends his childs profit; When he cannot carry his child
abroad to view the creatures, he must, what he can, bring the creatures home to
the child; so shall he make the book in the childs hand, what ever it be,
more legible: For this the parent shall find, that, where he comes short in
making representations to his childs eye, there the child will fall short in
his apprehension. Nothing comes into the understanding in a natural way, but
through the door of the senses: If the eye has not seen that, we are speaking
of, it can make no report of it to the mind. The spirit of the child, as I
may say, is fashioned and molded to the pattern and model of that it looks
upon. And note we, then the child goes on with ease and delight, when the
understanding and the tongue are drawn along, like parallel lines, not one a
jot before another. It is Comenius his rule, the ablest man in that way, that
yet the world has taken notice of. And this also the parent shall the more
easily effect and with quicker dispatch, if, (when he has laid the book of the
Creatures before the childs eye, and is reading the lecture from thence, he
shall put the lecture into questions, and make the child, not an hearer only
(that is the old manner) but a party in the business: It will much enliven,
and quicken the childs fancy, to see it self joined as a party in the work,
though its little it can do. A parent must question his child, and in a fair
way take an account of him; speaking wholly, is lost labor. The Tutour in
Xenoph. Lib 1. de Inst. p. 34.
for a lecture to his scholar Cyrus, proposes this question; A great youth,
having a little coat, gave it to one of his companions of a less stature, and
took from him his coat, which was the greater; upon which he demanded his
judgment: Cyrus answered, that it was well, because both of them were thereby
the better fitted: But his master sharply reprehended him for it, because he
considered only the fitness and convenience thereof, and not the justice,
which should first and especially be considered, that no man may be enforced in
that, which was his own.

And this no doubt is an excellent manner of instruction, says Charron; and it
is probable, this was the manner, which the Jews took for the instruction of
their children: Deuteronomy. 6. 20.
And when the child shall ask thee, thou shall say, thus and thus: But how if
the child did not ask? then sure enough the parent did ask the child, or help
the child how to ask. If the child did not question the parent, the parent
did question the child. We would have the child ask and enquire; for it is a
true rule, He that doubts and asks most, he profits most: And he that
enquireth after nothing, he knows nothing, says another. But the parent will
find the child very slack and backward this way; Few children there are, who
make any further enquiry, but When is the next holy day? Therefore here the
parent must help, and give the hint of a question. As it requires some sense,
to make an answer not absurd; so it asks some knowledge, to demand a question
not impertinent; it exceeds the skill of a child. Therefore there is no
question, but the parent must help, and give the hint of a question at the
least, and that will give an hint to further instruction. It is past all
question; that it is an excellent way in teaching, to put the lecture into
questions: We have our great Lord and Master a president unto us, whom they
found in the Temple, sitting among the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking
them Luke 2. 46.
questions. It is then no novel way, but ancient, and authentic; though now,
as the best things are, grown out of use and fashion. And it suffices to point
only at this way of questioning the child, so making it a party, which will
help it very much to read in the volume of Gods works, and to profit by
reading, which was the third thing.

4. The fourth follows, which is, To give some essay herein, and read a short
lecture, out of this great volume of the Creatures, that lies open before us;
And I begin at the footstooll where we had our beginning:

At the Earth: for it is says the Father, (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis Ser. 1.
our country, mother, our nurse, our table, our grave. An effect it is, which
in a measure, may be perceived by man's understanding, but the manner of
production cannot be concieved by any spirit compassed with a mortal body.
Here I enquire first

1. What Form or figure it has. 2. Whence its dependence. 3. What its
magnitude etc. How far a childs sense will help in all three.
Something hereof the sense will report to the understanding, but it will leave
the understanding of old and young in a wonderment, and that, as was said, is
but the effect of a broken knowledge. The use hereof we shall see anon. The
first;

1. For the Figure of it; It is circular or round, we must not look for corners
in it. Our sense does not report it so, if we look downward upon the unequal
surface of the same; for the curvature or bending thereof appears not to the
eye, nor is it possible it should, being but a foot, or there abouts, in
fifteen miles, yet something it is. But the Globe representing the same, which
with the earth and sea makes but one, tells us what the figure of the earth is;
so do the waters in compassing the same, and the Sun or the Heavens rouling
round about.

But more clearly, the fabric of the heavens declares the figure of the
earth, whose concave we behold, and see it like an Arch or Furnace over us,
which plainly shows the Furnace flammeo.
same figure to be of the earth. And that (which is demonstrated in a little
circle) no part of the surface thereof is uppermost, and lowermost in respect
of it self, but lies in a full aspect to heaven, though it seems otherwise to
us, who live on this side of the Globe; as it does likewise to them, who are on
the other side in the South. Which also clearly concludes, That, there are e
Antipodes, though they tread not See Plin. not. Hist lib. 2. c 65. Aug. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 9. Lact. lib. 3. cap. 23.
in a direct opposition to us, which so posed the Ancients; I mean, a people
(for the word is improper) who inhabit that other side of the Globe; so
clearly, I say, concludes this truth, and so universally, that now, to phrase
it as one does, it scorns defense.

This is wonderful to sense. It is so, and it must be granted to be so, both
to young and old, for it leaves us all to wonder, and no more. It leaves us
with our light in the dark. Note it, There is enough in the greatest portion
of knowledge to humble us very low: And enough in the least portion thereof,
for there is the greatest danger, to puff us up and make us swell; so needful
it is to know the imperfection and shallowness of our knowledge, but, more
especially to know our selves to be but men. And, if we conceive so small a
part of God here about the earth; how little, little, is that we conceive of
Him, when we go higher? If He be wonderful in His footstool, think we, and
think seriously; How glorious is He in His Throne? This meditation should not
be passed over until it has wrought us from wonderment, to an holy trembling
before Him, and a godly fear.

There is one thing more, touching the figure of the earth, which offers it
self, and I cannot pass it by, though it is very ordinary and familiar, and
the sense can make report thereof to the understanding, It is this; A circular
or round figure cannot fill up that which has corners; there will be still an
emptiness. It tells us this ordinary lesson, That the earth, and all the
stuff and lumber there, cannot fill up the heart of man, no more then wind or
ashes can satisfy the hungry stomach. We may weary out our selves, and lay out
our stock of time, and parts, about the encompassing of Capacem Dei non implet
minus Deo, Tu Deus diligenti Te quantum praecipis, oslendes Te and sussicis ei.
Aug. Cons. 12. 15.
some portion here below; but it will not be a portion proportionable unto the
nature of the soul; it will not profit, nor give satisfaction. That very seal,
which made the impression, will fill up and answer the same impression, and no
other for it: It is only heaven and the great things thereof, which give rest
and peace, which fills up the heart, and makes it stable; removed therefrom,
the heart is like a needle shaken off from the pole star, in an unquiet
trembling posture, when it feels it self, like a Meteor, tossed with every
motion, and still in doubtful suspense (...). Luke 12. 29.
. Behold then; The heaven is before us, and Christ, in our nature, has opened
the way thither, and There appears for us; And thither-ward must the soul
tend, if it looks for rest. The Lord Christ seems to speak to every soul, as
Joseph to his brethren, Genesis 45. 20.
Regard not stuff, for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours: Regard not
the stuff and baggage lumber here below; ye are borne for higher things;
Behold the heavens; Behold all the good in those spacious mansions, is yours.

This meditation must be followed, till it has set us loose from our spirit of
infirmity, bending us down-ward, and has wrought our affections off from
things below, and raised them upward, where the treasure is (which only
satisfies) thereon to fasten even upon the Lord Christ, as the portion to the
soul, every way proportionable.

And woe unto us, if this meditation does not work upon us even thus far, for
how shall we answer, our coveting an evil covetousness to our house; our
increasing that, which is not ours Hab. 26. 9.
; our heaping up riches, or rather, as one says, sins (...), etc. Isid. Pelus.
lib. 2. ep. 135.
, but all this while contemning the blessing? our minding earth, and earthly
things, wherein is such variety of changes, and neglecting house or kingdom
rather, which cannot be shaken. How shall we answer this? It is not possible
says the Father (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 4. w.
, to expect pardon for so great a neglect; for our eager pursuit after, and
care about the earth, and our neglect of heaven, and of our right precious
souls, which live to all eternity. This will besaid of us, if our care be so
preposterous, which was said of him Isid. Pel. lib. 2. ep. 156.
, who had built him a sumptuous house, which he enjoyed a short time, but
neglected the chief and principal thing, which leads to those everlasting
doors, whereat the King of glory is entered in; In the one he proclaims his
covetousness, in that other, his great neglect, his extreme folly rather. So
much in way of resolution to the first enquiry; What figure the earth has, and
what use therefrom.

2. Whence its dependence? or how born up? It is Gods question; So He demands
of Job, Job 38. 45. 6.
Where wast thou, when I laid the foundation of the earth? who has laid the
measures thereof, whereupon are the foundations fastened? etc. And as it was the
Lords question, so must it be His answer for there is not a man upon earth, nor
ever was (clothed with sinful flesh) that can show the Kings matter. What then
is the Lords answer? If we know the Scriptures, we know what it is, for thus
they say; He has founded the earth upon the Seas, and established it upon the
floods Psalm 24. 2.
. Upon the seas and upon the floods? what finite understanding, says the
Father Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 12. Near the middle. Ad Pop. Ant. Hom. 9. Lege
Hom. primum S. Basil. in Hex.
, can understand or comprehend this? when we men lay a foundation, so the
Father goes on, we dig deep, and if we meet with water in our way, we go
yet deeper, till we see the spring dried up, else we will lay no foundation;
for a foundation upon water, makes a building unstable, and tottering, it
cannot be a fixed dwelling. It is against the nature of water to bear up so
heavy a body. It was not the stick, no nor the work of nature, though put to
the extent thereof, which caused so much as the iron 2 King. 6. 6.
to swim; And it is against the nature of the earth to have its seat or basis
upon such a foundation.

But Gods ways are not as man's ways, which may be found out and comprehended
by reason. And yet (says the same Father) Why do thou wonder o man? If thou will wonder, thou shall never cease wondering, for into whatsoever creature thou will pry into, thou will find an unlimited and boundless power, much more
then, in the bearing up of this (...).
massive body; And to this power thou must be brought, else thy understanding
can never fix but be as unstable, as the waters: We must be brought to this;
even to the power of God, for hitherto all the answer, that the sacred
Scripture makes to this great and grave question, tends. He hangs the earth
upon nothing, says Job 26. 7.
: upon nothing? nothing can bear up nothing; yea but the earth has pillars;
so we read also; The 1 Samuel 2. 8. Cardines Poli.
pillars of the earth are the Lords, and He has set the world upon them: The
meaning thereof is this (though some bend the interpretation otherwise to their
own end, according to the sickness of their fancy) That these pillars are our
North and South poles, amidst whereof the earth is s Read Pol. Virg. lib. 4.
ca. 9. Where they would make us believe that Anna prophesied of Cardinal Pole,
or others the Popes Cardinals, so making them elder then the Moon.
placed, which confirms unto us the singular power and providence of God,
says Trem. and it is as much as is employed from that text; I mean the
singular power of God therein, for that is intimated by those words past all
question. Another sacred Scripture says thus: Fundavit terram super bases ejus
Trem. Psalm. 104. 5. Terrae in se locus est. Plin. Hist. 2. 65.
He has founded the earth upon her own Basis, that it should not be moved for
ever; That is, till there be a new heaven, and a new earth. And this answer
comes nearest to our sense, and is most suitable to our understanding, though
far exceeding both sense and reason; That the Lord has given such an occult
and hidden property to the earth, that it should bear up and poyse it self
with his own weight; that it should be, as the Philosopher said, a place u to
it self; and it is as impossible, that it should leave its place, as for a
stone to tend upward. But still in our search and enquiry here, our reason
leaves us in the dark; we must refer this, to the head of that boundless
power, before mentioned, and there leave it amongst the wonders Inter Arcana
naturae. Alsted. de Terra.
and secrets of nature, or rather of His Art, which is beyond our skill to
find out.

Only this every child knows, and he it is whom we would instruct, That every
building must have some pillars whereon to depend, and bear it self up, this
the child knows: If then the child be asked, what or where are those pillars,
that bear up the earth? It must needs answer, That pillars it has none, as
other buildings have, to support the same; and support it self it cannot; an
invisible hand there is, made bare of flesh, that gave the earth at first a
being, and ever since a subsistence, poysing it with his own weight, and so, as
the Prophet of himself, bearing up the pillars Psalm. 75. 3.
thereof; so the child will answer, and from thence he learnes that, that is
of the greatest force and strength, which is least exposed to the eye. In
earthly things we find it so; we hear how the thunder (Gods voice) roareth,
we see it not; we hear how the wind renteth our houses and stocks up trees; we
see it not; we hear our Lact. lib. 7. cap. 9. M. Faelix p. 23. in sol. See
Hist. of the world lib. 1. cap. 10. sect. 10. Lactant 2. 2.
voice and a sound (that which poseth all the naturalists in the world) we see
it not; The more remote from the senses any thing is, the more divine and
admirable: Nay, if a natural eye could perceive it, there were no divinity in
it at all. That is best seen, which is not seen Magis videtur quod non
videtur B. Juel Artic. 8. page 402.
; That is (as our Jewel interprets it) we see more certainly with our faith,
then we can see with the eyes of our body; they may deceive, the eye of the
soul cannot; But I am too high, if as children in knowledge, we understand not
earthly things, how can we heavenly? The arm of flesh is too short here;
nature is at a stand; I give but an hint only to helped it out, for here nature
will ever stick, till an invisible hand, I mean, an Almighty power, helps it
out; and raises nature above it self: For by faith we understand, etc. Heb.
11. 3.

I would ask one question more, and it is according to a childish supposition,
but best agreeing with his understanding and conceit. Suppose the earth did
hang, like as our deceived sense presents the Sun at its setting, popping down
behind the nexthill; or, like a stone, still dropping into the water; suppose
it so, I would then ask, whether should the earth fall? It must needs be
answered according to the same conceit, That it must fall into the lap and
arms of heaven; And this is, as if we should say, That the creature falls into
the arms of Him, who holds it up; which secureth the stabilitie of the same;
That there are, as the sacred Scripture says, everlasting hills and perpetual
mountains: Habb. 3. 6.

It secureth also (and it is a principal thing) The stabilitie and firm
foundation of the Church, and the true members thereof; They are an everlasting
foundation also, they stand fast, like Mount Sion, fast for evermore. The gates
of hell, (power, and policy) shall not prevail to remove and unbottom them;
so fast they stand; for how should they fall, or which way? which way soever
they fall, they fall into the arms of Him, who supports them. They may be
turned by the giants of the world (as Mr. Dearing calls them) from post to
pillar as the proverb is, and, from the pillar, separated to the four winds;
and yet they are upon their basis and bottom still. All their shocks cannot put
them off thence. How so? They are in the same hand, that holds up the earth, in
Gods hand; He loves His people; All His (Isreal's) Saints, are in thy hand
Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Trem.
; And we must all grant, That what is in Gods hand cannot by force or fraud be
thrown out. Oh how sure, how secure that building, which God bears up! and
the Corner stone whereof, the Lord Christ is! how sure and certain is their
dependence; who having nothing, can yet root themselves upon Him, who hangs the
earth upon nothing! So much to the second enquiry, and the use therefrom.

3. The third is touching the magnitude thereof; And this our sense reports to
be a massive body, according to all demensions, but therein exceeding both
sense and our finite understanding. And yet, we must needs conceive also, That
this is, as it is absolutely considered and in it self; for, if we take the
earth comparatively, with respect to the heaven, it is, and our sense reports
it so, but as that center or point, where the foot of the compasle stands, to
the compass or circumference round about the same point: So as if the earth
could be beheld down ward from the highest star, which may be supposed,
though it cannot be through a double impossibility, the opacitie of the earth,
and the contrariety to sense, it would seem as little, and less unto us
there above, then the star does seem to us below. The scoffing Lucian Icaro
M^nippus. Ridentem dicere verum, etc.
Philosopher makes this consideration very useful, for what hinders, but that
a scoffer may in some things speak the truth, and make the same truth useful.

But this is certain; They who are risen with Christ, whose affections are upon
their treasure, which can be no where but in the heavens, for there Christ
sits, they are filled with the beauty and glory thereof; filled I say, as
we read, the house was; The priests could not stand to minister, for the glory
2 Chronicles. 5. 13, 14.
of the Lord filled the house of God: so is their house filled, their soul I
mean, with the glory of the things of Christ, that the world can find no
room within their house, so filled with glory. The world is indeed as it is,
but See Chrysostom. Ad Pop Ant. Hom. 15.
as a point to them, and they are at a point for it; heaven is before them, and
the great and durable mansions there, no matter for the stuff of the earth;
let her keep her gifts, her pleasures and profits; for as the brother said,
they have enough; they have the pearl; for they bid to the price of it, they
have it, and they have enough.

And so much to the three demands, or enquiries, touching the earth; the
resolves thereunto, and instructions therefrom.

2. It follows, that we take a general view of the things on the earth; And
behold variety of obj^cts; all to refresh and comfort, to instruct and humble
me I have no sooner set my foot abroad, but presently I see, There an hill,
here a dale; There a barren ground, here a fruitful: There good fruit, here
weeds (...), Chrysostom. in Genesis cap ^ Hom. 17. (...), etc. Bas. in Hex. Hom. 2.
: There the sheep seeding, here the horse and ox ploughing: There the sheep
giving us her lambs, and her wool; here the cow giving her calf, and her milk;
so we have from both, first an increase, and then their flesh; cloth for our
backs, and food for our hunger: There I see herbs, flowers, trees, leaves,
seeds, fruits; perhaps now in their winter and withered quarter; or in their
Springtime, and new dress, receiving a new life again: whether so or so, they
give clear evidence, that what is quite rotten now, shall revive again In
resurrectionem futuram, omnis natura meditatur. Expectandum etiam corporis ver
est. Minut. Faelix. p. 24. in sol. l. 19 The Spring is the resurrection of the
year; And consonant to reason it is, That man, for whom all things spring and
rise again, should have his spring and rising too. Tertul.
. Here I see an hedge, and as much care to keep it strong, as there was to
plant the field, with any of all these. There I see the Behemoth, (beasts) so
called for her greatness; here the little worm, retiring into its hold, and
earthing it self, in case it feels the least touch. I cannot reckon up what I
see; but if I do no more but see, the mule, and the horse and the ox do as
much as I. If we see nothing in the heavens (they are Mr Dearings Heb. lect. 5.
c. 1. verse. 10.
words) but that they are light and above our reach; the horse and mule see
this as well as we. If we see nothing in the earth, but a place to walk in, or
to take our rest upon it, the beasts and fowls see this as well as we. If we
see nothing in our gorgeous apparel, but the pride of a goodly color; the
peacock sees that in her feathers: And if in all our refreshment from the
creatures, we know nothing but the pleasure and sweetness of our sense, the
hog and swine have here as great a portion as we. To be short, if hearing,
seeing, smelling, tasting, feeling, be all the comfort, we can find in the
works of God; we have given our preeminence to the dumb Creatures, which have
these senses more exquisite then we, and we have turned the hearts of men, into
the hearts of beasts; who with wisdom, prudence, understanding, knowledge,
reason, can do nothing. And the words of the Prophet are fulfilled in us: Man
when he was in honor, had no understanding, he was compared to Read Isid.
Pelusiot. lib. 2. ep. 135.
the bruit beasts, and was made like unto them. Therefore the beholding the
works of God, must affect us more then so, else we shall be but as the beasts,
and below them.

We must learn, according as the works of God are thus before us, so to behold
them and take the pleasure of them, that we give glory to God in all that He
has done. When we see the heavens, we must see His greatness, who was able to
set such a covering over the earth. When we behold the earth, we must behold
His providence, who has ordained such a place of nourishment for all
creatures. When we look upon the unchangeable course, in which all things are
established; We must look upon His constant wisdom and goodness, who in a
steadfast purpose has extended His mercies over all His works. In the least of
all the Creatures of God, when we see wisdom, power, glory, more then all the
world can reach their hands unto, we must humble our selves under His high
Majesty, before whom no King, nor Prince, no power of the world has any
account. So far Mr Dearings words.

I add for further illustration of the beauty of the Creation: That the
beholding the works therein do serve to instruct and humble both. I see all
these, and what ever else I do see, all in their ranks glorifying their
Creator, and serving man, who of all the works of Gods Hands, once the most
glorious, is fallen out thence and from his station, rebels against his Maker,
and now is called, as he is, A transgressour from the womb: and so makes the
creatures groan under him; serving in bondage and in weariness. This
consideration instructs and humbles very much, if it come home.

So also, if we consider, how little it is, that we understand of all that
variety, which we do see. If, says the Father Chrysostom in Ephesians. Hom. 19. o.
thou should come into a Physicians or Chirurgions closet, how small a part
could thou understand, of what thou see there? If into a Carpenters,
Painters, or Smiths shop, in how many things would thou be posed there? Thou
could not tell what the workman can do with this little thing, or with that,
but thou must be forced to acknowledge a skill in him, beyond thy apprehension;
Nay, I will go lower with thee yet, says the same Father; Go to the be hive,
(where thou may note by the way, and it is of great use; That Mar. Aur. Ant
Medit. lib. 6. sect 49. page 94. See Cic. Offic. 3. p. 141. Chrysostom. Ibid.
which is not good for the beehive, or for the whole swarm, cannot be good for
the be) see whether thou can understand that curious art; from the be, go
to the pismire, see whether thou can understand ^ Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11
cap. 5 6. 7 8. and 30. Basilii ep. 168. o.
her ways and work; from thence to the spider, consider her web, and her
house; Then to the swallow, and mark her nest and the workmansh^p there; And if
thou have understanding herein, then be bold to enquire into Gods works, and to
search them out to the bottom; but if not, then enquire not, but rather admire
and break forth into praise; For, if in these creatures, thou art forced to
acknowledge an art beyond sense in beasts, or apprehension in man; how much
more then, when thou look abroad into the great shop of the world must thou
needs acknowledge, the Creator and Disposer of all these, is wonderful in
working, and His ways past finding out. Job 11. 7.
Zophars question is a strong negation; We cannot by searching find out God;
we cannot find out the Almighty to perfection. The secrets of his wisdom are
double to that which is, we understand not the least part of His works. And
(which is our great fault) what we do understand in our measure, we do not make
use thereof according to our measure: But this we must acknowledge that He is
good to us and the earth, even in those things, which we count hurtful, and
know to be poysonfull; even in the toad and in the serpent; And then we must
conclude, How great is that goodness, which makes the worst things good!

And he is infinite in power and skill in the smallest as in greatest of His
works; In both we must see the footsteps of a Deity, how they carry a mark
imprinted in them of the power and Godhead of the Creator. For he that made
the greater and more excellent Creatures, made also the least and most
contemptible: And as His power is great in the greatest, so not one jot less
in the least Deus ita est Artisex magnus in magnis ut non minor sit in parvis,
etc. Aug. d^ civit. lib. 11. c^p. 22. Nusquam natura magis tota quam in
minimis. Plin. Nusquam pote^tior natura quam in maxim ^ragilibus.
. There is not the smallest creature, whereof there is not some need and use to
set forth the glorious power of the Great God, when He shall please to use it
for such a service. We may observe also, that mean and small things discover
the skill and art of the workman better, then the greater things, and more
excellent: Examples whereof are common and familiar. And sometimes also, small
things can help to discover the great, better then the great can discover the
small; So He has disposed it, who does many times choose the weakest things to
confound the strong, and simple things to confound the wise.

It is a good note, which the Learned Advancer gives us, P. 107.
We see how that secret of nature, of the turning of iron touched with the
Loadstone toward the North, was found out in needles of iron, not in bars of
iron. And this I have added; that we may take notice of the power and wisdom
and goodness of God, As in mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all
cedars; Beasts and all cattle; So also, in creeping things such despicable
creatures Psalm. 148. 9. 10. Quicquid ^ssentia dignum ^st id etiam scientia.
Novum organ. 1. 120. Creatorem n^n in coelo ^antum miramur, and terra, sole,
oceano, elephantis; camelis, etc. sed in minutis quoque animalibus, sormica,
culice, muscis, etc. Hier. lib. 2. Ep. 22. p. 268.
; For I see that all the hosts of men, though they should join their strength
together, cannot make the least of these creatures, which I see; not a creeping
worm, not the flying dust, where-from I must conclude as the Prophet before me
Isa. 40. 12. 17.
all nations before Him are as nothing, and they are accounted unto Him less
then nothing, and lighter then vanity it self: This use the Prophet could make
of the smallest dust, when it came into his eyes. We should not neglect the
least atome, or mote in the Sun, for that also gives us an instruction. It
was spoken to the praise of a Prince excellently learned; That he was a carver
or divider of cumine seed, which only noted his patience and settled spirit to
enter into the least and most exact differences of causes. Cymini sector. Adv.
p. 69.


So much to the general view of the creatures upon the earth, for we are yet
no higher; particulars here, (unto us) are infinite, and to insist upon
generals, is to walk in a maze: Therefore I shall single out two creatures
from out of the throng, for the singularity of natures work in both; the one,
the greatest, that goes on earth; the other the small^st, that creeps on the
same.

It is a well known observation, and experience concludes it; That in every
kind there is the greatest, and the smallest Datur maximum and minimum in
utroq^e genere.
; a greatness, which cannot be exceeded: and a littleness, which cannot be
contracted: So in men, though we should not believe the narration of
Hollings-head; yet we know there have been men of great stature, Hist. of the
World p. 1. 5. 8. Dr Hak. Apol. 3. 2.
and we see there are dwarfes. So in Creatures going on the earth, and never
rising higher, there is the greatest and the least; and in those two, I shall
now instance.

The Elephant is the greatest, I shall not relate what we read, touching his
ready obedience, dociblenesse, memory, and some other things scarce credible
See Plia. Not. Hist. l. 8 cap. 12. ^. Ver. Hist. vitae and mortis page 72.
Al^^ed Phys. ^ars 6. cap. 5.
. Certain it is, he is Behemoth in the plural number, because of his massive
bulk, as big as many beasts; and as the beast is, such is his strength; So we
read in the History of the Maccabees 1. Macc* 6. 37.
; And upon the Beast were there strong towers of wood, which covered every one
of them, and were girt fast unto them with devices, there were also upon every
one, two and thirty strong men, that fought upon them, besides the Indian that
ruled him. The more loaded he is, the firmer he goes, because feeling his
burden, he puts out his strength: He is the chief of the ways of God, as we
read in Job; Cap. 40. 19.
And it is notable which follows; He that made him, can make His sword to
approach unto him: If we mark whose sword that is, it carries the eye to God,
and teaches the child the wonderful might of His power; He 9. 19.
that made ^im etc. Therefore as Job also says, If we speak of strength, lo He
is strong. The other creature we call the mite, or weevell; a very little
creature, the least of any, says the Naturalist, and that little, which is, is
all throat; The husbandman shall meet with it in his barn, as sure as he
finds it in his chief; and for one, as the old Poet says, five hundred;
Plaut. cur. Act. 4 scen. 4.
A great devourer it is, where ever it is, but most likely in the corn-heap. It
will consume, says he that writes of husbandry Populatque ingentem farris
acervum curculio. Virg.
, a great heap of grain. Hence the instruction Maxima e minimis suspendens.
Adv. p. 112. l. 2. Hist of the World. A. 2 verse. 13. 4. chap. 16. 2.
is; God usually hangs the greatest weight, upon the smallest wyars; And does
the greatest works, both in a way of mercy and of judgment, by the silliest
and weakest executioners.

He needs not an army of Giants, one whereof (and he was the greatest, that I
think, our last Centuries have taken notice of) was of such a stature, that the
sole of his foot did cover four of ours Grimstone Hist. of the Netherland. p.
39.
: The Lord needs not an army of such, nor needs He iron charriots, nor
Elephants to make a battle fierce and terrible against a backsliding and
revolted people. When a Nation needs a sharp knife, as the Father expresses
it, to cut away the dead flesh; the Lord can do it by despicable instruments,
and yet of force and sharpness enough to execute His pleasure; who to approve
Himself the God of all power, works great things by the weakest means. Even
by His northern Army, the locust, the cankerworm, the caterpiller: Joel 2. 20.
25. A locustis, a muribus, genus omne occidi^ur atque arroditur frugum. Arnob.
lib. 1. p. 3. in fol. vide com.
These silly creatures can make a Garden of Eden before them, a desolate
wilderness behind them; and nothing shall escape them, verse the 3. If He
speak the word and bid it go, the silly frog shall scale the palace, and the
Kings bed chamber; The rats shall take the tower; The mise shall consume all
the provision of war, and in one night they shall do it; as writes Herodotus:
And so speaks that monument there, of one holding a mouse in his hand, and
bidding the beholder look up to God, and serve Him in fear (...).
. And to relate nearer to the thing in hand; A little worm can devour all the
provision of bread, as experience has sometimes told us; and that noted story
in Grimston, who writes; That the corn twice or thrice sown, was as often eat
up by a little worm, or gray snaile, and in one night, whence followed dearth,
famine, pestilence, wolves Page 819. Anno 1586.
.

Oh that man, so dependant a Creature, should carry himself proudly before the
God of Heaven! Who to approve Himself the God of all power, and able to abase
the proud heart, has a thousand ways and means whereby to do it; He can by a
gnat, a fly, an hair, stop the breath; and by the weakest means destroy life
and livelihood: We have often read these words, and there is much comfort in
them, to such, who are fearers of the Lord; Thou shall be in league with the
stones of the field; and with the creeping things, Job 5. 23. Hos. 2. 18.
etc.

I remember what an old Preacher said upon these Texts, It was this; What great
matter is it, will some man think, to be at league with the stones of the
field, or in covenant creeping things of the ground; he fears no danger from
these; No, said the Preacher, he does not; and therefore being out of covenant
with his God, his danger is the greater, because not feared. He that fears not
God, has cause to fear every thing, and that he least fears may most hurt
him: That stone, which lies before him, may dash out his ^rains, by such a
means, as no man possibly could suspect; and the beast that is in his hand,
and knows not his strength, nor shall put it forth, yet may occasion his fall.
I knew a man, for he lived amongst us, who had a Barbary horse to present to
his great friend; and stroaking the back of the beast, and there feeling it
crushed with the saddle, was presently in a great rage with his man; and in
that rage stamped with his foot; the heel of his boot being, after the fashion,
high, slipped within the crevice of the stones, (it was on a causie-way.) and he,
plucking his heel out again, with some heat and choler, fell down forward,
where a sharp stone standing above the rest, met with his forehead, and his
brains, and dashed them out.

A great mercy to be at league with the stones, and in covenant with the
beasts, and creeping worms; which we cannot be, if out of covenant with God.

So much to the works of God on the earth; and to the instruction therefrom,
which, in this cursorie way and view of them, we may take along with us, They
serve to refresh and comfort, to instruct and humble. God is great in the very
least, and to show Himself the God of all power, He can and does bring to pass
great works by the weakest and simplest persons and means.

It follows now that we take a view of the great Waters, Globe. In the view of
this subject (leaving more subtle enquiries for a fitter place,) I behold
first, their surface; secondly, their bars and bound^; thirdly, their weight;
fourthly, the Creatures therein.

1. The surface thereof; it is as the winds and weather is; if calm, the sea
is very pleasing, and in some places like a table; if stormy, then troubled,
and raging, casting up mire and dirt. It shows us the common error, and
mistake we have, when we commend a person; for we say, he is a very good man,
unless he be stirred or Multi nonnullam mansuetudinem prae se ferunt quamdiu
blanda omnia and amabilia experiuntur: at vero qui eundem s^rvat modestiae
tenorem ubi pungitur and irritatur quotusquisque? Call. Just. lib. 3. cap. 7. 4.
moved; Unless he ^e stirred? So is the sea also, a comely pleasing creature
in her calmes; but rough and dreadful in her storms. If the wind stir, the
sea mounts; if they bluster, it roares. I know not a consideration that may
sooner calm a man, if in a commotion (as wind enough he shall find to cause
it;) But surely a good man finds a calm or makes it, even then, when there is
much stirring about him. The winds and storms properly taken, tell us what
the sea is, and metaphorically taken, they tell us what the man is. Our
passions are elegantly called tortures Et vino tortus and ira. Her..
Tortures upon the body, many times make the mind more secret, or opens the
mouth against judgment, as said a Lawyer honest and learned; for rackings
stood not with his law Fortescue. chap. 22.
. But tortures upon the mind tell us what the man is; they discover a man: If
passion has put the mind upon the rack, and the person now suffer no wrack in
the storm of his passion, he is a man of a sound constitution, we cannot doubt
of it; For our Poeta perturbationes, non inscite appellat torturas, quod ab iis
secreta etc. Augment. l. 8. p. 252.
passions try what a man is indeed, as the storms and winds what wood the
ship is made of, how firm and sound it is, how well compact and set together;
and so forth, for the use hereof is large.

2. The surface of the waters shows us, how the Lord deals with His ransomed
ones, conducting them to their haven; For with those travelers, prisoners,
sick-men, we see seamen joined, Psalm. 107. All those conditions fitly
resembling the condition of those that seek the Lord; but none of all more
fitly, then the latter. He finds storms as well as calmes, doubts and fears
as well as refreshments. He sees the works of the Lord, and His wonders in the
deep. According to this resemblance or seafaring condition, the Lord deals
with His servants; they are like that ship, tossed with winds, and almost
covered with waves; and they may continue so high till the fourth watch, but
the end shall be a calm; for out of these great waters they shall be
delivered; and through those bars they shall break, though they seem as
strong as iron and brass, and over the wall they shall leap in His strength,
through whom they do all things; for the sea and the wind obey Him; so do all
temptations and fears, at His rebuke they fly; if He say, Be still, The
storms and waves of temptation are calm and still also; which leads me to
the second enquiry, that is;

2. What their bounds and bars? Hereunto the Lord Himself Jer. 5. 22.
answers; Fear ye not me, says the Lord? Will ye not tremble at my presence,
which have planted the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree,
that it cannot pass it; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can
they not prevail, though they roar yet can they not pass over it. There we
read, what boundeth the raging sea, and sets unto it its limits; The Lord
has, says the Father, walled (...). Chrysostom. in Cor. Hom. 4.
about the sea with the sand; He has bridled and held in the strong raging
hereof with a very weak thing; it is the sand thereof, and that a worm can
creep over. But yet, when the Lord has decreed it so, That thitherto the water
shall come, and no further Job 38 10. 11. 12.
, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed, then shall those sands be to the
sea as bars and doors (...). Basil Hex. Hom. 4.
, for there is the decreed bound. It had carried a greater show of possibility
to nature, if the Lord had said, I have set the rocks a bound to the sea, and
the land clifts as doors to the same; but then it had not so magnified His
power, nor so exalted His Name, that strong Tower, as now, that the sand is the
bound thereof; which wonderfully establishes the hope of the Righteous, and
secureth them, when the floods of great waters are at the neck, and even
running over the head; that yet, there is a decreed bound, so far, and no
further: As in the case of Jeremy; the three Children; all the faithful of
God, who may be delivered up, even into their enemies hands, That they, who
hate them, may be Lords over them, and execute upon them, the pleasure of their
own will, which is the utmost extent of their chain or bound; and yet, they
shall not do, what they think they can do, and is in their power to do, they
shall do them no hurt: The Lord sits upon the floods and orders them, though
they rise high, yet He is above them Psalm. 93. 3, 4.
. As the promise was of old (for that question is a strong affirmation) iron
shall not break the Northern iron and the steel Jer. 15. 12.
; though the enemy be hard as iron, the Lord will be too hard for them: so,
though the waves roar, yet they shall not pass those little sands, the
decreed place.

I remember now the holy confidence, security rather of Luther; News was
brought him, that the enemies banded themselves against the Church, and were
resolved to swallow up Saxony, and to eat Gods people as bread, We will not be
dismayed, said Luther, He that sits in the heavens laughs at their rage, and
shall we cry Melc. Ad. vita Luth.
? No, we will sing, and our song shall be the 46 Psalm; God is our refuge,
etc. Though the waters of the Sea roar, that is, though the enemy threaten to
swallow us up quick, yet he shall do us no hurt, none at all: Our God sits upon
the water floods, He is above them. Wickedness is cast into the midest of an
Ephah, a Bushel Zech. 5. 7.
, That is, says Mr. Calvin, it has its measure, its bound, which it shall not
pass. The righteous know, That the Lord is greater then all Gods, and, as once
it was, it will ever be; In the thing, wherein the enemies deal proudly, He
will be above them Exodus 18. 11.
; The Lord rules in the midst of His enemies Psalm 110 2.
. And will deliver, if not from all, as He did Peter, yet certainly from the
greatest expectation Act. 12. 11.
of the Adversary, He will so deliver, that all shall see, that there is no
God, that can deliver after this sort Dan. 3. 29.
. For He has appointed the bound, which the enemy cannot pass, though they
think not so; and the further they run, like a Springtide, or destroying
flood, which carries down all before it, the more wonderful, in the end, will
Gods power appear in opposing and stopping the same. For those floods of
ungodliness, which rise so high, and open so wide upon the righteous, as if
they would swallow them up quick, shall either break and dash themselves to
pieces, with their own violence, or they shall be a means decreed, as in the
former examples, and in Jonah, to bring them to their safe haven, the place
where they would be: so mighty is God in power, and so excellent in working;
and never more glorious, then, when He opposes strength with weakness, in the
eye of nature, and wisdom with foolishness, which is, as if a man should set
a few sands, as bars and doors to the Surging Ocean, when the surges thereof
are many degrees above the sands. So much to the second, and the establishment
the soul has therefrom. The third is;

3. What weight these waters have? It seems a matter of more use to consider,
how good a servant water is, so fire also; and how hurtful they are both, when
masters over us and ours: of use indeed to consider how good every thing is in
its place, order and use, and how good service it does therein: But then again,
how evil it is, and what hurt it does, when (through man's sin, who has
broken his rank, and left his first standing also) it is out of that place and
order. We need make no question hereof, but use a great deal. I have proposed
a question, whereto every child can make answer (but I intend the use) for who
knows not, That the waters are heavy? Ask the beast that tugs at the wheel,
when it has told its rounds Cha^ron.
, which it will soon learn to do, it will stand still and tell you, the water
is weighty: so will he or she say, that bear it on their shoulders, or upon
their heads. But this weariness is, and this weight they sinde in the water,
when they tugge at it, to draw it from out of its place; for, though it is
heavy in its own nature, yet not in its own and proper place Elementa non
ponderant in proprio loco.
. He that diveth into the waters, and lies under more then would fill many
Hogsheads, feels no weight from all that; Nay, suppose a man were in the
bottom of the Sea, and life within him; the water would soon choke him, but
he would feel no more weight from all those billows over his head, then he
would from a feather upon his back, for the water is in its own place, and
the person is out of his; and that is the reason, why he feels no weight, but
yet he will be choked with it.

This is of ordinary use, and thus it is applied; when a person is over head
and ears in sin, when he and his sin are affianced, yea, married together;
when he is joined to his Idol, and is let alone; All this while his sin is
delightful unto him, he takes pastime in it, as the Leviathan in the waters,
and finds no trouble in it at all, but peace and satisfaction rather
Volup^a^e ^ru^ maxima voluptas.
. Sin is a light matter with him, so also is pardon and forgiveness of sin,
so small a matter in esteem now, as not worth the craving, a seeking after in
good earnest, though he does, in a customary way, and for order sake, reckon up
the fifth petition amongst the rest. He cannot desire ease, for he feels no
burden; nor enlargement, for he feels not how he is enthralled: And the reason
hereof is; his sin is in his heart as in its proper place and center, and
being so, it burdens him not. But now stay a while, till this person be laid
upon his sick bed; till his way be hedged up with thorns; till his month
come, when he must cast forth his sorrows; till he be griped Non reddit oracula
nisi constrictus.
with pains both within and without; till death look in at the windows, and
sin stares him in the face, and now is summoned to make his appearance before
the Judge of the whole world, before whom the lying spirit spakes truth Job 1.
N^tura vexa^^; prodi^ seipsam.
; much more the conscience of a man. Suppose we, I say, a person in such a
case; Nay, we will not suppose it, we need but antidate the time, for it
certainly comes and will hasten; and then put we some intergatories to this man
in this case, we shall find his mind changed. Ask him what he thinks now of
the cup of pleasure, which he drunk down so greedily? he will tell you, he
finds it bitterness in the latter end; it was indeed like sugar under his
tongue, but now in his bowels it is as the gall of Aspes; and to have overcome
his pleasure had been pleasure indeed Vicisse voluptatem voluptas moxima. Gro^.
243.
. Ask him what he thinks of pardon for sin? he will tell you it were news
from heaven indeed; the best and most comfortable tidings that could be thought
of. Ask him how he feels his sin now? he will tell you, heavy, very heavy,
the weightiest thing in the world; sand is heavy, and lead is heavy, but sin
exceeds them all (...). Chrysostom. de Anna ser. 6. p. 946.
; it presses down to the nethermost hell, into the deep's among Dragons. So he
will say; And have I feigned all this? no sure; I appeal to the consciences of
all men, that are neither a sleep nor seared: And to the testimony of all those
Ministers and others, who have visited the sick, and men appointed to dye; men
put in fear, and knowing themselves to be but men, men in such a case as was
before mentioned; I appeal, I say, to the testimony of all such, who have
conferred with men put in fear, they will give clear evidence to the truth of
that I have said. And indeed, how can it be doubted? For God has set it down
by an eternal Decree, That vexation and sin should be inseparable Jussis^^
domine, and sic est ut omnis inord natus aff^ctus si^i sit Poena.
: But there is a yet clearer voice, which seals this truth; for when sin
seizes upon the soul, and the weight thereof is felt; the soul will then wish
it could lie hid in the bottom of the Sea, swallowed up therein, or covered
under the lowest sand of the hills or mountains foundations; This we should
think on betimes, and consider it in our hearts; For sin causes wrath even
from the Lamb Revel. 6. 16.
, that meek and merciful Savior, and will make us hide our selves (if we
could) from His face, the beholding whereof, unto the righteous, is better then
life. They, who will not be taught by instruction, must be taught by pain 2
Esdr. 9. 11, 12.
.

Other enquiries there are, (some necessary and useful) which might be easily
made, but not so easily resolved, nor so usefully. There are some qualities in
the waters, which we see plainly, but not so plainly the reason of the same;
That is dark and obscure to moderate minds, and does but mock and deceive
the more curious, who scorn that safe refuge of occult properties Latent
animos temperatos, illudunt curiosis, qui putant cuncta ad certas causas
reducere manifestas and irrident salutare Asylum illud occul^^ ^r^pri^tatis.
Scalig. exercit. 218. 8.
. I take that, which I think most familiar and quickest for use. So much to the
demands, and resolves thereunto.

4. For the works of God in the great deep, they are innumerable and
wonderful. Amongst them, the strangest and most admirable is, That little
fish, which will slugge a ship, and stop her under full sails, so the Scalig.
Ibid. Plin. not. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 25.
Naturalists say, and we leave them to their proof; But we may certainly
conclude hence; It is easy for the Lord then to stop a man, when he is
breathing forth threatenings, and is now upon an eager pursuit, and furious
march in his own way, the way of sin and death.

Time would fail me here, and my understanding both; The Lord is great in the
least fish, the Anchoie (which we use; Ap^^.
abuse rather to provoke appetite) as He is wonderful in the greatest
Crocodile (the greatest, if we observe his original, from so low a bottom, as
is the quantity of a Goose-egge, reaching at length unto sixteen cubits
(...), Diod. sic. lib. ^. page 31.
) or the greatest Whale*fish, The Sea-Dragon, that wonderful Leviathan, and so
described by God himself Job 41.
: And yet I cannot tell whether Gods work is less wonderful in the Ship;
which reeleth upon the waters like a drunken man, and sometimes falls into
the great deep, then rises again, and is carried safe to its harbor.
Assuredly, the Lord is as wonderful in steering and conducting this vessel
(to Him we must pay our vows) still climbing, and tottering, and sinking and
drowning; so as the passengers are in deaths often; yet still living and
weathering it out: As wonderful, I say, is the Lord The sh^p-masters phrase.
here, as He is in the water-creatures, which are in the deep, their proper
element. And as wonderful is the Lord too, nay much more wonderful (for He
shall be admired of all them that believe 2 These. 1. 10.
) in conducting a weather beaten soul to its haven: For behold such a soul, if
we can, weathering out its tempests, climbing over the billows of temptations,
carried now like a gallant ship well ballasted and rigged, with a strong gale
of faith (thence I think we may borrow our expression 1 These. 1. 5. (...).
) and full assurance of hope. This is an high contemplation, and commands the
mind to fix upon it. I now look back to what has been said touching the
earth and waters, that we may gather up yet further instruction from both.

We have reached almost unto the extent of man's dominion (for we are not yet so
high as the air, so high his dominion reaches). We might have observed
therein, the serviceable obedience of the beasts, which upbraideth the base
ungratitude and rebellions of Gods own nursed children: The Ox knows, etc
Esaias. 1. 3. It was an old complaint, but man's ingratitude renews it every
day. No creature so rude or savage, that stands not in awe of man, and dreads
him as his sovereign; and will be content to be ruled, and be struck too, by
the hand that feeds them.

The vast greatness of the Elephant has not privileged him from man's
service; he has under gone the burden of a wooden turret, and has exposed
himself to the extremities of war. The Camel, a beast of incredible strength
too, has submitted himself upon his knees to receive his burden. Particulars
are infinite. The Prophet concludes the truth in general terms; All the
beasts of the field, pay most obsequious vassallage to man, so the fowls of
the air, yea and the fish of the Sea: The great monsters there, that make the
deep to boil like a pot, are not exempted from man's government, from them has
he toll of bones and oils, and tribute from all the rest.

How full and convincing then is the Lords question? Have I been a wilderness
unto Israel? No, to Thy praise be it spoken, a delightful Paradise Thou have
been: Thou have furnished man with a lightsome and delightful dwelling place,
a disloyal tenant though he be; and Thou broughtest him in unto it, as into a
paradise, like a rich heir, ready furnished with all furniture for use, for
delight, for ornament. To the intent that man should serve Thee, and serve Thee
cheerfully, Thou have made all Thy creatures to serve him; That he might
subject himself wholly unto Thy will, Thou have put all things under his feet;
That he might be Thine, Thine only, Thou have created all these outward things
for Chrysostom. upon the contemplation of the Land and Sea, and that Host of
creatures in both, And all these, says the Father, serve for the good of them,
that fear the Lord, theirs are all things, for they are Christ's; Thus then let
me reason the case, If these things are done and bestowed before our eyes, let
us think, what (...). etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in ep. Ad Ephesians.
good things are laid up for them, in the heavens, in those mansions there?
If, where they are strangers and but sojourners, they have so much homage, so
much honor, where their City is, what glory shall they have there? If where
their Lord said, ye shall have affliction, they have such a Ministry, so many
servants, such an attendance, such a guard, such a retinue (for the Angels are
their Ministers, The stones and creeping things, fish and foul, are at a
league with them, and are their servants) if so, while here below; then what
rest, what quiet, what security above, there, where the Lord has assured
them, shall be the place of their eternal rest! What and how good and great
things shall they have there! So the Father reasons and concludes the glory of
the Saints, and so much to the contemplation of the earth and waters.

The Plin. not. Hist. 2. 8. and cap. 38.
Air is the next, that, which fills up this vast and veins, arteries,
nerves, all are quickened by it, it is the soul of our breathing. If I had all
that heart could wish, all were nothing, if I wanted air; and air must be
good, and wholesome too, or else all would be as good as nothing. Therefore it
is Gods great doale to the world, all share in it; And it has a kind of
ubiquitie; It is every where, and yet we cannot see where it is, so like it is,
the likest of any to a spirit (for it is the most bodylesse body) by which name
it is sometimes called; As we call that, for which we have no name to express
its strange virtue and efficacy. If I could go to the furthest parts of the
earth or sea, there it is; If I could climb up to the uppermost region, there
it is also; If I could descend into the lowest vaults and caves of the earth,
there it would be found. It is as inseparable from a man as his conscience is,
shut the windows, bar the doors, draw the curtains all close, yet you can
as easily shut out your conscience as it; The air will come in, it will visit
us in what condition soever; And if this may be said of the creature, what then
of the Creator? He that has given the creature so large a circuit, three
regions of the world, has yet appointed it its bounds; But take we heed, we
limit not the Holy One of Israel. By this creature we ascend nearer to the
Creator then by any other; but yet we come infinitely short: we must not
compare God to any creature, for to Him nothing is like.

The air is pure and clear of it self, and in its own nature, but, if it were
so to us, it would not be agreeable to ours; it would be then too rare and
thin, and not agreeing to our earthy, and compounded bodies; therefore, for our
benefit and comfort, sometimes for our punishment too, it receives alteration,
from beneath, or from above, or from about it; thence it is, that most times
the air refreshes, and sometimes poysoneth; sometimes temperately cooling:
sometimes again with heat scorching. Sometimes it candies the herbs, and
trees, and hides the waters, as with a stone Job 38. 30.
; and then, who can stand before His cold Psalm. 147. 17.
? who casts forth His ye like morsels; for so we must resolve the Lords Job
38. 29.
question, out of whose womb came the ice? And if it be said, who can stand
before His cold? hou much more then, who can stand before Him, when He is
angry? for our God is a consuming fire.

1. Here the winds have their circuit, but where there treasure is, we cannot
tell; I know what the Poets faigne, and what the Philosopher of the greatest
experience, that our part of the world had, does write hereof; But the sacred
Scripture says, That the Lord causes it to blow Psalm. 127. 18. 104 3.
; He raises the stormy wind, for He has appointed them their work and their
circuit, as He has the treasures Job 38. 22.
for the snow, and hail: And we hear their sound and feel them too, but the
place whence they come, we know not, nor whither they will, so secret is the
way of the wind: And as secret is the way of the spirit, but more admirable in
working; it casts down strong holds too; it levells high and exalted things.
But I am too high. This we may conceive; The same wind, which now shakes the
leaf and makes the feather to move, being charged against a mountain, would
have turned it up from the foundation; And the same strength that blows up
the dust, if it came against the earth, would shake the bottoms of it. And this
should make us fear before Him, that whatsoever. He has done, whether it
seem great or little, we should confess His handy work, and according to His
greatness so we should honor Him, that whatsoever He has commanded, whether
it seem weighty or little, all our obedience should be straight unto it.
These are Mr Dearings words Heb. 1. verse. 3. Lect. 2. Tranquillus dom^aus
tranquillat omnia: quietum assicere quicscore est. Call.
; I add this; All the winds without, though never so raging and boisterous
shake not the earth; which is of ordinary use. If a man have peace within, no
matter what troublesome blasts without; they shall not remove him.

2. Here likewise is the kingdom of the winged Creatures, where they have more
scope then the greatest Monarch on the earth; and more aire-roome, then the
ship has sea-roome, when it rides on the widest Ocean. And more secure these
creatures are then we, for their provision, though they sow not, neither do
they reap, nor carry into their barn, for your heavenly Father feeds them;
And does He so? even the young raven, a forsaken creature, thrice mentioned in
the sacred Scripture, the more fi^mly to establish us in a providence; for the
Naturalists say, the old raven forsakes her young till they be feathered, but
our heavenly Father feeds them; how much more then, those, who trust in Him,
and roll themselves upon Him for provision; They are of more worth then the
ravens. How great should be the security of the Righteous, that the Lord will
provide; He will take care for their orovision; as He does for their
protection. Oh be thou, says Chrysostom, as secure as the birds k are, that
thy heavenly Father will feed ^ ^ves sine pa^^^onio vivunt. M. F^lix in fol. p.
^^. li^. 1^. (...). Chrysostom. ad. Pop. Ant. Hom. 12.
thee too.

Here also, I mean, in the a^rie regiment, we see the great vessels of water,
rouling over our heads, and it should be wonderful in our eyes; for we cannot
understand the ballancing thereof. He that upholdeth all things by His mighty
power, upholdeth the clouds, and divides a course for their rain, making small
the drops thereof, so as they distill upon man abundantly, and in a way of
mercy. He it is, who makes strong the bond of the cloud, who gives it a
retentive faculty, whereby the water is bound up within it, as with a swaddling
cloth; for so we must resolve the Lords question, Who Job 36. 16. and 36 27.
has bound the waters in a garment? Even thou o Lord, have done it, we know
Thy Name, and Thy Sons Name; for thou art wonderful Prove. 30. 4. Isa. 9.
: If the Lord should unloose this bond of the cloud, this retentive faculty,
then would the water fall, as through a floud-gate, or from a spoute, not
breaking into drops, but in one body with a resistlesse violence; as sometimes
our contrymen have observed it, when the violence of the waters fall, has
laid the ridges of their land equal with the furrows: But more ordinary the
rain falls so amongst the Indians, who call the falling thereof, in that
resistlesse manner, The spoutes Hist. lib. 1. c. 7. 6.
; So writes Sr Walter Raleigh; but the Scripture calls it, I think, the
great rain of His strength. Job 38. 6.
. And if it fall with such violence, who then can abide the viols of Gods
wrath! Who can stand under the spoutes of His displeasure! The wicked shall be
driven before the tempest, as the chafe before the wind. But to the matter in
hand; certain it is, This clotheing the heavens with blackness, and making
sackcloth their covering Esaias 50. 3.
; This ballancing the clouds, and binding the waters within them, as within a
garment, thence making the water distill by drops; all this must be taken
notice of as the wondrous work of Him, Who is perfect in knowledge Job 37. 16.
. And upon the power of this Mighty Hand, does the faithful soul stay it self;
Faith can never be at a stand, for, whether the Lord gives rain, or restrains
it, because of our back-slideing Jer. 14.
; yet behold a glorious dependence; faith limits not the holy One of Israel,
nor binds Him to natural means Lege Basil. Hex. Hom. 5. p. 47.
; Who did make the earth to bring forth before He set the Sun in the
firmament, or made it to rain; and filled the valleys with water, when there
was neither wind nor cloud 2. Kings 3.
.

3. Hence it is that the thunder is heard, whereat the heart trembles, and is
moved out of its place Job 37. 1.
: but the heart soon setleth again, when the noise cease, for it has learnt
the reason thereof: And yet, it posed the heathen, and almost made him cease
from his own wisdom, when he heard it thunder, but saw no cloud Har. car l. 1.
od. 34.
; then it was the voice of the Lord sure, and is it not the same voice, though
the cloud appear, and appears never so thick and dark? His voice it is, and
acknowledged so to be, when it has astonished the mighty Potentates of the
earth, as His lightenings have made their hearts to tremble, like a needle
removed from the loadstone, or leaf in the forest tossed with the wind: For
God thundereth wonderfully, with the voice of His excellency; great things does
He, which we cannot comprehend. Out of the midst of water, the Lord fetches
fire, and scatters it into all the parts of the earth, astonishing the world
with the fearful noise of that eruption: And hard stones out of the midst of
thin vapors D^ Hall contemp creat.
. I can say no more to it; but some have trembled at the roaring of this voice,
and some have mocked; but the mockers have been struck down dead in the place,
to teach us, That with God is terrible Majesty, and touching the Allmighty we
cannot find Him out; But let us hear attentively the noise of His voice, and
the sound that goes out of His mouth; He directs it under the whole heaven,
and His lightning unto the ends of the earth; after it a voice roareth Job 37.
23. 4.
.

And here we may take notice of snow, (the Vo^a communia sunt n^ves diutinas
sedere, tellus illo modo sem^nt^scit. Plin. not Hyst. lib. 7. cap. 2.
muck of the hail, which pruneth without a knife Job 38. 22.
; but we cannot enter into their treasures, even that is a knowledge too high
for us Du Bart. 2 day.
; but this we know, for the Lord has spoken it, He has reserved these against
the day of battle and war Verse 23.
; For more have been consumed by the fall of hailstones then by the dint of the
sword Josh. 10. 11.
; that we may acknowledge touching the Almighty; He is excellent in power and
in judgment, and in plenty of justice Job 37 23.
. All these, the lightning and the thunder, the snow and the hail do what
soever He commands them upon the face of the world in the earth Verse 12.
; Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy winds fulfilling His word Psalm. 148.
8.
.

And now our eyes are in this ascending line, as the mind (who delights
himself in the Lord, rides on the high places of the earth, is fed with the
Heritage of Jacob Esaias 58. 14
;) His mind is above the winds, and storms and clouds, where all things are
calm, serene and quiet. And I know not how high our eyes discern, but this is
not the least wonder; That our visive faculty can ascend so high, and not be
tired, is the wonder indeed. The foot is quickly tired, not so the eye: Good
reason for that, says the Father Chrysostom. Hom. ad Pep. Ant.
; but a gracious providence in it too; because, of all our members, or
servants, none so necessary upon all occasions as is the eye: And therefore
that must not feel a weariness as does the other faculties, that it may be
quick and expedite upon all services. The eye can through this large
perspective of the air (by which medium, I can show a child and make it
understand, what is a diaphan. or transparent body) the eye can behold the
highest stars, and in the twinkling of an eye, that short moment of time,
the eye can do it. And this is an height, that cannot be measured: For, for
ought I can learn, the highest stars are as high above the Sun, as the Sun is
above us; and how high that is, we may judge by what the Sun and stars seem
to us below. It is a mathematical conclusion, and that has the certainest
grounds of any art, that the Sun for quantity and bigness thereof, would make
an hundred sixty earths, being so many degrees bigger; and yet, it seems to us,
at this vast distance, If that ascending line could be drawn right forwards,
some that have calculated curiously, have found it five hundred years journey
unto the starrie heaven. Dr Hall contemp.
no larger then a sieves bottom; and the least of those stars, is fifteen
times bigger then the earth, yet by reason of that great gulf betwixt the
star and our eye, it seems but like the apple in our eye, or the pearl and
diamond in our ring. Thus high can our eye ascend, and in a moment of time; how
then can I think any thing unpassable or impossible to the eye of faith? It
finds a way, or as it was said of one, it makes a way through all
difficulties. If God has given such a power, or quickness of elevation to our
bodily eye, this little candle of the body, that it shall light us through this
vast gulf, and void space, unto such a distance, and with such speed; what
then is the power of the souls eye, when it has received an anointing from
above? How much beyond those stars can that eye pierce?

The Saints shall stand and wonder with admiration 2. These. 1. 10.
, but they can never be at a stand, they know, whom they have trusted, and that
to Him, nothing is impossible. Nay, He that did make the eye, was He, who gave
a greater power yet to the eye of flesh; even to see as far above the starrie
heaven, as it is, for ought I know, to that heaven, even to the heaven of
heavens, and to see them opened, and the crown of our glory there Acts 7. 55.
. This the Lord can do, to show the might of His power, and to assure His
Bright. Revel. 2. 13 p. 33.
Antipasses, all His faithful Martyrs, by the first, that they shall not look
to Him, or wait for Him in vain; their expectation shall be satisfied to the
full, and beyond: For though that was an extraordinary case, yet this is
ordinary, and secured unto the faithful, that, whosoever is full of the Holy
Ghost, who looks up steadfastly into heaven, who sets his face thither-ward Luke
9. 51.
; he that girds 1. Pet. 1. 13.
up the loins of his mind, (they are the strength and Basis of the body
Chrysostom. in cap. 6. ad Ephesians. Hom. 23.
, and do imply the strong resolution and activitie of the soul) I mean then,
He, who is strong in his God, and has his hope and his heart fixed on Him; He
shall see (though his outward eye have not the same Chrysol. sermon. 24. de servo
vigili page 81.
clearenesse of vision) he shall see as great things as Stephen did; he shall
see heaven opened, the glory of God, and the great things that Christ has done
for him; for which he shall be admired of all the Saints in that day. So much
to that, which seems not the least wonder; that God has given our outward
eye such an elevation of sight.

And now that our eye is thus elevated, what, and how great are the things,
which we do see? We cannot give answer, nor make report thereof. I do not
wonder, that Paul, whom the Father elegantly calls an earthly Angel Chrysostom.
Tom. 1 de poenit. continent.
, and an heavenly man, that he, being caught up into the third Heaven, could
not utter what he heard there; for it was unutterable. He, whose eye is but
upon the outside of that paradise, beholds such great things there, that we
cannot utter, nor comprehend what we see.

There I see the heavens stretched over me like a curtain; thence it has its
name in Hebrew; but in Greek and English, a firmament; because it is firm and
fast: This I see, because it seems to terminate my sight; but I know not what I
see; nor know I, how He builds His stories (spheres) in the heaven Amos 9 6.
; but I know it is fully called the firmament of His power Psalm. 150. 1.
; And that is all I can say of it, for the out-spreading of that Canopie is
unutterable and unconceiveable. There I see those fiery Globes, each of them
many degrees bigger then the earth, yet in comparison with that out-spreading
firmament, each of them but as a diamond on the ring or point in a circle. If I
think upon the the glory of the Creator, as I should do, (for if these be so
wonderful, how much more wonderful is the Creator hereof?) This thought
thereof swallows me up as a drop in the ocean; How far beyond the scant
compass of man's understanding is it then, to conceive of the glory of His
Saints? for it is said, They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for
ever and ever Dan. 12. 3.
; nay it is said, They shall shine forth as the Sun; Matt. 13. 43.
nay more, They shall be like unto Him at His appearance 1. John 3. 2.
. And surely though this glory be incomprehensible, yet our understanding may
conceive and comprehend that so it is; for if the Lord has beautified the
outside of their palace, or heavenly mansions, with so much glory, what is the
inside, and the glory there within (...) etc. Basil. Hex Hom. 2 a.
? I cannot think that strange, which follows, that he, who has this hope,
purifieth 1. John 3 3.
himself; for certainly, none but the the pure in heart can enter in there. I
see now, how necessary it was, and that so it must needs be; That Christ should
give Himself for His Church, that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word: That he might present it to Himself a glorious
Church, not having spot nor wrinckle, or any such thing: But that it should be
holy without blemish Ephesians. 5. 26. 27.
; For the conclusion is peremptory and certain, There shall in no wise Rev. 21.
27. (...).
enter into the heavenly Jerusalem any thing that defiles etc. And me thinks,
when I read, that Elias 2. Kings 2.
was carried up into heaven in a fiery chariot; it shows me in a figure, that
in the act of dissolution (...). Chrysostom Tom. 5. de resur. sermon. 33.
, in that moment of time, when the soul is departing out of the body,
sanctification is complete and perfected, and all remainder of corruption is,
as by fire, purged away: for none but the pure, and the clean, and undefiled
can enter in here, into this Holy of Holies, whose out-court, or out-covering,
or pavement of that Court, is so glorious. And do I see all this, and do I
believe it too? What, and yet go I on in an evil course? and yet do I take the
Name of God in vain? If so, I do but as the devil does, he believes, and yet
continues as he is Esse Deum credunt lamen in perversitate perdurant. Sal. de
Prove. 4. p. 100. subjungit ad pudorem, etc. Sal. Ibid.
: But if I do not fear before this power and tremble too, I am short of the
devil, for he does both. We may think hereon when we behold the firmament of
His power, and the glory thereof, which is, as we have heard, though we have
not heard the half thereof.

And yet, though thus outwardly glorious this out-court is, it must be
dissolved, and by fire; What confidence can we then put in any thing we call
flesh, or in these vile bodies of ours? If the firmament, that firm and fast
thing, shall not still continue, of how small continuance is man, and the
things of this earth, which we dote upon? But to leave that, and to raise our
thoughts higher, where they should fix, we should make the same use of the
glory of the third heaven, (which is the Saints city, and country, where they
shall be glorious, and crowned with life, and for ever with the Lord of life,
whose Majesty shall shine in perfect beauty before them) the same use, I say,
we should make hereof, which the holy Apostle makes, touching the dissolution
of this outcourt or firmament; seeing we look for such an heaven, wherein
dwells righteousness, what manner of persons 2. Pet. 3. 11.
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness?

Chrysostom maks a larger use of this contemplation, and it is of use indeed.
His eyes were fixed upon that out-court, beholding the excellent beauty thereof;
upon which contemplation thus he speaks, and this the philosophy he gives. If
these parts of the heaven turned toward us, are so bright and glorious, what
are those upward and inward parts! How exceeding glorious that heaven of
heavens (...). Ad illud coelum coeli; etiam terrae nostrae coelum terra est.
Aug. Conf. l. 12. cap. 2.
!

And yet, as if this glory were not worth the seeking after, we stand greedily
(...).
gaping and catching at the shadow of things, and let go great things of a
durable substance: So he goes on, and that which follows is yet more notable.
When I think on the beauty, clarity, glory of this heaven, I find my thoughts
can fetch a wide compass, yet I have not a thought to measure this glory
withal: my thoughts are infinitely too short here, but this effect I find,
they cause not more wonderment, then mourning; In the thoughts hereof I must
needs weep bitterly, and my spirit must mourn within me (...).
; For when I rise to that height, I am presently as low again in the thought of
my fall: When I behold that Glory, with the same eye I must reflect upon my
misery; O from what excellent things are we fallen! from what happiness are
we estranged (...).
? I say well, estranged! for we carry our selves as strangers to that city of
rest and happiness: We exceedingly busy our selves, and unnecessarily in our
Thorough fare, as if there were our abiding, and our place of rest, and no
country above, no glory there; Yet such a Glory it is, as no tongue can
express it, no thought can reach unto it. Tell not me now (so the Father goes
on) of hell, and what the damned feel there (...), etc.
; tell me of heaven, if thou will move me, and the exceeding glory there: For I
tell thee, that the pain of sense, (as the learned call them) the pain the body
shall feel in hell, will not be so keen, sharp, and fretting (though sharp
and fretting they will be, past all expression;) yet not so fretting, as will
be the pain of loss; loss of heaven, and the exceeding glory there. This
loss, this, will be most tormenting; Thoughts thereof will sink the soul into
that pit, like a stone or lead in the great waters; This, I say will be the
fretting worm, the tormenting thought, what I have lost what happiness I have
fallen from; More tormenting it will be, then the lowermost hell, and the utmost
wrath there (...).
And this thought will add much to our torment; For what a toy, a trifle, a
thing of naught, we have forfeited this exceeding weight of glory: so small a
thing it was, that it will be justly said of us, we despised our birthright.
For this great deceiver, be it Satan, or our own heart, (deceivers both) he
gives us small things (...)
, a puff of honor, short pleasure, transitory riches, poor, base, empty,
shrunken things: he takes from us great things (...).
, a weight of glory, it contains all, an exceeding excess of glory, it cannot
be expressed: but all this he takes from us. He gives us dyrt, he depriveth us of
the pearl: he presents us with a shadow, he (...).
robs us of the substance. And here we are without excuse, for hereof we cannot
plead ignorance, it being the daily voice of all the creatures under the Sun,
sounding louder then the loudest trumpet (...).
; That they are as grass, and the beauty of them as the fading flower,
vanity, or lighter then so, if ought can be; and such things are the very best
this deceiver can give us; but he takes away such things, as we heard, and as
we must conceive them to be, if we behold the out-court or pavement of that
Holy of Holies. This large use the Father makes upon this contemplation, as we
may better understand, and more enlarge it, if we peruse his 14 Homily upon the
Epistle to the Romans toward the end. And so much in a general way and view
of the firmament, and the great works of God there, which He has set out unto
open view, to show us what is within, and what manner of persons we ought to
be, who look to enter into that Holy place: And withal (which is the chiefest
of all) to stir us up to press toward the mark; And, forgetting things
behind, in our earnest pursuit thither ward, and expectation thereof, to
reach out, as with necks-stretched forth, after those high and great things;
such they are, as the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor the heart can
conceive; But such they are, unutterable and glorious, which the righteous Lord
will give, to all that fear Him, and wait for his appearance; Only show we
our selves men, not children, who for an apple, will part with a pearl, and
think they have no loss, by that exchange: So much to the contemplation of
the firmament of His power, the height and glory thereof.

I descend now unto that creature, which the Lord has divided unto all
nations, and with which our sense is more acq^ainted, but deceives our sense
exceedingly: for though it discover unto us things below, yet it locks up with
the clearness of its light and luster, the things above. Our eye, if we mark
it, will discern much higher in a clear night, then it can in the clearest
day. In the night, we see as high above the Sun, as the Sun is above us; but in
the day we have no clear discerning of any thing, that is above the Sun,
because of the clearness of that mighty Body, which dazleth the eye, if we
look upon it, and puts it out, if we stand and gaze. And thus the heathen did;
and so that light darkened Leg. Clem. Alex. ad Gentes. page 31.
them, that they could not rise to a glory above the creature, but where they
terminated their sight, their they terminated their worship; Therein like the
countreyman, who looking for the King at his Court, thinks, that he must need
be the King, who first comes forth in most gorgeous apparel Read Plut. in the
life of Pericles. Morneus de Verit. Rel. Sol quasi solus, etc. Cic. de d^via.
, though the Kings honor sets him forth, and sets up his head above others;
and the glory of apparel those, who have least honor. But I have digressed.

I began my morning instructions with the Sun, and with that creature, I will
end my instructions from the creatures. It is called a solitary Leg. Basil.
Hex. Hom. 6.
creature, because it shines alone, obs^uring all other lights with his
clearness, and being the fullest in our eye.

I observe, 1. the motion of the Sun; 2. the beams; 3. his brightness; And
some short instructions from all; Then I shall be at the end of our walk; And
conclude the instructions therefrom.

1. Behold, if we can, the Suns motion; we cannot see it stir, but we can see
it is passed; then, by what hand it moves, and with what strength and
quickness; no motion so quick, except that, which is like lightning in an
instant; Then behold we the magnitude thereof, how massive a body it is, for it
may enter into our conceit: And beholding all this, we shall be filled with
wonderment, and be forced to acknowledge, that Wonderful is the Creator
thereof, a mighty God.

Behold again its constancy in moving. The Sun never yet rose, nor set; nor
more then once stood still, since first it was created to run its course,
though to us it seems to do both, which makes our morning and our night. It
still moves, to teach us constancy in our holy profession; and still in its own
sphere, and within its own limits and bounds, to teach us the decency of order:
for when it has touched those limits, which we call Tropicks, it is
retrograde, and turns back again. Some have taught, that the Sun moves nearer
to the earth now, then in former times, but they who teach so, would be taught
by stripes, and their writing blotted out with spunges; says the learned
Scaliger Exercit. 99^.
; The Sun never transgresses his set bounds. So much, or so little rather,
to the Suns motion, which we see, when it is past: but the full understanding
thereof is too high and wonderful for those, who are clothed with flesh. Man
cannot find out the hand of God herein, unto perfection.

2. The beams of the Sun are as wonderful also: we know their Father, we
understand not their production, so wonderfully are they begotten. How then can
reason carry us into a more secret mystery, The proceeding of the Holy Ghost?
which some, whom I have known, have searched into with their own light, and
lost themselves in the search. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but
things revealed belong unto us Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
.

First then, This we find revealed, The wonderful power, and universal
efficacy of those beams; for this is the conclusion from the sacred Scripture
and from experience; That nothing is hid from the heat thereof Psalm. 19. 6.
. And if these beams In solemn in^^n^e, coelo affixus, sed terris omnibus
sparsus est, pariter praesens ubique interest, and misce^^r omnibus; nusquam
enim claritudo violatur. Quanto magis Deus, etc. a quo nullum potest esse
secretu^, tenebris interest, etc. M. Min. Felic page 23. in fol.
are so piercing, so searching, Whither then, Lord, shall I go from thy
spirit? or whether shall I fly from thy presence Psalm. 139. 7. See Chrysol.
Ser. 2. page 5. 6.
? where shall I hide my self, or my sin? If I say, surely the darkness shall
cover me; even the night shall be light about me, yea, the darkness hides not
from Thee, but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are
both a like to Thee. I cannot hide my self, nor my sin from Thee; but I may
hide both my self and my sin in Thee: Christ is that hiding place, a sure
sanctuary for my person, and a certain cover for my sin. There is no flying
from Thee, for we shall be found out, but it is safe flying to Thee, for with
Thee is mercy; So Austin speaks.

This meets with a known dotage, and concludes against it, That God does see
sin in His children; if nothing be hid from the heat of those beams, what
then can be hid from the Creator of them? He has not beheld iniquity in
Jacob, neither has He seen perverseness in Israel Number. 23. 21.
. No, He beholds them in His beloved Son, in whom He is well pleased, and
for His sake, with them: He does not behold sin in them, to condemn, to
punish them for it; for by His sons stripes they are healed; And, this is
that rich mystery of grace Mysterium opulentum gratiae, admirabile commercium:
peccata nostra, non nostrae, sed Christi sunt; and justitia Christi, non
Christi, sed nostra est. Ex^anivit, etc. Quomodo in peccatis nostris dolet and
confunditur, hoc modo nos in illius justitia laetamur and gloriamur, etc.
Luther in Psalm. 22.
, (So Luther spoke, who spoke out of experience) that admirable exchange, when
Christ took our sins, and gave us His righteousness; emptied Himself, that He
might fill us; stripped Himself, that He might invest us; sorrowed Himself, and
was confounded with our sins, that we might rejoice and glory in His
righteousness. An admirable exchange indeed, a rich mystery! which magnifyeth
the riches of Gods love, giving His Son to the world; and of Christ, giving
Himself for the world, of believers. But this does not take off from Gods
knowledge; what He sees not to condemn, and punish, He does see, even in His
Israel, to reprove and correct: And when He shall correct for sin, His Israel
shall confess, against this vanity, tossed to and fro; Thou have set our
iniquities before Thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance Psalm
90. 8.
.

2. From the different operations of the beams, I note, That the diversity of
subjects, the Sun works upon, diversifies the effects. And this is but a
conclusion of experience also; how unclean soever the place is where they come,
they alter not, but work diversely, according to the matter they work upon; If
upon clay, it is hardened; if upon wax, it is softened; if upon a dunghill, the
stinking vapors more offend; if upon a garden of sweet herbs, the sweet savor
more refreshes; if upon good fruits, they grow for the use of man; if upon
weeds, they grow to humble him: The alteration is here below in sublunary
creatures, the Sun changes not. Hence we learn how unreasonable that dealing
is, which the Wiseman tells us of; The foolishness of man perverteth his
way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord Prove. 19. 3.
. This should not be so: but clean contrary; For, when a man perverteth his own
way, and then fretteth against God, It is, as if the dunghill should blame the
Sun, from whence nothing can come but light, as from a dunghill an unsavory
smell, which is the more sensible and offensive, the clearer and more piercing
that light is: or as if a man, through inconsiderateness taking a fall, should
fret against the stone. If God leaves us to walk in our own ways, or
recompenseth our ways upon us, we ought not to charge Him foolishly, but to
charge our selves with folly; and if we have learnt so much, we have learnt a
short, but a great lesson, For it will make us continually to walk humbly with
our God, and a continued humility, is a continued adoration of His Majesty;
and the groundwork of an holy life, which is a continued prayer Vera humilitas
perpetua adoratio, pia vita perpetua oration.
.

3. We may note again; That these beams of the Sun in its circuit do pass
through many pollutions, and yet not polluted therewith, but remain pure and
clean. The Sun works upon inferior bodies, and cherishes them by light and
influence, yet is not wrought upon by them, but keeps its own luster and
distance; The Father makes this use hereof; How much more then, says he,
could the Sun of righteousness dwell with flesh and pitch His tabernacle with
us (...). Joh. 1. 14.
, and yet not be polluted by us? How-much more could that Son of righteousness
communicate with man, and take unto Him the infirmities of mankind; I mean
such, which accompany the whole nature; As, hungring, thirsting, weariness,
grief, pain and mortality, yet, without any touch or tincture of sin from
all these; because, what ever were the effects here-from, were in Christ like
the stirring of Crystal water in a Crystal glass, whereof we have no
sedament, no dregs in the bottom (...). etc. Tom. 5. Ser. 31. Chrysostom. o.
.

This shows us also, who are heavenly, and the beauty of a well ordered soul:
It thinks nothing in the world of sufficient worth to put it out of frame: such
a soul is instructed what it should be; It should rule over things beneath, and
not be ruled by them; like the Sun, it should be under the power of nothing
beneath it self. But this entire estate, this freedom from pollution is
reserved for an higher place, where all corruption shall be done away: for now
the soul, having so much earth about it, and so much of earth within it, which
is the cause of defilement, it cannot mix with things of the earth, and not be
polluted, it cannot but receive some tainture there from; But yet still, the
soul that is heavenly, striveth after perfection, and in desire, would be in
some proportion like the Sun in his race, which works upon inferior things,
but is not wrought upon by them: It desires to carry it self like the Sun,
above forms and storms, in an uniforme way, in a constant course and tenor,
like it self, suitable to its own dignity, and keeping its distance. Thus we
are instructed by the Sunbeams.

3. The brightness and splendor of the Sun instructs also, for it is
admirable, and the more admirable it is, the less my eye is able to behold it.
But such is his brightness, which I do see, that I have a fullness in my
vision, and from thence comfort and satisfaction, if I behold it wisely and as
I am able; But if I should be prying into it, and gazing on it, I shall then
see nothing at all. The Sun is the cause that I do see, but it will not give me
leave to see into it; The clearness of that great eye will darken mine, and
put it clean out Solemn, qui videndi omnibus causa est, videre non possumus:
radiis aci^^ submovetur, obtutu^ intuentis hebetatur: and si diutius in
spicias, omnis visus extinquitur. M. Minut. Felic. page 22. (...). Clem. Alex.
ad Gentes. p. 39. We must not measure an infinite God by a finite
understanding. Lege Call. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 13. sect. 21.
. And this leads me into a great secret, and high, and commands me not to
search it out, nor to stand and gaze thereon, for thus I reason from that I do
see: How little a part of the Sun is it, which I see? yet is it so big, as we
have heard, and yet we see it but so big, as we see; and the more I see and
pry into it, the less I see; and if I will yet pry further, I then shall see
nothing at all, for I shall be dark with light.

What then can I discern of God, or how small a part of His ways? yet if I
will enquire with sobriety, I may know so much as will satisfy and comfort
me; but if I enquire further and beyond my bounds, which the Lord has set, as
sacred as the Mount Exodus 19. 21. (...), etc. Vol. 5. ad eos qui scand. 862.
and 865.
, I shall find that, which will confound me; And if I will gaze there, I must
perish. Chrysostom gives me a good rule, In all the dispensations and works of
God give the same silence to thy Maker, as the clay to the Potter o.

Again, the light of the Sun is in some part hid from us, by the interposition
of the Moon, sometimes of the clouds, often in the day; and half of our
natural day quite intercepted by the interposition of the earth, as in our
night. But what then? though I am dark, the Sun is light; though I I see not
its luster, yet it is the same in our night, as it was in our day, when we had
a clear sight of it: For this we know, and reason gives it to be so, that the
Sun has shone forth clearly, and like it self, without any diminution to its
light, unless, when the Creator thereof suffered, ever since first it was
created, and set to run its race, though the earth, and the Moon, and the
clouds, do eclipse the luster thereof from our sight.

This may teach us not to judge of heavenly things with earthly eyes; for they
are not fit judges sometimes in earthly matters; we know the Sun does shine,
when we have not the least glimpse thereof; and we must acknowledge, that God
does shine forth in glory; though we have no discerning thereof. He does reign
most gloriously, in the midst of His enemies, though we perceive no such
thing.

There is a way wherein God sometimes does walk, and more undiscerneable it is,
then the way of an Eagle in the air, or of a serpent upon the rock Prove. 30. 15
. As is the path which no soul knows, and which the Vultures eye has not
seen Job 28. 7.
. And here our way is (mark it) not to pry and to gaze (for it is as sacred as
the mount Exodus 19.
) but to have recourse to this, and to be fully resolved of it, The Lord is
righteous in all His ways Psalm. 125. 18.
. What though they are clouded to me? yet are they righteous, and the equity
thereof will shine more clear then does the Sunbeam: What though darkness is
about Him, and my darkness comprehends Him not? Yet will I ascribe
righteousness unto my Maker Job 36. 3.
. What though I cannot find Him out; nor is it possible I should, no more then
I can draine the great Ocean with a man's scull, yet He is excellent in power
and in judgment, and in plenty of justice Job 37. 23.
. What though a thick cloud is spread about His Throne, I cannot pry into it,
yet Righteousness dwells there, that is certain; Clouds and darkness are round
about Him, Righteousness Psalm. 97. 2.
and judgment are the habitation of His Throne (...).
. Here we must stop our reasonings, for this is the resolution to an high and
mysterious question.

And so I have checked my sad and proud thoughts; that, what ever covering for
sin and destruction the proud heart may suggest, (for it finds out many
inventions) what ever plea or excuse the heart may have; why yet, when the
covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all nations
shall be quite destroyed, which will be at the last Day, fully, then shall the
justice of God appear so clear and conspicuous, as that all mouths, though
now full of contradictions, shall be stopped; and all knees shall bow before
the Judge of all the world. Then all men shall see the justice of God in those
His most secret and hidden judgments; Those judgments of God, which S. Austin
terms secretly just, and justly secret Occulte justa and just occulta.
: So they are now, but at the Day of judgment, they shall be manifestly just,
and justly manifest. Then it shall appear, not only that the most secret
judgments of God are just, but also, that there was just cause, that they
should be secret, or kept hidden to that Day. But in the mean time, which is
our Day, we may learn a fit instruction from the Sun also; That as it is safest
to look upon the Sunshine in the air, not in the beam or body of the same;
they put out the eyes, the other comfort it: so is it safest to deal with the
linckes of the Golden chain, which God has let down unto us; and not with
those, which God has reserved to Himself: To observe by some reflection of
grace within our own souls, whether Gods countenance shine upon us, and not to
pry into that light, which no mortal eye can attain unto, lest searching into
His Majesty, we are consumed by His glory: His will must content us, which He
has revealed, without any reason, which He has not revealed. The brightness
of His excellency cannot be gazed upon, nor must the height of His power be
disputed. To keep Gods commandments is our duty, to pry into His counsels is
curiosity, which will be surely punished. Labor we to understand things that
are safe, and venture not in things that be too high.

So much the brightness of the Sun, which will not be gazed upon, teaches us.
And so I have ended this large discourse, touching the works of God, with the
consideration of that creature, which is fullest in our eye.

I conclude this walk, and the instructions therefrom, as I began in Mr
Dearings words, which he still weighed at the Sanctuary, there is not one too
light. We must consider the works of God, and in them His greatness, His
power, His goodness, and thereby learn with all our hearts to serve Him, to
glorify Him, as our only God. But if we be unprofitable creatures in the
world, if we have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, and the sight and
use of so excellent works can stir us up, neither to love, nor fear, nor
once to know so excellent a workman, we are holden in the bondage of a
spiritual Egypt, wander in strange and unknown ways of a spiritual
wilderness, where we have neither water of life, nor any secret Manna, to
satiate and and fill our faint and hungry souls: We walk in the world, as
subjects of the world, and dwell on the earth, as servants of the earth: The
ox and the horse do as we do, they eat, and drink, and see the Sun, and use at
their will the day and night, and never consider Him, who made all these
things. Let us not be like unto them, but as we have hearts able to comprehend
better things, so let us use them, that we may fill our ways with perfect
peace. Let us wisely meditate in all the works of God, for they are the wisdom
of God, in which we should know God, and glorify Him, and give thanks unto
Him. So we read, when Eliphaz would persuade Job the fear and reverence of
Gods Majesty, he bids him behold the stars, how high they are. The
Prophet Isaiah, when he will assure the Church of the mercy of God, that He
will according to His mighty power, fulfill all His promises, he says thus,
who has measured the waters in His fist, and counted heaven with His span, and
comprehended the dust of the, earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
a weight and the hills in a balance? In meditation of these great works of
God, the Prophet would teach them, to fear no man, but put their only trust
and confidence in God. So the prophet Jeremy sets out the constant course
of the day and night, for us to consider, and in it to know how unchangeable
the love of God is to all His Saints. So our Savior Christ, by the goodly
colors of the flowers of the field, He would have us learn, what a fatherly
providence God has over His children, to cover their nakedness, Who clotheth
so gloriously the fading flower. The Prophet David in many places, and
especially Psalm. 104, does make a goodly rehearsal of the providence of God,
in ruling the whole world; thereby exhorting us to obey God, to hate iniquity.
Thus should we by these exhortations and instructions teach all our senses, our
eyes to see, and our ears to hear, so that in the creatures of God, we may
see His glory, love His goodness, fear His Majesty, express His Image in
all our conversation. So far Mr Dearing Lectur. 19.
on Heb. 4. 34. etc. where he informs us touching the Sabbath, the works
thereof, and the perpetuity of the same. But I may more fitly shut up this in
the words of S. Basil upon the same subject Hom. 8. in Hex. a. p. 94.
; When I look back to behold the variety of things, I have spoken of, then I,
think I have spoken a great deal, and too much; But then again, when I
consider the admirable wisdom of the Creator in them all, I may very well
begin my speech again, for indeed I have said nothing; nothing to the
incomprehensible Power, unsearchable wisdom, exceeding riches of goodness,
which the Lord has manifested in all His creatures, and toward man, the Lord
of them all. What remains then, but as He is great and wonderful in working,
so He is greatly to be praised? as His power is wonderful, so should our fear
be; as His mercy exceeds, so should our thankfulness in our measure, though
indeed His mercies exceed all thanksgiving and praise. So much when thou
walk by the way. And now that the Sun is departed from us, we have done with
our walk: The night succeeds, and the instructions therefrom follow.

CHAP. VIII.
In this world the day and night have their course; when they cease, it will be
always day or always night: How that instructs. What darkness teaches.
How we are engaged to lie down with serious thoughts of God and His goodness.

4. AT night, etc. I suppose now the Sunset upon us, when the beasts go out to
prey, and man retires from his hard labor under the Sun. It is a fit time for
a man now, to retire into himself also, and to consider not so much his little
world, the several parts, powers and faculties of the same (Though that is a
point of great consideration, and would fill another book;) but how he has
employed these in the daytime to the glory of the Giver, and the good of them
amongst whom he lives. This is a strong argument to press home this
consideration, even this, That the longest day will have his night.

1. Let that man, who has spent the day in the may game of the world, and, as
the most do, who make no account of time, nor think themselves to be
accountable for it, let him ask himself, what contentment he finds in the
pleasures, so eagerly pursued all the day before; and what comfort they now
give unto him, now that the night is come, and his doors shut upon him? He
must needs answer that they are gone and passed; and most likely they have left
but a sad relish behind. But yet if he be resolved, when he is wakened, to
tread the same ways again of sin and death, he must needs consider withal, if
he have the consideration of a man, that, though now, through Gods gracious
dispensation toward him, the night is, and the morning will dawn; yet a night
will come, which shall never have morning. A night, when our pleasures, and
profits, and honors, all that we call good things, and so dote upon, when all
shall set and return no more.

While we live here in this world; As the morning comes so comes the night;
and as sure as the night follows day, so sure sorrow follows our pleasures;
which may teach us not to over-joy, or over-prize our worldly contentments,
when the candle of God shines upon our tabernacle, for they are short and
momentany, of small continuance: As sure as the night comes, so sure a change
will come. And here also when it is night, we know the day will dawn again, in
its apponted time; And though sorrow may abide for a night, yet joy may come in
the morning; It is easy with Him to make it so, Who turns the shadow of
death into the morning Amos 5. 8.
. And the darkest time here below, may clear up again; comfort may return as
the morning does, and when troubles do usher in comforts, they make comforts
more comfortable. It is said of the Sirens, that they weep in calm weather,
and sing in a storm Aug. de Civit. lib. 12 cap. 10.
; for they know that after a calm, they shall have a storm, and after a storm
they shall have fair weather. The Moral teaches us this point of wisdom, in
the time of adversity wisely to consider, and to look back R^spice Trem.
Eccles. 7. 14.
to the change of things, to call to mind the time past, how it has been: God
has set prosperity and adversity, one against the other; Now the day is, but
it will be night anon; now the night is, and anon the morning will be. And
thus, I say, it is while we live here; just like travelers (as the father
spoke very usefully Basil. in primum Psalm. p. 113.
) This life is a way-fare, here we meet with some things, which do delight us,
but they will away, we must pass by them. And here we meet with some thing,
which will annoy and offend us; it will away too; we shall quickly be past it,
for our course is speedy; whether we wake or sleep; as men a ship board, we
sail onward to the port. Pleasant and delectable things will away; our pains
and griefs are of no long continuance neither, though they should abide by us
all our life long; for our life speedeth like a post, or ship on the Ocean;
thus while we walk like pilgrims here.

But a time is coming, after the full period whereof (...). Chrysostom. ad Pop. Ant.
Hom. 23. p. 268.
, there follows a day, which shall never have a night; and a night which shall
never have a morning, I mean, a time, in the closing-up whereof, there shall
not be this vicissitude and intercourse of day and night, but either all day,
and no night, or all night and no day. The Fathers words will declare these
(...). Chrysostom. Ibid. Hom. ult. 77. o. p. 817.
; Here, says he, good things and evil things have their course and turn, as
the day, and the night; now good, then evil; now evil, then good: And as here
they have their changes, so here they have their end; I speak of things of the
earth. It will be said of all our earthly contentments, as Abraham said to
Dives, we had them, we were clad, and we were fed gorgeously, deliciously, but
now it is night, with those contentments and with us; we had them, but we shall
have them no more: So likewise of our grievances, we felt them; this sorrow,
and that burden; this pain, and that loss; but we shall feel them no more in
this kind: For death cures all diseases and pains here.

But in the next world, good things, and evil things are everlasting. There
Lazarus is comforted, and he shall be comforted, it shall be ever light with
him; in the other place Dives is tormented, and he shall be tormented; how
long? The answer to that breaks the spirit, and causes the greatest torment;
it shall be ever night with him, for ever and ever; the thought hereof swallows
the soul up in sorrow: our very thoughts cannot reach unto the length of this
night, we have not a thought to measure it Drexclius 4. 2.
; though we know the place of this darkness, for it is utter darkness and the
furthest from light; and we know the paths that lead thereunto, yet we can
never know the bound thereof Job 38. 20.
. How can we measure Aeternitie? Think we, then says the Father Chrysostom. Ibid.
, how unsufferable a burning-fever is, and that thou can not endure an hot
bath, for one hour, heated above its proportion; how then will thou
everlasting burnings? how will thy heart endure this perishing for ever? And
consider this with it, (which that Father has in the same place) here if thy
body be burnt, or otherwise hardly used, the soul will out, it will forsake its
dwelling Nemo pervalde dolere and diu: aut extinguetur aut extinguet. Sen. ep.
78.
; but if the body fall into these rivers of brimstone, the soul must abide by
it, there is no getting forth; as they were, I mean the body and the soul,
joined together like brethren in iniquity, so must they suffer together; and
no change shall they find, no ease in their suffering; not so much as a sick
man finds, in changing of his bed; or what a tired man finds, in changing his
postures, or his sides. This present life is well called a vale of misery, for
here are pains, perils, gripings, etc. But our death here may be as well called
a shadow of death: But a shadow in reference to that death, where we still are
dying, but never die; where we shall seek and wish for death, but death flies
from us: But a shadow that to this. Think we here-on, and then we think on a
short day spent in pleasures, and of an eternal night to be spent in sighs.
And this is the first consideration, which may make us well to husband and
improve the day of our peace, because a night must follow the day of our peace,
as the night follows the day; and at the end of time, a night, which shall
never have day; or a day, which shall never have night.

2. It is very considerable, that as sensual pleasures continue not long, so
the longer they continue, the more they satiate, but the less they satisfy;
They run one after another, and in their changes, they are most pleasing; the
ear is not satisfied with the same tune, be it never so sweet, but quickly it
desires another; so the eye in seeing; so our taste in relishing: all our
senses, says the Father (...). etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 1. Hom. 30. p. 338.
, have their measure, which will be soon at the top, and quickly satiated,
though never satisfied: And contrary things become most pleasant by their
vicissitude, and change. What is sweeter then rest to the wearied man? But if
the rest exceeds its proportion but some few hours, this rest grows wearisome
and restless. What more pleasant then the light? yet such is our frail
condition here, that if we should have it long in our eye, it would not be
delightful: What more comfortless then the darkness? yet as our case is
ordinarily, we shut out the light, that it may be more dark about us. So long
as we inhabit flesh, variety delights; and still the same, dulleth,
satiates, yea quickly kills.

Mr Dearings words are notable to this purpose Lect. 14.
; All delights must have their change, and the greater the pleasure is, the
nearer is satietie, in any whatsoever appertains unto the body. Would thou
never so fain sell thy self to serve any thing, thou shall find nothing that
will give thee a perpetual pleasure to buy thy service: hunger and thirst are
soon satisfied; the heavy eyelid is easily filled with sleep; Labor has
weariness, and rest is soon tedious; all play and pastime, which so many make
the crown and garland of their life, this also is dullness in a little while,
and this garland is as withered hay: another thing must come to take this up,
or rather then this should be still, we would never play while we lived.

Blessed be God, that He has given a day and night; the day makes the night
welcome, and the night the day; so like ringers we are, best pleased with
changes (...) etc. E^r^p. Orest p. 8. (...). Herc. sur. p. 4.
; or like tired men, a little refreshed with shifting their beds, their sides,
and their postures. Oh, how should we avoid these paths of death, which lead
to that place, where there is no change, but from torment to torment! And how
earnestly should we set our faces toward those heavenly Mansions, where the
Saints shall with open face behold the glory of the Lord; and shall have no
other change, but a changing into the same Image, from glory to glory! 2. Cor.
3. 18.
.

3. It is of use to consider, what darkness is, and what the bounds of the
same; the resolution is short; we shall find it to be no positive thing, but a
mere privation; and as boundless it is, as the light was, for it is but the
absence thereof. If I take a candle out of a room, I do not put darkness into
the same room, but in taking away the candle, I leave the room dark: Thus of
the great candle of the world; it does not make this side of our globe dark,
but withdrawing it self from our side, it leaves us in darkness.

This is of use to inform us; That, there is no efficient cause of darkness,
either in our great world, or in our little, but a deficient altogether Vide
August. de civit. lib. 12. cap. 6, 7.
; which cause is understood by the same way, that darkness is seen, or
silence is heard; we hear silence, by hearing nothing; so we see darkness by
seeing nothing; Shut the eye, and behold darkness. Our enquiry is naught
touching the efficient cause of an evil will, or of a dark mind, says
Mornaeus Male quaeritur unde mal^m efficiatur.
, for there is no such cause thereof. If light withdraw it self, either from
our world without, or from our world within, there needs no more to leave all
dark (...), etc. Basil H^x. Hom. 2 page 18, 19.
, yea, and to expose us to the power of darkness, and to lead us to the hour
of temptation. The useful enquiry then is, Who is that fountain of Light?
Which lights every man, that comes into the world? And we must acknowledge
here, if there be truth in us, and say contrary to that, which the Fathers of
old said in an opinion of themselves we see not, nor can we see; Nay, we shall
ever sit in darkness, and in the very shadow of death, until this Light, this
Dayspring from on high shall visit us; who at the first, caused the light to
shine out of darkness, and made the air light before He gave the Sun; And
this is that Sun of Righteousness. We must acknowledge farther, That as we
have many ways to shut out of our rooms this light in the air, but no way to
shut out darkness; so there is an heart in us, which can oppose this fountain
of Light shutting our eyes against it, and thrusting it from us, so resisting
the Holy Ghost; but for darkness, we are held and chained in it, and against
that we have no power; A consideration, if put home, that will hide pride from
us, and humble us to the dust, that from thence we may present this great
request, To the Hearer of prayers; Lord, that we might receive our sight Mark.
10. 51.
. Lord, that thou would give unto us, the spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of Him, the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, that
we may know what is the hope of His calling, and what the riches of the glory
of His inheritance in the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, etc.

4. It is considerable, how small a thing does make the place about us light,
supplying the want of that great body, which is now with the other side of our
globe. What the Sun cannot do, says Chrysostom, a little candle can (...) Ad
Ephesians. Hom. 12.
: for, not to speak of the stars, those great lights, which then show
clearest when the night is darkest) a rush-candle, a Glowworm, the bones of a
fish, a rotten piece of wood, will dart you out a light, which, though the
faintest, all the power of that darkness, we properly call night, cannot
withstand.

But here we must remember a darkness, which, we read of, so thick and
palpable, that it overpowered the fire and candle, it put both out, neither
could burn the while, As Philo Iudeus tells us, as well as the Apocrypha Wisd
17. 5.
. This tells us first, that He, who is the God, not of some but of all
consolations, can take away some comforts, and supply us with other-some, which
may not be so full in our eye, but yet as satisfying and more contentfull: He
can put our acquaintance far from us; He can suffer the devil to cast some
into prisons, and into dungeons, where the enemy thinks there is no light to be
expected, so wise they are in their generation, and so prudently they have
contrived: But the enemy is mistaken, for He, who forms light, and creates
darkness; He that made the light to shine out of the womb of darkness, He
that makes a candle supply the want of the Sun; He that turns the shadow of
death into the morning; He that does these great and wonderful things; He it
is, that gives His children light in darkness, and songs in their night: As
Peter found it, (for behold to him a light shined in the prison Act. 12. 7.
) so shall it be with all that truly fear the Lord; A light shall arise to
them in darkness Isa. 58. 10. Psalm. 112.
; There is some cranny left, whereby to let in light; and a way open with the
Lord for deliverance from all the expectation of the enemy, though all the
ways be blocked up to man, both in respect of the prison and the Iron-gate
Act. 12. 11.
. The children of Israel, children of the day, and of the light, ever had in
despite of the enemy, and ever shall have light in their dwellings Exodus 10. 23
, though these dwelling are prisons, caves and dungeons, which the enemy
calls, and indeed seem to be like the shadow of death. This meditation may
be more enlarged; for, if nature be so solicitous (as was said Preface. p. 19.
) in recompensing what is wanting; much more then so, will the God of nature
do. He takes from Moses a distinct and treatable voice, He Himself will be a
mouth to Moses; He takes away John a great light to His Church, He gives the
Lord Christ, The Light of that Light; He takes away Christ (His bodily
presence,) He leaves them not orphans comfortless, He gives His Church a
fuller measure of His Spirit. He takes away strength of body, He gives strength
of faith, establishment of heart; He takes away a dear child, by that sorrow,
as by a sanctified means, He forms Christ in the heart. It is of high use to
consider how God does supply in one kind, what He takes away in another, as He
does make the little candle to supply the absence of the great Sun.

Lastly, when we lie down we are to be taught, as to recount the mercies of the
day, so to call to mind the dangers of the night. Houses are marked out in the
daytime, and broke open in the night; houses also are fired in the night. And
how helpless is man, amidst these casualties and dangers! If a sleep, the
thief finds him bound to his hand; and if fire take his chamber, he is fuel
for it; such sad examples we have known, and our eyes have seen. The
destroying angel, but one of Gods guard, has set forth in the night, and
before the morning has executed his commission; our adversary will do that to
us sleeping, which he cannot waking; many have gone to bed well, and before
morning have made their appearance before the Judge of the whole world, and
then as they lay down, so they rise up, and so provided or so destitute; there
is no time for provision then, when we are summoned to appear. Naturally all
things seem black unto us in the night, and if we see no danger, nor see any
reason of danger, yet our fancy can create dangers unto us. The Lords second
coming is often mentioned in the sacred Scripture, and as often, in the night,
which defines not the time, but shows the manner of His coming. As a thief in
the night, as a snare, suddenly, when, by the most, least expected. All these
considerations should teach us, to watch over our hearts, and to take a strict
account of our ways, at our lying down, and to lift up our eyes to the Keeper
of Israel, that His eyes may be upon us for good, appointing a sure Guard about
us in the night. As we cannot tell what a day may bring forth, so nor can we
know, how our fears may increase before the next morning; we cannot (no not
the wisest of men) look forward a few hours, to tell what may happen before
the day-dawn Imminentium nescius. Tac. de Paeto. 15. 2.
; which should engage ^ur heart to Him, who changes not. And that it may be
so, we must remember our prayers, and our praises; these being performed in a
right manner do secure us, touching protection in the night: prayer will help
us against carfulness, notwithstanding our dangers are so many as we have
heard; it will suck out the heart of our fears and sorrows Preces hirudo
curarum. Melanch.
, so as they shall not hurt us, nor dismay us, but that we may lie down in
peace: But then we must remember what prayer is; It is, says Luther, The
unutterable groaning of those, who despair of any strength in themselves
Precatio est gemitus inenarrabilis desperantium de se. Luther in Genesis
. It is not every prayer, which secureth us, there is a prayer which more
provokes uttered only from the lips, in such a manner as would not be accepted
before our Governor Melac. 1. 8.
.

We must remember our tribute of praise too, and great reason, That we should
praise the Lord, who has yet spared us in the night of our ignorance, when we
could not enquire after Him; and in the night of our vanity, when we cared not
for Him; and in the night of our sorrow, when our spirits were overwhelmed,
that we remembered Him not. Thus has He patiently spared, and hitherto watched
over us to show mercy; when we were secure and careless in our duties toward
Him, which engages us the more to give the more praise to His name. And so
much may teach us to keep sound wisdom and discretion, that when thou lie
down, thy sleep may be sweet; so I have done with those four seasons in the
day, so seasonable for instruction.

CHAP. IX.
An ordinary and great neglect in point of education; The ground of that
neglect. For the helping thereof, the Parent is advised to fix upon two
conclusions: what they are: Of the School and Schoolmaster, and the way he
must go.

THus far, as my method or way led me, touching the good culture of the
child; It prescribes a way to no man; no matter what way he takes so he does
his duty, and so the work be done, and the end attained, which is, The tilling
over the whole man, by the well improving of this seed-time: A season very much
neglected, willingly or ignorantly let slip and passed-over by the most.
Parents too many, make but a waste of those so precious hours, as was said
Preface page 20.
, and as it were an empty space, which yet, being improved, would serve to
fill and store up that, which would be of more use to promote the child, then
the Parents purse, though therein he puts more confidence.

Thus I say, it is for the most part, and we cannot easily believe, how much
the Family, the Commonwealth, the Church, how much all suffer for this neglect
herein. And, which is the loss indeed; The higher the persons are, and the
more promising their parts; the more, for the most part, they are neglected in
point of culture, and due manurance. It was Mr. Calvin's complaint; Hoc crat
summu^ decus nobilibus nihil pro^s^s tenere doctrinae; and gloriati sunt etiam
nobiles hoc nomine, quod non essent clerici, que madmodum vulgo loquuntur^ etc.
Call. in Dan. cap. 1.
The honorable of the land, account it a point of their honor, that they have
no learning, none at all; And in this they glory, that they are no Clarks, as
the usual saying is. Charron relates (for it is out of another) to the same
purpose; That Noblemens children learn nothing by order and rule, but to manage
the Horse; he gives the reason; Because the Horse is neither Flatterer nor
Courtier, he will cast a Nobleman as well as a meaner person Of wisdom first
book: chap. 49. page 203.
: Our learned Perkins observed Ascham, a worthy Tutour to an excellent
Princess As the Rose the Queen of flowers, so she the Queen of Queens, and of
Kings also for Religion, piety, magnanimity, justice: you cannot question
what Rose I mean, since so she was by desert, and descent. Lord Cook Preface to
Littleton.
, tells us as much, and it is very notable, which he tells us, this it is.

Some of our young Gentlemen count it their shame to be counted learned: and
perchance, they count it their shame, to be counted honest also. For I hear
say, they meddle as little with the one, as with the other. A mavelous case,
that Gentlemen should be so ashamed of good learning, and never a whit ashamed
of ill manners; such do lay for them, that the Gentlemen of France do so: But
that is not so; many good Scholars there, young, and Gentlemen indeed do prove
that to be most false. Though yet we must grant, that some in France, who will
needs be Gentlemen, whether men will or no, and have more Gentleship in their
hat, then in their head, be at deadly feude, with both learning and honesty. So
he in his Grammar-Schoole page 18. five pages before Page 13.
, The same goodman does cast up the reckoning for these young Gentlemen, that
at the foot of the account, they may read the issue and product of their cast
away hours; and much abused good parts, thus he says;

The fault is in your selves, ye Noble-mens sons, and therefore ye deserve
the greater blame, that commonly, the meaner men's children come to be the
wisest Counselors, and greatest doers, in the weighty affairs of the
Realm. And why? for God will have it so of His providence, because you will
have it no otherwise by your negligence. And God is a good God, and wisest in
all His doings, that will place virtue, and displace vice, in those Kingdoms,
where he does govern: For He knows that Nobility, without virtue and
wisdom, is blood indeed, but blood truly, without bones and sinews: and so of
it self, without the other, very weak to bear the burden of weighty
affairs. Thus touching the great neglect of our young Gentlemen in former
times. And the evidence of the present time does clear it. That the most
hopeful plants are most neglected, and our Seminaries filled with the less
promising slipp's too soon set there, before they can suck any juice or sap;
or too late, when they are first run out to seed and wild in some other place.
We see a great part of our Gentry, Citizens and others, running out very far
this way; so as they are like the sluggards field, and by their cut and garb,
they make their Parents fear, as much as that great Gamaliel spake-out in his
last testament, That the child will scatter as fast as the Parent gathered,
and empty with as quick an hand, as the father did take in. For the end
answers the means; The child was taught no obedience, when it might, now it
is too old to learn: The child was not bended when it was tender, now it is
too stiff, it will follow its own bent: The Parent has slighted the grave
counsel given him before Chap. 1. p. 6. and chap. 2.
and neglected his precious season and seed-time also; And now, that it is too
late to call back yesterday, he may thank himself for the evil consequences
from that neglect, and humble himself to smart patiently, for smart he must, if
he have any feeling of the weight of his charge, or of his childs miscarriage.
He had his child in his hand, and he might have carried him on fairly, and
have taught him to know God, himself, and his parents; But the parent neglects
this fair opportunity, till the child be slipped out of his parents hands, and
from under his own also, whereto, he was at first, too soon and ill trusted;
And then what follows, we see; and how the parents and child complains, we
have heard. Page 18. and 24.


This neglect is manifest; so is the hurt which issues therefrom. The ground
or bottom of this neglect is as manifest, which is this, as appears by full
discovery.

The largeness of the childs patrimony, causes a barrenness, or scantnesse
in its education. He is heir of all, no matter how the Georgicks are
neglected: He shall have goods enough; for the goods of the mind the least
care; Learning will be but a burden, at the best but a needless accessory; so
it is accounted, and so it falls out commonly, that the eldest child is bred
in such a way, as that he can be of little use to himself, and of no use at
all, to others amongst whom he lives. If means fall short, as commonly they
do, short enough to the younger brothers, then they are designed to a trade,
and then writing and cyphering fits them for the best, whether in city or
town. If there be a third brother, and he the lowest, and weakest of all, then
he is designed for the Preacher, as the Parents word is, he must be the
Scholar: For the Parent has a friend at Court, he is sure in his purse (as
the witty Knight said) he knows a ready and road-way for his preferment. My
words here may be credited, for I believe my own ears; it is ordinary with
Parents, thus to say, and to design their children, long before the time, one
to the Innes of Court, the second to a trade, the third to the Pulpit (as we
heard;) and accordingly the Preface, page 26.
Parent will, and the Master shall, order them: while yet we may well discern,
that the Parent discovers his own inclination, not his childrens fitness;
rather what he is resolved and will do, then what the children can do.

For the helping of this great deceit, and taking off this veil of false
opinion, I would advise the parent to fix on two conclusions, and accordingly
to order his child; first this;

That learning is the principal; riches, but an accessory: Learning makes the
man; it fits him, and inables him both to serve himself and others; whereas
without it, a man is commonly but a slave to himself, and a burden to others;
The second is,

That the parents duty is, and his endeavor must be with all his power, to
give the child instructions universally good and profitable, whereby the
child may be capable and ready to whatsoever. This is (says Charron) to go
upon a sure ground, and to do that, which must always be done; and may be done
before their years will admit their designation to any course for afterward.
Accordingly now the parent must order the child, first in the fit choice of a
school; then, when the school has sufficiently promoted the child, in the fit
choice of a calling; touching both these, and first of the school.

There must be a good foundation and groundwork laid in the parents house:
The parent must lead on the child, as far as the light and understanding he
has, can carry him. But we suppose a parent cannot do all, he must take the
help of a master; but whether is most convenient, within his own walls, or
without, admits some dispute, which is not proper to this place. Experience,
the oracle of time, concludes, that without the parents house is the fittest
Quint. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 2.
: For children learn best in company, and the better, the less cockered by
parents; that is out of all doubt: The master is more tied and straightned then
is convenient in a parents house, and must sometimes do and speak more to
please then to profit; which is not to be questioned neither. But whether the
parent brings a master home to his children, or sends his children abroad to
the master; the difference will not be much, so the parents be well able to
govern themselves and their house, and can show the same wisdom in choice of a
master; That he be such an one, who is a master in his art, (it is an art, and
not quickly learnt to govern children) That he be a knowing man and
conscientious; that knows his work and can skill of it, and has an heart unto
it: for such an one he should be, who can instruct the life of his scholar, as
well as his tongue; can teach him, as well how to live, as how to speak; for
these doctrines, must not be separated as the Heathen man could say Neque
disjuncti Doctores, sed iidem erant vivendi praeceptores atque dicendi: ut ille
apud Homerum Phoenix. Cic. orat. p. 140. in for. (...), etc. Hom. Il. 9. p.
328. Doctri^a ore tenus imbutus, animum bonis artibus non imbuerat. Tacit. lib.
15. cap. 11.
. In a word, such an one he should be, who can promote the soul of his child,
I mean, that the child may prosper as his soul may prosper; that is the prime
and essential part both in father and child; and this is the very
masterpiece of a man's skill, and evidenceth his faithfulness, nothing more,
then does the promoting thereof: And note we; that this price is put into the
masters-hand; I mean, he has the fairest opportunity for promoting the
childs good this way, that can be wished; if he have an heart unto the price,
his means and opportunity is much every way, more then the minister or pastor
has. But I will open this light no further; The adversary knows it too well,
and we know it, by his practice in all hard difficult and perilous times Aug.
de civit. 18. 52. Aelian. de var. Hist. l. 3. Advanc. first book page 60.
. Our times are not such now, yet my words here will be a complaint.

That in this choice we want the parents discretion and judgment very much, in
no one thing more. If the parents choose ought for the childs body; be it
garters, stockins, shoes, he will have them good Aug. de verbis Domini se. 16.
and de civit. Dei lib. 3. cap. 1. Res nulla mineris constabit patri, quam
filius Juven. 7.
; he is not so careful in the choice of the master, who should make the child
good. The parent commonly will put forth his child more carelessly, then he
will his childs coat, or his own suit of apparel, and yet both, if we observe
it, put forth to making. The clark of the Church shall serve the turn, or he
that only reads there, two most ordinarily, the unfittest men in a whole
country. But if the parent do happen upon one, (for it is hap and not choice)
that has more knowledge and skill; yet then the conversation of the man is not
looked unto, how well able he is to command himself, though that be the chief
thing to be regarded, for it works most upon the child; Mr Aschams observation
requires ours; He will make others but bad scholars, who is an ill master to
Himself School. p. 23.
. Mr. Hooker gives us a good rule also, The only way to repair old ruins,
breaches, and offensive decays in others, is to begin reformation at our
selves Upon Jude. o.
. For children are taken by example, we have heard page 11.
. Therefore the parents care and foresight at this point is more especially
required; and no more but what he will take in putting forth his cloth to
making; he puts it forth to such an one who can make it so, as that it shall
give a graceful comeliness to the body, and commend the workman. So careful
a man is in putting forth his cloth, not so in putting forth his child,
though, as was said, both put forth to making: daily experience tells us so
much; and the little good the child has found now after six years schooling,
either for the informing his understanding, or reforming his manners; The
little in both, which the child gained, speaks it out plainly, that a wise
choice was not made: And if the parent could understand the language, he should
then hear, that his loss hereby were more, and the injury greater, then the
thief had done him, who has taken away his purse, or broken his house.
Therefore let a parent show his discretion in the choice of him, to whom he
will commit his child; for he must remember, that he puts the child out to
making as he does his cloth; and he cannot but remember also, that there holds
little proportion betwixt his child and his cloth, though he would have them
both made, and then certainly he will choose a workman for both.

And now that I think of this; that when a child is put to a master, he is put
out to making, for so much we must needs grant: And when I think again what a
treasure a child is, and what a charge comes along with it; and then again
what a fair opportunity the master has in his little nurcerie or seminary to
prune and manure this little plant, so as it may grow fruitful, that the
Church, and State, and Parents, that all may rejoice together; when I consider
the opportunity the master has, even to his hearts desire; so far exceeding
the opportunity which the Pastor has, (at least does take) as that he has
not a day for a week, nor scarce an hour for his day, nor has he the
opportunity to call his disciples to an account: When I consider this, I
shrink at the thought of this charge, for I must needs think, that a masters
charge is very weighty, and that his neglect must be very much, if he do not
very much good.

So much touching the choice of a schoolmaster, and the weight of his charge;
if he be answerable unto it, the use the Church has of him, is much more then
is ordinarily conceived, and the service he does, greater then he is by the
most accounted for, but he serves a good master, The God of recompenses, Whose
payment is sure. If (says the Father Chrysostom in Ephesians. Hom. 21. o.
) they, who draw the Kings picture, have an answerable respect and reward; what
are they worthy of who adorn and polish Gods Image? (such is man) in what
esteem should they be had? or what reward do they deserve? If this their due be
not paid them, there is yet comfort in this; that they who do the Lords work
diligently, in helping, what they can, to repair and beautify this Defaced
Image, shall have reward answerable to the greatness of their service, a great
reward. For the place of payment, it is not set down, whether here or
hereafter, that must be left to the wisdom of our great Master, but the
payment is certain and answerable to the honor of the work.

And so much also briefly to the dignity of this work. As briefly now touching
the method or way of performing the same.

The way the Master must take with his Scholar (I shall but point at it again)
is clean contrary to the common practice, which is the tasking the memory in
the first place. But I will not repeat what was before spoken s; these two
Preface p. 8. Book. p. 97. and 98.
things I will addde,

1. The Master must make the Mother Tongue, I mean that, wherein the child is
daily versed and understands, a precognition to that tongue he understands not;
it is the only ready means to inform a childs understanding in both, and to
speed his course.

2. A Master must make great use of the childs senses; but so he does not do,
unles he makes the same use of examples. It is most certain, that a child
understands more by one example, if in all mildness he be taught how the
example contains the rule, and concludes it, then by saying the rule twenty
times over. The rule is too general; But the eye can fix upon the example, and
so fixes the understanding; and then the understanding is a leading-hand to
memory; now the child goes on, with ease and delight. It is an old saying, but
the truth thereof is more ancient; That by precepts the way is long, but by
examples we make a short cut, and very compendious. This is the principal
thing to be noted and practiced, in the promoting the child; provided still,
we do not cast-off the dull Boy, for he may, prove a solid and understanding
Man. The child seems the duller, the quicker the Master is, and because he
leads on the child in a dull way. Our proceeding at this point is very
preposterous; and indeed Lilly has led the way, and we follow him hood-winkt,
as if we would not see more (low statured-men though we are) then he did an
hundred years ago, and more, and standing ever since, as it were, upon his and
others shoulders. He begins with composition first, whereas he should have
begun with simple terms, as all know, who are acquainted with Art or reason.
Your Master Builder, from whose Art we borrow our word of Art, knows that very
well, for he fits his Stone and Timber first, then raises the building; and
when the first work is done, he counts all is done. Nature proceeds orderly
without skipping or leaping Naturanon sacit saltum.
: so must Art too, and so must we also: For, if we would build like good
workmen, we must fit our materials first, simple words I mean, before we join
them. And when we have done so according to the rule of Grammar and Art (for it
takes all along with it) The child is as fit for Aesop, Cicero, or Ovid, as
for the Childish book: Yet Pueril.
such our customs are, and so we fit our books, this part of Ovid for this
form, that part for another; Virgil to the fourth; and Horace to the fifth, so
making the forms more, and our labors too, but the benefit the less.

All books are alike to the English and Latin Scholar, when once the grounds
are well laid in letters and syllables for the English tongue, and in
declension and verb for the Latin; though yet there must be great choice of
the matter, such ever, as is best suitable, which will be ever that, which is
most sensual. But the main thing is, and which gives strength to the building,
what foundation is laid in declension and verb. And it is strange that we do so
much fail at this point, and are so much out of the way, because our way herein
has been pointed out unto us by one, who was a famous Grammarian more then
fifteen hundred years since Nomina and verba declinare inprimis pueri sciant:
neque enim aliter pervenire ad intellectum sequentium possint. Quod etiam, etc.
Quint. orat. lib. 1. cap. 4.
. I should say more of this point, if others had not said all, therefore I
leave this and the remainder, which should have been said (for it is a great
deal) to those, whose work and study it has been to make a more full
discovery thereof unto the world, whereunto I shall only say this.

That the chiefest help for the speeding the child in the attaining to the
tongues, and the moulding the speech thereunto, is not yet by any of our men,
made known to our Country. I know well what Mr Ascham has done; A man of an
approved judgment, and his work, of the greatest use of any we have printed in
our tongue. I know as well what Mr Brimsely has written, and the clearenesse
of his intent therein. Our Grammar, (the best and easiest of any for a learner)
has been viewed and reviewed; but it has happened to that, as to the picture,
which we read Plin Not. Hist 35. 10.
, was exposed to public censure. Something has been added to it; letters I
mean, which hindered the understanding very much, leading the child in that
common Rode-way, which no wise Master will suffer the child to go in. This I
am sure of; That the Grammar was easier, and plainer, and better for the
learner, twenty years ago and ten, then now it is, after all this revising;
how it may prove, when it comes forth again, (for it is in hand now) we may
shortly see. And when we see it, this we shall see by it, that, though the
faults in the first inventers (to whom we ow most) are in good part corrected,
and the rules of Etym. etc. are brought into better order (for after thoughts
are more digested) yet can it help little the tediousness of our common
course, nor much promote a speedier and quicker way. These helps before
mentioned (if we may call them so, because so intended) are above and in sight,
other things of more substance lie under hatch and cannot appear.

Here at this point, I must make mention of two, the one Mr Brook. Mr. Horn.
projecting, the other digesting a very exact method, whereby the tongue may be
molded and framed to a speedy attaining of three languages. The former was a
seeing Multorum ingeniorum magnae dotes veluti debiles and ipsa paupertate
aegrae jacent. Barel. Euph. 3. 226.
man though outwardly dark, and had a clearer insight into the way of
training-up youth, then any man that has yet appeared in so weighty a
business, wherein he labored above strength, and so broke himself in the
work. God has now removed his shoulder from the burden; he is taken away from
us, and a poor widow with four children, the eldest not nine, left behind;
Gods peculiar care these, and it is well they are; for the common care is no
bodies in particular; we traversed this way, and that, and the other; all three
ways, but found no way, for relief of the Mother and her orphans, so they are
resigned unto His hand, who makes a way in the wilderness, and will be seen in
the Mount, providing a lamb for a sacrifice; He will provide also, that the
children of such a Father so careful, so faithful, shall not perish for want
of bread, nor perish yet worse for want of breeding. But I recall my self
remembering what I was speaking, this, That had this person before mentioned
found encouragement and help (for it is a work too hard for one or two) he had
then very much promoted the public good, for he had set out the clearest light
to Grammar, for the clearing and speeding the childs understanding and way
therein, that ever yet our Church has seen. And in good forwardness this work
was set by him (Mr Horn) who was more then an eye and hand to Mr Brooks
therein;) but, there being little hope then and less now, that there can be a
hand, which can widwife-forth that birth, if it should be perfected and fitted;
therefore it was but coldly proceeded in then, and is like to lie now as a
thing not thought upon, or forgotten. And therefore the forementioned Mr Horn
has taken the best and safest course, and but according to the advice of his
Elders; he has labored for himself, and is setting forth a work of his own,
whereby he leads on the child to Rhetoric and Oratorie (Grammar is touched
upon too in passage) in a clearer way then any man yet has gone before him in.
So Scholars like wells, are the fuller the more they are drained Page 71.
(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. sermon. 55 a.
: The more they let out themselves for the good of others, the more they are
filled. And a fullness this man has, if the skill in the languages and arts
may be accounted so; and, which is the crown of all, he has an heart to lay
forth his treasure and to spend himself for the common good. And that is the
way to increase even to a fullness; to empty our selves continually for the
public good, as Chrysostom writes very usefully.

I have spoken this, at this point, in a zeal I have to promote the childs
good, my subject now; and he, who gives another his due, does not in so doing,
detract from any other. I know there are many able and faithful Ministers this
way, and the Lord increase the number of them: But I consider, Scholars must
be wound-up within the same common winding sheet, and laid to the same mould;
In that very day, though their works follow them, for their labor cannot be in
vain in the Lord, yet their thoughts perish. It is good to know them, and to
use them while we have them.

Thus far, touching the way the Master must go, and such helps, which serve
very much to promote the Scholar in the same way. The Masters duty follows;
and that is, to do his work thoroughly and fully in point of reformation, and
information before the child pass from under his hand: And Parents must have
patience and suffer both to be done, before the child be other-where disposed
of. It proves no small disadvantage to the child and Church, that he is hasted
to an higher Form or place while his mind is empty and unfurnisht of such
matter, whereof, before he came thither, he should be well furnished: or that
he is posted into a strange country to learn the language, before he has
learnt his Religion, or attained any stayed or fixed carriage, or command over
himself. The success must needs be answerable, for the child is then most
left to himself, when he is least himself; when he is in the most slipperie
age, and place (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 44. o. Read Ascham. schol. p.
13.
, I mean, when the furnace of concupiscence is most heated (as the Father
speaks) when affections are strongest from within, and provocations more
stirring from without. Therefore till the child has some good understanding
of himself, and book; till he can command the one, and well use the other, what
should he do abroad, either at the University, Innes of Court, or in a far
Country? We can neither teach nor learn how to weigh, measure, or point the
wind, as the Noble Advancer speaks, against the sending of children abroad
too soon and too unripe. Humanity will not down nor Logic neither, and
Littleton worse then either of the former. They that go too unripe to those
places, quickly grow rotten. In all probability, and we cannot easily conceive
otherwise, youth will leave that they understand not, and can find no
sweetness in; And they will to that, which they can do, and their natures must
needs relish; They will to such companions (their books they understand not)
whose language they can skill off; and when they cannot draw at the fountain,
they will to the sink in those places; and you may sent them as strongly, that
there they have been, as if they had fell into a vessel wherein is no
pleasure. There is great cause, we should labor to set our children as upright
as we can, and to fix their carriage before we send them forth from us, else
there is great danger of miscarrying, considering what our natures are, as was
said Page 44.
.

The sum then touching this point is, That there be a Graduat proceeding with
the child, as up a pair of stairs; That the childs seed-time be improved to
the utmost. And for the daughter that she have general instructions, all
qualities the parent can bestow, which may set off, and yet stand with decency,
and sobriety; more specially, that she be accustomed to the essentialls of
huswifery: unto all that may make her rejoice in time to come. And when the
Parent in his house, and the Master in the School, shall have thus fully
discharged this care touching the child, then may the Parents have thoughts
touching the disposing of it, to some lawful calling, whereof as follows.

CHAP. X.
Of Callings: what the dignity of some, what the main end and use of all: how
to judge of their lawfulness: Our faithfulness and abiding therein: Doing the
proper works thereof. Designing the child thereunto.

THE Lord has disposed us in the civil Body, as He has the members in the
natural; one needing another, and serving for the good of another, and all for
the common good: The foot says not, if I had been the hand, I had served the
body; nor says the hand, if I had been the head, I had served the body, every
member in his proper place does his proper office, for therefore has the wise
Disposer placed it so. God has set the members every one of them in the body,
as it has pleased Him 1 Cor. 12. 17. 19, 20, 21, 22. (...), etc. Chrysostom.
Ibid. Hom. 32. juxta cap. a.
; And if they were all one member, where were the body? But now are they many
members, yet but one body. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need
of you. Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary; The Lord so tempering the body together, that there
should be no schism in the body. Even so in the body politic.

God has given to some the pre-eminence, and principality of the head. They
must look to their influence. They are resembled to the head for weighty
causes: who can conceive the manifold instruments of the soul, which are placed
in the head? the consideration whereof instructs very much.

It is an high point of honor to be head, and Lord over others: so is it an
high point of service; It will not be impertinent to remember the words of a
great Divine and devout Spaniard, to his great Lord Avila's Spiritual
epistles. 15. page 130.
, which are these. Look upon the Lord of men and angels, whose person you
represent. He that sits in the place of another, it is but reason, that he have
the properties of Him, Whose place he represents. A Lord of vassals is a
Lieutenant of God. There is nothing, to which great Lords ought to attend so
much, as truly and cordially, (and like men, who live in the presence of God)
to remain ever faithful, and firm to Him, without hanging either to this
way, or to that. And this will be easily performed, by that great man, who
shall attentively consider, That he is but the Minister of God, as one, who but
merely executes, and must not exceed the Commission, which is given to him.
God places not great Lords in the world, to the end that they may do, and undo,
what they list; but to execute the laws of His holy will. And though they may
account themselves Lords, yet are they still under the universal Lord of all,
in comparison of whom, they are more truly vassalls then their vassalls are
theirs, and their power is as truly limited as their vassalls power is, for as
much as concerns the dispensing with what they ought to do. So much to his
duty, whose office is to be the head of the body: how great that office is,
and how strong the engagement for the answerable discharge of the same: Others
He has made Seers, as the eyes of the body; such grace and excellency He has
given them. They must look to it, that their eye be single: single toward
their Masters glory. These considerations will help much hereunto; first, That
they are called His holy ones, upon whom the Lord has put the Vrim and the
Thummim: such excellencies, we can neither express nor conceive Exodus 28. 30.
Quae and qual^a fuerint non constat.
: 2. That, the higher their place is, the lower their service. The eye must
observe how the feet walk; The more proper and peculiar their persons are, the
more common servants they are; They must observe how the hands work: nor so
only, they are a leading hand, look on me, and do likewise Judge. 7. 17.
, for they are as the Ship-Admirall that carries the Lanthorn: but of this a
little after.

The third consideration is; That the Apostles were sent forth; as if they had
neither bellies to feed, nor backs to cloth: (yet neither did want) as men of
another world; divided betwixt two, and faithful Stewards for both, Their Lord
and His Church. Public persons these are, they must serve others not
themselves (the eye sees not for it self;) not yours but you 2 Cor. 12. 14.
, is a standing rule. At that instant, says that devout Spaniard, does that
person cease to be public, when he hangs never so little toward the
particular; he must stand like a stalk of a balance, no ways bending; Lastly
then, I will remember (for it is very useful) how that grave Divine Avila's
Spiritual epist. Ibid 131.
writes to him, whom God had set as an eye in the body.

Your Lordship must consider, that as you are set as an eye in the body, so
has He placed you in the eyes of many; who take that to be a rule of their
lives, which they see you do: make account that you are, seated in a high
place, and that your speech and fashions are seen by all, and followed by the
most men. Take it for a point of greatness, to obey the laws of Christ, our
Lord; without doubt, inferior men would hold it an honor, to do that which
they saw practiced by great persons. And for this reason, I believe, that the
Prelates of the Church, and the Lords of the world, are a cause of perdition,
to the most part of souls. I beseech your Lordship, that as you are a
particular man, you will look into your self with a hundred eyes; and that you
will look into your self with a hundred thousand, as you are a person, upon
whom many look, and whom many follow. And take care, to carry both your person,
and your house, so orderly, as the Law of Christ requires; that he who shall
imitate your Lordship, may also imitate Christ our Lord therein, and may meet
with nothing to stumble at. The vulgar is without doubt, but a kind of Ape.
Let great men consider, what they do, for in fine that will be followed, either
to their salvation, if they give good example; or for their condemnation, if it
be evil. I will add one thing more, and it shall be the speech of Sarpedon to
his brother Glaucus, it is worth all men's knowledge. Come on brother, we are
Lords over others, accounted Gods upon earth; Let us show that we are so,
indeed and not in name. Our work must evidence our worth. They, who are the
highest Lords, must, in point of good service to their country, be the lowest
servants. They, that are above others in place, must shine before others in
virtue: They, that eat of the fattest, and drink of the sweetest, and so have
the best wages, must, by the rule of propertion, do the best work: And this,
that our underlings, such, who are inferior unto us, may have cause to say;
these are honorable persons, and they walk honorably; they are prime, first,
and principal men amongst us, and they are, as their pre-eminence in place
imports, the first and foremost in every good and honorable action. So Sarpedon
(...). etc. Hom. Iliad. m. 12.
encourages his brother, That, as two worthy persons, they might do worthily;
and it is worthy every man's knowledge that has pre-eminence above others.

And so much to assure us, what the duty of those great officers is, who are
set as the head over the body, and as guides and lights thereunto: They guide
all; They must be be well able, well to guide and command themselves: for as
they guide, so the people follow (their example is a command Cogi eos dicit,
qui exemplo Petri Judaizaban^ Galat. 2. 14. Bez.
) if well, they follow well; Being like sheep, a wandering cattle, which will
drive well in a flock, but not single and alone Advance. B. ^. 272.
.

And as this may instruct us touching the dignity of those persons, who are as
the head and eyes in the body: so may it inform us touching our obedience to
both: for from this little empire in this world, obedience to the head is
strongly enforced. The beginning of all motion, all the knots and conjugations
of sinews are in and from the head, they have their head there; which teaches,
that the bodies motion is by law from the head. And for the eye it is notable,
which one observes, how observant all are of it, and to it As^h. Fox. p. 62. A
curious and delicate fabric, so precious for use, that it seems to be made of
finer mould then the rest of the body: But that it should be made of the same
matter whereof Bricks and Tyles are, shows that God is admirable in working,
Chrysostom. to the people of Antioch. Hom. 11.
. So much to those principal officers, so fitly resembled to those principal
parts in the body.

Others the Lord has set as hands to the body, as feet others; every one in
his proper place and station. In the body natural, the eye has the gift to
see, not to go; The foot to go, not to see: In the great body of the world it
is still as it was, Hirams country yielded excellent timber and stone;
Salomons country good wheat and oil: so in the body politic, one needs
another, one supplyeth the need of another; ones abundance, the others want.
Hereto we are called and stand bound as our callings are: And to this end,
according to the diversity of callings, God has given diversity of gifts,
for the discharge of the same, and better correspondence each to other: and all
this, that there should be neither lack nor schism in the body, but that the
members should have the same care one of another. It were a monstrous thing,
said the Orator, if one arm should seek the strength and spirits of the
other, that it self might exceed its proportion in both, and leave the other
arm shrunk and withered: so were it, for one man to graspe unto himself the
good and livelihood of another, not caring, so himself be increased, how faint,
feeble, and impoverished the other be. This were monstrous in nature, it is as
monstrous in polity. We may recall here the words of that Divine before
mentioned. There is no state, but would perish and be undone, if public
business should be lead after the pace of particular affections.

Our relation, I mean our callings, wherein we are placed, should be a great
means to sodder us together, and to make us look, as the Cherubins Exodus 25.
20.
, with our faces one toward another, for the good each of other, for we are
members one of another Ephesians. 4. 25.
; a feeling expression, there is much in that, nay, all, to make us seek the
peace and welfare each of other. We are all born to be fellow-workers, and
fellow-helpers, as the feet, hands, and the eyelids, as the rows of the upper
and under teeth, says the Philosopher M. Aut. medit. B. ^. sec. 15. page 14.
Societas nostra lapidum fornici similima. Sen. epist.
. And to the same purpose, says another; Humane societies makes us like
Arch-buildings, wherein one stone holding up another, makes the whole frame to
stand fast and steady.

But there is no such feeling consideration as this; That we are members one of
another, and so placed in the body politic. The same Philosopher could make a
true and sound use thereof, for thus he said: As several members in one body
united, so are reasonable creatures in a body divided and dispersed, all made
and prepared for one common operation. And this thou shall apprehend the
better, if thou shall use thy self often to say to thy self, I am a member of
the mass and body of reasonable substances, (...).
and not a part; for then, thou do not yet love men from thy heart; and thou
do exercise thy bounty, or talent, upon this ground barely, that it is a
thing convenient and fitting: but when thou do exercise it as thou art a
member, then thou do it as one doing good to thy self, when thou do good
to others.

So much of callings, and how, in the proper use and exercise of them, they
help to sodder and cement men together.

Now, because there are callings miscalled, callings, but are not so; serving
only in the nature thereof, and not by accident, to enlarge the bounds of
Satan's kingdom: because, I say, such callings there are falsely so called, I
will add a word, touching the choice of callings, and make some enquiry,
touching the lawfulness of the same, and how we know them so to be; for the
lawfulness of a calling gives the mind a settlednesse, and sure ground for
comfort.

First then, I would not choose such a calling, which has more dependence upon
the humors of men, then upon their necessities: which is taken up, or laid
down, according as fancy leads, not as right reason guides: such callings
there are, I may not say, unlawful, but I would not choose such a calling, so
I say. Nor such a calling would I choose, which, without more special care and
foresight, will be quickly perverted from its own primitive nature, and first
institution, to supply the instruments of luxury, excess, pride, vanity; such
callings there are also, and very lawful they are, and some there have been
and now are, who use them lawfully: And they who do contrary, do not therefore
make the callings unlawful. But yet I only say, I would not choose such a
calling for my child; considering the ready bent of our natures, how hardly we
stand firm on firm ground. What danger then of falling, where, by occasion of
our callings, we stand surrounded with snares, and, as it were, on a precipice?
such a calling, I would not make choice of.

Now touching the lawfulness of a Calling, and how we may know it so to be, it
will be of use first to recall what was spoken before; and thence then to
consider what influence my calling has into the good of the universe, and how
far, as a member, I promote there by the good and welfare of the body: for
this saying of the Philosopher in this case, is of universal truth and use;
That which is not good for the Be hive, or whole swarm, cannot be good for the
Be M. Aurel Aut. Medit. B. 6 sect. 49. p 94.
. But this is too general.

2. We may give more then a conjecture, what calling is lawful, what
unlawful, by that, which was anciently spoken by a man of a very base life,
and calling; I am said he, by profession such an one, Boni viri me pauperant,
mali ditant. Plaut.
whom good men would crush, quite starve and shrink up: but wicked men put life
in me, they countenance and keep me in heart. Hereby we may take a certain
scale, what callings will hold weight, and what are to be disallowed, and to be
cast out as refuse.

3. We may suspect that for no calling, which cannot show its descent, or
pedigree in a straight line from the first man downwards, on whom was laid (and
so upon all our flesh) This burden, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat
thy bread; That is; in the travel and labor of thy body, or mind: And here
the idle Gentleman with his attendants, are discarded, as those, who live in
no calling, he and his man are less serviceable to the place where they live,
then is old lumber in an house, as was said Book. page 44.
; Greatness in place or estate gives no warrant for idleness, though it does
give allowance for such an attendance, or retinue, as is suitable to both; but
yet so, as every one must have his office, and do his work belonging thereunto.
If it was the praise of the virtuous woman, That she did not eat the bread of
idleness Prove. 31. 27.
; It must follow, that it is a dishonor to the man, so to do. And if she must
look to the ways of her household, then so must he also, else he walks
inordinately, and without his rule. Every one that is grown-up to fitting
years (he that is not, his calling is to fit himself for his calling) must
work the thing which is good, with his hands and with his mind; else he is
like a member in the body, out of its place, and doing no service thereunto,
but a disservice rather, causing a disgrace, like some exuberance in the body.

4. Lastly we may suspect that calling, that has not its allowance and
legitimation in Gods word. Not, that every lawful calling is named there, for
we cannot quickly give a name to every lawful calling; But that it has its
deduction, and original grant from thence. If then I find no warrant there,
for the lawfulness of my calling, I am sure to fall short of comfort in it. I
may increase my means by it, but certainly I shall not increase my joy.

So much to instruct us touching the lawfulness of a calling and how to judge
thereof; now a few words, 1. touching our orderly walking, 2. our abiding
therein: To the former I would give two rules in way of caution,

1. That, supposing our calling lawful, and us lawfully called thereunto,
then, That we must give all diligence in discharge thereof. I mention this,
because I observe the most men working hard, and very diligent in their way;
but not from a true rise of duty: They do it, because otherwise they could not
live; if there were a means of livelihood, if men or children could live
without a calling, we would care little for callings, and take as little pains
about them: for we observe the calling is left, so soon as we have gotten a
support by it, and can live without it; which assures us, That the belly
Magister Artis ingen^^que largitor venture. Pers. prol.
constrains men to work, not conscience; sense of hunger, not sense of duty, to
live according to Gods ordinance. Note we; our Great-Grand-Father had means of
livelihood enough, and of lands good store, yet had he his employment designed
unto him there. No man has a license to idle away his time. Slothful and
Gentile may stand together for a time; but wicked and slothful (so we must
read it Matthew. 25. 36.
) for they are unseparable. God has joined wickedness and slothfulness, and
we may be sure they can never be parted. A slothful servant is a wicked
servant, though he may pass for a Master in the world.

But he may defend his sloth thus (so I find it in Chrysostom In Ephesians. cap.
4. Hom. 16.
) Though I stand idle in the Market of the world, and sleep in the harvest of
the year, yet I neither pick nor steal, I neither curse nor strike my fellow
servants, and then I have done no hurt I am sure; So the slothful servant may
say for himself, he has done no hurt; Yes, if thou do no good, thou do
hurt; if thou art slothful thou art wicked. The husbandman has done thee much
hurt, if he sat still in the Springtime, and slept in thy harvest, though yet
he was not drunk all that time, nor did he strike, nor abuse his fellow
servants. The mouth and the hand will do the body much hurt, if they neglected
those offices, proper to those ends, wherefore they are placed in the body,
though yet the one did not bite, nor did the other smite or scratch the body.
In omitting our duty of doing good, we commit much ill; for Truth has sealed
hereunto, That the slothful servant is a wicked servant. And so much to
persuade to duty for conscience sake.

2. That doing our duties to man, we neglect not our duty to God: That while we
answer our relation, we stand in as members of the body, we forget not that
strict bond and relation we stand unto our head.

This is a main point, and I touch upon it here, because many there are, who,
serving their particular callings, and doing their duties there, think, that
this will hold them excused, for their neglect in their general calling, as
they are Christians. I hear the same pleading which was of old, why we cannot
do this or that, though of infinite concernement to our souls both; yet we
cannot because our callings will not admit so much vacancy, or leisure: what,
not to serve God! what? leisure to serve our selves, and the world, and can
find none to serve Him who gave us being, and a place, with all conveniences
in the world? no leisure to serve Him? These things ought we to have done in
their place, order, and subordination to an higher thing; but the other thing,
that one thing we should not have neglected. Certainly, it will be a most
astonishing excuse, no excuse indeed, but such as will leave us speechless, To
plead the ordinance of God, for our neglect in the service of God He has
designed us our several callings, that there we might the better serve and
glorify Him: And if from thence, we shall plead our omissions therein, our
excuse will be no better then if a drunkard should plead thus for his abuse of
the good Creatures; If thou Lord had not given me my drink, I had not so
dishonored thee, and my self.

Vain man! the Lord gave thee drink to refresh thee therewith, and being
refreshed, that thou should return praise to the Giver. It is thy sin, and
thy great condemnation, that thou have turned a blessing into a curse;
overcharged thy self, and by thy exceeding that way, have pressed thy
bountiful Lord, as a cart is pressed with sheaves. And let this bid us beware
of our old-Fathers sin, for it was Adams, the woman that thou gave me; he
pleaded the ordinance of God for his walking inordinately. Beware I say; and
let it command our watchfulness too, for particular sins do adhere and stick
to particular callings, as close, as the ivy to the wall, as the stone to the
timber: But yet our callings shall give us no excuse for committing those
sins, or for omitting the contrary duties: It is certain we shall have no
excuse therefrom, none at all, but what will leave us speechless. This by the
way, but not from my scope. So much to engage our faithfulness in our
callings, and our heart still to God. A word now touching our abiding in that *
station or Ne quis temere suos fines transiliret, ejusmodi vivendi genera
vocationes appellavit; suum ergo singulis vivendi genus est quasi statio, etc.
Call. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 10. sect. 6.
calling whereunto God has called us.

Certain it is, the Analogy or resemblance holds well and teaches very much
between the body natural, and the body politic; Thus in the body natural, it
is; blood and ch^ler contain themselves within their own proper vessels; if
blood be out of the veins it causes an Apostume; if choler out of the gall, it
makes a jaundise all over the body: So with our members, if any one be out of
place, or does not its proper office in its place, then every one is out of
quiet: For the good and peace of the whole it is; that every member keeps its
proper place, and does the proper office belonging to that place. Thus should
every one do, in that place where God has appointed him in the body politic.
He must do those peculiar acts, which are peculiar to his place, from which his
calling has its denomination and is so called: He that teaches on teaching,
is the Apostles rule, and extends it self unto all callings as an universal
rule, and of universal use. Therefore, to instance in that one calling for
all, which is the highest of all, but gives the same rule for the lowest. The
office of a Pastor, Bishop, or Minister, is to feed his flock, to look to the
state thereof, to prepare the way of the people Esaias 62. 10.
, etc. for that Scripture is fully and usefully explained by Tremellius: This
the office of Pastor, or overseer, to seek, not yours but you, to feed not
themselves but their flock See Hist. of the council of Trent. (...) 2. p. 252.
See page 216. No^ magis de pos^endo grege cogitan!, quam suitor de a^ando. Call
Inst. 4. cap. 5. sect. 12 and 13.
. Those overseers then were truly taxed and charged of old, that they did walk
as men, and did no way answer the office, whereto they were called, when as
they saw nothing in their cures, nor knew nothing of them but their rents. This
had been proper to him; who was in office, to be the Kings Rent gatherer, but
very impertinent to him or them, whose office it was to prepare the way of the
people: or to prepare a people for the Lord. The conclusion is peremptory, he
that teaches on teaching. So likewise, as we are called, and as every man has
received the gift, so must we minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold graces of God, that He in all things may be glorified
1. Pet 4. 10.
.

As he has received the gift, I resume it again, because we must well note it;
my gift fits me for my calling; my calling for my work; If I have not the gift,
I must not affect nor enter the calling; If no calling, I must not venture upon
the work; without a gift, all will be done unskilfully; without a calling,
disorderly; without work, unprofitably, and to no purpose B. And^.
. The lesson is; If I have the gift I must fall to my work, such as is suitable
and congruous to my gift and Station. So much also touching our abiding in that
place, whereto we are called; and that we exercise those acts, and do those
works, as are proper and peculiar thereunto. A word now, follows in way of
caution touching the designing the child to a calling, wherein Parents are
commonly too early, and forward, and in one thing more preposterous.

Parents must not be too hasty here, I mean, in designing their children to
any calling; specially, not to the ministry, that sacred work, so much spoken
of, and so early resolved upon, before Parents can have any discerning of their
childrens fitness that way Parents will have their children disciples and
teachers together, they would have them cleanse others before themselves are
cleansed. (...), etc. Nazian. orat. 21. page 378.
. A Parent will make the child a Preacher, so he is resolved to do, for so
boldly and unadvisedly he speaks. He sees preferment in that way, and that way
the child shall go, though the child says plainly he is a child and cannot.
I do but relate the Parents words, and my own knowledge. The Parent considers
not, that he speaks of great and high matters, infinitely above his reach and
compass. He weighs not how weighty a burden the work of the minister is,
and how the most able men have declined from it, shrunk and fainted under it.
If arrogance were not in me, how should I, of all wretches the great est, think
to look into the highest room and vocation that is upon the earth, said humble
Bradford to Father Treaves Book of Martyr. p. 1510. Read Isid. Pelus. lib. 3.
epist. 127. and lib. 4. epist. 40.
. Who is fit for these things? surely he, that is best fitted, has need of
all; even of the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ Romans 15 29.
: And he, that has the least, must have some special influence from heaven;
else, what ever else he is fit for, he is not fitted for that sacred function.
I remember what good Bishop Babington said concerning a Church Benefice (I
find it in his good Letter to the Gentleman of Glamorgan shire, very worth the
reading) The propriety of a Church Benefice, said he, (and he takes it from
the Common law) is neither in Patron, Parson, nor Ordinary, the Fee-simple is
in the Clouds; And therefore it is a great wrong In nubibus.
for a man to make a commodity to himself of that, which the Law cannot find
he has, but is as far out of the reach, as the clouds are distant from his
handling. I know well at what this strikes, and that it cuts to the quick, and
heart of all Symoniacall contracts. But this also, we may infer hence by way
of necessary deduction; That, if the purchasing of this Church be as far out
of the reach of any earthly thing, as the clouds are from our fingers: Then the
purchasing of a sufficiency for the execution of the service in this Church is
much more higher, as it is more excellent; and we are no more able to compass
it by our own strength, what ever the indowments, or endeavors are, no more
competent are we for it, then we are able to touch the highest star, with our
lowest finger.

If that text we read Genesis 31. 38, 39. touching Jacobs care over a brutish
flock: and Chrysostomes words upon that text, touching a Ministers cure over a
reasonable flock: (mighty (...).
words they are, so indeed are they in the text, and should be as a signet
engraven on a Ministers hands, as frontlets before his eyes, and to his feet as
obvious as the light is in his way:) If those words also, which the same Father
has in his Latin Tract, (if that be his) upon Matthew. 24. 27. Ruler over All
his goods; That All are the souls of men, for they are all: If, I say, those
words were thought of and considered, it would make the ablest men to shrink at
the very thought of the Ministry, that high calling, of being a Ruler over all;
And yet, how small a matter does it seem? how lightly do we speak of it? how
easy does it lie, even like a feather, upon some men's shoulders? Thus much in
way of caution, because I observe Parents ordinarily so far out of the way in
a preposterous designation of their children. The lesson is; But stay a little,
while we hear how a man Asch. Toxoph. p 58. 2d. side.
of much learning and of no less judgment, has lessoned parents in this
point, and this fourscore years ago, his words require our mark; these they
are.

This perverse judgment of fathers, as concerning the fitness and unfitness
of their children, causes the Commonwealth have many unfit Ministers: And
seeing that Ministers be, as a man would say, instruments, wherewith the
Commonwealth does work all her matters withal; I marvel how it chances,
that a poor Shoo-maker has so much wit, that he will prepare no instrument
for his Science, neither Knife nor Aule, nor nothing else, which is not very
fit for him: The Commonwealth can be content to take at a fond fathers hand,
the riffe raffe of the world, to make those instruments of, wherewithal she
should work the highest matters under Heaven. And surely an Aule of Lead is not
so unprofitable in a Shoo-makers shop, as an unfit Minister, made of gross
metal, is unseemely in the Commonwealth. Fathers in old Time, among the noble
Persians, might not do with their children as they thought good, but as the
judgment of the Commonwealth always thought best. This fault of fathers
brings many a blot with it, to the great deformity of the Common wealth: and
here surely I can praise Gentle-women, which have always at hand their
glasses, to see if any thing be amiss, and so will amend it, yet the
Commonwealth, having the glass of knowledge in every man's hand, does see such
uncomelinesse in it, and yet winketh at it. This fault and many such like,
might be soon wiped away, if fathers would bestow their children on that thing
always, whereunto nature has ordained them most apt and fit. For if youth be
grafted straight, and not awry, the whole Commonwealth will flourish
thereafter. So the Author goes on very usefully, and that, which we read in
the side of the leaf before, is as notable, but I omit it, and return now
where I brake of; The Lesson then is.

Parents must first discern their childrens fitness before they design them
to any calling: And they must discern Gods good hand pointing them, and
fitting their child more peculiarly for that great work (they speak so
slightly of) before they must have thoughts to design them thereunto, or any
other way; whereof as follows.

As there is a great variety of callings; so is there a great variety of
dispositions diversely inclined thereunto. We cannot think any child equally
inclined to this and that all alike. There is a special bent and byas of
nature, and thence a fitness and more peculiar aptness to this rather then to
that in the most children. A propriety very hard to find out; Therefore we
must follow nature Consuetudo contra naturam Tyrannis quaeda^ est: and cito ac
levi occasion corruit. De Aug. 6. 10.
as close as we can, and use all the helps this way to make discovery of the
childs inclination, which, being well understood, brings in a very precious
commodity. The child discovers himself best, when he thinks the Parent
observes him least. The more careless the parents eye seems to be (it should
never be careless, though sometimes see mingly so) the more serious the child
is, and the more discovers his inclination. Or, if the child be more reserved
(as it is cunning enough to deceive it self and others too, in that which most
concerns its good) then note the child well in the kitchen, I mean, in such
a place, he suspects not his Parents ear or eye, then he may be understood.
Therefore there is great need, that some wall should have an ear, and some
open place a spiall: as much need there is of some trusty servants, with whom
the child will be open and plain, for if he or her be faithful to God and the
Parent, they may do, and in nothing more, very good and faithful service this
way.

The Cautions here are these.

1. That Parents do not give too much heed and credit to the light divinations
and conjectures they take from the motions of childehood or youth, which are as
unstable and uncertain as the water, and may deceive the Parent exceedingly,
and commonly do.

2. Nor must the Parent credit what children say; they are very subtle to hurt
themselves, and very cunning for their own ends (Nature teaches them.) A
child will ever seem to bend to this or that, so far as he, in his
foresight, which is none, may think it makes for his ease and liberty, which
he thinks a change may bring (as the ass in the fable;) and if he may, to the
writing-school, then he is sure of it; the Latin school is too close for him;
he is, for his good, too much pent up there. Here we may observe how the child
will turn and wind himself in-to the Parent. The child will make the Parent
believe, that he can no way skill of the book, but of any course else very
well, what the Parent will, for that way his ingenie does bias him: so the
child will say, and so the Parent believes him; whereas his bent is only that
way, which he thinks may give him more liberty, scope and elbow-room in the
world. Therefore the Parent must be as wise as a serpent, for the child is not
so innocent as a dove: It is the very masterpiece of a childs cunning to
deceive and hurt it self. A Parent then must not hearken to the child, but to
his own discerning of the childs parts, and accordingly he must fit him with
general instructions, making him as capable as he may, and ready girt for any
course.

But for the designing the child to this or that calling, requires a clearer
insight unto the childs inclination and abilities that way, then the Parent
can attain unto by his own strength: and therefore the Parents work in this
case is more specially and peculiarly with God. He looks up to that Hand, which
wisely orders all things, and which is never looked up unto in vain. He
remembers, that the Lord Christ prayed all the night before He chose His
Disciples; which teaches man what to do in matters of weight and difficulty;
even to wait upon a secret and invisible Hand, which way that points and
directs. And if the Parent do look up earnestly to This Hand (which cannot be
in vain) it will easily be discerned thus.

That Parent, whose eye is to God, carries the same single toward His glory.
He thinks not what advantage may come, what preferment may be had; he thinks
not thereon, as on a Principal: But how the child may receive most good, (he
means that, which is good indeed) how he may do most service, most promote Gods
glory. This is the very life of the Parents life, and it must be the very soul
of his actions; it was the end, wherefore God gave them the child, and for
that end they must return the child back again. So the Parent aims at, and
desires the best and most excellent way, but he looks to the childs fitness
that way; he will proportion his childs place, to the portion of his childs
gifts, that the child may not stretch (...). 2. Cor. 10. 14.
himself beyond his proportion, not Tenter himself beyond his scantling: If a
low gift, then to a low place, a doore-keeper he is content to make his child;
that is; he is content to set him in the lowest rank or form, and he sees
comfort enough therein, so the child prove faithful. It is not the height of
a calling, that commends a man, or that advances Gods glory; but a faithful
discharge of the calling, how low soever Nullum tam sordidum ac vile opus (in
quo, modo vacationi tuae pareas) quod non coram Deo resplendeat and
pretiosissimum habeatur. Call. Inst. lib. 3. c. 10. sect. 6. (...). Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 1. Hom. 5. Let no man be ashamed of his trade, how mean soever, if it be
lawful; but let the idle person be ashamed, who perhaps has many servants
attending upon him, and employed about him, when, in the mean time, the Master
does nothing; let such an idle person be ashamed.
. Therefore a wise Parent would rather his child should be an honest and
faithful scullion serving in the kitchen, then a proud Mistress serving her
lusts; rather a good servant then a bad Master; rather a wise child rich in
graces, though sitting in a low place; then a foolish child sitting in great
dignity. He would rather have his child a Prince, (so we are all by
profession, Sons of a great King (...) Isid. Pelus. lib. 2. ep. 147.
) that is; one that can wisely command it self, ruling those, that are others
masters, though it be as low as the earth and going on foot; then a servant to
his lusts, though on horseback, and as much honors done to him, as is to him,
whom the king will honor. This the mind of a wise parent, but few there be
such, and therefore few of that mind.

The rule is, and the sum of all. A wise parent (contrary to the custom of
the world) does dedicate unto the Lord The male in his flock, that is, the
first and best of his strength and glory; but designeth not his child further
then he discerns an invisible hand guiding the child, and enabling him for
service.

And so much, that the Parent may attend his seed-time, not slacking his hand,
then the child shall be fitted for some work, but not designed to any, till
the Parent can discern the childs fitness and a secret hand pointing him
thitherward, whereto the Parent earnestly looks, and whereon he faithfully
depends, not troubling himself about Gods charge, which is to provide and
protect; but his own duty, which is to give all diligence, yet without
carfulness: and so the Parent does his duty, and teaches the child his,
that both Parent and child may rejoice together.

FINIS.
A CHILD'S PORTION.

THE SECOND PART: RESPECTING A CHILD GROWN UP.

That thy trust may be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this day, even to
thee. Prove. 22. 19. He that follows after righteousness and mercy, finds
life, righteousness, and honor. Prove. 21. 21. (...), etc. As our heavenly
Father, so the Earthly, desires to reap no more fruit from the Child, then
comfort in it is well doing: how reasonable a desire this; and how unreasonable
for a Child to deny the Parent that. Clem. Alex. Protrep. p. 4. Deuteronomy. 6. 24. 3
John 4. (...), etc. The Term of Gods service admits no Vacation. Id. Strom.
li. 1. p. 201. Prove. 23. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 58. (...), etc. Grace is an ever during
portion: Chrysostom. in cap. 48. Genesis Hom. 66. o. 1. Chron. 28. 8, 9. Psalm. 73. 26.
London, printed by I. Legatt. 1640.

TO THE MVCH HONORED WIDOW, IOANE CROKER, a Widow Indeed: and to the Right
Worshipful her Lady-Daughter, the Lady MARY PIE.
Right worshipful,
THis in your hand speaks to a Child, but a Child grown up, no Child in
understanding. Such are mine yet, being yet in their Childish years. So it
might have stayed a longer Time, but I knew not how short my Time might be, and
I made all speed, when I was upon it, to leave such instructions as might be of
use to them, when I could not, and to make them Legible. They should have been
more contracted, for so I intended at the first, but a sheet or two, and so,
to have spoken much in a Little; but so I could not do, nor was it proper if I
could; for then it had been of little use to those, unto whose hands it is more
specially commended.

It had gone forth alone, without a former Part, if so it could have been
thought entyre; But so it was not thought. It was specially intended, but the
use of general concernment, not so particularly any ones, but that it does
concern every one, that will read it. It leads on a Child through all the
Stages of his life (which are implied here, supplied in the First Part,) and
through the great occurrences, we meet with therein; And, for our clearer
passage through them all, It supplieth such Doctrines, which I may call, as the
Apostle does, Strong meat, because none but a Man-child can digest them.

It supposes a Daughter rather, as there was reason, and so goes on in that
Gender, and in strict propriety of speech for matter and form both, for
(both) were to be observed for Gender-sake; but yet, whether son or daughter,
it respects both alike, for its Scope and white is, To improove the soul,
which has no Sex.

The margent is sometimes (yet as sparingly as might be) charged with a
Barbarous Language: (such is that to you and me, which we understand not 1
Cor. 14. 11.
) One reason was, That it might both please and profit more then one; The
other, That the line might be kept free, and not a word there to hinder the
understanding; for I considered still all along, whom I would teach to profit,
and therefore if there be any word in the line not so familiar in our Language,
it has always a second to explain it. I have often thought of the Apostles
words, and very observable they are. If ye speak with Tongues to the
unlearned, will they not say, ye are mad verse. 23.
? Truly I affect not words, but matter; and such words too, if my heart
deceive me not, which may yield the most profit.

That I have Entitled this yours, there was a kind of inforcement, which has
not always good reason to strengthen it, but yet, as it falls out, I have
reason too. Things of this nature are not thought comely nor well addressed to
go abroad, unless they carry some persons In front, to whom they are
specially Devoted, so here I was enforced.

And that I made choice of the Mother, and the Daughter, I had reason for that,
which ye shall hear, and, how reasonable it is, of that ye shall judge.

We make choice of such persons, to whom our personal relations are strongest:
In this then, I am sure, I am right, and have right good reason.

And of those also, whom we most honor. I am right here too, and by the same
reason, for there are no two in the world (for these personal and particular
respects, so I must be understood) whom I more honor then your selves; or, who
have more deserved honor, in your private and particular ways, then your
selves have, from all that know you. And this I speak clearly without the
least show of flattery, which I hate, as I do that, my stomach most loatheth.

Besides all this, there are virtues pointed at here, which claim acquaintance
with you, and say, ye have an interest in them, for they are yours. When I come
to the Middle-Age, you shall find the Parent Advising about a match for the
Child, and so on, where ye shall read these particulars pointed at (for
though I am very long in the whole, I am short in the parts, pointing at
things in passage briefly, So giving the Reader an hint for further
enlargement) pointed at, I say, a discreet Parent; a virtuous Wife; a grave
Matron, an honorable Age. And, in the shutting up of the book, a closing of
the eye; yielding up all into the hands of Death, which yet is to such, as
Joseph's wagons, serving only to convey those, who are such, To the place of
rest, where they would be. And such ye are, I think, and an interest ye have in
those virtues before mentioned, ye may lay claim to them, and call them yours,
else I know not where to find a virtuous woman, a True wife, a grave Matron,
an honorable Age. Therefore I conclude, such ye are; And that your departure
out of this life will be joyful, for ye go to the God, whose ye are, and whom
you serve Acts 27. 23.
, the strongest ground for comfort that ye can stand on.

And now that I have concluded so, I have excluded none from partaking with you
in the same virtues, and reward, and wish that all were even so, and more
abundant. So it puts you on to strive, to improve, to grow, to increase. It is
the Apostles inocuragement often, none more often, and to those, who had gone
very far, even to perfection; where note our perfection here, is our strife
after perfection.

And after this ye strive too, as the Apostles wish was, even your perfection 2
Cor. 13. 9.
. O how good and blessed a thing it is, to stir up, to encourage one the
other, the husband the wife, the wife the husband; the Parent the Child, the
Child the Parent, etc. Let us go on to perfection Heb. 6. 1.
: ye do, I doubt not but ye do, strive after this, ye do labor (it is a
grave word, but it 2 Cor. 5. 9.
loses of its weight in our Language, for it implies such pains, as a man
will take to climb up to the pinnacle of honor See the Book. page 9.
, less labor will not serve, for we intend an higher place, so ye strive)
That ye may be accepted of the Lord, that ye may live for ever with Him* Oh, it
is good to strive here, and not to faint; It is for eternity, and for a crown
lasting so long, and (unlike other crowns) still flourishing, even to
everlasting. Gird up your loins; That is, put to all your strength, and the
Lord strengthen your hands to lay hold hereon; and strengthen you the more, the
more feeble Age has made you, and the nearer you are to the putting it on. Be
as ye have been, and be more abundant, Eyes Job 29. 1^,
to the blind, feet to the lame; that the blessing of them, that are ready to
perish, may come down upon you, as the Dew upon the grass; and your prayers
may ascend as Incense, coming up in remembrance before the Lord.

But above all, look to the root of all, Faith, Gods great work John 6. 29.
and gift; restore that, may be filled with joy in the Lord. Ye see now the
full scope of my words, even to lead you to hopes on high, for they will send
your thoughts on high, they will purge, quicken, stir up, they will elevate
and advance the soul to a wonderful height. And now that my words have
attained this end, as I hope they have, even to set your affections, hearts,
heads, hands, all a work, (ye labor to be accepted of the Lord) my words shall
here end also, so soon as I have only mentioned the Apostles farewell; I
commend you to God, and the word of his Grace n, and have subscribed my self,

Your worships in a double obligation, EZEKIAS WOODVVARD,

THE PREFACE; PREPARING THE EAR OF him, or her, who is a Child in
understanding.
My dear Child,
HItherto thou have been an hearer only, growing up as my papers filled; and
as an accession of years, through Gods goodness, gave some addition to thy
growth and capacity, so did I to the strength and weight of my Instructions.

I suppose thee now grown up, and thy knowledge answerable to thy years; for,
though a Child is made a pattern, yet we must not be like it in
understanding. When we were Children, we did, and we spoke as children, and all
was comely; but when we out-grew Childe-hood, we out-grew Childishness (...).
Clem. Alex: Strom. p. 51.
. We had need of Milk and not of Strong Meat, for we were as Babes,
unskilful in the Word of Righteousness; but now our stature is increased, it
were a shame that we should be Dwarfes in the Inward man, the man indeed. They
can have no Apology or excuse for themselves, who are grown up to full years,
yet have a Childs understanding (...). Chry sost. Tom. 4. quod nemo laedit,
etc.
. I suppose thee then of full Age, even such an one, as I would have thee, who,
by reason of use, have thy Senses exercised to discern both good and evil
Heb. 5. 13. 14.
:

Childehood and youth are the Parents seed-time, when they must look to their
duty; The after-Age is the season of fruit, when Parents expect an harvest of
their pains: Children then must look to their duty, that Parent and Child
may rejoice together.

But alas! how many Parents are deceived here? even they, who have not
neglected their seede-time. They think upon the Instructions they have given;
the Entreaties they have used, (what my son, and the son of my womb, and
what the son of my vows Prove. 31. 2.
?) These they think on, but how many are quite lost, how few or none take! what
may make for ease and delight, that Children learn quickly; so will the Horse,
the Mule, the Ass, and the Ox; put any of these to the Wheel, they will
quickly find out the number of their Rounds, and never after can be deceived
in their Account Charron of wisdom.
. This is nature still, and her field is fruitful.

But, no Earth there is, that requires more labor, and is longer before it
yields fruit, then Man's nature; so decayed and wild it is grown, and so
rightly compared to the Sluggards field, as the person is to a Colt, an
Asse-Colt, a wild Asse-Colt.

The Philosopher reasons this case very pithily Plut. de amore prolis. page 157.
; He that plants a Vineyard, quickly eats the Grape; So in other grains; some
few Months bring them to our hands again, and the fruit of our labors to
our Eye and Taste: Oxen, Horses, Sheep, etc. they quickly serve for our use,
and much service they do in Lieu and recompense for a little cost. But Man's
education is full of labor and cost; The increase is slow, the fruit and
comfort far off, not within Eieshot; perhaps the Parent may kenne this
comfort, perhaps he may live to see it, and to rejoice: perhaps also, he may
discern little hope; he may live to hear of the miscarriage of his Child,
and see that, which, like a back wind, will put him onwards toward the pit,
hastening him with sorrow to the grave.

But In hope the Parent must do his duty; herein also like the husbandman,
whose work is never ended; something he finds still, that requires his eye,
and must command his hand; or like the Painter, who cannot withdraw the hand
from the table, before he sees his work fully perfected. But herein the Parent
and the Painter are very like; In all his pictures (says Pliny) more is to be
understood then is expressed; although the skill be great, yet there is always
more in the mind In omnibus ejus operibus intelligitur plus semper quam
pingitur: and cum Ars summa sit, Ingenium tamen ultra Artem est. Pliny. l. 35.
10.
of the Workman, then the pensill could express to the eye of the beholder.
His Ingeny, or Idea, the proportion he has framed in his mind is beyond his
Art. It is so with a Parent; his care may be great, and his skill somewhat, and
the Child may observe both, and much of both; But the Child must understand
more then it can see, and yet understand it cannot the yearning of the Spirit,
the turnings of the bowels, the desire of the heart toward the Child: It is
the Parent, he and she only, who know the Heart of a Parent. And this, (as one
speaks very feelingly Chrysolog. de Arch sy. Sermon 33. (...). Hec. to her son
Hector. Hom. Iliad. 22. p. 814.
Should work very much with the Child, what Care and Cost, and Labor, and
Fear, he has put his Parents too. But alas! Children consider it not, for if
so, they would give all diligence, to render back their so due service. But if
all this work not upon the Child, it should work upon the Parent very much, To
consider, What a barren wild nature his Child has taken from him; Barren to
every seed of Instruction; and, which is the grief, but not the wonder, the
more precious the seed is, the more barren the nature is unto it, the more hard
to receive it. And yet, if this precious seed be not received, and the nature
of the soil changed by it, Man will sink lower into misery then a Beast can.
And in ordinary matters here, a Beast may as far exceed him, as he thinks he
exceeds a Beast. Take a man in his pure Naturalls, and we find it ordinary,
That a Beast exceeds him; which might be further exemplified. For many have
written very usefully thereof, I will take that, which I know is of most use,
and this it is;

Defects of Reason in Beasts is supplied with exquisituesse of sense, says
Basil Hex. ham. 9. page 100.
Nay, there is something more then sense in Beasts, and then vegitation in
Plants, says he in the same place: And so says the learned Geographer II.
Book. cap. 4. sect. 6. page 229.
in his History of the world. It is not sense alone, which teaches beasts at
first sight, and without experience or instruction to fly from the enemies of
their Lives: Seeing that Bulls and Horses appear to the sense more fearful
and terrible, then the least kind of Dogs; And yet the Hare and Dear feeds
by the one, and flies from the other, yea though by them never seen before,
and that as soon as they fall from their Dam's, etc.

The truth is, and there is great use of it, (for it tells us what a blow or
wound we received by our fall) Beasts have many excellencies, and much
perfection of outward sense; And (which is of use indeed, to hide pride from
our eyes) they can make good improvement thereof for their safety, and, some
of them, for their Lords-service. Only man, in his pure naturalls, is herein
below the beasts; as brutish as the Swine (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Protr^p p.
44. Fish^^^s cannot be tamed nor taught. Basil. Hev. Hom. 7.
, which is the most brutish creature: As unteachable as a fish, and that is a
creature, which you can neither tame nor teach.

But now to instance in a creature most familiar with us, and of the very
lowest rank, A Dog. And not to speak of his logic, which they say, he
has, and the Hunts-man discernes that so it is; This we must note, because it
is so usefully noted to our hands. A Dog will follow S e Hist. of the world. 1.
Book. cap. 12. sect. 6. Lege Lipsium. C^nt. 3. Ad. Bell. epi 56. etc. Cent 1
epist. 44. Cic. lib. 2. de natura deor. paper. 323. and Scal. exerci. 202. 6.
his masters foot; he will keep of the theife, and the murderer; he will
defend his master if he be strong enough; if not, and his master be slain (for
so we read it has fallen out) he will stay by the carcass till he pine away
with hunger; or he will pursue the man of blood, and single him forth, as if he
would tell the beholders, That is the man that killed my master. All this a Dog
will do, and more then this (though this is most strange) as experience has
told us. And why all this? why? because he has received a dry-bone from his
masters hand, and, sometimes, a bit of bread: Therefore will this Dog put forth
his strength to the utmost, in way of requital, for his masters peace and
security.

Hearken unto this all ye that forget God, hearken. Will the Dog do all this,
for a dry-bone, and an hard crust (...), Hex. Hom. 9.
? What will they say for themselves, who love not the Lord Jesus? what excuse
can they find, who forget their Good Master in heaven, who feeds them, and
does cloth them every day; who does preserve them every moment of the day; from
whose hands they receive all good, and nothing but good, nothing, which they
can properly call evil. What will they say? so St. Basil reproves unthankful
man, so like a swine and fish; so untameable, so unteachable; so far fallen,
even below a Dog. I know not what some may think, when they spy a Dog here,
and that he is here for this purpose to instruct his Master; we may think him
too low a servant (very faithful though he be) for that purpose. But what ever
is thought, this I think, nay this I know, and am sure of; That there is not a
Creature in the World, which does so mightily convince, reprove, ashame man's
ingratitude, as the dog does; how so? Because he does so much, for so little;
And man does so little, for so much. And let us observe it well, and make this
as familiar with us as our dog is, for we shall have no excuse for the neglect
of our service to that Lord, who gives us to reap, where we sowed not, and to
dwell were we builded not; we shall have nothing to say, why we are unmindfull
of such a Master.

The dog has led me a little beyond my mark, but not out of my way; my scope
here is but this, to show, that (so we are degenerated, so low are we fallen)
the Beasts exceed man in their Naturals; and men in their pure Naturalls make
not that improvement of their senses for their Masters service, their own
safety and mutual comfort each with other, as the Beasts do; no cause we
should be proud of our Naturals.

And for Intellectuals, being without that, which the Apostle says, our speech
should be seasoned with, the Salt of Grace, they may prove, and ordinarily do
(like Absoloms hair) deadly. So, I remember a Knight, that suffered upon
Tower Hill, acknowledged, who had not returned his gifts to the glory of the
Giver. Nay more, for we hope better of him; they make a man more miserable,
then the beasts that perish: Achitophel is a sad example hereof, so is
Machevil, who, (say the Italians) (so I learn out of Bishop Andrews) rotted in
pson.

Reason and speech, they are the chief properties differencing man from a
Beast. Reason is the Ratio and Oration.
Crown of a man; his tongue, his glory, (the same word in the sacred Tongue
signifyes both.) But if man shall depose reason, taking from it, Her
sovereignty (I mean in earthly matters) then will a man be carried like a
horse, that has cast his rider; and he will abuse his Tongue also, vilifying
that which should have honored him; and in so doing he will liken himself to
the most stinking place, that we can pass by, and to the most odious name,
that is named under the Sun; and so in the end, will fall lower then a Beast
can. A Beast can fall no lower then the Earth, nor does it apprehend any evil
till it feel the same; and when it comes it is soon over, and there is an end.
Which remembers me of Pyrrhoes Hog, that did eat his meat quietly in the Ship
almost covered with waters, when all the men there were half dead with fear.
But now, reasonable Creatures are sometimes perplexed with unreasonable fears;
A man's apprehension may present evils, that are not, as impendent; which may
make his knees smite together; and with all, the apprehension of the time, that
is past, and of that which to come, may torment him too before he come to the
place of his torment.

Be not like the horse and mule then, which have no understanding, for then
thy condition will be much worse and lower then theirs in the latter end.

It may be I shall never call thee to an account, nor live to see how thou have
thriven. But consider this first, what an Heathen Plut. de fraterno amore.
spoke, it is very worthy a child's consideration; We are charged that we do
ill to none, much less to a parent: but it is not enough for a child not to
hurt his parents, he must do them all the good he can; his whole deportment
must be such, such his words and deeds, that thereby he may glad the heart of
his parent, else it is wicked and unjust. Mark it, for thus much it implies:
It is not enough that the child does not actually or positively give the parent
cause of sorrow, that were monstrous; he or she must not privatively rob them
of their comfort, or stop them of their rejoicing, even this were impious and
unjust: It is not enough, not to grieve the parent, not to give them matter of
sorrow, the child, that does not more, does not his duty; he must give them
matter of comfort and gladding of hearts. This a childs duty; let a child
think of it, and that an Heathen spoke it, from whom a lesson comes double to
a Christian.

Consider again what the Lord says, It is a people of no understanding,
therefore He that made them will not have mercy on them Esa. 27. 12.
. Consider with that Scripture, what the Apostle says, 2 These. 1. 8.
In flaming fire taking vengeance of them that know not God, etc. If this and
that be considered, Thou will cry Prove. 2. 3.
after knowledge; and lift up thy voice for understanding: wisdom is the
principal thing, therefore thou will get wisdom, and with all thy gettings
thou will get understanding Prove. 4. 7.
, which only consolidates a man, making him like armor of proof, or like a
rock, for it fixes the heart on Him in whom is everlasting strength.

Thou must consider also; That an account must be given, and the greater thy
receipts have been, the greater thy accounts must be. Line upon line, and
precept upon precept, fills up the score apace. A man looks to reap liberally,
where he sowes liberally: And as God did bountifully reward the faithful
servant, so did He severely punish the unfaithful and negligent. In the last
place, consider this, and it suffices; That a worthy name is called upon us,
even the name of Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named.
Ephesians. 3. 15.
A name, which will honor us, if we honor it; which will highly exalt us, if
we exalt it. (...), etc. Nazian. Orat. 21. p 378
And this we do, when our conversation is honorable, and as becomes, in
heaven, though amidst the things of the earth. If there be a precise walking, a
good and suitable conversation, worthy that name The Scripture acknowledges
them Christians, or the anointed of the Lord, who live Christian-like,
according to Christ.
, then the Christian is the honorable person, as the fruitful vine, the best
amongst the trees; or as those, which were very good Jer. 24. 5.
; But if we defile Read page 36.
that name, by an unworthy conversation, then are we the basest of men, like
the barren vine Ezech. 15. 4.
, fit for nothing but the fire; or unsavory salt, very bad, and to be cast out
Christians are the worse, the better they should be; the more sacred their
name, the more accursed their guilt, etc. Read Salv. de Guber. l. 3. o. the
end. and Li. 4. within two leaves of the end. Christiani deteriores sunt, etc.
Reatus impii est pium crimen.
. It is a good conversation, which commends a Christian, and that only, and
which proves him so to be: not miracles if a man could work them; not
revelations, if a man could see them; not signs and wonders, if such a power
were given from above. It is the conversation, which is all in all, and
justifies before men.

If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not John 10. 37.
. Our Lord said thus of Himself; His work should testify of Him, Luke 7. 21.
and be a foundation of their faith; works are the standard, by which we must
be measured also, whether we are in Christ, and Christ in us. If we do not the
works of Christ, such as He has proposed for our example, It is a vain
belief, a conceit only, To think we are Christians. Our works tell the world
what we are, for those, the world sees and hears, and by them we either
glorify our Father in heaven, or give clear evidence, that we have denied the
Lord, That bought us, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Redeeming from a vain conversation 1 Pet. 1. 18.
.

Chrysostom speaks usefully to this point, where he speaks concerning the
title of Lukes Tom. 5.
second Treatise. Thus he speaks, It will not profit, though we could say; In
thy name we have prophesied, cast out devils, cleansed Lepers, wrought
miracles, etc. neither this, nor that commended the Apostles, but their Acts,
their Doings. And these are, To be chaste, modest, temperate, meek, gentle,
kind, pitiful; To bridle our anger, to subdue our passions, to mortify our
affections: In a word, to exercise all grace. This is Action, this Doing; this
tells us we are Christians in deed, living Christians. And it takes of that
great objection, which is put in our way (says the same Father, and it is of
infinite use) when we stir up our people to follow Paul, as he followed
Christ: we say unto them, ye must imitate Peter, ye must follow Paul; ye must
be like John, and ye must do as Saint James did. What? even so; just to that
Copy? will our people say. We cannot; it is not possible we should; there is
no strength in us to do as they did: They made the lame to go; They raised the
dead; cleansed the lepers: so they did, we cannot do so, we cannot follow them.
Say not so (replies the Father) say not, that we persuade to impossibilities,
things above all strength; we tell you not, That you must restore the sick;
work miracles, etc. If so you could do, it would do you no good, it could give
you no boldness before the Lord in that day: A miracle does not bring unto
Heaven, but a conversation heavenward. Imitate the conversation of the
Apostles, and ye shall have no less then the Apostles did receive. Follow
peace with all men, and holiness; go about doing good, abounding in the work
of faith, in the labor of love, in the patience of hope (...), etc. Nazianz.
Orat 3 p. 77.
. So the Apostles did, do so, and ye shall have an Apostles reward. For signs
and wonders made not the Apostles happy, but a pure life.

The sum is, and this our greatlesson, we have a worthy name, our
conversation must be answerable; we must live, act, do, worthily. We must by a
good conversation, build up our selves and others. If we answer our name, we
will to our power do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem h.

I conclude with a short prayer, and a short exposition on the same. It is
Hierom's prayer for his friend: and his exposition upon it too Hier epist. l.
1. ep. 55. p. 47.
. k Ruth. 4 11.


My prayer and hearty desire is, That the Lord would in that day acknowledge
the child amongst those his children, who are very good Ier. 24. 5.
. That Is the prayer; his exposition, this; The Lord loves those who are
upright in their way, who are hot; that is, who are burning and shining lights;
who are seething hot, fervent in prayer, zealous of good works: such He loves,
in such He rules, with such He dwells, and delights. And He turns not away from
those that are cold, sinners of the Gentiles, publicans, notorious sinners, key
cold, dead in trespasses and sins; from such cold wretches, (such we were
all) He turns not away. But there are middling persons, of a middle temper,
halting betwixt two; or, like a cake half baked, neither good nor bad; neither
hot nor cold, such the Lord hates, He speweth them out; that is, they are an
abomination; His eyes can be no more toward such, then ours toward our vomit,
which our overcharged stomachs have cast up, and now our eye does loath Bright.
on Revel. cap. 3. 15. 16. Mediocri^as hic est pessima. Nihil in te mediocre
esse contentus sum, totum summum, totuni perfectum desidiero. Hier. Lib. 2.
Epist. 15. ^. page 187.
.

My prayer is, thou may be very good, upright in thy ways; hot, fervent in
prayer, zealous of good works; else better thou were cold, key cold: for a
middle Temper, as it is most deadly, so it is most abominable.

Thus (as a learned man writes to his great friend) I could have written unto
thee things more pleasing, nothing more profitable. But what I have or shall
write, nothing will profit unless the fear of God awes the heart and inclines
it; unless He teaches inwardly, words cannot outwardly. Wax takes an easy
impression from Iron; Iron not so, but very hardly; an Adamant takes no
impression at all, by all our force, because of its hardness; (so Nazianzen
Epist. 130.) And such hearts we have; understand but so much, and it will
humble thee, it will hide pride from thine eyes, and then thy ear is prepared,
and heart too. And so much as a preparative to the ear, but the Lord bore it;
and to incline thy heart to understanding, but the Lord open it.

This is all the parent can do, and his maine duty at this point, even to
spread this peremptory bent of nature, (as was Preface to the first part.
said) before the Lord, whose work it is to turn the heart, and to open the
ear to instruction, which now follows.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
GOds Goodness in framing us in the womb, in bringing us thence; ascribed to
His hand, though yet the sore pain of childe-birth no whit less engages the
Child to the Mother; how great that engagement is, to page 5. duty to the
Father enforced by a pressing-speech out of Luther, and from two very great
examples, who brake that sacred bond, and were remarkably punished, to page 9.
Gods patience in sparing and reprieving us. His goodness in ranking us in the
highest form of His Creatures here below; ho^ that engages and teaches to
page 13. His mercy in giving us all our parts, or members, and proportion in
all; a great engagement. A recognition thereof, and use therefrom, to page 20.

CHAP. II.
Our frame of spirit, how depraved. A glass to look our selves in. What seeds
of corruption within us; how it humbles those that can look into it, to p. 24.
How to bottom our corruptions; where its strong hold; how we may fathom the
depth of misery. The law of the leper to page 28. The love of the Father, and
the obedience of the son, how figured out unto us to page 30.

CHAP. III.
Baptism: Outward, Inward. The secret work of the Spirit, to page 31. We must
not pry into this His secret; if that work be not wrought, Luthers counsel is
to be followed. Gods will holy and just: Man wills his own destruction, to
page 34. (at this point read the first part page 139. etc. Lips. de Constant.
lib. 1. cap. 20, etc. lib. 2. cap. 15, etc. Cent. 1. Ep. 58.) Two things
figured in Baptism 35. 36. Our engagement from both. How sacred our Christian
name, how strait our covenant. 37. A feeling expression, we are members, and
mighty to engage us, that we are sons, daughters, heirs, Solders, who our
enemies, what their strength, 39. A paradox against all conceit and reason.
Basil's complaint, 40. A great question proposed and usefully answered, 43. who
the great tempters. We must keep our watch strong, 44. Our covenant: Gods
covenant. Christ His obedience has not abated an ace of ours. Gods law broad,
and perfect. The use a true Christian makes thereof. One Root of grace, and but
one fruit, to page 47.

CHAP. IIII.
THe root of sin remains. How the branches are kept from spreading, 48.

1. Pride, why called the woman's sin, whence it is, that clothes, hair, etc.
do puff up. Whence we may fetch help against this Tympany, or swelling
disease. What considerations most prevalent, and abasing (from page 48 to page
61.) applied to the child. The grace of humility to page 64.

2. Our darling sin, why so called; what a snare it is, and how it becomes
so. How we may keep our foot from being taken in that snare. Beginnings must be
withstood. Chrysostom's words very notable thereupon, to page 67. Occasions
must be prevented; a watch kept over our senses; Over our fancy; That it may be
ordered, and must, else all will be out of order to pa 73. What may awe our
thoughts. 74. What the sovereign help, next to the awfulnesse of Gods eye, to
page 79. the sum and use thereof to the Child, to page 81.

3. Of profit; how unsatisfying: what does satisfy indeed, to page 82.

4. Anger. What it is; whence it arises; who most subject unto it. How we may
be armed against this passion, and overcome it. Chrysostom's note notable, and
Melanchthons practice. Gods patience toward us, mighty to persuade us thereto.
Abraham and Isaac, how meek and yielding this way; of the tongue, (from page
83. to page 92.)

5. Of Censure; Charities rule; her mantle; how largely we may stretch it,
according to Chrysostomes and Mr Perkins rule; A rule in Herauldry of great use
to page 95.

6. Affections, sometimes the storms of the soul, sometimes the sweet gale, or
wind thereof: like moist elements; Who boundeth them. Considerations of use to
moderate our fear, sorrow, etc. to page 100.

7. Of Discontent; how unreasonable it is. Considerations teaching us content
in present things. Chrysostomes short story very notable, so are the
Philosophers words, with Mr Bradfords concluded, to page 107.

CHAP. V.
THe Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Graces required in those, who present
themselves at that Table. If wanting, what is to be done. Note Chrysostomes
words, and Dr Luthers at that point. The close of the chapter very notable, so
is Mr Raynolds meditation, to page 121.

CHAP. VI.
Marriage. A solemn ordinance. I. Our well and orderly entering into that
honorable estate. Abuses very many and great touching that point, in young and
old. Whose abuse most notorious, and how justly punishable, etc. to page 125.
Our rule in treating about a match; application thereof to the child. A child
no match-maker: A child no match-maker: A notable story to that purpose, to
page 127. The duty of every single person threefold, of infinite concernment,
to page 131. The Parents or overseers duty at this point fivefold. The last of
the five least thought on, and worse answered, but of infinite concernment,
page 138.

II. Our well ordering our selves in that state, as becomes the honor
thereof. Affections at the first strongest, how to guide their stream in a
right channel; sin has put all out of frame. Chrysostomes note notable,
Page 140. Good to count our Cost, and forecast trouble. Page 142. Equality
inequality, hard to draw even. The man the leading hand; how he stands charged,
the weight of the charge. If the head be surcharged, or so headless, it cannot
lead, or draws backward, what the wives duty. The head has a head a grave
consideration. 148. A consideration, which may help to make up all breaches,
and silence all differences betwixt man and wife, out of Chrysostom, Page 149.
Grievances rancked under two heads. What is only evil, and to be feared. Page
152. Evils, Imaginary, Real; The former how prevented. Page 154. The bearing
the latter silently and like a Christian supposes two things, greatly to be
studied (to Page 158.) Snares, they spring from two roots, how snares from
plenty are prevented that our foot be not taken with them. Fear, a Catholic
remedy (page 163.) snares from scarceness, how to break through them, and how
to carry and quiet our spirits in them. 165. The houswifes charge, how it may
be discharged toward children, what the parents ambition touching them; and
servants; our charge over them, how neglected; The houswifes duty engages the
Tongue that it be apt to teach; The eyes for over sight; The hands that they
be diligent and open: mercy to the poor enforced (to page 170.) Diligence a
great thriver: well husbanding the present, makes us secure for the after-time.
The family the fountain of society, how ordered, if it be, as those families
whose praise is in the Gospel. The conclusion, (to page 175).

CHAP. VII.
Old Age, as an Haven; we must do as men arrived safe there. What questions we
must put to our souls, the more to quicken us to the sacrifice of praise. Many
questions resolved into one, to page 180. Two periods of this Age. I. Desired,
not welcomed. A calm Time if youth has not troubled it. It must be employed.
The lamp of our life must not now blaze-out (to page 184.) A grave complaint
and counsel (page 186.) who gives understanding, 187. II. How burdensome
those years. The Grasshopper a Burden. When our time is shortest our
expectation is longest; a weak Body, but a strong presumption; how vain to
think we can turn to God then, when we have turned from Him all our days. It
is not our Time, nor Gods Time, (to page 192.) Fools delay Time, Children of
wisdom not so (to page 193.) Two lessons drawn from hence. We must not wish
for death in a passion. Eternity, when we may wish for death (to page 196.) Not
trifle away Time. Grave counsel to that purpose (197.) Who may be said
properly to live. Groans not discernable from what spirit they proceed (199.)
We make an Idol of the last prayer. What first to be done. 221. Comfort in
death, Whence? the peace of the Godly. They taste not death, they see it not,
etc. Applied to the Child concluded.

Faults escaped.
Page 29. line 12. of thy wings, read, whereof. Page 50. line 34. covered, read
opened; Not be hid. Page 108. line 7. this, read thy, 109. Last line, read
imply. Page 116. line 29. would, read should. These faults were found, not
sought for; and, because they mar the sense, are noted; so might many more,
if there had been will or leisure to have perused the Book. The Remains must
stand as properly belonging to every person and press, and expect favor from
every one, who knows himself partaking of the same common nature. But, if here
are more faults then usual, our excuse is, that the copy could not be made
legible by the Authors own hand, and being written by another, was the more
wanting in stops, and otherwise, and we keep to the Copy.

A CHILDS PORTION. The Second Part. Respecting a Child grown up.
CHAP. I.
What we are taught by beholding our selves in the womb; and what, by our
outward frame of body.

I Shall now call thee back to look unto the Rock, whence thou was hewn, to
the womb, whence thou was taken; I shall begin with thee at the very beginning
of thy being, that thou may take a more clear sight and consideration even
there, of Gods goodness; thy Parents kindness; thy self misery. Assuredly
there is no period of a man's age, that yields him such a discerning, as this
point of time does, at which he first breathed in this world, and so set forth
to run his race. Therefore I shall reduce thee now to thy primitive
originals, and, as it were, lay thee again in the womb, whence thou reduction,
thou may take special notice of two main and principal points whereon so
much depends.

1. Thy outward frame of body. 2. Thy inward frame of spirit. Of the outward
frame here.
1. Here take notice of God first, and of His goodness laid out upon thee,
when of nothing thou wast made something: some few days before, thou wast a
mere nothing. That which never shall be, was in as great a possibility of
being, as then thou wast. And when thou wast something (Job tells thee what it
was) that something was as much as Mar. Au. Ant. Medit. li. 10. Sect. 26. p.
171.
nothing to the producing of such an effect (so an Heathen could say) from such
a beginning. Of that nothing wast thou limmed or framed, thence this curious
work, not the work of nature, but of an Almighty-hand quickening Nature, and
actuating the same. And in seven days (for so experience tells us, says Hier.
Fabricius the Physician) that frame had its proportion of all parts. And one
half of that work, P. 686.
but the better part indeed, is more worth, then a whole world (thy soul) so He
says, who went to the price of souls.

2. And as thou must take notice of the hand, that covered thee in thy mothers
womb, so must thou take notice of the same hand (for the same Hand it was)
that brought thee thence, and none other but that. If this has not been told
thee, nor have thou yet considered so much; then believe me, that the most
curious searchers into Nature, and the powers thereof, which are great, and
strange in their extent and latitude; they, who have ascribed too much unto it,
even they have yet acknowledged at this point, when the child is brought to
the birth, and no power to bring forth, that, this is the finger of God, this
is the work of His hand.

And yet this sorrow in childbirth is not the same in all, nor is the danger;
the Lord so dispensing therewith, though the curse be common. We know what the
Mid-wives say, touching the Hebrew women; and common experience tells us also,
that some women there are, who, in this case, speed better then their betters.
We read what our Geographer and Historiographer (for he is both) writes
concerning the Spanish women, and what he cites out of Strabo, touthing
History of S. George. Histo. of the Sab. Geog. p. 32.
a woman there, who rose from one labor to another; from labor in
childbirth, to labor in the field: She was rather an Hedge-woman, then a
childbed woman, and it is with them many times, as we heard. But this we are
sure of, that this is that burden, which is laid upon that Sex, In sorrow
shall thou bring forth children; and so wonderful the Delivery is, that we may
say with the Prophet, Thou art Psalm. 71. 6.
He that took me out of my mothers bowels, my praise shall be continually of
thee.

1. And thou child (I suppose thee the eldest, though I would make no
difference here, for whether the next in years, or the youngest, it will fit
very well, and instruct alike in the maine, for which I intend it) have as much
cause to consider this, as any other; because of the sore travel thy mother
had with thee. (I will not mention the travel of her soul for thee, that
Christ might be formed in thee, though a travel it was also) she was in hard
labor, with the greatest danger of her own life, before thou did suck in the
air of this. She might have called thy name Iabesh; 1. Chron. 4. 9.
because she bare thee with sorrow. Such were the pains upon her, and so heavy
was that burden, which was laid of old upon that Sex, that it pressed her out
of measure above strength, as if she must first go out of this world, before
thou could come in. A strong engagement this to look up to Him, with
thankfulness, who brought thee to the She sickned the 17. of August, and died
the 30. at 9. in the morning, 1631 when thou wast 4. years and 7. days old.
womb, and took thee thence; and to thy parent in all due observance: and it
is as strong as ever, though thy mother is not (here I suppose thee the
eldest:) she was taken from me and thee, when thy fifth year was current, and
yet not seven days run out of it. Me thinks a child grown up, and
reflecting on it self lying in the womb, and taken thence, should observe a
love in the mother as strong as Death. All these turnings of stomach (part of
the mothers sorrow) those throwghs afterward, as so many deaths; such waters
could not quench this love, nor such floods of sorrow drown it: nay all these
were but like the Smithes water cast upon his fire, which makes it burn the
hotter and the clearer; for all these sorrows are out of mind, when the child
is in sight, and serve but to increase the love, and to inhance the price of
that sweet commodity the mother has so dearly bought. In one place of sacred
Writ the mother is placed before the father, Fear every man his mother and his
Lev. 19. 3.
father; It may be, because the Mother is generally so neglected, or because
she so neglects her self. I may not hit upon the true reason, but I can tell a
strong reason, why, at some time, the mother may be put, as it were, upon the
right hand, and why she should at all times be of high and honorable account
with the child, for she has bought it dear (as they use to say) so dear,
that even for her sorrow in Childbirth, the child must ever be her debtor.
Suppose we the most dutiful and observant child standing forth, that ever yet
was clothed with sinful flesh, telling the reciprocation of his duty, and
mutual workings thereof toward The name and nature of the Stork. Heb. (...).
Hesiod. etc. Quinta aetas. Homer Iliad. 4. Lage Hex. Basilii Hom. 8.
his mother; that he has done toward her as the young Stork to the old, the
same (say the Naturalists) which once the old did to the young; suppose all
this, the Mother could answer all in few words, Remember child (if thou can)
the turnings of my stomach, not the least part of my sorrows; the pains I
felt, every one as so many daggers to the heart, sinking my spirits, and
throwing up my tired breath, as if I should never take it in again. Should the
mother say no more but this, what she suffered for the child (though much she
did for it afterward; And there is more then nature in it, say some, that so
much she did unto it, when it lay like a Hom Odys. l. 6. ^^cretius.
man after a shipwreck, cast up upon the shore, the most forlorn and
helpless creature that can be thought of in the world.) Should she, I say, but
tell what she suffered for the child, when in the womb, and bringing thence,
she has answered all the child can say, and left it far in her books; so
far, that it can never get out; death only cancells that bond. The parent,
and the child can never cut scores, or strike tallyes, for they can never lie
even.

And so much that thou may honor thy Mother, for then thou art as Ecclus.
3. 4.
one that lays up a blessing. Mark that; for, by the rule of contraries, he
that dishonours the Mother is as one, that lays up a curse. Honor thy
Mother, and forget it not.

2. Thy Father too; look to it, thou do not set light by A se migrat and ab
homine totus transit in bestiam paternae pietatis immemor; gratiae genitoris
oblitus. Chrysol. de prodigo. Ser. 2.
him (so thou do do, i^ thou do set light by his admonitions). For that is
a sin, which calls down a curse from the Almighty; And, though I should
not plead my right, and thy duty; yet the Lord would do both. Nay, if I should
pray against the curse (as God forbid I should forbear to do) yet would it
(according to Gods ordinary dispensation) certainly fall; the arm of flesh
being too short to keep it off. He is the God of Recompenses, He looks up on
the breach of that sacred band, betwixt parents and children, ^ Si gravaris
auscullare parentibus, esto dicto audiens carnifici: quod si neque huic obedire
sustines, obedito (...), etc. Catachis. Lut^.
and will require it. That which Luther speaks is very notable, and may win
much upon a stubborn child, if any thing will; If thy neck be so stiff that
thou will not bow nor bend, nor relent by all the persuasions and entreaties of
thy parents; then expect that the Executioner shall bend thee. If thou will not
hear what thy parents say, for thy instruction, thou art like to hear what
the Hangman says, for thy cutting off and destruction; Prove. 17. 11. Carnifex.
Trem. Ephesians. 6. 1. Sicut post Deu^ d^ligere parents pietas est: sic plus quam
Deum, impietas, Chrysostom. in Mat. Lat. tantum. Hom. 26.
A cruel messenger shall be sent to a Son of rebellion. If thou will not put
thy neck under the yoke, thy parents would put upon thee, which is no other,
but what God enjoyneth, and for thy good; annexing a large blessing thereunto:
If thou will not submit to this easy and sweet yoke, In the Lord, for this is
right; thou must then submit to an iron yoke, in putting thy neck into the
executioners halter, for that is but just. So Doctor Lu. speaks in our plain
English, and adds thereto; That the experience of all Ages, have evidenced the
Truth thereof. And for the yet clearer evidensing the same; This I add
further. I have been young, and am not far from being old, but never saw I a
dutiful child that went away without his blessing; nor a child stubborn and
undutifull, to prosper. Hist. of the World. 2. 13. 5. page 361.
The debts of cruelty and mercy are never left unsatisfied, says one in
another case; we may say the same in this case; Disobedience to parents ever
receives its due punishment. No less then a thousand witnesses give in clear
evidence hereunto, and it is worth our giving our ear unto them, and our eye
also: For therefore are judgments wrought in the earth, that they might be had
in continual remembrance, like a great mountain, still in the Travelers Eye.

It was written for our Instruction; That he, who rose up against his father,
left behind him no other, then an heap of stones, a monument of his shame;
and a pillar, the only 2 Samuel 18. 17, 18.
memorial of his name. Examples there are, an heap of them, of more fresh and
bleeding memory, which I shall pass over, and recall to mind Times further
off, and give instance only in two, who, because they are very great examples
(examples are rules, and yield us the shortest, plainest, and most certain
Instruction) being persons of the highest rank and quality, are, I conceive,
the fuller of use to those of the meanest.

The first is concerning Robert Duke of Normandy, eldest son to William the
first of England, so famous for his conquest there. This son was stained
(says my Author) with this only fault; Disobedience to his father; if I forget
not, he took up Arms against him thrice, and once un horsed his father, and
wounded him in his arm, (ignorantly says the Author, not knowing him to be
his father; for when he did, he hasted to remount him, humbly craving pardon:)
this now requires our mark; This Roberts younger brothers S. Daniel. p. 41.
succeeded in their Fathers Throne, William the second, and Henry the first;
Robert puts hard for the Crown against King Henry his youngest Brother, and
obtains the payment of three thousand Marks by the year, and the reversion of
the Crown; a succession in his Brothers Throne, in case he survived. Thus they
capitulated, and on these terms they stood, for the present; Robert safe in
Normandy, and Henry in England. But contentions betwixt brothers, and betwixt
them for a Crown, are like the Bars of a Castle, once two never one again;
Quickly after, the fire of contention, raked under cold Embers, burnt out again
betwixt the two, brothers (Kings love not to know their heir, unless he come
out of their own bowels) and consumed diverse worthy men in a mighty battle,
whereby England won Normandy, and one the same day (such are the turnings in
humane affairs) whereon forty years before, Normandy overcame England; And
here Robert, who stood in a fair possibility of two Crowns (of England and
Jerusalem) was deprived of his hopes there in both places, and of his Duchy
also, of all he had: But there ended not his Tragedy; Out of Normandy he was
brought prisoner into England, and committed to the Castle of Cardiffe, where,
to add to his misery, he had the misfortune of a long life (surviving, after
he had lost himself, twenty six years) whereof the most part he saw not,
having his eyes put out, whereby he was only left to his thoughts; A punishment
barbarously inflicted on him, for attempting an escape, but wherein we may see
the righteous Acts of God, withering those arms, which were reached forth
against the hands, which embraced him in his swaddling clothes (as the old
Father speaks to his Andronicus) See Turkish Story. page 158.
and suffering those eyes to be picked out, that set so light by him, out of
whose loins he descended.

Gods ludgements are as the great deep, and we are too shallow to conceive of
them; but what lies on the top, or surface, as it were, we may take for our
use; and that we have heard.

The next is concerning Edward the third of England. He stepped over his Fathers
head, to his Throne; That was not the Sons fault, (says the Author) for he had
the Crown by resignation from his Father. But Crowns are not easily parted
with. The sons of Zerviah were too hard for him. The Father was over-powred
(so just was Gods judgment upon him, that before gave up his power to the
lusts of others, who quickly set that under-foot, which is every man's master,
and so made their King and people miserable) and The Law is every man's master.
M. Aurel. Ant. lib. 10. Medit. 25. page 171.
then he must resign what he could not keep: so the Son was put in the
Throne, and the Father thrust out. And persons of such eminency seldom find a
mean, betwixt the highest flood of honor, and the lowest No mean between
highest and nothing. Tacit. supple. p. 8.
ebb of disgrace. If they fall from their pinnacle, seldom do they meet with
any stop, till they fall to the bottom.

The Father now unking'd was most miserably contemned, most despitefully used,
and then in a most hideous manner murdered: He was forced (such instruments
defaced Majesty meet with-all) to sit on a Mole hill, whilst he was shaven,
and washed with cold water out of a ditch; but, indeed, he told them, that, in
despite of them, he would have warm water at his Barbing, and therewith shed
abundance of tears. Other vile reproaches were put upon him (as if he had not
been anointed with oil 2. Sam. 1. 21.
) and quickly after, his savage laylour muthered him, by thrusting up an hot
Iron into his bowels, through an hollow instrument, whereby no outward note
might appear, to bewray how he came by his death: so they gave out, that he
dyed of extreme grief; and so he did indeed, and of pain to boot. Though
this were not the sons fault (so says the Relatour, and it needs not our
debate) yet the son had a punishment, and in a most high kind, which
requires our mark; for, having so plentiful and able an Issue-Male, as none
before him or since; seven sons, whereof five lived to have issue, he had not
yet a son of his own to sit upon his seat; He left his kingdom worse then he
found it, and a great Inheritance like a large sum divided into Fractions;
all was rent from him before he died, excepting only the poor Town of Calais.
So concludes the story and his life; which secureth those of the highest
degree, Genesis 41. 32.
That their Throne is established in righteousness, a conclusion doubled
twice, as the dream Prove. 20. 28. 25. 5. 29. 14.
, because of its certainty: And it instructs those of the lowest degree;
That they be subject to the fathers of their bodies, and that the son thrust
not into his fathers

And so much that thou may learn to honor thy mother, and thy father; (so I
invert the order for this time) and that thou may not set light by either,
so shall thou escape the curse, and, as was said, be as one that lays up a
treasure. And now having digress'd a little, that thou might the better
learn thy duty at the womb, and see how thou art engaged unto it; I return
again to Him, to whom all honor, and praise, and thanks are due, for there we
left.

2. Thou must yet take further notice of Gods good hand toward thee, and of
the wonderfulnesse of His work; for the goodness of God must interveine all
along, which way soever our method leads; but while we are upon this point,
it must be wonderful in our eyes. It is not necessary, nor is it my care, to
set my words in such an exact order or posture, as figures stand in
Arithmeticke, whereof, if one be Quis artem quaerit ubi assectus dominatur?
out of order, all are out of tale; it is not so in words; Consider then,

He that gave thee roomth in the world, and bid thee stand out, when there was
no need of thee, might have refused that any should have been at further cost
and trouble with thee, save only to wrap thee up in a winding sheet, instead of
swaddling thee in a blanket. He, that took thee from the womb, might, the same
moment of Time, have sent thee to the grave, and from thence to thine own
place, the Acts 1. 25. (...).
nethermost parts of the earth; where it is, I know not, but the farthest off
from Him, who prepared it of old; and our Deus non expectaba^ Angelos. ^mb.
own place it is, the proper and just inheritance of a sinner. Thus He might
have dealt with thee, thus quick and short, as He was with those, who were once
far more excellent Gods pa^ience to a sinner, is the purchase of blood, the
fruit of the Gospel.
then thou art now, and yet falling from God the chief good, they fell from
their happiness, into a bottomless gulf of irrecoverable misery, and both at
one instant. In the same

Take notice then thou must of Gods exceeding goodness and patience toward
thee, in sparing and repreeving thee yet longer; And despise not his patience,
and rich goodness: but account, that the Long-suffering of the Lord, is
salvation; and since he has graciously spared thee thus long, Labor thou 2.
Pet. 3. 15.
(it is the Apostles word, but too short of his meaning, losing 2 Cor. 5 9.
(...).
much of its weight in our tongue, flat and dead to his understanding) make it
thy greatest ambition, and account it thy chief honor, the top and height of
thy preferment (for so much the word does import, so labor, so contend) to be
accepted of Him. Acceptance with the Lord, is the height of a Christians
preferment, as it will be the Crown of his rejoicing, and is the ambition of my
Heart concerning thee, the very butt and scope, where-to tend all my endeavors.

. 3. Consider again, as the riches of His goodness, so the wonderful work of
His hands. He that gave thee a being, might have given a being only, and no
more; or He might have given thee life and stayed there; Thou might have
been such a creature, which now takes the bone from thy hand, and licks the
dish, and gathers the crumbs, that fall from thy table, thereby to sustain
life; and when that life is gone (which serves but for salt to keep the body
sweet) is laid in the ditch: such thou might have been, for in reference to
our own demerits, so vile, as a dog, have the most excellent of sinful men
accounted themselves. And it was the lowest expression of humility, and
abasing amongst the Hebrews: and so low, did the sense of their vileness
depresse the excellent and honorable of the earth: Such a creature thou
might have been; or a croaking Frog, or a loathsome Toad. It is amongst
Austins Confessions; Thou might (Lord) have made me even such an one; or a
worm, or a flea, or a fly, which now thou can fillip, and crush to death at
pleasure. So thy Lord might have dealt with thee, and have done thee no wrong
at all. He might have given thee the stamp and outward impresse of a reasonable
creature, and yet have wounded thee in thy crown; I mean, He might have
stricken thee in thy reason and understanding-part, the dignity, excellency,
crown of the outward-man. So He might have done, thou wast in His hands, as the
clay in the Potters, yet so He did not deal with thee. But according to His
goodness, He vouchsafed more grace, more honor; He stamped upon thee an
excellent image, and then admitted thee not into the lower rank of His
creatures, which lick the dust, and feed upon it; No, He has made thee but a
little lower then the Angels; and has crowned thee, (as we read one was) in
the womb, with this honor, That thou should be Lady-Princesse over the
creatures before mentioned, even over all the works of His hands (And God said
unto them.) etc. Thus Genesis 1. 26. 28.
honorably has the Lord dealt with thee; so as, though (...), etc.
thou art the meanest of many, yet may thou take the words of Him, whom God
exalted, and speak them out to His praise, For, they are proper and fit well,
because so He Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in Genesis 1. Chron. 17. 17.
has exalted thee; Thou have regarded me according to the estate of a man of
high degree, o Lord God.

Oh, that I could advance and elevate thy thoughts now according to the
excellency that God has stamped upon thee! That as thy stature is erect and
up-wards, thy mind also, that yet more excellent part, might not be low and
downwards, grovelling to the earth, as if thou could find rest In imo etc.
Lact. lib. 1. cap. 1. Lib. 3. cap. 12. and 26. 27. Boet. lib. 5. Mel. 5.
unto thy soul, That chief good, in the bottom and underneath, where the
worm creeps, and the serpent eats dust. This is the great mistake The Lord
discover it to our hearts; It is the veyle spread over us, the Lord pull it
off, for nothing more evidenceth the wonderful deordination and disorder which
is brought upon man's nature, then this, which I am speaking, does; Man abhors
misery, yet he loves it in the cause thereof; he desires happiness, but he
seeks it in the place, and in the things much inferior to and below himself:
Look up man, as one said, it is not there; it is higher. Thy stature is erect
and upward; thy eye can behold the things above: whenever now thou shall
mind earthly things, and fix upon them, then thou make thy self, like the
beasts that perish, etc. Read this in the 9. Hom. of S. Basil. Hex. (...), etc.
(...). Ibid.
. Let the beast look thither-ward, and fix there, who cannot look nor rise an
inch higher. We dishonor our parentage, if, being born men, we do by an evil
and beast-like conversation match our selves as with beasts, not considering
our honor and dignity. Its far worse to be like a beast in conversation,
then to be born a Beast Pejus est comparari jumento, quam nasci jumentum.
; this is no fault, but a great fault, that. And such an one is he, who seeks
nothing, nor savours nothing but earth, contrary to his nature, and Image
stamped upon him. Assuredly, there can be no consideration so effectual, to
raise our thoughts and send them upwards, and so fix them on high, there to
seek our chiefest good, as is the consideration of that Image, and
superscription, which God has stamped upon us, and appears unto us even through
the outward man; think we thereof, and it will raise the spirit to the place,
whence it came, unless we have that spirit of infirmity, we read of Luke 13.
11.
, which bows us together so, that we can in no wise lift up our selves: That
was an infirmity, the greatest that can be thought of, as now it is the
commonest in the world; and from that unclean spirit it is, who is stronger
then we, and would lay us as low, as himself is. I know not what to say to it,
for this infirmity like an epidemicall disease, rages every where, and
presses sore clinging us together. It is a spice of our peremptory nature
(before spoken of) of that crookedness, which man cannot straighten. To God
let us look, and on Him let us wait, till He shall say unto us, as to the
woman, Thou art loosed from thy infirmity: for, till that time come, noble
Verse. 12.
and excellent creatures though we are, the chief of Gods works, yet on the
dust we shall feed, and fill our selves, as with the East-winde; I mean, with
that which cannot satisfy.

For this we may be sure of, that as nothing can fit and fill up that stamp,
which the seal has made, but the very seal, which at the first stamped that
impression or superscription; so can nothing in the world, no not all the
world, fit and fill up this image, which God has engraven upon us, but He,
that has honored us with such an engraving; He, Capacem Dei non implet minus
Deo.
and He only can satisfy this Image. The eye (we know) is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing. These Tu Deus, diligenti te, quantum
praecipis, ostendis te, and sufficis ei. Aug. Conf. l. 12. cap. 15. (...); etc.
C^rys. Tom. 6. ser. 1. in Genesis
things below us find us still hungring, lusting, desiring; and so they leave
us, still more unsatisfi'd. But He who has stamped this a excellent image upon
us, which should show forth (as that engraving upon the plate) Holiness unto
the Lord, He can fit the same, He can fill it up and fully satisfy; So that me
thinks (and with that I conclude) David has a full expression, when he says,
When I awake, (that is, I think, in the day that I shall rise again) I shall be
satisfied Exodus 28. 3^.
with thy Image. God can satisfy David, and God only, Psalm. 17. 15. Geneva
Tran.
and then, but not till then, fully, until he awake out of the dust of death;
for that is the time, when God is all in all: When I awake, I shall be
satisfied with thy Image. And so much Let us at length show our selves men and
look up to heaven, that thence we may receive that which is after our Image.
Chrysostom. Hom 9. in Epist. ad Cor. o.
touching thy Image, that thou may look on it, and behold His goodness that
so engraved thee; and then, as thy Image directs thee, look up to Him, till
thou art loosed from that spirit of infirmity, and filled with His goodness,
with His Image, which only can fit and fill up, which only can satisfy thine.

4. There is yet another remnant of Gods goodness toward this Image of thine;
and thou must remember it to His praise, for it makes up the sum of His
mercies, to thy outward man, and very much it makes for che beauty and
comeliness thereof, which consists but in the full number of parts, and in
their comely order, wherein they are placed, holding conformity and proportion
with the whole: For the beauty and comeliness of the body, stands in an
oneness and fit agreement of many parts to one. I call this goodness of God a
remnant of His mercy, or fagge-end thereof, not that it is so; for the mercy I
shall remember thee of, is the very beauty of His work, the excellency of thy
outward glory, it sets it off to the eye, and declares the excellent skill of
the Worker; But it is as a remnant or fagge-end in our esteem, we look upon
it, as the list of a fine piece of cloth; we, too commonly, either behold it
not at all, or account not of it at all; and all because, we have this mercy,
we want it not. Assuredly the commonnesse of a mercy, and the not knowing the
want of that mercy, is the cause we set no estimate upon it at all. Had the
Lord dealt thus with thee (as He might, there are many monstrous births in the
world, many in whom His Image (at the first not taken, but cast away) is doubly
defaced.) Had He made any part of thee double, which is single, or single which
are double. Had He for one face (which no creature in the world has but Facies
homini tantum. Plin. Not. Hist. li. 11. ca. 37.
man) given thee two; for one tongue, two; or for two eyes, two ears, two
hands, two feet, but one. I will not instance in those so beautifying
ornaments. Had the Lord for two eye brows (which are but a few hairs, and they
excrements of the body) yet, had He of them given thee but one, that want had
taken nothing at all, from the bulk of thy body, but very much from the
ornament thereof; so much, that Si unum radatur supercilium, etc. August de
Civit. Dei. li. 11. c. 22.
thou can not well think or imagine; But thou can imagine, that if any
thing might have been spared, then an excrement might; and if not an excrement,
but deformity would have followed, then, much more, if thou had wanted some
excellent or more useful part. Thou have thy parts, child, in weight, and in
number, and in their order too, and due place, comeliness, and proportion in
all. Thou art not wanting, And why think thou? David that King and Prophet,
tells thee, Because the Lord had written all thy parts in Psalm. 139. 16. Our
book is our Remembrancer. Fidelissimus adjutor memoriae. Brightm. Revel. ^. 1.
pa. 91.
His common place book; He speaks to inform man, and therefore to his
capacity, for he is dull and slow to understand. That, which we will not have
forgotten, nor omitted, nor slipped over, we will note in a book, and set it
before our eye. In thy book all my members were written. Had the Lord left out
of His book, thy eye, thou had wanted it, and then thou would have said, Oh
what a mercy it is to have windows to look out of! for now my body is to me a
dungeon, and the world a prison. Had he left out thy tongue, thou had wanted
it, and then, as thou may use it, thou had wanted thy glory, though
otherwise, and by abuse, it is a world of wickedness. But had thou wanted
it, thou would have said, Oh, what a mercy is it! what an happiness to have
whereby to express my self! Whereas now a Shepherd takes more content with
his dog, then with me, one that cannot deliver my meaning Aug. de Civ. Dei.
l. 19. c. ^.
. It is so with the ear too, had it been left out, thou had stood amidst the
people like a Statue, or walked with them, but converse thou could not. In
His book were all thy members written, and thou may say as follows, How
great is the sum of them! how great think thou? put them all together as
they are, and behold them, and thy self an epitome of the whole world, the
Index of all the creatures; and therefore well may thou take the following
words, speaking them to His praise, How great is the sum of them! Nay, should
I call Man the great world, and the visible world before us the little world, I
should say no more but what a Greek Father Nazianze.
has said before me; So excellent and beautified a creature is man, when he
has all his parts, comeliness and proportion in all. I could be large here,
but praise would be the sum of all, and praise is comely; Oh that men would
praise the Lord for His goodness, and the wonderfulnesse of his works, even in
this behalf touching our outward frame!

Consider now, and so I conclude this also; Has God written all thy members in
His book, not one is left out? Has He set them in a comely and decent rank and
posture? And is this order and uniformity comely and goodly to behold, as
Soldiers well disciplined, or as an Army with Banners? We must needs grant, it
is so; it is graceful in the eyes, as the contrary, an inconformity and
disorder in parts, would have been as unseemly, as to see Soldiers breaking
their Ranks, or an Army routed. Then consider but this, what then is the beauty
of a well-ordered soul? Think but so, and certainly thou will think, that
nothing in this world is of sufficient worth to put us out of frame. This
thought set home, may carry the soul like the Sun, which works upon all
inferior things, but is not wrought upon by them) above forms and storms too,
in an uniform way, in a constant course and tenor, like it self, suitable to its
own dignity, and keeping its distance.

We take a view now of the way we have gone, and of the observations in our
passage.

This first, that it was the Lord, who curiously formed thee in the womb, He
brought thee thence, (and yet thy engagement to thy parents no whit the less)
He gave thee a being amongst the creatures, and those of the highest rank; He
put thee into an house, like a rich Heir, ready furnished See Chrys^st. Hom 8.
in Genesis
; He crowned thee with honor, and gave thee dominion over the works of his
Hands. In His book were all thy members written, thou do not want one of
them; and how great is the sum thereof! so great, that thou art the epitome
of this great world, the Index of all the creatures; which sets deep upon thy
score; thou have much to return unto the Lord, if thou do return according
to that thou have received. So God has exalted thee, so should thou exalt
the Lord; and all this from thy outward frame, the site and posture thereof.
And so far we are gone, and before we go further we must take fuller notice
of things we have passed briefly over, for they are observable.

1. We are Gods workmanship, His building, wonderfully were we made by Isa 45.
11.
Him, accordingly should we strive to live unto Him; if we ask more grace, He
will not deny us it; A strong argument it is, Psalm. 138. 8.
We are the workmanship of thy hands; and as strong is this; Created in Christ
Jesus unto good Ephesians. 2, 10.
works.

1. 2. He brought us forth thence, where many miscarried because there was no
power, that our praise might be always of Him. And He gave our parents charge
over us, and them a strong affection, to discharge that trust, though we were
froward, and like perverse children, which engages mightily to honor the
parents, to obey them in the Lord. And to do what possibly we can, and all too
little, for their good, if they shall need it, and for the promoting their
comfort in the childs well-doing, the very garland of their hope, and sore
travel under the Sun, and a very cordial to their drouping spirits.

2. His exceeding patience to us ward, in sparing us so long, and His good
providence over us, all this time, but specially then, when we could have none
for our selves, when we foresaw nothing, not not a pit before us; For mark, I
pray you, that little thing, such an one I was, so wast thou; and let us not
carelessly behold him. If now he be out of the cradle and the arms, and can do
more then creep by the wall, we shall see it still in harmes-way, now pu^dering
in the fire, then in the pot of seething liquour, then up the stairs it will
creep, and down again it tumbles, with little or no harm: And if it can break
the mother prison, we shall see it marching in the streets, presently in the
Carts way or under the horses heels, perhaps (as his strength is) upon their
backs, or upon some Ladder, or some Tree, where he ventreth his neck for an
apple, or a less matter. Like a Lapwing it is, Squerill headed, still skipping
into danger, not so quick to get from it. Such like and many more dangers
attend that silly age. So that this is a sure thing which I shall tell you; It
was not the care of the earthly Father, though he was careful with all his
care; nor the tender hand and eye of the Mother, though both still helpful and
wakefull: neither this nor that was it, which provided for the child, and
secured its safety: but the providence of the Almighties eye; 2. Kin. 4. 13.
His good hand upon the child, that kept it. That, that was it, and to that we
must sacrifice, that we have been preserved where so many have fallen; and
escaped those snares and dangers wherein so many have been taken; Make this use
we must of the casualties. And forget we must not the many diseases, this vile
body is subject to, which we have been kept from or delivered in. Pliny
reckons no fewer then 300. from top to toe; I mention but two, and they be
capital ones, the Evil and the Falling sickness, very incident to children,
and makes their life but a death to themselves and friends. That we have been
preserved and delivered thus and thus, what a mercy herein! what praise
therefore!

3. He has ranked us in His highest form, amidst His chiefest creatures; that
our thoughts should be on high, and our ways on high. Noble creatures we are
of an heavenly stamp, impresse and superscription, that our carriage and
deportment should be answerable. Oh then how is it, that the horse and the
mule, which have no understanding, should teach their Lord, and this Lord so
brutish, that he will not be taught by them! We put bits in our horses mouths,
and they obey us. The dog follows our foot, and will be struck by our hand;
the Jer. 8. 7.
Storke, the Crane, the Swallow know their season; The Isai. 1. 3.
Ox knows his Master, and the Ass his Crib: but man is become brutish, he
considers not. Every Jam. 3. 7.
kind of beasts, and of birds, and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is
tamed, and have been tamed of mankind. But man is the unruly creature; the
ungoverned person, yet has he reason to guide him; Reason, I say, the crown
and dignity of a person; when the natural powers and noble faculties are
entire and sound; a great good mercy, go to Bedlam else, and enquire we there,
but that we need not do, we need but go, sit down, and hearken there, and then
we must needs say, Oh what a blessing is it, what a mercy! that we have the use
of reason, that our understanding part is sound and perfect: He has reason, I
say, to guide him; the fear of the Lord to awe him; His word to instruct him;
and if he be not guided, reclaimed, taught, he will have no excuse, no pretext
for himself: for, says In Genesis Hom. 9 p. 85.
Chrysostom, man tameth the Lion, and he leads the Bear, and he frays the
Serpent, that he hurts him not; thou art unexcusable then, O man, if thou art
an u^^overned creature; so the Father reproves man made in (...) image. And
Elihu to Job 35. 10. 11.
Job, gives us as full a reproof, and concludes the use, saying, But none
says, where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night? Who teaches us
more then the Beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser then the fowls of heaven?

4. Lastly, he has given us our parts, proportion, and comeliness in all,
nothing wanting; what praise therefore! we have the candle of the body, whereby
we escape the pit under us, and the rock before us: a great mercy, ask him
else, who at noontide gropes his way as in the night. We have tongues, whereby
we may make our thoughts known: and ears we have, whereby we understand what
others say to us. The nose beautifies the face, we must not forget that, for a
great ornament it is, as the want thereof defaceth, and disfigureth, nothing
more: the Virgins thought so, who (says the Barthol. Anat. li 3. c. 10. p.
143. o.
Anatomist, and out of our Chronicles too) cut off their noses that they might
prevent, both love, and lust from their amorous but bloody conquerours. This
organ we have, a great comeliness to the face; and the stomachs taster it is,
of as great use also. We have hands both, the instrument Putean. Epi. 17
of instruments, an excellent instrument. We have feet two, whereby we can walk
and go, and, as occasions are, run; all these instruments we have, and
exceeding great mercies all these. Ask him else, who has eyes, but sees not; a
nose, but smells not; a tongue, but speaks not; ears two, but hears not; no
more, then the deaf In Scotland Heylyne Geogra. pa. 503.
stone, we read of, or then, if there were seven walls, betwixt him, and the
speaker, ask him; and him, who has no hands, or but one, or if two, yet no use
of either, ask him; and him, who has no feet, or but one, or if two, yet walks
not, ask him. Ask we this man and that, and the other, and say we, what we are
assured, these defective persons would all say: Oh what mercies are these! of
what use and account! how precious should these be, every one in respect of
both their use and esteem! How do these organs, these instruments, adorn,
beautify, honor the outward man! how serviceable are they thereunto! Oh how
should we serve our Creator, who has made us so! how should we not give all,
and every part to serve Him, and to advance His glory! And so much, so little
rather to the outward frame of body; and to the great and many instructions
therefrom. The inward frame of spirit comes now in the second place to be
treated of.

CHAP. II.
Our inward frame of spirit; how, naturally, depraved.

THou must now take a view of thy inward frame, the frame of thy revolting
heart: revolting, I say, from Him, who has done all this for thee, whereof
thou have heard; who sums up all things in Himself, being all sufficient, the
fountain and Ocean of all our happiness; from Him are we parted, and to
cisternes we are come, to creature comforts, which empty faster then they
fill; yet, after them our hearts wander, from creature to creature (for so our
comforts here lie scattered) like the Be, from one flower to another, seeking
fullness but finding emptiness, for our own findings are sin and death.
Such a generation we are, and so degenerated, even from the day that we were
born (for Grace makes the difference, and separates, not the womb) polluted in
our own blood, to the loathing of our persons, and the magnifying of His
grace, who regarded so low an estate, making it the object of His pity. So
here in this Chapter I can make no division; for, though I am to speak of a
Body, which has many members; of a Root, which puts forth many branches; yet
is it but a body of death, a root of bitterness. And so spiritual it is in
working, so speedy and quick, and with such consent, and agreement also, that
I can see no more reason to divide here, then Abraham did to divide the Birds,
But them he divided a not. It is sufficient to show this body, as in b Genesis 15.
10.
a glass darkly, how filthy and loathsome it is. And for this purpose, we will
look on the 16. Chapter of Ezechiel, which gives the clearest reflection, and as
fully shows a man to himself, as any glass in the world. But then the eye
must have a property, which the outward has not, to look inward, and to see
its self, which imployeth, it has received an anointing from above. But
whether we have it, or have it not, (Ezekiel. 16.) a fit glass it is to see our
selves in. If we could lay our selves close up on it, as the Prophet applied
himself to the child, the proud heart would fall, the haughty looks would
down. And therefore, That thou may take shame to thy self as thy just
portion; and the more advance God, and the riches of His goodness Here is
ground of comfort, and for firm resolution, said Staupitius to Luther, in that
you stand for that Doctrine, which gives All to God, to Man nothing at all: for
this is according to the Truth of the Gospel. And in sure confidence hereof, I
shall set my face like a flint, said Luther. Com^o^ Galat. 1. 12. and chapter 2 6.
according to the doctrine of the Gospel; (God is never exalted, till man is
laid low; nor is Christ precious, till we are vile) Consider thy self well,
and begin there, where thou tookest thy beginning. There thou shall find the
first Cornerstone, in thy foundation, was laid in bloody iniquities, in which
thou wast conceived; The very materials of soul and body, whereof thou do
consist, were tempered with sin, like the stone in the wall, and beam out of
the timber; so as they cried out, even the same moment thou wast born, raze
this building, raze it even to the ground. And the cry had been heard; and thou
had been sent before this time to thy own place, but that mercy came betwixt,
even the cry of that blood, which speaks better things, then the blood of Abel.
And that cry, was heard, so thou wast graciously spared; and behold what riches
of grace, here are showed unto thee; for, thou wast then as wholly naked and
stripped of all goodness, as thy body was being newly born; and as wholly
invested with the worst filthiness (for it is expressed by such things, which
are not comely to name) as thy body was with skin, and thy bones with flesh.

So thou came in, Tantillus pu^r, tan^us pecca^or.
a very little child, but a very great sinner, not after the similitude of
Adams transgression, for sin was actual in him, breaking a Commandment;
Original in thee for thou brought it into the world with thee; And a world
of wickedness it is, defiling thy Body, and setting on fire, not thine own
only, but the whole course of nature; for thou had an hand (to use Mr.
Boltons words) in that fire-work, which blew up all mankind; he means in Adams
transgression (in whose loins thou wast, as a branch in a common stock) which
brought forth such a bloody sea of sin and sorrow into the world.

I will hold thy thoughts at the womb, so may thou the better know thy
self for ever after; From thence thou came into the world, a sink, a Sodom
of all filth and impuritie. Thou have inherent in thy bowels secret seeds, and
imbred inclinations of all sin. The principles of Hazaels bloody cruelties,
of Athaliahs treasons, and Iezebels lusts; The womb, the seed of all the
villainies, that have been acted in the world, which Saint Paul has sum'd up
together in his first chapter to the Romans. 1 Timothy 1. 2 Timothy 3.

Thou have within thee the spawn, the fomenter, the formative virtue of all
that hellish stuff. All those floods of ungodliness, have no other original
fountain, from which they issue, then this sin, thou art now taking a view
off. Thy Heart is the Treasury of all that wickedness, and if the Lord shall
rip up the foundations of thy nature, as He may, and in mercy also, then will thou know I do not speak parables. But if thou can not follow sin to its
first original (if thou could so do, thou would fear it more, and fly
from it faster, then Moses from the serpent, for more active it is and
hurtful) if thou have not learnt so much, yet then learn now, and follow the
streams, they lead to the Springhead. Know then, whatsoever vanity,
ignorance, or darkness is in our mind; whatsoever swarms of foolish
thoughts, whatsoever insensiblenesse in our conscience, whatsoever disabilitie
or enmity is in our Will; whatsoever unfaithfulness (...). Heb. 2. 1.
leaking or running-out in our memory, whatever leaven or corruption in
doctrine or manners; whatsoever bitterness, dissentions, wars, devouring
words; To conclude, whatsoever we have found in our selves, or observed from
others, to break out of the mouth, at the eye, like the purging of a corpse,
now the soul is out; All this is but the issue of this body of sin, which
thou carryest about thee; All that, has no other original fountain, from
which they issue then this sin.

When we let our tongues, and eyes, and ears, loose and at liberty, keeping
no watch over the one, nor making no covenant with the other; when, I say, we
do thus, set the doors, windows and all open; we then commonly excuse our
selves thus; That though we speak merrily, yet our mind is good; And though
our eyes wander, yet our heart walks not after our eyes Job 31. 7.
; And though we let in vanity by the ear, (as the wool sucks in water) yet
we can keep the inward man clean and pure; this is our excuse, and we would
be pardoned: But the excuse is worse then the fault; for we must know, That the
tongue, the ear, and the eye (these doors and windows of the soul) The feet,
and the fingers (there is a Prove. 6. 13.
speaking with the one, and a teaching with the other) All these are but as a
little Comentary upon the great Text of the heart; they do but serve to make
plain, so as he that runs may read, what lewdness and frowardness lies in
that depth, involved there in more hid, dark and obscure characters. Or, to
use a plainer metaphor, and according to the sacred Scripture; The heart is the
treasury, the ever*going mint, wherein our thougbts Fabricatur. Prove. 6. 14.
hammer mischief. Out of that abundance the mouth (so of the rest) fills
and emptyeth it self. If there be a little vanity upon the tongue, we must
conclude there is much in the heart; if the eyes be full of adultery, then the
measure of the heart (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Relig. p. 597. What wickedness
will they stick at in secret, who proclaim their folly openly; etc. says
Isid. Pelusit. lib. 2. ep. 153.
is pressed down running over. That vanity, which is showed openly by the
outward members, is but like the money a rich man carries in his purse, to be
laid forth upon all occasions, compared with that, which is in the bag or
chest; there is the store. The mouth is but as the cistern; the heart is the
well, that fills it; The abundance is in the heart, there is the treasury: And
this thou carryest about thee. Nay, it is within our earth, more inwrapped
within our nature, then the Ivy within the wall, as fast as with a band of
Iron, and Brass. And it is (as was said) the acting, sinning, brooding sin,
the fountain and inlet of all we can call evil; The first matter of all our
misery; The tinder of lust, disposing us to evil, and causing an averseness to
all good: This is the treasury, thus we have looked into the abundance, that
is in the heart of every mothers child: In all it does not break out alike,
God in mercy to mankind, and for preservation of society, restraining the
dominion, and overruling it in some; And some again having received more
grace, prevailing over the same, with the wrestling of God; strong wrestlings
Genesis 30. 8.
. But within us this abundance is, I mean, this sin dwells within the best
of men; The life thereof is prolonged Dan. 7. 12.
, though the dominion is taken away. And its kingdom, (to allude to that
place) is partly strong and partly broken Dan. 2. 42.
. And hence is that, which ever has, and ever will make the people of God vile
in their own eyes, and to loath themselves, witness their low and base account
of themselves; Dust Genesis 19. 27.
and ashes says Abraham; (we may say that, and more, even what was said of a
bloody persecutor, we are earth mingled with blood, and to the same fierceness
we should proceed, were we not renewed or restrained.) Genesis 32. 10.
Less then the least of Gods mercies, said Jacob. What am I? a dog, fit to lie
under the table; a dead 1 Samuel 24. 24.
dog fit for the ditch; It was the lowest expression of humility, and we know
whose it was. It is Thy Lam. 3. 22.
mercy we are not consumed, so the Church makes her acknowledgement, when she
was brought even to the dust of death: Though the Church be smitten to the
place of Dragons, yet if it be above hell it is mercy, so she accounts.
Nothing, (says Paul) not worthy to be accounted an Apostle 1 Cor. 15 9.
. And to mention but one nearer our own times, a true Antipapa^. Bright. on
Rev. 2. 13.
Antipas, a faithful witness, a holy-man, yet thus vile and abased in his own
eyes, and feeling; I am as dry as a stone, a most miserable hard-hearted man,
an unthankful sinner; Thus subscribed he his letters, Humble John Bradford.

And this is the reason, why I would have thee, child, look back to the rock,
whence thou wast taken, and stay thy thoughts there, even to humble thee, and
to make thee see, how vile thou art, that thou may exalt Christ. Certainly
there is no such ground for humiliation, that can be thought of. Search then
this nature of thine, and search in to the bottom; There is no quick flesh,
till we come as low in our search as David did, to our conception and birth.

The plough must go so deep, as to strike at that root, whereto sin is
fastened, else we sow among thorns: Slight not sin here; S. C. page 226.
Corruption, the less we see it, and lament it, the more it is; sighs and
groans of the soul, are like the pores of the body, out of which the sick
humors spend and become less. Here thou must begin thy repentance, for this
sin thou must be humbled, more then for actual sins; for this is the acting
brooding sin, this, as was said, is that which breeds and foments all our
trouble.

It is Souls conflict, page 192.
good to follow sin to the first Hold and Castle, which is corrupt nature;
Indeed the most apparent discovery of sin is in the outward carriage; we see
it in the fruit before in the root; as we see grace in the expression before in
the affection: But yet we shall never hate sin thoroughly, until we consider
it in the poisoned root, from whence it arises. That, which least troubles a
natural man, does most of all trouble a true Christian: A natural man is
sometimes troubled with the fruit of his corruption, and the consequents of
guilt and punishment, that attend it, but a true-hearted Christian, with
corruption it self; this drives him to complain with Saint Paul: O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me? not from the members only, but from this
body of death.

We must be humbled for actual sin, but that is not low enough; he that goes
no lower, does but, as if a man should rub his nose to make it leave bleeding.
As in good things, the cause is better then the effect; so in ill things the
cause is worse. There is more heat in the furnace, then in the spark; more
poison in the root, then in the branch; more bitterness in the spring, then in
the stream. It is not actual sin, that only or primarily defiles me, I must
look back to my first original, I was tainted in the spring of my Nature, that
is worse, then any of those filthy streams that come from it; my Nature is
subject to break out continually upon any, upon all occasions; pray we then,
Lord strike at the root, dry up the fountain in me.

Oh, Dr. S. S. C p. 195. 196.
if we could but one whole hour seriously think of the impure issue of our
hearts, it would bring us down upon our knees in humiliation before God. But we
can never, whilst we live, see so thoroughly as we should into this depth, nor
yet be humbled enough for what we see. How should it humble us, that the seeds
of the vilest sin, even of the sin against the Holy Ghost, is in us? And to
hear of any great enormous sin in another man, considering what our own
nature would proceed unto, if it were not restrained? we may see our own nature
in them, as face answering face; If God should take His Spirit from us, there
is enough in us to defile a whole world.

We cannot see the Dregs in the bottom, before we see the vessel shaken.
Sin may lie dormant, like a dog asleep, for want of an occasion to jog it,
and all that while, we may keep clean, as a swine in a fair meadow. We know
not our own hearts, till an occasion be offered, nor then neither, unless we
plough with Gods Heifer, till His spirit brings a light to ours. I hold thee
the longer at this point; Because it is the maine point. The more we consider
the height, the depth, the breadth, and the length of this misery, the more
shall we be humbled in our selves, and magnify the height, the depth, the
breadth, and the length of Gods mercy in Christ. Page 213.
The favorers of Nature, are always the enemies of Grace; This, which some
think and speak so weakly, and faintly off, is a more enemy to us then the
devil himself; a more near, a more restless, a more traitorous enemy, for
by intelligence with it, the devil does us all the hurt he does, and by it
maintains forts in us against goodness.

Therefore slight not sin here, nor thy misery by sin; According to those
steps thou can go down into this depth of thy misery by sin, thou shall
rise upward again to the greatness of Gods love in Christ, and so fetch
happiness out of that depth also. Here it is most true, one depth calls unto
another depth. If every step or Article in the first, (which is misery by
sin) do not more and more humble us in the sight of our misery; no Article in
the second part (which is our redemption by Christ) can comfort us.

Enlarge thy sin to the uttermost that thou may magnify the grace of
Christ. Lessen not, mince not sin, in hope of pardon. Little sin to forgive,
will make Christ little loved. The height and depth of mercy cannot be sounded,
but by the measuring line of misery.

We must be brought to David's acknowledgement; Psalm. 38. and 7.
There is no soundness in this flesh; no part of health or life in our sinful
nature, which was most fully signified, in that, which was most remarkable
(says Mr. Ainsworth Ainsw. Levit: 13. 15. Plurimum prof^cit, qui sibi plurimum
displicere didicit. Call. Inst. 3. 3. 20.
.) in the Law of Leprosy; That quick or sound flesh in the sore, should be
judged leprosy, and the man unclean; whereas, if the leprosy covered all his
flesh, he was pronounced clean. Hope not then in small sin, but in great
mercy; and that it may not seem small (for that is the fear) think thus; Can
that pollution be small, which has past through so many Iordans, yet cannot be
cleansed? Can that root be any other then a root of gall and bitt^rnesse, which
has defiled all, and all parts and faculties of All? Can that Stump be small,
that has thrust out such strong branches, and those so often cut, and he wed
at, and yet growing again? Can any spark be little that comes from such a
Treasury? Think on this, and think seriously, whether here be not cause of
loathing; take it actively, that thou should loath thy self, or passively,
that thy person should be loathed: Cause of loathing there is, and of
despairing also, in thy self, but not in another: Cause to go out of thy self
for mercy, no cause to despair of mercy: A great sinner has a mighty
Redeemer, but he will not roll himself upon Him, That is mighty, till he feels
himself to be such a sinner as we heard, a great sinner; which consideration
will drive the soul upon another rock, if we observe not how the Prophet
pleads for mercy upon this very ground, Because his sin is great Psalm. 25. 11.
. The glory of God is great in the salvation of great sinners: And by putting
confidence in Him, Who is mighty, we lay Glory and Majesty upon Him; for to
those words we may properly allude, Psalm. 21. 5.
His glory is great in thy salvation, honor, and Majesty have thou laid upon
Him. Our thoughts are straitened now, yet think we on the riches of His mercy,
Who, when we were as outcasts, to the loathing of our persons, in the day that
we were born, when we lay polluted in our own blood, said unto us at such a
time, as that (Ezekiel. 16.) Live. If we think k on this, we think on a Love,
which passes knowledge; on a mercy, whose height and depth, and breadth cannot
be measured: but if we can spread it upon our sin, as the the Prophet himself
upon the child, we shall find it equal to all dimensions.

And this is the Love of Him, who gave His Son; and the obedience of that
Son, who gave Him self for our ransom, a price that cannot be valued, for it
went to the worth of souls. And this He did, being made, as Luther said well,
the greatest sinner in the world, suffering what was due to such a sinner,
eternal wrath; not in respect of its duration, for it was of a short
continuance; but yet eternal, in respect of the excellent dignity of the
person suffering, who was the eternal Son of God.

And this He suffered, even such a weight of wrath, that He might free us from
the same, I mean, that wrath, which is to come, which has in it, the very life
and spirits of wrath. The present wrath, though it lie heavy for sin, yet it
is but for present, but the wrath to-come seizes upon the soul, and lies upon
it to all eternity Omnis peccator peccat in suo ae^^rno.
; And this is the life and spirit of this wrath, the thought whereof swallows
us up, as a drop is swallowed in the wide Ocean. This weight He suffered as the
greatest sinner, that He might save to the utmost those, that come unto Him.
Mark it, for the hour may come (says Disc. of Just. page 519.
Mr. Hooker) when we shall think it a blessed thing to hear, That, if our
sins, were the sins of Popes and Cardinals (ours are very great, having had a
clear sunshine of grace so long, and yet not walked as children of the Light)
the bowels of the mercy of God are larger. I must read his following words
too, I do not propose unto you a Pope with the neck of an Emperor under his
feet: A Cardinal riding his horse to the bridle, in the blood of Saints: but a
Pope or Cardinal sorrowful, penitent, disrobed, stripped not only of usurped
power; but also delivered and recalled from error; Antichrist converted, and
lying And shall I think that Christ will spurn at him? No, He suffered to the
utmost, that he might save to the utmost those that believe, whom he makes the
righteousness of God; re-instateth in the Paradise, which they lost, that
there they may live ever, with their Lord, partaking with Him of an exceeding
weight of glory.

And here (for the time would fail me, my understanding both) I would fix thy
thoughts, even at this well of Salvation. On this Rock I would settle thee, but
that my hands are too short, but under the shadow of thy wings, my hearty
desire is that thou may trust, and dwell for ever; then happy art thou, and
for ever happy, for this Rock is Christ, from Him issues water of life,
healing sin, washing away guilt; sweetning sorrow, swallowing up such a Death
(before mentioned) with all its issues. Christ, I say, get Him, thou have all,
a Sea, an Ocean of good things (as Clemens calls Him:) cleave to Him, He has
strength enough; enough (...) Protrep. p. 51.
against all assaults from within, from without. He and His righteousness
answers all, makes us firm and steadfast like an everlasting foundation, the
gates of hell, nor policy, nor strength shall prevail: All in Him, all of Him,
all from Him. And all this, as it is fully discovered in his Word (therefore
let it be thy delight, and thy counselor, and pray, that His Spirit still
would be thy Interpreter, for without Him, it is as a Book sealed) so was it
figured out and sealed unto us in Baptism. But before I come to that
Sacrament, we must look over what was said touching our inward frame of spirit;
Where we behold from what a dignity we are fallen, into what a depth of
misery; That the Scripture speaks not in vain, The J^r. 17 ^.
heart is desperately wicked. It is for hardness, like the nether mil-stone,
the Rock, the Adamant; It is in point of conversion or turning unto God, as
dead as a doore-naile; as unchangeable as the spots of a Leopard. It is in
point of that poison, malignity, and rage, that is in it, a Lion, a Dog, an
Adder, a Dragon, an Aspe, a Viper; in point of uncleanness, like a Leper, from
head to the foot polluted. All this and much more, That we may remember and be
confounded, and never open our mouth any more Ezekiel. 16. o.
, but in acknowledging our selves, unclean, vile, loathsome; and in magnifying
the abundant treasures of grace, and riches of mercies, in and through Christ,
freely offered and secured unto us, in Baptism, which now comes to be treated
of, etc.

CHAP. III.
Baptism; the outward; the inward; the secret and mysterious working thereof.

Baptism, wherein sacramently is (...) pretium Redemptionis (...) Lavacrum.
blood to justify, and water to sanctify; even all Christ in that sign of
water, to quicken, to renew, to sanctify. He bids us in this Sacrament, wash,
and be clean, as in the other, eat and live. There we put off the old man with
his lusts, and we put on the new man with his righteousness; here we are made
one with Christ, as a branch with the vine, as a member with the body; we are
Christ's, and Christ is ours; we are as truly united unto Him, as is my hand to
my arm, my arm to my shoulder, both to my head: as truly, I say, but more
strongly and firmly (for these may be parted) though my outward sense gives me
not a feeling of it: but such a near union there is, and it is sealed unto us
in Baptism: I mean not that (as was said of circumcision) outward in the
flesh, made with the Hand, sprinkling the face, which does but tie us to the
body in an outward profession, as a graft to the stock, from whence it has
neither life, nor nourishment; it does not put us into Christ, nor will it in
the day of visitation, and separation, difference us from the Heathen Jer. 7.
19.
, but exposes us rather to more wrath. And this outward Baptism, which,
without an inward work, cleanses not, is as much as the Baptist, that is
deputed by the Church, can administer. John, who was the greatest, that was
born of women Matthew. 11. 11.
, could reach his hand no further then to the outward water, and dipping
therewith. It is the Baptism made by fire and the holy Ghost, which reaches
to the heart, which cleanses and purges indeed. He or she who have received
this washing, who are purged from their old sins, may glory in their
fountain, opened for sin and for uncleanness Zech. 31. 1.
, and in their privileges, worthy to be gloried in, as we read a great
Emperor did, more then in his Imperial Crown e; for what greater glory is
there, then to Aust. de Civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 26.
be of the off spring of God, to receive the adoption of sons, and daughters;
and to have that worthy name to be called upon us; and such honor have all thy
Saints.

And now we are come to a great secret. The way how the Lord works, and upon
whom He works, is more secret, then is the wind, which blows where it
lists, etc. and as indiscernable to sense, as is the knitting of the bones in
the womb, and covering of them with flesh. What we cannot conceive, pray that
we may admire; what we cannot understand, pray we, that we may experimentally
find and feel, that, though we cannot comprehend, we may be comprehended.

The Lord knows who are his, and it is a great secret, yet His secret is with
them that fear Him; I mean (not always, and with all that fear Him) they know
that they are His, though yet all know it not, nor some at all times; and this
they know as not by extraordinary revelation, so, nor by prying into his
secret Decree, how there He has disposed of them. This will, as by fixing our
weak eye upon a strong object, blind us with light. It is a ventrous, and a
bold coming unto God, and most dangerous also, for if we climb up unto His
Decree, we shall fall into the gulf of despair, because we come unto Him
without a Mediator Hic sine m^diator^^es agitur, and disputatur de Dei
beneplacito ac voluntale, in quam sese Christus resert. Luther Psalm. 22. P. 337.


In doubts of Predestination, begin from the wounds of Christ; that is, from
the sense of Gods love in Christ, we should rise to the grace of election in
Him, before the world was. It was Luthers counsel, and he found it of force
against the devises of Satan De praedestinatione disputaturus incipe a Christi
vulneribus and statim Diabolus cum suis tentationibus recedet. Mel. Ad. in
Staupicii vita. p. 20.
.

The way to melt our hearts into a kind repentance for sin, is to begin from
the love of righteousness, and of God, all figured out in Baptism, as well as
in the Supper. And this also was Staupitius counsel to Luther, whereby he made
the practice of repentance ever sweet to him, whereas before nothing in all the
Scripture seemed so bitter Vera est ea poenitentia quae ab amore justitiae and
Dei incipit, dixit Staupitius, Quae vox ita alie in animo Lutheri insedit ut
nihil dulcius suerit deinceps e^ poenitentia, cum a^tea eidem in tota
Scriptura, nihil ^sset amarius. Mel. Ad. ibid. vita Staup.
.

But now suppose our case to be this, and it is most likely to be so; that we
find no work of the Spirit upon us, no change wrought by His renewing grace;
we are, as we were, not cleansed from our old sins: we have passed over this
Iorda^, we have gone into this water, and we are come out as unclean as before,
our hearts are not sprinkled. We see a price paid for us, and no less then the
price of the blood of God, yet we have not consecrated our selves to Him, who
has so dearly bought us, yet we have not accepted Him for our Lord (though we
are His purchase Romans 14. 9.
, and for this end He died and rose again) but other Lords rule over us: And
though we be called by His name, yet we walk in our own ways, serving diverse
lusts, as if we were our own, and not peculiarly His, who bought us with a
price. If, I say, this be our case, then Luthers counsel is observeable, which
is this, To enter into our closet, there to spread our selves before the Lord,
in humble confessions, as follows.

Oportet nos esse tales, (scilicet vere poenit^ntes) and non possumus esse
tales. Quid hic faciemus? Oportet ut cognito te tali non neges te talem, sed in
angulum vadas, and juxta consilium Christi, in abscondito ores patrem tuum in
coelis, dicens sine fictione: ecce optime Deus, poenitendum mihi praecipis, sed
tal^s sum ego miser, quod sentio me nolle neque posse; qua^^ tuis prostratus
pedibus, etc. Concione de poenitentia. An. 1518.
Lord, thou have set a fountain open, but to us it is sealed; Thou have bid us
wash and be clean; we cannot, we are no more able to wash our selves, then we
can take out the seeming spots in the Moon. Thou have said, When will it be?
etc. we say, it will never be, no, not when the Rocks fly in pieces, and the
earth shall be no more; but then it shall be, when thou, giving that thou
command, art pleased to make us, as thou will the heavens and the earth, all
new. Thou have commanded us to come unto Christ, that we might live; we cannot
come, no more then Lazarus could, by his own power, cast off his grave-clothes,
and turn up the mould from over his head, and stand up from the dead. We are
bound up in unbelief, as within gates of brass, and bars of iron.

Thou have said, Turn ye every one from his evil way; we say, we cannot turn
Lay down thy heart under the Word, yield it to the Spirit, who is, as it were,
the Artificer, and can frame it to a vessel of honor. Mr. Reynolds on Psalm.
110. pa. 42.
, no more then we can turn that glorious creature, which, like a Giant, runs
his course; so gyant-like we are, and so furiously marching on in our own ways
of sin and death. This is but part of our confession.

2. We must acknowledge also, that righteous is the Lord in commanding what is
impossible for man to do: Because the Lord did not make things so at first; He
gave us a great stock to deal and trade with, but like unfaithful stewards,
we have wasted the same, and so have disinabled our selves. Our inability was
not primitive and created, but consequent, and contracted; our strength was not
taken from us, but thrown from us. This is the principal point of confession;
our inabilitie comes out of our own will Read and observe with all diligence
Mr. Dearings words on the third Chapter to the Hebrews, ve. 8. Lect. 15. Sentio
me nolle neque posse: I find that I neither will, nor can, before. D'S. S. p.
215. (...), etc. To be feverish is not voluntary, but my intemperance, which
causes a fever, is voluntary, and for that I am deservedly blamed and pained.
No man chooses evil as evil. Transl. out of Clem. Alex. Stro. l. 1. p. ^28.
(...). Sin is my voluntary act. Loco la^d. l. 2 p. 294. C^sset volun^^s propria
and non erit inf^^nus.
originally, we will not be cleansed; as Tho: Joh. 20. 25.
so say we, in effect, not, we cannot, but we will not, we will deny the Lord,
that bought us: we will not come unto Him that we may live; so stiff are our
necks, and so hard our hearts, that we will not turn: for though out of the
very principles of Nature, we cannot but desire happiness, and abhor
misery, yet such a deordination, and disorder lies upon our Nature, that we
are in love with eternal misery, in the causes, and abhor happiness in the
ways that lead unto it, our will is the next immediate cause of sin; it puts
it self voluntarily into the fetters thereof; Necessity is no plea, when the
will is the immediate cause of any action.

Men's hearts tell them they might rule their desires if they would; For tell a
man of any dish, which he likes, that there is poison in it, and he will not
meddle with it; So tell him that death is in that sin, which he is about to
commit, and he will abstain, if he believe it to be so; if he believe it not,
it is his voluntary unbelief and Atheism. If there were no will, there would
be no hell, as one says. And this is the confession which goes to the core of
sin; and it must not be in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth, for
it is the truth. And if we can thus spread our selves before the Lord, if we
can willingly and uprightly Read our second Reinolds on Romans 7. p. 262.
own damnation, as our proper inheritance (to that the heart must be brought,
and it is the Lord that meekneth it so far) if we can willingly resign our
selves (for nothing is left to man but duty, and resignation of himself) it is
not Op^rtet pium animum velle nescire Dei secre tum superse, etc. Impossible
est eum perire, qui Deo gloriam tribuit, and eum justificat in omn^ opere and
voluntate sua. Lut. Psalm. 22. Christus faciet poenitentes quos jubet
poenitere; supplebit de suo, quod d^est de nostro. Lut. de Poenitent. 1. Pet.
18.
possible then that we should perish. He will make supply of His strength, what
is wanting in ours; He will give, what he commands; He will give clean waters;
He will create peace; He will strengthen our hand to lay hold on rich, and
precious promises. And then we cannot possibly be barren or unfruitful in the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ; we cannot but gird up the loins of our
mind, giving all diligence ( 1. Pet. 1 13. (...), etc. Show me a man, that
ever lea^nt an ordinary Trade, or lived upon it, with ordinary diligence: point
me to a man, that was bad, yet labored to be good; or, who was good, yet took
no pains to be better. Chrysostom. in 1. Ep. Ad Tim. cap. 1. Hom. 1. About
ordinary things, very easy matters ((...)) we take extraordinary pains: but
great and extraordinary things we think we may attain sleeping. Chrysostom. 4.
Tom. de Vita Monast. cap. 7.
ordinary diligence will not get ordinary preferment, much less will it a
Crown.) The Scripture says, Giving all diligence, waiting the sealing and
testimony of the Spirit, and walking in all the ways of righteousness,
whereto the Apostle presses at the end of every Epistle: for whom the Lord
justifies, He sanctifies; and if we find no fruits For the certainty of
faith, search your hearts; if you have it, praise the Lord. But if you feel
not this faith, then know that Predestination is too high a matter for you to
be disputers of, until you have been better scholars in the School-house of
Repentance and Justification. I wade in Predestination, in such sort as God
has opened it. Though in God it be first, yet to us it is last opened. De
elect^one judicandum est a post^riore, etc. Mr Bradford to some friends, who
were too scrupulous in point of Election, ascending up to Heaven to know, when
as they should have descended into themselves. Mr. Fox, p. 1505, and p. 1506.
thereof, we have cause to suspect that the Stock is dead; if no glimpse from
that shining light of our sanctification, so as men may see our good works
(which justify before men) then we do ill to boast of a burning light, which
is our justification, and more hid within. Nor is it a point Non est bone
solidaeque fidei sic omnia ^d voluntat^m Deireserre, and ita adulari, ad
unumquemque dicendo, Nihil fieri sine voluntate ejus, ut non intell^gamus
aliquid esse in nobis ipsis.
of sound faith, to put the weight of our salvation upon what shall be, shall
be, nothing can be done, without Gods will. That Is true, but this is Gods will
too 1. These. 4. 3.
, even our sanctification, and this belongs to us, even subordinately, to serve
Gods providence, with our own circumspect foresight, care and labor, knowing,
that His providence does not always work by miracle. I do not blame them, nay
I commend them, who say still, If God will, and refer all thither; but I
blame them much, who say, If God will, He will persuade me, He will convert me,
in the mean time they do just nothing. A fair speech this, to say, If God
will; but a soul practice, in the mean time to do our own will: we must
labor, we must endeavor our utmost, then say we, If the Lord will; if so we
do not, Gods will will be done upon us, we shall never do His will. To this
purpose Chrysostom. very excellently in his first Tom. thirteenth Sermon toward
the end. And so much touching the inward Baptism made by fire and the Holy
Ghost: The secret working of it in our hearts, and what way we are to take, in
case we feel not that inward power. Now I come to that in Baptism which
speaks to our Eye and Ear.

We had our Sureties in Baptism, who stood and promised in our steeds; which
solemn custom, and the fitness of it, I leave to the discission of the
Church, whereunto we may see reason to yield Mr. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.
Sect. 64 p. 336.
; leaving that, these two things are clearly figured out unto us in Baptism, a
death unto sin, a life unto righteousnese; and both these, in the death and
resurrection Romans 6. 2, 3.
of Christ, which are the two moulds wherein we are to be cast, that we may
come forth like Him: and there is a virtue, and power from both, to cast us in
and mould us thereto; for, if in the days of His flesh, there went virtue out
from even the edge of His garment to do great Cures; then, much more, from His
own self, and from these most principal and powerful actions, of His own
self, (His death and resurrection) there issues a Divine power from His death,
a power, working on the old man (or flesh) to mortify it; from His
resurrection, a power, working on the new-man (the spirit) to quicken it; a
power able to roll back any stone of an evil custom, lie it never so heavy on
us; a power able to dry up an issue, though it have run upon us twelve years
long, these are Bp. Andr. words not one grain too light. We see in that Element
the price paid for ^ Realus impii est pium nomen. Salv. 4. de Guber. p. 145.
See li. 3. p. 95. The Church is a choice people picked out and paled up from
these, whom the Apostle places, without* but there is yet a more choice and
peculiar people, as Clemens ^ calls them, after whom we must walk more
peculiarly, which we cannot do but by offering violence b to our selves, that
we may walk worthy of His calling.
us, and the equity hereof, that we should glorify Him, whose purchase we are.
How should we live in sin, that lay so heavy upon the soul of Christ, and
could not be purged, but by the blood of God?

And how should we not be wholly consecrated to that Lord, who so dearl bought
us, in whose Name, we were all baptized (and that is to consecrate our selves
up, as not our own but another) and whose Name is called upon us. It is (...).
p. 500
a worthy and honorable Name indeed, and it must be honorably answered. It
was a sad, and wise reproof, which the Father gives to one, who walked not
decently nor in order: Why do thou defile that good and honorable name of
Christianisme (...).
?

But I must not insist upon this, though nothing (except Him, who leads into
all truth) can be more flexanimous, more persuading then is this worthy Name,
which is called upon us; we who carry Gods Name, how exactly should we carry
our selves! what manner of persons ought such to be! choice persons, for we
have a choice Name. There is not a more natural request, then, what we would
be, such to be; what we would be in Name, such in deed, that is, that having
obtained so excellent a Name, we would be even what our Name imports, even
such, That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in us, and we in
Him, (...). S^r. lb. 6 p. 485.
2. These. 1. 12. This is our engagement, and by the solemnest vow, that ever
was taken. And therefore it is called, The answer of a good Conscience toward
God; for then we entered into covenant, as God with us, of grace and salvation,
so we with Him, of faith and repentance, as He to be our God all-sufficient, so
we to walk before Him and be perfect.

We have by Christ, a right to, an interest in a much better covenant; and now
we must look to ours; we cannot think that God is bound, and we loose.
Religion is nothing else, according to the denotation and meaning of the word,
but a gathering-up, and binding of us fast to God. If we look that God should
stand fast to us, we must cleave to Him; If we break our bands, and cast away
our cords, we must look to be broken. There was never any covenant more
solemnly made and ratified then this in Baptism, nor in breaking whereof there
is more danger: And yet an oath despised, and a covenant broken with man, has
been severely punished, as we read Ezekiel. 17. 15, 16. And as the whole
Christian world feels at this day, for it smarteth yet, for that breach of
league long since made with the Turk; whereby they both lost the day, and
their honor; in both an irrecoverable loss. And can we think to prosper or
escape, that do such things? or shall we break the covenant of our God, and be
delivered? keep we covenant here, through Christ we can, and if we do it in
sincerity, that mantle will cover many defects. And we are the more likely to
do it, the more we see how false our hearts are; how ready to break all bands,
and to cast away all cords; for this our impotencie truly apprehended, will
make us fear always, and cleave the faster to Him, in whom our strength is,
keeping our selves (as the Apostle counsels) in the Jude 20.
love of God; building up our selves in our most holy faith, praying in the
Holy Ghost. Such a prayer will (as the Horsleech sucks out corrupt Preces
per^inacissima cura^um birudo. M l. vit. Luth. p. 139. etc.
blood, it is Luthers comparison) consume our cares, our fears, our sorrows,
our sins. This by the way. My chief scope is here, to put to our
consideration; what a straight and binding cord Religion is; and better we
cannot see it, then in Baptism, wherein we are wholly consecrated (...). Clem.
Alex. Pr^^r^p^. page 30.
to the Lord, that bought us.

1. There we profess our selves made the members of Christ. How can the
thoughts thereof, but stir us up, to give our members weapons of
righteousness unto holiness? shall we take the member of Christ, and give it
to our lust? There is great weight in those words.

And if members of Christ, then members one of another Ephesians. 4. 25.
; And then we suffer as members, when we suffer not in our own bodies; we
suffer in compassion, as others in their passions, such a sympathy and
fellow-feeling there is; In Saint Paul's Heb. 10. 13. Heb. 13 3. Lege Chrysostom.
in 1 Cor. c 8. o. in ep Ad Colos. cap. 4. Hom. 12. remember my bonds, Verse 18.
Perniciocissime la buntur quod fratrum infirmitatem nullius pensi habent. Call.
Inst. lib. 3. c. 19. sect. 10.
construction it is ever thus; If ^his brothers back be pinched, it is my back,
I am pi^ch^d too; If his eye be offended, it is as the apple in mine, I am
offended too; If his heart is sadded, it is my heart, I am sadded too: ye are
members one of another, and then ye are pitiful and merciful. As we have
received, so we must return, according to our measure, mercy for mercy;
ble^^^ng for blessing; nay, blessing for cursing, knowing that we are thereunto
called, that we should inherit a blessing 1 Pet. 3. 9.
.

I know, said Luther Ignorantiam meam facile feret, and ignoscet mihi Ecclesia
Dei, Regina illa misericordiae and cujus viscera sunt merae remissiones
peccatorum. Luth. Prae fatio in postilla^. (...). Chrys^n Act Apost ca. 21.
Hom. 44. o.
, my ignorance the Church will bear with, and my faults she will pardon, being
the Queen of mercy, and nothing else but bowels and forgiveness of sins; so
like the Body is unto her Head, for she has the Spirit of Christ. And so we
know the true distinguishing property of the true Church. In this are the
children of God known, They love the Brotherhood; They show bowels of mercy
toward all.

2. In Baptism we are made the sons and daughters of God, and inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven; Behold, says the Apostle, what manner of love 1 John
3. 1.
here is? our thoughts are too short. We are now the sons of God, and it does
not appear what we shall be, but when He shall appear, we shall be like Him:
our thoughts cannot reach to this brightness; our eyes are dazzled with the
very conceit of this glory; so, exceeding it is: But this is clearly evident,
He that has this high prerogative, here to be called the son of God; that
has this hope to be changed hereafter, as from glory to glory, and to inherit
a Kingdom, which shall never have end (the glory whereof, as much exceeds the
glory of all other kingdoms, as does the light of the Sun, exceed the light
of the smallest rush-candle) He, I say, that has this hope, purges himself,
even as He is pure Verse 3.
. He cannot think of such a Kingdom, but he must have strong motions
thitherward, and after holiness, for nothing unclean can enter there: Hopes
on high, will raise the thoughts on high.

3. We solemnly promised in Baptism, and received that Sacrament as our
presse-money, binding us to perform, even presently to begin, so soon as we
could discern of good and evil, to serve the Lord in all well-pleasing, who
chose us to be soldiers, against His and our enemies, the Devil, and our
Lusts, which all fight against our souls; And through faith in His name, that
great engine, which spoyleth principalities, and powers, we should do
valiantly, as good soldiers of Jesus Christ 2 Timothy 2. 3.
.

But here we take a scale of our misery, and look how low we are fallen, and
what darkness lies over our hearts, when the most of us take part even with
the adversary, that hates us, delighting in nothing more, then in the shame
and pain of the creature. We fear him not (he that fears, he fears to
sin) who made no scruple to tempt our Savior Christ, whom himself called
the Son of God; And cannot be terrified (though he be in chains, therefore
restrained; else he would deal with the world as with Jobs house, and with us
and ours as with Jobs goods, children, and body) from doing ill, and all that
is contrary to God, and Goodness, no not by the fearful word of the Almighty:
How great then is our folly and madness, who hold communion and fair quarter
with such an enemy, who delights in proud wrath! yet such is our darkness, so
we do. It is a paradoxe indeed, clean crossing conceit and reason; That we
should fear a Bear and (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Ad Gentes 21.
a Lion, yet not fear the Devil (for then we should fear to sin;) Hist of
the world. first B. c. 11. sect. 8 o.
That we should be better and unplacable enemies to our enemies, and yet hold a
league with Satan, yea and account him a familiar (so some do) who yet is the
grand enemy of mankind. Ibid sect. 6.
And now what shall we say to those unworthy wretches, who are in a league with
this unclean spirit, and do think they can impale him in a circle (a circle
which cannot keep out a mouse) and so insconce themselves against this great
monster; and think they can terrify him also; whereas in very truth, the
obedience which the Devil seems to use, is but thereby to possess himself of
the bodies, and souls of them, who hold such familiarity with him: such it
is, and so willing a subjection and vassallage it is, as if the Lord of the
creatures counted it his glory to be in slavery and bondage to proud wrath
Prove. 21. 24.
.

I cannot but remember here, how sadly and feelingly Saint Basil Tom. 2. p.
418. Regulae fusius disput. Inter. 2. (...).
complains at this point. Thus he speaks. Horror and amazement takes hold of
me, when I consider, how good a Lord and Master we have, how great and
magnificent a benefactour, yet, notwithstanding, how little He is feared, how
poorly served, how unwillingly, if at all, obeyed: On the contrary, how cruel
and devouring an adversary the Prince of darkness is, yet how much feared, how
cheerfully served, how willingly o-obeyed. We are broken away from our just
and righteous Master, who created, who redeemed us, and have sold our selves to
a proud Lord, whose lusts we do, though he does all against us to the extent of
his chain, all the hurt he can, all our days, by all means. And (which
aggravates our defection and base servitude) for what a poor reward have we
done this? For a poor bait of profit, or pleasure, which is taken with
delight, but presently will be gravel in the teeth, rottenness in the bowels,
bitterness in the latter end; For so poor a thing, such a scrap as this, we
are revolted and gone. And this is the great condemnation, yea more; It will be
the great reproach, scorn and taunt, which in that great day, the Devil will
cast even (...).
upon Cbrist Himself, and upon man, thus beguiled and revolted; for this will
be the scorn and taunt;

Here is the man created in Thy Image, bought with Thy blood, fed by Thee,
preserved by Thee all His days; This reasonable man, have I (Thine, and his
professed enemy) gained from Thee, and not with strong wrestlings neither, but
as easily, as one can win a child with an apple. I offered him some profit (a
poor and shrunken commodity) he eagerly ran after it: I presented him pleasure
(but masked and under a veil) he embraced it; he greedily swallowed that bait
(and Hell with it, sin is but Hell disguised, as pleasure is but pain
unmasked) and so was content to be my slave for ever; my slave, who never
wrought him any good, or willed him any, but all the ill and hurt I could: For
the love of such a Master, was this man content to have his ear boared, that
he might not depart from me for ever.

Thus Saint Basil complained, and this he adds more, which is more then all the
rest; That the consideration of this reproach and taunt, which the Devil will
cast upon Christ and the man of His right hand, was more astonishing to him
then thoughts of Hell it self: For the thoughts (...).
what a good Lord we neglected, and how cruel a Lord we served, and what wages
we had for our work, will be more tormenting to the damned in hell, then will
be the pains therein. But to return, and to say as they do, who have better
learned Christ;

We must know 1. That Satan is a devouring enemy, still watching our
destruction. 2; As his name is, such is he, he will accuse us for those very
sins, he now tempts us unto, and will upbraid them to us, unto the confusion
of our faces. 3; That we have no means to avoid his baits, but by flying from
them; nor have we any other means to impale, and insconce our selves against
this Monster, but in the Name of the Son of God, the only Name that
terrifies him indeed, being called upon and believed on in Truth; And then by
flying from and avoiding his baits those great Enchanters, whereby he
bewitcheth us, beguiles and overcomes so many.

And here it is not impertinent, to remember an useful answer to a grave and
weighty question proposed to an honest and learned Isid. Pelus. lib. 2. ep.
164.
friend by way of wonder. The question is this; How it comes to pass, That the
devil, now wounded in his head, and spoiled by our great Captain and Prince of
Salvation, should yet prevail so mightily in the world, and carry so many
captive as he does, and this daily, which is not usual with a spoiled enemy to
do? This is the question, and the wonder; His good friend answers; And do you
wonder at this, says he, Truly, I wonder not at all; for what wonder is it,
that an ever diligent and watchful enemy, who neglects no time nor occasion,
should spoil a negligent people, secure in their victory, and now (as
soldiers drunk with prosperity,) snorting in their tents? What wonder, to see
soldiers, who can endure no 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
hardness, who will entangle themselves with affairs of this life, who will
sleep in their trenches, though the enemy be at their backs, who neglect all
necessary succors, what wonder, I say, to see such fall even before a wounded
enemy? The Lion is strong, the Serpent subtle, and yet, if the Lion be a
sleep, and the serpent chil'd with cold, they may be overcome as easily, as the
weakest and simplest creatures. It is an easier matter to encounter with
twenty ships lying in harbor, whose Mariners are a sleep in their Cabbins,
or drinking in Taverns, then with five prepared for the fight; This was the
observation of a great Commander Hist of the World, book 3. chap. 11. sect. 9.
p. 117.
, and of great use here; and no wonder in all this. Nay, rather this were to be
wondered at, and it were strange indeed; if we, doing none of those things,
which becomes soldiers and conquerours (they stand upon their guard, and
keep watch still, knowing that a wounded enemy bitetls deadly, and rages
furiously) should be able to maintain, and make use of our victory against a
mighty and now raging enemy, who moves every stone, and imployeth all his
Methods or Stratagems against us, This were strange indeed; Thus the Author
answers the question, and takes of the wonder. Now hear his counsel: If you
demand then, what is to be done by us in this case, I make further answer.
Because our adversary, though he is fallen, and broke, yet boasts great
things, and is bold in his confidence, and takes all his advantage from our
neglects and carelessness Nostris peccatis Barbari for^^s sunt: Nostris vitiis
superamur, Hier lib 2. ep. o.
; We must keep our watch (...), etc.
, we must labor, we must endure hardness, we must implore Gods help; we must
do whatsoever is to be done, we must fly from the devil, and unto that Name,
that strong hold, whereto the righteous fly and they are safe. If thus we do
not, we betray our succors, and the victory, our Lord has purchased; we
forfeit our own peace, and our souls into the enemies hands: And then we have
nothing, whereof to complain of the enemies strength, but much whereof to
accuse our own extreme folly, and supine negligence. This is his counsel, and
because it is very good, we will hear the like from a latter divine, a very
devout Spaniard Avila's Spirit. epist. page 30.
. Be not negligent and secure, having so watchful and diligent an adversary;
for if thou be, thou art instantly undone: If they who watch best, have enough
to do to defend themselves, what do you think will become of wretchlesse
persons, but that they should be entirely overcome?

We must then keep our watch, and keep about us our armor, and keep close to
our strong-hold, we must give all diligence to avoid those great enchanters,
whereby our enemy bewitcheth us, and overcomes so many. These enchanters are,
1. The glory, pomp or lusts of the world, from without: 2. The lusts of our
own flesh, from within. The one, as he once showed in the twinkling of an Eye,
so it passes away in the like moment of time. It is fitly called a fancy, and
as fitly translated pomp Acts 25. 23. (...).
; for as a thought or fancy, this pomp passes away, and by us, even like
castles and steeples on a pageant, and so it is gone; but the glory of the next
life is the pleasures at His right hand for evermore.

2. The lusts of the flesh are the great tempters. All the hurts Satan and the
world do us, is by correspondence with our selves. All things are so far
under us as we are above Te vince and tibi mundus victus est.
our selves. Satan for the most part boweth us to what the weakness of our
nature does incline; he sails ever with the wind, he fitteth such temptations
as are most agreeable to our humors and desires. Our nature helps to act
Satan's part, he does but set the bias stronger. Nature has a supply of
wickedness (as a Serpent of poison) from it self, thence a spring to feed it.

Great cause, we should fear always, for always we meet with snares, and
always ready to be caught with them, and the devil watches the occasion. And
great cause Semper imminet occasioni.
we should wind up our hearts to God, that we may be wise in His wisdom,
strong in His strength.

Lastly, in the day we were baptized, we avouched Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 19.
, the Lord to be our God, to walk in His ways, and to keep His Commandments;
And the Lord has avouched us that day to be his peculiar people.

The Lord Christ has obeyed and suffered to make our bonds of obedience the
stronger, not to abate us an ace of duty: He has vindicated His Law, from the
vain glosses of the Pharisees, from that, which was said of old; whence we have
learnt, That His Law pulls out the very core See Hist. of the World. lib. 2.
chap. 4. sect. 7. p. 232. and sect. 11. p. 237.
of sin; and that, whereas man's Law does but bind the hand and the tongue,
Gods Law binds the heart, and orders the secret motions of the same. The
Philosopher Angusta est justitia ad legem justum esse. See Isid. Pel^s. lib. 2.
^p. 138. Love constraines more under the Gospel, then fear restrained under
the Law. Ibid.
could say, It is but a narrow and scanty justice, which extends no further,
then man's Law. Few offenders there are which come within the Magistrates
circuit, and they that come, are not all taken; some, and they not a few, break
out of the cob-webbe by force and some by favor. But the Law of God is perfect
and exceeding broad, it reaches to all persons, and to the words and actions,
and thoughts too of all the sons of Adam: not a syllable can pass, not a
thought stray, not a desire swerve from the right way, but it falls within
danger, and is liable to the penalties. Thence it is, that the greatest and
hardest work of a Christian is least in sight, which is the well-ordering of
his heart. And a good Christian begins his Repentance, where his sin begins,
in his thoughts, which are the next issue of his heart. God counts it an
honor, when we regard His All-seeing eye so much, as that we will not take
liberty to our selves in that, which is offensive to Him, no not in our hearts,
wherein no creature can hinder us.

It is an argument that we fear as we ought before the God of Heaven, when we
forbear the doing of that, which, if we should do, it were not possible that
man should understand or condemn it; as Lev. 19. 14.
is the cursing of the deaf, which the Deaf man hears not; and the putting a
stumbling block before the blind, which the blind perceives not. But the
Lord hears, and He sees, for He made the Ear and the Eye; and Him shall thou
fear, for His eyes behold, His eyelids try the children of men Psalm. 11. 4.
. And this is the Law, which stands charged upon us, and through Him, by whom
we can do all things, we can keep the same Law, with our whole heart, in an
acceptable manner, checking the first motions of sin; discerning not beams
only, but moats also; light and flying imaginations, and abasing our selves
for them, and by degrees casting them out, as hot water the scum, and as the
stomach does that which is noisome. And because they press upon the true
Christian, as Flies in Summer, incumbring always, over-powring him sometimes;
therefore is he moved to renew his interest daily in the perfect righteousness
of His Savior.

The deceitfulness of his heart still inciting and drawing back from God, and
His perfect Law; and his readiness to break covenant, makes him the more
watchful over his heart, and careful to bind himself daily as with new
cords; To Jude 2^.
build himself up in his most holy faith, to pray in the holy Ghost, and to
keep himself in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ
unto eternal life: for it is a standing Rule, That Gods commands are not the
measure of our power, but the Rule of our duty, the sum of our debt, the
matter of our prayers, the scope of our strife Mouline, See Hist. of World. B.
2. Ca. 4. Sect. 13. p. 240.
.

But we must ever note this, which is, that there is in the heart of every true
Christian a disposition answering every Iota and tittle of Gods Salv. d Eccles
Cathol. o.
Law. They have the same Spirit in their hearts, which is in the Law: so soon
as that Spirit made a change in them, they could not but then exceedingly love
the Law; and where love Chrysostom. in Romans cap 4 o Si amor est, vincit omnia, etc.
Chrysostom. de past. bono. Sermon. 40. Haec omnia dura videbuntur ei qui non amat
Christum. Amemus Christum and facile videbitur omne difficile; Brevia putabimus
universa quae longa sunt. Nisi vim feceris, coelerum regna non capies. Hier. Ad
Eustoc^ium Ep. 17. l. 2. p. 207. Prima regula in culta Dei ut ipsumdiligamus,
non potest Deus vere diligi, quin sequatur hunc affectum membra omnia and omnes
parts, etc. Cal^^n Dan. c 9. v. 4 (...). Chrysostom. in c. 29. Genesis Hom. 55.
is (that great Commander) there is diligence, and activenesse in all the ways
of obedience, joy also and peace in obeying. For in case they are opposed and
persecuted for their love and ready obedience, they have gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, all armor of proof, whereby they are made
resolute and patient to bear, according to their wise choice, affliction,
rather then Job 36. 21.
iniquity. For this we must add to the rest and note it, God communicates His
common gifts diversely and scatteringly; this man has the gift of tongues, that
man a gift of prophecy; one man has this, another that: he that is lowest
cannot say, but the Lord has dispenfed unto him some grace, and he that is
highest cannot say he has all. But now for these graces, which make a man well
pleasing to God, (they are all freely bestowed) these, as one said, love
neighborhood, Mr. G.
are in a continual conjunction. They are freely bestowed, and altogether, as
it were in one lump, not scatteringly, as the Spora^es (Islands in the Sea
scattered here and there, here a little ^ye of Land, and there all Sea again)
Sponsa Christi ^rca est Testamenti, etc. Hier. ep. 17. li. 2. p. 205.
this man has not faith, and that man hope; one has not love, and another
patience: But he that has one, he has all; and he that has not all, has
none. These graces put or spring forth together, though all may not have equal
growth, nor show themselves alike operative. It is certain, he that has a
grounded hope, has a lively faith, an unfeigned love, he has patience,
meekness, gentleness; or if any of these be missing, th^re is weeping and
mourning, and hanging down the head, for the lack of this grace, as there was,
when there was a Tribe lacking in Israel Judge. 21. 3.
. There is no chasme or gaping in the life of a true Christian. It cannot be
that he should be one while like firm land, which cannot be moved, and then
again, as weak as water; or like the raging Sea, which fometh out mi^e and
dirt; it cannot be that he should one while glory in the Name of Christ, and
another while, defile, pollute and dishonor that worthy Name by which he is
called. These gifts of the Spirit, though many, yet are called in the singular
number a Fruit, because they have but one root, and do put forth like grapes in
clusters, and come or draw together like the rings in a Chain. It is a report
concerning our Spice, that all proceeds from one Tree; one kind is the root,
another the bark, a (...) Galat. 5. 22.
third is the fruit enclosed within a fourth: so they say, but so it is not, it
is fabulous, yet the moral is good; all the fruits of righteousness, in what
kind soever, are from one root of righteousness, and though diverse in kind,
yet so one as but one fruit, as was said. This may kindle our desire to be
rooted in Christ, then we cannot be barren or unfruitful.

And this may teach thee, child, how strait a Band Religion is, and the
solemness of that covenant we entered into by Baptism: How complete a true
Christian is, and how fully armed and furnished every way answering that
worthy Name which is called upon him.

If we look a few leaves back, we may gather up the sum of all under these
three heads.

1. The greatness of our misery by sin, which we have followed to its
strong hold, or first original. 2. The abundant grace of God, through His
Son Jesus Christ, stopping that bloody Issue, and pardoning iniquity,
transgression, and sin. 3. The Band of our Duty; all figured out in Baptism:
So far we are gone.
CHAP. IIII.
An Introduction thereto. Though the Branches of sin are lopped in Baptism,
where it receives its deaths wound, yet the live Root remains; what the
bitter fruits there from; how kept under from spreading too far, and running
forth wild.

AND now, leaving this inward frame of our revolting heart, I mean the
fountain of original impuritie, or the body of death, as Paul calls it, to our
most retired thoughts, that so it may stir up to continual watchfulness and
humiliation; I say, leaving that fountain or body of sin, I come to the members
issuing thence, as the stream from the fountain, or as branches from the root:
For though the current thereof be, in a good measure, stayed and stopped in
Baptism, by the sanctifying power of Christ's saving blood, yet it does more or
less bubble up in our rebellious nature: Though the branches are hewed and
lop't, yet they trust out again from their bitter root: Though the body of
sin be mortified, so as the power and dominion thereof is subdued, yet the
life thereof is prolonged Dan. 7. 12.
; and the power thereof is (as the kingdom spoken of by Daniel Dan. 2. 42.
) partly strong, and partly broken. So as here is still matter of our strife
and combat, as against an enemy dwelling within our Land, like the Canaanite
in the border of an Israelite, to vex, exercise, and prove us. I cannot reckon
up the least part of that wild fruit, which springs forth of this our so
fruitful stumpe, bound up fast within our earth, as with a band of Iron, and
Brass; But some three or four or more branches I shall point at, which run
most wild to the dishonor of our outward man, and disturbance of our inward
peace. And these I shall discover unto thee, that thou may est be most wary of
them, and ever well provided and armed against them, as follows; The first is*

. 1. Pride.
. 1. I mean not that privy pride, springing up from a secret and unsuspected
fountain; even from an holy zeal, godly duties, good actions, not properly
ours, yet flesh and blood will lay claim unto them; And has its seat in a
sanctified soul, making it proud, that it is not proud, even of its humility.
And therefore does the same soul make its watch the stronger.

I mean that pride, whose root is discernable; and whose fruit soonest
shoots forth and declares it self, defiling our outward members and inward
faculties; lifting us up so much the higher in a windy conceit; the emptier and
lighter we are upon the balance, and the more wanting. And this, some call the
Woman's sin. Indeed it is most unworthy, and unbeseeming a man; the truest
testimony of weakness and vanity. But yet, Since there is (as one notes L.
Verulam Essays. Act. 12. 63.
) in humane nature, more of the fool, then of the wise; we must grant it to be
the Man's sin also, perhaps not so generally his, nor in the same degree. For,
if we do grant, as ordinarily it seems so, and is so concluded; That the
inward powers of Judgment, and Reason, are weaker in women, then in men; we
must needs grant, That pride, as it is (till of late) more ordinarily
discovered in that sex, then in the other; so it is, for the same reason, more
incident unto them. They may have less inward worth, and beauty to commend
them, and therefore do they the more paint, and adorn the outward. Likely it
is, that they do not so well discern the simple and naked truth of things, and
therefore delight themselves in feathers, toys, flattering conceits, false
valuations.

They are not so well able to study nature, as men may and can, therefore may
they (it is not proper to say they may, and yet more excuseable it is in them,
then in men) they may please themselves with polished Art (at the best but
natures Ape,) rather then with that, which is simple and natural; with very
app^arances, affectation, and pomp, rather then with reality and substance;
rather with that which is borrowed, then with that, which is proper and
natural.

Lastly, they may not be so able, to study themselves; The principles they
consist of; The foundation they stand on; The vileness of the body; The
excellent worth and dignity of the soul; The faculties of both body and soul;
The excellency of that end, for which they received them. Where these defects
and wants are (as in all they are; for naturally in all, as was said, there is
more of the fool then of the wise) and the more or less they are in man or
woman, accordingly will he and she, more or less reckon and account of
falsehood, and outward appearances, before verities; Lying and base vanities,
before realitie and substance; and so are paid accordingly, with wind and
counterfeit ware, instead of current commodity; for these vain conceits, and
false valuations will prove but poor and shrunken things in the end. For from
hence it is (and so we may go through all things that do lift up man and blow
up that bubble) hence it is, That our clothes, made for necessity and ornament,
yea to make us humble, and thankful (humility and thankfulness still go
together) do prove so contrary to those ends, priding us up in our own
conceits, and dishonouring us in the eyes of others.

Hence it is that we are such Fashionists: so fantastic and changeable that
way, That the Tailor can as hardly fit us, as the Plut. Conv. 7. sapient.
man (so goes the fable) could fit a garment for the Moon.

Hence it is, That our hair made to cover our scalp, does in a windy humor to
a base fashion, cover our face, and that part of it, which of any should not be
covered: So that which was made for an ornament, (and we should find it so, if
we wanted but an eye-brow) is so nourished, and let to spread out so, that it
makes the person look like afurie.

Hence it is, that we do tread like the Antipodes (if the word were proper)
clean contrary to nature, hiding that, which should be covered, and covering
that which should be hid.

Hence it is, That our eyes, feet, fingers, our whole gesture and deportment,
do make so plain a Commentary upon the heart, That (if I may apply it so) he
that runs may read the present humor and state of the mind and will: so
great a discovery of our dissimulations, the gesture is; for that speaks to the
Many have secret hearts, and transparent countenances. Essays 21. p 128.
eye, as the tongue to the ear.

Hence it is, That the inward beauty is so neglected, and the outward so set
out, and highly prized; when as beauty and strength will be much wasted by one
fit of an Ague; yea (...), etc. Basil. in Hex. Hom. 5.
quite gone in one night.

Hence it is, That Knowledge does puff up, That Learning makes proud: which is
not Knowledge indeed nor Learning, but our ignorance and going back wards, a
windy and flatuous conceit of both. True Learning the more it is, and the
truer it is, the more it humbles, the closer it lies, the less noise it makes.

Hence it is, That the rich man's wealth is his Prove. 18. 11.
Strong City, and as an high wall; for all this is but in his own conceit.

Hence it is, That men in eminency of gifts and place, are so taken up with the
person, for a time put upon them; That they both in look, and speech, and
gesture show, that they forget their natural condition; That they must lay
aside their persons and dye like men; and give account, as stewards, what they
have gained.

Lastly, hence it is, That our own Righteousness seems so lovely in our
eyes, when as it is but like filthy rags and dung, such things we may not
otherwise name, so filthy they are; And were it considered, it would help much
to cast a spewing upon our glory Hab. 2. 16. 1. Act. 8. 9.
.

Thus we have seen, what it is, and whence it is, that blows up the vain
heart of man, making it think of it self (...).
above what is meet i.

And thence we may fetch helps, and remedies against its pride; for if it is
but a vain opinion, a flattering conceit, a false valuation of things, that
does deceave us; we must labor to rectify our judgments, and to understand
the truth, and realitie of things, that we may not be deceived.

Secondly, if it be the want of the right knowledge, and true understanding of
our selves, that makes us overvalue our selves, we must learn to understand
and read our selves, (a great and an hard lesson An hard thing to know
ourselves. Not only the eye of the body, but of the mind too, wants this noble
faculty, of looking inward, etc. Translated out of St. Basi. Hex. Hom. 9. p.
103
) and our own principles, so as we may know our selves to be but men: poor
weak men, deceitful upon the balance, and very wanting; The sum is, we
must study how to rectify reason, and to take a true scale, and a right
estimate of our selves and things, not as they seem and appear to be, but as
they are indeed at first.

. 1. Is it my apparel that would puff me up, because my cloth is of a finer
thread then some others is? This is a false valuation: for the sheep had it on
its back before my self, yet was it but a sheep then, and the same now: so
Sr. Thomas More would prick the bladder, and let out that windy conceit Hanc
ovis olim gestavit, nec aliud tamen interim quam ovis suit. Vtop. lib. 2. page
166.
.

. 2. Is it the gorgiousnesse of my apparel, the pomp of the same, which would
puff me up? That were but a Act. 25. 23. (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Religi. 601.
a. Mirantur quenquam esse quem exiguaegemmulae aut lapilli dubious oblectet
fulgor, cui quidem stellam aliquam atque ipsum denique solemn liceat intueri.
Ibid.
fancy, and a windy conceit also. A poor ornament it is, which is put on and
off. And a windy conceit it is, and most unworthy of a man, to be taken with
the shining or glittering of some Gold-lace, or Jewel, who can point to the
earth below him, to the Lilly there; And to the heaven above him, to the Sun
and Stars Prove. 18. 11.
there; so the same Author would let out that wind also.

. 3. Is it the portion a man has in the world above his brethren, which
blows up the bubble? What is all that more then in conceit? neither a strong
city, nor an high wall: they cannot deliver in the day of trouble; It is but a
mere conceit, we think they can. And what is a fat and full possession of
these outward transitory things; if there be leanness in the soul; if that be
blown up with these vanities? As certainly it must be so, and can be no
otherwise, when these outward things have stuffed and crammed our hearts, so
that they are made fat, and blown up with them. An heart filled with this wind
(...), etc. Nazianz ep. 18. 52. page 781. You may better trust the wind, or
letters written in water, then man's prosperity. And so uncertain it is, that
we may with a speedier course hasten to God, where is certainty, and no shadow
of change.
, is as barren of true grace (pride and grace are incompatible) as the surface
of that earth is, where these treasures are, which is as barren the
naturalists) as the parched places of the desert. They are great snares and
intanglements, and impossible they should be otherwise, without a great measure
of grace from God (with whom all things are possible) and watchfulness over
our selves: which consideration should rather humble us.

Better they cannot make a man; therefore the Heathen would not have them
called Good Things: But worse ordinarily, they make him; more proud against
God; more insolent and oppressing over those that are below and inferior unto
him; And very unsatisfiable they are (and therefore disquieting also like
thorns to the head:) we may as well undertake to fill a bag with wisdom, a
chest with virtue; as our hearts with gold, silver, riches, high room with any
earthly things, no reason those things should puff us up; or if there be reason
in it, it is from our wisdom, which must be ceased from Pro. 23. 4, 5.
; for why should we let our eyes fly upon that, which is not; so uncertain and
fleeting it is; and being grasped after and enjoyed, does press us below our
selves, even lower then the place whence it was dug.

. 4. Is it an hairy bush of vanity, let out to spread beyond its reasonable
and due proportion, that would blow me up? That were a monstrous conceit; How
can that adorn me, which has proved an halter? or how can that commend me,
which the Spirit has concluded to be my 1 Cor. 11. 14. (...). Hom. 26.
shame. A point of great impudency it is to fight with, or go against and
contrary not only to our selves, but to nature also, says Chrysostom upon
those words.

Is it my pleated, curled, or cut hair, that makes me think of my self above
what is meet? That is a very affrighting conceit, for the Lord can make our
head of hair to take the form sometimes of a great Snake, sometimes of many
little Serpents; as some in Poland and Germany have found and felt, witness
the bloody drops their hair yielded being pricked, and the loss of their eyes
if they cut it; says the learned professor of physic in Padua. And methinks
says Mr Bolton's four last things. p. 40.
Mr Bolton, (from his hand I have it) our monstrous fashionists both male and
female; the one for nourishing their horrid bushes of vanity; the other for
their most unnatural and cursed cutting their hair, should every hour fear
and tremble lest they should bring that same noisome horrible disease in the
hair (called the plica) upon their own heads, and amongst us in this kingdom.

5 Is it the putting off the hat at a distance which lifts a man Sic leve, sic
parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum subruit aut reficit. Hor. lib. 2. epist.
up? or the vain applause of the ignorant multitude? He must thank his money
for that O nummi vobis hidantur honores Juven. (...), etc. Pindar. isth. ode 2.
(...). Eurip. orest. 30. (A rich man shall have many heralds)
. It is ordinary with some to gaze upon a gilded post; It was, manners make a
Man, but now according to the old complaint, Money u.

6. Is it knowledge that would puff us up? This were an empty conceit. We
know, that, as in vessels, the more the liquour or matter of substance and
worth comes in, the more the Air goes out (it is the empty vessel that makes
the noise:) so, the more we truly and indeed know, the more we are humbled in
that we know. All my knowledge (and that all is but a little to that I know
not) All separated from Christ (which the more it is, the more it humbles)
will not advance me above the devil; nay, in respect of my knowledge, I am (if
a creature could be) infinitely below him: I hold no proportion with him, none
at all, but in my pride; that gives me some equality with that proud Lucifer,
and makes me like him; In knowledge I am much inferior. The Devil knows more
then all the knowing Men in the world, and has the experience of so many
thousand years to help his knowledge; and yet it helps him not, but aggravates
his judgment. And indeed how can a man reasonable think, but that that same
gift, (suppose it knowledge separated from that, which St. Paul did only
desire to know) But that the same gift, I say, will prove unto him like
Absaloms hair, it will be his ruin, which he has used, abused rather against
God the Giver of the same; so fighting against Him, with his own weapons.

7. Is it eminency of gifts or place that would make me think my self some
body? This were but an empty conceit neither; For the higher any one is in
place, the lower he must be in point of office, and service toward those that
are under him. At the best, we are but Stewards, and the more betrusted we are,
the greater will our account be, and the more expected, what we have gained.
And can it be reasonably supposed, but that, That man's reckoning will be very
heavy, who, the more power was in his hand, the more he put it forth in the
oppressing the meek of the earth, making them to groan under him (which is but
an exorbitancy of power, or at the best but to exercise it as a jaylour, Vnum
aliquem voluptate ac deliciis fluere gementibus undique aclamentantibus aliis,
hoc non est regn^, sed carceris esse custodem. Vtop. Tho. More.
turning the edge of it against the Lord, and His servants: And the higher God
raised and honored him, the more he suppressed goodness and dishonored God;
Turning his gifts, so bountifully bestowed, of nature, liberal maintenance,
grace, all against the Giver, to the satisfying of his own lusts: for judgment
causing oppression, and for righteousness a cry. Is it likely I say, but that
man's reckoning will be very heavy Isa. 5. 7. (...)
at this point?

Again, how unreasonable a conceit is it, That our Lord Christ, taking upon Him
the form of a Servant for us, and humbling Himself so low as the Cross, should
yet, with patience, long endure a proud servant, lifting up himself, in the
pride of his thoughts, before an humble, and for his sake, an humbled Lord?

And how unreasonable also and altogether unbeseeming (...). Chrysostom. defalo.
orat. 5.
is it, That Man, poor silly man, should in all things seek himself,
Pervestigare. Prove. 25. 27.
hunt after his own repute, his own glory, when as the Lord of Glory coming
down from Heaven to seek Man, that was lost, sought not his own Glory? John 8.
50.


Certainly this is an iniquity, which greatly provokes, and has been, and is
accordingly punished; for hence it is, That the sword is upon the right eye and
arm; hence it is, that a man, proud of his knowledge is become blind with
light: proud of his virtue, is poisoned with the Antidote; Blown up with his
Authority and height of his place and power, finds his rise has proved his
downfall, and his ladder his ruin.

Certainly for men to search their own glory, is not c glory, Prove. 25. 27.
it tends rather to ruin; examples whereof are written before us, as in
Capital letters: But of this before, and anon after.

8. Is it strength of Body, or comeliness of parts? (which is the beauty of
the same) Is it this or that, which makes us think better of our selves, then
is meet? This also is but a false valuation, a vanity Prove. 21. 6.
tossed to and fro. If our strength lift up our heart, it will be to our Chron.
26. 16.
destruction. Which is to be considered; so is this also, That, that is the
Lord Ver. Essays 43. page 252.
true comeliness, the best beauty, which a picture cannot express; yet no
cause we should be proud thereof: for the outward comeliness, as it is Gods
work, and has His Stamp and Superscription, we must prize it, and put an
honor upon it too; but I must not be proud thereof; what I dote upon, will
prove my sorrow; and what I am proud of, my snare; For the most part (as one
notes) it makes a Dissolute Youth, and an Age a Ibid.
little out of countenance; though yet, if it light well, it makes Virtues
shine, and Vices blush. But, however; It is not a thing to be proud of, for it
is as Summer fruits, which are easy to corrupt, and cannot last: We cannot say
of it, IT IS; Hist. of the World 2 book 3. 4. etc. Preface. p. 20.
It may change, if not vanish, in a very short time, in a night: one fit of a
fever, of fear, of sorrow, may in one night, so quaffe up our spirits, that we
cannot easily be known to be the men; witness a Nobleman in Charles the fifth
his Conrt, as we read in Lemnius. Lemn. de complex. page 147.


Oh, says one Dr Sibbs. S. C. p. 141.
, That the creature should dare to exalt himself against God, who need not
fetch forces from without, to trouble and molest us! if He let out the humors
of our body, or the passions of our mind against us, we shall be an
astonishment or wonder unto others, a terror and torment to our selves: man in
his best estate is but vanity.

If we could read our selves, and the principles we consist of; if we could
look down toward our feet, and see what our foundation is, then, certainly,
our plumes, our high thoughts would fall flat down.

I remember how Pliny instructs the great men of the earth, by occasion of a
child smothered in the womb, with the snuff of a candle; And thou, says he,
who art so proud, because thy blood is fresh in thy veins, and thy bones full
of marrow; thou that art so puffed up, because of some fullness, or some great
estate fallen to thee, may purchase thy death, at as low a rate as that
child, or lower; a ray son stone may choke thee, as it has some others, so
may a hair in the milk. He therefore weighs his life in a right balance,
who truly considers how frail he is; so he concludes a little chapter with
a great lesson Plin. Na^. hist. lib. 7. cap. 7 se cap. 50.
.

It is a common Theme, yet worthy to be insisted upon; for if we did know our
selves to be but men, we should have wiser and sadder thoughts; Therefore it is
good to read our selves. Our vile body, and the foundation it stands on,
speaks out plainly that fall it will, we know not how soon. I knew a man (says
Aug. de Civil. 22. 22.
St. Austine) and one of a strong constitution too, his leg slipped, and with
that slip, a joint out of place; so it laid him on the ground, and could not be
cured till he was laid underneath.

Sitting in a chair, says the same Father, is a safe posture, but we know who
fell out thence and brake his neck (as we remember one did out of his bed, that
retyring and refreshing place). The case was extraordinary, for he was full of
years, and as full of sorrows; And the news of the Arc weighed lowest; But it
tells us the ordinary lesson, That death may meet us, when, and where we less
look for it. A Judges 3. 20.
Summer parlour seems a safe place for repast and quiet; And a brothers feast
2 Samuel 23.
, has no show of danger; And yet the hand of justice has met with the sinner
at both these places; which tells us, That He, who has his breath in his
nostrils, should not be proud, for there is spare enough and in all places, at
all times, and by the unlikeliest means to let it forth.

I remember a proud Conqueror, demands in a brag, what he should fear
Victor timere quid potest? quod non timet. Sen. Agam. Act. 4.
? And it was answered in a breath, That which he feared not; which he found
true, for soon after, that he least suspected, damped his spirits, and quite
put them out. What I fear not, and think not off, is likely soonest to fall
upon me; As he is likelier to spoil me in my house, which he has marked out
in the day time, Then that person, whom I am warned of before my door, and
whom my eye is upon.

Oh, That silly man, should lift up himself in a windy conceit of that, which
is not: who, before the next morning, may be laid upon his sick bed; and in a
readiness for the grave! what is our life? a vapor, says Saint James; A Jam.
4. 14.
wind says another; Not M. Aurel. Ant. p. 14.
one constant wind neither, but every moment of an hour, let out and sucked in
again; like the Dove in the Arc, out and in, in and out, and then never
returns again.

Do not our eyes behold, how God every day overtaketh the wicked in their
journeys, how suddenly they pop down into the pit? how Gods judgments, for
their times come so swiftly upon them, that they have not the leisure to cry
Alas. How their life is cut off like a thread in a moment? how they pass like
a shadow? how they opened their mouths to speak, and God took them even in
the midst of a vain or idle word? And dare we for all this, talk so big, and
lift up our selves in the midst of so great, and so many ruins? Now the Lord
teach us to know of how senseless, and heavy metal we are made, and yet how
easily blown up with a little wind; They are Mr. Hookers words, in his 2.
Sermon upon Jude page 547.

But rather then our hearts should be lifted up against God, we should pray
unto God, That He would put us in fear, that we might know, and know in good
earnest Vehementissime agnoscaut. Trem. Psalm. 9. 20.
, that we are but men, worms of the earth, dust and ashes, poor, frail,
corruptible creatures. All is contained in this word Men; one may be a learned
man; another, a wise man; a third a strong man; a fourth an honorable man; If
learning puff him up, the consideration that he is a man, may abase his proud
looks; If wisdom make him proud (so true wisdom never does) If he consider
well he is a man, it will humble him; If strength make him think of himself
above what is meet, let him know himself to be a man, he will think of
himself as he is, and he will remember that God was his rock, and the high God
his Redeemer. If honors lift him high, serious thoughts that he is a man will
lay him low; but a man, like the first letter of a patent or limmed book,
which, though it has large flourishes, yet it is but a letter Advinc. p. 36.
. There is a pretty fable or fiction, call it what we will, so we observe the
lesson which the moral yields us. Alexander, they say, had a little-stone,
which, being put into the balance, would weigh down things of very great
weight; but if dust were cast upon the stone, then very light matters would
weigh down it. What does this teach? said Alexander to his wise Clerks; The
lesson is plain, answered they, This stone signifies, The great Alexanders,
Emperors, Princes, Potentates of the world; who, while they are, as they are,
though no bigger then other poor men, yet they out weigh a thousand of them;
but when they must dye, and dust is put upon them, then one poor man weighs
more upon the balance then they. For a living Dog, is better then a dead Lion
Eccles. 9. 4.
. A great lesson it is to know our selves to be but men: In our very best
estate upon earth, but vanity.

. 9. Is it thy own righteousness that is so lovely, and does so sparkle in thy
eye? Is it that, which, like the mornning dew, or the Sun beams on the
mud-wall, so glareth? Yes, that is it. God shall strike thee thou whited wall;
what, because the Sun does daine to cast his beams upon thee, gloryest thou,
as if thou were the father of those beams Perinde ac si paries radium se
purturire dicat. Call. Insti. lib. 3. cap. 12. o. sect. ult.
, thou did produce them? Boast on, but all such boasting is vain; glory in
these sparkles of a false light, but this is thy judgment from the Lord; Thou
shall lie down in sorrow. t Thy glory will be thy shame. Thy confidence is as
in an unfaithful Esaias 50. o.
friend, who in time of trouble will deceive, like a broken tooth, and a foot
out of joint Prove. 25. 19
. Our own righteousness Job 6. 17. We are in Gods hand as the pen in the
writers, he makes it, puts ink into it, directs it along the paper; The pen
does nothing of it self, but blot and blurre. Nothing properly our own but
sin. Call.
deals deceitfully, like the streams of brooks, when it is hot, and there is
need of them, they are consumed out of their places; and we shall be confounded
because we hoped. We never heard of any, that durst trust to it (I mean this
self righteousness) on their deathbed, when they were making ready for their
appearance, and knew themselves to be but men; Then, though before they were
content to live in a righteousness of their own, yet they are glad to die in
the righteousness of another See the excellent Epistle of our Divines before
Luther. coment. Galat. See Mr Hookers Disc. of Just. 502.
.

But to help us against this monster (so Luther calls an opinion of self
righteousness) pray we, that the Lord would rip up before us the foundations
of our nature; show us the Rock whence we were taken, and what an hard rockie
stone the heart is, which no ministry, nor misery; no braying in a mortar;
no judgments, though made sick with smiting; nor mercies, though made new
every morning; none of all these can possibly break, can possibly mollify. The
consideration of such an heart would surely humble, if we could consider it
heartily. I will conclude this in Mr Hookers words, Disc. of Just. p. 494.
which are these. It may seem somewhat extreme, which I shall speak, but let
every one judge of it. I will only make a demand; If God should yield unto us,
not as unto Abraham, If fifty, forty, thirty, twenty, yea, or if ten good
persons could be found in a Ctie, for their sakes that City should not be
destroyed: but, and if he should make us an offer thus large; search all the
generations of men, sithence the fall of our Father Adam, find one man, that
has done one action, which has past from him pure, without any stain or
blemish at all, and for that one man's only action, neither man nor Angel shall
feel the torments, which are prepared for both. Do you think that this ransom,
to deliver men and Angels, could be found to be among the sons of men? The
best things, which we do, have somewhat in them to be pardoned. How then can we
do any thing meritorious, or worthy to be rewarded? And so much to fortify us
against this monstrous conceit of self-righteousnesse.

In the last place, the strange judgments of God, upon the proud should be
still in remembrance; how Job 4 10.
He has decked Himself with Majesty, and cast abroad the rage of His wrath;
for, in effect, He tells Job, that so He does, He does abase the proud and
bring him low, Acts 12. 23.
Worms have consumed them; They have with the Serpent Dan. 4. Read Hist. of
the World book* 3. 11. p. 17.
licked the dust. Nebuchadnezzar is a great example hereof, so is Herod; He
also, who was a great Z^ch. 4. 7.
Mountain before the Lutherans, and quickly made a plain; He bent his hand
against the Apple of Zech. 2. 8.
Gods-eye, and he both commanded and armed that hand, which thrust forth the
Apple of his: hereon a story depends, which, for some reason, I relate not
here; he that can may read it at large, or very little abridged ( Epitomies
Advanc. 2. p. 3
are, as the Noble Advancer says, but mothes, corruptions and canke^s of
History) by O siaander. cent. 16. lib. 3. cap. 34.

But we may look into a place nearer hand, and a fitter looking glass for a
woman, where we may see how the Lord did retaliate those proud dames (Esaias 3)
proportionating their punishment to their sin, and to the several parts,
wherein they offended, verse 24.

Thus, child, I have been more particular touching this sin; The causes, The
workings of it, The remedies against it, That in something or other, some
instruction or other may take hold and persuade with thee; That thou may
take heed of pride, and vain*glory, (as all is vain that is in, and of the
Creature: That glory is not good) Glory belongs to God, (Souls Anima sexum non
habet.
have no sexes in the better part, male and female, they are both men) to man,
shame and confusion. God will not give His Glory to another: if man do take it,
it will be his destruction. Thankfulness must be our return to God for His
blessings; whether of body, mind, or goods. If they lift us up, we provoke God
highly, fighting against him with His own weapons, which will be as a sword in
our bones.

Consider again, by what has been spoken, how true it is, and what reason
there is for it; That the proud, the fool, and the sinner are convertible terms
through the whole sacred Scripture. The Lord make us wise by it, purge out all
pride in self-pleasing and self-seeking; That in whatsoever we do, and in
whatsoever we have, in all, and for all, we may give all the honor and glory
to the only wise God, to whom all honor belongs and is due. Take heed of
taking from God to set up thy self; put not that to thy account, which belongs
to Him; take heed of sacrificing to thy strength, or parts; acknowledge that
all the excellence of all thy actions is of Him. God is very jealous of His
honor, and oftentimes leaves His people to feel their own weakness, because
they honored not His strength. If the faculties of thy soul bring in willingly
and plentifully, offerings unto God, say with David, (when so much store with
much freeness was brought-in by the people to build the Temple) Now 1. Chron,
29 14 16. Lege Call. Inst. 2. ^ 1. and sect. 11.
our God we thank Thee; for all things come of Thee, and of Thine own hand have
we given Thee. All things come of Thee, we give-back but what Thou gave
first. Without Thee nothing we have, and nothing we can do. This
acknowledgement befitteth us, who have spent and cast away all our stock, and
do sit now at the receipt of a free-mercie. And this debasing of our selves so
low that we can go no lower, even to a (...) Call. ^^st. 2. 5. 13. o.
nothingnesse in our selves, is far from being a base thing: This abasement,
if it be in truth and sincerity, is an excellent grace, the very root of grace
springing-up, and so setting out and adorning the whole man, All the parts,
powers, faculties, of all. But a root it is, which grows not in our own soil:
No: As every good and perfect gift, so this comes down from above. God gives
it, and to such He gives it, (it is Avila's Spir. ep page 201.
note) Who dig deep in their own dung, taking up and rumating upon their
faults and frailties; amongst those poverties and miseries is this precious
jewel to be found: for prying narrowly thereinto, a man shall see cause enough
not only to be humbled, but even confounded. And then he that before could not
live with any body, no nor with himself in peace, can now live with all the
world, keeping the unity of the Spirit in that bond; for he has learned
mercy, and judgment., and to walk humbly with his God. And this humble
walking, is the very note and character of a good and holy man. It was the mark
whereby the Anchorite Beda lib. 2. c. 2. read our Jewel 3. Art. page 186.
would have his couhtreymen judge of Augustine, Englands supposed saint; If,
says the Anchorite, he be gentle, and lowly of heart, he carries the yoke of
the Lord, and offers to you to carry the same: But if he be disdainful and
proud (so they found him) then it is certain, he is not of God; you need not
regard him. Such a distinguishing quality Humility is.

O then be clothed with humility, let it come within thee as water, and like
oil into thy bones, it will soften and mollify thee; It will make thee
fruitful, like a garden watered from the clouds.; It will beautify the whole
outward man, setting it and keeping it in good frame, and order; The eye will
be low, thy speech soft, meek and gracious, thy gate comely, thy whole
deportment as befitteth a Christian, exalting the dignity of that Name, as
pride does folly; for certain it is, as was pointed at before; The more true
grace comes into the heart; the more (as it is in the filling of vessels) the
aierie and windy conceits go out; The higher indeed and in truth, the lower in
our own appearance, the viler in our own eyes, and yet we are content to be
more vile, that God may be the more glorified; The Trees of righteousness are
just like that tree we read of, whose root was just so much beneath the earth,
as the top * was in height above it. The higher they grow up to perfection, the
deeper they take root downward in Virgil. A En. 6. The higher in virtues the
more lowly in mind, and c. Isid. Pelusit. lib. 2. ep. 151.
humility, considering they have nothing of their own but sin, and it were
foolish and impious to be proud thereof. I conclude this with that of the Wise
man: Prove. 16. 19.
Better it is to be of an humble spirit, then to divide the spoil with the
proud: Better indeed; for with such an on, the high and lostie on does dwell
Esaias 57. 15. 1. 2. 66.
So little, (for it is little, which man can say or do) to the plucking up this
root of bitterness, which so defiles, and the planting in the contrary grace;
that root of holiness, which so beautifyeth

. 2. Our darling sin.
The next sin, which we should be armed against, I cannot presently name;
that belongs to every ones own heart to do, for I mean that sin, which
every man may more properly call his iniquity Psalm. 18. 23.
; not, but that every sin is properly ours, and we must own it, except that,
which the devil does cast in (and that we make ours also, if we give it
lodging, or suffer our hearts to brood upon it, as an hen upon eggs) every
sin, I say, is ours, for we have within us the root of all. But this is ours
more peculiarly, our heart is more endeared unto it; it is its beloved sin
and darling corruption, as hardly parted with, as a right eye, or arm; such
mastery it has in the soul, so it besets our nature, and so hotly charge
the same; And then most likely it is, that sin, which one calls, The great
Hist. of the World B. 2. chap. 4 sect. 13. page 239.
Enchantresse of mankind, he means sensual pleasure; for the most are
bewitched with it; how have the strong fallen by it? It is that which makes the
wise become fools; Nay, it is folly in the Abstract Genesis 34. 7. 2 Samuel 13. 13
; folly in Israel, and as one of the fools in Israel; So we read, where we
read of one, that would drink the poison of this Sorceresses cup; which, being
first presented, infatuates a man (unless the watch within be the stronger)
and gives him not so much time as to think Omnis acics and quasi vigilia
cogitationis obruitur. Aug. de civ. 14. 16.
what do I? and so having put out the light of a man, which is his reason and
understanding, like some murderers I have read of, she kills with embracings
Amplexu strangulant Phil^tae. Sen. ep. See Hist. of the World B. 5. chap. 4.
sect. 10. page 532.
: or if not so (but so it is) she sends forth man, that lordly creature, to
feed on husks, among swine, such empty things; or (to give it the fairest
interpretation) she sends forth man (a wise and discerning creature, when he is
himself) to gather Ibid. 2. Book. 4. 6.
garlands in the May game of the world, whose flowers wither, while he does
discourse of their color, or is in gathering them.

It is likely, could we take but so much time as to ask, what do I? what is
the bait I am now swallowing? That quiet and peace I am now forfeiting? what is
the shame I am now drawing on me? we would resist and thrust it from us, with
as much earnestness, as Paul did shake the viper from his hand, and as we
would a spider creeping up our breast. But she deals with man, as Delilah with
Sampson, she closes his eyes first, then weakneth him; or rather, as the
Philistines afterward, they pluck out his eyes, and then they put him to the
Mill.

Were it not, That just so, pleasure did first quite stupifie the judgment,
and put reason out of office, so taking away our crown, and putting out our
candle, it were not possible, that a reasonable creature, sad and serious in
other things, should give his (...). P^^t de educat.
life for his pleasure; his part in Paradise for his present satisfaction in
Paris, yet so, we read, some have spoken, so we know some have done (...). etc.
(...). Hom. Him. in V^^. p. 423.
; for pleasure is deceitful, it promises fair, but deceives, or changes
our ways.

Every sin, except one; The Hist. of the World. 2. B. 4. 13. p. 239.
taking of Gods Name in vain (And yet nothing more common, though it has no
profit to allure, unless the hate of good men, and Gods curse be accounted an
advantage, nor pleasure to entice, for it satisfies no one appetite, except
everlasting sorrow, and hell dwell in our desire) every sin I say, but that
one, pleasure more specially, comes disguised and sophisticated, like a pill of
poison, gilded over, or a sugered cup, so it goes down sweetly, but it kindles
a fire in the bowels, it tickleth the heart in the beginning, but frets and
pricks it in the end: It is pleasure in the doing, sorrow when it is done
(...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. Hom. 15.
(And that is the best fruit that can be expected) Thence it is we read of the
deceitfulness of sin Heb. 3. 13.
: The wicked works a deceitful work Prove. 11. 18.
; Deceitful lusts. And all this we know, and are as sure of, as we certainly
know, That worm wood is bitter, and honey is sweet, it is not conceit only, but
the nature of the thing it self, we know it to be so, in the issue, it will be
so: universal experience has so concluded it, and assures us; That, as they
say of the Scorpion, Ephesians. 4. 22.
being taken into the hand, it will seem to play about it, and make pretty
sport by its wrigling, then suddenly stingeth to death; so pleasure, it will be
bitterness, it will sting like a serpent in the latter end, and we know it
will do, so when we are our selves; we know it, I say, as certainly, as we know
that coals in the bosom will burn, and pitch in the hand defile, for it is
the nature of the thing: And yet such is the distemper of fancy, and so it
darkeneth, that we cannot judge soberly of things, we cannot consider them as
they are; For sin, coming so disguised, and upon advantage of our distemper,
is much more plausible then virtue, and goodness; And mere falsehood, having a
better outward appearance Lege Hom. S. Basilii in Psalm. primum, p. 114.
, (at lest more pleasing to such, who regard but the present) takes more
advantage over us by subtlety of Argument, and cunning persuasion, then truth
does: for our corrupt nature gives us nothing toward the entertainment of
this, but very much for that.

And therefore the counsel is to be followed; fly from foolish and hurtful
lusts; There is motive enough, that they are youthful, foolish, hurtful; we
must not come near them; at the first encounter they strike at the eye. There
is no parling with them, then we must come too near. We must not be careful
what to answer; if we come to that, we come too near. He that parleth with
such an enemy, will yield at last; And then he that before might have given
his enemy law, must now take it from his enemy. Its easier not to taste of
this cup at all, then tasting not to drink (...). He that lips of this sorceres
cup will drink deep; it is a wonder else and a mighty hand restraining. Clem.
Alex. Strom. lib. 7. page 539.
deep; easier to keep from the pits brink then to keep our selves from falling
in; or, being in, from falling infinitely; it is hard staying down the hill, to
refrain the mind in a precipice. It is easier to give a peremptory answer,
then to stand out in continual solicitation. Every sin, as well as that
specially mentioned by the Apostle, Acts (...)
13. verse 10. is easy to corrupt nature, and being once committed, is more
easily repeated, and pursued; The first act drawing on the second, the second
the third, etc. still with more eagerness toward satisfaction, but never
attaining the same. A fall into sin, is like a fall down a ladder, it is hard
to stop. A little fall Avila's Spir. epist. 13. p. 92.
says one, in relation to a great one, lies as close, as does the Eve to the
Holy day. Whereby we learn to withstand the beginnings, first assault or
incroachment In Matt. 27. hom 87.
Chrysostom, though you will think it a strange speech; We must be more
circumspect and cautelously wary, we must more fortify and immure our souls
against small, (...).
trivial sins, sins of no account with us, then we need to do against
great and mighty sins: For these latter, such is the nature of them, and such
our natures, that, as a sick stomach, we turn away at the naming of them. But
our small (...).
and light sins (if we may call them so, as so we may in comparison, though
in it self, no sin is little, being committed against a great God and an holy
Nihil est parvum in lege Dei, sed omnia magna: quia magnus l^gislator.
law) our light sins, I say, make us slack and (...). Lege Hom. S. Basilii
Psalm. 1. p. 115.
negligent, we may do so, and so, is it not a very little sin, and yet our
souls may live? so we say, and so we do, not considering how far a little and
a little may lead us: We see much folly committed in Israel; fornication and
adultery both (in this the Father does instance, as in some more horrible
sins, but this to our purpose here) whence had this uncleanness its
original? From a very small beginning in our account ( Non jam leve est
periculum si leve videatur.
though nothing is to be accounted a small thing, which leads to great) A
wanton cast of the eye, or a vain word, whereof we make no account. By all
means withstand the beginnings, immure thy self well against them, for the
devil by insensible degrees, will lead thee from very small sins to very
great. Therefore we must first prevent all occasions and becks of pleasure; we
must not go to such A golden rule of Chrysostom. ad Pop. Ant. Hom 15. (...) etc.
places, nor frequent such company, where we are sure to meet with her
solicitations. If Balaam (I mean him, who lays a stumbling block before Revel
2. 14.
Israel) if he do but counsel only and no more, and obtain so far by his
counsel, that the Occasion and nature, are like two inordinate lovers: They
seldom meet, but they sin together. Feltham. Resol. p. 203. praeparatoria,
and praenuncia Adul. etc. Tacit. Annal. 14. chap. 1.
occasion be offered, so as Israel and Moab may come to an interview, that they
may see each others faces, and be present at each others sacrifices; Then folly
will be committed by Israel, there is no doubt of it.

He that does not avoid occasions, what may be, does, as I may say, tempt (...)
etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. page 598.
temptation; he does provoke his lusts and the devil to tempt him; he makes his
own desires and suffers evil to be prepared, which is a great point of folly
N^scit anima quando pe^istos introitus sur in greditur; super eum id^o vigilare
debet, and cl^udere omnes illos imroitus. O^narrationibus sanctis; aur^s
auditionibus piis; oculos consideratione mirandorum operum Dei* mentem
cogitationibus occupare coelestibus, etc. Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 22. lat. tantum.
The delivering of Joseph out of the hands of his mistress giving the occasion,
was as admirable every whit, as the rescuing of the three children from the
fire; And this that we may avoid the occasions, the harbing^rs and spokesmen
for sin. Chrysostom. ibid.
.

And if I must avoid occasion, I must avoid idleness, for It is the devils
occasion; I must not sit slothfully at home, or walk negligently, when others
are gone forth or else preparing for battle 2. Sam. 11.
; if I would not sleep, I must not sit down. Idleness is the very hour of
temptation; The devils tide* time, when he carries the soul downward, and with
ease. We must up and be doing; Labor is the pickle of Virtue, it keeps our
faculties of body and mind sweet and fresh, as the pickle keeps fish and
flesh, but hereof before.

But it may be we cannot possibly avoid the occasions; As it is said of
offenses, occasions will be; how then? Then we must avoid them, what is
possible. It is a great Lege Isid. Pelus. lib. 4. ep. 2. 3. 4. and 12. 24.
mockery (but God is not mocked, we are deceived) to pray, Lead us not, when we
lead our selves, into temptation, by making desires and matter of trouble to
our selves; It is as if we should pray to the Lord to keep our house, while we
leave Januae ^untos and aur^s; senestrae autem oculi. Chrysostom. Hom. 51. in
Matt. lat. tantum* p^ne seram januae tuae, sivis esse securus, id est, legem
Divini timoris, etc. Ibid. Sed quoniam fragiles sunt nostrae serae nisi Deus,
etc Ibid. (...) etc. The eyes our guardians are first corrupted. We had better
wander with our feet then with our eyes. Clem. Alex. Paed. lib. 3. cap. 11. p.
1841. (...).
windows, doors, gates, all open.

Therefore in the second place, though I cannot always avoid the occasion; yet
always I must look to my covenant, and the keeping the watch strong over my
outward senses especially my t eye, which is the light of the body. And I must
be very careful to look unto my imagining faculty, or fancy, for that has
great power to darken and put out my inward light of Reason, and Judgment;
first then;

1. I must keep a strong watch over my senses; especially my leading sense,
(...); etc. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Ant. Hom. 15.
for that is a gadding instrument, and loves to be looking into every corner of
the Prove. 17. 24. Inconstantes and vagi sunt, adeo u^ animorum insta^ilitatem
indicent and vacu^tatem sapi^^^iae. Trem.
world. I must shut the windows at which sin enters; And (as there is great
reason) I must suspect my succors within, for there is the Sinon I mean the
Traitor. The eye is a sense of the greatest certainty; that it is, and of the
greatest deceit too. There began the first temptation, and from thence evil
has had its first rise ever since. There are two maine reasons of this deceit
(The Optics reckon 20) 1. The object is full of deceit; A thing may seem
crooked and be strait; so may a thing seem right, and be evil. 2. This organ
or instrument may have its suffusions, and then it will be deceived sure, for
it is in no case to judge. Our charge then is, and it concludes our rule too;
Ye shall do that, which is right, according to your rule, Gods will revealed in
His word; ye shall not do that, which is right in your own eyes Deuteronomy. 12. 10.
, for that stands most crooked to your rule. There is no sense you can worse
trust then your eye, specially when pleasure has corrupted it, cast dust into
it, and it is full of it, even quite over cast with it. We must then with all
our observation, observe our eye, for it is pleasures great Leader, and
Commander; And from the roof he saw 2 Samuel 11. 2.
: I will not look up on that, which I may not touch* said one, who made good
use of Eves eating the forbidden fruit, And Achans taking the accursed thing
Joh. 7. 21.
. If I restrain not mine eye, it is likely I cannot restrain mine hand, nor
my heart; for now that sin, like a tear Strad. Pro^u. 3. p. 119.
, has dropped from my eye to my breast* it is likely it has, though not by
force, yet by cunning and plausible persuasion, and subtle complying, taken
that fort, or framed it to a readiness of yielding ere long. He must be more
then a man, whose heart does not walk after his eyes Job 31. 7.
.

It is very evident; That our senses do deceive reason, and beguile the
understanding; Great authority they have over us, else we would not turn them
away, when we are to be let blood or launced; And the falls of great men have
told us, That the sense being left at random, has vanquished and quite
overcome all former resolutions, of virtue and patience; Therefore look to
those out windows Lege Chrysostom. in ep. Ad Romans cap. 7. Hom. 12.
, and keep out from entering there; An enemy is better kept out then driven out.
It is a point of wisdom, to make our selves strong against the first
encounter: but a point of vanity and folly, to open the door upon his enemy,
to try masteries upon the threshold. There is a kind of honey (says Zenophon)
which works according to the degrees of comparison; A little makes drunk, more
makes mad, the most kills. Beware of this little, it will draw on to the
tasting of more, and if more, the working thereof will be very like this we
heard off, deadly.

This letting in of this little, by the eye or ear, is like the letting in of
a little thief by a little window, who opens the door and gates, for the
greater thieves to enter and to make spoil. Look we carefully to this
covenant with our eyes, or else all former resolutions will be broken, for the
eyes are Panders for pleasure, Purveyers and Caterers for lusts: As in some
cases our eyes watch for us, so, in this case, we must watch our eyes.

2. And we must look well too, and keep a strong watch over our imagination:
That is a gadding faculty also; and we must follow it with our best
observation, as a mothers eye does her little child, which is newly out of her
arms, full of action, and still in harms way, so we must observe our fancy;
That works day and night; when the eye is bound up, that is waking, and busily
employed. This imaginative faculty is the souls first wheel, ever turning,
and naturally to evil; and yet, as that moves, so the other wheels stir.

But it is said; That it is impossible to have command of fancy. It is the old
and common objection; few are morally able to apply themselves all the day to
exercises becoming the day: And then when darkness comes, to command the
fancy, to busy it self about that, which, according to rule, was done in the
day time, impossible this.

It is so. Few are able: none are able: Few morally able; no man possible able
to do as was spoken, and, when darkness comes, as we heard. Moses hand, though
a servant of the Lord, and mighty through Him, will quickly be wearied and
hang down; It is the property of the Lords Arm to have it stretched out
still. And this Arm of His can do, what He pleases; He can make a brittle
glass to hold together, though knocked against a stone; This He can do, and
this He has done, but it is very extraordinary. He can make Moses endure
forty days together, and keep his thoughts, as his body was, in the Mount
all that time. But these are extraordinaries, and they serve like scaffolds at
the first founding, and raising of a Church; and when the building is up, the
scaffolds go down; we say then; That none are able to do as we heard; A man is
supposed in a Christian Homo supponitur in Christiano.
. And yet we say, and we say truth, that a man may command his fancy. It has
great power over us, and we some over it, if we have not, we shall be as the
swine. We must not despise what the Philosopher teaches in his Ethics; That a
just (...) Honestorum hominum honesta etiam sunt somnia^ Arist.
man is differenced from a man unjust, not by sleep, but by dreams. And we
must not deny that to the fancy, in moralls, which Aristotle thought possible.
The words immediately before, were once well weighed, though by some, now found
light. They are these, or to this purpose. It is possible that our fancy in the
night, may hold some conformity with the days employment, for if our mind in
the daytime be intent upon good employment, and well fixed thereon, our sleep
may relish of the same employment also; and our fancy may make return of
something, whereof we so fastened on in the day, as well as it will do in other
vanities. The fancy indeed is a wild and ranging thing: As it may be affected
by the eye, and from the stomach, we can command it no more then a flock of
geese in a meadow, or of birds in the sky: if there be a distemper in the
belly or Cujus cerebrum est in ventre, ingenium in Patinis. Agrip. ep. 18
brain, the fancy follows it; and by the representations thence, we shall see
plainly it does; if the guts be in the head, and the brains in the belly (so
it is with some men, as Agrippa to his friend) the fancy will be out of order,
as it is certainly out of place, for it will be in the belly too, still where
the brains are. The Poet Claud. lib. 3. Praesat. (...). Chrys^st. in Gen S r.
6. o.
has resolved the case long since, what we think on in the day, we dream on
in the night. He that eagerly seeks preferment in the day, may perhaps think
his bed the Court, and so solicit the business in his sleep. The fancy
moves, as the days employment acts it; As we practice in the day, we fancy
in the night. If a man follow vanity in the daytime, his fancy will represent
it on the bed; But he whose practice is contrary, shall find a contrary
working. The Preacher Eccles. 5. 7.
gives us a good lesson. In the multitude of dreams, and many words there are
also diverse vanities: But fear thou God. If thou fear God, thou need not
fear thy fancy, nor thy dreams; Thou shall not be afraid yea thou shall lie
down, and thy sleep shall be sweet Close thy eyes with thoughts of God, and
His goodness, and thou shall have sweet dreams, Thy fancy shall not be
troubled. Ch^ysost. Ibid (...). Prove. 3. 24.
.

Briefly then and directly to conclude the Answer, we cannot, when darkness
comes, and we are closing our eyes, we cannot then determinate our fancy to
this or that object specifically: This were a conceit and fancy indeed too
light to trouble our tongue or pen withal. It is as impossible so to do, as to
preach sleeping, as one made believe he could, and all believed him, who knew
not; That waking man. But this we say also, That we may so employ and exercise
our imagining faculty in the daytime, that the same faculty may relish and
taste of the days employment. This is possible, nay it is not possible to be
otherwise. Therefore, I say not, we may, but we must give all diligence to
watch, and wake over our fancy, thereby to determinate it to good, which is
possible, through Him we can do all things: for this determination makes such
an impression, and sets, as I may say, a Bias upon the fancy in the daytime,
that accordingly it runs, when the outward senses are bound.

We allow for humane infirmities, and know, through grace, they are dispensed
with; And we may grant also, what the Philosopher has said and concluded: If a
man could be commanded to think nothing by himself, but what he should
presently speak out, he nor no man were able to endure it, though but for one
day M. A. Ant. Med. lib. 12. lin. 3. p. 198.
. But because we cannot attain to such a purity as we should strife after,
just with the Copy, we may not wallow with the Swine: And what we cannot have
an absolute command over, we will not cast away our power wholly, as who will
take no charge over it at all. There are many in the world, who say they
cannot, when indeed they will not; they question their power, when they should
their will, and they take from their power bestowing it upon their lusts.

So much to show, we may have power over our imagination if we have not lost
the power over our selves; Now it follows, That we must exercise the said power
and charge, or else we shall lose our selves in the empty conceits and Mazes
thereof. Imagination seems an empty windy thing, but has real effects; for
there is a mutual working and reflux, between the will and the imagination;
Imagination stirs up the will, and as the will is affected, so imagination
works; And therefore they whose will is guided by their fancies, live more
like beasts then men (in whom fantasy is the chief ruling power) and so we
fall lower then the beast. For if we roll wickedness about in our
imaginations, like a sweet Morsel under the tongue, we do, in so doing,
personate these (...). Clem. Alex. Protrept. p 30. A spark of wickedness
neglected, or dallied with in the fancy, may quickly beget a flame of
wickedness in the heart. Corpus opere sordidatur, animus voluntate. Chrysostom.
in Matt. Lat. tantum. Hom. 52.
pleasures, which we have not opportunity outwardly to perform, which is
called speculative wickedness, and greatly defiles the man, and dishonors
God, and so answerably provokes Him, even to give us up to our imaginations,
and to cast us loose into the lap of our Delilahs, or lusts, which is the
greatest judgment in the world: for when sin is let into the soul by the
eye, and rouled about by the imagination, it will quickly, like a canker, eat
out all the grace in the soul; and then what follows, but a filling of our
hearts with Satan, and in the end a reaping the fruit of our own ways?

If we suffer our fancy to brood upon lusts, we shall hatch Cockatrice eggs,
or weave Spiders webbs, the issue will be mischief or vanity, and so we shall
weave the web of our own sorrow and shame. Therefore we must watch over our
thoughts, if we regard our peace, whereof watchfulness is the preserver. They
may make a through*fare in our mind, they must not get entertainment nor
lodging there From sin lighting upon our thoughts, it is impossible: from
making a n^st there, or hatching, that we may do, and are charged so to do. We
must keep our heart from resolving and saying, content. Bp. And. p. 190.
. And that we may be afraid to think before God, what we are ashamed to do
before men, we must consider; first,

1. That we have to do with an holy God, who specially sees the heart, and
requires purity there; It is our spirits with whom God, who is a spirit, has
most communion with all; And the less freedom we take to sin here, the more
argument of Vo^ scelera admissa punitis; Apud nos and cogitare, peccare est:
Vos conscios timetis; nos etiam conscientiam solam. M. Minut. Fael p. 25. lin.
3. in sol. Summum praesidium Regni est justitia ob opertos tumultus, and
Religio ob occultos. Card. de sap. lib. 3. ^ Incentiva vi^^orum statim in mente
iugulabis, and parvulos Babyl^^is allides ad P^tram, etc. Hier. lib* 2. ep. ^8.
p. 216. ^ Succub^ Incubi. Zanch. de oper. Dei. lib. 4 cap. 16. Aug. de Civit.
Dei lib. 15. cap. 2.
sincerity, because there is no Law to bind the inner-man, but the law of the
Spirit of Grace, whereby we are a law to our selves. But on the contrary, the
more way we give to wicked imaginations, the more we show, what our actions
would be, if we dared o, for if we forbear doing evil out of conscience, we
should as well forbear imagining evil, for both are alike open to God and
hateful to Him; And therefore often, where there is no conscience of the thought,
God gives men up to the deed.

The chief lesson then is this; As we desire and expect to have communion with
God, we must address our spirits before Him p; we must be pure not in body
only, but in heart also; nay we must be in our measure pure and holy as He is,
if we look to see Him as He is.

We must consider withal; That our unclean spirits, make us like that Spirit,
who, though he commits no corporal uncleanness (some tell us of sexes in
devils, or assumed by them, and of their filthiness that way q) yet he is
called an unclean spirit; And as he is, he is called, which tells us, That the
uncleanness of our spirits and hearts, as it is the greatest defilement, so it
does make us most like the devil. And therefore if this unclean spirit, or
our selves have stirred a sink in our souls, we must not stir it more by
our imagination, but, as we use to do, when a sink is stirred, we go into a
sweeter room; so we must remove our thoughts, and take off our imagination,
from stirring and puddering in that filth. And this we may do, by finding it
some sweeter, more cleanly and befitting work. It is certain, that the
imagination has a power, if it be put forth (but that requires an other power)
to raise it self as swiftly, and as quick (which is the excellency of it) to
heaven, to the high and great things there, as it will descend to hell, though
it be a natural descent, to those black things there: And it is certain too,
that hopes on high, will lead to thoughts on high; The nobleness of the soul,
and thoughts thereof, and of great things prepared for it, will remember our
imaginative sacultie of noble work, of high and weighty considerations.

If our affections be indeared to any sensual delight, they will drown our
fancies therein: and on the other side, our fancies, quick and nimble though
they be, yet will they move heavily, and die in their excessive motion to the
things below, if the soul be taken up with the Love of the best things. And
this leads me to the last thing, which is a more special and sovereign virtue,
to help and fortify our soul against her sensual appetites; I mean such
helps which reason can suggest. I know if the Eye of the Lord awe us; Job 31.
if destruction from God be a terror unto us; if the spirit of holiness comes
into the heart, then the work is done.

2. In the last place then, because our imagination hurts, and betrayeth our
succors within, by false representations, and by preventing reason, usurping a
censure of things before our judgments try them; whereas, the office of
imagination is, to minister matter to our understanding to work upon, not to
lead it, much less to mis-lead it; since, I say, our case is so, and so
depraved our faculty is; we must take great heed, and give all diligence,
That, (as one excellently advises) we suffer not things to pass suddenly from
the imagination to our will, and affection; we must ask advise first of our
judgment (That is the light, and eye of the inward man, and we must pray for
the inward anointing) whose office it is to weigh things in the balance and so
to discern. This judgment does acquaint the mind to balance reasons on both
sides, and to turn back the first offers, and conceits of the mind, and to
accept of nothing but first examined and tried.

There is a sickness of fancy, and there is no way to cure it, but by advising
with judgment. We shall (as Saul in another case) account the ways of sin
and death, even the shedding our own souls blood, in the pursuit of our own
appetites, and the liberty to satisfy the same; All this we shall account a
compassion 1 Samuel 23. 21.
, if judgment do not come betwixt our imaginations, and will. The tumults, and
distempers of the soul, though they rage in silent darkness, would be in a
great measure quieted, if summoned before strength of judgment and reason.

Therefore when any desirable object, presents it self to our imagination,
and solicites for admittance, we must not open before reason and judgment have
done their office: We must take off our selves, upon what ground we entertain
such a conceit; Souls Cons. p. 284.
whether we shall have the same judgment, after we have yielded to it as now
we have? and whether we will have the same judgment of it in sickness, and
death, and at the day of reckoning, as we have for the present? That which is
of it self evil, is always so, at one time as well as another: if the time
will come, when we shall think those things to be vain, which now we are so
eagerly set upon, as if there were some great good in them; why should we not
think so of them now, when as the reforming of our judgment may do us good,
rather then to be lead on with a pleasing error until that time, wherein the
sight of our errors will fill our hearts with horrors and shame, without hope
of ever changing our condition.

Think we hereon, before we have swallowed the bait. It is of special use to
awaken the soul, and to stir up reason, cast asleep by over-powring lusts,
and Satan's charms; of great use it is to scatter the clouds, through which
things seem otherwise then they are, that so we may discern and judge of
things, according to their true and constant nature.

Is it a known and noted story; That a great Commander being ready to perish
with thirst, delivered up himself and his command into his enemies hands for a
cup of drink; who, so soon as he had quenched his thirst, had these words, For
how short a satisfaction, have I forfeited all my former contentments! The
moral of it is as well known; It seems to imply thus much; That he did (as we
all are ready to do in desirable things) suffer the thing he desired, to pass
too soon from the imagination, to affection; and he made choice before his
Judgment had done its office; and thereby lost the command of himself. But
indeed, though there is use in it, yet in this case, it does not press home,
nor is it full to the purpose; for, if we should suppose Kingdoms in one
scale, and a dish of water in an other, we know which would weigh down so low,
that it would be great folly to make the comparison.

But now again, if we shall but consider, how dependent a creature man is,
(which does engage his service to his God) and to how weak supports his life is
beholding, and that he is, in his best estate, but vanity, and that his Crown
cannot help or ease the headache, nor can all the pomp and glory of a kingdom
refresh his fainting spirit, which yet (as the case may be) a dish of water may
do: In this case I cannot tell whether a dish of water, though it be dearly
bought, may yet be well purchased with a kingdom.

Satan might speak true, All that a man has will he give for his life Job 2.
. And had there bin no more but an earthly and temporary blessing lapt up in
Esau's birthright, Esau had reasoned well. I am at the point to die, and what
profit shall this birthright do to me Genesis 25. 32
. But the extreamitie was not so (which is very observable) he was short
spirited, all for the present. The eagerness of his spirit, and his slighting
the blessing (he despised his Verse 34.
birthright.) presented it so: And besides, there was an heavenly blessing
wrapped up in the earthly. And therefore this example o^ Esau comes home, and
presses to the quick; That we follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12.
; looking diligently, lest any root of bitterness springing up, trouble us,
lest there be any fornicatour or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel
of meat sold his birthright. This presses home; and therefore from this
example, we must, before that things pass from our imagination to affection;
now that pleasure solicits for admittance, we must thus reason; we do, in
hearkening unto it, adventure more then a temporal contentment, though what
can countervaile that damage? In yielding here and giving admittance, we may
bring in a Worm, which will never die: If then judgment do its office, it
will reason thus; Here are a few bitter sweet pleasures, and here is an inch of
time, in this vale of tears to take them in; I know not how soon my day may
set, perhaps I may suddenly sink down as others have done, even in an eager
pursuit after a shadow (my present satisfaction) and so, at once, die twice;
but sooner or later, long it cannot be, (there is not much space in an inch or
span of time) long it cannot be, before I go hence, and shall be seen no more;
And then, when I go hence, I enter into eternity (the thought whereof
swallows us up, as a drop in the ocean) where I shall meet with everlasting
burnings, a perishing for ever; or with pleasures at Gods right hand for
evermore. Shall I then (so judgment reasons) prefer a short satisfaction
(which will leave in the soul a very sad farewell) before an ever springing
fountain of glory, and everlasting bliss? A few bitter-sweet pleasures, and
these lasting but a span or inch of time, at the longest, before unmixt and
unmeasurable joys through all eternity in those glorious mansions above? So
our judgment debating, thus concludes.

What then is this sading, perishing, and at length tormenting contentment unto
me? It is but like a flash of lightning before everlasting fire. Carnal joy is
like the crackling of thorns, soon out like a lightsome flash, but spiritual
joy is like the light of the Sun; what then is this poor, short, and at length
tormenting pleasure unto me? When James 1. 15.
Lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin, when it is finished,
brings forth death. The world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that
does Gods will abides for ever 1 John 2. 17.
.

Thus far in the discovery of this sin also; The spring of it we know; The
issues therefrom are as discerneable; how to stop it at the spring head,
commands our care and diligence; if we be wanting at this point, our heart will
wander after our eyes, and then we shall be carried like a ship in a tempest
without a pilot, or like a colt that has slipped his bridle: All will be out of
frame within, and then nothing can be in order without. There will be a winking
with the eyes, and a speaking with the feet, and a teaching with the fingers:
for, wickedness is in the heart, and the mouth will be an open sepulcher, much
corrupt communication will proceed from thence; But to them, who maintain their
watch, all will work contrary: They will be framed to an orderly and sweet
comportment; They shall have command over themselves, and their desires shall
be made subject to an higher Law of reason and true judgment; They shall not
rule but be ruled and commanded.

The sum of what has been said may be thus gathered, and put together;
Pleasure is a great Enchantresse; at the first encounter, she charms our
senses, therefore we must be the more prepared against her; first, we must
avoid all occasions; they are the becks of pleasure, and panders for lusts;
especiaby we must avoid idleness; it is pleasures pillow, the hour of
temptation, the devils tide time. An unemployed life is a burden to it self,
and vexation; It is like the Dead sea, or a raging sea, raging rather. We must
make a covenant with our eyes, they are also caterers for lusts; and watch our
fancy, finding it work suitable to so noble a faculty. We must remember, That
the Father of Spirits has communion with our spirits, if after Him kept pure
and holy, like a room perfumed and prepared for such an entertainment. But if
unclean, then like that house, which was empty, swept, Matt. 12. ^4.
and garnished for that spirit, who is most unclean, though he commit no
corporal uncleanness. And this our uncleannes, which so debaseth man that
noble Creature, happens by the sickness of the fancy; The way to cure it, is
to go to our judgment for counsel before we suffer our thoughts to pass from
the imagination to the affection; This is the sum.

I add; we all hunt after pleasure, and strive after peace, we would find
rest to our souls, and satisfaction therein; This is natural to us, though
nature can never hit on the right way, that leads thereunto. If we follow the
bent and bias of nature, we shall seek the living among the dead. But now tread
we the paths of holiness, of righteousness, they are the ways of
pleasantness, all those paths peace Prove. 3.
. Certainly were the beauty of holiness discovered unto us in any measure, our
affections would be strong toward it, we should mount up with wings of Eagles,
h we should 1. Esaias 40. 3.
run after it, and not be weary, we should walk and not faint. The straitness
and weariness we find in these ways is caused through our indisposition, and
unto wardnesse to those ways, through our want of giving all diligence. (...),
etc. Eurip. Orest. 23. A vain conceit to think of doing great things with
little pains. (...).
It is the conclusion of all that are truly wise, That those great and
insuperable difficulties that we usually pretend to meet with in the way that
leads unto virtue, and godliness, are rather vain pretenses, want of heart,
sloth, and lithernesse (as St. Chrysostom in many places, specially in his
(...) Chrysostom. Ibid.
19. Hom. to the people of Antioch) that is, mere want of courage and
resolution, then difficulties really hard and insuperable. We see says he,
what your wonder-workers can do, what strange feats: They will run upon the
ground like a wheel circularly; They will run up and down a rope with as much
steadiness as another in Ad Pop. Ant. H. 19.
plain ground. They will cast up swords like Tennis-balls and catch them again
with the like ease; yet stranger things he tells of, and all attained unto by
diligence and custom, provoked by a little gain.

What then, says the same Father, can we think the way or practice of virtue
and holiness more difficult? and the end of that way to have less gain, and
peace? overcome we the stubbornness of our Will, gain that; wind up our
selves to a resolution (i we cannot by our own strength) choose we the ways of
holiness; give we all diligence to

The conclusion then is, Awake thy soul, give all diligence, and with the same
diligence keep thy heart, for out of it are the issues of life. Ponder the path
of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established Prove. 4. 23. and 26.
.

. 3. Profit.
3. The other great Enchantresse of Mankind (so I find them coupled in the
forementioned place Hist. of the World lin 2. chap. 4. 13. p. 239.
) is profit. A restless desire of getting still more, when, though all the
world were gotten, it could never satisfy, nor make a man say It is enough; It
jades a man, and tires his spirits out in an eager pursuit of that, wherewith
he can no more fill himself, then a coffer with knowledge, and a bag with grace
You must not account that the chief riches, which you can put in a purse. Clem.
Alex. paed. 3. 7. p. 173.
. And yet he lays out his precious stock of time and parts in his eager
pursuit this way; which is, as if a man should furnish forth a chamber in a
Through-fare, where he is to stay but a night, and neglect to provide himself
of a Mansion in the city, where he is for ever to dwell.

This is our folly, the chain of darkness over our heart; That spirit of
infirmity with which we are bowed down, so as we will weary our selves in the
ways of vanity, though we find our selves hungry and faint, as the beast,
under their idols, and as the Smith working them with the strength of his arm;
or if we think our selves filled, it is as with the East-winde, or ashes
instead of bread; when we awake (for now the deceitfulness of riches has
closed the eye) we shall be hungry. And it is not possible to be otherwise, for
the heart turned from the Creator to the Creature must needs be empty, there
being a vanity upon it; And being removed from the only and eternal Good, it
must needs be like the needle, shaken off from the pole-starre, in an unquiet
trembling condition; Like a meteor still in agitation, and doubtful suspense
(...) Luke 12 29.
. The way then to fill the heart, and to quiet it, is, to point it heavenward,
where is Rest and Satisfaction.

And this consideration may help to cure us of this spirit of infirmity, which
clings us together that we cannot look up, to wit, that God has summed up all
our happiness in Himself, as the drops in the Ocean; All our streams of
comfort come from that Sea, and must return again thither; If we have Him, we
have all, if we want Him, we have nothing. Here our comforts lie strangling and
divided, some in this thing, and some in that; we go to the coffer for some,
and to the table for other some, and yet we are not satisfied; but in Christ
these comforts are united, if we have Him, we have all; But God we cannot have,
nor is it possible to feel how sweet he is, while we feel a sweetness and
satisfaction in the Creature, and are feasting thereon. It was a good answer,
and of great and high use, which one made, being asked where he found God,
There I found God, (said he) where I left the Creature. This is all I intend
here, whereby to fortify us against the deceitfulness of riches, which
Fatigant, nec satiant tamen. Buch. in Psalm. 73. verse 7.
weary, but satisfy not. I do not take this to be so proper to my scope, and
in some things, which would fall in here, I have presented my self else where
in the preface to the first part.

Hitherto of such inordinate desires, which are not properly passions, but
proceeding from our opinion and fantasy, our judgment and reason being put
out of office, and exposing us to the full sway and power of our passions;
whereby it does appear, That we are not in greater danger in the hands of any,
then of our selves; And therefore great cause to pray; Deliver us from evil,
That is, our Quis est improbus ille? Libera me a meipso, Domine.
selves from our selves.

I come now to our master-passion; The subduing of it, is like the taking in of
an Arch-rebell; It is the leader and master of misrule, then which nothing does
sonner and so immediately deforme Gods image, and sometimes deface it utterly.
This is,

4. Anger.
strong motion from very weak reason. It fills our house with smoke (...).
Anger is like a smoke, it darkens reason, makes a very wise man a fool, and to
do unreasonably* Achilles speech. Hom. Iliads 18.
(well compared thereunto) that we can see to do nothing in it; nay more, It
deals with us, as if one should cast the master out of his dwelling, and then
set fire on his house: or, as if an intemperate scold, ( it is Mr Boltons
comparison Direct. p. 98. Lege Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 53. o.
) should justle a reverend Judge out of his place, and there to take on in her
talkative and scurrill manner. Just so will this absurd passion, usurp and
domineere over judgment, not giving reason leave to interpose a word; whereby
it comes to pass, that the man loses the rule of his own spirit, and so
becomes like a City without walls Prove. 25. 28.
; or like a ship without stern and pilot, exposed to winds and tempests in the
midst of a furious sea. This man must needs be at a loss, and make shipwreck
of his wisdom and discretion and all, so as his discreet friend cannot
recover him again till he has more command of himself, for if one should
repair him and deliver him to day, he will need the same help to morrow, for
he will suffer wrack again by the storm of his passion; If thou deliver him,
yet thou must do it again Prove. 19. 19.
. So we have heard how blustering a passion this is; and what raises the
wind, viz. that we are disposed unto it, by weakness of spirit, for the
weaker any one is by years, or by sickness, the more subject unto it, as
children, old persons, or Seneca de ira. lib. 3. cap. 10.
sick (so universal experience has concluded) or by overtendernesse or
niceness of mind. Therefore the wanton delicate persons are very testy Non
vis esse iracundus? ne sis curiosus. Ibid. cap. 11.
, very petty matters will trouble them, a spot on their garment; a bird, a dog,
a glass. It puts me in mind of a delicate person, who, being Master of a
feast, condemned his servant to be eat up of the Lampryes for breaking a
Crystal glass; whereupon the poor boy falls down at the Emperors feet, who
was entertained at the feast, requesting only this favor, that though he knew
he must die, yet he would not suffer his Master to make him meat to fishes,
which are man's meat, whereto the Emporour yielded, causing all the glasses in
the house to be broken before his face, and then thrown into the fish pond
where the boy should have been put; I mention this to assure us; That none are
so imperious, nor more abuse their power, then your delicate persons; one hair
lying out of order will more disquiet them, then a disturbance in a
Commonwealth.

There is another fruit of this weakness, and that is an ungoverned tongue. A
great makebate, disturbing our own peace, and the peace of others. It foments
and stirs up anger, and provokes more wrath: It makes the spirits keen and
eager, so as words, cut like a razour, being whetted, as the Bore its tooth, in
its own foame. There is a little spark of fire before us, It is at the V^rum
que in ore. a. (...) Chrysostom. in Genesis de David and Saul Hom* 3. p. 1049.
pleasure of our mouth to make more sparks, and to kindle it to a flame; and it
is at the pleasure of the mouth, to cast water upon it, to spit it, or to tread
it out. So in point of debate and contention, the fruits of Anger; It is at the
service of the tongue, to kindle the heat and the fire yet more and more, and
it is in the tongue to quench and put it forth. He that has power over his
tongue, shall strike at the very root of this passion, and go near to cut the
( Salvian de guber, lib. 2. p. 71.
fibras) the very small sprigges or hairs thereof; The wisest of Philosophers
(if Aristotle was he) tells us; That Anger serves as a weapon to virtue; It
may well be, but then this weapon must be in a wise man's hand, who can command
himself and his anger, for such a man can be angry and sin not: otherwise
anger is a weapon of a strange nature; for, we do manage other weapons, and
this does manage us; our hand guides not it, but it guides our hand; it
possesses us, not we it. So we have heard what a weapon this is, or rather,
how domineering a passion. We have heard also, what exalts this folly; It is
weakness; The remedies are answerable, whereby to get strength, and fortify
our selves against it.

That person is seldom overcome of anger, who can take some command over
himself in such things, which yet, we may think, do little concern that
passion; but yet they do very much. For the reason why a man has so little
rule over himself in a passion, is, because he had so little comdmand over
himself, when he was out of his passion: or rather, for so shall I speak more
properly, because he carries himself, as one in a passion always.

I have often thought on those words of Saint Paul; 1 Cor. 6. 13.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient; All things
are lawful, but I will not he brought under the power of any. What is this to
the subduing of this passion of anger? very much; for he that can
check-himselfe in things lawful, will not easily exceed in things unlawful. I
have known some, who would not reach their hands to a dish, or cup so soon as
they might; they would abridge themselves, and take of from that eagerness of
spirit, we are subject unto: So they could keep themselves from coming under
the power of the creature, and more able, by using this fitting command over
themselves, to carry themselves calmely, and temperately, in the puzell of
business, and tempest of humane life. He that carries himself as in a passion
always, we must look to see him sometimes in a frenzy, when it would become
him, to have most command over himself. He that cannot temper himself in
lawful things, will run riot in unlawful.

This is a point of special consideration; it takes of from niceness and
weakness of spirit, which sharpneth very much the edge of anger Plut. Mor. de
Cu^i. (...). Clem. Alex. P^ed. lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 109.
. I have read of one, who would put a letter up into his pocket, not breaking
up the seal; which yet he knew full of news, but could not answer till the
next morning; And such a letter, says he, I know some would have broken open
with their teeth, if with their fingers they could not have done it so
suddenly. He does instance in other points of abstinence, and persuades to
them, and concludes thus. That man cannot easily abstain from things forbidden
him, who takes his full liberty in all things, which are not forbidden him.

This requires our consideration, for there is more in it, then ordinarily is
conceived. But suppose a man now in his passion, what shall we say to him then?
nothing, it puts him out of his precepts quite; we must stay till he be
sober, unless we can bind his hands. No sound counsel can come in, while
fury is going-out. As in a tempest (says Chrysostom) while the Sea rages,
and there is tumult and trouble; words are vain. If we will wait their
season, we must stay till there be a calm In Act. Apost. cap. 7. Hom. 17.
: So here, we must stay till the storm of anger be over. This puts me in mind
of a very pretty observation from Phi. Melanch. which is this.

His little daughter was sent on an errand, and staid beyond her appointed
hour, which moved the mother not a little; so much, that she said, she would
pay her daughter, that she would. The father heard all, but as his manner was,
said nothing; went to the door, and there he sat, expecting his daughters
return. Presently after, home comes the gyrle. Now daughter, said the father;
you are too blame, you have stayed too long, and your mother will be very short
with you, for so I heard her threaten. I pree thee, child, what will thou say
to thy good mother now, for she is angry? The child answered simply Simplice
pu^rilique sententia ai^bat.
and like a child; nothing for sooth.

This answer pleased the father very well, and he made very good use of it, for
this was his manner: When he observed men marching in the rage and roar of
their passion, and upon the spur, then he stood stock still; When he heard them
casting-up their words, from a very corrupt stomach, and calling-out, as if
their tongues were their own, they might use them as they listed, then was he
all that while mute as a fish; making good use of his good childs answer,
nothing for sooth. And this nothing, effected something; for by this patience
in That excellent servant of the Lord, he brake the violence of his adversaries
impatiencie; so says Camera: who writ Mela. Life Page 81.
. It teaches us how to carry our selves toward men, carried in a passion, To
say nothing. But now for a man in a passion, if he be teachable, this, which
follows, may instruct him.

It is a hard matter to stop our course down an hill, and it is as foolish to
course there, so is it a point of difficulty to refrain the mind in a
precipice Advanc. p. 242.
; But yet some have found it possible; I say then, if a man could refrain
himself, and give unto his mind (as is used in horsmanship, and wherein the
old Britains, says Caesar Vsu quotidiano and exercitatione in declivi et
praecipiti loco incitatos equos sustinere. Caesar. Com. flexibilem esse ad
naturam auri proxime accedit. L. Ver. de Aug.
, did by experience and custom much excel) the shortest stop or turn; As
thus; if he could refrain his hand, or his word, when it is going out, and
behold himself in a glass, before he strike or speak: And then after the heat
were abated, which would quickly be, reflect, as before upon his posture, so
now upon that he was about to do, I say, if he would do but thus, it would be a
great preservative to prevent the next fit of his fever. We read of one Seneca
de Ira. lib. 3. cap. 12.
, who, being very angry, and having his arm lifted up to punish his offending
servant (over whom masters at that time too lawlesly abused their power)
bethought himself very seasonably, and of what he was doing, so stayed the blow,
but kept his posture; then beheld himself in a glass, to see how like a fool
he stood; But he discerned more then so, that he stood, not like George on
Horseback, though that is menacing, but more like a madman Arnob. lib. 1. p.
6. 7. in sol. Lact. de Pru. Dei. cap. 5.
, with his hands up, mouth drawn aside and foaming, eyes sparkling, countenance
pale and much deformed; at the sight whereof, he dismissed his servant, and
corrected himself, and so was better advised for afterward. I dare say, it
would calm the hastiest man living, if he would look himself in a glass, when
he is angry and in a rage (but it is a point of patience) that then he might
behold his impotent, and unmanly behavior, how it disfigures, distorts and
deformes him; It would help also, if, refraining his mind in such a distemper,
he would reflect upon that he was (in that transportation of mind) about to do
or might have done; if he can reflect upon it, he will see clearly, That it
was much better for him, because he took leisure of more consideration.

Of all things, which admit delay, there is nothing, that receives more
advantage by it, then our passion, nor hazard, then our repentance. It is
certain, what repentance gains by admitting no delay, anger loses, our peace
and quiet; yet deal we here clean contrary; for where we should not consider,
(not whether we should repent or no) there we do; and where we should consider,
there we do not. There is nothing, that can work us more sorrow, then this; nor
more advantage, then if a man would suspend his actions a little, and arrest
nature in her passionate march. A little time would do it, and blunt the edge
of anger, as the saying over the alphabet, says one, the Lords Prayer says
another D. G.
. But if we gain not some leisure and time here, for our better proceeding, we
shall for our repentance The end of passion, is the beginning of repentance.
Felth. Res. 8. Plut. Mor. de Ira.
. Phocion advised well to hinder the Athenians from a present resolution upon
the hearing of Alexanders death; News came that Alexander was dead; And the
Athenians would, the same night, meet in Counsel, and determine things:
Forbear till next morning said he; if Alexander be dead to day, he will be
dead to morrow. Be not so hasty, this business will admit some hours delay,
and we shall proceed much more warrantably.

It is very applicable here; we must not proceed hastily in any thing, for that
is to proceed in a passion; if it be a fault, we are about to punish, it will
be a fault anon, and teo morrow, and we shall be better able to discern it,
and to help it. We may do nothing while we are angry; for then we will think
we may do any thing. He must not loose the power of himself, who has an other
under his. He had need have all his wits about him, that comes to drive out
folly; and to understand himself very well, that would direct another. It is
the wife man's lesson; The discretion of a man deferreth Anger. It is a point of
wisdom to subdue betimes, Prove. 19. 11.
the first beginnings of unruly passions, which else, like an ill nurtured
child, will grow headstrong (here we should meet with the tongue again:) And
this is by giving a check and stop to our selves, so giving time for reason to
enterpose, and to ask this question only, What do I? For want hereof, we
observe men dealing unreasonably with senseless things, falling foul upon
them, misusing the poor beast also, that does better service in his kind, and
shows more obedience then man does. But very Imperious and domineering over
children and servants; for our spirits (as was said) stir as intemperately, and
raise as great storms in our little ponds, as great persons do in their great
seas. Vide dominum saevientem in servos, etc. Fluctus cosdem, etc. Lips. de
cons. lib. 2. page 25.
.

I pass by them, who are so furious upon the Ox, the Horse, and the Ass, the
poor Sheep also, all which do after their kind, but he that misuseth them,
does against nature. I have nothing to say to such, their folly may correct
them. But when a parent is correcting his child in a passion, this may check
him, if he take so much time as to consider; That he is a child, and his own,
so is its fault also; This will stop his eagerness: but of this in the first
part. So also when I am angry with my servant, this may check me; That though I
may be bold with him, or her, being my servant, yet not so bold as to shame my
self, or hurt them. Did not he that made them make me? Have we not both the
same masters over us on earth? and would we not be used kindly, and gently by
them? And have we not all one Master in heaven? See the first Part. chap. 4.
sect. 12.
and would we not all find mercy there? Yea, but he is thus and thus, and does
so and so, and so often he has provoked me? I must check my self now with
this, and it will surely calm and cool my spirit; how Chrysostom. in ep. ad
Romans cap. 8. Hom. 14. page 206. 2 Pet. 3. 15. Romans 2. 4.
much, and how long, God has borne, and forborne me; And can I be impatient
now? The long suffering of the Lord is salvation: It was salvation to Saul,
waiting till he became a Paul; so was it to Peter, waiting till he went out; To
us, else we had been, before this, consumed: Mark this, and enlarge thy
meditation upon it; I, it will be a means to frame upon thee that ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit, which, in the sight of God, is of great price: for if
I can say to my self but thus much; how long suffering has the Lord been to
me ward? I cannot be short, and eager spirited toward my brother. I cannot say
more, which is more pressing and availeable to subdue my passionate spirit, and
to gain that constant and comfortable temper, which resembles the highest
region of the air, where there is still a perpetual serenitie, and peace.
Lastly, are they the wrongs, and unworthy usage from others hands and tongues,
that have put me out of the possession of my self? or are they crosses in my
estate, that trouble and disquiet me? Then thus I must check my self, By
looking narrowly into my self, and up to an higher hand, as the children of
wisdom have done; I must remember the ten thousand talents; There is nothing
that can be thought of, of more force to win upon a passionate spirit, and to
frame it to lowliness, loveliness, calmness, and unpassionatenesse (which
is the cement of society and sweet converse) nothing, I say, of such force as
these considerations; First, of Gods all disposing, overruling hand, who is so
good, that He would suffer no evil to be, were He not so powerful, that out
of the greatest evil, He can extract the greatest good.

Secondly, The riches of His mercy, that forgave ten thousand talents; And
should I fly at the throat of my fellow servant for a few pence? Thoughts
hereof will frame us to a settled reposed estate, and an unpassionate spirit.
But the remedy of remedies, the most certain and excellent remedy, whereby to
shoare-up, and underprop the soul against the shakings, and impetuous
blustering of this weak but impotent distemper, which blows hard, and
boasts great things; The best remedy I say, is, To address our spirits
before the Lord; To look to Him, who rebuked the winds, and Seas, and they were
still. We may say of this fiery exhalation, as is said of the tongue James 3. 8.
(a fire too, and angers first Prima semper iraru^ tela maledicta sunt; and
quicquid non possumus imbecilli, optamus irati: Salv. De Gub. lib. 3. page 81.
weapon) But this unruly evil can no man tame: we must then pray, and in our
prayer (...). Iam. 5. 17.
pray, that is, we must pray earnestly, we must wrestle and weep in our prayer
before the Lord; That He would hold in our spirits, calm and meeken the same.
We are taught of God, to love one another, says the Apostle, we are so indeed,
says the Father; For no man can teach it, and if God teach not, we shall fly
off and all to pieces, like an unserviceable piece of Ordnance, before we are
discharged. We shall bite and devour on another. Upon every occasion, we shall
fly out into sparkles of heat, like the sons of the coal as one speaks,
which if you blow, it will sparkle in your face, behold then, how great a
matter a little fire kindles Jam. 3. 5.
. We may allude here to what we read, spoken of the Leviathan Job 41. 21.
; An angry-mans breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth. But
if God meekens the spirit, if He humbles the heart, all this fire will be
quenched, or, if not so, yet so kept in this fire shall be, that no burning
lamps, no sparks shall leap out; I mean, nothing shall be done or spoken,
which may kindle wrath: but much yielding there will be, much forbearing in the
spirit of meekness, as we learn by the example of Abraham; who yields unto
the younger, rather then difference shall arise. And the true son of a
gracious father will yield, not to Abimelech only, but to the Heardsmen of
Gerar, though the place shall carry a memorial of the contention there, and
injury done Chrysostom. Ibid.
to Jacob there, the taking from him that, which God and nature makes common;
yet rather then there shall be any contention, Isaac yields, and accepts of an
apology or defense afterward, though never a word thereof true. And this is
meekness, and patience indeed mildly to yield, not to superiors only, against
whom, perhaps, we cannot stir and be safe; but to yield to inferiors, such
we would have disdained (as Job says Chap. 30. 1.
) to have set with the dogs of our flock. This is a point of a meek spirit
indeed. And this is a spirit of Gods own framing, even His, to whom these two
things do of right belong; To subdue iniquity, and pardon sin. Mark it;

The Lord, He it is, who subdueth every distemper of the soul, which vexes
there; and pardons all the iniquity Micah. 7. 18, 19.
there* from, casting it, as into the bottom of the Sea; therefore to Him we
must seek. I conclude with the wise man's lessons Prove. 16. 23. 24. Verse 32.
. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips.
Pleasant words are as an honey-combe, sweet to the soul, and health to the
bones. He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty; and he that rules
his spirit, then he that takes a city.

I know, That, before I came off from this point, I should have spoken more
concerning the tongue, and the government thereof. But the subject is so large,
and so largely little of it.

It is, me thinks, observeable; That he, who wrote a book thereof, was a whole
year (so himself says) bethinking Drexelius.
himself, what to call his book, which (if I remember) he was ten years in
composing. At the length he entitled his book Phaeton, and we know what is
feigned of him, as we do know, what was the original of that fiction: But the
Title fits very well, and the Spirit gives good warrant to it; For the tongue
is a fire, a world of iniquity Jam. 3. 6.
; it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is
set on fire of hell. Great cause to look unto it, and to guard it well (as
nature teaches us) with all our care.

But he that can master his passion, and this master passion, can master his
tongue also, that is supposed: For the tongue (as we heard) is but angers first
weapon; And if we can bind the strong-man, we can spoil him of his weapons,
that is out of question, for it is first done. I will say but this then (for I
have spoken to it before in the first part) It is the wisdom of a man to see
himself speak; That is, well first to observe the way his tongue is
traveling in, That he may be sure and certain, that the way is safe.
Remembering still (what was said too) That a man has fallen more 1. Part.
dangerously by his tongue, then he has by his foot.

5. Of Censure.
I would charm the tongue here, before I leave it; but so it is hard for man to
do, nay impossible; yet I will lesson it in point of Censure, Which is a bold
liberty the tongue takes, as if it had a K. I. Daemonolog. lib. 3. cap. 1.
patent for prating, or had received another edict, that all the world should
be taxed. The lessons are these,

1. Take no evidence from hearsay; It is the greatest liar in the world.
Report will fully the whitest name upon earth, and when it has done, and you
would find the author, you cannot, he walks as undiscerneable as if he had
his head in the clouds Caput inter nubila condit. vide Scal. Poet. lib. 5. cap.
3. page 524.
. Report nothing upon bare report, especially nothing touching any ones
good-name, which, the purer it is, like a white ball, the more fullied with
tossing.

2. Where thou want certainty, judge charitably, the best; and leave that
thou can not know to the Searcher of hearts. Indeed sometimes a man's
outside, actions, words, gestures, do make an easy and plain Commentary upon
the heart; we may expound the heart by them. There is a speaking with the feet,
and a teaching with the Prove. 6. 13. 14.
fingers: The organ or instrument of speech is the tongue, What can the feet
speak? What can the fingers teach? why, the feet can speak, and the fingers can
teach, what is in the heart: Their commentary is so plain, that a man may
read, frowardness is there. But now when a man's actions, his meaning and
intent are of as doubtful construction as some old Characters, worn out and
decayed; Take we heed now, that we read them not according to our sense,
unless it be most agreeable to charity. It is a good rule; Ampliandi sunt
favores.
We must show all the favor that may be; We must stretch out charities mantle
as wide as we can, that is, as wide, as heaven is wide, says (...). in Acta
Apost. 21. Hom. 44. o.
Chrysostom, and we must note it. We are bound to give the fairest and most
candid interpretations of actions and meaning as possible may be. It is Mr
Perkins rule, and but the rule of charity, Be as tender of a man's meaning as
with his eye, so of his actions, as perhaps he did not so, as it is suggested;
if he did it, then not with a mind to do me hurt; or, if with that purpose,
then by some temptation, which might have carried my self too, and upon a worse
evil. Still deal tenderly we should with our brothers Name, with his
Conscience, with his meaning, as tender of all this we must be, as we are of
our eye, or of a glass of Crystal.

3. Speak well of the dead, or nothing at all; It is for such to trouble them,
that are at rest, who are of his generation, who did pursue his brother with
the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and
kept his wrath for ever Amos 1. 11.
. Mark well how sadly and confidently Job speaks touching the security of the
dead; mark it, I can but point to it Job 3. from 13 to the 20 verse.
. And learn we may something from the devil, when he feigned himself Samuel;
That it is no point of Civilitie to disquiet the dead 1. Sam. 28. 15.
.

4. No, nor to disquiet those that are absent, in conjuring up their names, for
they are dead to us, and cannot speak for themselves. Stay a little till
Mephibosheth 2. Sam. 16. 2. Chap. 19. 27. He has slandered thy servant, verse
27. Not slanderers 1. Tim. 3. 11. (...).
can be heard to tell his own tale, he will prove himself as sound at the
heart, as he is lame in his feet, and Ziba shall be counted as he is, a Devil.

5 If the name of thy neighbor be in question and thou can relieve it by a
word, and that word but the very truth; Take heed now, Let not that precious
name of thy neighbor faint and die under thy hearing for want of a word, thy
speaking what thou know, and stand bound to speak by the bond of
charity. If thou shall be faulty in this point of charity, it is a privative
censure.

I keep the chief lesson last, I take it from a rule in Herauldry, this it is,

6. All Joh. Guil. display of Herauldry. page 163.
Animalls born in Arms or Ensigns must in blazoning, be interpreted in the
best sense, according to their generous and noble qualities; if a fox be the
charge of an Escutchen, we must conceive his quality represented to be wit and
cunning, not pilfering and stealing etc.

I may find bad qualities in the King of beasts; I must in blazoning take the
most noble; Then much more in blazoning my brothers Name; I must finde-out his
good qualities. So the Apostle with Job, James 5. 11.
we have heard of the patience of Job; not a word of his impatience. And
observeable it is, how David fills his mouth with Saul's 2. Sam. 1.
virtues; But how if my brother have not one good quality? I must not think
so; not, that any one is so buried under the rubbish of his own and Adams
ruins, but some good may be found in him, if with the Chemist, we would set
the fire of our charity on work, some good might be extracted; for, as there
is some rubbish in the best of men, so there is some ore too, something of God,
some good in the very worst; doubt it not, while thou can see a poor woman
puddering in the dust-heap, and finding some good there. And let this teach us,
how we deal with our brother, not worse then with a dust-heap (I hope)
pick-out his good and let go the bad. But if thou must fix upon the bad, as so
the case may require, love, in meekness, in the spirit of meekness: so shall
thou honor thy brother, but thy self more. Chrysostom (...) etc. In Genesis 13.
Hom. 34. ^.
gives us a good note. The truest sign of a man honored with reason, is to be
gentle, meek, courteous, merciful, as one that would obtain mercy; for,
consider we our selves, or others, we are vessels of earth all, which could
not be cleansed with water, they must be broken Levit. 11. 33. ^eade Mr Answ.
; or like bellmettle, once broken, never sound again till new-cast, and that
will not be till the morning of our resurrection; There be faults in all, make
the best of all. It is good for a man, nay it is his wisdom, to pudder much in
his own dung (as a devout Spaniard Avila's spirit. Epist. 24. p. 200.
phraseth it) To pry well into his faults, and frailties, and with great
diligence there, for from thence (that bitter-root) springs that excellent
and sweet grace, humility, but to pudder in another man's dung, is Beetle-like,
Scarabaeum aiunt simo sepultum vivere, apobalsomo immersum emori.
a creature, we know, which lies covered in dung, and finds sweetness there;
but put it amongst sweets, and there it dies.

I will shut up this in the words of the Learned Knight, changing but a word,
They who have sold the (blood of others) good name of others, at a low rate,
have but made the Hist. of the World. preface.
markets for their neighbors to buy of theirs at the same rate and price. But
Chrysostomes words upon those of our Savior, (...) etc. In 8. Genesis Hom. 40*
(Judge not that ye be not judged) will serve better to stitch upon our lips;
How dare thou set thy self in Gods Throne, by judging thy brother? If thou will be a judge, judge thy self, and thy own ways, so may thou mendon; But
if thou sit and judge thy brother, thou shall but make thy own judgment
the heavier.

6. Affections.
So much to the master passion, and the subduing thereof; and to order the
tongue too, that disordered member. Affections are the next, which may be
called passions also, when they come like sudden gusts, for then they are the
storms of the soul, and will overturn all if they be not suppressed, and the
heart steered aright, by the interposing of judgment and right reason. Our
Affections set at liberty, are like a Multos dominos habet qui unum non babet.
child set loose, and left to himself, which will cause our shame and our
sorrow both. To instance; our affection of fear, not ordered and pointed
right, will make us like a Roe before the hunter, or like a leaf shaken with
the wind: The Apostle speaks much in one word; where fear is, there is
torment, etc. It slays without a sword; Thy Esaias 22. 2. read Edmunds upon
Cesars Comment. p. 17. and p. 38. 39.
slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle; How then 1 John
4. 18.
were they slain? (for it is not proper to say, slain with famine) with
Exanimantur metu. Trem. A man that had his eyes covered to receive his death,
and uncovered again that he might read his pardon, was found stark dead upon
the seaffold. Char. chap 16. p. 69.
fear; that surprised them before the battle, and did the part of an
executioner before the sword came: Such an astonishing affection fear is if
not fixed upon Him, whom only we should fear. The like we may say of Love
Furori proximus amor. Tacit. A^nnal. lib. 11.
, Joy Joy and sorrow have a contrary working. but being immoderate they drink
and quaffe up the spirits quickly and sometimes suddenly.
, Sorrow; if not placed aright, but immoderately set upon the Creature, they
will swallow us up, as a ship in the quicksands. In a word; The excess of our
affections do cause the greatness of our afflictions.

But contrary; when our affections are well ordered, they are the wind of the
soul, carrying it so, as it is neither becalmed, that it moves not when it
should; nor yet tossed, that it moves disorderly: They are the very wings of
the soul; A prayer without them (so we may say of any other performance) is
like a bird without wings; If I cared for nothing (said Melancton) I should
pray for nothing; They are the springs of all our services to God; we are dry,
cold and dead Fear is worse then the thing feared, as is prooved by the
communication of Cyrus and Tygranes. Xenop Cyri. paed. l. 3. p. 192.
without them; They set the soul and heart on work, and then we seek the
Lord. David had prepared much for the house of his God, and the reason was,
which himself gives; Because I have set my affection to the house of my God. We
are as a dead Sea, without our affections, and as a raging Sea, if they exceed
the bounds; And exceed they will, if they are not held in order, by His voice,
who said to the Sea, Be still. Oration sine malis, avis sine alis.
Sinibil curarem nihil orarem.
1. Chron. 22. 29.
1. Chron. 28. 3. p^s meus affectus meus, co seror quocunque seror.
They are, as it is said of the body, like a curious instruments, quickly out
of tune, and then we, as quickly, have lost the mean, between too much and too
little. They are just like moist elements, as Air and Water, which have no
bounds of their own to contain them in, but those of the vessel, that keeps
them: water is spilt and lost without something to hold it; so it is with our
affections, if they be not bounded by the Spirit of wisdom and power. And if
so, they will answer all Gods dealing to His children; As He enlarges, so they
are enlarged; as He opens, so they open; if evils threaten, the more fear
fixes where it should, and then fears no evil tidings Fear has torment
when it is out of place, but if placed right upon God, it quieteth and calmeth
the heart, it makes a man fearelesse; his heart is sixed trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112.
; The more tokens of displeasure, the more sorrow; yet ordered not without
hope, not a sorrow swallowing up the heart in despair, but a godly sorrow
putting on to obedience. These well ordered affections put the soul into a
suitable plyablenesse, that they answer the Lord in all His calls; to joy when
He calls for it; to mourn, when He calls for that.

But this sweet harmony and temper in the affections is never, but when the
Lord sets them in tune, and keeps them so; when His spirit watches over ours
(which should be our prayer) for then, look how many affections, so many
graces. Love is turned to a love of God; Joy to a delight in the best things;
fear, to a fear of offending Him more then any creature; sorrow to a sorrow
for sin. And this is the main and chief help to bound and order our
affections, even to look up to the Lord, that as He has planted them in the
soul, He would order them so there, that they may tend to Him and for Him.
Other rules and considerations there are, which may help some thing to calm
our affections as follows.

1. Let this be a standing rule; Nothing deserves our sorrow but sin, and the
loss of Gods favor by sin. It is seasonable at no time (I speak of some
exceeding that way, for man must not have (if it might be) an Apathie, he must
not be without natural affection, like a stock moved at nothing; no, This is
the commendation of a true Christian, That he has strong affections, but
through God, he is mighty to prayers and with our instructions, says (...),
Ad Colos. Hom. 12.
Chrysostom. It is pity, that such a sweet and fruitful affection, should,
like water, run-out to waste, should be spilt upon that, which cannot profit.

2. Nothing commands our fear but God: and if we keep to Him, He will be our
Sanctuary; if it be removed from Him, we shall fear every thing.

3. We must use this world, but as if we did not use it; use it, but enjoy God.
In the one is changeableness and vexation, in God is no variousnesse, nor
shadow of changing. The world and things of it, are but the cisternes of
comfort; they quickly empty and dry up; God is an ever springing fountain.

4. Many things will command our love, and must have it, but we must hold it
under command, and to its rule; In God, and for God: we must equal nothing
unto Him, much less account of any thing above Him. He will have no corrivall:
that which we equal with Him, will prove our snare; that which we honor above
Him, will be our shame and sorrow.

5. There are some times, when there will be some flushes of joy, some
exceeding that way; as it is hard in any passion of the mind to keep just
measure: But there is never more need of watchfulness then at such times. It
was a fit season for the Father to be at his Sacrifice, when his Children were
at the Feast. I have observed times of feasting and merriment strangely
crossed; to call back the heart, which would soon forget, if not loose it
self: and to teach man to fear at all times.

In such cases as these, such thoughts as these may help to allay the over
sweetness of our contents, as thus to think; Now I could sing for joy (for we
give no time for Calvish mirth) others there are, who at this very time do sigh
for heaviness of spirit; and groan under heavy pressures Hic nuptias, ibi
planctum, etc. Hier. 21. 22. lib. 2. o. page 247.
. As a member of the body, my passion of joy must be moderated with my
compassion Remember my bonds. Colos. 4. 18. Lege Chrysostom. Calamitas illius
fores pulsat qui aliorum calamitatibus non movetur.
. I will speak in Hirons words, they are to this purpose. There is a wedding
in that house to day, and there they are merry; with them I should rejoice: In
the other house there is a funeral, a beloved yoke fellow, or a dear child
is carrying forth to burial, there are sad hearts we are sure, I should weep
with them: for this is to be like minded, to be companions with others, as
members of the same body. I must think again; I know not how soon their case
may be mine: Mirth and sorrow have their turns, and I know not how soon, they
may exchange with me. As I shall let my heart loose in the one, the less
command I shall have over it in the other: As my sensual contentment shall
dilate and expand my heart; so will sorrow compresse and shrink it up: If my
heart be as light as a feather in the one, it may be as heavy as a stone in the
other; it was Nabals 1 Samuel 25.
case. Let me ever find out something even in the midst of my mirth,
Christian-like to leaven it; so I may more likely find something in my sorrow
to sweeten that also.

The maine and principal lesson is, That we sauce our earthly joys with godly
sorrow; so should all our worldly sorrow be mixed with spiritual joy. We must
not let earthly contentments take up all the room in the heart; for then
sorrow, when it comes, will look for the like freedom, commanding there, and
stopping up the least cranny for comfort to enter in at.

So much to temper and moderate our minds in the sudden flushes of joy.

There is a more constant running out of our affections, in a more constant
tenor of earthly things, which some at sometimes may find; if so, and our
affections are enlarged beyond their bounds, such like sad and sober thoughts
as these may call them in, if they take place.

Is my estate prosperous? And do I over greedily seek, or highly esteem, or
intemperately joy in the comforts, which prosperity affords? Let me think now,
that the wicked have these things too, and more abundantly, and Gods dearest
children often want them. And what are they, that my heart would close withal?
Nothing, for nothing they avayle in the day of wrath Prove. 23. and Prove. 10.
10. Trem.
; when we most need them, they stand far from our help.

Are they pleasures my heart would relish? let me consider, they are but for a
moment, but the torment of sin is everlasting Breve and momentaneum, quod
delectat, aeternum; quod cruciat.
. Have I contentments on every side? peace round about? all things as my heart
can wish? Then I must stir up, and quicken my self the more; standing waters
gather mud and dirt; wines not racked gather Lees. I must suspect my way, that
it is not right; for in the world ye shall have afflictions; we have our
Masters word for it, and that is as much as the earth and heavens have for
their continuance. Can I expect two heavens? all contentments here, and
pleasures for ever more hereafter? can I expect to triumph in heaven, and yet
not to perform any worthy service in the Lords Battle upon earth against His
and our enemies? Can I expect a weight (...). Tom. 5. Ser. 33.
of glory, when I go hence, and no weight from the cross here? Can I think it
reasonable, that the Captain should bear all the brunt, and endure all the
hardness, and the Common soldier endure nothing? These considerations and
such like, may give some sharp taste to allay the lushiousnesse of our
contentments, that we may not over-joy our comforts.

Discontent. 7.
We are as prone sometimes to overlook our blessings also, and overgrieve our
crosses; when our mind is overshadowed with discontent, that great disturber
of our peace and quiet.

It is an unreasonable passion, what else to call it in propriety of speech, I
know not, but this know; it makes a man complain, he knows not for what; and to
quarrel with his estate, be it never so good: Like a thorn in the foot, or an
arrow in the side, it makes all places and conditions uncomfortable. It puts a
man out of conceit with his own estate (which a wise man thinks the best) and
into a good opinion of an others condition be it far meaner; for what matters
it, what my condition be, if to me it seems bad Si cui sua non vide^tur
amplissi, ma licet totius mundi Dominus su, tamen miser est sen. ep. 9. Sapiens
neminem videt cum quo se commutatatum velit. Stul^ilia laborat sastidio sui.
Quid resert qualis fit status tuus si tibi videtur malusi Sen. ep. 9.
; if so, I must needs walk most unquietly with my self, and most unthankfully
toward God.

Those sons of Eliab enjoyed no small privilege, but yet that seemed nothing
unto them: Egypt, where they served in clay, and brick, was now esteemed far
beyond all, when their present discontent, like dust cast into the eye, had
taken from them the sight of all their good things Numb. 16.
. They are a sad example to us, that we murmr not as they did; and it tells us
also, how unreasonably a discontented mind will reason.

It was an answer worthy our marking, which a servant gave touching his master;
he was asked, What he left his Master doing? I left him said he, seeking out
cause of complaint, many blessings standing round about him the while Plut. De
tranquil. Hor. lib. 2. ep. 3.
; it is the case and manner of many, and it is (says the same Author) as if a
man should seal up his hogshead of good liquour, and drink that which is
sour, and hurtful. Thus disquieting an humor discontent is; the remedies
against it are,

First, that we suffer not our mind too much to fix upon our grievance, for
this were like a foolish patient, to chew the pill; and then we shall so much
taste the bitterness of one cross, that we shall disrelish the comfort of
twenty blessings.

2. It is good to look to those below us: It is certain, no man's estate is so
happy, but, if his discretion be not so much the more, he may find something
in it, which would sour all: nor is any man's condition so low, but he may
find something which will sweeten the meanness of it; Thus then I may reason,

I live not so high as others do; nor am I acquainted with others temptations:
Great gates give room enough for great cares to enter in at; I am sure great
temptations. I am not so rich as others; nor am I disquieted with their cares
and fears: As the rich have advantage of the poor in possessing, so have the
poor advantage over the rich in parting. I carry not that pomp and state,
which he or she do, who ride in their coach; nor perhaps am I in so mean a
condition, as he that drives it. I have not so much ease, as he or she who sit
in their Sedan, (and yet that you cannot tell, for some bodies sit there, that
have little ease) but this I am sure of, that in respect of bodily toil, I go
at more ease, then they who sweat at so unbecoming and beast-like a burden
(...). Luc. Cynicus. p. 8^3. Leg^ Clem. Alex. paed 3. 11. p. 185.
.

I have not another velvet, nor their fare, nor their ease; nor have I their
stone, or their gout; I must set one thing against another (...), etc. Chrysostom.
de Lazaro conc. 1. lege Diod. Sicul. bib. lib. 12. a.
, it may much quiet me. And thus far the Heathen have carried us by their
false light, for to this purpose they have reasoned the case, and so satisfied
themselves in their present condition; we shall reason more like Christians, if
we speak as we are directed by him, who was taught in the School of Christ.

In all our grievances let us look to something that may comfort us, as well as
discourage Dr Sibs So. Conf. p. 172.
: look to that we enjoy, as well as that we want. As in prosperity God mingles
some cross to diet us; so in all crosses there is something to comfort us. As
there is a vanity lies hid in the best worldly good; so there is a blessing
lies hid in the worst worldly evil. God usually makes up that with some
advantage in another kind, wherein we are inferior to others. Others are in
greater place, so they are in greater danger; others be richer, so their cares
and snares be greater: The poor in the world may be richer in faith then they.
The soul can better digest and master a low estate then a prosperous, and being
under some abasement, it is in a less distance from God. Others are not so
afflicted as we, then they have less experience of Gods gracious power then
we. Others may have more healthy bodies, but souls less weaned from the world.
We would not change conditions with them, so as to have their spirits with
their condition. For one half of our lives, the meanest are as happy, and free
from cares, as the greatest Monarch: that is, whilst both sleep, and usually
the sleep of the one is sweeter then the sleep of the other. What is all that
the earth can afford us, if God deny health? and this a man in the meanest
condition may enjoy. That wherein one man differs from another, is but title,
and but for a little time; death levelleth all. There is scarce any man, but
the good he receives from God, is more then the ill he feels, if our
unthankful hearts would suffer us to think so. Is not our health more then our
sickness? do we not enjoy more then we want? I mean of the things that are
necessary; are not our good days more then our evil? And yet (so unkindly we
deal with God) one cross is more taken to heart, then an hundred blessings.
We should consider, God does not owe us any thing. Those that deserve nothing
should be content with any thing. We should look to others as good as our
selves (as well as to our selves) and then we shall see it is not our own case
only; who are we that we should look for an exempt condition from those
troubles, which Gods dearest children are addicted unto?

The chief help then of our discontent is, to look up to a supreme hand; The
Heathen also by their glimmering light, could discern how vain it was to
strive against the absolute prerogative thereof. We must not quarrel with that
condition, which God sees fit for us, for that were to blame His wisdom, who
gives no account of His matters; and in so struggling we make our bands the
stronger.

The humbled y and meekned spirit, that can resign it self, submit and wait
under Gods Almighty hand, shall be lifted up in Gods good time. In the mean
time, having knowledge of Gods excellencies, and his own vileness; He looks
upon mercies, and counts himself less then the least of them: He looks upon
afflictions, and under the greatest can say right humbly, It is Gods mercy I
am not consumed. Are his pressures many, he sees mercy in it, that they are
not yet more: Sees he little light of comfort? he praises God he can see any
at all: nay, discerns he none at all? yet he stays himself upon his God and
submits I can be abased Phil. 4. 12. If we can once take out this lesson, it
will bring with it such a Christian perfection, that we shall not be to seek
almost in any point of Christianity. Dr Alray's lectur.
.

Yea, but how if this person, now under the rod, is not persuaded that God is
his Father, though he cannot but know, that He corrects every childey: As
many as I love, I chasten Heb. 12. 6. Revel. 3. 19.
.

If so, yet he does know, that God is his Lord, and thence, an humble
submission must follow. As Laban Genesis 24. 50.
and Bethuel This thing is proceeded of the Lord, we cannot therefore say
either good or evil. So, whatsoever the affliction be, be it in body, goods or
good name, yet he must say, for he is better instructed then they; This is
proceeded of the Lord, we must say good of it. Let His will be done, so we
pray; His will is done, let us submit. Woe be to these cross wills Vae
oppositis voluntations.
, they struggle, strive and tugge, to pluck the neck out of Gods yoke, and so
put themselves to more pain.

Thus still we must resolve the case, God is a debtor to no man; He may do what
He will with His own; And they that deserve nothing, should be content with any
thing. But this is not all, there must not be only a submission unto Gods hand,
but a bettering by it; we must gain by our wants, and be bettered by our
afflictions. It is not gold that comes not purer out of the fining pot; he that
does not learn by affliction, will be taught by nothing. We read but of one,
whose heart did not somewhat relent under the blow, and one there was, that did
not, That was King Ahaz 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
. In his affliction he sinned more; but we must be made more wise by it, else
we lose the utilitie Perdidimus utilitatem calamitis; miserrimi facti est is
and pessimi permansistis, Aug* de civit. ib. 1. cap 33.
and benefit of our affliction, which is not little to a good heart. We must in
patience submit, and learn thereby to search in particular, what the sins are
in our souls which God points at, and would kill by the smart in our bodies.
If we have worldly losses, we must search then, was not our sin
covetousness, bottoming our selves on things below? If disgrace; was not my
sin ambition? If scarcity, was not my sin the abuse of Gods good
creatures, vainly, needlessely, unthankfully? And, if pains or aches; did
thou not offend in sinful pleasur^s Lege Chrysostom. ^ Psalm. 3.
? Thus shall we speak good of the affliction, and submit, yea, and be
thankful. That is a duty of a Christian, to be thankful for afflictions, for
corrections. It was good for me that I have been afflicted Psalm. 119 71.
; if it was good for him, then doubtless he spoke good of it, and was
thankful. I remember, says Chrysostom Hom. 10. in Coloss. 3.
, a very pious and holy man was used to pray thus; We give thee thanks O Lord,
(Thanks was his first word) for all thy mercies from the first day, to this
present day bestowed upon us, Thy unworthy servants: for those we know, for
those we know not etc. for our tribulations, and for our refreshments; (...),
etc.
for our hell here, and our Fatherly punishments, as for our Heaven hence, and
our hope of rest. He puts afflictions etc. into the Catalogue or register of
Gods mercies, and in the first place. Indeed it is no hard matter to open the
mouth in way of thankfulness for the good things of this life, as we call
them; but to be thankful for the evils, that is an hard task, but yet the
daily work of a true Christian.

The Heathen Philosopher could say Mar. Aur. Aut. medit. 12. B. sect. 2. p 197.
A wise man should be fitted for all estates and conditions, like Empedocles
his Allegorical Sphere, or like a square body; Throw it, you cannot overthrow
it; cast it down, if you can, it will stand as upright as before, losing
nothing at all of its height Lege ep. 168. Basil^i.
. And such a man, says he, has gained unto himself great rest and ease, for
he has get his mind loose from outward intanglements, and that manifold
luggage wherewith we are round about encumbered. We may discern our selves, as
we do our metalls, best by our falls, or casting down; if when we are thrown,
our sound is flat and dull, murmuring-wise; it argues a leaden spirit (...)
Naz^anz.
, which sinks under trouble, like lead into the waters: But if our sound be
silver-like, clear and pleasing, it argues we are of better orat. 18. When
there is a storm without he keeps his mind clear within. page 302.
metal. That is not silver, which comes not clearer out of the fining pot, nor
is that gold which does not shine in the fire Prosperity does best discover
vice; but adversity does best discover virtue.
.

A good eye is for any color, though all colors are not equally lightsome.

A good care for every sound, though every sound has not the same
gratefulness; Good teeth are for all meats that are wholesome, though all be
not alike toothsome: so a sound understanding is fit for whatsoever shall
happen, though every thing, which happens, is not alike pleasing. He that
cannot receive evil, as we call it, from Gods hand, as well as good, shows,
that he is of a crazed temper in the Inward man, as an eye that seeks after
green colors; or as teeth after that which is tender, which argues, says the
same Philosopher, Sore eyes, and unsound teeth. Mar. Aur. lib. 10. sect 37. p.
177


I have been long upon the point, the longer that I might persuade to a
contentedness in every condition; and that we might find use, and pick good
out of all. But it is the Lord who persuades the heart, and He does it, else no
condition will please, seem it to others never so pleasing. To possess our
souls in patience (we lose them else) is the readiest way to be eased, and in
time to be exalted. The Lord teach thee the wisdom of His people; and give
thee content in present things, understanding in all: He subdue thy spirit; He
meeken thy heart; He fashion and mould thy will to a patient submission unto
His, that it may be as conformable there unto, as the wax unto the seal. All
this God can do, He only. And when He has thus humbled the heart, and thus
meekned the spirit, when he has thus fashioned it, then the work is done, and
nothing will be grievous.

It is a remarkable speech from Mr Bradford ^ox p. 1503.
; he has many such, but with that one I will conclude, and shut up this;
Though my body be in an house, out of which I cannot come when I will (for he
was in prison) yet in that I have conformed my will to Gods will, I find
herein liberty enough; and for my lodging, bedding, feeding, etc. all above my
worthiness; worthiness quoth I? alas! I am worthy of nothing but damnation.
So he wrote to his mother; I must tell you also what he said to his friend. He
was in a strong hold, near the time of his enlargement, when he was to pass
to his crown, but through the fire. His friend told him, that he would, if it
pleased, intercede with the Queen for his life; Do if you will, said he: if her
Majesty will be pleased to give me my life, I will thank her; if my liberty,
I will thank her for that; if neither of both, I will thank her still. If she
will keep me here, I can thank her here; if she will send me hence to the
stake, I can thank See what an humble man can do! he can smart patiently; he
can suffer silently; he can receive blows and return thanks. No murmuring, no
repining, no complaining in his mouth. He has committed his cause to God.
Learn how contented this man is; and observe the patience of the Saints, so I
have done.

CHAP. V.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, The mystery thereof. Graces required in
those, who come to this Table. In case these Graces be wanting, what is to be
done. Of Man's worthiness.

AND now, Child, having made some discovery unto thee of those our
master-sinnes and corruptions, which most dishonor our outward man, and
disturb our inward peace: And having supplied unto thee some provision for the
better subduing thereof, I shall now for thy better provision and preparation
also, put thee in mind of two extraordinary and solemn approaches, both
before the Lord, and both in the face of the Lords congregation. In the one
(the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) we profess, by faith, to be one with
Christ, and by union with Him to partake of all His honor and glory. In the
other (falsely by some called a Sacrament also) they, who were two, are made
one, joined together in so straight a band, that nothing but death, or that
which is worse and more destroying then death, can dissolve.

We must be well advised before we approach to either of these ordinances, for
it is for life. It was well answered by one, who was asked why he took so much
pains, and was so curious about his work; it is, said he, because I work to
eternity Pingo aeto^^^tati.
. Much fitter might the same be said in these cases; we must walk warily here,
we must take pains here, for we work to eternity, we receive to eternity, and
so we marry too, to our eternity; it is for life both, and beyond it, as far
as the heaven is above the earth. A glorious life depends upon the right
receiving of the one; so do all the comforts of our temporary life depend upon
our advised entrance into the other. I shall give thee some instructions, for
this better provision for both. And first of the first,

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper; therein we see the Cost of our Redemption,
and the matter and substance of our Righteousness before God, which does
consist, principally, in His body broken upon the cross, and His blood
communicated unto us. These holy mysteries received in due manner do
instrumentally both make us partakers of the grace of that body and blood which
was given for the life of the world; and imparts unto us, even in true and
real, though in mystical manner, the very person of our Lord Himself, whole,
perfect, and entire together with the communication of His holy Spirit, to
sanctify us, as it sanctified Him, that, what merit, force or virtue, there is
in His sanctified Body and Blood, we freely, fully, and wholly have by this
Sacrament. And all this (for the Sacrament in it self is but a corruptible, and
earthly creature; and an unlikely instrument to work such admirable effects in
man) all this rests upon the strength of His glorious power, who brings to
pass, that the bread and cup, which He gives, though true Bread and Wine (for
our senses tell us so, and in such cases they cannot be deceived) shall be
truly the thing promised; the flesh of Christ, which is meat indeed; and the
blood of Christ, which is drink indeed.

If we understand not this, but will ask, How can these things be (...).
Chrys^n ^. Ad Tim. c. 1. Hom. 1.
? we must remember; that nothing is hard to the Lord; therefore to Him we must
pray; that we may be taught of Him, and that His Spirit may reveal it unto us:
That is all we are to do, for further question is needless, and fruitless.
Very observable it is, that in the sixth of John, Verse* 26.
The people finding Christ at a place, whereto, by an ordinary way and means,
they knew, He could not come, fall to wondering, and then to questioning,
Rabbi, when came thou hither? The disciples in the 20. of John, when Christ
appeared to them in far more strange and miraculous manner, moved no
question, but rejoiced greatly in that they saw. For why? The one sort beheld
only that in Christ, which they knew was more then natural, but yet their
affection was not rapt therewith through any great extraordinary gladness;
the other, when they looked on Christ, were not ignorant that they saw the
wellspring of their own everlasting felicity; The one because they enjoyed
not, disputed; the other disputed not, because they enjoyed. If then the
presence of Christ with them did so much move, judge what their thoughts and
affections were, at the time of this new presentation of Christ Hooker c^^.
Pol. 5. 67. page 358.
, not before their eyes, but within their souls. And so much for the opening
and unfolding of the mysteries which we are to receive; The further
manifestation we leave to Him, who works All in All, according to the
pleasure of His good will.

It follows now, That we consider how we must come addressed to this great
feast of the soul, wherein our approach to an earthly banquet gives us good
instruction; though the persons inviting, and the cheer to which we are
invited are of a very different nature, and yet somewhat such a feast
instructs. We come to a common table, specially, if invited thereto by no
common person, well fitted and prepared, decently and in order; And in case we
find our stomachs clogged with bad humors or feaverishly disposed, we come
not at all, or we forbear to eat. This allusion Chrysostom follows and makes
very useful in his 27. Hom upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians chap. 11.
toward the end; but more fully in the following Hom. near the beginning of the
same; very full of instruction all.

I shall follow our plain Catechism, and therefrom set down these requisites
which must be in every worthy Communicant, and they are three, strongly
enforced and employed in the signs before our eyes.

1. Repentance from dead works; which God gives, and it answers, The eating of
the Lamb with sour herbs. There I see in the Bread (first thrashed, then
put into the mill, after in the oven; All this the True Bread went through,
before He was made the Shewbread to God, the Bread of Life to us) as much as
the Church of old did in the Exodus 12. 9.
Lamb, which was to be roasted with fire; or in the Manna, which was ground in
the mills Numb. 11. 8.
. I see in the wine powered forth, That Christ powered forth His soul unto death;
and by Himself purged our sins Heb. 1. 3. See Mr. Dearing on that text.
. Hence we learn to hate sin, and to hate it with a perfect hatred, as the only
ground of our misery, the creatures vanity, and of Gods dishonor Mr. Raynold
on the 110. Psalm, page 411, 412.
. We see it is so hateful unto God, that He will most certainly be avenged of
it. If he spare me, yet He will not spare my sin (though His own beloved
Son must be punished for it.) O then! how should that be light to me, which
was as heavy as a mill stone to the soul of Christ? How should that be in a
throne with me, which was upon the Cross with Him? How should I allow that to
be really in me, which the Lord so severely punished, when the guilt thereof
was but imputed to His Son? so our second Raynolds.

Therefore we should learn with David to hate every evil way, because God
hates it, and suffers it not to pass unpunished; To revenge the quarrel of
Christ against those lusts of ours, which nailed Him; and to crucify them for
Him again; for, for that end was Christ crucified, that our old man might be
crucified with Him, that the Body of sin may be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin Romans 6. 6.


What measure of sorrow is required in every Receiver (for it is said, The Land
shall mourn Zach. 12. 10. 12.
) the Prophet does fully declare where he says, And they shall look on Him,
etc.

The sorrow for sin, is set forth by our sorrow for such things, whereof we
have the quickest sense. And such a sorrow it is past all question, which is
lasting, which makes us mourn, as David for his son, every day 2 Samuel 13. 37.
. It is a bitter sorrow, and it is accompanied with loathing Ezech. 6. 9. 43.
20. 43.
. How these will stand together; Godly sorrow, I mean, and spiritual joy, is
not to our purpose now: But the greater our sorrow, if it be godly, the greater
our joy. The more sour our sins, the more sweet is Christ; The more loathing
of them, as the alone and greatest evil, the more prizing of Christ, as the
only and greatest good, the choicest of ten thousands. Whether we have this
grace of repentance, the trial is easy; for if we sorrow after a godly sort,
behold what carfulness it works, what clearing of our selves, what
indignation, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
what fear, what vehement desire, what zeal, what revenge! Infallible marks
these of repentance unto life.

It is now with the penitent as once it was, and as ever it will be: A sorrow
to repentance is not a work of a day or two, the hanging down the head like a
bulrush for a day, or an hour, as the custom is. Where there is a breaking
the bands of our yoke, there is a making to go upright Levit. 26. 13.
; a constant walking with God, as those, that have now communion and fellowship
with the Father and the Son. And though this godly sorrow is more secret in
the heart, and there the work also of a true penitent is most, in the well
ordering thereof, and in watching over the issues therefrom; yet is it not
altogether undiscernable to the outward sense; for as Mr. Dearing Heb. 2. 11.
notes well; There is no affection in us according to to the flesh, but, if it
be great, it will appear in its work; much more this which is of the Spirit of
God. If thou be sorrowful, it will make thy face sad Deprendas animi tormenta
latentis in aegro Corpore, Juven. Salyr. 9.
: if joy be within, it makes thy countenance merry; if thou have a flattering
heart, all the members of thy body will straight serve so vile a thing; if
hatred be within thee, thy body will show it forth in all manner of cursed
doing; and there is nothing that can possess the mind, but it leads the
members in obedience of it. How much more, if the Spirit of God have
replenished our minds, with these affections of godly sorrow, and spiritual
joy? And so much to the first requisite.

2. The second is Faith, the hand of the soul, which the Lord creates and
strengthens, to lay hold on eternal life by Jesus Christ.

In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we see a full Redemption wrought, and a
full price paid in His body broken, and blood poured forth. In the bread and
wine (he that Qui dividit perdit.
devides destroys the Sacrament) we have a full and complete nourishment, all
that the soul can desire. But now, as the mouth is opened, so are we filled; As
the heart is enlarged, so do we receive. If the mouth be shut, and the
principle of life be wanting, no matter what dainties are set before us, or
what put in. Therefore we must consider our Interest in the Covenant, and
whether we can lay hold on a promise, for life, reconciliation, and peace: For
the blood of Christ and His Body serve not for the nourishment of any, in whom
they have not been as the seed of regeneration, both in pardon of sin, and
change of the heart, in which conversion stands; we must remember, Sacraments
convert none, but strengthen the converted: To the fainting spirit, they are
means to convey power, they increase strength Isa. 40. 29.
. The Sacraments are as the breasts of the Church, from which the living child
does suck, and is satisfied with consolations; from which the thirsty soul does
milk out, and is delighted with the abundance of her glory Isa. 66.
: But it is the living child that draws comfort here, and the instrument by
which he draws, is Faith, which is Gods gift, as is Repentance; He gives both.

So then, we must examine how provided we come hither, else we come to a well
of living water, but having nothing to draw: or we are like a vessel cast into
the Ocean, which has no mouth, or, if any, it is stopped. The outward man can do
its part; it discerns, tastes, digesteth, the outward signs; But now what
inward principle has my inward man, and what help has it from all this, in
the beholding, tasting, enjoying the spiritual part, Christ and the influence
of His Grace issuing therefrom? This is all the Question, and point to be
examined; what Faith I have? whose work is the same, about the spiritual part,
as is the work of the outward man about the outward. And yet had we all Faith,
I mean justifying faith, we could not receive all that is offered here: and
though we have a weak faith, if true, we shall receive sufficient. Our hearts
(as one notes) cannot comprehend all the wisdom of God in the wind that
blows, Mr. Dearing. Ibid.
how He raises it up, or makes it fall again; how can we understand this
wisdom of our uniting unto Jesus Christ? only this we true members can say,
God has given us faith, in which we may believe it, and out of which such joy
shines in our minds, as crucifieth the world unto us; how far our reason is
from seeing it, it skilleth not, it is sufficient if we can believe it.

We believe in the Lord our God, yet we know not what is his countenance; we
believe and apprehend by hope, His glory; yet neither eye can see it, nor ear
can hear it. We believe and see immortality, yet our heart cannot comprehend,
the height, the breadth, the length, the depth. We believe the resurrection of
the dead, yet we cannot understand such excellent wisdom, how life is renewed
in the dispersed and scattered bones and ashes. We believe our Savior Christ
is man, and we have seen Him and felt Him; yet how He was man, born of a
virgin, all men in the world have no wisdom to declare. Even so we believe,
that our Savior Christ and we be one, He of us, and we of Him, He the head, we
the body, really, substantially, truly joined together; not by joints and
sinews, but by His spirit, of which we have all received; And this unity I
cannot conceive, nor utter, till I know God even as He is, and His holy spirit
which has wrought this blessing.

But yet, though thus secret and undiscernable this work of faith is; we may
take some evidence of the life, and operation thereof, by those things, that
our understanding part does here, in matters below, and of another, and much
inferior nature;

As thus; My mind, by the velocitie and speed of my apprehension, can be many
miles off, upon the naming of the things I love: Then surely my heart is dull
and slow, and wants the principle of a new creature, if, by so lively
representations of the Lord Jesus Christ under these signs, to nourish and
cheer me; if I cannot Eagle-like fly up to heaven unto Him, and on that
carcass fasten and fix my faith, thence to draw strength and refreshing. The
soul can presently be one with that, it delights in, be it profit, be it
pleasure; and it should much convince and ashame us of our flatnesse herein, a
matter of such concernment; And in case we find no such working, then to
withdraw our foot being Tremenda mysteria.
now approaching toward those high, and awful mysteries: For, if our hearts
can open toward the earth, and unite with things there, but are flat and heavy
toward Heaven; no working that way where the Treasure is, the Lord of Glory,
then surely we are no fit guests for this table. For certain it is; That
whenever our soul shall feel its union with God in Christ, all things below
will seem base unto it; the soul cannot unite with them, nor be servant unto
them: use them she may, but she enjoyes God; her union there, parts, unrivets,
and divorceth her from base unions and fellowships with things below. And so
much to the second Grace required in the Receiver.

3. The third is Love: Love to God, who loved us first; and gave His Son,
that we might not perish; Love to to Christ, who so dearly bought us; a Love
as strong as Death; which stirs up all the powers of the Body and Soul to
love Him again; so as we can think nothing too much, or too hard to do or
suffer for Him, who has so abounded toward us. The History of His passion is
more largely set down, then is the History of His Nativitie, Resurrection, or
Ascension; and for this reason it is, That all the circumstances thereof, are
so largely set down, That our hearts should be enlarged after Christ; That we
should have largeness of affection to Him, and these steeped as it were in His
blood, and crucified to His cross, and buried in His grave. And as Love to
Him, so love to our Brother for His sake Amicum in Christo, inimicum propter
Christum.
. It cannot be doubted of in Him, that tastes of this Love Feast; he partakes
of that there, which is the cement, that sodders and joins us together Sanguis
Christi coag^lum Christianorum.
, as the grains in one Loaf; or as the stones in an Arch, one staying up
another; or, to speak in the Scriptures expression, as members of one Body,
nay, which is yet nearer, as members one of another; we partake in one house,
at one table, of one bread; here is a near Communion, and that calls for as
near an union; so the Apostle reasons, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. One God, one Christ,
See Chrysostom. on the 1 Cor. Hom. 1.
one Spirit, one Baptism, one Supper, one Faith; And all this to make us one,
That we may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4 3.
. But above all, The Sacrament of the Supper is ordained for Love. But our love
to our enemies, our showing the kindness of the Lord 2 Samuel 9. 3. first part.
p. 71.
, that is, returning good for evil; This blessing them, who curse us, this is
all the difficulty, and the doubt. And hard it is to corrupt nature. I
remember Salvian says, He that thinks he prays for his enemy, may be much
mistaken; he speaks, he does not pray Si pro adversario orare se cogit,
loquitur, non precatur, lib. 2. page 70.
. And yet, it is much to consider, how far a common and natural light has
lead some here, in this straight way of forgiving an enemy. He was an
implacable brother, who said, let me not live, if I be not revenged of my
brother; The other brother answered, And let not me live, if I be not
reconciled to my brother Plut. de Fralorno amore.
. And they were brothers too, betwixt whom, we read, never any other contention
was, but who should dye for the other Mart. lib. 1. ep. 37.
. So strong a natural affection has been, and so able to endure wrongs, and
to right them with good, which is our rule, and (contrary to former customs
Isid. Pelus. lib. 3. epist. 126. 1 Cor 4. 12. 13. Lege Chrysostom. ad Pop. Ant.
tract. Hom. 9. o. (...). Plus. de Frat. Am.
) wins the Crown or garland. Grace is stronger then Nature, it rivets and
joins men together like twin-members, eyes, hands, and feet; or like twigs on
the same root, or stalk, which stick always together.

But especially, if we suppose two persons communicating together at the Table
of the Lord; we must needs grant, that in this Communion they see that, which
will reconcile implacablenesse it self; for there they see a free offer of
grace and peace, not only to an enemy once, but to enmity it self; an
infinite debt cancelled, a transgressour from the womb, an infinite
transgressour since; yet accepted to mercy. This will beget again a love to
God, and to the most implacable enemy for Gods sake; thoughts of this will
swallow up the greatest injuries. If our thoughts be upon the Ten thousand
talents, we cannot possibly think of requiring the hundred pence; this
Chrysostom Vol. 5. (...), etc. Lege Chrysostom. in cap. 8. ad Romans Hom. 14. p.
206.
presses very fully and usefully in his first sermon upon that parable or
debtor; We must remember always, that much love will follow, as an effect from
the cause, where many sins are forgiven Luke 7. 47. Matthew. 18. 33.
. We cannot but think on the equity of this speech, and how inexcusable it
must leave an implacable man; I forgave thee all thy debt, should not thou
also have had compassion on thy fellow servants. The sum is, and our rule, I
must love my friend in Christ, and my enemy for Christ. Catechismes are large
here, and helps many; and it is hard to meet with new meditations on so old a
subject, handled so fully and usefully by many; but His good spirit lead thee
by the hand, who leads unto all truth.

It remains only, that I give some satisfaction to a question or two; these
they are.

But how if I find not these graces, Repentance, faith, charity to be in me:
how then? May I go to this Table? or go I as a worthy Communicant?

A weighty Question this, of high and universal concernment: For he or she
that eats and drinks unworthily, are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord
1. Cor. 11. 27.
The guilt of blood lies upon them; Now the Lord ever puts a price upon blood,
even upon the blood of beasts; upon the blood of man, much more; upon that
blood, that was shed for man, how great a price! being the blood of God, and
the price of souls.

So then we must be well advised what we do; For if we spill man's blood (as God
forbid we should, for blood cries; yet if we would) we have another blood to
cry unto, which cries for mercy; but if we spill this Blood, and tread it under
foot, what then? whither then shall we fly for mercy, when, with our own
hands, we have plucked down our Sanctuary? We spill, we cast away our right
precious medicine: We must then be well advised what we do; and be humbled very
low for what we have done; even to girding with sackcloth; and wallowing in
dust. Jer. 6. 26.
For who is he, that may not say, even in this case, Deliver me from blood
guiltiness, O Lord the God of my salvation Psalm. 51.
: And blessed be God, even the God of our salvation, that we can, in His Name,
go to blood for pardon of this crimson sin, even the spilling of His Blood,
for so three thousand did before us Acts 2.
; And written it is for our example: For when the stain of This Blood was fresh
on their hands, and hearts too, yet, being pricked at their hearts for it, even
for the shedding of that Blood, they cried to that Blood, and were pardoned.
And so having premised this, I come to the question, which has two branches,
and so shall have a double answer briefly; first to the first branch.

If these graces be wanting, may I go?

It is not safe. If thy case be so wanting upon the balance, unbroken heart to
do, with a broken Christ? What relish can a dead man take in the sweetest
dainties? What pardon can an implacable man expect from the Lord, who paid our
debt, to the utmost farthing? What comfort can that soul fetch from seeing
blood poured out for him, who cannot at least, pour out his soul in
confessions before Him? Answer thy self at this point: for, if I answer, I must
needs say, though to the confusion of my own face, that certainly, there is
required of every communicant, that there be some Analogy, proportion,
conformity or agreement betwixt our hearts, the frame of them, and the great
duty or employment we are upon; I mean thus; That we bring mortified lusts
before a crucified Lord; a bruised spirit before a broken Body; a soul fitly
addressed to such a feast: Some drops of mercy in a free and full forgiveness
of trespasses against us, before such an Ocean of mercy swallowing up the guilt
of so many trespasses against Him.

And surely though I define nothing at this point, yet truth there is in what I
say, For I remember Chrysostom says (...).
, That Disciple^ only are to come to this holy Table, such, who are taught
from Christ's mouth, and live according to what they are taught. And the danger
of not being such an one, and yet coming to this feast, is certainly very great
too, for the Father adds in that same place (...).
; That he would rather suffer his own heart blood to be spilt, then that he
would give the blood of Christ to a man of unclean hands, of an impure life,
and known so to be; to an unworthy Communicant and discovered to come
unnworthily (...).
. If the danger be such in giving, then much more is the danger great in
Receiving, though indeed an impenitent person cannot be said properly to
receive Christ, but rather to reject Him. But yet, in propriety of our speech,
we say, he receives, whereas so none can do truly and properly, but a Disciple.
Therefore the Father resumes it again, saying, he must he a Disciple, that
comes to this feast: If not, I give and he receives, but it is a sharp sword in
stead of bread (...). Matt. 26. Hom. 83. o.
. So I leave it upon examination, and pass to the second branch; Thy
worthiness.

Do I come as a worthy guest?

No sure; But this is the great enquiry, what worthiness? If worthiness in
acceptance: But we will make no mention thereof at this time, none at all,
but, for thy better instruction, of His worthiness only, for whose sake our
unworthiness is not imputed unto us For suppose thou had all Grace,
Repentance first; Thou could gird thy self with sackcloth, and, as the Lord
commands, wallow in dust, so loathing thy self; and had all faith too, even
like precious faith; and all charity, which thou can extend like the
heavens, as the Father expresses, and I cannot mention it too often: suppose
all this; could thou then think thy self a worthy Communicant? I trow not.
If thou were worthy, what should thou do there, It is a feast designed for
the halt, the lame, the blind, for the faint, for those that have no strength,
no worthiness in themselves, none at all. If thou had not wants very many,
why should thou come thither, where is such a fullness? Thou come thither
as to a well of salvation, which never drains it self, but into empty vessels,
(mark that) And therefore the more thou art wanting, the more likely, nay out
of all doubt, thou shall be filled; He fills the hungry, the empty soul, but
the rich He sends empty away. Therefore open not thy mouth, mention not thy
worthiness, but the worthiness of the Lord Jesus Christ, for He only was
found Worthy.

I remember Luthers words upon this point of Catechism, they are to this
purpose.

This thought, I am not prepared for this Supper, I am an unworthy guest for
this Table, will make a man sit down astonished, and keep him off for ever from
approaching thereunto. When we consider our worthiness and the excellency of
that Good, which is offered there at that Table, and then compare them
together, our wrothinesse is like a dark lantern, compared to the clear Sun.
Therefore let this be thy trial here, says he;

Thou want a broken contrite heart, but do thou not in thy prayer pray *?
that is, pray earnestly (...); Tom. 6. de oratione.
, (a man may but James 5. 17.
speak or prate in prayer, as was said, and so speak he may that he hears not
himself, and expects he that God should hear him, says Chrysostom?) do
thou not, I say, pray earnestly that the Lord would bruise it, give thee a
tender spirit, sensible of all appearances of evil, of all that may offend?
Thou feel thy heart dedolent and hard, the greatest of all evils, but is it
not thy burden, and thy greatest sorrow, that oppresses thee, that such a
heart thou have? Does not thy stone in thy heart (It is in every ones heart
more or less) lie as a burdensome stone upon thee? Thou want faith; but
do thou not cry out, Lord work it, Lord increase it in me? Thou want
love; But do thou not pray? Lord spread abroad that Grace in my heart, that
it may abound, and overcome all wrath, i^placablenesse, self-seeking,
self-pleasing, all in me, while I am my self, being by nature the child of
wrath. Have thou wants? I know thou have, and more then thou know of; but
come to Him, who promises to supply all wants Phil. 4. 19.
. No matter how many wants there be, so thou art pressed, and laden with them;
so thou have a true sense and feeling of them. Bring all thy wants hither,
where is a fullness, a full Treasury, and that ordained (I say again) for
supply of all wants. Thou art unworthy, thou know thou art, yes and more
unworthy then thou can think thy self, but art thou sensible thereof? very
sensible. Bless God that thou art so, and now come, come Revel. 22. 17.
, The Spirit and the Bride say Come, And let him that hears say come. And let
him that is a thirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely. Come then and fear not, Come, and welcome, for though thou art no
worthy guest, yet thou art an invited guest. why? I will tell thee in Luthers
words, And for this very reason, because thou art unworthy Prorsus propterea
quia indignus.
. There is a great disproportion, a wide difference betwixt Gods thoughts, and
man's thoughts; Man may have high and glorious thoughts of himself, and yet be
nothing; nay an abomination in Gods esteem Rev. 3. 17.
; So may he be low and vile in his own sight, even to loathing, and be high in
Gods account, even to a gracious acceptance Rev. 29.
.

Only then beg, entreat, cry for the spirit of the penitent, who can gird
themselves with sackcloth, and wallow in dust and find sweetness there, even
by putting their mouths into the dust, even thence fetching hope Lam. 3. 29. 1 Samuel 14. 4.
. In lifting up the eye to Christ, there is hope, none at all in looking
downward: Breath after Him, cleave unto Him. Break through all difficulties,
as Jonathan did, and make way to the rock; if it be possible to perish at the
fountain of Salvation, or to thirst at the head-spring of Life, there thirst,
there die. But set thy face steadfastly, looking to Christ, through all, through
flesh and grace (for grace is but a creature) through all; and thy salvation is
sure. This in way of answer, which we may find more at large in Luthers short
Catechism.

So much for thy provision, and to stir up thy preparation, against thy
approach to the Lords Table. I conclude this, as I find a chapter concluded
touching this very subject, Mr Reynolds Medit* on the Lords Supper. Chap. 12 o.
.

How pure ought we to preserve those doors of the soul, from filthiness and
intemperance, at which so often the Prince of glory Himself will enter in? The
thought hereof is of high and sovereign use before we come to this Table, and
it is of no less use after we have been there. Certainly we will strive to
preserve the doors of the soul, those eyes and ears, that mouth and that
heart also pure from filthiness and intemperance, through which and into which
we profess that the Prince of Glory Himself is entered in.

CHAP. VI.
Of Wedlock: how sacred that band: how fundamental to comfort. I. Our well and
orderly entrance into that honorable estate. II. Our well ordering our selves
therein according to the dignity and honor thereof.

IT follows now, that we make some provision also, against the other solemn
Ordinance, wherein two are made one; That is in the day of our marriage; which
day has an influence into all the remaining days of our mortality: For, of
all our civil affairs, there is none more weighty, important, of greater
consequence, either for extremest outward vexation, and hearts grief, or
extraordinary sweet contentment, and continual peace, then wedlock is; it is
as the last sum, put at the foot of our reckoning; whereby we may read, what
all comes to. As this proves, we say, it goes well with us, or ill: All our
Temporalls, comforts and erosses lie here, as within a little map or table
(...) etc. Eurip. orest. p. ^^.
We must walk softly here, and very considerately, it being, according to the
old saying, like a stratagem in war; we cannot err and recall it. We marry
for life as was said, nay, for eternity.

I shall note here for the more comfortable entrance into this estate.

1. The headie proceeding of some young folk.

2. The notorious abuse of the Minister.

3. The cunning contrivance of some parents.

4. And the cousening crafty concealment of those, who are more at liberty to
dispose of themselves, I mean widows and widowers. These things, I shall only
point at in the first place, the better to make way unto that, I principally
intend.

1. The proceeding herein of the younger folk, is like themselves, rash and
headie; as if what they did to day, could be undone a month after; And so they
pay for their rashness, and have time enough for repentance all their life
after. How often have I known two green heads, who could think of nothing but the
present, give their consents for the undoing of themselves? But because their
consent is nothing, without a fourth person (for we make no doubt but the maid
or manservant is the third person, always a pander Servi corrup^elae juvenum.
in these cases) therefore, they have agreed also with a Minister, for so poor
a reward, as will pay his score at the alehouse some month after, that he
shall come in and witness their consent; then, which belongs to the office,
(as he straineth it) to put to the Churches seal, as a sure witness, that all
is made firm.

The Parents quickly hear of it, and we may be sure, it wounds deep; For now
(as it is most likely in such a proceeding) neither their sorrow, nor their
wealth, nor their counsel can possibly redeem their child from perpetual
thraldom.

A Minister, I call this man, who knit this couple, and made them one, and a
minister he will be called; whether we will or no; be it so; but in my
construction, it is in a large sense, so an hangman is a minister also, and in
this case, he does but the office of a very executioner; yet, which does more
debase him, in a most unlegall way. And such an one, I saw once standing before
an honorable Court, for joining, by virtue of his much abused office, two
persons, in condition very unequal; and as unseasonably too, in the night;
within less then one hours time after the Father of him, now newly yoked, was
departed out of this world; his orders (I think they are called so; and so
called to put such men in mind of their duty even to walk orderly) were taken
from him, and some other penalty inflicted upon his purse, which he regarded
not, for the ale house had dried and shrunken up that before hand; and some
restraint of liberty (but he was a prisoner before:) For any further
punishment, it is not within the verge of that Courts jurisdiction. These
points following are too high for me to examine; whether the knot which this
fellow has knit, be of that strength, as with us it is accounted? Some think
not so, and have their grounds for so thinking; but if so, I mean, if being so
unlawfully knit, it cannot be lawfully undone; then, whether our provision of
laws in Church or Commonwealth, are not too short for the pulling out of these
cankers? These be matters too high for me, but, I am sure of these two things,
which I speak very feelingly, as one who knows the heart of a Parent;

1. That my child is a much more valuable commodity, then is my purse, my
horse or my mare. A child is a fathers earthly treasure, the other are trifles
in comparison, and being lost, may be made up again. It is not so with a child;
if a ruffian-like-hath stolen her affections, or her away, and another, alike
person or Priest, has married them, this loss is unreparable, the Parent
cannot recover or make it up again. And what can recompense this loss? A
child is stolen away; she is unequally yoaked for eternity, for life I am
sure. The Parent now may complain sadly and that is all, for help he cannot.

2. This I know also, That, those of that sacred order (for so their orders
have ranked them) deal herein most dishonourably and unworthily, and do offer
such an affront to Church and Commonwealth, as in no one thing, more or a
greater opprobrie.

I think now of the Institution of Marriage, how sacred that was, the honor
and dignity of the same, and how this Minister has abased himself, and
vilified this sacred ordinance, and now I commend him to the eye of the civil
Magistrate, and from his hand, to the hand of his fellow Minister, the hangman
I mean, for, I pray for him, That he may suffer as a notorious malefactor:
Because he does most notoriously abuse his office, scandalize his sacred order;
and, which is yet worse, does more hurt to the Commonwealth, then has the most
notorious Rogue in Newgate. I am very sensible and sure of what I say. The
servant before spoken of, must be remembered too; the Cart or Bride-well is a
fit punishment for her, but too easy a punishment for such an one, who, for a
trifle, will hazard the casting away her Masters jewel. I have done with the
pandar and his fellow Minister both.

3. Sometimes I have observed, that the Parents on the one side, have been well
pleased, and contented to wink and give secret allowance to an unwarrantable
proceeding; the Child they think, will choose better for it self, then they
could have done.

And here I must tell also, what I have seen and observed further, which is;
That crosses have presently followed the conclusion of the match, which one
side gave secret allowance unto, in hope of advancing their Child; either a
present separation has followed; The son has been posted away into some
foreign Country, else some strangeness of affection; for such love is quickly
cold, bird like (as Clemens (...), (...). ^. 10. page 144.
says) it cannot be fixed. Some thing or other has happened that crossed, and
blasted all their hopes.

4. I have observed some also, being at their own liberty to make their own
choice, not so careful and upright this way; They have carried things in a
cloud: some things they have made more then were, some things less; some
things they have concealed, which should have been made known; and some things
have been presented under a color and show, and all to compass a poor end,
some wealth and repute amongst neighbors; but things have proved contrary,
they have embraced a shadow, and lost the substance. They preferred a poor
accessory before the principal, and so have been paid with wind, with
counterfeit coin instead of current. I could instance in some now, widows and
widowers, who at this present do smart openly, and in the eyes of others, for
their reservednesse, their secret and cunning contrivance and imposture this
way; nor could it be otherwise, for it is not Gods way, we cannot expect a
blessing in it. What I compass by guile and cunning, does but serve to
increase my after discomfort; A foundation (...) Piad. Nem. od. 8.
laid in unrighteousness will be like a tottering wall; at the best, but like
a house built upon the sands, and tending to ruin. And therefore this should
be a warning to those, who have any hand in this so weighty, and fundamental
a business, the issues whereof are so great; And hence follows their rule,
which is this;

Look wherein a man expects the greatest good (and his expectation is larger in
no other thing, then in marriage, being most ancient, important, fundamental
to a sweet society of life, and a great number of mutual obligations, and
profitable offices flowing thence) therein now, in a business of so high
concernment; Let a man proceed in the greatest evidence and clearenesse of
dealing, not swerving one jot, or hairs breadth from the ways of sincerity
and truth; This is the direction, and I would have it evidence my mind, when
my tongue cannot.

And now, child (to make application of all to thy self, and way for thy
better provision) considering the premises; That marriage is a business of
such, and so great consequence, and concernment; That the band is so strait,
that nothing can dissolve it but death; or that which is to be punished with
death; that, if there be an error at first, it is hardly recoverable
afterward; considering all this; I, that might command thee, do entreat thee,
by that worthy name called upon Thee, and thy sacred vow then given; By all the
engagements of a child; such be all thy parents travel for thy good: By all
the comforts thou can hereafter look for; Be well advised first before thou
do proceed in this great business, which requires such and so much
deliberation; Be, I say, well advised first; By whom? not by thine own heart,
ask not counsel there, it may be, and is in such cases, strangely corrupted;
nor by thine own ear, there is prejudice; nor eye, that is blinded; nor
affections, they are troubled, and can give no certain answer; Nor by thy self,
for now thou art not thy self; Thy judgment and reason are quite steeped in
affection Affectiones facile faciunt opiniones.
. Yield thy self wholly up, to those, who have the oversight and charge over
thee, that is my charge; There leave this great business and submit; Here show
thy obedience as thou look to prosper.

All thy deportment, from the years of understanding and onward, thy gesture,
thy words, thy actions, should all, at all times, sweetly and child-like speak
out, and show forth thy duty to, and due observance of thy parents; So as all
that look on thee, may hear and read it in thy whole carriage; and all short
enough to answer thy debt. But here is the principal business, wherein they
that have the charge over thee look to be observed; And as thou do observe
them here, so look to prosper. I will read a short story here, wherein we shall
see a great example of a childs duty at this point; The greater the person
was, the greater the example is: yet not so great the person, in respect of
place and dignity; but we are greater then he in respect of name and
profession; And therefore, if we Christians fall short at this point, our
disobedience will be, as the more notorious, so the more abominable. Xenophon
relates the story thus; Instit. Cyri. lib. 8. p. 665.

Cyaxares would have espoused his daughter to Cyrus the great, offers him a
portion answerable; A large country for her Dowry, great gifts besides: Cyrus
thus nobly makes answer; I like the Stock well, I cannot dislike the Branch;
The portion pleases and proportion both; all lovely and desirable. But, Sir,
I am a Child, and must deport my self herein Childe-like; A Child is no
matchmaker, unless in childish and trivial things, things of a low nature,
and of but ordinary concernment; A Child must not treat at such a point as
this. I have, Sir, a Father and a Mother both, as they will treat and conclude,
so shall I determine and resolve you; This is the example, and see the old
discipline, and awful respect of children in old Time to Fathers and
Governors. And but equal it is, and very reasonable, that so it should be;
for, if the Parents will determine nothing till they ask the maid Genesis 24.
57, 58.
, (whereof afterward) how unchild like were it (to say no more) for the maid
to say, or do, any thing till she ask the Parents? Esau was a bad Child of a
good Father, and he showed (says Chrysostom) his untowardnesse betimes, for
he Ibid.
matched himself, without his Parents consent. And that we may know how ill
such matching thrives; It is upon everlasting record, That they were a grief
of mind unto Isaac and Rebecca Genesis 26. 35.
. And certainly if we grieve the hearts of our good Parents, we do, in so
doing, block up our own way to our desired blessing: so then, the best counsel
I can give, and the best provision a child can make against this great and
solemn time, and for the better success in this great business is; to look
carefully, first to its single charge; And then to leave the rest to them,
whose charge it is, and have taken upon them faithfully to discharge the same.

The first is a Childs principal duty, This ruling of one well, The
discharging of that little great-Cure, so as a man (souls have no sexes, as was
said) may quit himself, like himself, in that single account. This I say, is
every single. Bodies principal duty; Therefore of this first.

1. We are by nature ambitious of rule, like the Bramble, the more unfit to
govern others, the more desirous. We love to be in authority, and have others
under us, before we have got command over our selves. We would take upon us,
the charge of more souls (so does He or She, that enter into this condition,
and they must be accountable for them too, the greatest cure in the world)
before we know how weighty the charge of one soul is. Marriage is an
honorable estate, and if well ordered, there is nothing in the world more
beautiful; And that it may be so, we must be well ordered beforehand, as
befits the honor due to so sweet a society; And it were well if our
sufficiency this way, and means for the well ordering of our selves, were well
tried (as in some Commonwealths it has been) before we are suffered to enter
into so holy an order: unbrideled humors and unreclaimed desires are not fit
for this strait bond. This band is strait, and of any band holds in the
shortest, how ever we may think the contrary; neither our own will, nor the
liberty we may take, but right judgment, sanctified reason, and expediency
must guide us; else that, which should suppress sin, may increase and foment
it: and that, which in true use does refresh and comfort, will weaken and
exhaust nature.

They that marry, marry not for themselves but for posterity, family, friends:
matters of great importance and of great burden; But few there are that
consider it beforehand, and therefore few that carry themselves, as befitteth
the ordinance, orderly and honorably in it, whence it comes to pass, that
that which is the greatest good, proves the greatest evil, the fuel of sin,
and matter of the greatest discontent.

A man may live to forty or fifty years, and yet be very unadvised here; and
so run on as the most do, of whom we may say; they know not what they do. A due
consideration before hand, and care how to discharge this single cure would
prevent all this, and set a man in a ready way for a future blessing. It was
usefully answered to a friend desirous to know his friends resolution, how fit
it was for him being a single man to change his condition: If your own desires
(said his friend) find you work enough to reclaim and keep them in; you had
best forbear yet to take upon you more work in the charge over others: If it
be an hard task to steer your little boat in a little River, it is not safe
to venture your little skill in steering a ship through a wide Sea Lips. cent.
1. cp. 36.
.

These words imply but thus much; That every single person must examine himself
well and seriously in this point; how he has discharged his single account;
how he has ordered his little house, himself. And if he fall short here, as
certainly, if he deceive not himself, he will find himself short enough; Then
he or she (but we respect not sexes) must think it as well a mercy, as the very
reason that God does not trust them with more; their unfaithfulness would be
the more, and their account the greater: He that is not faithful in a little,
will not be faithful in more, nor shall he have much committed unto him.

This intends every single bodies instruction, more specially thine; Take a
special charge (my child) over thy self, rule well thine own house, I mean
thy self; God has made every man a governor there. The poor man, that has
none to govern, yet may be a king in himself. When thou have learnt to rule thy
own spirit, thou will be fitter to be subject to another, and to rule others
also. Look up to God, and look well to thy affections, that they get not the
upper hand, for then they will keep reason under foot. Look well to thy outward
senses, and make a covenant there; beguile not thy self with such a mockery
(...) etc. Isid Pelus. lib. 4. epist. 24. See epist. 2. 3. 4. 12. ejusdem
libri. Quid hac voluntate mendacius? Aug. de civit. 14. 4.
as this; To pray against temptations, and then to run into them; If thou
loosest thy command over thy self, thou loosest thy self; for thou will be as a
city without a wall, where those that are in, may go out, and the enemies
without may come in at their pleasure: So, where there is not a government set
up, there sin breaks out, and Satan breaks in without control.

This is a sacred Truth, not to be doubted of: Believe me now in what follows;
I have known many, but more there have been, whom I have not known, who
(neglecting this single charge; and casting off the government of themselves)
have poisoned all their springs of comfort at the very head (...). Eurip. Her.
Fur. p. 46.
, and blasted their hopes in the very blossom, and blocked up their own way to
the comfort they greedily catched at, but in a very shadow. Nay, which is more,
I have known them, who have kindled a fire in their youth, that has consumed
them in their age; and some remaining coals have singed the child, not then
born.

Know it a truth not to be doubted, and so plain, that it needs not
explication; therefore what is possible, keep thy heart as a chaste Virgin unto
Christ, even to thy marriage day, and ever: Thy posterity, and the blessing
upon them depends upon it. And so much touching this so necessary a charge,
this so prime a duty, The looking well to our selves, our single charge;

Which cannot be to purpose, unless these single persons look up constantly to
God, who is the chiefest Overseer; (Parents and others are but deputies under
Him) who leads us on and holds us in every good way, and has said, I will not
leave thee, nor forsake thee (...). Five negatives surely I will not, verily
verily I will not. Heb. 13. 5.
: And this so great a business they must commend unto Him (for it is a chief
point of their charge) with the same earnestness as they desire to succeed and
prosper in it. Our Lord Christ spent that whole night in prayer, before He
chose His disciples: Thereby teaching us (weak and frail creatures, who have no
subsistence of, or in our selves, but all from, and in God, what we ought to do
at all times; but more especially then, when matters of importance are in hand.

It is of great importance, how and in what manner matters of importance are
entered upon, and begun; where we may note; that nothing shall prove a blessing
to me, which I have not commended to the Lord, and gained it from Him by
prayer; so then, the young persons must look up to that hand, that disposes
all things, and to that hand they must submit. They must leave God to His own
time, they must not tie Him to theirs; He is wise and wonderful, and
accordingly does He work for those, whose hearts are stayed upon Him.

I have observed those, who have waited Gods time (which is ever best, He does
all things well and in their season) so preferred in their match at the last,
that it has quite exceeded their own expectation, and the expectation of their
friends; and this at such a time when they least expected, and had the least
hope. I have certainly observed it so. They that wait on the Lord, shall once
say they are remembered, and in a fit season: But they, who like an
unserviceable piece of Ordinance, fly off before they are discharged; they who
will put out themselves before their time, have broken themselves with haste,
and proved like proffered wares, of the least esteem, quite disregarded. They
must wait on God herein, whose hand leads into every good way, and gives a
blessing in it: And they must wait His time also, which is a chief point of
their duty.

3. The younger folk must leave this weighty business in their hands, who are
deputed under God to take the cure over them, and the care thereof: And this if
the single parties shall do, they have then discharged their double duty,
before mentioned, which consisted, first, in the well ordering themselves, and
so discharging their single cure: And then in leaving the rest, for the
changing of their condition, wholly in their hands, whose charge it is, and
whose duty also it is faithfully to discharge the same, and now follows; for
it is necessary I should add something thereof: I mean, touching the overseers
duty.

They, that are overseers of the child (Parents, or deputed so to be) must be
earnest with the Lord at this point, for it is a main duty; house and riches
are the inheritance of Fathers, and a prudent wife is from the Lord Prove. 19.
14.
. Parents may give a good portion, but a good wife is Gods gift; a great mercy
and greatly to be desired. This is their first duty; The next is;

2. They must choose the man; (we regard not sexes) I say a man, not a boy, not
a girl, before the face can discern the sex; parents must avoid the
inconveniency of haste in so important a business, which helps to fill the
world with beggary and impotency See Censure of Travel. sect. 7.
. And they must choose the man; I say the man, not his money: It is well where
both meet, and then they may choose and wink, but that is not very ordinary,
and therefore they must be the the more watchful; so where there is a flush of
money, an high-tide of prosperity, there is commonly a low ebb of better
matters, which indeed denominates a man: prosperity is a great snare, (the
greater, when the young heir begins at the top first, at the same peg or
height where the Father ended) and it is many times accompanied with some
idleness of brain Ad omne votum fluente fortuna lascivit ocium. Quint. Dec. 3.
p 32.
. I need not fear this; but yet I say in way of caution, choose the man, and
then the money; when I say, a man, I mean such an one, who can find meat in a
wilderness; who carries his riches about him, Cic. Parad. Sen. ep. 9. 2 Chronicles.
25. 9.
when he is stripped of his money; who has his chief comeliness within, and yet
not uncomely without, such a man they should choose. If this man be wanting,
the child shall not set her eyes upon him, the parent must not. If some money
be wanting, no great want, it is easily supplied; it is certain, if other
things answer, some want that way, I mean in money, is not of sufficient value
to hold off, or make a breach. As it was said of the talents, The Lord is able
to give much more then this r; But if goodness be wanting, it is a greater
want then is in a light piece of gold, which in a great payment will pass not
withstanding; as many great wants pass current, where there is a great
portion. Parents must show their wisdom here* else they fail in a prime duty.
They must choose goodness, and not account it an accessory. Better want the
money then the man See Chrysostom. of the choice of a wife. Ser. 28. Tom. 5. Non
sum ex insano amatorum genere, qui vitia ^iam exosculantur, ubi semel forma
capti sunt. Haec sola est quae me delectat pulchritudo, etc. Calv. ep. 16.
.

Religion Mr Bolton direct. p. 236.
and the fear of God, as it it is generally the foundation of all humane
felicity, so must it in special be accounted the ground of all comfort and
bliss, which man and wife desire to find in the enjoying each of other. There
was never any gold, or great friends; any beauty or outward bravery, which tied
truly fast and comfortably any marriage knot. It is only the golden link and
noble tie of Christianity and grace, which has the power and privilege to
make so dear a bond lovely and everlasting Mendax est omnis secularis
amicitia, quae divini timoris vinculo non est ligata. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Matthew.
^atin. tantum.
; which can season and strengthen that nearest inseparable society with true
sweetness, and immortality. So far Mr Bolton; and so much touching the
Overseers duty, in making the choice.

3. There is another main point, That they give the child leave to approve of
the choice. As the Child offers the greatest affront to Parents in giving her
consent without their leave and privitie; so shall Parents offer the greatest
wrong to the child, that can be thought of, in concluding a match without or
against the childs allowance; we have an old example hereof, and a standing
rule, We will, call etc Genesis 24. 57. 58.


To use constraint and force here, is the greatest piece of injury that is
done in the world; yet so injurious have some Parents been, and so they have
compassed their end, some estate for their child, but quite forfeited the
comfort of estate, and child both. The parents care was for that the child
least cares for; and neglected the main, the childs liking of the choice.

This is most injurious dealing; nay more, not unlike his (and that was most
inhumane) who joined the living to the dead Virg. Aen. 7.
. Smithfield and other places have told us the sad sequells of such matches. So
then, this is the next thing belonging to the Parents charge; They will not
proceed without the childs consent.

But it will be said (as many times it falls out) The Parents have made a fit
choice, and have asked the childs consent, but cannot have it, nor any reason
(except a woman's reason) why it refuses.

And indeed so it may well be; for the elder sort cannot always give reason of
what they like or dislike; (and when they can, their reason is unreasonable in
such cases, no better then folly See first part. chap. 4. 13. 4. p 55.
;) much less sometimes can the younger. And if so, then the child must be
drawn on by all fair means, and the plainest Arguments, such as true wisdom
and discretion can suggest, whereby to win upon it, and sweetly to incline the
will; And if after some time of trial, they cannot (by such fair means)
prevail, then the worl^ is wide enough, they must make another choice; they
must not use force, oh by no means.

I think now of the sad and heavy consequences herefrom: So long as my child
has a principle of life to carry her to Church, let her not be borne thither
as upon others shoulders; for she matches for her self principally, and for her
life; let it be with her full consent.

4. It is proper to the parents charge, and it is a point of their wisdom
also, to be watchful herein, that the parties have as little sight one of the
other, as well may be, till there be some likelihood of proceeding. And then
but sparingly too, till the match be made up. There are two things necessary in
all matters of weight; That we have Argus his eyes, and Braiareus his hands
Prima actionum Argo committtenda sunt, extrema Briareo. De Aug. 6. 41. p. 201.
; That is; that we walk leisurely, and circumspectly, looking with all our
eyes, and deliberating with all our counsels before we determine; and when so
we have done, then to dispatch speedily. Young folk are good at the latter,
they will conclude quickly, they are quick at dispatch: but in point of
foresight they are no body. They spell the rule backward, they dispatch first,
and deliberate afterward; which causes so much trouble in the house, and
sorrow in the world. They think not, what they do, they do to eternity.
Parents must balast them here, for they are like a ship without it: Parents
must foresee and forecast with all their eyes, and more if they had them,
before young folk go to far in this business. Let this objection be nothing;
I must eat good store of salt with him or her first, whom I would make my
friend afterward; There is some use in it, but not here betwixt young parties.
If their affections meet for the present, they examine not, what may cause a
disagreement hereafter. Let the parents look to that, and judge of their
dispositions; they may do it, and they ought; the younger parties, cannot,
their judgment is steeped in affection, as was said, they have little
discerning further then as may fit the present; but one or both can so entangle
themselves, and very quickly, that if the match should break, the weaker breaks
with it, and carries the trouble of it to the grave. I have observed it so
also; and I tell no more, but mine own observations all along. Let them have as
little familiarity one with another as possibly may be, till the match be made
up, and then as befitteth Christian modesty.

5. And now I suppose the match treated upon, proceeded in and concluded in
such a way, as is most agreeable to Gods will and word, for in so doing we may
expect a blessing. There is but one thing remains, as a close to that great
business; The solemnizing thereof according to the same rule.

And here we require the parents care and circumspection, at no point or
circumstance more wanting; yet at no time more needful, for it is the last and
chief point of their duty, and evidenceth what their sincerity has been in
all they did before, touching their proceeding in and concluding the match:
They must remember now, and consider with all consideration, That they are on
this solemn day laying the foundation of a new house, or family; now we know,
what care we take in laying the foundation: They are now so joining two, that
they make two one; and this they can do by joining hands, but there is but One,
and He only, that can join hearts, and keep them joined; That marries them to
Himself, and each to other, making them that day, and all their days of one
heart in one house. This is a great work, and peculiar to Him, who is one God
blessed for ever. Therefore a main point of circumspection it is, that they do
nothing this day whereby to offend His eyes, who gave them their child, all
that is lovely and comfortable in their child; all the good they have, or can
expect: Who makes a Unity, and keeps a Unity in the bond of peace. Certainly
I am upon a great point of duty. O how careful should we be, that we give no
offense here! And yet how is this care wanting? May we not complain here, as
Chrysostom in his days In Genesis 24. verse 67. Hom. 48. o and Hom. 56 o. and
Tom. 5. ser. 18.
? How are marriages solemnized, and in a manner, how uncomely for Christians!
in such a manner, with such preparations, as if the purpose and intent were,
that the devil should be the chief guest called in thither, and a blessing
shut out.

I remember the same Fathers words in another place; If the minstrells be
within, Christ is without; or if He does come in, He turns them out (...). In
Coloss. cap. 4. Hom. 12. o.
. I will not say so, lest I should strain the Fathers words, for I cannot take
his meaning so: Music is a science not to be despised, and though it be not
congruous for mourning, yet it is for a feast; I suppose, there we are now. And
though we are so, yet this I will say, and all that have common reason will say
so with me, where such songs are, as are usual at such feasts, there Christ is
not, that is certain. He is excluded: and let parents well consider, what a
guest they have shut forth: such a one, who has done all for them, from whom
they expect all for hereafter. And here now, thou that art a parent shall be
judge in thine own case, supposing it to be thus:

Thou have no means whereby to prefer thy child, none at all; thou could
not give it so much as her wedding clothes: But a friend thou have, who would
do all for thee, all to thy very hearts desire, and more. Tell us now, would
thou forget this friend, on the wedding day? no sure, that thou would not;
who ever was forgot, he should be remembered sure enough. Thy engagement to the
Lord Christ is much more, and much stronger, I cannot tell thee how much more,
but infinitely more, that it is; can thou then forget to invite Christ to the
wedding? Certainly no, if reason or civilitie can prevail any thing: nay,
before and above all (or else it is nothing, for He must be chief and Lord
where He comes) thou will, as the same Father advises, call Christ thither
(...). In ep. ad Coloss Hom. o.
: for certainly, a marriage feast cannot be well ordered, if it be not, as once
it was, even thus; And both Jesus was called, and His Disciples to the marriage
John 2. 2.
. Suppose it so, and the parents have quitted themselves well, for things are
done decently and in order. But now, here is a grave question, for thus it will
be said; Great reason we see, that we should invite Christ, but how can we do
it? He is in Heaven, and we are on earth; He is a spirit, we flesh. That And
when ye have done so, according to knowledge, then observe an Analogy or
congruitie in this business; as thus; would you know how you may invite
Christ? As thou do thy much honored friend before spoken of; Thou do
solemnly entreat his company that day; thy preparations are answerable to that
respect thou bear unto him; such company, such cheer, such a communion, as
is every way suitable. After this manner invite Christ; but remembering still,
both Christ and his Disciples, they stand close together, and can never be
parted.

But if Christ come in, our mirth must go out; He marres so it is said, or so
it is thought. Why? It is certain; there is a Christian liberty Christ's own
allowance. If ever mirth be comely, then at a wedding dinner: if ever good
cheer be in season, and some exceeding that way both in mirth and cheer, then
at such a feast; it is not properly a feast without it, not a marriage feast I
am sure: And such a feast it is even by allowance from our great Master of that
feast. But now we must take this along with us: 1. There is great cause, that
we should watch over our selves, and over our affections now, more specially,
because, where God gives a liberty, there man is prone to make an excess.

2. We must account that a mad mirth, which grieves the Spirit of God. 3. That
to be a most unkind requital of the Lord, where He has made our table like a
full pasture, there to exalt the heart, or to lift up the heel. And all this we
are apt to do, therefore must we be the more circumspect, and watchful over
our selves at such a time, that things may be done decently and in order; that
all may show forth Christian honesty, prudence, wisdom, modesty. And this,
because that day, having an influence into all our following days, may be so
disposed and passed over, that it may be a pledge of a blessing upon all the
rest. And this is according to Gods holy ordinance.

And so much, Child, for thy better provision and preparation for this great
and solemn business; Of convenient entrance into this honorable estate,
wherein I have discovered the great abuses and disorders about it, for thy
better warning; and the more to engage thee to thy duty, which was twofold: The
well looking to thy self, thy single cure, and then looking up to God, leaving
the rest in their hands, who are thy parents, or deputed so to he; What their
charge is, we have heard, even their five fold duty.

It follows now, that I add something touching our Christian-like managing
this worthy and honorable estate; as befitteth the honor of it, whereon
depends our comfortable living in it.

2. We suppose now, that affections at the first meeting II..
are strongest, like a springtide; there are some certain flushes, as I may
say, of Love, and Joy, from the present enjoyment each of other. Here then is
required more wisdom then we have to moderate our affections (now in their hot
fit) and to temper them with knowledge and discretion: For this we must know,
that there is as much difference betwixt these sudden flushes of love, and a
well grounded affection, as is betwixt the burning heat of a fever, and the
natural heat of a sound and healthy body.

It is of sovereign use to help us in the guiding the stream of our affections
in the right channel, to consider; Who it is, that makes the Creature so
suitable, lovely and beautiful; who it is, I say, that adorns and beautifies
both the Bridegroom, and the Bride. To forget this, seems as unreasonable, as
it is impossible for a maid to forget her ornament, or a Bride her attire Jer.
2. 32.
. And if it be remembered, it will beget some reciprocation, both of affection
and duty, to Him, from whom we have all our comeliness Ezekiel. 16. 14.
, and the stream of our affections will run right; We shall greatly rejoice in
the Lord, for he has clothed us with the garments of salvotion, He has
covered us with the robe of righteousness, as a Bridegroom decketh himself
with ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her jewels Isa. 61. 10.
.

And it will help also much to advance our affections that way, where our
treasure is or should be, if we consider that expression, then which, there is
not another more feeling one in all the sacred Scripture (except in the 103
psalm verse the 13.) As the Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so shall thy
God rejoice over thee Isa. 62. 5.


This consideration would much help us in the keeping our hearts to God, the
sole fountain of life and happiness; and from cleaving to the Creature, which
at the best, is but as a Cisterne Jer. 2. 13.
, which fills and empties according as its influence is from the fountain. It
would be a means to cut our expectation the shorter, that it spread not out too
large toward the Creature; which (though our thoughts are otherwise, but they
have no bottom) cannot satisfy; nor is it possible it should, no more then the
East-winde can fill the stomach; there will be an emptiness notwithstanding,
or a filling with wind, such a vanity there is, that lies upon the Creature.
And then the more we shall enlarge and widen our hearts toward it, the more
the Creature may contract, and narrow it self toward us, for our just
punishment; and so, the heart, finding a capacity in it self, and a
narrowness in the Creature, it would find so large content in, but cannot,
nor is it possible it should, there grows a satietie, then a flatnesse, then
perhaps a coldness: whereas a true and orderly love would have kept it self in
life and heat, and have maintained a good proportion in both, etc (...) etc.
(...) etc. Ibid.
.

Sin has wonderfully poisoned our natures, and put all out of frame: And if
we be left in our own hands, we shall pervert Gods good ordinance, and turn it
into sin; so, that which was ordained as a remedy against sin, may prove,
through our sin, an occasion to foment it the more. For indeed, those very
expedient remedies (on which we may dote too much, and put too much trust unto)
considered in themselves without a divine influence sanctifying them, are but
crazy and sickly. They cannot put us into a sound constitution, or right
temper, nor keep us in it, no more then meat and drink can, till the stomach be
cleansed, and a word of blessing from the Lord of the Creature does accompany
them, but if abused to intemperancy, our good temper is more lost, our
distemper is increased, as fire by fuel put unto it. The reddition or
application hereof to our present purpose, is very easy, but I forbear it.

Over some things we must draw a vail, and when we walk under that, we must
walk the more comely, and honorably: No cover hides from God, whose eyes run
to and fro through the whole world 2. Chron. 16. 9.
. But though all things are bare and naked before the Lord, even the hidden
works of darkness, yet we must note that the Lord beholds us more narrowly,
and takes a more strict observation of our way in those places, where man's eye
cannot look in upon us. There is the very trial of our sincerity and
uprightness, and thither the Lords eyes come; And withal (as I may say, for
the Scripture intimates so much) with a light or torch in His hand; we cannot
be hid. Therefore look we must to our selves more especially in the dark,
because there we are most observed.

This is a point of special consideration, and concernment to make this estate
comfortable unto us, and, as it is usually called, honorable. To teach us well
to order our affections, and to carry the stream thereof in a right channel.
But more specially the words of Chrysostom may teach very much, these they
are: He loved his people committed unto him, as the Bridegroom the Bride, and
thus he bespeaks them (...) etc. In Act. Apost. ap. 23. Hom. (...).
; I love you, said he, and ye love me; so we do well, but we do not enough, nor
orderly neither, unless we fulfill the first commandment first. Let us all
love Christ, with all our might, with an exceeding love, who has done all for
us, and has exceeded to us ward: let us exceed (if there can be an exceeding
that way;) Then our love will run in a right channel, from Him to Him. This
concerns you and me very much, let us put to all our might here, let us love
Him with fervency of spirit; for (...)
pity it is that so sweet an affection should be spent and lost upon the
Creatures: that is the conclusion.

2. It will conduce much to our after content and quiet; if we, at the first,
count our cost, and forecast discontent; I mean, if we expect troubles, and
keep a room for them (as was said) for come they will, being the proper badge
of a Christian, and the very accessaries of a married estate 1. Cor. 7. 28.
. Some men's thoughts are so youthful, that they can think of no change, but
that it will be May-tide all the year; they think of nothing but the present,
and that, as it is at present, it will be always; though that present time
passes, as quick as the thought, and troubles follow, as the night, the day:
but this they think not of. We know whose conceit it was, that every quarter of
the year would mend, and prove better and more easy to him; but it proved
otherwise, for it was the vain and simple conceit of such a simple creature,
whose nature is inferior to a fool; The moral is ours, and teaches that
every quarter of life, the Conjugall state more specially, has some proper and
peculiar troubles attending on it; and the more we account of them, the better
we shall bear them.

Things may go cross for want of care, so may they notwithstanding all our
care. It is a true saying, we know not the faults of our yoke-fellows before we
are married, nor quickly then; there is enough reason and cunning also, to hide
them before. And now, that we know them, we might have known before; that two
Angels are not met together; but two frail creatures; whereof the best is full
enough of infirmities: And this true wisdom counts of before hand, and that is
to count the cost; then nothing can come which was not expected.

We must expect to enjoy blessings with afflictions M Dearings letter. 12.
; a mirgling our joy with sorrow; our wealth with some woe; a tempering heaven
with earth; and this is a happy tempering, that we should neither love nor rest
in this earth, above that which is meet, but acknowledge all is but vanity:
and so we should love it as transitory things, and have our great delight in
the Lord alone. And if this be our wisdom in this particular and more special
business, then, if matters be not well, we make them well; and, if not our
yoke fellows, yet our selves the better.

We must note a second thing also, for it is of great use, for the keeping the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; that in marriage there are two
things essential to it, and seem contrary, but indeed are not; An honorable
equality, and an inequality; A superiority, and an inferioritie: both
founded in nature upon the strength and sufficiency of one sex, and weakness
and insufficiency of the other.

The equality consists in this, that man and wife should count nothing their
own; Read Chrysostom. in Ephesians. cap. 5. Hom. 20. o.
miae and thine, two words that make so much difference and division in the
world, must not be heard in the house between man and wife; no, never heard in
that community; All things are in common betwixt them; souls, bodies, goods,
friends, acquaintance, one the others; all common.

The inequality or superiority consists in the husbands headship, and power
over the wife, he is supreme as the head.

Now here is a point of high wisdom; since a conjugall estate is a drawing
together in one yoke, and the yoke seem unequal; yet to draw strait and even,
and in a right path; This, I say, is a point of high wisdom, for it is taught
from above There is but one will in an house, when the will of the wife to her
husband, and her husbands is subject to God.
: And where this wisdom is not, there these two things, which seem contrary,
but are not, will be contrary indeed; and that, which is indeed the foundation
of all order, which proceeds from unity, as the head, will cause great
disorder.

But where this wisdom is, this teaching from above, it will be thus discerned
and exercised; The husband, superior to himself and his own will, sweetly
commands himself, looking carefully there (that is the Apostles rule and method
to all, that have oversight and authority over others, as well as pastors,
our selves first, then others Acts 20. 28. 1. Tim. 4. 16.
) And so commands his wife; And she, again, as sweetly and willingly obeys him:
The husband lives with his wife, and rules, as a man of understanding; and the
wife submits, as a woman, that has knowledge: The husband counts it his
greatest dignity, to govern in the fear of God; And the wife her greatest
honor to submit thereunto. It is not baseness, but a point of a nobleminde to
know ones self inferior, and to demean ones self accordingly, says
Chrysostom. A wife by taking that to her self, which belongs to her husband,
as Chrysostom. on Ephesians. 6. Hom. 22. a. (...) Chry. Cor Hom. 26. (...). etc in Med
m.
his proper right and charter, does not, in so doing, take the honor of the
man, but loses the ornament of the woman, says the same Father in another
place. Indeed there is not a more unseemely and unworthy sight, then to see a
wife usurp the authority over the man; It is like a body, I have sometime
seen, whose head was bowed down so close to the breast, that behind, you could
scarce discern any thing but the shoulders. Certainly, it is a seemly sight,
To see There is much in the example of a good master to make all follow his
sleps; though he say nothing, yet children and servants may see enough, whereby
they may be taught. Chrysostom. in cap. 17. Genesis hom. 40. o
the head stand out in sight; and the contrary, as unseemely. And as unseemely
every whit, if the man demean himself unworthy of his place, if he be not
answerable to his honor and headship, it will but disgrace him the more: being
like a pearl set in lead, or a jewel in a swines snout, a skull without
brains; or an head without wit.

It is not to be doubted, but the prime duty, and the very weight of the
burden lies upon the man; It is much how he leads the way, and draws here:
for the head is the Glory and Crown of the Body; and to be an Head imports a
pre-eminence, and soveraigntie; it implies also a derivation of the spirits
thence to the members, which being intercepted, the body would quickly fall
into a dead palsy Vt in corporibus, sic in imperio gravissimus est morbus qui
a capite diffunditur. Plin. l. 4. ep. 22. o Morbido Capite nil sanum est: neque
ullum omnino membrum efficio suo sungitur, ubi quod est principale non constat.
de Salv. de Guber. l. 7. page 234.
; All which strongly argues the man's principal charge and duty, to whom
belongs the headship; and therefore is the principal and leading example; The
man by his example must lead on the wife to faith; else what is one in the
flesh, will be two in the spirit, that is, divided, says Chrysologus. Vir
conjugem dedicat ad fid^m, ne quodunum est in carne spiritu sit d^v^s^m. Ser.
10. As it is in printing, when on Sheet is set a thousand are easily pressed
after it: so when the master has a good impression upon him, his family is
easily stamped to piety If Grace that precious ointment be plentifully in the
head and heart of the Master, it will quickly distill to his skirts, children
and servants.
The man is in his place, though of the lowest rank, yet in his place, as the
great parsons in their great seas; as the Ad^irall ship that bears the
Lantern, all steare after it: And indeed this man, though in a low so Lipsius
phraseth it De Constable. lib. 2. chap 25. see part first p. 93. ^ The lightness
of my family shall be said to my charge, so my con^cience makes me fear for
lack of more earnest and deligent instruction which should have been done.
Bishop Ridly to Master west martyr. p. 1569.
; Therefore whether the man be in high place or low, it is very much how he
leads the way, for he is as one that carries the Lantern. If the husband
has received the stamp of holiness, as was said, Epistle to the first part.
he will quickly press his household with the same impression: if Grace, that
precious ointment, be in the head of the head in an house, it will, quickly
destill to his skirts, Children and servants. A husband should know that he is
not more above his wife, in place, then in example. Therefore what is done a
miss in thehouse, will return upon the man, as most blameworthy. My
conscience makes me fear, that the lightness of my family shall be laid upon
my charge, for lack of more earnest and diligent instruction, which should
have been done, said Bishop Ridly to Master West. Woe and woe again, if we by
our examples, should make others to stumble at the Truth; So John Bradford to
John Careless Martyr. page 1569. Page 1494.
It is a tradition, that Matthias the Apostle was used to say; If a goodmans
neighbor did fall into any great sin, the goodman was to be blamed: for if
that goodmans life had been suitable to his Rule, the Word of God, then had his
example, according to rule, so awed that neighbor, that he had not so fallen,
said Clemens of Alexandria (...) Strom. l. 7. page 541.
. Much more may the same be said touching the husband and the wife; the father
and the child; the master and the servant; if any thing be amiss, if things
go not straight in the family, it is very likely; the husband, the father, the
master, walk not according to rule, but some cross or crooked way, for he is
the head, the leading hand. The stars are eclipsed oftener then the greater
lights, but their eclipse we observe not; but if the Sun or Moon are
eclipsed, our eyes are upon them, for the one rules the day, the other the
night. Inferiors fail often in their duty; but the observation is, what their
Superiors, what their Governors do. They are in their little house, as the
Sun and Moon are in the great world, The little great Rulers therein.
Therefore it requires our Mark; That it was the Man, for whose faithfulness
the Lord did undertake; I know that Abraham will command his children, and his
household, etc. Genesis 18. 19.
Command, mark that; Command not so much by his Word, though that was a
command too, but by example. That has more force in it, more of that we call
compulson; Abraham will command. And it was the Man, that promised for himself;
I and my house will serve the Lord, Joshua last 15. It was the man, and a man
after Gods own heart, that said, I will walk within my house with a perfect
heart; (Psalm. 101.) And much reformation must follow, for the removing of the
wicked from his seat and sight, and for the encouragement of the godly; as it
is plain in that place: And, which is more, this was a great house, a kingdom.

It was a man, and one under authority, though he had soldiers under him (and
they are none of the tamest creatures) who did say to this man go, and he went,
and to another come and he came; and to his servant do this, and he did it.

And to put the lowest last (for indeed he was much below a Christian, but
quite shames him) it was an old man, and a darkman; That had four sons,
stout young men; five daughters; many servants; a great retinue; over all, this
man carried himself with such authority, with such a Lord like command, but so
well tempered, as his servants feared him, his children reverenced him, all
honored and loved him: In the house you might see, says the author, Cic. de
Senec.
the old paternall authority and discipline revive again.

All these examples charge the man still, and good reason, that he should be
accountable, being principal, and the head of the family, the chiefest pillar
in it, that holds up all; And, though the wife be (as she should be) more
faithful in her place, then Bibulus in his office, yet the husband carries
the chief name of all, being the more worthy person; and Lord in the house:
And the wife is well content with it; she counted the husbands honor here; and
so it is: And being always (as the Moon is sometimes with the Sun) in a full
aspect with her husband, then she casts the greatest luster, then she is most
bright. Similies must not be strained too far; Wives must not shine then the
brightest, when Angariari Parabolam.
the husband is farthest off, though then also, though not her clothes, yet her
virtues may shine the clearer; for then her wisdom in governing and commanding
does fully appear, when the husband is far off; And her husband is known
thereby; He sits among the Elders, and her own works shall praise her in
the gates. A good wife is still in full aspect with her husband. Certainly, it
is the comeliest sight in the world, To see man and wife going in all things,
as Peter and John went to the Temple, together, Act 3 1.
(it was spoken of before) Epist. to the first part.
where there are cloven hearts and divided tongues, there is no edifying in
that house, but a Babell of confusion rather.

But now suppose the case, as it is too ordinary, that the man is the weaker
vessel; the head goes the contrary way, it is so surcharged, or the heart is
so like a stone; suppose the case so, that the head is so distempered and
Nabal-like, that it cannot lead the way, how then? This is a cross in the way
and a great one; but it must be taken up and borne; and the wife must, as was
said, Page 104.
speak good of it: we must not choose every day: If the choice is made and the
two are yoaked, they must draw as well as they can, and be content. They must
use all the skill they have to fit the yoke to their Neck, else it will prove
an yron-yoake. Before I have chosen, I may fit my choice to my mind; when I
have chosen, I must fit my mind to my choice: before, things might have been
otherwise: now they cannot, I must not now go Cross to my Cross, for that is
to make it a double Cross. Patience and meekness in bearing and forbearing,
Prove. 25. 12. and 15. very notable.
wins much upon a contrary disposition, and at length may overcome it; but if
not, and the labor be lost: yet, as says the Chrysostom. Tom. 5. de Laz con. 1.
Greek Father, (applying it to Ministers waiting, when God will give
repentance) the reward will not be lost, no nor the labor neither, for if the
wife cannot better her husband, yet she will make her self the better, as the
old saying is, Mariti vitium aut tollendum, aut serendum: quae tollit, maritum
commod^orem praestat, quae fert, s^se meliorem sacit. Aul. Gell. lib. chap. 17.
and it concerns the wife, as well as the husband. But how bad soever the
husband be, his badnesse shall not bear her out, nor have her excused for the
neglect of her proper duties, and walking with God in his ways, nothing shall
plead her excuse for any neglect therein.

We are apt to quarrel with our blessings, much more with our crosses, and
with that calling, that God has set us in and allotted us unto. But, assuredly
that excuse shall leave us speechless; though we think every thing will be of
weight sufficient to have us excused, yet we shall find it but a mere conceit:
nothing is of weight sufficient to excuse from the doing of duty, First part p
174.
it shall not be an excuse for the man to say; Lord, I had done my duty as thou
command, but that Thou gave me a scoffing Michal; nor shall it serve the
wife to say, Lord, I had done my part, had I not been yoaked to a Nabal.

The man failing in his duty, shall not hold the wife excused, for her failing
in hers; If the man leads ill, the woman must not follow ill; it was a good
answer to an abusing and an over-bearing commander, Do you what you will, I
will do what I ought: (...). The head has an head. All things shall be done
as you will have it, but you must command, as God will have it.
The wife loses her fathers name, and must forget her fathers house, but she
must not forget her Lords charge, nor her vow in Baptism, nor the name was
called upon her then. Her head has an Head; and therefore she must say to her
husband, as Ignatius to the Priest, All things shall be done, as you will have
it, but then you must command as God will have it Ignatius to a Priest. Chrysostom.
Tom. 6. in vet. ^ Princip. p. 10. Charrun.
. The husband must command in the Lord, and so must be obeyed: if otherwise,
yet he must not put out the eyes of his wife; she has a light to guide her,
besides her husbands false rule. The husbands exorbitancy from his rule, will
be a cross, and no small one; a block in the wives way, and a very clog
hindering, that she cannot walk on with speed, alacrity and comfort; but is so
far from warranting the wives aberration from the way God commands to walk
in, that it the more binds and engages her unto it, her bond is rather the
straighter, as her praise will be the more. And this we must still note; Not to
obey as we should, is more dangerous to society, then not to command as we
should; though they shall not be unpunished that are careless in either, being
both the fountain of all human society.

If the wife must stand alone; so far from an helper that her husband is an
hinderer, then she stands single and charged but with her single duty; I and my
maidens, says a woman, a Queen, that had attendants answerable to her state;
yet she would seek God in His own way, so should her maidens too Esther 4. 16.
: indeed she lived apart, and therefore might much better maintain her
authority. It is not easy to maintain it there, either over maidens or
children, where the husband in presence, will foolishly and unworthily
contradict or slight the same. But however the wife must do her duty, I and my
children, I and my maidens, Ester is a clear pattern, who lived apart from
her Lord. And if that comes not so home, Ahigals carriage is exemplary, who was
very unequally yoaked. But now (for I cannot pass over this point lightly,)
that the husband and the wife may draw even, though the yoke seem to be, or
indeed is, uneven, let them consider, the husband first; Let him remember that
hour, when the father gave his daughter to him; for then the father gave his
daughter out of his own hands, and from under the tender-eye of the mother, so
intrusting her unto his righthand: she leaves her dear parents and their
house, that sweet society and commu^ion there: she forsakes all these so well
relishing comforts, which she found in her parents house: nay, she forsakes her
self, for she loses her name, that is the propriety in her self. And what
imports all this (says Chrysostom Epist. ad Cor. Hom 26. o.
,) but that the husband should now be to her instead of all those, as a
careful father, as a tender mother, as her dearest brother, as her sweetest
sister, as her only self; that in him she may find her self again. In a
word, the father giving his daughter implies and expects thus much; that his
daughter shall now find all those comforts sum'd up in her husband; in him, the
Abridgement and Epitome of all. All this will be remembered if he remember that
time when his wife was entrusted to his right hand.

And the wife must remember also that at that very time, she engaged her word,
that she would reverence her husband as a father; honor him, as her Lord;
observe his eye, as her mothers; tender him, as she can her dearest brother, or
sweetest sister; that she will be unto him as an haven (so the father speaks)
that when her husband comes home, perhaps in some storm (as few men there are,
that, from within or from without, find not winds enough to cause it,) yet
then, and at such a time, he may find an haven at home, all calm there. If the
wife remembers that time, she must remember, that to all this she stands bound
by a most solemn promise. And thus the husband and wife both may learn and
look to their proper duty; That the husband love the wife, the wife honor the
husband. O beware (for this is a nice and tender point,) beware, lest we blow
that coal, which will sparkle, and quickly kindle a flame; foresee and prevent
all occasions, which may make the least difference or smallest division betwixt
the man and his wife, for the breach will be quickly great like the Sea, Lam.
2. 23.
who can heal it? And then, that which should have been as an haven, will be
a Tempestuous Sea. For when there is difference betwixt the man and the woman,
the house fares no better, says Chrysostom In epist. ad Cor. Hom. 19. o,
, then the Ship does in a storm, when the Master and the Pilot fall to pieces;
now if the agreement be not made quickly, and the difference accorded, the Ship
will fall to pieces upon the Rock. And so much touching the joint duty of man
and wife; and that, though the yoke seem unequal, yet they may draw even;
and that in case the one fail in duty, it is no excuse for the failing of
both; how both are instructed, and from what time. Other duties there are, but
they have been already intimated in the first part. What may more particularly
concern thy self, child, whose instruction I specially intend, now briefly
follows.

Every estate is subject to grievances, more specially the married; To speak
briefly of them, and as briefly to give some provision against them, I rank
them under two heads; fear of evils future; sense of evils present. Touching
both these, the only troublers of our life and peace, some few directions.

1. There is but one thing which is evil indeed, which truly and properly is
the troubler of our peace and quiet; But one thing, And that is sin: It has so
much malignitie in it, that it can put a sting, and set an edge upon crosses;
That it can make our good things evil to us; can turn our blessings into
curses, can make our table, our bed, etc. all snares to us; It will leaven our
rest and peace whereby others are edified walking in the fear of God, and in
the comforts of the holy Ghost Act. 7. 31.
; This rest and peace (a comprehension of all blessings) through sin, will
slay our souls, and be our ruin, which was, as we heard, the building up of
others: so malignant, so destroying, sin is; more malignant more destroying
this sin is, this evil work, then is the mouth of a Lion, as the Apostle
intimates very usefully, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. Therefore more to be avoided,
therefore we should more desire to be delivered from it, then from that
devourer.

For as there is but one thing properly evil, so but one thing to be feared as
evil: Fear not wants, nor disgrace by wants, turn thy fear the right way,
fear sin, and avoid an evil work; So Isid. Pelus. writes to his friend
Lib. 3. ep. 101.
. And it is but the conclusion, or a case long since resolved by Chrysostom
(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 4. epist. limp. See Hom. 5. ad Pop. Ant.
, Sin is the only thing to be feared, whereof he makes a full and clear
demonstration thus; Suppose, says he, they are those three great and sore
evils, famine, sword, and pestilence, which threaten us? (he names them and
many more) why, these are but temporary, and but the fruit and effects of
sin; they continue but their time, and shall have their end; nay suppose they
are those two great winding-sheets L. Ver. Essaies. 58. 330.
of the world (as one calls them) and Lege Sen. not. quaest. lib. 6. c. 1.
as the flood of ungodliness does threaten an inundation of water, or an
earthquake, plagues threatened and inflicted to wash away sin, and as a
punishment thereof: Then, yet still sin is to be feared, not those; It is
foolish to fear the effect, and to allow the cause. Consider also (so the
Father reasons the case or to that purpose) will See Chrysostom. de terrae motu.
Tom. 5. ser. 6. Lege Sen. Ibid.
it be terrible to see the earth totter like a drunken man, and threatening
confusion in an instant, and men flying before it, but they know not whither?
how dreadful then will be the wrath of God, which will be heavier then the
heaviest mountain, and shall be manifested from Heaven, as the just portion of
sinners, sinking the soul under the same to all eternity: how dreadful will
that be? and sin makes it so: if it were not for sin, though the earth
shake, we could not be moved; what ever evil come upon the face of it, yet
would it be good to us; it could not hurt; therefore fear not the earthquake
(that is most terrible and affrighting) but fear sin the cause that makes
the earth to reel: I add, and fly from it, as Moses before the Serpent; and
as they fled before the earthquake Zach. 14. 5.
, and fly to Him, who is the propitiation for sin, if we so do, (as we must
needs do, if we apprehend sin to be so evil, for we will avoid poison, when
we know it to be so) This will take away the trouble and sting of fear, and
prevent the shaking fit thereof.

I have told thee a great lesson now, and to make it yet plainer, I will read
it over again; Sin only is to be feared; I mean that sin I am not humbled
for, I have not repented of, that only is to be feared, for it makes every
thing fearful; Death, they say, is terrible; of all things most terrible; It
is not so to him, who has repented of his sin, and is at peace with God, he
can die as willingly, as we can fall asleep, when we are weary. The prison,
sword, fire, fearful things all, an earthquake very terrible, not so to them,
who have made God their rock, and refuge, to whom they can continually resort;
fear nothing but sin, and the hiding of Gods loving countenance from thee;
for the lightsomenesse thereof is better then life. Fear the least eclipse of
His light, and every thing that may cause it, for it is more refreshing to the
soul, then the Sun beams to the earth. Mark this still; when sin shows its
full*face (we see but the half now, and in a false glass too) and when God
hides His face, there will be, to say no more, a fainting. The servants of the
Lord have been under heavy pressures, yet then they fainted not; they have been
in prisons, and there they fainted not; thence they have been brought to the
stake, there they fainted not; fire was put to, and flaming about their ears,
and then they fainted not: but when sin shows it self, and God hides Himself,
then the next news is ever, The spirit fails. Zophars counsel is the close
hereof; If iniquity, etc. Job 11. Verse 14. 15. etc.

Now touching our present grievances incumbent and upon us; These are either
imaginary or real; and the imaginary, as one says, are more then the real;
we make some grievances to our selves, and we feel them so, because we fancy
them so; we call for them before they come, because our imagination, (a wild
and ungovernd'd thing) leads us and misleades; he was led with a conceit and
troubled with it, who complained of a thornie way, when it was not so, but he
had one in his foot.

The way to help this, is to take a right scale of things, and to weigh them by
judgment, which, interposing, thus resolves and assures:

1. As thou shall shorten thy desires, thou shall lengthen thy content; the
poorer thou art in the one, the richer in the other.

2. Bridle thy appetite, not accounting superfluous things necessary.

3. Feed thy body and clothe it Cultus magna cura magna virtutis incuria ex
Catone. Call. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 10. ser. 4.
, but serve it not, that must serve thee. If thou shall pamper or pride it, the
order will be inverted, and all out of order; that which should obey, will rule.

4. Measure all things by the compass of right reason (Sin never wanted a
reason, yet we call it unreasonable) by reason, I say, not by opinion Opinioni
insitum tum variare and poenitere ut Chamaeleon, etc. Lips. cont. 1. ep. 12.
or conceit, a fluttering, ranging thing, it can find no bottom to settle on;
it is as changeable as the wind; it feeds as they say, one does upon the air,
therefore is still gaping, but never content.

Lastly and chiefly, for it is the sum of all; be assured hereof; that
outward things cannot inwardly satisfy Capacem Dei non implet minus Deo.
. This finite, requires an infinite; He that fills the earth with His
mercies, must fill the soul with His goodness, else there will be an
emptiness. Expect then a satisfaction, a filling from that hand, who alone can
give it. O far be it, if God shall enlarge thy earthly portion, and cast thy
lot in a pleasant place, to say, as an unwise and unthankful people once did,
We are Lords (that is, we have a full portion in a fruitful land, whereof we
are Lords, and wherein we take contentment) we will come no more unto thee Jer.
2. 31.
. Look upon outward, as cysterns, which cannot fill but from the wellhead; and
being filled, empty again.

How pleasant soever thy lot be in respect of them, yet say still; But it is
good for me, to draw near Psalm. 73. 28.
unto God; and to continue with Him too (...). Acts 11. 23. (...) Acts 13. 43.
. And be restless in thy desire, until thou can say, thou art the portion
of my soul: Thus judgment interposing resolves; and it helps much to cure
the imaginary grievances of our life: for if we be poor, we are not the
further from Christ; nor, if rich, are we the nearer. The like we may say of
health and sickness; of honor and dishonor, even the very same, which the
Aoostle speaks of that, wherein the Church of old much gloried in and doted
upon, They are nothing 1. Cor. 7. 19. Prove. 23. 4.
; Things that are not in the wise man's account; for indeed, he had an eye, that
could look into and through them: And therefore as God made all things by His
power of nothing, so he, having wisdom from God, made nothing of all things;
nothing in reference to that one thing necessary; or nothing in reference to
heaven, our putting forward or backward in our race thither-ward to our crown
He that boasts in his riches, etc. is as as if a fellow servant, fed from the
same Master, at the same table, should glory over his fellows, because his
hairs are longer then his fellows, so are his nails. Cries. 1. Tim. Hom. 1.
. And to the same purpose Calvine speaks upon the forenamed Scripture; For
outward things, says he, be not over-carefull, or over-troubled, look that thy
heart be turned, and thy life changed, then care not for other changes and
turnings of things below* come wants, come sickness, dishonor, disgrace,
reproach and so forth; come what will or can come, they make some change or
alteration with us on earth below; they alter not our state at all, they make
no change at all with us above in heaven. Health is nothing, sickness nothing;
riches nothing, poverty nothing; honor nothing, dishonor nothing; What then
may we properly call something? That the Apostle shows in the following
words; The keeping the commandments of God; For in Christ Jesus neither this,
nor that avails any thing, but A new Creature, or Faith which works by love
Gal. 6. 15. and 5. 6.
So much to remedy our imaginary grievances, that proceed from the sickness
and distemper of our fancy, which calls things, that are not, or are nothing,
as if they were, or were something; and that which indeed is, and is All, as if
it were not, or nothing at all. This is the fruit of our distemper; And this,
which thou have heard, may, with a blessing from Above, give some cure and
remedy unto the same. A chief remedy also it is against those, we call real
grievances, whereunto notwithstanding I must say something, which now follows.

There are real grievances in a married estate; not such, which we fancy to be
so, but we know to be so; as we know wormwood is bitter, and honey sweet,
being of the nature of the thing.

And here I come to the bottom, and find the root of these also, it is our
foolishness, our sin; that is it, which sowres all, and brings a curse upon
our blessings. As the Father says (...). Ch^ys. Tom. 5. ser. 32.
, Where Christ is, there is heaven: so truly we may say, where sin is, there
is hell, for so we find it to be, even from thence, our vexation and pain. And
therefore if I should speak in a word, the way to help these grievances is to
pluck out the core of our wound, which puts us to all the smart and pain. That
core is sin: Sin is it, which causes our sorrowing, even sorrow upon
sorrow. Therefore if we look for an healing-up, pluck that core out: And then
set grace against these grievances, so we may be as grieving, as sorrowing, and
yet even then and always rejoicing. If Nature teach bees, not only to gather
honey out of sweet flowers, but out of bitter: Shall not grace teach us to draw
even out of the bitterest condition something to better our souls? Man has
learned to tame other creatures, even the wildest; Grace will teach a man, how
to subdue the greatest troubles: but this is too general, more particularly
thus.

Learn then, since troubles will meet with thee; do thou sit down counting thy
cost (as was said) and go forth to meet with (...), etc Before the storm come,
be we humbled as in a storm, so when it comes we shall find a calm peace.
Chrysostom. Tom. 6. vet. Test. 7. o p. 99.
them; then thou will be better provided and fore* armed. It is no point of
wisdom, to let an enemy to surprise us, on our own ground, in our own home.
Troubles will come, prepare for them, leave some room to entertain them, as was
also said; And when they are come, there is an art to bear them, as there is to
poise a burden, and well to fit it to the back, that it may be carried, if not
without burden, yet with more ease.

But now, this Christian likt bearing of troubles, this carrying our burdens
patiently, and as we say, lightly and merrily away, it supposes two main
things;

1. That, through his strength, by whom we are able to do all things, we have
made a through work in the great and necessary business of mortification;
delicate and dainty flesh will startle more at the scratching of a pin, then
mortified flesh upon the gridiron; They that have hungered and thirsted after
righteousness, can endure to be shortened in matters of a much lower nature;
and they that dwell in heaven, while they sojourne on earth, cannot be much
disquieted in their change; they that know, they deserve nothing, can be glad
of any thing.

And the way to come to a through mortification, (I speak of an ordinary way)
is to begin to deny thy self in small matters, thou shall the easier do it in
great. If we cannot forsake a cup of wine See first part. p. 84.
; or beer which is not needful for us; we shall never be able to forsake,
husband, child, house, land, for Christ's sake. If we have not the command of
our selves in a trifle, in a toy, we may never hope for it, in weighty matters;
It is Mr Perkins note in his Comment. on Gal. 5. 24. And it comes seasonable
here; for married persons shall have troubles in the flesh; but if we have gone
through-stitch in this great work, we shall carry our troubles with ease, and
our burdens lightly away.

2. This patient bearing of troubles, supposes a second main thing; That we
have made a right choice; I do not mean of a wife, or husband, but of that,
which is an all sufficient good, and makes all good: Therefore, make sure of
that one thing, which is necessary, that better part. Thou shall have many
sutours; much solicitation thou shall find for the entertainment of other
things, and for giving them the chief room in thy heart; but, be peremptory in
thy denial; give them not entertainment, they are but troublers of thy peace
and quiet; what ever they say and promise believe them not, they are deceitful
and will change thy wages: But give this one thing, (call it godliness, or the
Gospel, or Christ the kernel of the Gospel, all this it contains) give it but
leave to plead for it self, why it should be entertained; and then thou can
not refuse it. Admit of but sad and serious thoughts, about the excellency of
this one thing, this better part, and it is not possible then, but thou must
give entertainment unto it. But then, thy thoughts must be fixed and settled,
not fluttering about the mind, making a through-fare there; they come and are
presently gone, like a flash of lightning, which makes all light about us, but
is gone in an instant, and then leaves us more dark then before: It is a settled
light that guides us; bestow some settled thoughts hereon, and it suffices; for
it is not possible, that a reasonable creature should entertain such things,
that are troublers of its peace, and neglect the only thing necessary, if he
entertain sad and serious thoughts about it. Goodness, say they, Mr Dearings
s^rm preached at the Tower. p. 6. read it. (...) etc. Chrysostom. ad episcop. ob
pietatem in carc. inclusos. Tom. 4 a Isid. Pelus. lib. 2. ep. 174. Ad popul.
Ant. Hom. 13.
is so amiable and lovely, that they, who persecute it, must commend it; and
vice is so deformed, that they, who practice it, must disallow it.

If Mr Raynolds Psalm. 110. p. 114.
any person did seriously consider and lay together such thoughts as these; I
am very busy for the affairs and passages of this present life, which will
quickly vanish and pass away like a weavers shuttle, or a tale that is told; I
have another and an abiding life to live after this is over. All that I toil
for here is but for the back, the belly, the bag, and the posterity: and am
I not nearer to my self, then I am to my money? Am I not nearer to my soul
then I am to my carkeise, or to my seed? Must I not have a being in that, when
neither I nor my posterity have either back to be clothed, or belly to be
fed, or name to be supported? Oh why am I not as sadly employed about this one
thing, which is the better part, beyond all comparison the better? it makes
that which is bad in it self, good to me; that, which is good, better. My
Eternal good depends upon it, which shall never be taken from me? If, I say,
a creature, who is sad and serious in other things, can bolt them out to the
bran can lay together such thoughts as these; he cannot but make choice of
that, which is the only necessary thing, the better part, which shall never be
taken away; and this choice is supposed to be made by him or her, who is able
to bear troubles, and to carry them lightly as an easy burden.

For thus such a person reasons; I am stripped of all things, but they have not
taken from me my Treasure (as the good man said Aug. de civit. Cap. 10. l. 1.
) I have my God still, who will supply all my need Phil. 4. 19.
. I am laid low now, I shall be exalted hereafter; I am made the filth of the
world, and the offscouring 1 Cor. 4. 13.
of all things unto this day; But in the day of the Lord, I shall be made up
with His jewels Mal. 3. 17.
; I am persecuted for Christ now, and I suffer it; I shall hereafter reign
with Christ, and according to the measure of my sufferings shall my
consolations be, pressed down, running over, and so forth. Thus then look to
it, that thou make a right choice; let true judgment interpose, then the
choice will be easy. Get Christ* Thou have all: with Him, the heaviest yoke,
the world can lay upon us, will be light and easy. In this yoke, We are not
alone: He draws with us; With him, the sharpest and most bitter things will
be sweet and pleasant, for He is that Salt 2 King. 2. 22.
, who has changed the property of those bitter and deadly waters of
Afflictions and healed them. Thus we may be able to bear lightly the heaviest
burden* through Him, who strengthens us to do all things Phil. 4. 13.
.

Other considerations will help to support in bearing of our Burdens, as the
Hand, from which they come, and the causes wherefore: they are usefully handled
by Lipsius De Constable. l 2. Cap. 89.
; These would take too much room there, and they are impart employed before.
And so much for the bearing of our grievances, and what is required for the
bearing of them lightly away, the going upright under them, and like a
Christian.

It follows now, that I give some rules for the preventing of snares, they
fall under two heads, Snares from Plenty; Snares from Wants; All along we shall
find our way is strawed with them: for such are our natures, either we find
them in our way, or we lay them there; even our good things we make snares unto
us; for prevention hereof, these are the rules.

If riches increase, we know our rule; And if God give thee a Child, that's our
rule also; Thou must not set thy heart upon them, or this. It is a resolved
case, If thou would keep thy Child, sacrifice it (in thy affections, I
mean:) else it will be a snare, and cause unto thee no ordinary sorrow,
because thy affection was extraordinary to it, so as thou could not
sacrifice it, according to the Rule: for whatsoever lies next thy heart,
except Christ, will cause the breaking of thy heart with worldly sorrow, which
works death. There are two things that break the hearts of parents, they are;
When the Child lives ill; or dies too soon. Thou shall be armed against these
sorrows, at least thou shall not be hurt by them, if, whilst thou have the
Child, thou art as if thou had it not: and, having it, if thou do thy
utmost to it, that may make thee to rejoice for the Time to come. But hereof in
the first part, which I will not recall here.

The same we may say of riches, If thou would keep them, forsake them, deny
them: Get thine heart from off them, then they can be no snare. It is notable,
which Augustine says De Civit. lib.
, No man holds Christ, but by confessing Him; no man keeps his Gold, but by
denying the same: If I lay up 1. cap. 10.
money as a Treasure, I shut out Christ; and in so doing I cause a rent in my
soul as wide as Heaven, a breach like the Sea Lam. 2 23.
. The World stands in a Diametrall, a direct opposition to Christ, as two
contrary Masters; we cannot lean to the One, but we must turn from the other;
We cannot embrace the One, but we must hate the other: the heart cannot hang
betwixt heaven and earth in an Equilibrium, like two scales equally poysed: if
the world be at our foot, and under it, then Christ is exalted, and so on the
contrary. With all thy care then keep the earth, and the things of the earth in
their place, under foot: Be in the world, but embrace it not, hug it not. Use
the world as travelers and pilgrims (such are we;) they use things in their
passage as they may further them toward their journeys end: They see many
goodly houses, and much good land, but they fix not on them, they suffer them
to pass, because their mind is on their country, the place where they would
be.

I remember what is storyed of a People, whose country we only read of, as we
do of Platoes commonwealth; It is a fiction, but I intend the use: They had of
gold and silver good store to make their necessary provision with all, but none
for ostentation or show to adorn their cubbords; what could be spared from
their very necessaries, they must make thereof vessels of dishonor, such as
we set at our foot, in plain English, Chamberpots, or the like. And there was
this good in it (said the merry Knight) V^opiae. Th. Mori. lib. 2. page 160.
when their silver and gold should be required they could not be unwilling to
part with that which before they had set so low as their foot. This gives us
the very reason whence it is, That some are so well contented when they are
disposessed of their possessions: when they had them, they had them, as if they
had them not; They kept them at their foot, far enough from their heart; And
being taken from them, they loose but what before they counted loss Phil. 3. 7.
, and so are able to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods Heb. 10.
. But this is but half the reason, the other necessarily follows: For if we
would not have our riches a snare unto us, then as they must be set at the
foot, so Christ must be embraced as the only Treasure, and so laid to heart.
And this will be, if we consider this to purpose, which follows: He made
himself poor, to make us rich; he emptyed himself, to fill us; he stripped
himself, to cloth us; he was wounded, that by his stripes we might be healed;
He was made a curse, that we might be made a blessing; He died, that we might
live. If we think on this, nothing can seem too much to do, nor too heavy to
suffer for Him. I remember a lovely answer of a Wife to her Husband; And
because a story depends upon it, I will set down the whole relation, which is
this; Xenephon de Iust^tut. Cyri. l. 3. page 203.


Tigranes and Armenias, the husband and the wife, the father in law also, All
lay at Cyrus his mercy, and when he might have taken away their liberty and
their lives, he dismissed them with honor, granting them both; So, home they
went well apaid. When they were returned, they began to commend Cyrus, one for
this, and another for that; what do thou think said Tigranes to his wife;
Was not Cyrus a goodly person? Truly Sir, said she, I cannot tell that, for I
looked not upon him. No, where were thy eyes, woman? on whom were they fixed?
On thee, my dear husband, said she, who, in my hearing, did offer thine own
life a ransom for mine. This gives us the reason, why a good man and his goods
are so easily parted; whence it is that he breaks so easily through those
snares; his affections are more endeared to Christ, Then hers were to her
husband, and the cause wherefore, much more binding. Ask then those, who may
properly be called the Spouse of Christ, and demand of them; What think ye of
your possessions, your livings, your liberty, your life? They will answer;
They are lovely things, for they are Gods blessings, they came from His hand,
they must not be slighted in ours; and they have made many wise men look back,
(as our Ieuell Apol. 2. page 227.
says,) even as many as had not their faces steadfastly set toward Christ Luke
^. 51. (...).
; But now that their eyes are fixed upon Him, they see no beauty in them at
all; The strength of his love who poured forth His soul unto death, and the
brightness of that glory, wherein, Through Him, they are sharers, so holds
their eye, and so steadfastly, that it cannot look downward to those things,
though otherwise very lovely, with an adulteress eye. And so much to prevent
snares from plenty, the brief of what was said therein is this; If we deny
not our riches, they will cause us to deny the Lord, and to say, Who is He
Prove 30. 9.
? If then we would prevent a taking in that snare, keep we earth and things
thereon, in their proper place, at the foot Psalm 8. 6.
. If we exalt it, it will press us downward, lower then the place is where we
dig it: If we think of outward above what is meet, we shall think of our
selves above what is comely. And then our riches will be a strong Tower in our
conceit Prove. 18. 11.
, and we shall be so conceited of them, so bottomed upon them, so earthed in
them, that we shall say, as before mentioned, We are Lords, we will come no
more unto thee Iere. 2. 31.
: And then we shall so pride our selves, that we will contemn, disdain and
scorn others, better then our selves, and so bring not our selves only, into
a snare, but the whole City; nay we shall be as those, who set a City on fire,
who blow it up, as with Gunpowder Prove. 28. 9. Inflammant, sufflant. Trem.
.

So much for prevention of snares from Riches in a general way, now somewhat
more particularly.

Riches have many snares; where there is fullness, and plenty, there is plenty
of them. But one daughter there is of plenty and fullness, which, like the
horseleach, still cries give give, but is never satisfied. This a great snare,
and fitly called the great inchantresse of mankind, we commonly call it
Pleasure; not so properly, for, says one, Isid. Pelusit. l. 2. epist. 240.
How can we call that Pleasure which causes so much solicitude and
carfulness (madness says the Author) before we take it, so much trouble and
weariness in taking; so short a satiety presently after; and so much anxiety
and perplexity of spirit, anon or some while after. If this be pleasure, that
has so much sower and gall in it, then we say well when we call it so.

The only remedy against this Siren, or Witch, is to bind our selves, as one
was to the mast of his Ships Hom. Odyss. lib 12. Resolution the moral of that
fiction. (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Ad Gentes. page 55.
, with the cords of strong resolution Psalm. 17. Act. 11. 23.
unto a constant walking onwards in the ways of holiness. I am fully
purposed, says David, etc. But for preventing this snare, and fortifying our
selves against it, and to learn us to call it by its right name, something
has been spoken in its proper place, which I will not recall here.

There are other snares in plenty, so many, that it is impossible to give
several remedies against them. But yet to speak in a word, and yet enough for
prevention, that our foot be not taken by them, note we: There is one thing,
which God has appointed as our watch-keeper, and will hold us waking, and well
provided against them all, if it does its office, and this is fear; fear I
say according to Godliness. It is the most waking affection, and most
serviceable of any, if it does its office. It is the house porter; the bodies
spiall, and the souls too, still keeping watch; it is, next to love, the most
commanding affection; our keeper, and p Sit moderatus cibus and nunquam venture
expletus, plures quippe sunt quae cum vino sint sobriae, ciborum largitate sint
ebriae, etc. Hier. ad Hist. ep. 17. page 204. etc. Lege epist. 14.
Truths keeper also; it is the best king in the world, (The great or little)
for it keeps both Tables. I will say no more of it, for I cannot say a little,
but let us observe what it will do, what good service to a man, if it be right
and we use it right.

Jude Verse. 12.
, the servant of Jesus Christ, tells us of some, who fed themselves without
fear; That is, who fed themselves suspecting no snares at their Table, or in
their meat, whereas, according to the plenty there, there are plenty of snares
in both. A fear now according to godliness, will make us to prevent all. So
likewise there are some, who go to bed q Tenen^i codicem somnus obrepat. Ibid.
p. 205. (...), etc. The fear of God is a Catholic remedy, etc. Clem. Alex.
Protrep. p. 52. and 86.
without fear, as if there were no snares in sleeping nor in waking, whereas
in Bed, we shall find many snares; a fear according to godliness, inables
against these also. There are some, who rise again without fear, who walk
abroad without fear; who converse with men, and amidst the affairs of the
world, all this without fear; as if there were no snares, in all this, whereas
there is no less variety of snares, then there is occasions or things in the
world. Fear according to godliness, awakens a man, he can look before him; It
arms him against all. In a word, fear helps to feed a man with food
convenient for him; It clothes him as with a garment; It arms him as with
shield and buckler; it keeps him in his walk and course, as under watch and
ward. It guards the eye, ear, hand and foot, that all may do their office and
keep in order. It aweth his very thoughts. All this fear does, if it does its
office, which is to keep the watch strong: for this is certain, If I fear
death to be in the pot, I will not taste of the pottage. And thus sovereign it
proves to be, because it winds up the heart continually to God, who promises
to be a sanctuary to all such who fear before Him. The Wise man's counsel is
notable, Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long Prove. 23. 17.
. For it is a conclusion of experience, A wise man fears and departs from
evil: But the fool rages and is confident Prove. 14. 16.
, as if there were no snares in his way, whence it comes to pass, that his
foot is taken like a bird in a snare, he is holden by it and cannot be
delivered, for this is a resolved case also, Happy is the man that fears
always: But He that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief Prove. 28. 14.
. And so we have enough in one word, for the prevention of all these snares,
which are ever strawed thickest in a full and plentiful state.

There are snares in wants also; O give me not too little, says Augur, but
feed me with food convenient for me Prove. 30. 8, 9.
; lest poverty be a snare unto me, lest I put forth my hand to that which is
not mine, and take the Name of my God in vain; such a snare there is in
poverty. Therefore to help thee here, and not mention what has been said,
though it would fit very well, I will reason out this point with thee.

If God make thy family like a flock of Sheep, and thy pasture be bare; if the
Mouths, thou have to feed, be many, and thy provision of Meal is now toward
the bottom; if thy charge be increased, and thy means shortened; if so, I know
here is a straight, and a burden; Want is a burden (...) etc. Chrysostom. de
Laz^r. Conc. 1.
, says the Father, grievous to be borne, they will tell us so that feel it.
But yet, as the same father elegantly says, We are all Stewards, and we must
all give an account: what shall the poor man give an account of, who has
scarce any thing Sermon praecedent. page 9. (...), etc.
to give to his mouth? The Father answers; The rich Steward must account with
his Master, how bountiful he has been, according to his Masters appointment;
And the poor Steward, he must be accountable too, how patient he has been
under wants, how he has humbl*d himself under the Almighty Hand; And how
dependant upon that hand. If there be a strait, and the Meal be at the
bottom, here is an hint of a glorio is dependence upon Him, that multiplied
the oil, and the meal, and the Loaves; And with the fewer loaves (though the
power was the same) fed the more; And the more was remaining; upon Him, That
does cloth the Lillies, feed the Ravens; makes a path in a wilderness;
causes water to flow out of a Rock, or in a parched ground; filled the Valley
with water, when they saw neither wind nor rain 2 King. 3. 17.
. It is good and safe to depend here; Infinite power and goodness can never
be at a loss; nor faith, which looks thereunto, can be at stand.

Faith makes up a life without the creature; It cheeres the countenance without
oy le Famem vera sides non time^. Hier. lib. 2. ep. 18. p. 221.
; refreshes the spirit without wine; glads the heart, and strengthens it
without the bread of men; It is certain, a soul, that has such a dependence,
is never fatter and better liking, then when his pasture is shortest, like a
wilderness. It is fattest in the winter, as some creatures are; when there is
no green thing, but ground, trees and all are all covered; Then this soul can
pick meat, when the heaven is brass, and the earth iron; Then, even in such a
time the soul can live, rejoice and joy in the Lord the God of Salvation. Habb.
3. 18.

This is the only way, which will lead thee through the snares, which are in
wants, that thou shall not be entangled with them, not put forth thy hand unto
wickedness. If thou can find no way, God can make a way; only thy part is,
if means be short, to trust the more; And to lengthen thy hope. Hope, we say,
is an inheritance for a King; and this, God will provide, makes Gods children
confident. It is good to be in a depending condition, then we roll our selves
upon God. The depending soul can best track the ways of Gods providence, and
sees how wise and admirable they are; whereas the fullness of outward means
obscureth the luster of that track, and draws the heart unto them from a
providence.

And now I need not bid thee use all lawful means; for dependence on a
providence does establish the means, and us in the use of them. It is
unreasonable to think, that God will feed us from Heaven, when we may gather
our meat from the earth; He works not extraordinary in a fruitful land,
where the plough can go; I mean in that place and time when our hands can work.
As we must not trouble our selves about Gods charge, as it is usual so to do:
So we must not neither neglect our own charge, which is to give all faithful
endeavor; and having done it, then stand still, rest and wait for His
blessings, who has said, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. And now we
are upon thy duty and charge, hear some lessons, which may be of use for thy
better discharge thereof. Therefore the chief lesson follows, for it makes all
easy.

Let the law of the Lord be never out of thy mind, nor His word (when household
employments admit vacation: for she that is married, cares for the things of
the world, how she may please her husband) be out of thy hand. That Is an holy
word, says Clemens (...). protrept. p. 41.
, which makes holy, as He is, and like Him. Tongues there are, but one is
enough for a woman, and work enough to use that one well: Other learning there
is too; but like nuts (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 199.
(I refer to thy sex) it nourishes not. This word makes 2 Timothy 3. o Lactan.
lib. 3. cap. 25.
perfect, and thoroughly furnishes. All necessary truths are plain there, and
nothing dark (...). Protrept. p. 42.
to him or her, that will come to the light, by earnest (...) Chrysostom. in Matt.
Hom. 25.
prayer asking of Him, who is the Father of lights, who leads into all truth.
And if He join himself to our chariot, we shall go on and increase mightily,
for it is in the strength and with the increase of God. I can but point at what
I would say. For thy instruction this is the chief; Take counsel from this
word, and from this Great counselor, then thou shall be taught indeed to
answer thy worthy name worthily; and all those relations, thou stand in, as
becomes; first to children. The chief burden of our charge, as they are the
chief of our possessions. The rules are (what was mentioned before I shall not
recall:)

1. Thou must not set thy heart upon them, as was said, but keep a watchful
eye over them, thereby keeping them in awe; and begin betimes; sit close here;
children are like a wild ass colt, if thou do not overruled them, they will
overthrow thee, and themselves. It is a pretty observation, I know not how
true, That great men's children learn nothing by order and rule, but to manage
their horse well; and the reason, why they are so careful therein, is, because
they know their horse is neither flatterer nor Courtier; he will not stick to
cast First part p. 253.
them as soon as a meaner person, if they hold him not strait in, and
themselves close to his back. It is so here, if thou do not sit close upon
them (upon servants also) holding a strait hand, neither slacked nor strained;
if not, they will run headlong: What ever honor is due, none will be paid,
unless it be honorably commanded, I mean, with authority and with a
countenance commanding a respect and a reverence. Let this bridle loose once,
and they will let loose the bridle before thee Job 30. 11. Essrenate in me
invecti sunt quasi immissis vel excussis habenis. Trem. first part.
; that is, they will speak unreverently and scornfully as if they were not
children, nor thou their Mother, and the order will be inverted, the child
will be above, and the parent shall be below. And therefore hold fast here.
Thus much, or this little rather (for I have spoken to it before) that thou
may maintain thy authority over them; if thou loosest that, thou will
adventure thy comfort in them.

Covet after the best callings, but be not ambitious to make them great here
below. It had been a good ambition in the Mother, if it had been spiritual, to
be an earnest sutour for the preferment of her children to Christs's kingdom
Hoc praecipuum est, uti pie sancteque vivant. dixit uxor Calv. epist. 101.
: No preferment in the world comparable. Do thy best here, Grace is a sure
commodity, and however the world go, the trade of godliness cannot fail. Make
sure of that for thy self, and thine, what thou can trade heavenward, the
world and trading here will fail. Read Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 66. w.
Put up thy prayers for them, be not wanting at the Throne of Grace; thy
prayers may return, when thou think not, and with much more advantage, then
thy cares; Mark that.

We suppose thou have servants too, a great part of thy care and charge; and
then there is work enough for thy tongue, thy eye, and thy hand, thou being a
leading hand in All.

1. Work enough for thy tongue; I mean not therewith to trouble thy house as
some do, filling it with wind as with smoke, which is the abuse of the tongue;
but to instruct, to exhort, to reprove, to correct also, thereby to bring all
to know and serve God. There must be no difference, none at all, between
children and servants. It is not said, Genesis 18. 19.
Abraham and his Isaac, Lydia Acts 15. 16.
and her daughters; but Abraham and his household: Lydia and her household. All
alike in point of information, though a difference in affection. This is the
praise in the Gospel, that some private families were particular Churches; The
Church in thy house Philem. 2. And hence, says the Father Chrysostom. in ep. ad
Cor. Hom. 12.
, (If we observe so much it suffices) hence all our evils which break out in
City and Country; ever from the neglect of this family or household; We think
it, says he, sufficient to excuse our neglect, when he or she walk in their
own way, the way of sin and death; That they are our servant or handmaid; as
if servants had no souls, and we no charge over them; or to use the same
Fathers words, as if in Christ Jesus there were either board or free. All one in
our care. But now hear the same Fathers reproof; we do not so neglect our
horse or our ass (for we would have them good) as we do our servants. For the
same may be said of us (the Father In epist. ad Cor. Hom. 8.
puts it down as a Caveat in way of prevention) which was said of a people in
Ieremiah's time Jer. 7. 18.
; The children gather wood, and the fathers kindled the fire, and the women
knead their dough: So of us, children and servants run after their pleasure,
Fathers as fast after their profit; the women make provision for a temporal
life only; none seek the things of Christ, but all their own things, whence
must needs follow disorder in the family, confusion in the Commonwealth. And
so much may teach thee so to use thy tongue, that it may be thy glory, in the
setting up, and maintaining the Glory and service of God in thy family; which
was the grace and glory of those families, whose praise is in the Gospel, and
the praise of that virtuous woman; She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in
her tongue is the law of kindness Prove. 31. 26.
.

2. There will be much use of the eye too, many servants riotously waste much,
children wantonly spill much; be wakefull herein; see that nothing be riotously
abused, (as the swinish manner is in some families, worse then brutish) nor
needles^ly spent; nor carelessly spilt. Set an honorable price upon Gods gifts,
for thou receivest them from God opening His hand: What comes from His hand,
must not be slighted in ours; The least crum of His blessings should have its
due regard. And as He does open His hand, so do thou open thy heart. Thou can
not open at all, till He open first, much less so wide; but yet pray, as the
one is enlarged toward thee, so the other may be enlarged toward Him, in thy
measure; and thy hand also open to others, according as He has blessed thee.
If He does give thee to eat of the fat, and to drink of the sweet, and to be
clad with the wool Nehem. 8. 10.
; Remember them for whom none of all is this provided. And remember withal it
is one of the properties of a virtuous woman Prove. 31. 20.
; She stretches out her hand to the poor* yea, she reaches out her hands to
the needy. Mercies are spilt upon us, if our hearts are not open toward God,
whose they are, and our hand open toward our brethren, who need our help. The
poor man's hand is Christ's treasury Manus pauperis est gazophylacium Christi.
Chrysol. Ser. 8.
; as we add thereto, we give unto Christ; and we show mercy to our own souls
Prove. 11. verse. 17. and verses 24. 25.
; and that thy alms may not stick in thy hand, as if thou were grieved to part
with it; learn a lesson from thy bee-hive; There thou see great store of
honey brought home, but look in the place whence the Be did fetch it, and thou
can see nothing missing Quis unquam quod ferentem ^pem viderat, ubi d^esset
inven^t? Quint Pro paup^re, decl. 13. p. 158.
. It is so in giving of alms; Thou do cut a cantle from thy loaf, so from
thy cheese, and something more thou take out of thy purse, wisely considering
the poor and needy (for that is supposed;) believe me now, at the years end,
thou shall find nothing missing of all thou have taken from thy loaf, or out
of thy purse. But suppose thou have not whereof to give (it is a strong
objection if there be truth in it, as oft-times there is not) but suppose thy
case so, though I cannot well suppose thy case harder, then was the case of the
widow; who, notwithstanding, (as rich in faith, as she was poor in outward
things) from a very little parted with a little, and thereby found a very rich
increase. So we read. 1. Kings 17. It is an extraordinary example, but of no
ordinary use. But suppose, I say, this little is wanting, thou have nothing to
give; Then we must suppose also, that, as it is said, thou wast thy self a
stranger, therefore thou know the heart of a stranger Exodus 2^. 9.
: So, thou art a needy person, and now thou know the heart of the needy and
helpless man; he would have kind and merciful words (they, as an alms, will
be accepted, when there can be no more) he would not have affliction added to
affliction, not gall and wormwood put to his sour cup. So then, what thou
can not do with thy hand, supply with thy tongue, but let thy words come from
thy heart. Mark it, we are not commanded to draw out our purses to the needy
person; No, for our case may be, as it is an ordinary case, silver and gold
have we none. But this we are bound to do; To draw out our soul to the hungry
Esaias 58 10.
; even then, when otherwise, we cannot satisfy the afflicted soul. We must be
kind, pitiful, merciful to his body, more specially to his soul; that is, to
draw out our soul to the hungry, when we have no purse to draw out. And then
past all doubt, we are bountiful; for it is a case long since resolved, A
poor man may be liberal. Now in a few words, learn the way of thriving, how
thou may est have whereout to give; this is the way. A wise and Christian
thrift, will supply us much this way, to enable us to supply others wants,
whereas a profuse and riotous spending, emptieth all the contrary way, and
seals up the heart that it shows no pity. The eye must be wakefull, looking
about thee that nothing be lost; and thy hand must be diligent in thy house:
for we shall never see one and the same person, slack and slothful, yet
liberal and bountiful; profuse and riotous, such a person may be casting or
throwing away Gods blessings, not bestowing them with discerning, as they, who
wisely consider the poor, and are attent to their cry Psalm. 41. 1.
. It is the Apostles advise, and it may stand for a direction, Let him or her
labor, working Ephesians. 4. 28.
(whether with the hands, or with the mind it matters not, if it be) the thing
which is good, that they may have to give to him, that needs, and that of
their own; for if they, who do not work with quietness, do not eat their own
2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
bread (so it is implied) it cannot be that they should give their own bread. A
liberal hand then implies a diligent hand, that it may be liberal, that
there may be whereof to give.

And now here is like to be a getting and thriving on all hands; for he that
gives, increases; in watering others, he makes himself more fruitful, like a
watered garden (which must be marked by the way) And he, that works, increases
also. It is the Wise-mans conclusion; He becomes poor that deals with a
slack hand Prove. 10. 4.
, But the hand of the diligent makes rich. Diligence is a great thriver, it
makes good haste, though not so much speed; It is still improving, and adding
somewhat to the heap. An housewife is well likened to the Snaile; as well to
show what an improvement, a continual diligence in a house will make, as the
keeping of her house. The snaile goes a snailes pace, as we say, very slowly,
but by her constancy in going, She will ascend (so I read) the top of the
highest tower Guellianus display of Herald. p. 217.
. And we may remember a pretty fiction touching the Snaile and the Hare, and
that the Snaile out-went the Hare, for the Hare trusting to his footmanship,
would take a nap by the way, so before the Hare awaked, the Snaile was at the
journeyes end. It teaches, what a continual diligence will do; matters above
ordinary conceit; Take then for example the virtuous woman, mark her ways and
be wise. This is her prime commendation, that she eats not the bread of
idleness Prove. 31. 17.
. She is diligent in her house, yet without carfulness, without distracting
or dividing cares; for this requires our mark, which we read in the verse
before (read it as we should, and as Tremelius, does) This diligent woman,
Laugheth at the time to come Prove. 31. 25. R^d^t ad tempora sequentia.
Calamitosus est animus futuri anxius, and ante miserias miser. Sen. ep. 98.
Sapiens vivit praesentibus laetus, futuri sec^rus. Sen de beat^^ vita cap. 26.
; that is, (for laughing, says Tremelius, implies a security in Gods
providence) she is not anxious or solicitous what will fall out afterward, she
is diligent for the present, which is her charge; and she lets God alone for
hereafter: to disquiet her self thereabouts, were a disquieting in vain. She
may perhaps break her sleep sometimes, in rising while it is yet night; so
doing her duty, and giving all faithful diligence; But she will not break
her sleep about Gods charge, which is to provide and to protect; for she has
learnt this, Our God will supply all our needs; He has undertaken it so to do,
as His proper charge. It is a vain dependence to rest upon a providence, and
neglect the means. A security in a providence, does establish all lawful
means, though it does not stablish or bottom a man upon them; the diligent
person is always the secure person. He or she, that does wisely and faithfully
dispose of the present time, cannot be careful for the after, no not in the
year of drought Jer. 17. 8.
. They were careful when time was, with all their care; Therefore they shall
laugh when others weep; They shall sing for joy of heart, when others shall cry
for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit Esa. 65. 13.
. So high a point of good husbandry, or huswifery it is, well and prudently to
husband the present time. Let us then (for it concerns all) well and carefully
improve the present time, making good the ends, and the means tending thereto,
and leave God to make good the issue, and to turn all to our good. Let us part
our care so, as to take upon us only the care of duty, and leave the rest to
God. For this is the way of all the servants of God, as it was of that virtuous
woman, in whose ways I would have thee tread; She gave all diligence, yet
without carfulness: She so disposed the present time, that it was well spent,
and that made her secure for after-time. And if thus thou shall do, thou will
then observe times and occasions still in their seasons; For diligence without
order and due observation is no thriver; There are particular becks of
providence, and they are intimations of Gods will; Providence has a language,
which is well understood by those, that have a familiar acquaintance with Gods
dealing; They see a train of providence, leading one way, more then to another.

Study huswifry, and the essentialls thereof; not the sticking of a Pin, or
setting of a ruff, or pricking of a cloute, yet these in their season; As
husbandmen pick hemp, and mend shoes, when the weather lets more
necessary employments. Some women are in their houses as a Tulip in the Garden,
for show: but so it should not be; as her place is principal, and her charge,
so should her work be at least her oversight.

To her belongs that Mistresse*quality of a woman; that is, the commodious
and honorable occupation of provision of Bread, and cloth, and work for her
household; It is excellently set down in the same chapter. Great Ladies have
made it their pattern, it concerns not the meaner sort only. I know well, the
Wise man, in another place i, adds one thing more that the house-wife must
look unto, and that is Correction. It may be none will do their duty Ecclus.
23. 24. (...), etc. Arist. oeconom.
without it at sometime, and some at no time; Then it is as necessary as their
Bread; Be sure, let them have it, but instruction with it; And this in all
meekness: For they will take the better, if there be more tears then words;
For then the instructed can discern that there is love in the instruct^r. It
is notable unto this purpose, which the Father k has, (...), etc. Chrysostom. Ad
Cols. Hom. 12.
our tears are never seasonable, but in our prayers, and in our instructions.
But this in passage only falling upon the point of Correction, wherewith
instruction is so necessarily joined, and with both meekness or tears, that
there may be good done.

It is part of the good wives commendation, She looks well to the ways of
her household Verse. 27.
: She keeps them in good order: As she does her duty, so she looks to it,
that they do theirs; as she is diligent, so she will have them to be (...).
Clem. Alex. Str. lib. 1. page 201.
, she will not suffer an idle person in her house, such an one consumes like a
Canker. It was Luthers Minus nocet ignavus fur quam segnis minister.
observation (it is of use in higher matters) A sloathfull Thief, who has not
the slight of conveyance, is not nimble that way, does less hurt, then does a
negligent servant. And it agrees well with that we read; He that is
slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster Prove. 18. 9.
An idle person, is the barrenest piece of earth in the world.
; Remember always, that wicked and sloathfull stand together in the same line
Matt. 25. 26. Acts 20. 31.
.

So now in this great point of houswifry, thou have heard thy duty, which
engages thy Tongue First, that it be apt to teach, to instruct, to warn, and
that with tears; Secondly, Thy eyes, that they look well to the ways of thy
household, that there be no backe-way of consuming, nor bad way of gathering;
Thirdly, Thy hand, that it be open and diligent, working the thing that is
good; else we cannot do good to others for the present, nor in quietness and
rest depend on a providence for afterward. This is the sum of what was last
said; And now drawing to a conclusion, I will put all together, Children and
Servants (for there is no difference in point of care and instruction) and so
read over once more, (for that is not said enough which is not learnt enough)
The chief point of thy charge, which is this:

It is not enough to be virtuous thy self, but thou must teach others so to
be (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 21.
; thou must lead others along with thee, in the same good way, both children,
and servants, and all by thy own example, to walk holily before God; We
cannot else expect, they should walk righteously with man. If they be
unfaithful in the great matters, they cannot be faithful to thee in small, so
as thou can orderly expect a b^essing upon them, or from their labors. If
thou suffer them to steal from the Lords service, especially on the Lords
day, to give unto thy service, or their own pleasures; They are Sacriligious
to their Master in heaven, they cannot be trusty to their Master on earth.
Therefore here look well to thy self and them: Considering still, that there
is right government, where Christ's government is set up and maintained See
Chrysostom. in Genesis cap. 16 o.
; Where his service has the prime and most honorable place both in the house
and heart, then things are done decently and in order.

Herein, indeed, is the beauty of society, and nothing is more beautiful, then
a family thus ordered, and then Persons so ordering.

This order in thy family shall gain thee the commendations, which they had,
whose Praise is in the Gospel, that is praise indeed, and worth the having; it
is the praise from God and goodmen.

And a family so ordered will be the Church in thy house, which is the
honorable title the Apostle gives to some families, in a very bad time. And
this, like a comely Nurcery, sends forth hopeful plants to the City and
Country, Church and Commonwealth; And as this Nurcery is maintained, so are
they supplied; for from this fountain of society two in one house, arise
families, and from them Commonwealths.

And now we have again the block in our way, though we have remooved it
before; I know well, that a family may be so governed, as we heard, and as it
should be; It is required, that these two in one house should be one in one
house, with one soul, with one mind, with one heart serving the Lord. This
blessing and gift from above (for a good husband as a good prudent wife, are
both the gift of God and a special favor Singulari modo Trem. Prove. 19. 14.
Chap. 18. 22.
,) my prayer is, that thou may receive: But if not, thou have heard thy
charge, and withal, how patient thou must be under that want. Thou must wait
when God will give Repentance, and use all means, that may hasten the same; as
the Common adversary does our destruction, and never dispaireth of it, while
there is place for hope, as the Father sweetly and elegantly, showing Chrysostom.
de Lazar. Conc. 1. a.
cases, wives especially; that the unbeleeving husband may be won, by the
chaste conversation of the wife; and so I leave thee now, and thy charge in
this supposed condition, as I would have thee, and them under thee, found; thee
sweetly commanding in the Lord, and they willingly obeying, and in the Lord
still; I leave thee, I say, in thy family, like a little Common*wealth, (...).
etc. A good housewife, is an excellent ornament in an house, she is ^ grace to
her husband and her self. In that house all rejoice, children in their mother,
husband in the wife, the wife in children and husband; all in God. Clem. Alex.
Paed. lib. 3. cap. 11 p. 183.
reverencing thy husband, ruling thy Children, commanding thy servants, and all
in and for the Lord; which will find thee work enough to keep thee waking in
the season for it; and to employ the strength of thy parts, and most precious
time, and so both thy time and parts will be well spent in so behoovefull a
service. Now pass on to the last stage of our life, which is, Old age.

CHAP. VII.
Old Age. Two periods thereof, pressing to duty both. Comfort in death, whence
distilled.

AND now we are come, like a ship from out of the maine Sea of the world, which
lies open to storms and gusts, and rides at Anchor, under the Leeside, where
the passengers may look out and see their harbor. We must now do in the
first place, as Seafaring men should do in such cases, they tell what they
saw, and what they felt, even His wonders in the deep, and they declare these
works of the Lord with rejoicing Psalm. 107. 22.
: So they, who are brought safe to this port, or stage of time, Old Age, must
recount and record the Mercies of the Lord, and what deliverances He has
wrought for them, in their way thitherward. This is the first thing to be done,
even to sacrifice the sacrifice of thankesgiving, and to declare his works also
with rejoicing.

And, Child, I began the Register of Gods Mercies, toward thee, where thou
tookest thy beginning, and first entrance into the world, at thy Birth and
Baptism; There I considered thy outward frame of Body, and inward frame of
mind; where I left off then, there I begin now, to teach thee to recall to
mind, and record the mercies of God to thee ever since that time. And though
this recording of Mercies be proper to every person that is grown up to the
years of understanding; and not to every Age only, but to every year, and
month, and week, and day therein; yet this is a duty, which seems more to
press upon us, the more and the faster years do press on. And therefore
though it does concern All in general, and every age and person in special;
yet being specially intended, and because that, which is spoken to all, is
counted as spoken to none; I shall bend my words to Thee, whom I must suppose
now stricken in years; the Sun of thy day far passed the Meridian, and its
shadow gone down many degrees toward the place, where anon it must set.

Thou must then consider how wonderfully the Lord has maintained thy life, and
preserved the same ever since thy coming into the world; and that this
consideration may press the more, thou must consider what this life is, and
that of so small a bottom, the Lord should spinne out solong a thread; Had he
not drawn it out of his own power, as the Spider does her web out of her own
bowels, it had been at an end the second minute. The maintaining the Radical
Moisture, that Oil which feeds the Lamp and light of thy life, is as great a
miracle, as was the maintaining the Oil in the Cruse of the poor widow. But
He did not maintain this life only, and at His own proper cost: But defended
and protected thee also, took thee under His Wings, as the hen does her
chickens, to shelter thee from those many dangers thy life has been exposed
to; We cannot tell how many: but this thou must know, that there are
principalities and Powers, both in the plural number, to show they are
Legions, and in the Abstract, to show they are armed with power, as they are
swelled with malice: And to this their malice and power thou wast liable every
moment of thy life; and thou had felt both their malice and their power, as
quick and fierce against thee, as Job and others have done, if the Lord had not
charged them concerning thee, Touch her not: and how can thou be sufficiently
thankful for this?

Again consider how many dangers and casualties thou have escaped from the
Earth, the several creatures on it; from the Water, from the Fire, from the
Air also; how often have the Arrows of Death come whisking by thee? Took
away those next thee, and yet have missed thee; perhaps thou have seen some
Dear years of time, as thy forefathers have done; When a thousand have fallen
at thy right hand, and ten thousand at thy left; When Gods Arrests have seized
upon some walking, talking, and yet have spared thee.

And if not so, yet consider thine own body, and the humors thereof; They had
every day overflowne, and drowned thee, as the waters the earth, if God had not
said unto them, stay your proud Waves. In a word, if thou consider, what thy
life is, and the dangers thou art subject to; thou must acknowledge, that the
preservation thereof, is as great a wonder, as to see a spark maintained alive
amidst the waters; So Chrysostom speaks of Noah (...). Tom. 5. ser. 6.
: As great a wonder, as to see a glass, that has been in continual use, gone
through many hands, and has had many knocks, and falls, to be kept for forty,
fifty, sixty years, whole and unbroken: As great a wonder as to see a Candle
in a paper lantern, in a strong windy night, kept from being extinct, when as
we often see in many, that a little cold comes but in at a little cranney, and
blows their Candle out, as ^ob speaks. Thus has God kept thee, and, as it
were, in His hand carried thee. And in thy way, how has He crowned thee with
His goodness, and filled thy years with comforts, so as they are more
innumerable, then are the Minutes of thy life! Only thus thou must sum them
up in the gross* That what ever comfort thou have had in thy life time, from
Him thou receivedst it, who puts in all the Sugar and delight we find, in or
from the Creature; as Air lights not without the Sun, nor wood heats without
fire, so neither can any condition comfort without God; and with Him every
condition is comfortable, though seemingly never so discomfortable, for He
moderateth the discomfort (it is like thou have found it so) so as we are not
swallowed up of sorrow; and He fashioneth the heart to that disconsolate
condition, and that condition to the heart; so much, it is very likly, thou
have found also, and it requires thy sad and serious consideration.

But more especially, this thou must consider, what have been the effects and
fruits of all this goodness? What thou have returned to the Lord for all
these? All these, what are these? Nay, it is not possible to reckon them up:
They that keep a Register of Gods mercies (some do) cannot set down all the
Receipts of one Day, much less of all their days; so great is the sum of
every particular day, that we cannot reckon up the specialties thereof, and
call them by their names, as God does the Stars. But put it to the Question;
and let thy heart make answer before him, who tries the heart, and searches
the reins, and will bring every secret thing to judgment.

The Oil and radical Balsome of thy life we spoke of; has it been fuel to
thy Thankfulness, or has it increased the fire of thy lusts? Thou have been
preserved and delivered, so long and so miraculously, as thou have heard and
seen. How has Gods patience, and longsuffering wrought upon thee? Has it
brought thee nearer to repentance, and so nearer to God? Or has thine heart
been hardened thereby (because sentence against an evil work is not presently
Eccles. 8. 11.
executed:) So as, with that stubborn people, whose sons and daughters
naturally we are; thou may say, I have been delivered to do more
abominations Ierem. 7. 10.
. Thou have had mercies upon mercies, they have been new unto thee every
morning; and for thy Sorrows, they have been mitigated too, and so mixed, that
there was much mercy in them, many ingredients of comfort, to take of the
sharpness, and allay the bitter relish thereof. What strong workings have thou
found herefrom? How have thou been inclined to love the Lord for His goodness,
to fear Him for His Mercies? How have thou been melted thereby to obedience,
and engaged upon his Service? Ask thy self again (for in that Method we
went:) Thou have two hands, another has but one, or, perhaps, none; what more
work have thou done? Thou have a Tongue, and the use of the same; there is
another thou know who has a Tongue, but speaks not, wherein have thou
glorified thy Maker more then the other has done? Thou have two eyes, thy
Neighbor is dark; Ask the same question over again: For, as it was said of
him, who was borne blind; So it was, that the works of God John 3. 9.
should be made manifest in him: So we may say, we have our eyes, ears,
tongues, hands, which others have not; That we might the more ptaise the Lord
for His goodness, and declare His works toward the children of men.

These are the questions, but upon the point, it is but this single question,
and the very same, and to the same purpose, which the King makes (to that I do
allude) touching Mordecay; What honor and dignity has been done to Mordecay
Esther 6. 3.
for this? So let this be the question. What honor, what service has been
done to the Lord? He has so honored thee; he has so served thee; be has so
and so preserved thee, from the Paw of the Lion, and jaw of the bear so
delivered thee. Through his strength thou did leap over such a wall, He
brought thee out of such a strait; He supported thee in such weaknesses; He
supplied thee in such a Wilderness; He gave success to thee, in such
businesses. What shall I say, for we are confounded here; He is the God, not of
some, but of all consolations; the Father of mercies* And we can no more number
them, then we can the drops of the rain or of the dew; or the Treasures of the
snow and bail, but we know, who is the Father of them, and out of whose Bowels
these mercies come; whereby thou have been fed all thy life long, and redeemed
from evil: we know the price of them too, the very least of them, is the price
of blood. What honor has been done for all this? What peculiar Service; that's
the single question. If now thy heart make answer, as we read in the foregoing
place, There is nothing done, no peculiar service at all: instead of being the
Temple of His praise, thou have been the grave of His mercies; They have been
buried in thee, they have brought forth no fruits; if this be the answer of thy
heart, and so it condemn thee, the Lord is greater then our hearts, He will
condemn much more.

And therefore it is high time, to look into the Register of Gods mercies, into
the books of record; And if these mercies have lain as things cast aside, and
of no account, as dead things out of mind; if so long and to this day forgot,
then now it is high time, that thy rest should be troubled, and sleep should
not come into thy eye; till thou have looked over this Register, and recorded
the mercies of the Lord; and so pressed them on thy conscience, That it may
answer out of a pure heart, that something at the length is done, some
sacrifice of praise and thanks is returned to the Lord for all this.

This is the first thing to be done now, and it is high time to do it,
Considering the season: It is supposed that gray hairs are upon thee, here and
there they are sugared now, and like the hoary frost; The Almond tree
flourishes, thou art in the winter of thine age; It is high time now to look
about thee, and to consider. That is the first ground of consideration.

2. That time is hasting, whose portion and burden from the Lord is but labor
and sorrow: And then, though we have time; for our day lasts while life
lasts, yet no time to do any thing in it to purpose, for then the
Grasse-hopper is a burden.

So I make two periods of this age, And each a ground to press on unto a
timely consideration: The one I call declining age, when we have lived almost
to threescore years; The other, when we are drawing onward to fourscore, etc.
extreme old age; of both in their order.

1. Both the one as well as the other, is an age not more desired then
complained of; They knew best why, that feel the burden of it (I have not
lived unto it; It is likely, that person complained not without cause, who
being willed to hasten her pace, told them, who were so quick with her, That so
she could not do, for she carried a great burden on her back; And whereas no
burden at all appeared to the eye, she replied again, that threescore years
were passed over her head and that was the burden, Plaut. And so it may well be
with those, whose spirits are much spent, and strength wasted, even at those
years; And then age it self alone, is a burden. I can speak little here out
of experience. But this I can say; If God be pleased to stretch out my day so
long, I shall know no cause to complain of the length, for that is a blessing;
Length of days is from the right hand, Prove. 3. 16.
Riches and honor from the left. Only we must note here, That if the Lord be
pleased to shorten the day of this life to any person, as sometimes He does to
His dearest and most obedient children (their days are not long upon earth)
why yet, if He eek out this short day here, with an eternity of days, and
pleasures at His right hand, when they are taken hence; if so, that party
shall have no cause to complain of a short day on earth, so abundantly
recompensed in heaven. This is a note by the way.

If, I say, God be pleased to stretch forth my days so long, I know no cause,
why I should complain of a blessing; I may complain, and just cause why I
should, and that bitterly, but not for the accession of years. If any thing
sower them, it is of mine own Leaven, and of my own putting in; Complain of
my self I may, of them I may not.

Old age is a calm, quiet, and easy time, if youth have done it no
disservice, in filling its bones before hand; Nor no intemperance has weakened
its head or feet. If so, Old age has just cause to complain of the Man, not
the man of Old Age.

There is no Guest in the world, that is more desired and expected, and yet,
when it comes, worse welcomed, and entertained, then Old Age is; still with
sighs, and complaints; which, we know, argues bad welcome. I would have my
Child make good provision for it, against it come, and when it is come, to give
it good welcome. Welcome, I say, I do not say, ease. Good welcome does consist
(we say) in showing a good and cheerful countenance to our guest, not in
giving him too much ease, or feeding him too daintily. Let it appear, thou
have laid up store against thy years come; and now they are come, thou can
welcome them, and art glad they are come; but do not make too-much of them, in
giving them too much ease; I may warn thee of it again, for Old Age is very
craving, very importunate that way; though they may be importunate. If thou
yeeldest to a lithernesse, and a listnesses, whereto Old Age inclines us very
much, and so to spare thy body, thy activenesse will decay more in one month,
then otherwise it would in twelve. Its observable what the Heathen Nos sumus
qui nullis annis vacationem damus, and canitiem galea premimus, etc. Senec. de
otio sapientis. cap. 29.
said, and it may instruct Christians;

We allow no vacation to our long term of years, we can put an headpiece
upon our hoary-scalp. We will rest when we are dead, life is for action. Keep
then thy body in breath, and in ure with exercise, else it will quickly grow
unprofitable, and a Burden: Use strength and have it, it is a sure proverb;
and if ever we will use expedition, it is then seasonable, when gray hairs are
upon us; It is dangerous to burn the Daylight, and to trifle out this
precious time. The putting off this day, and the next, and half a day, cost
the poor Levite and his Concubine very dear; as we may read, Judges 19. The
evening hastes on a pace, and the Sun is near the setting; now put on the
more earnestly, because night is coming, and thou must to Bed in the dark;
now gather twice as much; I mean, now, pray, hear, read twice as much; For
the great Sabbath is coming when thou look for ever to Rest, for ever to be
with the Lord. This Sabbath Day is coming, which shall never have night; Now
gather spiritual Manna, thy Homer full; twice as much as formerly. If in thy
youth thou did by hearing, reading, conference, etc. gain thirty-fold, now
gain sixty. Now bestirre thy self, and put to all thy strength, for the
laying in store of provision in this thy day, that thou may rejoice in that
great Day, the Day of the Lord, or the particular Day of thy Death. Let it
appear thou art going out, by the clearness of thy light; and that the night
is coming by the hasting of thy pace. It is strange to consider what old men
have done, and how fit they have been for the best actions (I mean of the
mind, I know outward must decay) because they kept their mind like a bow, so
they said, always bent.

I forbear to put them down here. The holy Scripture, Heathen Authors, our own
observation, does reckon up not a few. But remember still, that there are none
recorded in the sacred Register (after the term of life was shortened) for old
men, but their old age was a crown unto them, being found in the way of
righteousness Senibus vita productior a deo tributa est, in eum finem, ut
insiginum aliquorum operum in Ecclesiaesuae emolumentum organa essent.
Mardochaeus ad liberaudam Ecclesiam sub Artaxerxe, vixit annos, 198. Jehoshua
ut p^pulum e Babylone, cum Esdra and Zorobabele, reduceret, vixit annos, 130.
Philo* Ammi^nus in breviario temporum. Tobit senior, ut populi calamitas sub
Salmanasare levaret, vixit annos, 158. Ea ipsa causa, Tobit junior vixit annos,
127. Judith ad liberandum patrium sub Holoferne, vixit annos, 105. Six^us
Senensis Bibliothec. lib. 8.
. They that are planted in Gods house, bring forth much fruit in their age. He
that is fruitless in his latter years, may be much suspected how he spent the
former. But I am sure there can be little comfort in it. It is a sad thing to
be an old man in years, and a child in understanding; To grow like a Leeke,
green, fresh, and lively toward the earth, flag and saplesse, upwards toward
heaven; To have the eye of the body dim, and the eye of the soul as dim; To
have the body bending toward its earth, and the spirit no more elevated; To
have one foot in the grave, and the other tending to the place of utter
darkness; To have the outward man quite decayed, and the inward dead or
fainting; To be hasting toward the pit, and to have the heart within like a
stone. A dying spirit in a dying body, what a woeful conjunction is this!

I consider thy sex, child, and thy charge, but whatever it be, thou wast
never so fit, as now thou should be, to serve it: Now admonition,
correction, instruction, counsel, all are in season; before, they might be
suspected. Now thou have the advantage of all thy former past days, and every
following day is the disciple of the preceding day (...)* Pind. ol. od. 1
. Here is Master after Master, and lesson upon lesson, thou art a very bad
proficient, if thou art not now an old Disciple Acts 21. 16.
. I shall never examine thee upon this point, but be assured, He that numbers
out thy years unto thee, will take an account of thee, how thou have spent
them; what provision thou have laid up for their coming; what store thou have
treasured up against a dear year, against a time of spending. Old Age is like
our winter, a time of expense; we must get and lay up in youth, what we must
use and lay out in age Juveni parandum, Seni utendum. Senec.
. And here we must use the more diligence, because it is not with man in his
winter, as with the earth, the trees, and fruits thereon*, in theirs; If they
look dead and saplesse in their winter, the Sun will return unto them, and
renew their face, they will spring out again; but man decays and renews
not, he must not look in a natural way, to renew his youth like an eagle. If
the Lord has lengthned out thy span and thread of life unto old age, thou must
needs say, the Lord has been gracious, and full of patience to thee ward, and
then thy heart must needs answer; Render again praise and obedience to Him,
that is so good unto thee: So thou would expect from thy child, from thy
servant, so a Prince from his Subject. Great favors are great engagements
between man and man; betwixt God and man much more, for He is the fountain and
wellhead of mercies (The mercy, which man shows, is but as a drop derived
to us from that fountain) Gods mercies are all strong cords to bind unto
obedience, which ever is the fruit of true thankfulness. David said very much
in a few words against Nabals churlishness, Surely in vain have I kept all,
that this fellow had in the wilderness 1. Sam. 25. 21*
. So David argued or rather reproved Nabals churlishness; And had not Abigail
seasonably stopped David in his way, Nabal had heard more touching his churlish
dealing and answer. This instructs us to sobriety and watchfulness; that the
Lord may not have the same controversy against us, when we come to our
declining age; Surely in vain have I kept this man, this woman, and all that
they have, so as nothing is missing of all that pertained unto them: In vain
have I lengthened out their days; in vain have I fed them all their life, and
redeemed them from evil; in vain have I preserved their inward and outward
faculties, both of soul and body, all sound and entire; for all this have they
so, and so churlishly requited me; for all, they have returned evil for good.
This is a reproof, the hearing whereof we cannot endure. And such a like
reproof must he or she hear, even such an one, as will make their hearts like
a stone within them, if, being preserved so and so long, they have so unkindely
requited the Lord; if, having so long a time of gathering and of exercising
their talent, they have gained nothing; if, having passed over so many years,
they have carelessly passed over also the observations, which so many years
would have yielded very many. For this we must still remember; That the
unthankful man, the better he is, the worse he is; That is, the more good the
Lord has been to him, the heavier his account will be, and then the worse it
will be with him. Better the Lord had been a wilderness unto him, then that he
should be a wilderness to the Lord, who had so watered him, that he might be
fruitful.

That we may escape this great condemnation, labor we to acquaint our selves
betime with the Lord, and to grow up more and more, in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ and the power of his grace: for according to our increase and growth
herein will our strength be, for in Christ Jesus the decays of age are
repaired, so as there shall be no more an infant of days, nor an old man that
has not filled his days: as Mr Calvine expounds the place Esaias 65. 20.
.

Let us hear now how sadly Clemens of Alexandria complains at this point; we
will hear his counsel also, for that is of use indeed, but his complaint
first, which is this. Ye have been infants, then children, then grown-men,
after grave-men, but yet good men never. Now reverence your (...). etc. ad
gentes page 50. (...). Ibid. etc. (...) etc. Ibid. (...). etc. Ch^ysost. Tom.
6. in vet. Test. page 543.
old age, (this is the counsel) give this honor unto it of being wise, of
doing virtuously; give it, as you would have others give you, honor and due
reverence. You are hastening now toward your grave, set your face the more
steadfastly toward your country, which is above. Your feet are almost
stumbling upon the dark mountains; pluck them up now, as a Traveller, that has
slept out his time, and yet has far to go, and walk on the faster in the
ways of peace, so redeeming the time: Put that crown upon your gray head, upon
your declining age (the Sun of the day is near the setting) that now at
length, now you are dying, you may begin to live (A man cannot be said to live
truly, till he lives godlily, holily; till then, he is dead, though he lives)
that the end of your life may be the beginning of your happiness. Oh! far be
it, that ye should be delivered, and delivered again, and yet again; that you
should be spared, and spared, and yet to commit more abominations Jer. 7. 10.
: far be it, that ye should be (...). Ioid. page 40. Alex.
(as some have been) by so much the more wicked, the more kind and gracious
the Lord has been.

You pity blind men (...), etc. Ibid. page 49.
, and deaf men, because they cannot see the works of God, which ye see, nor hear
the works of God which ye hear. O pity your selves for ye are both, both
blind and deaf. Ye have seen much, ye have observed little; ye have heard many
things, and those great things, but ye understand not, what ye heard. Now hear
and hearken; now see and perceive, now, while it is called to day; and know,
that there is a great deal of mercy (...). etc. p. Ibid. 41.
, that yet the day is, and is yet continued still every day to this present,
repeated; a great mercy this, provoke the Lord no longer; grieve His good
spirit no more, lest He swear in His wrath, as He will do, if we continue to
turn grace into wantonness (...) etc. Ibid.
. While it is yet to day, hear His voice, and turn unto Him. This is the
counsel, I will add but this to it;

That He, and He only, turns the heart, who opened the eyes of Him, that was
born blind, and made a man every whit whole; therefore the Church says,
convert me, and I shall be converted, etc.

It is He, who gives a seeing eye, and an hearing ear, even both these is a
special mercy from the Lord, and greatly to be begged for. This then we must
note for close hereof; that, as there may be a child in Noli annorum nos aest
mare numero: nec sapientiam, canos reputes, sed canos sapientiam. Hier. ad
Paul. 14. p. 180.
years, and a man in understanding; so also may there be an old man in years,
and a child in understanding. For understanding comes not by years, but by
meditation in Gods law Psalm. 119. 99. 100. Noli fidem pensare temporibus. Ibid.
: I have more understanding then my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
meditation. I understand more then the Ancients, because I keep thy precepts. A
man may run out many years and more hours, and yet be never the wiser by all
that time; because he has not learnt from whom every good and perfect gift
comes, even from the Father of lights. He that works all our work in us
and for us; before whom the Elders fell down and worshipped, casting their
crowns before His Throne, acknowledging themselves to be, in point of grace,
but Almes-men Exuentes omne propriam benignitatem se benefictarios ejus
agnoscunt, ante cujus thronum coronas abjiciunt. Brightman Rev. 4. 10.
, or sitting at the receipt of a free mercy; He it is that gives wisdom, not
length of years, nor number of days; out of His mouth comes knowledge Prove.
2. 6.
and understanding; God iustructs unto discretion Esaias 28. 18.
. The Husbandman can neither sow, nor reap etc. without assistance and
instruction from God; much less can he sow righteousness and reap the same;
without special instruction from His mouth, Who knows the heart; therefore
it is said, Who teaches like Him Job 38. 22.
? And he, that is old, and stricken in years, yet has learnt so much, as has
been said: That the Lord gives wisdom; that His word or law instructs to
discretion; This man's case is not to be despaired of, though it be toward the
last hour; for while breath is within the nostrils, for ought we know, there
is a door of grace and mercy open: But yet this is a very sad and lamentable
case; For the longer a man walks on in the ways of ignorance, the more
unwilling and unable he will be to return, and be reformed; custom in sinning
exercising still more and more tyranny; his understanding will be more darkened;
his judgment more perverted; his will more stubborn, his memory more stuffed
with sensual notion; his affections will become more rebellious; his thoughts
more earthly; his heart more hardened; his conscience more seared.

And so much considering the season, that gray hairs are mingled with the
black; no time for delay now, when before it be long, there shall be no more
time. We must account, that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation 2. Pet.
3. 15.
. And let the conclusion hereof, be an earnest prayer to the God of all grace;
that, as His promise was unto His Church, to Joel 2. 25.
restore the years that the locusts had eaten, the Cankerworm and the
Caterpiller; So he would restore unto us the years which the ignorance of
childehood, the vanities of youth, the negligence of age have consumed.

There is another period of this age, the burden whereof is labor and sorrow.
Barzillai lived to those years, full fourscore; and what says he? I 2. Sam.
19.
cannot taste what I eat, or what I drink (a question in the sacred tongue is a
strong affirmation) I hear not the voice of singing, wherefore then should thy
servant be yet a burden? how long have I to live? (a question we should often
put to our selves, which would answer all solicitations, from the world and
flesh, and put them to silence) how long have I to live? That is, how very
short is the remnant of my mortality? yet a very little while (...). Heb. 10.
37.
, and I must hence; what should I think of now but of my death, and of my
grave? what are pleasures or earthly contentments unto me? so feelingly spoke
that old man.

The many decays and infirmities, that accompany this age, are fully set down
by the preacher, Eccles. 12. Amongst those many, one expression there is very
full and significant, as our, English renders it, verse 5. The grasshopper shall
be a burden; In the Original the words imply no more, but the curvature of the
back; which with men of such years, stands bent like a Grasshopper; and that
makes an old man's gate the more burdensome: The words may imply also, according
to the common construction; that every thing, even the lightest, to an old man,
is burdensome: If he creep up to his bed and down from it* though to repair
his decays, yet even this is burdensome; even delights (to others) to him are
tiresome; he takes no delight in the Grasshopper, nay it is a burden; that is,
(says Tremellius) that pleasant season of the year when we hear the
Grasshopper, yields no pleasure to him, none at all; he has quite lost his
taste and relish now in those things, which to others are pleasurable. etc. And
yet if the grave meet us not in our way hitherto (as commonly it does before we
come so far) and prevent our expectation; it is larger in nothing, then in
the issue of this age, and in the account, we hope to give up at that time.
This is our greet folly; For, how bad stewards soever we have been of our fore
past time, yet at this time, we hope to lay our reckonings even, and so to give
up our account with joy. Though we have turned from God all our days, yet we
have a sure and certain hope, (in our conceit) that we shall turn unto Him, and
He will turn unto us, at this time, when indeed we are not able to turn our
selves upon our bed. And naturally (for it is but Nature seeking its own
preservation) naturally, I say, and usually men do make fair offers, essays
and promises this way, at such a time as this, when they see themselves
dropping into the grave. But we must note, as one before us and for our use B.
Andrews* on Psalm. 78. verse* 34.
, that this time is the time when all Hypocrites, Atheists, tag and rag come
in, and seek Him; For who is it, that will not look out for a dwelling, when he
sees his old house dropping down upon his head? Who will not cry out for mercy
mercy, when he sees the door shutting upon him, and if he speaks not now, he
must hold his peace for ever? Who will not desire, and that earnestly, to live
for ever with the Lord, now that he sees he must die? So true it is, that this
is the time, when all, even the worst of all, do seek unto God, and will turn
unto* Him.

But we must note also, that this is not our time, nor is it the time when God
usually opens unto us.

1. It is not our time, to seek, when we are not in case to seek any thing
else. It is not our time to turn to Him, when we are not able to turn our
selves in our bed; not our time to rise early to seek Him (so we must, if in
an ordinary way we look to find Him) when we are not able to rise at all; not
our time to enquire after Him, when breath fails us, and we are not able to
speak three words together. What ever our words are, and how pious soever;
whatever offers we make toward heaven, it will be suspected to be slavish and
extorted for fear of the Pale horse, and that which follows. It is not to be
doubted, but at such a pinch as this, something we would say, and something we
would do, which might do our selves good: But what, or how can we do to
purpose, when our strength is gone, our spirits spent, our senses appaled, the
shadow of death upon our eyes? This time is not our time.

2. Nor is it Gods time to hear. In the Law, the Lord forbad that torn flesh
should be offered unto Him, it was allotted for the dogs Exodus 22. 31. Mal. 1.
v. 13.
. But such a like sacrifice are our prayers and our praises, at such a time as
this, as torn flesh; broken, divided, and interrupted they must needs be, when
our heart within us is as Lead, and our sighs beat as thick as a swift pulse.
The Lord ever refused the torn, blind, and the lame for a sacrifice. It was
not beseeming our Governor Mal. 1. v. 8.
, a man like our selves* In case to Him, it was offered, he would not accept of
the same, much less will God accept our torn, divided sacrifice, our refuse,
our Lees or dregs, bottom, dotage, That which was dogs meat, that which our
selves and friends are weary of; We had a male in our flock, that is, we had
strength of body and mind, and then of that best or male, we should have
offered unto the Lord: But now that our best or male is spent, now that we have
cast away our precious stock of time, and parts upon the service of sin and
Satan, how can we now think, that our torn, blind, and lame sacrifice can be
accepted? how can we think the Lord will accept a corrupt thing, against which
He has denounced a curse Mal. 1. 14.
?

It is not the Lords time, He hears not those persons, who Prove. 28. 9. Prove.
1.
turn away their ear from hearing his Law; we must hear God first, if we look
that God should hear us at the last; If He cries, and He cannot be heard; We
shall cry, and we shall not be heard, for the Lord has spoken it more then
once Zach. 7. 13. Quid enim justius? etc. Sal. De Gob. lib. 3. page 86. Non
audivimus, non audimur. ibidem.
. All our stretching, and crying, and howling, will be in vain. We should have
stretched and inclined our ears, and have lifted up our voice on high, when
Gods time and ours was; I mean the ordinary time, that he has appointed to be
called upon, and we are commanded to seek Him in. What time is that? it is
called the Day of Salvation, the acceptable Day. And when is that time? The
Apostle answers; Now is the accepted time, now is the Day of Salvation, now,
this present time 1 Cor. 6. 2.
; And it is but a day. Time is all the year long; but your sowing time, and
your reaping time, both these have their seasons. Time is all the day long; but
tide-time has See first Part. page 71.
its appointed hour, and we observe it, as the poor man the stirring of the
water. Now this present time while the male is in the flock, while breath is,
and strength is; while the season is of knocking and opening; Now is the time
when we must seek; Now the time, when God usually opens.

There is a pretty fiction, touching the shell*fish, and the Serpent; And
because it instructs us touching a special point of practice, we thus read it.
The Shellfish and the Serpent sometime lived together, and conversed; the
Shellfish very harmelesly with the Serpent; the Serpent very crookedly with
the Shellfish. After many fair means, and thereby prevailing nothing, the
Shellfish watched his opportunity, and while the Serpent slept, gave him a
blow on the head, which is deadly. The Serpent feeling himself wounded to
death, began to stretch out himself (it is the manner of all creatures so to
do, but most remarkable in the Serpent, because he lies in a ring, and goes
in folds or doubles.) The Shellfish observing the Serpent so stretching This
is a fiction, but it tells us our folly in good eatnest, and instructs us in a
special point of wisdom; we have this property of the Serpent; we are content
to walk crookedly all our life in the crooked ways of sin, and Death, our
own ways, and we doubt not but to make all straight, and even, when we dye.
But ordinarily it profits us not, our Thoughts deceive us, and that is a
fruit of our folly; Our wisdom is, to set all straight and even before hand;
to put our souls in order, and our feet in straight paths, while there is
yet Time; this has been the wisdom of the Saints. If we read the sacred
Register, we shall observe all along; That they whose years are numbered to be
many, were fruitful in their lives, and faithful in their Deaths, their Old
age was their crown of glory, for it was found in the way of righteousness.

And for that great and weighty work, Their setting their house in order;
Their making all straight and even; This was not a work to be done then, when
strength, and heart, and breath fails, but already done. When they came to
that point, there was no more to be done, but to close the eye, and fall asleep
quietly in the Lord.

Remember Lord, said that good King, when death was in his eye, Remember how I
have walked in truth 2 Kin. 20. 3.
, how I have done the thing which is good in thy sight. He assures and gives
large testimony touching the Time past, I have, I have. It was not large
promises concerning the time to come, when it was threatened, That time should
be no more; as the manner of the most is; I will do thus and thus hereafter,
if thou will be pleased to spare me now: many have said so, and so promised,
and recovered, and fallen back strangely, to commit greater abominations; For
that is a Time, as the learned Knight notes Hist. of the world. 2. B. Chap 3.
Sect. 4. page 212.
, When we remember God perforce, and when we stand upon no condition with Him.
It was not, what he would do, but what he had done; Remember, Lord, how I have
walked, how I have done.

I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
, said Paul the Aged, when the time of His departure was at hand. That is not a
time to fight, when commonly the heart faints; the head is light; the back
pained; the sides weakened; that is the time to have the Crown put on, which we
have so long striven after; a Time to have our sanctification perfected, which
before we have heartily labored in. It is not the Time to fight, but to
overcome, and to be more then conquerers. I have fought that good fight, I have
kept the faith. When? when was Paul such a Champion, so valiant for the Truth,
contending for the Faith, and keeping it; when was this? when his bow abode in
strength, then he played the Soldier, so fighting, so contending; And hence
Paul's ground of confidence: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown. Thus
touching the wisdom of the Saints; They have understanding of the times; And
they know what they ought to do 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.
: that is, they do all in season.

Two lessons, I shall draw hence for the Child's use, and instruction, and then
anend.

First, from hence I would give warning, and put in a Caveat against some bold
and presumptuous words, and for ever hereafter prevent them. We hear some, and
it is ordinary, To wish for Death in a Passion, before they have well thought
of it, and prepared for it; if we may believe them, they are well content to
dye, in a discontent. They wish for that, which they never before thought of in
sobriety, and good earnest. Know they what they say? do they consider what
death is, and the consequence of the same; when once death has made its last
conquest over the Body, in that very instant Time, the soul enters into a
condition never to be altered; it enters into eternity; a gulf of Time, which
all the figures in Arithmeticke cannot fill up. For when we have reckoned a
thousand thousand years, we Read Drexclius. 4. 2.
have not the fewer remaining. We are swallowed up in the thought of Eternity,
as a drop in the Ocean; It is not possible to find any bottom there; we want
a thought to measure it, but if we should think of it to purpose, we should be
well advised what we do or say. I know there are some, who send their prayers,
and their praises after Souls departed. But all helps no more then does the
crying after a Bowl (rub or run) now thrown out of the hand. The hand sets
the Bias, and gives the bowl an impression, and where the strength of that
impression cease, there the Bowl lies; all our running, and calling, and
crying, helps nothing at all, but to evidence clearly, as the Anticke and
ridiculous tricks of the Bowler; so the vanity, and unprofitablenesse of our
after labors, now that the soul is departed. For then it is night with the
Soul in respec^ of any further work; the pit is open, where there is no
praise*

Then it either rests from his labor, or is restless in pain; There tears
are wiped of, or else they begin never to have end; Weeping for evermore. And
this I note in passage, that, when we speak of Death, we may be serious.

It was well answered by a Father to his Son, who, being Crossed in his
humor, wished he were dead; learn first what it is to live; he that so
lightly wishes to dye, is as he that flies from an iron weapon, and a bow of
steel strikes him through, as Job speaks Job. 20. 24.
: Woe unto you, that desire the day of the Lord, to what end is it for you Amos
5. 18. Jer. 48* 48. and 43. 44.
? The day of the Lord is darkness, and not light, as if a man did flee from a
Lion, and a Bear meet him, etc. So the Prophet reprooved those, who were
dispisers of Gods Words and Works, and scoffed at His judgments. It may
instruct us to sobriety, that we do not, for the avoiding of an inconvenience,
run into a mischief. It is dangerous to live in discontent; to dye in it, or
to wish so to do, is much more dangerous. We ought to wish rather, we may live,
and to count it a great mercy, that we are spared till we can give a better
account of our Time, and are better fitted to dye.

Death indeed is the Churches portion, and part of her jointure, All are yours
Cor. 3. 21. 22, 23.
, and amongst those several parcels, Death is yours; and therefore it may be
wished for and desired, as lawfully as a Child may desire to go to bed, or to
his Father. For the nature of Death is changed to the godly; It is harmless
now, and has lost its venom; It is a passage to a better place, a gate to
Glory; It is the accomplishment of Mortification, and the end of labor. Thus
death is, but not in its own nature; so it is a destroying hostile thing, and
so to our nature, the most terrible of all Terribles; And therefore not to be
desired, till we are assured, that both the nature thereof, and our nature also
is changed. And then also our desires must not be immoderate; we must not long
for it, nor rejoice exceedingly, when we can find the grave Job 3. 21, 22.
. This argues too much shortness of spirit, and some impatience under Gods
Hand, and more unwillingnesse then becomes to wait upon Him any longer; we
must patiently wait Gods Time, remembering Eternity is a space long enough for
God to show mercy unto His, when their faces shall wax pale no more, they
shall rest for ever. And therefore no matter if yet longer they wait His Time,
and abide His pleasure, though with some grief and pain to the flesh;
pleasures at His right Hand for evermore, will abundantly recompense, what ever
pressures are from below.

But whether we dye sooner or later, it is then safe dying, when we can yield
up our spirits, as David did, and with the same confidence; Into thine Hand I
commit my Spirit Psalm. 31. 5.
: Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. It is safe casting a man's self
upon God, when he can say as Paul did, whose I am, and whom I serve Acts 27. 23.
. We may then wish for Death, when, with old Simeon, we can with the Arms of
faith, claspe and embrace Christ, the fountain of life; Now let Thou thy
Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Then there is
a peaceable departure, when the soul has such a vision.

And therefore pray thou, and pray again, that the Lord would spare thee yet,
and yet longer, till by a conscionable improvement, of life, health, strength,
peace, ordinances, corrections also, etc. Thou have got some good assurance,
certain and stable; That do depart hence is much better, for thou shall be
ever with the Lord, whose Thou art, and whom Thou servest.

And, (which is the second lesson) do not trifle away time, nor delay here in a
matter of so great consequence. Let me remember here, (for we cannot think of
any thing more to our purpose) how the learned Knight complains of and
convinces the true unhappiness of our condition, and the dark ignorance,
which covers the eyes of our understanding; we only, says he, prize,
pamper, and exalt Hist. of the World 1 Book. chap. 2. sect. 3. p. 24. See
preface page 19.
this vassal and slave of Death, and forget altogether the imprisoned
immortal soul, till the soul be going from out of one prison into another; for
when is it, that we seriously think of death? when examine we the great
account, which then we are to give up? Never, while we have one vanity left us
to spend: we plead for titles, till our breath fail us; dig for riches,
whiles our strength enableth us; exercise malice, while we can revenge; and
then, when time has beaten from us both youth, pleasure, and health, and that
Nature it self hates the house of old age, we remember with Job, that we must
go the Job 10. 21. and 17. 13.
way from whence we shall not return, and that our bed is made ready for us in
the dark; and then I say, looking over late into the bottom of our conscience
(which pleasure and ambition had locked up from us all our lives) we be-behold
therein the fearful images of our actions past, and withal, this terrible
inscription: That God will bring every Eccles. 12. 14.
work into judgment, that man has done under the Sun.

But what examples have ever moved us? what persuasions reformed us? or what
threatenings made us afraid? we behold other men's Tragedies played before us, we
hear what is promised and threatened: but the worlds bright glory has put out
the eyes of our minds, and these betraying lights, (with which we only see)
do neither look up toward termlesse joys, nor down toward endless sorrows,
till we neither know, nor can look for any thing else, at the worlds hands.

But let us not flatter our immortal souls herein: For to neglect God all our
lives, and know that we neglect Him; to offend God voluntarily, and know that
we offend Him, casting our hopes on the peace, which we trust to make at
parting, is no other then a rebellious presumption, (and that which is the
worst of all) even a contemptuous laughing to scorn, and deriding of God His
laws and precepts. Frustra sperant qui sic de misericordia Dei sibi bland^untur.
They hope in vain, says Bernard, which in this sort flatter themselves with
Gods mercy.

Excellent instruction this, if we could hear it. If man's voice were strong
enough, it would ro^ze us out of our Lethargy; and make us take time while we
have it, and prize a treasure (that is an opportunity) when it is in our
hands, and put both hand and heart unto it. It is a point of wisdom Prove. 17.
16.
to cast up our reckonings by daylight; I mean while the light of our life
remains; before it be like a candle burnt to the socket, and going out in a
snuff. O that we should suffer the lamp of our life to blaze out to no purpose!

The living, the living, he shall praise thee, it is part of his Esaias 38. 19*
verse 9.
writing, who had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness. The living,
the living shall praise thee; The good King knew by experience, that pining
sickness was not fit for that great work of praise, which breaks the bones
like a Lion, makes a man chatter like a Crane or Swallow, and the eyes fail
with looking upward; there is no strength now in this case for this work: The
living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day, said that good
King. Assuredly, what*ever use we make of our stock of time, and parts, which
are given us for this chief end; That we may traffic for our souls, and sell
the dearest affections of our heart, to buy the pearl; how much or how little
we prize our health and improve the same, yet it is the sound and healthy man,
that properly, and in a natural course, may be called the living man. He
lives, the sick man, who is pining away, cannot be said to live, but more
properly to languish; he spends and wastes, and is oppressed with pain in this
part, and in that; and so he spends his time in wearisome tossings, in silence
perhaps, such his patience may be; perhaps in sad complaints.

Many I have known, whose oppression has been such at such a time, that they
have not been able scarce to swallow their spittle (as Job complained) not able
to take leave of wife and children, and yet have languished many days. We
should make account that our sickbed will be as a crosseway where friends must
part, and if any thing remains now not agreed upon before in the way, it must
cease for ever: For pains and tossings (so it must be expected) will take up
that time on the sick bed; And if there be no provision stored up against this
sad dry spending time, if there be no succors so I may say, warned to come in,
and make their appearance, at this supposed time, for the clearing and
comforting the prisoner, that lies fast bound upon his bed with pain and
sorrow; If he have not before in his health, when he was a living man, made out
toward that strong tower (whereto the righteous fly, and they are safe) And
now can, being wearied with tossing and pining sickness, turn himself toward
the same, and find refreshment therefrom, and quiet repose; if not so, I
cannot see how this person should be a prisoner of hope d. I know he may have
many Zech. 9. 12.
sweet expressions (as was said before) there may be a lifting up and raising
the voice on high; but there is no more hold to be taken of a man's words, that
is drunk with sorrow, then is of the words of him, that is drunk with wine
(when he is awakened, he forgets what he said) or of the catches of a drowning
man, who will catch at a sword, or a knife, or a razour, any thing to keep up
from drowning. The words of a dying man are nothing, and of no regard further
then they receive weight and strength from the actions of an healthy and sound
man, the living man: Therefore it matters not, what a sick man can say for the
future, but what he says for the former time, for from thence he must fetch
his comfort, as we heard, I have walked; I have done, I have fought, I have
kept. Comfort in death must be distilled (as I may say) out of all our
gatherings in our life time; As our thoughts, discourses, actions have been,
answerable will our comforts be; if we can find no comfort by looking back,
recalling the time past, I cannot see, what comfort there can be in looking
forwards toward eternity. If our consciences do condemn us (as a learned
Spaniard phraseth it) that we have made time of eternity, and eternity of
time; that is (as he expounds it,) We have despised that eternal bliss, as if
it were but temporal; and we have lodged all our love upon this transitory
world, as if this had been the thing, which is eternal; And if so we have
done, we can have no comfort then, when our transitories are leaving us, in
looking forwards toward eternity; We may send our sighs and groans after it,
but in vain: Our hearts may beat strongly toward heaven, but all that may be
much suspected also;

It is of doubtful construction from what spirit our groans do proceed; If it
was thus once, when the foundation of the Temple was a laying; That the people
could not discern, the Noise of the shout of joy, from the noise of weeping
Ezra 3. 13.
, Then a harder matter it is, to discern betwixt groan and groan; sighs and
sighs; I mean betwixt the sighs and groans, which the spirit puts up, and
those which an heart pained, full of anguish, and drunk with sorrow, sends
forth. Very hard it is to discern here, and to make a difference, nay
impossible: for the groans from pain and sorrow, and the sighs of the spirit,
are both scarce utterable, and they are both put up in much bitterness, and
both call out of sin, as the cause of All, which makes the discerning the more
difficult.

This then is the conclusion; Obedience forced is slavish, but that is sweet
obedience, which comes forth, as the first honey drops from the full comb Mel
quod per se fluit, maxim laudabile. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 15. (...). dixit
Constantius, Tripart. Hist. Prefat.
, readily, willingly, freely. As the Emperor said of money, It will prove but
copper, if it be pressed out from the tears of the people. The same may be
said of our offerings; They are counterfeit for the most part, and profit not,
if they be squeezed forth by some pressures upon the spirit. It is a freewill
offering that finds acceptance with the Lord.

And this I added for three mighty Reasons,

1. That we may not make Time of Eternity, and Eternity of Time, as was said
before, and explained.

2. To awaken and quicken up our careless and dilatory spirits, well to
husband our opportunities, while our Bow abides in strength, and our Arms are
strong; before old age has degraded us of our former vigor and activitie; so
as our outward and inward faculties are bound up as in chains of Iron and
brass; I mean, before the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow
themselves, and those that look out of windows are darkened, and the Grasshopper
is a burden.

3. That we may not make (as the most do) an Idol of that last prayer, which
we think to put up, when we are at point of dissolution, and parting away
hence; for that hope to be heard then is the Sanctuary, and Place of refuge,
which the most think to fly unto, as Ioab to the horns of the Altar, in hope
to find safety; But their hope is like to deceive them, as it did Ioab 1 King
2. 28, 29.
, and as it has deceived others, Who cried, but there was none to save; even
unto the Lord, but He answered them not: then did I beat them small as the Dust
before the Wind; I did cast them out as the dust in the streets Psalm. 18. 41.
.

These words show us clearly what will be the issue of this last prayer, and
call upon the Lord, which is the great Idol of the world, what I say, will be
the issue thereof, to all those who turn unto Him at their Death, even
confusion of face, for evermore, a Treading down, and a casting out as the
dirt in the streets. This is of great and universal use, and instructs us to
incline the ear, while we can hear; to apply the eye, while we can see; to
frequent the Assemblies of the Saints, while we have strength and can go; and
to take the occasion, the smallest point of time, while we may, for it is soon
passed, and then we may send our sighs and groans after it, but cannot
recall, what we carelessely slighted. In a word, It teaches to seek, to
knock, while there is Time: for many shall seek and not find, and knock, and
it shall not be opened; shall strive, and shall not be able; And all this,
because they discerned not their season, they knew not the Day of their
Visitation.

Quod primum est dicendum postremum solco, cogitare. de Orat. Lib. 2 Page 131.
Fol. Exv^s^eribus Causae.
I remember a pretty inversion of order, used by Cicero in point of Oratory; An
allusion unto it may instruct us in a special point of wisdom; We begin
first, and then we end; But he made an end first, and then he began; I use,
says He to his Orator, to make my beginning (the Latin calls it an Exordium)
When I have ended my oration; for I must fetch that out of the Bowels of the
other Parts.

The true Christian makes an inverson of order also, and upon the same ground.
Death is the last great work which we are to do, and the true Christian thinks
of that first; First, I say, so soon as he is able to think any thing, and to
purpose. And he so disposes his life, as one that knows, that his life must
yield him marrow and fatness, when he lies upon his death Bed, in a time of
drought. We commonly live first, and then we dye; A true Christian dies first,
and then lives. He is borne, and he goes on in the great work of Mortification,
and so dies daily. And then when he must yield up the spirit, how willing, how
ready, how prepared is he? He is dead already to the World, to the flesh, He
is crucified to both, and both crucified to him. An easy matter now, and a
matter of the greatest comfort to depart hence now; now, that His eyes can
behold His Salvation. Now He chooses Death rather then life, for to Him the
nature thereof is changed; He has so walked all His life, so contended for,
and kept the Truth; so clinged to Christ in obedience and Faith, Who tasted
Death for him Heb. 2. 9.
, that now He shall neither see Death, nor taste Death; He shall not see Death,
He shall see the face of Death changed, lovely and pleasant now, as Esau's face
to Jacob; He shall see through the veil and shadow of Death, through the dark
Grave, and behold Him, who has swallowed up Death, and the Grave in victory.
He shall not Taste Death: The sharp and bitter relish of Death is quite allayed
and taken off to Him now; He tastes nothing but sweetness in Death, but joy
and peace in Death, a peace passing understanding; He is swallowed up, now not
of Death, but of very Rivers, and Floods, the Brooks of Honey, and Butter Job
20. 17.
. He does not see Death, nor does He taste thereof, such are the expressions
John 8. 51, 52.
, and they are to the heart of the Believer; in Death now He sees life,
accompanied with an eternal weight of Glory. He looks upon Death now, as
Jacob upon Joseph's wagon Genesis 4. 5.
, which shall convey Him to a place, where He shall have Enough; so as He
regards not the stuff and baggage of the world; for the good, I say not, of
all Verse 20.
the land of Egypt is His, but, Heaven is His, and all the good that Christ
has purchased is His. And now at this Brunt, (much like the straight, that
David was in but a little before the putting on of His Crown;) at this brunt,
I say, now that Death seems to make His Conquest, it does this Servant of the
Lord the best good service, for it shall open Him the way to the Crown, it
shall set free the prisoner of Hope, it shall be as a Wagon to convey Him unto
the possession of All good, even to Christ Himself; and now I have said All.
And all this, this Servant of the Lord sees in Death; and then how can this
person Taste of Death? since it must needs be that He can have no other relish
in His heart now, but of honey and butter, of Pleasures of Gods right Hand for
evermore.

Thus it is with that person, who does that work first, who in mortifying the
deeds of the flesh does Dye Daily; When Death comes he sees it not, he
tastes not of it.

But for the wicked, it is not so with them, They see death; They taste of
death. They see death and the horror of it, they see it over-powring them, and
getting now a full conquest over them; they see it rouling great stones upon
the mouth of their Cave, as Joshua upon the five Kings Jos. 10. 18.
, there reserving them as Prisoners of no hope, till the day of their doom,
when they shall receive that dreadful, but just sentence, under execution
whereof they shall lie eternally* being sent to their own place, where, like
slaves, Death shall keep them under perpetual bondage. And there they must
taste of it also, even such bitterness, as shall be to them, as the gall of
Aspes within their bowels, and the poison of Vipers; Thus they taste it, but
it is beyond expression; and this is the portion of them, that fear Him not,
nor, in their season, and Day of Visitation, call upon His Name, even this is
their Portion from the Lord, says the Lord Almighty.

But there is a sweet peace in Death to all such as painfully serve the Lord in
life; they are the words of him, who relates the last words of that excellent
servant of the Lord Mr. Dearing; And they were these.

It is not to begin for a moment, but to continue in the A comfortable death
ever follows a conscionable life. Dr. Ayeries. Lectur. p. 715.
fear of God all our days; for in the twinkling of an eye, we shall be taken
away; dally not with the Word of God, blessed are they that use their tongues
(so every other faculty) well, while they have it. So he spoke lying upon his
Death bed near the time of His dissolution, and having spoken somewhat
touching His Hope and Crown of rejoicing, He fell asleep.

This instructs us in this high point of Wisdom, more then once pointed at
before, but can never be sufficiently pressed, till it be thoroughly learnt,
which is, to make use of the ptesent Time; to know the Day of our visitation
Job 22. 21.
; to acquaint our selves now with the Lord; to number our Days (God only
teaches the heart that Arithmeticke) that is, to consider how short, how
transitory, how full of trouble our days are: And yet such though they are but
as a span, yet thereon depends Eternity. The thought whereof might stir up
to the well improovement of them. The Hebrews have a proverb which they
deliver in way of Counsel, Good friend remember to repent one Day before thy
Death. By one Day, they meant the present Time, the Day of Salvation. So the
words tend but to this, to persuade to a wise and Christian improovement of
that, which is our Time, the present.

There is no man's Will, but when he comes to that point, he bequeatheth his
Soul to God. But let him see to it, that he set his house in order, while
there was a fit season; that He committed His Soul to God, when He had
perfect memory, and strength of mind, and well understood what He did (which
in time of distress, a man does not Few men pinched with the Messengers of
Death, have a d^sposing memory; says a great sage of the Law (the L. Coke) in
his tenth epistle, where he advises to set our house in order while we are in
perfect health; weighty counsel every way.
) else all is in vain: for we know all is void, if the Will be forced, or if
the mind and understanding part be wanting, and out of frame. The Lord will be
as strict in examining our Will upon this point, as man is, what strength there
was of understanding, what freedom of Will? And therefore the sure and
certain way is, to evidence our Will in our health by double diligence, as by
two sure witnesses, else the Lord may answer us, as Iepthah to the Elders of
Gilead Judge. 11. 7.
, Thou despisest me all thy life, why committest thou thy Soul unto me, now
in thy distress at thy Death?

It is not to begin for a moment, but a continuance in the fear of God all our
days; It is not to use our tongue well at the point of death, but to use it
well, while we have it, and strength to use it.

We must not think to leap from Earth to Heaven; not think at the point of
Death to live for ever with the Lord, when all our life time, we cared not to
be made conformable to Christ in His Death.

We cannot think to Reign with Christ, who, when we were living men, did not
Crucify one Lust for His sake.

We cannot think to Rest with Him for ever in Glory, who never sanctified one
Sabbath to Him on Earth.

We cannot think to shine after Death, as the Sun in his strength, yea to be
like Him, who never took pains to purify our hearts, nor to rub off the
sully and filth of a vain Conversation.

We cannot look for pleasures at Gods Right Hand forevermore, who, in our life
and strength preferred a vain perishing, and now a tormenting pleasure before
them.

But great peace have they that keep thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.
Psalm. 119. verse 165.

Great peace have they in death, who painfully served God in life. Their hope
shall not make them ashamed, for they commit their spirit into His hand, Who
has redeemed them, the Lord God of Truth; they go to Him, whose salvation
their eyes have seen, and whose they are, and whom they served. What can dismay
them now, can death? can the grave? No, they are both swallowed up in victory.
They put death on the one side, and immortality on the other; worms on the one
side, and Angels on the other; rottenness on the one side, and Christ Jesus
on the other; and now they are bold, and love rather to remove out of the body,
and to dwell with the Lord Christ, with Him together with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, to have continual fellowship and everlasting communion.

Such honor have all the Saints; Death is no other thing to them now, then as
the flame to the Angel Judges 13. 20.
, for thereby (though clean contrary to the nature thereof) they ascend to
their everlasting mansions, there to see the good of His chosen; to rejoice in
the gladness of His Nation; and glory in His inheritance: There to take
possession of that crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge
shall give them at that day, when with all the Patriarchs Patriarcharum
consortium, Prophetarum societatem, Apostolorum germanitatem, Martyrum
dignitatem, etc. Calv. Ad eccles. cath. lib. 2. p. 398.
, Prophets, Apostles, all the Antipasses, those faithful witnesses (not yet
made perfect (...). etc. Chrysostom. in ep. ad Heb. cap. 11. hom. 28. a.
) they shall be made perfect* There to make up that tribute of praise, wherein,
while they lived on earth, they were wanting; bearing part for ever in that
heavenly quire, saying; Blessing and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. Revel. 7.
12.

Thus (my dear Children) I thought it meet, while I was in this tabernacle, to
stir up your minds by putting you in remembrance: knowing that I and you
must put off this walking tabernacle, we must lay down this piece of breathing
clay, I know my self must before long, and we all know not how soon; and the
good Lord grant that ye may be able after my departure to have these things
always 1. Pet. 1. 13.
in remembrance; It is my charge unto you, my last will, look unto it, and be
acquainted with it, for it is agreeable to Gods will. My hearts desire
concerning you is; that ye would acquaint your selves with God, for that is the
way to be at peace Job 12. 2.
; and good shall come unto you. Friends though they live, yet can do you no
good without God; but He can do you good without them; acquaint your selves
with Him and be at peace, and good shall come unto you. All that is written is,
as Deuteronomy. 4. 40. Deuteronomy. 6. 24. chap. 10. 13. Esaias 48. 18.
the Lord presses the observance of His own law, for your good; Therefore
fear God and keep His commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, so
shall your peace be as the river (still flowing) and your righteousness as the
waves of the sea (everlasting,) for in the keeping of them is a sure reward, as
in the casting of them behind the back, a certain recompense of wrath. If at
this point we turn to God the back and not the face, then in the day when we
shall call upon Him, to make haste for our help, He will turn to us also the
back and not the face, for so says the Lord. And indeed how reasonable is it,
that so it should be? For into what reasonable mind can it sink, that I should
serve one man, and demand my pay of another? That a man, for having obeyed the
orders of the great Turk, should ask a reward of the Christian Emperor? with
what color can I, who have offended a man, ask him a reward?

They who think to comply with their own proper affections, and with the love
also of the Lord, are mightily deceived. The pearl must be bought with the
selling the dearest affections of our hearts; and let this be the conclusion,
That Heaven did never cost dear. No man can find friendship with that
sovereign King, but only such a man as will confess that heaven is had very
cheap, though it should hap to cost him his life. Scatter not then your hearts
upon variety of things, but recollect them to the unity of one desire and of
one love. Seek God, but not in an ordinary manner, but like them, who seek a
Treasure, which alone is sufficient. It will be highly enough to possess God.
And let us not loose time, for it was not given us to be lost, but let us live
to the end we may live ever.

This is my Conclusion and my counsel, and you have heard all; But God forbid,
I should cease to pray for you, it being my duty also while I am in this
tabernacle, to bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Of Ephesians.
3. 16.
whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named; That He would grant you
according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened by His Might in the
Inner-man; That Christ may dwell in your hearts by says, that ye being rooted
and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height: And to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fulness of God,
etc. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Insert this page 48. last line but one.

The season fits very well: For I suppose thee grown up, and in the strength
and vigourof thy Age; a slippery Vicina lapsibus adolescentia.
season, subject to falling; therefore never more need of the greatest
circumspection and watchfulness. Weeds, through corruption of nature,
spring-up apace, while we are children; and if we suffer them now to gather
strength, and to take yet deeper root, they will domineere Infelix lolium and
steriles dominantur avenae.
over the good seed that is sown in us, and choke it. Think now on the evil
days, that are coming, the winter of thy life; let the Ant instruct thee
(Prove. 6. 6.) What thou sowest now, thou shall reap in Age. If thou layest in
good provision now (for now is the Time to store up and furnish thy
inward*house) such will be the benefit and comfort of it hereafter. Now study
this Art of improving time, means, graces; Thou can not imagine how rich it
will make thee, how the increase will come in upon thee (as one says A plea
for age.
) use upon use, in this only lawful kind of usury Profusissimi in eo, cujus
unius honesta avaritia, Sen. de brevit. vitae. cap. 3.
. Now put forth thy strength, and pluck up thy feet, and run the race that is
set before thee, with all thy might. And the Lord put forth His Arm, even His
mighty Arm; and carry thee in His right hand, even His strong and high hand
Psalm. 89. 13.
, that thou may have power against thy enemies in thy way, for they are
mighty; and without divine assistance, will overpower thee, for they are the
enemies of thy own house. What they are, how mighty, how ensnaring, I shall now
show unto thee, and treat of them in thy ears as follows.

An insertion to the second part. page 188. line 16.

To put a full period hereunto, it will be necessary to take of an unjust
imputation cast upon Old Age, by pleading her cause, and informing against her
informers. These are the precedent Ages, for thus they accuse and deride this
withered and decayed Age, telling us; It is like a weather-beaten house
dropping down, wherein none would dwell under such Ruins.

True it is, such a kind of thing Old Age may seem to be, but she retorts the
blame and cause thereof upon her predecessors; it is they, who have thrust her
into such a decayed house, and now they aggravate their fault very much, in
that they blame the old-building, which themselves have made so ruinous. They
have been as violent winds, and storms often beating upon this house of clay,
and so have brought it out of reparations. Youth will please his appetite, that
he will, come what will come; he will satisfy his youthful desires, though,
in so doing, he does exhaust Nature, and spends upon the principal stock of
life; which yet he thinks not of, for youth can bear it out, but it will fall
to the Lot of the old man to want and smart for this profuse Erigere durum est,
qui cadit juvenis, senem. A hard thing it is to make him stand firm in old
age, that fell in youth. Quis ullam spem habebit in co, cujus primum tempus
aetatis fuerit ad omnes libidines divulgatum? who can have hope of any good in
him, whose first years have been spent in all manner of lusts and luxury. Cic.
ad senatum post reditum.
spending. The Man Nusquam pejus quamin sano corpore aeger animus habitat. A
corrupt heart dwells no where worse or more dangerously then in an healthy
Body.
, him I mean, who is in his (...), the vigor and May-tide of his life; this
man is as profuse, and lavish of his spirits, as the youth was, as if there
would be no need of them hereafter; he puts forth his strength, and does evil
things, as he can Jer. 3. 5.
, and when he does so, then he rejoices Ita est non accepimus brevem vitam,
etc. Senec. de brevit. vitae. cap. 1. etc.
: Not at all considering, what infinite wrong he does to the old man his very
next neigbour, for whom the man now treasures up with both hands, pains,
aches, diseases, sighs and wrath to boot: and they lie as sealed-up in a bag,
which the old man, when he comes, shall open, find and feel both, that it is
even so. Such dis-service these predecessors do to their Successor Old Age.
Therefore neither the youth, nor the man have cause to blame old age; But the
Old Age has great cause to complain of them. And so having cleared the
objection, and laid the blame where it is due, I pass on to the second period.

An insertion to the second part page 201, line first. visitation.

It is notable, which we read, Josh. 2. Rahabs preservation, her peace, and the
peace of her house was secured unto her by this token, The line of scarlet
thread bound in her window, verse. 18. upon this now we must set our mark,
which we read, verse. 21. And she sent them away and they departed: and Jer. 11.
15.
she bound the scarlet line in the window.

It is very notable sure, That the dismissing the men, and the hanging* out the
line, stand conjoined in the Text; though Postea cumcommodum and necessarium
visum est.
perhaps, if Tremellius his interpretation be right, we cannot thereby conclude
the precise time, when she did hang it forth. But thus we conclude, for so we
are taught; That she used no delay, none at all, but when the time was fitting
and convenient, then she did it; and that might be presently, at that instant,
time as is specified in the Text, for ought we can or may gather to the
contrary. But what needed so much haste? she might have delayed the binding the
line to the window, some days, for the Spies were not yet returned; Joshua was
not yet upon his march; Jordan was betwixt; some time there must be in marching
toward Jericho; and six days they were compassing the City. Time enough to
hang out the Thread, when she heard, That the Trumpets blew, and, because they
were but ram's horns, she might have delayed yet longer, till the last day,
when she saw the walls fall down flat, and then she might hasten to the window,
and do that work soon enough. Thus flesh and blood might reason the case, and
very well satisfy a dilatory spirit. But it is of infinite use to consider,
That thus Rahab did not reason, but then, when she sent away the men, she bound
the scarlet line in the window. We cannot be too quick and speedy in case of
life and salvation. Here, delays are dangerous, perhaps deadly. I may defer
this day and the next till my enemy be approaching and surprising me, and I
find my self falling down flat; this I may do, and yet do well. But it is
very hazardous. It may, nay it is most likely, so it will be, if I stay till
dangers have beset me, and encompassed me, my fears will be such, as that they
will betray all my succors. Wisd. 17. 18.
And therefore since in this scarlet color lies the peace, security,
salvation of our bodies and souls too, we must do quickly what we do, we must
not delay in hanging forth this flag of peace. Now, now while our days are
departing (they are still passing away as the waters) now hang we forth this
scarlet line at our windows, and delay not. What it implies is of easy
construction, and of infinite use.


