Mr. Woodward's SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR At Guildhall Chapel,
August 1, 1697.

Clarke Mayor.
Jovis xxiii die Septembris, 1697. Annoque Regni Regis WILLIELMI Tertii
Angliae, etc. Nono.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Woodward to print his Sermon preached at the
Guildhall-Chappel, on Sunday the First Day of August last, before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Goodfellow.

Sodom 's Vices destructive to other Cities and States.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of
LONDON, At the Chapel of GVILD-HALL, On Sunday August 1. 1697.

By JOSIAH WOODWARD, Minister of Popler.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Ra. Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XC VII.

To the Right Honorable Sir EDWARD CLARKE, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
My Lord,
SInce it has pleased your Lordship to introduce the following Sermon into
further Light; I crave leave to prosecute the Subject of it so far as to
intimate, that since the Idleness which the Text condemns is usually the
Parent, or at least the Nurse of the other Vices therein mentioned; it seems
very natural to conclude, that a general Engagement of the many idle Hands
among us in suitable Employments, would be a most direct means to suppress our
other pestilent Enormities. We could scarcely be imagined liable to be overrun
with Sodom's Pride, Luxury, and Uncleanness, if we did not give way to Sodom's
Idleness.

The setting up of Public Workhouses for the Encouragement of the Diligent,
the Relief of the Poor, the Employment of the Idle, and the Correction of the
Criminal, is a Noble and Excellent Design, which has been long in the Thoughts
and Wishes of many Great Men and Brave Spirits amongst us. And it is hoped,
that it may now be seasonably and successfully proposed to that August Assembly
which superintends the grand Interests of this Nation.

For, a greater National Good can hardly be imagined than this would soon
appear to be; it being undoubtedly a much greater Chari^^ to any poor Person
that is able to labor, to supply ^im with constant Work to get his Living,
than to afford him a constant Maintenance in Idleness: for as much as Idleness
would naturally mourish many Diseases in his Body, and Vices in his Soul, which
an habitual Employment would be apt to prevent.

And in this Opinion, my Lord, (if I may not call it a Demonstration) I am
supported by that Great Philosopher of ours, the Lord Verulam; who advised
(...) his (...) to R. James I. Hern's Dom. C^rthus.
that all Houses of Charity should be Houses of convenient Employment and
Industry: which would at once enlarge the extent of the Charity, and make it of
greater Benefit to the Partakers of it; besides those great Advantages which
would accrue to the Public by a general Employment of all Hands, in the
increase of our Manufacture, Trade, and Navigation: which are none of the least
Interests of this famous Island.

And now, since the Advantages of a general Employment are so very great, and
so evident to every considering Person; it is very strange that in such a
trading, wealthy, and populous City as this, which is honored by the Residence
and Government of so many Wise and Industrious Persons, there is not yet any
effectual Provision made to set and keep those Idle People to work, who now
perplex the Business of the more Diligent, disturb their Quiet, pilfer their
Goods, and who are in truth the Sin and Shame, the Burden and Annoyance of this
Opulent and Magnificent City.

And since the Sequel of my Discourse leads me to it, I crave your Lordship's
leave to suggest further; that it is (I humbly conceive) a fundamental Error
(which the Industry of a Neighboring Country may teach us to correct) that we
inure not our Youth to diligent and constant Labor, by which they would be
brought to account Idleness a Torment in their adult Age. And by this Expedient
our Commonalty would be brought to better Behavior in time of Peace; and be
rendered more obedient to Orders, and more able to endure Toils and Fatigues in
time of War.

For, the Nature of Men is in this respect very like that of Waters; the purest
of them gather Filth by standing still: and therefore that coarse and drossy
part of Mankind which never had any Refinement by Learning, Education, or
Religion, will be apt to degenerate into the very Dregs of corrupt Manners, if
their peccant Humors be not carried off by wholesome Labor and Exercise. These
Hands, My Lord, must be kept close to commendable Employments, or they will
tear and undermine the State that breeds them.

And therefore, it is the Hope and Expectation of all good People, that since
our Renowned Sovereign has (by the great Blessing of God) reduced our Foreign
Enemies to Reason, He will now apply the Thoughtfulness of his Royal Mind to
correct our Domestic Enormities and Impieties; which will otherwise most
certainly destroy our Peace and Hope, our Prosperity and Renown, and will (in a
word) be the Bane of all our Interests and Blessings.

Now, since we have been often told, that the Calm of Peace is the only proper
Scene of such a Reformation, the good God grant that we may make a due
Improvement of the present Opportunity, and that we abuse it not after that
ungrateful sort that we have many others.

In these Noble and Divine Enterprises would the Great Soul of our Dread
Sovereign be shown in its matchless Glory; when his Royal Breast shall appear
to glow with a Zeal for the good Manners of his People, suitable to that Martial
Prowess whereby he has asserted their Liberties and Rights. Then will He shine
with a brightness of Majesty that will be conspicuous to all Mankind; beloved
of the Good, dreaded by the Evil, admired and honored of All.

And finally, then shall we indeed render a meet Thank-Offering to the God of
our Mercies, who has by an extraordinary Hand of Providence supported us these
many Years; who has marvelously succored and delivered us in the most extreme
Dangers; and in fine, who has mercifully settled us (as we now hope) on the
Basis of a good and honorable Peace; which, that God would vouchsafe to
sanctify to us, that it may in Mercy be continued with us, is the earnest
Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Very respectful Humble Servant, JOSIAH WOODWARD.

EZEKIEL. XVI. 49. Behold, This was the Iniquity of thy Sister Sodom; Pride,
fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness was in her, and in her Daughters;
neither did she strengthen the hand of the Poor and Needy.
THE Mission of Ezekiel into the Prophetic Office Ezekiel. 1. per totum.
was very extraordinary, (as we find it described in the beginning of his
Prophecy) and truly he Ezekiel. 2. 1.
was raised up in a very extraordinary Juncture; even when the Sins of the Jews
were ripe, and their Destruction Ver. 6.
at the door.

God had already poured out some Vials of his Wrath upon that degenerate
Nation: for now they became a Prey to their Adversaries on every side, to whom
they were formerly a Terror. They were insulted by the Bands of the Syrians,
the Moabites, and the Ammonites, as we read, 2 King. 24. 2. for it is there
expressly said, that God sent these Armies against them, to destroy them.
Besides this, the King of Egypt miserably harassed them, 2 King. 23. 35.
and brought them under severe Tributes. And now at the last, the King of
Babylon had invaded them, and besieged their Capital City; and entering it by
Surrender, he had driven away their King Jehojachin, and great 2 King. 24. 11.
numbers of the People Captive to Babylon: And having made Zedechiah his
Viceroy, he committed the Government Ver. 17. Ver. 20.
of Judea to him, till he forfeited it by his Rebellion, which was nine years
after. And then indeed the Forces of Babylon returned in fury, and laid both
Jerusalem 2 Chronicles. 36. 19.
and the Temple in Ruins, and filled all places with Slaughter and Desolation.

Now, it was in the time of this Respite, betwixt the first and second Invasion
made upon them by the Chaldeans, Ezekiel. 1. 2.
that God was pleased to inspire the Prophet Ezekiel (one of the Jewish
Captives at Babylon) to rebuke this Ver. 1.
backsliding People, who were not at all amended by their many Afflictions. And
this was the last Prophet who pleaded with them in the Name of God, before
their total Subversion in Church and State.

How gracious and long-suffering is Almighty God! who tries the greatest of
Sinners in methods of Love and Mercy; and follows even those with Calls to
Repentance, who are advanced to the Brink of Ruin. When he had here brought
great Misery upon the whole Land of Judea; and suffered their Enemies to
prevail in a great measure over them: He then stops the Torrent of his Wrath,
and they must have a Reprieve for nine Years, before their final Overthrow, to
consider the Things which belong to their Peace.

Thus we often see a prudent and tender Parent, who having given some blows of
Correction to a froward and undutiful Child, then stops his hand in which he
holds the Rod; and expostulates and reasons the Case, to see whether there be
any relenting disposition in the Child to prevent further Blows.

But alas! Such a fatal hardness and fatness of Heart had seized this
profligate People, that none of these things moved them. They reformed not one
of those Enormities which the Prophet assured them would be the Causes of their
Ruin: though they could not but see that they were the very same which had been
the Destruction of Sodom before, as the Prophet tells them to their Faces in
the words but now recited in your Ears. Behold, this was the Iniquity of thy
Sister Sodom; Pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness was in her,
and in her Daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

In which Words, the Prophet endeavors to impress this Observation upon them,
which I beseech God to fix deeply upon every Soul here present, namely,

That a City or Nation is then in very great Danger, when it abounds with those
Sins for which other Cities and Nations have been destroyed.

The same Way leads directly to the same End: And the same Sins lead as surely
to the same Miseries. God is a Righteous Judge, and will deal impartially with
all People according to their Sins, for he is no Respecter of Persons. He has
done Justice already to the Jews, and he will not do otherwise to the Gentiles.

So that the Spirit of God here, takes one of the most awakening methods in the
World to rouse up the Jews from their torpid Slumbers. He points at the very
Causes of their growing Miseries, and presses them to apply themselves to the
speediest methods of Redress.

Behold (says he) the very Symptoms of Destruction, which appeared in the
Cities of Sodom, are dreadfully apparent in thy Cities, even thine. Does it not
fill thee with horror to behold the very same Plague-spots upon thee that were
on those Places which God destroyed by fire from Heaven? Thou art the very
Sister of Proud, Idle, Unclean, and Unmerciful Sodom: a Sister to her in Vice
and Impudence; and art drawing on to as certain and as sore a Destruction. O
Jerusalem, I am sent from thy God to thee, to advise thee of this, and to
charge thee to consider thy languishing State, and to prevent thy Ruin. But
whether thou will hear, or whether thou will forbear, I will spread both thy
Sin and thy Danger before thine Eyes. Behold, thou art become a second Sodom:
and those very Sins which abound in thee, were those which destroyed her. They
were haughty, and luxurious, and unmerciful, as ye are this day; and God took
them away, as he saw good.

The Overthrow of Sodom was a proverbial speech for a sudden and terrible
Destruction, and is so used both in the Old and New Testament. We find, that
God threatened to destroy Babylon, as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, Jer. 50.
40.
and the neighboring Cities thereof: which another Prophet tells us were Admah
and Zeboim. And the Apostle Hos. 11. 8.
Jude minds us, that the Desolation of those Cities is set forth by God's
appointment, as a terrible Example to all after Ages: That all Cities and
Nations may consider in what Danger they stand, when once they come into any
affinity to their Sins. And therefore it will nearly concern us at this time
(when all, but such as never think, are convinced, that both our Sins and
Dangers are tremendous) to consider whether the Vices amongst us are not such
as led both Sodom and Judea to their Ruin. For which purpose, I now come to lay
them in order before you, as they are represented in the Text: And I recommend
this important matter to your special Consideration, (particularly to such as
are more peculiarly obliged to consult the Interests of this Great City) as in
the Presence of Almighty God.

I. The first Sin mentioned in the Text, as a Cause of the Destruction of
Cities and Nations, is that of Pride. Which consists in an overweaning Conceit
of one's self, or of something belonging to us, to that degree, that our Heart
is vainly lifted up thereby. And being so, the Man grows insolent in most
things which he either thinks, speaks, or does. He has a scornful Eye, an
imperious way of speaking, and a contemptuous Carriage toward all Men. Yea,
the proud Man carries it stiffly toward God himself; and almost forgets his
dependence upon him, and that he was formed out of the Dust of the Earth. It is
a Vice that is never barren, but is continually bringing forth other Enormities
by sholes. It produces a contempt of Sacred things, and an insolent resentment
of God's Providence, both of Bounty and Correction. In any Affliction he frets
and is peevish: for his Pride will not allow him to think that he deserves any
Rebuke or Correction; but he is rather persuaded, that the greatest Mercies of
God are due to his Merit. And this makes him grudg at the Enjoyments and
Promotions of others, as if the whole World were made for him alone, and every
Gift of God to others were a Robbery committed upon him. And for the same
Reason he is impatient of Reproof, and very apt to scoff, especially at such as
even in despite of his Pride he must needs perceive to be better than himself.
He carries it with a domineering Severity toward his Inferiors; so that (like
his Brother Nabal) there is scarcely any one that dares to speak to him; and the
least Affront (tho undesign'd) moves him to revenge it even with Blood. As for
Superiors, he scarcely thinks he has any: but like a true Son of Belial, he is
without Yoke, and is not to be brought under due Government; being ever apt to
mutiny, and to breed disorder: Not only saying with Nabal, Who is David? but
with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that I should serve him?

It is one chief Study of proud People, to endeavor to bring others to admire
them as much as they do themselves. And to this end (when better
accomplishments fail) they affect to plume themselves with the richest
Ornaments they can purchase or invent. And here, alas! Pride will so overdo the
business, that it cannot but move Contempt in every sensible Person to behold
with what ridiculous Forms and Modes they attempt to set forth themselves. They
fancy a sort of Comeliness in Deformity, and that it adds a beauty to the Face
to represent it under diseases and blemishes, tho God has given them an
unspotted soundness.

God has not given to the Children of Men a party-colored Skin like the motly
Brutes: nor has he marked them as he does many venomous Creatures and
pestilential Diseases, with dark Spots: and yet how unseemly soever this
appears to all impartial and virtuous Minds, (whom Custom and vain Notions have
not blinded) it is hidden from their own eyes.

Now this Vice of Pride manifestly tends to Destruction several ways.

First, In that it produces a multitude of other Sins, as its natural
Offspring and Effect: as you have already heard.

And Secondly, As it hardens the Heart under all the Guilt it brings upon it.
For it always runs in the direct Diameter to Repentance. Proud Persons are
great Admirers of what themselves do, and are hardly brought to acknowledge that
they have done amiss. But, like Saul, they avow that they have done the Will of
the Lord, tho every Beast in his Herd had a Mouth to refute it.

And Thirdly, Pride leads to Ruin, as it is a Sin which leavens the very
Prayers of Men, and renders all their religious Performances unsavory in the
Nostrils of God. The Pharisee mentioned by our Savior, was rather pufft Luke
18. 11.
up than humbled in his very Prayer, and so was rather condemned by it than
justified in the sight of God. For, Pride is a thing which God hates. Yea,
which he will Prove. 6. 17.
glorify himself in debasing. And therefore he will surely Isa. 2. 11.
set himself to it, and go through with it. And upon all these accounts, the
proud Person is so exposed to the Wrath of God; that the inspired Wiseman has
recorded it as a certain Mark of Destruction, Pride goes before Destruction,
Prove. 16. 18.
and a haughty Spirit before a fall. And indeed it cannot be otherwise, since
the proud Person renounces his Trust in God, to place it in himself; which is
to remove his Building from a Rock, to found it on the Sand.

And so I pass on to consider the second Vice, which is represented in the Text
as of a like destructive Nature; which is,

II. Fullness of Bread. This Expression denotes that Luxury and Excess which is
usually produced by great Plenty when it falls into ill Hands. The Sodomites,
it seems, made a very ill use of their plentiful Land, which is described, Genesis
13. 10. to be so beautifully situated, and so plentifully stored, that it was
even as the Garden of the Lord. A second Eden, for plenty of pleasant Fruits,
and other commodious Product. But these, alas! served their Bestial Lusts, and
nursed them to a very monstrous Growth: till at last their Incontinence
transgressed the very Laws of Nature, and became very crying in the Ears of God.

Now, this brutal feeding of our Bodies, or as the Apostle calls it, feasting
our selves without Fear, is contrary to the very Nature of our Christian
Warfare. For it administers indecent Flames to the sensitive Appetite, and at
the same time dulls the accuracy of Reason, and lays the Conscience asleep. And
we may easily guess what the End of that Person will be, who lies open to his
Enemies, and binds the hands of his Friends. But the prudent Christian does
otherwise: and says with St. Paul (tho he was sufficiently macerated by his
continual Labors and Afflictions) I keep under my Body, and bring it into
subjection, lest by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should
be a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

He that would be a solid and serious Christian, yea that would but be a grave
and decent Moralist, must observe due Moderation in Meats and Drinks, and all
corporal Pleasures: Yea, he must accustom his Appetite to submit to the
self-denying Rules of Abstinence and Mortification in their Season; and by
these and other Divine Expedients he must maintain a regular Government over
the Concupiscible Appetite. Which is a thing very agreeable to the
Flesh-denying Nature of our Divine Religion, and is both an Ornament and Help
to the serious Practice of many parts of it. And therefore it is no wonder if
the contrary tends to Ruin.

III. The next destructive Sin is that of Idleness: which, it seems, abounded
greatly in Sodom before its Destruction. For it is said, Abundance of Idleness
was in her, and in her Daughters; or especially amongst their Women.

Idleness consists either in doing Nothing, or Nothing of use, that a Person
might and ought to have done in his Place and Capacity. Now, to be of such a
negligent, sluggish, and torpid temper, is to contradict the very End and
Nature of Life. To live without activity and liveliness, is in a manner to live
(if I may so speak) without Life, like People asleep or dead. And to all
ingenious Minds, this is a most intolerable penance; it is contrary to the
Nature of brave and generous Spirits, and therefore they ever treat the dronish
Sluggard with just Disdain. And it is the Apostle's Rule, that the Sluggard
should be starved out of his idle way of Life, and not be suffered to eat, till
he applies himself to work. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.


Idleness is a Sin not only against God, but against one's Generation, yea
against one's own Health, Interests, and Posterity. There ought not to be any
Person (Male or Female) idle in the World. For God never made any one for
nothing, but to be of Use and Advantage to the Publick-Weal, according to his
Station and Capacity.

This great Machine of the Universe has not one Wheel or Pin in it, tho never
so small, but what is of use in its place, and tends to complete the whole. We
behold all the works of Nature full of Action, and useful motion. The Heavens
take their laborious Courses, and the Sun delights to run his rapid perpetual
Race. And every Being upon Earth, from the Elephant to the Ant, drudges and
toils in things suitable to its Nature. And some Active Minds of late can
scarcely bear it that the Earth should be accounted a dead Weight; and have
framed a probable Scheme of its motion amongst the rest.

And shall Man, the most noble Creature, and the most capable of brave
Productions of any under the Heavens, be the only useless and unactive part of
the Creation? Has God given us a Divine Soul capable of such Angelick Thoughts
and Designs, and shall we apply our selves to nothing at all? or to nothing
worthy of our Nature and Endowments?

It is not fit indeed that all Men should be employed in manual Labor, or in
the mechanic Occupations of human Life. Some Men appear in the World with such
a noble Genius, such refined Wisdom, princely Courage, and vivacity of Spirit,
accompained with such a generous Concern for the Public Good, that they seem
to be prepared and appointed of God to govern and defend the rest; and to make
improvements in those Arts and Speculations which tend to the accommodation of
human Life and the public Welfare; and above all, to dispose the conversations
of Men in those Divine paths of Piety and Virtue which tend to their
everlasting Bliss. These are Things which ennoble a Man, and render him
Honorable and useful in his Generation, and make his Memory fragrant to future
Ages.

But there are some on the other hand who are by natural incapacity rendered
unfit for public service, or any other Post of Honor, as Idiots and mere
Naturals; who are as Ciphers and Expletives in the Volume of the Creation. And
truly this reflects with sharpness upon such as rank themselves among these
noteless parts of human Kind by an idle and useless Life. Of whom it can only
be said, when they are gone; That such a one breathed so many years in the
World, and so died. Alas! what a putid shame is it to those whom God has every
way fitted to do great and worthy Things in the Church and State in which they
live, and has many ways called and excited them to it; that they bury their
rich Talents in the Dirt: and the Rust of Idleness, or the Poison of Vice
devours all those Endowments whereby they might have done great things in their
Generation.

Nor are they more Honorable, who employ their Parts and Labors about some
useless and vain thing, (like Domitian's industry in catching Flies) and spend
their Life in a sort of laborious Idleness; I mean, in a busy pursuit of
impertinent things; like Children, who seem very busy all the day long, and yet
appear at night to have done nothing.

On the contrary, it is remarked to the Glory of David's Memory, That his Life
was a standing Service to his Generation. Act. 13. 36.
He was of a Noble public Spirit, and spent his Sweat and Blood in the Defense
and Advancement of his Country both in Church and State. And this renders his
Memory blessed to this Day, and will do so to the end of the World. A noble and
active Genius exerting it self in contriving and doing Things for the Public
Interest, is a Divine Blessing to the Nation and Age wherein it appears. Such a
Worthy Person is like the Sun in the Firmament, which gives Life and
Cheerfulness wherever it arises. Or rather, like the Lord Jesus Christ (the
Sun of Righteousness, from whom all such Divine Spirits derive their Glory)
whose Character it was, That he went about doing good.

And whereas the Vice of Idleness in the Text is particularly charged upon the
Daughters of Sodom and Israel; this, alas! brings to our remembrance our
national and unspeakable Loss in the decease of that most industrious and pious
Princess who lately held the Scepter of these Kingdoms, and endeavored to
purge all the Daughters of her Land from the Sin and Reproach of Idleness, by
giving them a most admirable Example of indefatigable Diligence. O! may such an
Example ever obtain a general Imitation: that we may be exempted from the Sin
imputed, and the Danger threatened in the Text to Jerusalem, and her idle
Daughters.

For indeed where Idleness prevails, it nurses Wantonness, Baseness, and
Effeminacy, and almost every Vice. The Sluggard's Heart is like his Field
(Prove. 24. 21.) overgrown with Brambles and Weeds, and is unfit to produce any
good Fruit. Slothfulness ever dulls, enervates, and infatuates the Person that
indulges it, till at last it brings him to Rags and Ruin. It brought Sodom and
Jerusalem in the Text, to utter destruction; for abundance of Idleness was in
them, and in their Daughters: and whether it be not so with us and ours will be
of concernment to us to inquire; and indeed it will in a great measure appear
from that which falls under our consideration in the next Particular, which is
the last note of Destruction mentioned in the Text, namely,

IV. An unmerciful Neglect of the Poor: which is expressed thus, Neither did she
(i. e. Sodom) strengthen the hands of the Poor and Needy.

In which Expression these three Things are laid to their Charge.

1. They did not help the Poor to their Right in matters of Equity and
Judgment. 2. They neglected to provide Subsistence for their impotent Poor. 3.
They did not provide Employment for such as were able to labor. In all these
senses, the hands of the Poor were weakened and enfeebled.
First, They did not help the Poor to their Right in matters of Equity and
Judgment. The Poor Man's Cause was neglected and despised, and could not have a
fair Hearing and a just Determination. In this Respect, the Magistrate ought to
strengthen the poor Man's hand, that he may be able to recover his just Wages
where it is denied him, and may have Right done him in all Causes depending
before the Bench of Justice.

The Prophet Isaiah reproves this Partiality and Injustice in the Judges of
Israel with great severity, and tells them plainly (as my Text does) that they
were become like Sodom in this iniquity: Hear the word of the Lord, ye Rulers
Isa. 1. 10.
of Sodom, seek ye Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead
for the Widow. And he lamenteth, That the faithful City was become an Harlot:
it was full Ver. 23.
of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers: Every one loves
Gifts, and follows after Rewards, etc.

When the Streams of Justice are thus perverted, so that the loud Cries of the
Oppressed ascend up to Heaven against any City or Nation, it is in great
Danger. For it is said, if thou afflict the Widow and Fatherless in any wise;
and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry: And my Wrath shall
wax hot, and I will kill you with the Sword; Exodus 22. 23, 24.
and your Wives shall be Widows, and your Children Fatherless.

Secondly, A Neglect to provide for the impotent Poor; such as are by Sickness,
Age, or calamitous Providence, rendered unable to get their living. These are
the feeble parts of the Body, which (as the Apostle says) must be supported by
the more strong, in love and pity to the whole, Romans 15. 1.
or they will be guilty of a most unnatural Cruelty. It is hiding our selves
from our own Flesh (as the Prophet Isa. 58. 7.
terms it) when we turn away from a moving Object of Charity.

And that which enforces this Duty yet more upon Christians, is, That our
Blessed Savior has espoused the Poor as his Relations and Representatives
(where they are humble and pious) and resents all Neglect of such, as a
personal Affront to himself, Mat. 25. 45. And therefore we must become Infidels
to the Promises and Threatenings of his Book, before we can harden our Hearts
against proper Objects of Charity.

And truly our State is inferior to few, if any, in ample Contributions
toward the subsistence of our Poor. But with submission, there may perhaps be
some improvements in the management of our public Charity: the consideration
of which falls in with the last way of strengthening the hands of the Poor;
which is,

Thirdly, By providing suitable Employments for them, that we may shun two of
the destructive Vices of Sodom at once, to wit, Idleness, and Unmercifulness.

It is most certain, that a full and constant Employment of our Poor would
remove multitudes of Evils at once from us, and open an Ocean of public
Benefits and Divine Blessings. For, alas! Idleness tends to strengthen the
hands of our Poor in Wickedness, and in all manner of Vice: Many Hands in this
Kingdom are at this day employed in pilfering and picking of Pockets, which by
honest Labor would be tied up from this and other Enormities.

It is extremely moving to any good Mind to consider, That many Thousands of
young and able People among us (whose diligent Labors would be of great Use
and Advantage to the Public Good, and might by that method of getting their
Living be brought to live soberly, peaceably, and honestly) do now turn
Vagrants, Rebels, and Vagabonds: yea, they steal, and lie, and commit Whoredom,
and sell their Souls to get a temporal Subsistence. A dismal Thought! enough to
move a Heart of Marble, if duly considered. And it is enough, methinks, to gain
an universal Endeavor to redress this, if it be but observed, That in all
probability, the Remedy of this grand Evil (especially in this City) will be
with less Charge and Trouble than the toleration of the Distemper.

For indeed, the more this grows upon us, the more we shall of necessity be
impoverished, as well by the natural Consequence of it, as by the high
Displeasure of God against it. And truly, it becomes those who find themselves
disappointed and diminished in their Trade of late, to consider whether this
has not been one provoking Cause of it.

We behold Crowds of Beggars filling almost every Door, and disturbing all
Business and Conversation by their importunate Clamours. Our Ears are almost
deafen'd both in the Streets and in the Fields with the loud Cries of such as
beg for Relief: and the common Excuse for this idle way of Life, is, their want
of Work to set their Hands to. And from this stock of People bred up in
Idleness, the Highways come to be infested with Robbers, and our Houses and
Lives are endangered in the Night, when we should rest upon our Beds. And tho
the Prisons are filled with them, and Thousands of them are executed for their
Outrages, (to the eternal Ruin of their Souls, as well as to their being cut
off in the prime of their Days) yet the Distemper grows upon us, and is like so
to do, till sufficient Workhouses and stocks of Work be provided for their
constant Employment; which all good People will most readily accept, and be
thankful for it: And as for others, they must be driven to honest Labor by the
compulsive Power of wholesome Laws.

And without some such Provision, it is not very easy to answer their Complaint
of severity against the Laws of our Land, which condemn so many Thousands to
Death for pilfering a few Pence, and yet provide no Means for them to get a
Penny by honest Employment, when it may be done with public Advantage.

It is a gracious Promise of God, that there shall always Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
be poor People among us. And tho the unthinking and stingy Churl will not give
God thanks for this Promise, yet the prudent and serious Person will; not only
(tho chiefly) as it is a standing way of conveying his Treasures into the Bank
of Heaven, but also as the use of the poor Man's Labors is the direct means of
increasing his Wealth upon Earth.

And truly, the laborious poor Man is one of the most infallible objects of
Charity that we can choose, when his ability to labor fails him: Others may be
Hypocrites in their Profession, but he can be none in his. But alas! as the
Case now stands, any Person that is disposed to Charity scarce knows where to
choose proper objects for it. How can he distinguish betwixt the real Indigents
and the idle Vagrants, among the Crowds which solicit his Alms? When we pass
through the Fields, or sit in our Houses, and are entreated for an Alms by all
the Asseverations of Necessity and Want that a long and earnest Harangue can
express: what divided sentiments will arise upon this in the Breast of a pious
and prudent Person? It is difficult to believe, and yet as hard to disbelieve
the piteous Narrative of the Petitioner. It is scarcely Christian to deny, and
yet it is scarcely prudent to give.

In such cases indeed our Charity will incline us to venture the Hazard of a
small Alms, rather than run the Risque of denying a poor Member of Christ. And
in many Cases it is almost necessary to give something merely to stop Clamor,
and purchase Ease from intolerable noise and importunity: yea, sometimes, to
prevent the wrath and ill language which attends a denial.

Thus is the clear Current of Christian Charity obscured and diverted, and many
are scarcely free Agents in what they give. And alas! all this while, there
remain many poor Families who would be willing to work, tho they are ashamed to
beg: and some of these have concealed their Miseries within their private
Walls; and have chosen rather to perish in silence, than to open their Poverty,
where their public shame and reproach would be more certain than their
constant Relief. O blessed God! for thy Son's sake lay not these things to our
charge.

Thus have I laid before you the black Catalogue of Sodom's Sins, which when
they grew up also to a ripeness in Jerusalem, proved as fatal to the latter as
to the former. And I must leave it to every one's Conscience to judge, whether
this City and Nation be not in great Danger at this day from the same Causes.
And let me entreat you, that you would not dull the Edg of this Conviction by
the conceit of a submitting Enemy, and a blooming Prosperity consequent to it:
But remember the Eternal Righteousness of the Governor of the World, which
will keep its course, tho that of Men does not; and that he has thousands of
ways to bring a profligate People to Misery and Desolation.

And now, since we have perused the List of Sodom's Sins: if any one inquires
after the Sin of Uncleanness, which certainly made a great Cry among the rest;
we find it in the next verse, and they committed Abomination. And if we look
for it in the Text, we shall find it in the loins of those two Parents of
Uncleanness, Luxury and Idleness, which wherever they are conjoined, do
usually produce the nasty issue of bestial Uncleanness: As, alas! they have
done amongst us to a very dreadful (I had almost said, to a desperate) Degree.
So that if the Sin of Uncleanness be but obscurely represented in the Text, it
was notoriously visible in Sodom's Streets, and alas! in ours too; with this
shameful difference on our part, that whereas the Sodomites deferred the
prosecution of their Lusts till the Evening, hoping to vail their unseemly Sin
by the black Curtains of the Night; with us, alas! it is prosecuted in the
Noonday, and in the thickest Concourse. I pray God excite our Magistrates to
take the punishment of these things into their Hands, for it is an Iniquity to
be punished by the Judges, or else to Job 31. 11.
be sure God will: and then, woe, woe unto us.

This leads me to apply what has been said. And here, in the first place;

I. I humbly press the consideration of these things upon those Public and
Honorable Persons, before whom I speak, and must in Conscience speak freely.
Is it not a moving Consideration to behold the very Causes of Sodom's
Destruction, and Jerusalem's Desolation, growing upon us; and come to a very
dreadful Crisis? This may well alarm every Member of our Community, but it does
more especially concern such as by their high station represent the Head of
this Public Body; which is particularly empowered and capacitated to provide
for the safety of the rest of the Members.

It was a very passionate Expostulation of the Disciples with their sleeping
Master, Carest thou not that we perish? Mar. 4. 38.
We must needs say, it was an unfit and indecent Question to be put to the
vigilant and tender Savior of Men. But, methinks, the Extremities of our
present Case may apologize for such a rowzing Interrogatory to those Persons
amongst us who seem rocked to sleep by carnal Lusts and private Interests, so
as to manifest no just Concern for the Public Good.

Magistrates have some peculiar Features of God's Image impressed upon them above
others, even those of his Power and Authority: and upon this account they are
called Gods in Scripture, as being ordained of God to punish evil doers in his
stead, and to support such as do well. But the Rulers of Sodom had put off this
Character, and so had the supine Rulers of Israel; which so grieved and moved
the Prophet Isaiah, that the first Chapter of his Prophecy abounds with the
sharpest Invectives against them. And indeed, it is very deplorable to
consider, from what a Divine Seat of Honor and Dignity a corrupt Magistrate
descends when he acts contrary to his Post, or does nothing worthy of it. It is
somewhat like the Fall of the Apostate Angels, from being God's Ministers, to
be his Enemies.

And truly, every private Person will also fall under the same Condemnation who
does not sincerely set himself (according to his Place and Capacity) against
the violent Torrent of abounding Sin: Which leads me to a Second Inference.

II. Let all such as pretend to Christianity, yea, or to Sobriety and good
Morals, set themselves against the devouring Plagues of our Nation, the common
Sins thereof. If ever we had need to give our public Vote for the Reformation
of corrupt Manners, surely we have at this Day. And blessed be God who has
kindled any Desires of it in any Persons among us.

It is a most admirable work of God, and what opens the fairest Prospect to us
of any that I know, That any young Persons among us lament and escape the
Pollutions of this degenerate Age, and look Heaven-wards. The good God increase
their Number, and the Number of their Friends and Favorers. The Lambs are the
hope of the Flock; if they rot, the Flock will soon come to nothing. And if the
next Generation degenerates as dreadfully as this has done, we shall be as
corrupt as Sodom it self, and as surely brought to desolation.

Some may perhaps say, that all this is true, but how shall we help it? How
shall we? Why the lively sense of Danger scarce ever wants means or seasons, or
strength to avoid it. Any one acts above his usual strength, when it is to save
his Life, and to prevent Destruction. If we would once set our selves heartily
to suitable Remedies, the work were more than half done: As the Reformation of
Ninive, and its Rescue from Destruction does abundantly testify.

Truly, Sirs, the World only stands by Divine Providence in hope of its
Reformation; for all Flesh seems to be corrupted before God, a small Remnant
only excepted. And if the Sins of any People are indeed remediless, their Ruin
will be so too: as in the Case of Judah before us, of which it is said, that
they sinned till there was no remedy. And if the 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
case be come to this, I have only one Inference more to add.

III. And Lastly. How happy is their Case, who in times of general Depravity,
are exempted from the common Corruption! who (like the Family of Lot in Sodom)
are so far from being partakers in the vulgar Sins, that they are grieved in
their Spirits at the Abomination which they see and hear from day to day. Such
Persons must expect to be the Scoff and Byword of the wicked People among whom
they live, who ill repay their Pity and Concern for them. It was just so with
Lot in Sodom: If he entreats them to refrain their pernicious Exorbitances,
they bitterly revile and rail upon him. They call him a busy presuming Fellow,
who would be meddling with what he had nothing to do, and would feign be as
magisterial as a Judge amongst them, Genesis 19. 9.

Thus Lot was Sodom's Laughter, whilst Sodom was Lot's Grief. But the End
proves who acted the wisest part. For then Lot and his pious Family were
miraculously preserved, when Sodom and its mocking Crew were miraculously
destroyed. Lot had the glorious Angels of Heaven sent to him for his Safeguard,
when Sodom had Fire and Brimstone (the Emblems of Hell) poured down upon them
for their Destruction. Good and bad Men live by contrary Rules and Principles
now, and in their Death they will be divided; The one will be taken, and the
other left. They take different Courses, and must come to different Ends.
Lazarus is for ever comforted, and Dives for ever tormented. Lot was saved both
from the Flames of Sodom and those of Hell, through God's Marvelous Mercy: and
Sodom perished by an Everlasting Destruction. For St. Jude tells us, That as
they were destroyed by dreadful Flames upon Earth, so they now suffer the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire. Jude 7.


O! what greater Argument can I produce to convert Sinners, or to confirm
Converts? I request each of these to look to the End to which they are posting.

Be of good courage, ye that serve the Living God, for your Work will speedily
and infinitely be rewarded. Ye may perhaps be mocked and despised of Men, as your
blessed Lord himself was: But ye will be commended and crowned of God at the
last. And in truth, Sirs, the Favor of God is better than all the noisy Fame
and fading Enjoyments of this present World. I know nothing that deserves the
name of Riches, Honor or Happiness, so much as the raising and refining of our
Faculties and Capacities by Divine Wisdom and Virtue. And truly this alone is
all to us: For, all the Pleasures of the Flesh are Folly and Mockery, if
compared with the noble Joy of a regenerate Soul delighting in God, its proper,
adequate, and felicitating Object; by communion with whom, it anticipates the
Powers of the World to come, and rejoiceth with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory.

But as for such, who will neither by the Mercies nor Judgments of God be
reclaimed from Sensuality and sordid Lusts: They sink first into the vileness
of Beasts, and then into the misery of Devils. Their temporary Vanity leads
them most assuredly to eternal Vexation. They may perhaps have a little
Sunshine in the Morning, as Sodom it self had; but there is a dreadful Shower
of fiery Indignation coming down from God to consume his Adversaries. For
however they delude themselves now, they will find at last, that it shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for them,
except they repent.

Consider what has been said; and the Lord give you Understanding in all
things. Amen.

FINIS.

