THE COMPLETE Bee-Master; OR, A DISCOURSE OF BEES:

Showing the best Way of IMPROVING Them, and Discovering the Fallacies that are
imposed by some, for private Lucre, on the credulous Lovers and Admirers of
these Insects.

By J. WORLIDGE, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by G. Conyers, at the Ring in Little-Britain.
School. Price s^. 6d:

an apiary beneath a tree

To the READER.
AFter so many worthy Authors that have publicly imparted so much of Art and
Ingenuity to the World, concerning the ordering and governing this small Animal
the Be; and especially Mr. Butler, whose Treatise of the Feminine Monarchy
has been judged by persons of Learning to be the most complete that ever was
written of any one Natural subject, it will not be expected that any one should
exceed him, as to the general Scope of his Treatise. But seeing that diverse
Persons have been for these many years, and yet are willing to endeavor an
Improvement and Advancement of Bees, to make them more profitable, and bring
them into greater esteem amongst us than formerly; and that by novel Ways and
Methods of Ordering them, some Persons of very good Quality and Parts, have
taken a great deal of pains and used much skill to observe the Nature of these
Curious, Industrious and Profitable Insects, not thinking it an undervaluing to
their Reputation, although

Slight is the Theme, yet not the Glory slight,
[Virgil.] Others on the contrary, wanting that Reason and Experience they
pretended to, have abused the World with their fictitious Notions concerning
Bees, which have made a greater Humm than all the Bee-books that have been
published before. That humming noise was the occasion of my reviewing those
Observations I had formerly made concerning these small, profitable, laborious,
loyal, nimble, cunning, industriou^ and resolute Animals; so resolved, that
they cannot be compelled to digress from their own natural Inclinations, nor
yet restrained from their prodigious Increase, by which they preserve their
Colonies, which otherwise would suddenly be extinguished: So profitable and
laborious, that by the ordinary Methods of ordering them, they fully recompense
all your Care and Cost you need to bestow on them with a sufficient overplus;
and so nimble and cunning, that they are not to be played withal, nor governed
by such that know not how to govern themselves nor their Pens: But of any
Creatures what soever the most easily managed and improved, if you prosecute
their own ways or intentions that Nature prompts them to, as many poor and
ignorant Country Housewifes can tell you; and the most learned and accomplished
Poets and Philosophers have been forced to condescend unto: who after all their
subtle disquisitions into the Natures and Properties of them, have ever
concluded with admiration of their Virtues and their Knowledge, Order,
Government, Art and Industry. Therefore if you design an improvement of them
beyond the Ordinary Method, it is best first to understand their Natures, and
wherein the common and ordinary Method of providing for them proves deficient,
and then endeavor to supply all those defects and remove all obstructions that
stand in their way, that you may rather ingratiate your self into their favor,
by pleasing them in every thing, than in the least to thwart or cross them. for
which Love of yours to them, they will recompense you manifold. For their
delight is in warm and dry Habitations, not narrow and tall, troublesome to
ascend, but broad and shallow. For it was not the Love the Bees bare to
Ludovicus Vives that made them settle under the Leads over his study in Oxford,
and continue there above a hundred years; nor could a narrow place have
afforded so great a Mass of Honey as was taken thence upon renewing the Leads,
Auno 1630. as Mr. Butler has related: But it was the convenience of the place
being broad, warm and dry, that invited them to so long and continued a
Succession: In other places of the same nature I have known the like, although
not for so long a time. And as the Bees delight in a close and private
Dwelling, so you must endeavor to preserve them by the smallness and closeness
of the Doors to keep out their enemies, which are not a few, and save them much
of their labor in a continual watch for a great part of the year, and secure
them in their Sleep at other times from being destroyed or deprived of their
Wealth; yet not to straiten them in their busy times of gathering. Many other
things you may observe that they naturally incline unto, wherein you may assist
them But be sure not to plant any thing near, nor do any act that may be
offensive or Heterogeneal to their Natures, whatsoever any advise you to. Nor
do you feed your selves with vain imaginations, that they will fix their Combs
to Frames of your Fancy, nor work when and where you please; nor desert their
Lechery, when you instruct them to the contrary, unless you have a more curious
way of Castration than is yet discovered. Nor do you expect so vast a profit,
as some have endeavored to persuade you unto, only to invite you to be a
Purchaser; lest you reckon your Chickens before they be hatched. To assist you
in these Disquisitions, I have put you to this small charge: if it may be
useful to you in prosecuting the Improvement of this little Animal, or in
preventing your precipitating into Mistakes and Errors by any Ignis Fatuus, I
have my Desire and Reward. But whether those other new pretended Methods of
vast Advantage, that are so dear bought, or these ordinary and cheap
Instructions will succeed most to your Content and Profit, time and Experience
only can demonstrate; to which I must submit. This nevertheless I can assure
you, that what I have in this small Tract positively affirmed, is either from
Experience or good Authority; when peradventure what you pay dearer for, may be
barely Suppositions; and yet at your own Cost to be Experimented.

CHAP. I. Of the Universality of Bees and the Antiquity of their Colonies.
THE Be is an Insect more universally dispersed thoroughout the World than any
other that is known to be useful, and their mellisluous Colonies of very great
Antiquity; Sampson feeding on the Honey made by a Swarm of Bees that hiv'd
themselves in the Carcass of a Lion, and Jonathan tasted of the Honey that
dropped from a full Comb in a Wood. Profane Authors also have not passed these
Insects over in silence, the most ancient Poets and Naturalists having written
largely of them; as Hesiod, Philistus, Menecrates and many others.
Aristomarchus for fifty eight years did little else but keep Bees, and
Philistus employed his whole Lifetime about them, as Pliny relates, lib. 11.
cap. 9. Honey being much more in esteem in those Ages than in these, sugar
having lately gained a Repute above it. For if you observe most of the ancient
Instructions for Conserving, Preserving, or other Confectionating, Honey was
then prescribed where sugar is now: So that thence it may be presumed that Bees
were more nourished and cherished than in these later times. Such an opinion
had the Ancients of Honey, that in case it were gathered by the Bees under a
certain Constellation, that it would be so heavenly a sweet Liquour that no one
thing in the World might be comparable to it (Pliny lib. 11. cap. 14.) for the
universal Cure of Diseases, and restoring from Death to Life, like unto that
Celestial and divine Nectar which they supposed did immortalize the Gods above.

There are scarce any parts in the known World, unless in the Torrid Zone,
where these Insects are not harbored; from Asia through all Europe unto the
North America, the vast Territories of Russia, Tartary and other remote parts
from the Southern Seas, being plentifully stocked with them, sugar not being
there so usual.

But how these numerous Insects first came to be reduced into Colonies is
uncertain, unless Arist^us the Son of Apollo and King of Arcadia (as some
report) was the first Discoverer of their Use and Order; a Work becoming so
great a Person. But certain it is, that they in ancient times had their
residence in hollow Trees in ancient Woods, as that of Jonathan's finding Honey
there seems to assert: and in other Concavities.

Often in deep Caves (if Fame a truth report)
Low underneath they vault their Waxen Court;
And often discovered in a hollow Rock,
Or in the Belly of an aged Oak.
[Translat. of Virgil.] And at this day in many places it is not unusual, to
find Swarms in Trees and hollow places in Buildings, etc.

From whence their Swarms issuing out, it is probable that they were entie'd
into Hives or other Receptacles prepared for them, which were first made of
Rinds or Barks of Trees, in imitation, as may be supposed, of the hollow Trees
they naturally placed themselves in. Afterward by degrees they began to make
them of other Materials: And some before Pliny's time, had made such Hives,
with that fissile Glass we call Island-glass, where with Ships are glazed; and
some of clear Horn, placed in Frames to discover the Bees Work, although in
vain Then they betook th^mselves to the making of Hives of Osiertwigs, and such
like, and daubed them; as yet in many places are used. From all which it may be
concluded, That Bees preserved in Colonies, and their increase by Swarms, is of
that Antiquity, that no History certainly mentions the first Invention of their
management, unless you will credit that of Aristeus.

CHAP. II. of the Breeding of Bees.
THat Bees are Insects, and that the most, if not all, of Insects are sometimes
engendered by Putrefaction, is not by any denied; Bees many times being
engendered in the corrupted Carcases of Beasts, according to the Poet;

Quatuor eximios praestanti corpore Tanros, etc.
Four of his largest Bullocks forth he took,
As many comely Heyfers never broke:
And when the ninth day bright Aurora showed,
He worships Orpheus, and the wood reviewed:
A Wonder, not to be believed, he sees
From the dissolved Entrails, Swarms of Bees.
Which from the broken ribs resounding fly,
And in a thick Cloud sally to the sky.
On a tall top branch they Cluster now,
As Grapes hang dangling on the gentle bough.
[ Ogilby's Transl. of Virg. Geor. 4.] To which end also the same Poet directs
the very Method of ordering a Steer, some a Heyfer, others an Ox, limiting it
to that Species, others producing other Insects, that out of their Carcases
Multitudes of Bees may be engendered. And it is not improbable that the Carcases
of these Beasts should produce Bees, when we every Summer perceive, that other
Beasts that lie in the open Air do produce Insects of other Species. But this
of Bees may not so well succeed in these Northern, as in the more Southern
Parts of Europe, where our Poet lived.

It was the Opinion also of the same Poet and of others, that Bees gathered
their Seed out of certain Leaves and Flowers, and carried them to their Hives,
out of which their young were produced.

It Is strange that Bees such custom should maintain,
Venus to scorn, in wanton lust disdain
To waste their strength; and without throws they breed:
But cull from Leaves and various Flowers their Seed.
[The same Translat.] But this Opinion gains not much credit, nor is the other
way practicable here. Therefore other ways for the Generation of these worthy
Insects are to be discovered. Aristotle himself thought it a work of great
difficulty to discover it: And Butler in his Feminine Monarchy has taken great
pains about the Generation of the Queens, Princesses, Drones and Honey-Bees; to
which Curious Tract we refer you, only from him shall observe, that Bees begin
to Breed about the middle of February, if they are well provided for and the
Spring be forward, else in March, by laying their Eggs or Seed at the bottoms
of their void Cells; which by the warmth of the Bees sitting on them (the
season of the year concurring) are converted into Worms or Grubbs, as most
Insects are before they fly. Thus by the old Bees sitting on, warming, and
feeding these Grubs, in about three weeks time, are a whole Set of these
Insects generated. And as the Spring comes on and Food increases, so do they
increase their Breed, throughout the Months of March, April, May, June and July
continually feeding their young, either with their old stock of Honey in bad
Weather, or with new Food and Water, which they continually gather and carry to
their young if the Weather permit them to fly abroad; or else in building
Combs, as far as their room will suffer them and as it is for their own
convenience. And thus do they build and breed until the end of July and
sometimes after. For when Bees have done swarming you may be confident they
have done breeding and not before.

But whether the Drones are the Males or Females, or whether the Females, if
the Honey-Bees are such, before Droning time have conceived for the ensuing
year, I had rather submit to the Judgment of the most Experienced and
Ingenious Butler than endeavor to disprove it.

However from his Writings and every Ingenious Bee-master's Annual Experience,
I may safely conclude, that Bees do not spend their time in these Spring and
Summer-months (whilst they breed) in Luxury and Idleness, as by some is
imagined; but to maintain and increase their Colonies, during that part of the
year that yields them plenty of Matter out of the various Blossoms that are
abroad, for the building of their Combs and feeding their young; until not only
that Matter that is fit for those uses cease, but until the Leaves of the Oak
and other Honey-bearing Leaves and Plants yield plenty of that Nectar or
Celestial Dew that they lay up in store for their Winter and Vernal Provision,
and whereof their Masters many times deprive them.

In vain therefore can it be expected, that this noble (yet indocile) Insect,
should be either persuaded to desist from breeding sooner than the season of
the year enforces them; or to gather Honey before it is to be had, as some
would insinuate into us to believe.

It is not to be feared (in case it were in our power to prevent them) that
Bees will ever overstock themselves; for were the Hive never so full of Bees,
they would the sooner fill their Cells with Honey, and the better live over the
Winter. And after they have killed their Drones, which they usually do before
the gathering of their Honey, there is not an idle Be nor a Beggar amongst
them.

CHAP. III. Of Increasing and Swarming of Bees.
MAny Attempts have been made by several Ingenious Persons, for the increase of
Bees without the troublesome and hazardous way of Swarming; by giving them
liberty in the Spring and Summer to swell their vast numbers into several
Artificial Hives, set the one under or by the other. But when they are
dispersed into several Hives or Boxes, and near an equal proportion in each
Box; yet when there Hives are separated with the Bees in them, that part
separated from the old Stock will not thrive: A great Argument of their want
of, and love unto their King or Queen, which doubtless remains amongst his
greatest Riches in the first Stock; from which if part of them voluntarily
separate themselves, by swarming with their Leader they soon betake themselves
to their work.

So that I could never observe from the Experience of any other, nor yet from
my own, although often and seriously attempted, that the Stocks or Colonies of
Bees could by other ways or means, than by their own voluntary Swarming, be
ever multiplied or increased.

Therefore if you design many Stocks in your Apiary, or that you keep your
ordinary stock only for increase wherewith to store your better Hives
(hereafter discoursed of) which you keep for the sake of the Honey, be sure not
to overhive your Bees; for the less the Hive is, the oftener they swarm. For
Bees over-hived rarely increase, unless it be an early Swarm and in a good
Summer. And in good Summers, an early Swarm not over-hived may cast a Swarm it
self: A sufficient argument that they spend not their time in Luxury and
Idleness; and that although they have room enough in their Hives to make their
Combs and store themselves with Honey, yet do they breed during the
breedingtime, else could they not send forth a new Colony so soon; and cannot
employ themselves in gathering Honey before it falls.

The sending forth of Swarms or Colonies does not at all hinder or confound the
Bees, it being but the work of two or three days to prepare for a Swarm: unless
the badness of the weather prevent, which may as well prevent them of working
as of swarming. And after they are hived, they, the very next day, fall to
making of Combs if the weather permit, and will in few days in fair weather
have made large Combs and laid their Eggs or Seeds for another Breed. So that
it cannot be reasonably imagined that Bees are in any confusion either before
or after Swarming, or that they loose any time besides the day they swarm, as
some have reported.

Bees usually swarm twice in a year, sometimes thrice, and (though but seldom)
four times in an extraordinary good year; so that there is no danger of a decay
of your Stock, unless through your own neglect, but a certain hope and
confidence of taking a Swarm every year from each Hive to supply your new
Hives, (we are hereafter to treat of) without any diminution to your breeding
Stock; and as may also be presumed, a store left for a future increase, and
those that are superannuated left for you into the bargain, so that care be
always taken not to over-hive them.

CHAP. IV. Of the Bee-Hives or Houses.
BEfore we did observe, that some of the ancient Bee-masters had made Hives of
transparent Matter, that they might the better discern the Work of the Bees;
which it seems did not succeed according to expectation, else had they been
more frequently used and approved of by the Reporters of them. Butler also
condemns the use of them to that intent. And most true it is, that you cannot
through the clearest Glass discern their working, nor yet their Combs, unless
in July or August about Noon, when most of the Bees are abroad, and their
Company begin to wax thin by their killing their Drones and death of their old
Bees, which now through their constant and extraordinary labor have worn out
their Wings, and fall far from home, incapable of ever returning.

For often their Wings are torn on Rocks abroad,
Freely spending their Lives beneath their Load:
In Flowers and making Honey such a pride
They have, by which their Lives away do glide.
[Virgil.] Then may you discern the ends of their Combs filled with transparent
N^ctar, but from that time they work not in making Combs nor yet in breeding.

Some have been of opinion, that by the light of these transparent Hives, these
industrious Creatures do frame their work with more expendition and delight. To
which I may answer, That in the darkest Cells or Caves they shape their Combs
as curiously and artificially as in the most lightsome: And that in these that
are transparent, the numerous laborers do so much obscure their work, that you
would think the Light of small advantage to them. Therefore Glass for that
purpose is of no great use.

It is likewise supposed that Bees take much pleasure in the Light of these
Hives, and so are thereby the more prompted to Industry: Whether that be so or
not is difficult to determine.

But it is probable that an Hive made with large Squares of fine French or
Dutch Glass, which is more transparent than the English, may not incommode the
Bees; especially if each Glass-window has its Shutter over it, to close it
from the cold as the weather requires it. This I am sure that it yields the
Spectators much pleasure and delight to see these nimble Creatures always in
Motion and full of business whilst the weather is hot, although not that
exprected and promised pleasure of the view of their Architecture.

Now if you design really to improve these Animals to their greatest height of
advantage, you must observe their true inclinations, and follow them in that
very Method that naturally they themselves tend unto. As

1. In what place soever they design to inhabit, they begin their work above
and work downwards.

2. In a Narrow Hive or place where their number is great, they are much
impeded in their work; and in a broad Hive (so that their Number be
proportionable) they begin many Combs according to their number, and do not so
much hinder the one the other.

3. In a tall Hive or other Cavity, when their Combs are of any considerable
length they become weary, because they continually ascend and descend in the
narrow passages between the Combs; which is not only troublesome, but a great
hindrance to those that are below. For I have always observed, that the
uppermost part of the tallest Hives are never without Bees; but at the coldest
time of the day or night, then very full, and at the hottest times they are
continually ascending and descending. To prove which I once cut off with a
sharp knife, the top of a straw Hive and some part of the Combs, thinking by
that means that they would as well have passed out that way as at the bottom of
the Hive; over which I placed a Glass-hive made after Mr. Hartlib's way,
published in his Common weath of Bees, that in case the Bees would have always
ascended, they might have then built in the new Hive over them: but they would
not forsake their Combs.

4. The Bees always fix their work to the top of the Hives, and not to the
Sticks only that are placed in the Hive, as by some is erroneously affirmed;
those Sticks being placed in the Hives by some to strengthen them, that they
should not sink with the weight of the Combs, by others to preserve the Combs
from breaking in case the Hives should be leaned side ways or removed.

5. They always Swarm for want of Room.

6. A place cannot easily be over-stock'd with Bees, so that they have liberty
to fly without incommoding the one the other; but if the Country be barren or
wanting of Meadow, Water and Oaks, it may be overstock'd.

Therefore make a Box or Hive of about eight Inches in height in the Inside,
and about twelve Inches broad, four square, close at the top and open at the
bottom, with a Square of French or Dutch Glass on each side of about four or
five Inches broad and five Inches deep, so g^oved in that no Air may pass
through the sides of it; which may be prevented by fixing it in with Paste or
Cotton-wool. Let there be Shutters or Covers for each Square of Glass, to be
added and taken off at pleasure, by means of small Buttons or Hasps; or you may
make it without Glass if you please. Let there be two Teeholes or Doors, the
one in the middle of the one Square-side at the bottom, and the other in the
middle of the other Square-side next adjoining; that when this Hive stands with
the one Door toward the South East, the other may be toward the South-West,
each door being about three Inches long and one third part of an inch deep.

Then make another Box or Hive of the same depth, and about six or eight Inches
broader, with two Squares of Glass on each side, two Doors on two of the sides,
that they may tend toward the same coasts as the other: Let this Box be open
at bottom also and close at the top, except an hole in the Middle of about
three Inches Diameter or Square. You may also make a third Box of about two
Foot over or more, but of the same depth as the sormer; always increasing the
Number of your Glass-squares, and Doors proportionable to the breadth of your
sides.

The Tops of these Boxes must be made of well-season'd dry Wood, Oak, Beech,
Fir or Sugar-chest, and made in Pannels joined to prevent shrinking, swelling,
warping, splitting, etc. the sides with Studds and Pannels, as every Joyner can
direct you. The top on the inside may be either of the Board as it is, which is
best; or if you doubt that it will shrink you may line it with a thin Matt, as
I have seen it, or Plaster it with sine Mortar made of Lime and Hair; always
remembering to singe off the hair that may probably stick without the Mortar.

You may also make sticks to hang in several places of the Boxes, of about half
an Inch square, fixed in the upper part of the Box and extending to the bottom
or very near it, the better to preserve the Combs steady, and to help the Bees
the easier to come to their Combs.

The first of these Boxes you may take a swarm into it at Swarming time, and
set it in its place where it is to stand, leaving both the Doors open to the
coasts before mentioned; which if the Swarm be great will be quickly filled.
When you perceive it near full add the second Box under it, placing the first
on the middle of the undermost, leaving the hole in the middle open. This may
be done in the cool of the evening or in the night. The next day will part of
the Bees take to their new Box, but the greater number continue their former
employment until they have quite filled the upper. Then will they fall to work
in the lower, and it is probable may fill that also the same Summer. As you find
occasion, you may add the third, and so a fourth or fifth, leaving the several
Doors open in every Box whilst you find there is occasion; and as the weather
grows colder and the Bees labor less, so you may lessen their passages by
small Wedges, made flat and fit for that purpose; so you may keep their Glass
shut as you think good. You may if you please let your uppermost be a small
Straw-hive, which is as good, though not so comely or suitable, as that of
Joyner's Work.

You may make a Frame of Wood on four Legs, covered with Board or Lead, or
what you please to place these Boxes in to preserve them from the Wet, much
whereof they will not endure. Let the drip be carried off from the two foremost
sides, lest it drive too much on the Hives or Bees. This Case or Bee-house must
stand Arras-wise with one Corner toward the South, that the Boxes also may the
better stand that way. It must have doors on every side: the two Back-doors may
be whole, and made to open only when you have occasion to move, order or view
your Bees. The two Fore-doors may be made in several parts; the upper third
part to open upwards, supported, dripping forwards, by slender Iron-hooks, that
the wind stir them not; these serve to keep the Bees and Boxes from Rain and
Sun. The Under-doors may be made in halves, the one to hang on the East and
West-posts, and the other on the South-posts; those on the South-posts to be
taken off the Hooks all the Summer, and in the Winter also, except when the
Bees are to be totally confined. The Copper Cut will show you the form of the
whole, as well Boxes as Bee-house.

From this Form or Model of keeping of Bees these Conveniences and Advantages
will certainly ensue.

1. The Bees have not far to ascend, their Habitation being but low.

2. They are not hindered for want of Room, nor for want of Entrance; their
Doors are wide and on several sides of the Hives or Boxes, that they have great
freedom of passage to and fro in the most busy time of their Gathering.

3. The Bees have the benefit of the Sun the whole day by this position of the
Hive. In hot and dry weather the morning Sun is most necessary, to invite them
abroad before the Dews are off the Fowers and Trees; and the evening Sun is
necessary at all times.

4. Their entrance or doors may easily be straightened as the season of the year
requires.

5. The Boxes themselves may in the Winter be secured from cold Winds and
Rains, and the warm Sun may be excluded in the Winter-months, which shining on
the Hives, tempts the Bees to come abroad to their ruin, and usually wakens
them out of their Winter-fleeps; provoking them to expend their Provision,
which in the Spring time, if the weather prove unseasonable, they may want.

6. you may make use of your Glass-Windows at any time to view the numerous
Colonies of these most laborious Animals.

7. These broad and flat Boxes will harbor with advantage, as many Bees as
possibly can cohabit together in any one Colony, with all imaginable
convenience. And as they increase in Number, so may you increase your Boxes,
until you find them at a stay: And then it is best to take them by the usual
way of Smothering by the sum of Brimstone, admitted by some hole left at the
bottom of the Beehouse, and kept stopped until you have occasion to use it for
this purpose. For let not any one imagine, that their Honey can be taken from
them and the Bees preserved; unless by some sorts of driving mentioned by
Butler in his Feminine Monarchy, which also are not commended.

The Bees will never forsake their Combs that are full of Honey, as I have
several times experimented, as well by cutting off the top of the Hive and
placing another over it, as by inverting a Hive with the bottom upwards and
placing another over it; wherein the Bees built some Combs, yet by far the
greater part of them kept to their former old Hive. Therefore all the boasts
and affirmations of what has been done to that purpose have been vain, unless
such pretended Experimenters have met with a new Species of Bees.

CHAP. V. Of the Gathering of Bees.
THese Animals spend their time, as long as the weather will permit and any
thing will yield them matter to work upon, in gathering Honey either gross or
pure, or Wax, as their occasions require and the season of the year will afford
them, according to the Poet,

Now when bright Sol makes Winters Cold retreat,
Behind the Earth and opens Heaven with Heat,
Forthwith they rise, and thorough Groves and Woods
Reap purple Flowers, and taste the Crystal Floods:
By what instinct I know not; then they fly
To their own Courts, and their dear Progeny.
Next make their waxen Cells with greatest Skill,
And those they with Celestial Nectar fill.
[Translat. of Virg.] In the first of the Spring in February, if the weather be
fair, they will abroad; and in that Month and the next, as the Spring is
earlier and later, they gather much on the Hazel, Dandelyon, Dazie, Violet,
Withy, Alder, Daffodil, etc. But above any other Tree they most affect the
Phyllirea; one sort of them bears in those Months an abundance of greenish
Blossoms which yield great plenty of a Gummy Rosinny Sweat, which the Bees
daily transport to their Hives, and yet it as often as the day renews.
Nothing can be more acceptable to your Bees than a Hedge of this Tree about
your Apiary, it being a very close Fence green all the Winter, and yielding so
great a quantity of acceptable Food in the usual time of their greatest
Necessity.

Although these Trees are not now very common, yet are they easily propagated
from Seeds, Layers or Slips. And I do assure you the effects of them to be as
aforesaid, and do not advise it to your loss, as a certain Author did to place
the Elm about your Apiary; a Tree that has been always esteemed injurious to
Bees, not only by ancient and experienced Bee-masters, but our modern
Botanicks. Nor as has been advised to plant the Palm. tree, which neither Gold
nor Silver can purchase to flourish in this Northern Clime.

The residue of the Spring do the Bees plentifully gather on the Blossoms of
the Black-thorn, Bullace, Plum, Cherry, Pear, Apple, Goosberry, Peach, and many
other Fruits and Flowers, of the Gardens as well as of the Meadows.

Them let sweet Gardens with fresh Flowers Invite.
[Virgil.] Thus from one Tree and Blossom to another do these industrious
Insects gather their food, being more gross than the fine Honey they gather in
the Summer for their Winter-store; this being but the Ambrosia, as Bu^ler terms
it, serving only for present main^e^^nce for themselves and their Brood for
want of which (their old stock of f^^e Honey or Neotar being spent, and the wea
hor bad that they cannot gather) they often die. Therefore those Plants that
afford them most of this early Food ought to be propagated about your Apiary.

When the Spring is a little past, and the Summer or May-month well entered,
then the Bees prosecute their building, preparing Cells wherein to store up
their Treasure for the succeeding Winter; not neglecting their Breeding, which
they continue until Nature (their Mistress) Prompteth them to decline it, and
follow their work of gathering and storing up their Nectar whilst it is to be
had. Every Be has his several Office, some to gather, others to build, etc.
as the Poet observed.

For some provide, and by a Compact made,
Labor abroad; others at home are stayed
To lay Narcissus Tears, and yielding Gum,
As the first Ground work of the Honeycomb;
Which with stiff Wax they finish to their praise:
Others, the Nations hope, young Colonies raise.
Another part the purest Honey stives,
Until the liquid Nectar crack the Hives.
And some by Lot, attend the Gates to inform
Approaching Showers, and to foretell a Storm;
To ease the laden, or imbattell'd drive,
The Drones, a slothful Cattle from the Hive.
[Translat. of Virg. Georg. 4.] After the Summer Solstice the pure Nectar rests
on the Leaves of the Oak, and some other Trees, but most on the Oak; so long as
these Dews fall, the Bees daily lade themselves home with it; they not omitting
their making of Combs, nor as yet their Breeding.

Besides from Trees, they gather much Honey from Thyme, chiefly to be nourished
in and near your Apiary, as the Poet advised.

Set Thime about their Hives, and Pines remove
From lofty Hills, for they such Plants do love.
[Virg. Georg. 4.] For Thyme yields much and very pure Honey. The Pines are
only supposed to be for shelter, being ever green, in the room of which you may
place Phyllirea, which is to be preferred, yielding both shelter and food.

After the Honey-dews are over, Bees gather but little; neither do they then
build any more Cells, having no need of them, but fill at those times all their
Cells to the very top, not only with Honey, but all the Intervals with their
Bodies.

So that if you should separate or drive the Bees from their Combs before the
fall of the Honey-dews, and take the upper part, you would have but little
advantage, by reason of the young Grubs you would have mixed with your impure
Honey. And if you should separate or drive them after, you would not leave
wherewith to maintain them over the Winter; and your driving of them, being a
lingering Death, would prove greater cruelty to these Animals than a sudden
suffocation.

Not but that they in the Autumn continually employ themselves in gathering
very pure Honey in small quantity, from the time of the Honey-dews, until the
severity of the Winter prohibits their Flight; but not enough to renew their
Store for the succeeding Winter.

All which considered, you will soon be of the Poet's Opinion,

Omnibus una quies operum, Labor omnibus unus;
All rest at once, at once they labor all.
[Virgil.] THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Universality of Bees and the Antiquity of their Colonies page
1 CHAP. II. Of the Breeding of Bees. p. 4 CHAP. III. Of Increasing and Swarming
of Bees. p. 9 CHAP. IV. Of the Bee-Hives or Houses. p. 12 CHAP. V. Of the
Gathering of Bees p. 22
FINIS.
Some Books lately printed for T. Dring, at the Harrow at Chancery- lane-end in
Fleet Street.
1. A Relation of the Conference between William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury
and Mr. Fisher the Jesuit. The third Edition, in Folio. Price 8 s.

2. Systema Agriculturae; the mystery of Husbandry discovered: Treating of the
newest and most advantageous ways of improving all sorts of Lands, Folio. Price
8 s.

3. England's Imminent Danger and only Remedy: Faithfully considered and
represented, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

4. Ancilla pietatis; or the Handmaid to Private Devotion, by D. Featley. The
ninth Edition, Octavo. Price 4 s.

5. Poems upon several occasions, in English and Latin. By John Milton; with a
small Tract of Education, to Mr. Hartlib, in Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

6. The French Cook, prescribing the choicest, newest and best ways of Cookery.
The third Edition, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

7. Vinetum Britannicum; or a Treatise of Cider, and such other Wines and
Drinks that are extracted from all manner of Fruits growing in this Kingdom.
Together with the Method of propagating all sorts of Vinous Fruit Trees. And
Description of the new invented Ingenio or Mill, for the more expeditious and
better making of Cider. And also the right Method of making Metheglin and
Birch-wine; with Copper Plates. By J. W. Gent. Printed 1676. Price 3 s. 6 d.

8. New and Curious Observations on the Art of Curing the Venereal disease, and
the Accidents that it produces, Explicated by natural and Mechanical
Principles, with the Effects of Mercury, and its other Remedies. By Mr. de
Blegney. Englished by W. Harris, M. D. Price 1 s. 6 d.

9. The Separation and Consecration of Places for God's public Service and
Worship, vindicated by Tho. Wemys. Price 1 s.

10. The Ancient Method and manner of holding Parliaments in England. By H.
Elsynge Esquire sometime Clerk of the Parliament; the Third Edition Enlarged.
Price bound 2 s.

11. A compendious Collection of the Laws of England touching matters Criminal,
faithfully collected and methodically digested, not only for the use of
Sheriffs. Justices of the Peace, Coroners, Clerks of the Peace and others
within that Verge, but of all people in general. By J. B. Esquire, in Octavo.
Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

12. Jus Sigil^^ or the Laws of England touching his Majesty's four Principal
Seals, viz. The Great Seal, the Privy Seal, the Exchequer Seal and the
Signet;also of those Grand Officers, to whose Custody these Seals are committed.

13. Memoirs of the Affairs of France during the Reign of the present King
Lewis Price 1 s.

14. The Four Ages of England, or the Iron Age, with other select Poems written
in the year 1648. in Octavo. Price 1 s.

15. The Devout Communicant exemplified in his behavior before, at, and after
the Sacrament. The third Edition, much corrected, in Twelves. Price 1. s. 6 d.
plays.

Plays.
Love and Honor. Unfortunate Lovers. Thierry and Theodoret. Woman-hater.
Changeling. Albumazar.
Plays lately Printed.
Love-tricks, or the School of Complements. Com. Hero and Leander. Com. Amorous
Prince, or the curious Husband. Com. Town-shifts, or the Suburb-Justice. Com.
Six days Adventure, or the new Utopia. Com. Dumb Lady, or the Farrier made
Physician. Com. Old Troop, or Monsieur Raggou. Com. The Rehearsal. Gentleman
Dancing Master. Com. Mamamouchi, or the Citizen turned Gentleman. Com. Fatal
Jealousy. Trag. Morning-ramble, or the Town-humours. Com. Empress of Morocco.
Trag. Reformation. (...) Careless Lovers. Macbeth. Trag. Siege of
Constantinopl^. Trag. Dutch Lover. Com. Country wife. Com. Woman turned Bully.
Com.
THere is now in the Press both a Latin and English Dictionary, composed by
Tho. Hollyoke D. D. Son of Francis Hollyoke, the Learned Enlarger of Rider's
Dictionary; which said Dictionary is in part already printed in a fair large
Folio, and will in a short time be finished and published, and will contain
above 6000 words in the English, and 2000 in Latin, more than has been in any
Dictionary yet extant: Besides, it will have the Phrases, the Customs, Habits
and Ceremonies of Countries, for the better understanding of the Latin
Historians; not only fit for Schoolboys, but necessary and useful for all
Students and Scholars whatsoever; and will be sold by Tho. Dring, at the corner
of Chancery Lane in Fleet street, and others.

Now in the Press.
Pharamond, an excellent New Romance; the whole Work

FINIS.

