A CENTURY OF THE Names and Scantlings OF SUCH INVENTIONS, As at present I can
call to mind to have tried and perfected, which (my former Notes being lost) I
have, at the instance of a powerful Friend, endeavored now in the Year 1655.
to set these down in such a way as may sufficiently instruct me to put any of
them in practice.

-- Artis and Naturae proles.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grismond in the year 1663.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAjESTY.
SIR,
SCire meum nihil est, nisi me scire hoc sciat alter, says the Poet, and I
most justly in order to Your Majesty, whose satisfaction is my happiness, and
whom to serve is my only aim, placing therein my Summum bonum in this world:
Be therefore pleased to cast Your gracious Eye over this Summary Collection,
and then to pick and choose. I confess, I made it but for the superficial
satisfaction of a friends curiosity, according as it is set down; and if it
might now serve to give aim to Your Majesty how to make use of my poor
Endeavors, it would crown my thoughts, who am neither covetous nor ambitious,
but of deserving Your Majesty's favor upon my own cost and charges; yet,
according to the old English Proverb, It is a poor Dog not worth whistleing
after. Let but Your Majesty approve, and I will effectually perform to the
height of my Undertaking: Vouchsafe but to command, and with my Life and
Fortune I shall cheerfully obey, and maugre envy, ignorance and malice, ever
appear

YOUR MAJESTY's Passionately-devoted, or otherwise dis-interested Subject and
Servant, WORCESTER

To the Right Honorable, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal; And to the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the Honorable House of Commons; now assembled in
Parliament.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
BE not startled if I address to all, and every of you, this Century of Summary
Heads of wonderful things, even after the Dedication of them to His most
Excellent Majesty, since it is with His most gracious and particular consent,
as well as indeed no ways derogating from my duty to His Sacred Self, but
rather in further order unto it, since your Lordships, who are His great
Council, and you Gentlemen His whole Kingdoms Representatives (most worthily
welcome unto Him) may fitly receive into your wise and serious considerations
what does or may publicly concern both His Majesty and His tenderly-beloved
People.

Pardon me if I say (my Lords and Gentlemen) that it is jointly your parts to
digest to His hand these ensuing particulars, fitting them to His palate, and
ordering how to reduce them into practice in a way useful and beneficial both
to His Majesty and His Kingdom.

Neither do I esteem it less proper for me to present them to you in order to
His Majesty's service, then it is to give into the hands of a faithful and
provident Steward whatsoever dainties and provisions are intended for the
Masters diet; the knowing and faithful Steward being best able to make use
thereof to his Masters contentment and greatest profit, keeping for the morrow
whatever should be overplus or needless for the present day, or at least to
save something else in lieu thereof. In a word, (my Lords and Gentlemen) I
humbly conceive this Simile not improper, since you are His Majesty's provident
Stewards, into whose hands I commit my self, with all properties fit to obey
you; that is to say, with a heart harboring no ambition, but an endless aim to
serve my King and Country: And if my endeavors prove effectual, (as I am
confident they will) His Majesty shall not only become rich, but His People
likewise, as Treasurers unto Him; and His Pierless Majesty, our King, shall
become both beloved at home, and feared abroad; deeming the riches of a King to
consist in the plenty enjoyed by his People.

And the way to render him to be feared abroad, is to content his People at
home, who then with heart and hand are ready to assist him; and whatsoever God
blesses me with to contribute toward the increase of His Revenues in any
considerable way, I desire it may be employed to the use of His People; that
is, for the taking off such Taxes or Burdens from them as they chiefly groan
under, and by a Temporary necessity only imposed on them; which being thus
supplied will certainly best content the King, and satisfy His People; which,
I dare say, is the continual Tend of all your indefatigable pains, and the
perfect demonstrations of your Zele to His Majesty, and an evidence that the
Kingdoms Trust is justly and deservedly reposed in you. And if ever Parliament
acquitted themselves thereof, it is this of yours, composed of most deserving
and qualified Persons; qualified, I say, with your affection to your Prince,
and with a tenderness to His People; with a bountiful heart toward Him, yet a
frugality in their behalfs.

Go on therefore cheerfully (my Lords and Gentlemen) and not only our gracious
King, but the King of Kings, will reward you, the Prayers of the People will
attend you, and His Majesty will with thankful arms embrace you. And be pleased
to make use of me and my endeavors to enrich them, not my self; such being my
only request unto you, spare me not in what your Wisdoms shall find me useful,
who do esteem my self not only by the Act of the Water-commanding Engine
(which so cheerfully you have past) sufficiently rewarded, but likewise with
courage enabled to do ten times more for the future; and my Debts being paid,
and a competency to live according to my Birth and Quality settled, the rest
shall I dedicate to the service of our King and Country by your disposals: and
esteem me not the more, or rather any more, by what is past, but what is to
come; professing really from my heart, that my Intentions are to out-go the six
or seven hundred thousand pounds already sacrificed, if countenanced and
encouraged by you, ingenuously confessing that the Melancholy which has lately
seized upon me (the cause whereof none of you but may easily guess) has, I
dare say, retarded more advantages to the public service then modesty will
permit me to utter: And now revived by your promising favors, I shall
infallibly be enabled thereunro in the Experiments extant, and comprised under
these heads practicable with my directions by the unparalled Workman both for
trust and skill, Caspar Kaltoff's hand, who has been these five and thirty
years as in a school under me employed, and still at my disposal, in a place by
my great expenses made fit for public service, yet lately like to be taken
from me, and consequently from the service of King and Kingdom, without the
least regard of above ten thousand pounds expended by me, and through my Zele
to the Common good; my Zele, I say, a field large enough for you (my Lords and
Gentlemen) to work upon.

The Treasures buried under these heads, both for War, Peace and Pleasure,
being inexhaustible; I beseech you pardon me if I say so; it seems a Vanity,
but comprehends a Truth; since no good Spring but becomes the more plentiful by
how much more it is drawn; and the Spinner to weave his web is never stinted,
but further enforced.

The more then that you shall be pleased to make use of my Inventions, the more
Inventive shall you ever find me, one Invention begetting still another, and
more and more improving my ability to serve my King and you; and as to my
heartiness therein there needs no addition, nor to my readiness a spur. And
therefore (my Lords and Gentlemen) be pleased to begin, and desist not from
commanding me till I flag in my obedience and endeavors to serve my King and
Country:

For certainly you will find me breathless first to expire,
Before my hands grow weary, or my legs do tire.
Yet abstracting from any Interest of my own, but as a Fellow-Subject and
Compatriot will I ever labor in the Vineyard, most heartily and readily
obeying the least summons from you, by putting faithfully in execution, what
your Judgments shall think fit to pitch upon amongst this Century of
Experiences, perhaps dearly purchased by me, but now frankly and gratis offered
to you. Since my heart (methinks) cannot be satisfied in serving my King and
Country, if it should cost them any thing; As I confess when I had the honor
to be near so obliging a Master as His late Majesty of happy memory, who never
refused me his Ear to any reasonable motion: And as for unreasonable ones, or
such as were not fitting for him to grant, I would rather to have dyed a
thousand deaths, then ever to have made any one unto him.

Yet whatever I was so happy as to obtain for any deserving Person, my Pains,
Breath and Interest employed therein satisfied me not, unless I likewise
satisfied the Fees; but that was in my Golden Age.

And even now, though my ability and means are shortened, the world knows why
my heart remains still the same; and be you pleased (my Lords and Gentlemen) to
rest most assured, that the very complacency that I shall take in the executing
your Commands shall be unto me a sufficient and an abundantly-satisfactory
reward.

Vouchsafe therefore to dispose freely of me, and whatever lies in my power to
perform; first, in order to His Majesty's service; secondly, for the good and
advantage of the Kingdom; thirdly, to all your satisfactions, for particular
profit and pleasure to your individual selves, professing that in all and each
of the three respects I will ever demean my self as it best becomes,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most passionately-bent Fellow-Subject in His
Majesty's service, Compatriot for the public good and advantage, and a most
humble Servant to all and every of you, WORCESTER.

A CENTURY OF THE Names and Scantlings of Inventions by me already practiced.
points and imaginary places, proportionable to ordinary Escocheons and Seals
at Arms, each way palpably and punctually setting down (yet private from all
others, but the Owner, and by his assent) the day of the Month, the day of the
Week, the Month of the Year, the Year of our Lord, the Names of the Witnesses,
and the individual place where any thing was sealed, though in ten thousand
several places, together with the very number of lines contained in a Contract,
whereby falsification may be discovered, and manifestly proved, being upon good
grounds suspected.

Upon any of these Seals a man may keep Accounts of Receipts and Disbursments
from one Farthing to an hundred millions, punctually showing each pound,
shilling, penny or farthing.

By these seals likewise any Letter, though written but in English, may be read
and understood in eight several languages, and in English it self to clean
contrary and different sense, unknown to any but the Correspondent, and not to
be read or understood by him neither, if opened before it arrive unto him; so
that neither Threats, nor hopes of Reward, can make him reveal the secret, the
Letter having been intercepted, and first opened by the Enemy.





and punctually, letter for letter, set down by naked and not multiplied
points. And nothing can be less then a point, the Mathematical definition of
being Cujus pars nulla. And of a motion no swifter imaginable then Semiquavers
or Releshes, yet applicable to this manner of writing.

the self-same Point individually placed, without the least additional mark or
variation of place, shall stand for all the 24. letters, and not for the same
letter twice in ten sheets writing; yet as easily and certainly read and known,
as if it stood but for one and the self-same letter constantly signified.

without noise made or notice taken; being, according to occasion given and
means afforded, Exre nata, and no need of Provision beforehand; though much
better if foreseen, and means prepared for it, and a premeditated course taken
by mutual consent of parties.



night as well as by day, and as directly; without a platform or measures taken
by day, yet by a plain and infallible rule.

Tanquam aliud agens, and at any appointed minute, though a week after, either
of day or night, it shall irrecoverably sink that Ship.

off to dive and fasten a like Engine to any Ship, so as it may punctually work
the same effect either for time or execution.



made as fit to sail as before.



to weigh up an Anchor, or to do any forcible exploit in the narrowest or
lowest room in any Ship, where few hands shall do the work of many; and many
hands applicable to the same force, some standing, others sitting, and by
virtue of their several helps a great force augmented in little room, as
effectual as if there were sufficient space to go about with an Axle-tree, and
work far from the Center.

work and move toward the desired Port or point of the Compass.

by an indifferent strong wind.

Thames a floting Garden of pleasure, with Trees, Flowers, Banquetting-Houses,
and Fountains, Stews for all kind of fishes, a reserve for Snow to keep Wine
in, delicate Bathing-places, and the like; with music made with Mills: and all
in the midst of the stream, where it is most rapid.

Hourglass by a child in the twinkling of an eye, it holding great quantity of
water, and of force sufficient to make snow, ice and thunder, with a chirping
and singing of birds, and showing of several shapes and effects usual to
Fountains of pleasure.

unruly in a full career; a child being sufficiently capable to loosen them in
what posture soever they should have put themselves, turning never so short;
for a child can do it in the twinkling of an eye.

one into the other, the uppermost yielding its water (how great a quantity
soever it holds) at the self-same time the lowermost takes it in, though it be
an hundred fathom high.

with a Bucket fastened at each end. This, I confess, I have seen and learned
of the great Mathematician Claudius his studies at Rome, he having made a
Present thereof unto a Cardinal; and I desire not to own any other men's
Inventions, but if I set down any, to nominate likewise the Inventor.

private room or place out of sight, and a competent distance from it.

Copernicus.

Bullets of an hundred pound weight a Steeple-height, and a quarter of a mile
off and more, Stone-bow-wise, admirable for Fireworks and astonishing of
besieged Cities, when without warning given by noise they find themselves so
forcibly and dangerously surprised.

from the Center; and so proportionably to millions of pounds.

Arcenal at Venice.

Ten Tun with ten pounds, and less; the said ten pounds not to fall lower
then it makes the ten Tun to advance or retreat upon a Level.



hundred fighting men, and yet in six hours time may be set up, and made
Cannon-proof, upon the side of a River or Pass, with Cannon mounted upon it,
and as complete as a regular Fortification, with Half-moons and Counter-scarps.

though it contain but four Pieces, they shall be able to discharge two hundred
Bullets each hour.



Frenchman, Italian, Spaniard, Irish, Welsh, being Scholars; yea, Grecian or
Hebritian shall as perfectly understand it in their own Tongue, as if they
were perfect English, distinguishing the Verbs from Nouns, the Numbers, Tenses
and Cases as properly expressed in their own Language as it was written in
English.

so that one stitch shall significantly show any letter, and as readily and as
easily show the one letter as the other, and fit for any Language.











By these three Senses as perfectly, distinctly and unconfusedly, yea as
readily as by the sight.





or putting ones hand out of the bed. And the same thing becomes a serviceable
Pistol at pleasure; yet by a stranger, not knowing the secret, seems but a
dexterous Tinder-box.



metal, which thrown into a Pool or Pail of water shall presently rise from the
bottom, and constantly show by the superficies of the water the hour of the day
or night, never rising more out of the water then just to the minute it shows
of each quarter of the hour; and if by fo^ce kept under water, yet the time is
not lost, but recovered as soon as it is permitted to rise to the superficies
of the water.









by any Musical Instrument within hearing, in a seeming way of tuning it; or of
an unskilful beginner.







Wheel shall be perpetually further from the Center, then those of the mounting
side, and yet equal in number and heft to the one side as the other. A most
incredible thing, if not seen, but tried before the late King (of blessed
memory) in the Tower, by my directions, two Extraordinary Ambassadors
accompanying His Majesty, and the Duke of Richmond and Duke Hamilton, with most
of the Court, attending Him. The Wheel was 14. Foot over, and 40. Weights of
50. pounds apiece. Sir William Balfore, then Lieutenant of the Tower, can
justify it, with several others. They all saw, that no sooner these great
Weights passed the Diameter-line of the lower side, but they hung a foot
further from the Center, nor no sooner passed the Diameter-line of the upper
side, but they hung a foot nearer. Be pleased to judge the consequence.

working some little effect besides its own motion, without the help of any man
within sight or hearing: But if either of the Globes be taken out with ever so
swift or easy a motion, at the very instant the ebbing and flowing cease;
for if during the ebbing you take out the Globe, the water of that Vessel
presently returns to flow, and never ebbeth after, until the Globe be
returned into it, and then the motion begins as before.





to do the whole execution of a dozen shots, as soon as one pleases,
proportionably.



danger one may charge, level, and discharge them sixty times in a minute of an
hour, two or three together.



pounds of powder, twenty times in six minutes; so clear from danger, that
after all were discharged, a Pound of Butter did not melt being laid upon the
Cannon-britch, nor the green Oil discolored that was first anointed and used
between the Barrel thereof, and the Engine, having never in it, nor within six
foot, but one charge at a time.

Ship-musquets, to the number (if need require) of 2. or 3000. shots.



thirty Bullets at a time, even in full career.

When first I gave my thoughts to make Guns shoot often, I thought there had
been but one only exquisite way inventible, yet by several trials and much
charge I have perfectly tried all these.

Intra sphaeram activitatis, which is but at such a distance. But this way has
no Bounder, if the Vessels be strong enough; for I have taken a piece of a
whole Cannon, whereof the end was burst, and filled it three quarters full of
water, stopping and scruing up the broken end; as also the Touchhole; and
making a constant fire under it, within 24. hours it burst and made a great
crack: So that having a way to make my Vessels, so that they are strengthened
by the force within them, and the one to fill after the other. I have seen the
water run like a constant Fountaine-stream forty foot high; one Vessel of water
rarefied by fire drives up forty of cold water. And a man that tends the work
is but to turn two Cocks, that one Vessel of water being consumed, another
begins to force and re-fill with cold water, and so successively, the fire
being tended and kept constant, which the self-same Person may likewise
abundantly perform in the interim between the necessity of turning the said
Cocks.

motion, and as many more from both sides and ends, and at the selfsame time
shall fasten it to the place beyond a man's natural strength to take it away:
and in one and the same turn both locketh and opens it.







1. The owner (though a woman) may with her delicate hand vary the ways of
coming to open the Lock ten millions of times, beyond the knowledge of the
Smith that made it, or of me who invented it.

2. If a stranger open it, it sets an Alarm a-going, which the stranger
cannot stop from running out; and besides, though none should be within
hearing, yet it catches his hand, as a Trap does a Fox; and though far from
maiming him, yet it leaves such a mark behind it, as will discover him if
suspected; the Escocheon or Lock plainly showing what moneys he has taken out
of the Box to a farthing, and how many times opened since the owner had been in
it.



the handle, makes the hinges to be of either side, and to open either inward
or outward, as one is to enter or to go out, or to open in half.





to fly; which I have tried with a little Boy of ten years old in a Barn, from
one end to the other, on an Hay-mow.

the oftener looked upon, the more exact it shows the time of the day or
night.



Barrel no thicker then a Shilling, and yet able to endure a Musket proof of
Powder and Bullet.









presently shoot forth such and so many Bolts of each side and at both ends, as
without the owners Key can neither be opened or filed off, being made of
tempered Steel, and as effectually locked as an Iron Chest.

a lamode, and yet a stranger being persuaded to sit down in it, shall have
immediately his arms and thighs locked up beyond his own power to loosen them.

Candles, in which a man may make 500. dozen in a day, and add an Ingredient
to the tallow which will make it cheaper, and yet so that the Candles shall
look whiter and last longer.

mouth, and resolve the Question in French, Latin, Welsh, Irish or English, in
good terms uttering it out of his mouth, and then shut it until the next
Question be asked.

Primero at Cards, one may without clogging his memory keep reckoning of all
Sixes, Sevens and Aces which he has discarded.



make him start, and swiftly to run his career, using the decent posture with
bon grace, may take the Ring as handsomely, and running as swiftly as if he rode
upon a Barbe.



500. Tun, so that it may be calked, trimmed and repaired without need of the
usual way of stocks, and as easily let it down again.



Deer cannot run two steps but, if he miss of one Arrow, he may be reached with
the other, whether the Deer run forward, sideward, or start backward.



may take any thing in Perspective, as justly, and more then the skilfullest
Painter can do by his eye.

Primum mobile forward or backward, upward or downward, circularly or
corner-wise, to and fro, straight, upright or downright, yet the pretended
Operation continues, and advances none of the motions abovementioned,
hindering, much less stopping the other; but unanimously, and with harmony
agreeing they all augment and contribute strength unto the intended work and
operation: And therefore I call this A Semi-omnipotent Engine, and do intend
that a Model thereof be buried with me.

hundred pound can effect.

Symmetry, that though it work day and night from one end of the year to the
other, it will not require forty shillings reparation to the whole Engine, nor
hinder ones day-work. And I may boldly call it The most stupendous Work in the
whole world: not only with little charge to drein all sorts of Mines, and
furnish Cities with water, though never so high seated, as well to keep them
sweet, running through several streets, and so performing the work of
Scavingers, as well as furnishing the Inhabitants with sufficient water for
their private occasions; but likewise supplying Rivers with sufficient to
maintain and make them portable from Town to Town, and for the bettering of
Lands all the way it runs; with many more advantageous, and yet greater effects
of Profit, Admiration and Consequence. So that deservedly I deem this Invention
to crown my Labors, to reward my Expenses, and make my Thoughts acquiesce in
way of further Inventions: This making up the whole Century, and preventing any
further trouble to the Reader for the present, meaning to leave to Posterity a
Book, wherein under each of these Heads the means to put in execution and
visible trial all and every of these Inventions, with the shape and form of all
things belonging to them, shall be Printed by Brass-plates.

In Bonum Publicum, and Ad majorem DEI Gloriam.
Index.
SEals abundantly-significant. 1 Private and particular to each owner. 2 An
one-line Cipher. 3 Reduced to a Point. 4 Varied significantly to all the 24.
letters. 5 A mute and perfect discourse by colors. 6 To hold the same by
night. 7 To level Cannons by night. 8 A Ship-destroying Engine. 9 How to be
fastened from-a-loof and under water. 10 How to prevent both. 11 An unsinkable
Ship. 12 False destroying Decks. 13 Multiplied strength in little room. 14 A
Boat driving against wind and tide. 15 A Sea-sailing Fort. 16 A pleasant
floting Garden. 17 An Houre-glasse Fountain. 18 A Coach-saving Engine. 19 A
Balance Water-work. 20 A Bucket-fountain. 21 An ebbing and flowing River. 22 An
ebbing and flowing Castle-clock. 23 A Strength-increasing Spring. 24 A double
drawing Engine for weights. 25 A to and fro Lever. 26 A most easy level
Draught. 27 A portable Bridge. 28 A moveable Fortification. 29 A Rising
Bulwork. 30 An approaching Blind. 31 An universal Character. 32 A
Needle-alphabet. 33 A knotted String-alphabet. 34 A Fringe-alphabet. 35 A
Bracelet-alphabet. 36 A Pinck'd Glove-alphabet. 37 A Sieve-alphabet. 38 A
Lanthorn-alphabet. 39 An alphabet by the Smell. 40 An alphabet by the Taste. 41
An alphabet by the Touch. 42 A variation of all and each of these. 43 A
Key-Pistol. 44 A most conceited Tinder-box. 45 An artificial Bird. 46 An Hour
Water-ball. 47 A scru'd ascent of Stairs. 48 A Tobacco-tongs Engine. 49 A
Pocket-ladder. 50 A Rule of Gradation. 51 A mystical jangling of Bells. 52 An
hollowing of a Water-scrue. 53 A transparent Water-scrue. 54 A double
Water-scrue. 55 An advantageous change of Centres. 56 A constant Water-flowing
and ebbing motion. 57 An often-discharging Pistol. 58 An especial way for
Carabines. 59 A Flask-charger. 60 A way for Muskets. 61 A way for a Harquebus,
a Crock. 62 For Sakers and Minyons. 63 For the biggest Cannon. 64 For a whole
side of Ship-musquets. 65 For guarding several advenues to a Town. 66 For
Musquettoons on horseback. 67 A Fire Water-work. 68 A triangle Key. 69 A Rose
Key. 70 A square Key with a turning scrue. 71 An Escocheon for all Locks. 72 A
transmittible Gallery. 73 A conceited Door. 74 A Discourse woven in Tape or
Ribbon. 75 To write in the dark. 76 A flying man. 77 A continually-going Watch.
78 A total locking of Cabinet-boxes. 79 Light Pistol-barrels. 80 A
Comb-conveyance for Letters. 81 A Knife, Spoon or Fork-conveyance. 82 A
Rasping-mill. 83 An arithmetical Instrument. 84 An untoothsome Pear. 85 An
imprisoning Chair. 86 A Candle-mold. 87 A Brazen head. 88 Primero Gloves. 89 A
Dicing-box. 90 An artificial Ring-horse. 91 A Gravel Engine. 92 A Ship-raising
Engine. 93 A Pocket Engine to open any door. 94 A double Cross-bow. 95 A way
for Sea-banks. 96 A perspective Instrument. 97 A Semi-omnipotent Engine. 98 A
most admirable way to raise Weights. 99 A stupendous Water-work. 100

FINIS.

