A SHORT LETTER Modestly entreating a Friends judgment upon Mr Edwards his
Book, he calls an Anti-Apologie: With a large but modest Answer thereunto.
Framed (in desire) with such evennesse of hand, and uprightness of heart, as
that no godly man might be offended at it: And with soule-desire also, That
they, who are contrary-minded, might not be offended neither, but instructed.

Optime locutus esset si non in fratres pessime.

The man had spoken very well, if not against his Brethren, very ill.

Mel. Ep. (...).

Chrysostom. There is something unholy in His holy ones. His Angels he has
charged with folly, etc.

Job. 4. 18. 1 COR. 4. 5. 1 COR. 11. 31. Judge nothing before the time: except
your selves, that ye may not be judged.

1 THESE. 5. 21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed according to Order. 1644.

Worthy Sir;
I Have heard of Mr Edwards Anti-Apologeticall Book, as I must needs do, for
all the City and Parliament rings of it. The most of them cry it up, and some
few cry it down; Truly Sir I could cry too, but neither up nor down: For my
heart is big with weeping, and I could wish my head a fountain of tears, to
bewail the sad effects which are likely to follow upon these differences of
Religion, which are fallen out amongst Brethren. But that I may know also your
affections, let me entreat you to cast your eyes not carelessly over a few
leaves but the whole Book, that we may be instruments by the grace of God of
healing those breaches. Sir, your freedom of judgment has not deceived me
this 16. years in other matters of highest concernement, nor is it like to do
now since so many gray hairs have covered the seat of it. Thus beseeching the
God of Truth and Peace to assist both your judgment and affections, I take my
leave, remaining always

Sir, Your many ways obliged and most affectionate friend to serve you, SAM.
HARTLIP.
From my house in Dukesplace in great haste Aug 5.
A short Letter, modestly entreating a Friends judgment upon Mr Edwards his
Book, he calls an Anti-Apologie: With a large but modest answer thereunto.
I Must begin complaining; Alas (Sir) how do you disparage your own judgment,
when you do hearken after mine? But it is a friendly error, I must pardon it;
and more, I will grant your earnest request also. How can he choose, but yield
to you, what can be yielded, who are all for Truth and Peace, pursuing it with
all your might; Now Blessings be upon your head, (and the head of yours) who
have laid-out your self and all for God: He will return (for man will not,
nay indeed power is wanting, though will more, he cannot) all your labor of
love, work of faith, patience of hope sevenfold into your bosom, Amen.

But, Sir, me thinks you and I are Instruments now merely passive, you, in the
motion to this undertaking; I, in the undertaking; wrought upon both, by a
power, and counsel, higher and better then our own; I conceive it so in you,
by what I heard you say, you had concluded upon between your soul and God. I
conceive the same of my self, because I never thought of this, nay my mind was
wholly averse from scribbling, till I thought of your Letter, and then I could
think of nothing else, and was restless till I had answered you. Surely (Sir)
there was an hand here more then humane; a stronger motion on our spirits, than
self can make; A bond, which is more binding and engaging then the bonds of
men are, Gods Cause, with his Legacy to the world, Truth and Peace. And now all
is engaged, body, soul, spirit, judgment also, that is little or nothing
indeed; But He can use it, and direct it, Who uses the smallest things to
great purpose. I Will weight upon the Lord; as He shall communicate unto me, I
shall give-back unto you, even from His own hand: For I think it is the desire
of my soul, willingly to offer my self with all the powers 2 Chro 17. 16.
of soul and body first unto the LORD (Indeed I would not have (...) Cor. 8. 5.
my self, or them at my own dispose for all the world) and then my judgment
unto you. But first I shall say something by way of preface; Do not be jealous
of your friend now, that he will give any, the least libert, to his pen, to
asperse persons or their opinions touching the way of Government, now in
agitation and dispute: Or that any word shall reflect upon the Scots whom I
honor; no people in the world more, with my soul: And am persuaded they ought
so to be honored, for they are come-forth carrying their lives in their hands,
willing to lay their lives down for their friends: A greater love than this
has ^o man: Surely here is a love more then humane, for it is as strong as
death, the Lord return it to their bosom in Spirituals, for Temporals are too
mean a return for such Adventurers. It is also as far from my thoughts, as it
is out of my power, to asperse their way of Church Government: I think
honorably of that also, as be-commeth. Nor shall you make judgment by what
follows, that I am for the Independency (as I fool have called it) nor for
the Presbiterie neither, and Government that way. I profess unto you, These
words are so tossed to and fro by such simple ones as my self, that I cannot
tell what to make of them, or which way to take: And yet can see the way
cleared before me, the Church way past all question, for there the Scripture is
clear: when yet, where it speaks out clearly at the first sight, for
Presbytery; me thinks at the second view (and that should be, as our second
thoughts are, the wiser) it speaks all for Independency. So that I have not
understanding enough (the Lord be a light and help unto it) to tell my self
for what way I am, unless for both, as they may both lead each to other, and
meet in one. I am persuaded in my heart that so it will be; they will accord,
meet and kiss each other. Not that I can think the difference to be small,
about which there is so great difference: nor the way of government easily
discernable, since so many quick-sighted men are prying thereinto, yet cannot
find it out. But this is the ground of my persuasion; because the seekers after
this way, do, I hope, seek Him, That makes a path in a wilderness and are
fully resolved to continue seeking; and in their disquisition here, to keep
themselves close-up to the clue of the sacred Scriptures: and to shut-out
passion, which, a Noble Scholar (of large understanding the Lord fill it with
himself) calls nothing: for so much as there is of passion, in the Dispute, so
much there is of nothing to the purpose. The very best Ministers in the world
are jealous over themselves in this matter, and as watchful. They are
zealously affected toward Church Government in a Church way; their zeal may
goe-forth at the dispute about it, and passion may get in. Then Reasons, like a
bad hound, speeds upon a false sent, and forsakes the question first started.
Sir, you are at the end of my Preface, now to my undertaking; The Author
first, then to his Epistle, and so to the Book, and some resolves thereupon,
and then an end. The Author; you are pleased to Name him, so will I for honor
sake: But before I come at him I will reach forth my hand unto him, and my
heart, for these shall never go single. My heart is toward him, and to God
for him, That the Lord would shine upon him, and his gifts, that so neither he
nor they may runne-out any more to waste; as persons and graces do, which do
not promote the Glory of God, and the salvation of souls: Now I am come to
him, I suspect my self and my loving respects toward him, least they carry me
beyond my bounds in his commendation. Truly I cannot tell in what one thing the
man is wanting to make him complete, except in Charity; that is a great
exception, and some say he is so wanting therein, that he has no charity at
all, yet that is the everlasting grace, and compleats all: yea some do not
strain to say, he is a man of a malignant spirit, and he has showed forth
openly nothing else (he must be content to fall under censure.) Truly I think
they say not well, and so good he thinks himself, he cares not what they say
(and there he may be too careless;) But for my part, I would rather I could
say, he is a man of an excellent spirit, but then my love transporting me, I
should say too much: Yet this I must say; he is very high in my thoughts, (not
a whit higher in others account) almost as he is in his own: and he has
improved his growth not a little within these four years; for then he was
matched by, he knows whom: (surely the Lord would have had him accounted that
as a spetting in his face) and now he has attained to that height in the eyes
of all the learned, that he is too tall a match for a woman. Good man! (Indeed
the best have their failings) God has left him to himself, as he has said of
his Brethren, To try him, that he might know all that was in his 2 Chro. 32. 31.
heart. And now all know it, I think, better than himself, for palam est, It
is all abroad, and in every man's ear and eye, what was in his heart so secret
there this seven years upon my knowledge. And here I could tell the Reader
something from thence, from what I know; more what I heard from an excellent
Master in Israel, and his best Disciples in Hartford. But I must not do that
my self, which I must reprove in him, for I never spoke with him about it,
neither alone nor before others. Nor would I, for a world, render Gath and
Askelon debtors unto me, Bristoll and Oxford: God forbid, That I should give
the Philistines there matter of rejoicing: or the uncircumcised there, cause of
Triumph. Whether the reverend Author of this Anti-Apolog: has not more
rejoiced the Adversaries to the Truth, than edified her Friends in their most
holy Faith, requires his most retired serious and saddest thoughts; That so he
may, as he may see cause, give check to his busy pen: (in his zeal for God and
his cause, he has given his word, he will not cease writing) lest, while in
his zeal for the beating-out and clearing the Truths of God, and the way of his
Servants, he darkens those Truths, and lays scandals in the way, whereby to
grieve the Brethren, and rejoice the enemies to all Righteousness. And then
the more pains he takes, the more work he makes for repentings. The Lord be a
Light and Guide unto him now, That his after-labour may be a labor of love;
and his work, a work of Faith; Then may he be patient in hope, That he shall
see the travel of his soul. So I would bespeake him now and assure him, That
neither his Person nor his Graces have one grain the less weight in my
esteem, because he is for the Presbyterian-way: So are they, and they the most
the savor of whose Graces are now, as is the savor of the sweetest oyntmeut
all over the House and household of God: for they are for That way, whatever we
call it, which they are persuaded is the way of Christ. And the Searcher of all
hearts knows my desire touching him, is, 1. That he, for after time, may give
no occasion to those without to blaspheme; or to them with-in, To think, he
is against the strictness and purity of the way of Christ. 2. And that not one
drop of the Anointing he has received from the Father may run-out in vain; but
that in his pursuance after peace, he may maintain the peace of the Church, by
all means, Keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond thereof. So much to
bespeake him and his patience, while, for my friends satisfaction, I give
judgment of his Book in the same order as it lies. The Epistle first; It The
Epistle and purpose thereof.
is well compact, a sheet complete, and answers M^ Sympson sheet for sheet.
Yet, Mr Sympson his second Position there, stands unshaken upon its Basis of
Truth; That, for a son of the same Mother to divulge the faults of his
Brethren, is not brother-like, but quite beside the Rule of the Word, and way
of Gods holy ones. Mr Edwards says no, and argues the negat: tells us in what
cases the Brethren have divulged the faults of their Brethren: But that was not
to the case in question; for it was not the case between his Brethren and him;
As, I suppose, every man will see that has The Book and frame thereof.
read the Apoll. Narr. and his Book against it; which I did read next, a sheet
or two, and there about I brake off; for there, me thought, I met with too
common and unbecomming language, agreeable Even to our interiours we owe the
duty of a good language.
to a man's own spirit, which, like fire, cannot be, but it must break forth:
and so disagreeing to That spirit we should breath after, that I cast down the
Book with some distaste, and then fell a dipping, here I dipped, and there I
dipped, a snatch and away, as they say, the dog does in Nilus; and for the
same Logic, a dog has, because there are serpents there, such biting things.
Indeed I discerned quickly the frame of the Book, and the spirit of the man
heated above its due proportion in such matters; and that my best way was to
dip and away; and so I hastened to the close of the book the last leaf,
wherein the good man summons This Church, and That, and a third (and all are
but one) to come at his call, and to do as he bids them Nullum tam grave
scel^s, quod non ad judicium prius quim ad poena^^ venire debet. Luth.
Truly, (Sir) I could smile to see how the masters of their Assemblies stir
now, like a mountain, which one man, very imperiously bad come unto him; the
mountain moved like it self, not a foot; Well said the proud man, if the
mountain will not come to me, I will go to the mountain. I wish heartily it
may be so here; but if that cannot be, a brother cannot give forth to his
brethren his right hand of fellowship: yet let them have a place in his heart;
and then let him keep his station, and let his brethren alone in theirs.
Hitherto I have told you may manner in reading large volumnes, Efix upon the
Beginning and the End, speeding cursorily through the rest, dipping here and
there: which is as much as is suitable with my time and disposition, and may
suffice, whereby to give judgment; for he that reads but a part, may judge of
the whole, I mean the whole frame of the Book, and carriage of the business.
I shall not meddle with the doctrines there, not with the Aenigma's, and hard
questions; They are not to my purpose; besides, The cause of Truth shall not
suffer in the weakness of my patronage. I shall undertake him there, where
Truth shall master us both; and blame him for that, he will say himself is
blameworthy. Notwithstanding I shall lightly pass over personal matters, but
so, as they will, whether I will or no, stick upon him, who has so urged them
against his brethren; and so extremely marked what might be done amiss; yet I
shall remit him to the sentence of Scripture concerning these matters also,
there to stand or fall to his own Master: I dare not judge his intentions
neither, It is clear against Master Perkins golden rule so to do; We must
deal Upon the Gal. 5.
as tenderly there, as with the apple of the eye; A rule quite broken to pieces
now adays. Truly if I might judge, I should judge his intentions to be good
Ampliandi sunt savores.
. Nor shall I judge his Affections, they might be boyled-up to a degree of
heat, we call zeal; And then for that, we call passion, the fire of that
zeal; The Lord is judge betwixt him and his Brethren. I shall only touch upon
the frame and structure of his Book for the present; And this only I shall
say, It renders him a good Scholar, but of too quick Invention; he had his
places and helps in a readiness, and has found-out all, that needed be
found-out, and an hundred things more. And sure he was at cost for it; (...)
has made it his work these seven years, and more, by prying into a way he
meant not to walke-in; and into bosoms of Pastors and Teachers, and Disciples
too (most ungratious toward their gracious Teachers here and beyond seas) with
whom he meant not to Secreta domus and deinde timeri.
agree: but to serve his turn there to know the ways of the household; and
knowing so much, he thought he might befeared, There is his Invention; he has
wandered through those places, and found such helps, which are not to be found
but in his own Topics and Rhetoricks. And having gathered his Simples, he is
as happy for Composition. He is most blameworthy for his Elocution, and Action
there; for what was told him in darkness, that spoke he in light; And what he
should have heard in the ear first, (that is) privately, he published, as upon
the house-tops. But what speaks he out so loud, that all both near and
further off must hear it, as they must a great Bell long a Raising, but being
up, City and Country rings of it; what says he with so clear a voice? No more
but what we might know before, and the Apologists may confess, That they are
men; and, though walking in a Church Way (which should be every man's walk) may
yet sometime walk as men, subject to the like-passions, as the
Anti-Apologistand we simple ones are subject to: Alas! Men are men, Angels
indeed they are by office, not by nature; That old leavened thing will put
forth it self in the best; and surely they are best, who are most sensible
thereof. And for their writings, Hominem olent, as one said, surely their very
treasure may smell of the vessel, an earthen vessel, Levit 6. 28. Answ.
and that could not be cleansed with water; which teaches us a great lesson,
how to think and how to speak of men, the very best of them, and of their
works? that which is best, or nothing at all. I may contribute more to this
anon.

This shall follow now, which is so clear in the Book we have in hand, that
the R. Author has picked-up all the scatterings of Gods servants, made them
his gatherings; What the servants of the Lord abominate, (sure) and cast-out
for refuse, this he has taken into his Book and makes account of it, as of a
treasure; He has adorned his book, he thinks, with the blotts and blurres,
such as may be found in the best man's life: Alas! If a man should set himself,
as he has done, to spie-out (not as King Josiah did, which is every man's duty,
what idols of jealousy are set-up in the heart, and in the Land) but what are,
or were the carriages of the Mosesses there; he might observe miscarriages even
in them, though the meekest men upon earth. So in S. Peter too, after that he
had made that great profession of that commanding affection, Love to his LORD
Joh. 21.
, and appealed to his Lords knowledge therein; yet after all this, behold a
great miscarriage Gal. 2.
. yea, and in S. Paul also. What ever that thorn in his flesh was (there are
too many guessings at it, but) what ever it was, there it had not been, nor
had that messenger so buffeted him, if he had not 2 Cor. 12.
been raised a little too high in his own thoughts; And so much, and more, he
says of himself, but no man else besides himself. Surely there is the same
boundary for our words and actions (which give a mould to our thoughts, and
makes them legible) the same boundary I say, which is set to our thinckings;
Whatsoever things are true; Phil. 4 8.
and so forth) till we come to that, which should bound our thoughts, even
touching our brother) think of these things; What things? whatsoeverthings are
honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report; If there be any virtue, any praise,
think on these things, let these bound your own thoughts, yea and your thoughts
also touching your brother; It is not so clear in the text, but it is
according to the practice of all the godly, that ever have been or are in the
world. When for just reasons they were to speak of themselves, then they spoke
the very worst they could, rather the most they could, to throw down
themselves and exalt God: Matthew the publican, Paul the persecutour, said they
of themselves; but none other besides themselves. And as their words were, such
and so suitable were their thoughts. But when these are to speak of their
brethren, then you may read their thoughts in their words; Whatsoever things
are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report: If there be any virtue,
any praise, they think, and they speak of those things. Jobs, and Jeremiahs
impatience, not a syllable touching that matter; you shall hear of the
patience of Job. Whatsoever things are lovely, of good report, if there be any
virtue, if any praise, this you shall hear from the tongues, and pens of good
men, for they think on these things. And indeed it is according to a notable
rule in Heraldry, I can but point to it ^^^n Guil. Herald, page ^63. See
Childs Portion, p. 94.
; But it is the more notable, because it is according to the rule in the word;
the mind of God, and of all His people. I humbly conceive now, (let my betters
give their judgment) This Rev. brother has gone clean thwart to this rule:
for, whatever things are, (I will not say, untrue,) dishonest, unjust, unpure,
unlovely, of bad report; If any error, (...) swerving from the rule, if any
dishonor, he thought of these things, and has spoken to all the world, that
will hear them. A great transgression sure! what? have his brethren delivered
no truths? nothing honest, nothing just, nothing pure, nothing lovely, nothing
of good report? what? not any virtue in them? not any thing praiseworthy?
surely if there be, (but no man makes it a question) he should have thought on
these things.

A. So he does; he exalts them very high, and praises them in fine strains
of Rhetoric.


B. He does indeed, he lifts them-up high, that he may throw them down with
a witness; he praises their learning, and I know not what; But Sir, there is
an art of praising, so to praise men, that thereby a man may sharpen a
reproach, make it enter, and stick the faster. Such an art there is.


A. The same may be said of you, that you have the same art, to commend a man
for his gifts, but with such an exception, as shall disgrace him the more.


B. What I have said, I have said heartily; his gifts are of precious account
with me; that they may be of the same use to the Church of God, I shall tell
him how just my exceptions are in his commendations. I remember Cicero, writing
to his brother Qui^tus, wishes Ep. (...). Cap. (...) Te non p^ (quantum in me
est) cum exceptione (...) etc.
that he could hear him commended without an exception. It is my desire also;
but so, says he, I cannot hear; All say of you, that you are a good man; but
all say you are an angry man: so much I must say; The Anti-Apolog: a good man
no doubt, but a man of no good spirit sure; a great deal too hasty, and too
easily stirred, This shall be concluded from the premises, as the result of
all, that went before; That he has not shown forth GODS Spirit, but his own
spirit in his Book. That is the point and thus I clear it; He did omit a
Christian duty toward his brethren, before he put forth his Book; He should
have spoken with them before; first more privately, then more publicly, and
have kept-in his Book longer. I take it from Gods word, the Rule of charity
also, so he stood bound to do; to convent his brethren in a private way first,
before he set them upon the stage before all the world.


A. No, That rule is to be understood of private offenses; Had the Apologists
offended Mr Edwards, only, he had dealt with them according to his
Scripture-Rule: But they had given offense to the whole Church of God.


B. How will that appear* for the question must be understood here of their
personal failings, in their converse, and walking amongst themselves, or
before others: And touching these matters so nearly concerning the good of
souls, and the bands of brotherhood, He should not have taken-up matters upon
trust from hearsay that common liar; but in imitation of the Lord his Master,
have seen first (...) etc. Chrysostom in Genesis c. 18.
and well understood, by private communication with his brethren, whether
things were so or not, according to the cry that came to his ears: surely he
should have convented his brethren first, and shown them their personal
failings, whether so or not, or such as they were reported to be? whether they
would own them, and appear in justification of them; and then, when it was
made apparent, that his brethren did not walk uprightly according to the Truth
of the Gospel, then he might also have appeared against them as he has done,
and done all according to rule; whereas now, omitting this Christian duty, of
conferring with his brethren first, he has transgressed his rule, and has
done all he has done, neither decently, nor in order.


A. His brethren had the very same obligation upon them, to have dealth with Mr
Edw: first, and with the Assembly of Divines, before they put forth their Apol:
Nar.


B. I take it, under correction, No: no reason imaginable, why they should
apply themselves to M. Edw: They took the way was prescribed unto them by the
Assembly of Divines; they applied themselves to the learned and judicious
Licencer of Books, M. Herle, who, they knew, had appeared for the other way of
Church Government, but in a most orderly way, that Truths might be beaten-out
and cleared; and the bands of the brotherhood kept entire and sacred; To him
they applied themselves, for his judgment upon their Apology, first before
they put it forth, which, what it was, appears now as visible as the Apology
does; and is a real and full justification of the Apologists proceeding
touching that matter, That they did as much as the Assembly of Divines could
expect they should do.

Secondly, I humbly conceive, that they stood bound to give satisfaction by way
of Apology to all, especially to such simple ones, as my self, all over the
Land; we judged nothing before the time, but indeed we were offended to see so
many pillars shrink away from our house ready to fall upon our heads. Indeed we
did expect, and, (...) in manners we could have so done, we would have required
an Apology, for their so departing from us in such perilous times. But we had
it without asking we thank them, the fullest and clearest that ever was
penned, I think; as for other matters of an higher debate, M. Edw: might have
left them with his betters, to whose consideration and judgment, they were
modestly transmitted.

Hitherto I have set down, as I have conceived, M. Ed. his faults of omission.
His faults of Commission are greater; he is sharp, harsh and bitter toward
them, who were sweet, gentle and meek toward all, as Ambassadors for peace,
and lovers of Truth ought to be. But suppose there had been some harshnesse or
tartness in the Ap. Narr. and that it had some special reference to M. E.
himself; suppose so; yet he, having done as he has done, has transgressed
the Rule, and gone contrary to the examples of all good men, not transported
with passions (as he was) in dealing with their brethren. The Rule was set
down before, and will be repeated afterward: I Will show here, what others have
done, whose example is very imitable. Erasmus had written a book to serve as a
Buckler, whereby to safeguard the Truth, for it was called Erasmic. (...).
Melanct: (Erasmus his good friend) turns over the book, and says of it; That
it was not Est is liber plane aspis.
Clypeus, a buckler, as the word imports also, but a very Aspe, a stinging
Book. I conceive, Mel. meaning to be so by that which follows; I cannot tell,
says he, what Luther will say to this Book; something sure he will reply; and
if so, I shall entreat the man by all Scripture Obligations, That, what he
says may be with brevity, Per omnia sacra breviter, simpliciter, and sine
convitiis disputet.
in simplicity of heart; and without passion; no bitterness there, none at
all. That was Mel. advise, and that was his own practice, as we shall hear
anon. I will record M. Calvin's practice next; Luther was a man of an excellent
spirit, The Lord had heated it for those cold times. But many times there were
the workings of his own spirit; these wrought, and put forth sometimes; and
once he was a little more eager then was comely against Calvin. Well, says
Calv. Ep.
Calvin, Luther may say what he pleases of me, he may call me dog, if he
please; but I must call him as I have ever accounted of him, a precious and
excellent servant of the Lord, so Calvin. M. Ainsworth, though dead yet
speaks for our instruction, He was a man of a clear judgment in the
fundamental Truths of God; differed only from his Brethren in some
circumstantials, which were controverted mostly between him and M. P. his
neighbor: and very calmely still by M. Ainsworth, That no difference might
appear in affections; and so being able to master his passion, he was still
master of the Dispute. M. P. falls upon M. Ains. in another business; faulteth
his translation of Moses 5. books, That sometimes he uses the Hebrew word in
the line, sometimes that in the Margin: And this he so forces against M.
Ainsw. that it did appear plainly, that the greatest differences between them
were caused by the contrariety of M. P. affections toward M. Ainsw. M. Ainsw.
thought himself engaged to make Reply to M. P. which he has done, and left out
all personal matters, as if he had not been concerned therein not at all, (for
the Glory of God was not) and falls upon the point, pays that, and cleares his
translation before the eyes of all the learned in the world. A good example to
teach us how to manage a dispute. M. Dury shall be the last, an excellent Man,
and as good a pattern to write by: for he follows Truth and Peace decently
and in Order; and shows us all the way, how we must pursue after it also, if
we mean to overtake it: how? so, as we should rather break all our bones, then
the peace of the Church. This man has had the fight of the Apol. Nar. has
thoroughly perused it, does appear now in print, That his judgment cannot
fully close with it; lays down his grounds of dissenting, tells us his
well digested thoughts about it, communicates his light to his brethren, by
which he walks; Entreats his brethren to show him their light; Parswadeth
all to come-up close to the light of Heaven: So he maintains the
brotherhood, and makes their bands stronger. That is his aim and the bent of
his soul all along. And how well becoming a Son of Peace, all this! I could
never, says one, divide my self from any upon the difference of an opinion;
or be angry with his judgment for not agreeing with mine in that, from which,
perhaps, within few days, I should dissent my self. This thrust in it self,
while my thoughts were upon M. Dury, and the way he has and does take to
compose the fewdes and angry dissentions betwixt brethren; by showing forth
this sweetness of spirit, as one that would give all men to know, That a good
cause needs not to be patronized by a passion: but can sustain it self best
of all upon a temperate dispute.


A. M. Ed. speaks only Argumentative by way of dispute only; and that he
might cry victoria, he made the Arguments the sharper.


B. Very well; but he should remember Melanct. rule. We must every one dispute
so, That Truth may have the victory and charity the triumph. Though I am at a
loss in my dispute, said he, I would not loose my patience and fall-out with
my friends: for then the Adversary will be a gainer, and the Cause will be at a
loss. A sweet speech, if it could sink down into our hearts, it would
perfume our spirits, our tongues and pens also, which have not been dipped
only, but steeped in vinegar and gall: It would teach us, to Reason Desputare
no^ rahire, Eras. Ep. Latrant non ^oquuntur. Cic. Brut. p. 161. in fol. S^ridet
non loquitur Call. ep. 339. O^ estor causapugnet, non contumel^i^, Debem^^ enim
charitati, etc. Ep.
out our case like sober men: not rave like mad men. I Will proceed a little
further that I may propose Phi. Melanct. (with whom, as with Luther, the
Anti-Apol. is so well acquainted) for his and our Imitation. I pray you
heartily, says he, Let Truth contend in its own strength, and with its own
weapons; not with yours, they are commonly* contumelies, and nothing else. We
are all debtors to charity, which, I pray from my heart, may be kept
inviolate; and untouched, Amen. Yet this I Will contribute more, That Man is not
fit to be a Champion for Truth, who cannot Answer some Adversaries with
silence, and master sturdy and boisterous Arguments upon his knees. This was
Mel. manner; his Adversaries, rather Truths Adversaries, infested him, like
Waspes, he overcame them with patience, saying nothing See Child's Portion, p.
84.
sometimes, and when he replied, it was with such softness, that his words
fell like snow; with such meekness and modeation, as if his words had been
dipped in honey. It may be replied here.


A. What will you infer from all this? No more, but what will be granted,
That the Anti-Apol. has not done all things decently and in order; not keeping
so close to his Rule, nor following the example of his betters. Men are men:
every man has not the same spirit; nor one of an hundred such a sweet spirit
as Phi. Melanct. had. The Anti-Apol. has done very well in the judgment of the
best learned, and best men in all our City; for so I hear.


B. Very ill sure. And that I may clear it to every man's understanding, I Will
make a supposition, and upon that a question, then you The Supposition.
shall be able to give judgment on M. Edwards book: Suppose, That my self or
some other man, having the same spirit M. Ed. has (else he could not do it)
should write against five of his brethren more or fewer, who are for the
Presbyterian way of Government (I confess I do most unwillingly make mention
of Presbyterian and Independent, I am persuaded all the good and choice men are
for the old-way, Odi^sta dissidiorun nomina. Lu^^.
the way of CHRIST and his Apostles: for that way they are in the desire and
travel of their souls: But I must speak with the vulgar, and to their
understanding) suppose, I say, That I could pick out, five Ministers, accounted
Brethren now, and are, I suppose, heartily now for the Presbyterian way of
Government, and should bend my pen against them; I would not use the places M.
Ed found in his Topics; nor take the helps he met with in his Rhetoricks: (i.
e.) I would not help my self with private Letters; I would neither quote them,
nor Hearsay, not I; nor would I use Satyrs and Invectives, though such
Rhetoric finds the vulgar-eare more open then Logic (reason) does: I would
use none of all this; I would deal more heartily then so, and more becoming a
Christian, and a brother; Thus I would doc; make a Narration only and declare
things which I saw and heard, and not another for me: There I saw them bow at
the Name of Jesus: There cringe a little before wood and stone; and there I
heard them say one piece or cantle of their Service too; I heard them read that
(thrice accursed) Declaration against Gods holy day also, that I did: I did see
them give forth their Righthand of fellowship for the establishing of evil,
and overthrow of good. I saw them contribute their purses, (and then they would
their blood too; for money comes from us, like drops of blood) To strengthen
the hand of violence against the throats of their dearest Brethren, the Scots.
Understand me, good Reader; I would rather my fingers should rot from my hand;
my hand from my Arm; my Arm from my shoulder, than that I should employ my
hand in such a work. I would only give thee to know, how fruitful the Greeks
and Latins all conclude, That no Theme or subject is more fruitful, for it
has all the matter to work-on that our nature can give forth. every ordinary
man can show cloquence here; but the heathen man calls it a fierce kind of
Eloquence, Truci eloquentia Balbus promptus adversus innocents. Tacit. An. li.
6.
Theme or subject matter is, and how a man's own spirit could enlarge and
dilate upon it, very readily. But, to my Question now; how would thou
esteem such a book, so fraught and stuffed -- as aforesaid (for indeed my
stomach rises at the very thought of it) with the failings and fallings, and
now the repentings of Gods servants (I hope) how would thou esteem such a
thing, such a work, for I cannot call it a book; how would thou account of
it? or of my self for making such a foul piece of work? I Will answer for thee
and against my self first, doubtless if thou might have thy will, thou
would have me marked with D upon my forehead, that is Devil; for though I
would urge nothing against my brethren, upon report of Hearesay, or from
Letters, those silent interpreters between man and man: yet I might accuse my
brethren of those things they have repented of, and God, for ought I know, has
pardoned; and then thou would call me a Devil, an Accuser of my brethren.
And thou would wish my mouth stopped, and never license given to my Pen any
more. So thou would have me dealt withal. 2. And for the book which I could
make, it would be sure an abomination in the eyes, ears, hearts of all the best
learned all over the land: And to thy self also a very loathing, like thy
vomit, or some such loathsome thing. Why then thou can make judgment of the
Anti-Apol. that is such an abomination, and worse, for worse can be, and is M.
Ed. his book, which now I had done withal, but that I hope to get honey out
of it, a great deal of use before I make an end. And first, I should show the
mischiefs; this contrariety to the rule, contradiction in words, strangeness
in judgments, alienation in affections, have caused to the Church of God. But
all this shall be shown in a Parable, with which I shall close-up my Answer.

Now, Sir, you can, by this time, tell your self, why the most cryup M. Edw:
book? 1. Because the most are best pleased to see brethren stand at a distance,
or at a bay: or coming near hand, to strive and fight each with other. 2.
Because the most love the broad-way, and would walk in it; and are full of hope
now, that this contention about the way shall enlarge their way, and make it
yet broader; but they will be deceived; for whether this or that way, it is the
way of CHRIST, that is contended for (by our choice men) past all question. 3.
The most do shut their eyes against the light, and hate the truth of God. Vox
populi non est vox Dei. If the most say it, and it be touching the great things
of God, I shall doubt, nay I shall make no question of it, That GOD says it
not. If my writings any of them, said Melancthon, (and they were all for God
and His truths) were pleasing to the most, that should displease me most of
all: so as I should tear them, or throw them into the fire. I know how the
most relish the things of God well enough, and with what eyes they see: The
most have the least diseerning into the things of God, God knows.


A. Why but all the learned, and good men too cry up his book.


B. For what? surely not for his Invention, neither his Topics there, nor his
Rhetoricks; his Compasition indeed is pretty good; his Elocution, or that the
Orator calls Action (the All of an Orator) that is all stark naught, in the
judgment of all the Learned sure. But let the Author have all his dues, and
let his Book be called a Book, because the most say (but they know not what
they say) that it is a good one. For any further respect unto it, then to call
it a Book, (having seriously considered the general frame, scope and tendency
of the said Book) I know not how to give it; nay I verily believe, that every
good man will mourn over it upon these following considerations.

1. Because this Book is to the heart; it comfort those, that should not be
comforted, the Devil and all his servants. ( Let not the Reader be offended at
this expression, it is very possible for a good man to doc and speak that,
which may comfort (as he and they can be comforted, the Devil and all his
servants.) Oh how glad the Devil is at the sight of such a Book as this,
which flies at the face of those, he pursues with deadly hatred! He is called
Satan an Adversary; A Devil too, an accuser of the brethren; If any man now
will take the Devil his office, accuse the brethren, divulge their faults, oh
how the Devil rejoices at this, how glad his servants are! Be the accusation
true, or be it false, that matters not, the brethren are accused, the Devil
and his servants laugh. An Isralite strives with an Isralite; oh how pleasant a
sight is this! It will pluck back and hinder the Great-worke in hand as once it
did, thinks the Devil, then he laughes, and huggs this hope; and are not all
his servants as merry? surely the Devil and his servants are dancing now (for
joy) now he sees those struck at, whom he hates heartily; and those doctrines
opposed, which are the very destruction of his kingdom. Surely no good man
will help to make the Devil music; then, sure enough, he will not make such a
book, as this, for this is music for the Devil. You tell me you mourn over
it; I believe you, and that every good man mourns with you; but he that has
given the offense, much more must he m^urne: God will make him else: Howbeit,
because by this deed thou have given great accasion to the enemies of the LORD
to blaspheme (...) Sam. 12. 14.
; You know what follows, it is pat to our purpose and you can make good use
of it, and enlarge your self upon it sweetly. You can put-in a caveat also for
your friends, never to let any words pass from the tongue, or scribble from
the hand, which may comfort the Devils heart, or the heart of his servants. I
will contribute this hither now it is in my mind; I went two years since to a
neighbour-Church, where I heard the S. Scripture was expounded, (then it is
read indeed, when the sensa is given) the exposition being almost ended, there
came a note to the good Minister M. Cook, that one (whom I need not name)
would, with his leave, fill his Pulpit that morning; he had good leave; upto
the Pulpit he went, took his Text, stayed by it a while, and allthat while
spoke very well to the purpose; Then he fell upon his Service book to justify
the forms there; and then after his manner. I mention this for this reason,
which is to my purpose: When I went down the middle part of the Church, I
observed some adversaries there to the power, but close friends to forms of
godliness; And to tell you the truth, I listened as I went by them, to hear
what they said; and truly what they said was with full expressions touching the
last part of his Sermon, which was quite parted from his text, Heterogenius,
clean of another nature: but because it was connarurall, and complying with
their sense, oh how it pleased! I concluded at that time, What is pleasing to
corrupt nature, cannot be pleasing to God. You must conceive the rest, and so
fill up the first consideration, why the godly cannot approve of that book.
Approve! God forbid; They must approve things that are excellent, these things
will Phil. 1. 10.
be judged to be reprobate, upon a second consideration.

2. Because this book, and the like to this, saddeth the hearts of those, that
should not be sadded. O quam ^ucundum? how pleasant, how aimeable a sight is it
to observe brethren live like brethren, in unity. Ecce quam mutuo se diligunt,
said Tertullian touching Christians of old; See how they love one the other,
what sweet agreement, complying, bearing and forbearing each of other! O this
is to the heart of the Righteous: But the contrary, as at this day, saddeth
their hearts; see how they biteand devour each other! this saddeth the
righteous who should not be sadded. No good man is glad at this. And now you
have the reason also why the fewest cry it down; the fewest men are the best
men in the world, for they walk in the narrowest path; and what the fewest cry
down you will not cry up. And yet you will cry; I understand the reason very
well, because you follow Truth and peace: they that so do, must give clear
evidence, that so they do, by mourning over all that, which runs not bias
only, but cross and thwart to Truth and Peace, as stand the two Poles North
and South.

Well (Sir) for so it is, or God will make it so; You are not discouraged
(...). Hom. God lifts His enemiesup, that He might cast them down the lower:
He casts down His friends, that He might raise them up the higher.
at all this; nor can you faint in your mind. You know whom you have trusted,
Him, that never failed His people hitherto, and never will; Him, Who brought
light out of darkness at the first, does so still. Life out of death, does so
still. Glory from the Cross, does so still. Has wrought the greatest things
by the smallest instruments, nay by cross instruments, does the like still;
Did so at York, did He not? He raised His friends there, begirting the City;
throws down their spirits, their strongholds too, and confidences also,
gives all these into His adversaries hands; their hopes thither and their
hearts desire, and the prey into their chaps; nay they had swallowed it down:
Then the Lord arose, it was his time, snatcheth the prey out of the enemies
teeth, makes him vomit-up all his hopes, throws him on his face, there
leaves him to wallow in his own blood; And away his servants march, but the
most cross way that ever was heard of, For God makes His servants win a City
by loosing it; They are come to it again, and have taken it, but they counted
it lost first. Certainly (Sir) we have not read a stranger matter in our
Chronicles. But we shall read the like in Irelands Chronicle shortly, for we
hear of it already; I give but a hint and away, I go onward; And I pray you
let us entreat our friends to follow-on, and seek the LORD; to set their hopes
on Him; For He is the same still, He changes not; As He has wrought, He works
still, we see, for he makes cross wills, cross lines, and cross ways, serve
His will, and come direct to His line, and way in a most clear and direct
tendency to the Butt and White of his glorious -- I cannot tell what to call
it, but that it is, what was before time was. Oh Lord! who would not trust Thee
with all their cross wills and cross hearts, that are in our world, a world of
them! These are in God His hands, where can they be better? Cross and crooked
they are, God will turn them right and strait, thence to draw forth (1.) His
Glory, whether they will or no. (2.) Yea, and his servants Glory also, (3) And
the Glory of their Church Way, the way of Christ, His Apostles, and Disciples.
I pray you let us look over this again, weigh and ponder all this with all
our hearts, and all our souls. 1. Cross wills, and lines, and ways must
advance God His Glory; Past all question it is so. In all wherein the enemy
does proudly, God is above him Exodus 18. 12.
. The floods have lifted up their waves, and so forth (that is) The enemy
threatens every hour to swallow-up the Righteous. But the LORD on high is
mightier than many waters, then the mighty waves of the Sea Psalm. 93.
(mighty Adversaries are meant here) And what of them? These only dash against
Jacobs Rock, and break themselves, and exalt the Name of Jah, Jacobs God; but
they must serve His Providence first, for these mighty floods must serve to
bring in floods of Honey and Butter (i. e.) the strongest Consolations to His
Church. But I pass over this, how the Lord does serve Himself, and His people
by the men of violence, as not so pat Psalm. 140. (...)
to our purpose now, I take it this is, for we are upon cross ways, and
crosse-lines, and these drawn by the prosessed sons of the Church. Erasmus has
a pretty expression, Many, that go for the best Catholics (Romes sheep) are
but Cacolyck^s, the worst wolves: And Multes habet pro Catholic^s Cacolycos;
pro Evangelicis Disa^gclos. Era^. Ep. Dominus omnes ref^^get in sua^ gloriam.
V^t Christ us arcano suo consilio scenas rerum bumanarun, and li. 25. ^p. 20.
those, that go for Evangelists, good Messengers, are but Dysangelists, bad
and harsh to Gods best Servants, God knows. But says Erasmus, Let GOD alone
with them; He will ^ould and frame their wolvishnesse, and rage, and their --
All to his Glory. The Lord Christ raighneth, and turns about all things by
secret ways and counsels, so orders and disposes all the Scenes and Acts of
humane things; Let the Lord alone with these evil servants; They shall doc
their Masters good will while they do their own naughty wills, and so work-out
their Lords Glory. That is the first point, the LORDS Glory; His servants Glory
also, that is the second.

2. These cross spirits, lines, and wills, the Lord will use them all as
instruments to magnify His servants. How? By afflicting them. A strange way of
magnifying! Yes, it is Gods way: The direct way he took with Job; He suffers
the Devil and his servants to lay load upon Job, to press him down even to
the Dunghill. I know it was very far from Jobs thought then, when sore
afflictions were upon him, That God so visiting him, did then so magnify him:
yet so it was; nor had he had the honor to be so magnified in the world (as a
grave Divine said lately) now as he is, had he not been magnified by
afflictions, upon everlasting record in Gods word, a man of sorrows there; This
was the way the Lord took to magnify his servant Job. The same He takes to
magnify all his Servants, by affliction, sometimes from the hand of violences,
sometimes from the smitings of the Tongue. Indeed the best servants of the Lord
have need of rough means, a Thorn in the flesh to pluck them down; To let
out their (...).
nature, the pride thereof (which is all one:) And to lay them low, so to exalt
and magnify them; Its Gods way so to work by pricking Thorns and grieving
Briars. What a good God do His people serve, Not the Olive only and the Vine,
those fruitful Trees bear fruits and sweetness unto them; But the Bramble
also, the briar and the thorn, all good to them; these yield sweets unto them.
In very truth, These can gather grapes of thorns and figs of thistles. By
these low and base things, God does magnify His People even by their
Adversaries, that is the second point; The third is.

3. Cross wills, and lines, and ways must advance and illustrate the Glory of
the Church Way, the way of Christ and His Ser^: All the forementioned, cross
men, their wills, lines and ways stand-in Gods light a little, and obscures His
way (I will not call it man's way) but He will remove them with a witness; and
then, His light, and the Glory of His way shall shine-out the clearer, and more
Glorious, the more it was obscured and eclipsed by the interposition of the
earth, the sons there, forementioned. We would all be reformers of the Church
(an easy work that, we think, though we never think of reforming our
selves;) and we would all reform in our own way: As we simple ones have a
strong fancy, we can save the Church: so are we as strongly conceited, That we
can Reform the Church too, taking our own way touching that matter: Now
blessed be God, He will not let us be our own saviors, for we would destroy
our selves; nor our own Reformers, for then in stead of a Reformation, we
should make as horrid a deformation as ever the Archbishops, and Bishops made.
Say again. O blessed be His Name! As He will save us by himself: so will He
Reform us by Himself, and in His own way, that He will. He will use His
servants, choice instruments in his hand, and make them glorious there: They
fear Him, they shall know his secret Psalm. ^5.
. They will do His will, They shall know of His doctrine John 7. 17.
. They ask the way at his mouth; He will show them the way, and His people
shall walk in it. And for them, that stand cross to this way, and walk
perversely, even they shall help to give glory and lust^e to this way; that is
the point. Indeed, I could enlarge upon it; I Will give the sum of it in brief:
Now we have divided tongues, and cloven hearts, and our language is confounded,
for the same reason, as once it was, for we have abused the unity of one voice
(...), etc. Chrysostom.
: But God will use all this to bring His people to a unity again, of one love,
one faith, one way, one heart, one judgment; and then, they will be all of one
lip, Amen. Let God alone; He will work-out His glorious will by these cross
wills. God will make a method of all these cross ways; By all these crossings
and thwartings this way, and that way: The old way, the way of Christ, and his
Apostles shall be beaten-out, and cleared to the eyes, and ears, and hearts of
all his people. Amen.

And now having taken some honey out of the strong: I proceed, and according to
my proposed Method, I come to the Resolves, and first touching the Author.


A. It is resolved, that the Independents, as we call them, never met with such
an Antagonist before.


B. Well, be it so, though it be but a conceit, and their Resolve, who,
perhaps, are resolved too, That the highest star is not greater then the
Moon; nay, does not exceed in quantity, or quality, their great candle on
their table. Let him alone in his conceit, if it be his, and his friends in
theirs. The servants of the Lord will follow peace with all men, but not seek
peace with him, because he is Angry Ab iratis (...) perspicue pax petitur
augetur ^odium. C^^. de Juvent.
: yet will they not count him an Adversary, but call him a brother, and they
will thank God for him: for God will work out His Glory by him, and their
Glory also, as was said before. A man that would understand all his faults must
have a true friend, or a true enemy, one or both; It was the saying of the
Ancients. These Servants thank their Lord, they have both, True friends and
true enemies; But against all expectation, the enemy does the most good; he
puts most honor upon them, he helps to magnify them; We, their friends,
magnify them too, but in a wrong way; We may magnify them so that they may
magnify themselves more then their office* The enemy magnifies them so, That,
God may magnify them also, and they their office: A wide difference, but this
also was hinted before.

Secondly, It is resolved touching the Book that it cannot be answered; that
none can answer it but the Apologists, one or more, that is strongly conceited:
but they will not; first out of policy.


A. There are faults amongst them, personal faults, not a few; The Book
declares some, the Rejoinder more, and the menaced Letters will show forth all,
and more. There are also faults in their way of Government all along, and
strange slips in their Apol. Nar. For which, if they be wise, they will make no
Apology.


B. I know they are wise, what they will do, I know not so certainly. I do
know their power more then sufficient for that work, I know also what
expectation there is to gain their wills to make Replication; And I know how
often their Adversary (Brother I would rather say) calls them unto it, who
has Reply, Reply as often repeated as Homer has (...). They will reply never
the sooner for that, but for the zeal of their God, Glory of His Name, Honor
of their profession, they will make answer I think; And truly I thought I had
the very Idea of the Answer in my head, but let it vanish like a fancy; how can
my shallowness* comprehend what Answer such men will make? ^e do^ what I am
able to do. Weaken the Reasons, or show them to be no reasons against the
Reply, but all for it; And first in general, I say that Politic reasons are
of no account with them, who are all they are for God, and all to advance His
Glory. In this case, they cannot consult with flesh and blood. The glory of
God, and honor of their profession requires the casting away all politic
respects, when the glory of God comes to be respected; serious thoughts thereof
unties the ligaments of this selvish-frame, takes a man to pieces; dilates him
out of himself, and, by decrees, resolves him into Heaven; he has no
politics now but what become a Citizen of Heaven.


A. But the best way is to let things alone as they are that they spread no
farther.


B. Spread farther: Their Brother has spread the nakedness of his brethren so
far, that charities mantle, though stretched forth as it should be, like the
Heaven (...). Chrysostom, (...) Act. Ap. cap. 21. Hom. (...). co.
, is scarce able to cover it. But as they cannot doubt, so they cannot fear
the spreading of it.


A. The Apolog. began the quarrel, now let them sit down quietly and take
what comes of it.


B. The beginning of strife is like the opening of waters. But who began? he on
whose sid^ are hard words, angers first weapons Salv. Funestam Religionis
discordiam alibi prive cepisse hic prive desiisse. ^rat. Epolon.
; him who smites with the tongue. I will not crave judgment in so clear a
case. I Will wish, though it be too late, as I have heard some did lately; That
the said discord about Religion and that way of worship had begun in some other
Country before, and ended here first. So in the general; Now to the particular
Reasons; their personal faults first.


A. They have many;


B. Yes, who has not? And where is the man that has the fewest? But who has
told me and you of their faults? Hearsay; and he has told a great many lies:
Then let me advise thee as I would my own soul; Take up nothing upon his
trust, especially against a brother.


A. Their own Letters are on the file against them.


B. Not their own Letters sure; I am persuaded not one of the five ever
vouchsafed a Letter to him. But if so, I know what I could say; And indeed I
can hardly spare him there, for he has not spared the dead, John the beloved
Disciple, now in the bosom of his Master; he has dealt worse with that Saint,
then the Devil would be dealt withal, why have thou disquieted me to bring me
up Sam. ^8. 15. He that has read the Book, knows the meaning o^ that.
; If he has any other Letters, they are some disciples Letters, and if they
prove treacherous, none so bad as they; As we dare not believe hearesay; so we
must not believe false Disciples.


A. But they cannot deny their faults, I mean their personal failings in
point of practice.


B. Cannot! This implies no more an impotency or weakness in man, then it does
in God, Who cannot deny himself God be blessed, that His servants cannot do
that, whereby to dishonor God, though they might thereby maintain their own
honor and reputation in the world. I have concluded then; they will not deny
their faults; if the Adversary can make proof of these things, he urge^h
against his brethren (I am persuaded in my soul, he cannot, but if he can)
then they can give glory to God, and confess their sin, and take shame unto
themselves. Si quid indignum Erasmo, as Erasmus said Si in Scripto quidquid
indignum Erasmo ostenderis, ostensum protinus jugulabitar. Sed si quid
haeretic^^ Ep. l. 25.
of himself; I will undertake for them, as he promises for himself, do but
show it them, what they have done unbeseeming their profession, and they will
pierce it through, and their hearts will sorrow for it. But if any heresy
then, show them that, and no sooner shown, but they will serve it, as Moses
did the Egyptian, kill it presently, and take shame to themselves for it,
What? Maintain a sinful practice, while yet they maintain a Church Way, and
haereticall doctrine in that way! God forbid: I demand then, can their
adversary say he would (in a Church Way privately first) have told them of
their faults in practice, but they would not hear of them: And shown them, by
a light from Heaven, their mistakes in point of Church-governement, but they
would not see them? Let this be spoken-out, and let not their faults be spared;
have any faults in their practice been spied out? I am confident they are as
willing to hear it, as their friend has been to proclaim it: and as willing
to cast shame upon themselves, as he has been to cast it upon them: And for
their way of government; They may not walk therein every man with a right
foot; These Churchmen may do some things as men, and unbecomming a
Church Fellowship; But this they can say, that, touching the essentials
constituting a Church (for we do not pry into the scatterings of any one man,
or more, or all there) in these, if they are deceived, the sacred Scripture
has deceived them: so they can say, because in the integrity of their hearts,
they have opened their mouths wide to their God, and reached forth their hands
to him, that he would take them by the hand, lead them in the way, and keep
them to it, up close to the Rule; thus they can say in the integrity of their
souls: And that they have sought knowledge; sought her as silver, and searched
for her as for hidden treasures: And that they have done in their search and
scrutiny, as they that dig for gold, they cast away much earth: so they have,
upon due trial ^^^m. Alex. (...) N^ ho mini est hominem vincere: ^ed bonum est
^^mini ut cum veri^as vincat vole^^em, quid, etc. Aug. (...) ^asc. Ep. 171.
of examination, thrown away what ever, that was, not agreeable to the rule of
the Word, and so they went on their way rejoicing. Now if any man can show them
from the same Word, a more excellent way let it be examined without passion,
and they will embrace it. They do not contend for victory, but for truth; It
is not good for a man to conquer a man: but it is good for a man, that the
Truth may conquer him with his good will, for conquer it will.

Lastly, For the Apol. Nar. as the Apple of contention amongst us. True it is,
that two of our brethren have put it into a strange pickle, and would put the
same take upon every man's palate, that he might relish it as they do. I cannot
well tell how far circumstances, qui^, quid, cui, quando, quare, ubi, may vary
and alter the taste: And yet I will not give away my judgment in my tasting
things of that nature: And must profess still, That, though it be so and so
aspersed, yet it relisheth as sweetly with me, as any humane invention ever did
except our last Covenant. Truly I do think it like Manna in this one thing,
which, some say God fitted to every man's taste, and yet some did strangely
dis^^lish it.


A. Who can relish this I pray you? They call themselves exiles.


B. Call themselves so! They were so indeed and in truth: Reader I cannot say a
little to this, and, indeed, it is not so fully to my scope: yet this i will say:
As sure as by the patience of a good God, I breath in His air: so sure I could
clear this even to M. Edw. himself; that these his brethren justly call
themselves exiles.


A. Voluntary and willing, if not wilful exiles he says.


B. He says what he pleases, and so he has a contradiction in terminis. No
man, that may live in his Country, and enjoy quietly all the sweets there,
with Gospel liberties (take that with you,) will leave his Country willingly
sure. No, these brethren were forced-out: their persons forced, their
consciences forced, etc. but i will say no more.


A. They make an Apol. for themselves, and therein a motion to the High Court:
and is that well relished think you.


B. Yes truly, I think very well relished, That they should take liberty to
make a motion, and speak for themselves: It is no more than what is permitted
to Church-robbers, Traitors, yea and Sorcerers too; All these, says one, are
permitted to make a motion, and Sacrilegis and proditoribus vene ficis. Lact.
Lib. 5. cap. 1.
speak for themselves. Are they so? Then give the same liberty to the
faithful servants of the Lord, to make a motion, that they may be permitted to
serve their God after the way, which I and you, simple ones, may call heresy:
But they are persuaded, that in that very way, they worship the God of their
fathers, believing all things, which were written in the Law and in the
Prophets.


A. If it be so reasonable a motion, why is it not granted?


B. I profess unto you I cannot tell, but I can tell, that you and I must show
more manners, than to ask more questions touching this matter. It is a
reasonable motion, so we are concluded: It is committed to the highest
Judicature in the Kingdom, there we leave it, and so an end.


A. Not yet; you must remember there is one reason more out of their politics,
why they will forbear to make answer; Because it will but widen the
difference, and lay-open their Church Way to more open scandal.


B. I humbly conceive none of all this can be, but the contrary. It will
close-up and heal the difference: And clear their way to all unprejudiced
beholders, or give them clear knowledge that those brethren are (a little) out
of the way: And this answers their supposed politics, why in policy, they
will not make reply.


A. 2. It is resolved by some, They cannot make reply through weakness.


B. But I can never believe that; I hold it as feosible a thing, as any thing
that has been done this many years: and a work also of quick dispatch: for I
suppose, 1. That all personal things shall be cast away; Wherein they have
failed in point of practice they will thank him for telling them, all that;
and be careful with all their care to correct it. Moreover they have a good
God, to go unto, the Father of mercies: And for the people of God, the Church
she is the mother of mercies. I remember Luthers words here, in the very like
ease: I have much ignorance in me, about matters of God, and have carried
things negligently sometime, but my ignorance the Church will bear with, and
my saults she will pardon, for she is the Queen of mercy; Ignorantiam meam,
etc. See Child's Portion p. 38.
and nothing else but, etc. These personal matters therefore touching these
brethren, shall not blot paper, these shall be transacted in the closset,
betwixt God and their souls.

2. What things may be unjustly urged against them, (which sure are very many)
they can hear with silence, and bear with patience, so be, the glory of God
and honor of their profession be not concerned therein.

As surely all this is concerned, when things which the Apo^ knew not are
taken-up upon trust, and urged against them, and yet they should make no reply
whereby to reprove him to his face.

3. And for their reproaches, as Melanct. said in the very same case, Their
Lord Christ will give them strength to bear for him Valeat E^ci^^, and
tradu^at nos, and triumphos agat de parvu^^s; ad id genus calu^arum satis animi
praestabit Christus, etc.
, Who bore away the curse from them; they can suffer for Christ, and go away
rejoicing: More than all this can I bear for Christ, said he, smitten with the
tongue in the same manner: None of all this neither shall blot paper, no, It is
spread, as the Kings Letter before the LORD; He will answer it by Himself.

4. Touching M. Edw. his walkings in and out; his scatterings here and there,
not a word of that; let him and his friends lay open their own nakedness, they
will not: And so now the Answer is in every ma^s judgment, cut short, by
twenty sheets: Now for the work, and body of the Answer, I can say nothing to
that; only I am persuaded in my heart, that the Spirit of the Lord is with
them, the secret of the Lord is revealed unto them, because they ask it, as the
most comprehensive blessing Mat. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13.
: They obey from the heart, and so they fear Him, and do His will: surely
they shall know of the doctrine Joh. 7.
: for they can profess that they hated man's inventions, all along in his
willworship: and that they never leant to their own wisdom; they abominated
that, in their search and enquiry after Truth; they followed the most unerring
pattern, and when any spark of light was communicated to them, they desired
no more but to see the clearenesse of Heaven come along with it, and then they
followed on to seek the Lord: And knowing the terror of the Lord, they would
persuade with us, simple ones, in this, That we would fear to kindle a fire of
our own; to compass our selves with sparks: for this is the judgment of the
Lord in that matter: walk in the light of that fire, and sparks which ye have
kindled. This shall ye have of My hand, ye shall Isa 50. 11.
lie down in sorrow.

Thus, Sir, I have for the satisfaction of the simple Reader (it is great
reason he should be satisfied) removed the politic reasons, which were
resolved upon would withold a Reply to the Anti-Apol. and cleared in passage,
how able workmen we have for the work, how easy the work is, and how quickly
framed and raised upon the Advantage ground of Truth: Whether these servants of
the Lord will apply themselves, or their Answer to M. Ed. that I cannot tell, I
think not. They cannot sure think him worthy of an Answer, who has done so
unworthily. But the people and Church of God, they are worthy. And now, what
will this man do with his Rejoinder and Letters? Rejoyne (...) what will be
Rejoyne to this, Thou shall not raise a false report Exodus 23. 1
? Or to this, Consider of it, take advice, and speak Judge 19. (...)
? Doubtless the man will put his Rejoinder and Letters both to some private
shame or open penance.

Now, Sir, I have done with the Resolves, and will not question how I have
resolved you; but resolved I am not to withdraw my hand here: Let it be my
fault, hardly persuaded to put my pen to paper; as hardly drawn to take it
off: But let it be my excuse to, That I am very desirous upon your intimation,
to give Resolution to those that desire it, touching these grave Questions:

Q. 1. What a Church Way is? Or, What it is to walk in a Church Fellowship?

Q. 2. Who they are, that may, in the judgment of Charity, be thought walkers
in that way?

Q. 3. Who they are, whom we may judge, and without breach of Charity, to be
clean out of the way?

Q. 4. Their Qualifications, what they must be, to whom the Lord will show the
beauty of His way? When this is done, I shall tell you a short Parable, make a
short use of it, for the keeling of our spirits, and uniting of our hands in
mutual fellowship, and our hearts unto God, and then I have done indeed. To
the first (for I hasten) What is a Church Way, or to walk in a
Church Fellowship? that is the question to be resolved; and not whether
Independency or Presbytery be the way of Church Government; nor what the
Ministers must be, or how to be ordained. Ah Lord! I might run my self into a
maze here quickly; nor what Elders, and Deacons; nor how they must be
qualified. None of all this, this is the bare question, Q. 1. What is a Church
way? or, what is it to walk in a Church Fellowship?

A. I humbly conceive it is this, To stand charged to watchover each other in
their way; To give an account of their way; To bear each others burden; To
supply each others wants; To partake of each others graces; To do all things
as becomes a Communion of Saints, always doing or receiving good. This is
the Resolution in short to the first Quaery. The

Q. 2. Whom, may we conceive to be walkers in this way?

A. I humbly conceive, Those, who have most diligently asked after this way,
most frequently, and fervently prayed, Lead us, Lord, and hold us in this way;
And, if Leaders (unto others) then they prayed in prayer for grace to lead unto
Christ, and to command for Him, Who is given a Leader and Commander to His
people; Grace to labor in his Word and Doctrine; accounting those spirits best
(...). ^5. 4.
spent, which are spent in that service; Wisdom to understand this soul-craft,
how to win souls; and to lay out, and stake themselves, all they have and are
to those inestimable commodities; They, who could never comply with cross men,
in as cross a way, no never; rather let Liberty go, sweet Country farewell,
and friends adieu, now we must shake hands, for we cannot reach them forth in
fellowship with abominable men, and to their services. They, who kept their
garments, and their Lords Word even where Satan had his throne: These are
walkers in the way: People also, who are not pretenders to it, but burning and
shining lights in it, examples before others, so to win those, that are
without, unto it. These are walkers in the way; whether Independents or
Presbyterians, we do not regard names, these are walkers, and with a right
foot. And here I cannot exclude any by including these five, I might say
fifteen, the more persecuted with the tongue the more precise walkers in the
way: so I have resolved the second Question. The

Q. 3. Who they are, whom we may judge, without breach of Charity, to be quite
out of the way?

A. It is not my conceit, it is my knowledge: (1.) They are out of the way, who
are not in it, within their own house, I mean, quite out. They that cannot
guide their own house, cannot guide the Church (...) a Church way, that is a
resolved Case 1 Timothy 3. 5.
. (2.) And they, who are opposites to this way; out of the way sure all these:
for they are enemies to the way. (3.) And they, who complying with crosse-men
to Gods way, did those services, served those idols, read those books,
published those decrees, did this; though the greatest abomination; neglected
that, though the great charge of souls; gave forth their hands to that, the
establishing of evil: And to that, the throwing-out of good: All these things,
one whereof, had been enough, but all together has now kindled the fury and
anger of the Lord in our Cities, Jer.
and streets, and they are wasted and desolate as at this day. These mischiefs
these have done to their Country, and land of habitation, by their compliance
with abominable men, in all these or some of these things before mentioned. And
have these men been humbled for all this? This must be more enquired into, what
Ministers have done, who are Commanders and Leaders unto others; have they been
humbled for all this? If they have not, not taken shame to themselves for all
this, Then the word of the Lord speaks to them (cuttingly) sharply, That the
Pattern of His House shall not be Tit. (...). 13. (...).
shown unto them, for so says the Lord. Let the Wise, and the Disputers, and
the Scribe hearken to the good Word of the Lord upon the Resolution of the
fourth question, which is,

Q. 4. What their Qualification; what manner of persons they must be, To whom
the Lord will show His way or Pattern of His House?

A. I humbly conceive, and that it is undeniable, That they must be men, that
fear God above many. There are many secrets in this way of Church Government,
and some Mazes there; This for one, which we call Ordination: A man can never
find his way out of it by the ^lew of his own reason. Other Mazes there are,
and secrets, Aenigma^s and hard Questions: Mysteries also, but this is the
comfort: God will lead by the hand, open his secrets Psalm. 25^
unto all them that fear Him, and from the heart obey (...), as before pointed
at, for He gives His Spirit to all such. 2. They must be humble men, such as
lie low, as the valleys, men ashamed as Ezra and Nehemiah were, astonished
when they confessed over their own sins, and sins of their Fathers. To say
all over again, They must be ashamed of all that they have done; especially in
Gods House, and about His service there. If they have gone beyond Melancthon
his rule, bearing with those Ne deserat^^ Ecclesia propt^^ servitutem, qu^ sine
impietate sustineri possi. lib. 1. ep. 107.
things, which could not be borne without impiety, they must be ashamed of all
that; if they have complied with the Bishops, and their services, first, and
second, They must be ashamed of all that; if they have answered their unlawful
commands, for the establishing of evil, and throwing down of Good, for the
strengthening the hand of the violent men, and weakening of the Godly, yea the
murdering of a Righteous people; if so, they must be ashamed for all this; if
they have ducked and cringed when time was, so serving the time, they must take
shame for all this, and all that they have done against the Laws, and
Ordinances of the House of their God, before that the Lord will show them the
Pattern and Laws of His House. Till this shame be taken by them, as publicly
in Gods House, as they were a shame unto the House, God will not be enquired of
them concerning His way of worship there. Their disputing about a Church way
shall not profit them that live not in an Holy way. They that do my will shall
know my Doctrine Joh. 7. 17.
: They may eagerly pursue that way and ask after it; they shall not find it,
for they are not in a capacity of finding. They may sit long, and do little,
They may ask, knock, seek, and find nothing, but their own findings, never
find the Lord or his way, till they go forth of their own way weeping and
lamenting after the Lord, and over their sins, whereby they have gone astray
from Him, when Israel went astray after their idols: Till Ezekiel. 44.
this they do, nothing they can do for Gods House, in expectation of
acceptance, so the Lord has said, nothing shall be done, till this be done,
till they have taken shame to themselves for all that they have done, or
suffered to be done, when they might have hindered it: And then take shame for
all this before Israel and before the Sun (for so open their revolt and going
astray was.) I know they, who set their hearts to seek a Church Way, who desire
with desire to have shown unto them the whole house of GOD, the fashion
thereof, and the goings-out thereof, and the commings-in thereof, and all the
farms, Ordinances and Laws thereof; They that expect such a Revelation, set
their hearts to what the Lord God has said; He will never show them the
Pattern of His House, who have done against the Ordinances, Laws and Statutes
of His House; yet have not been ashamed. But are they ashamed for all the
dis-services and dishonours they have done to Gods House? Then it follows, Son
of man show the House to the house of Israel. They have cast shame upon their
own faces, for all their So they may find more favor then did the Priests of
old.
abominations there; They shall see with open face the whole House of God open
before them (i. e.) This is the Law of the House, these the goings-out, and
commings-in, and these the Forms, Ordinances, and Laws thereof; all shall be
shown to these humble people; they shall look upon all with open face, whereas
before they had so done, humbling themselves and bearing their iniquity, they
might sit as men hood winkt: The Scripture pressing upon them all this, is as
clear as any in the whole book of God. I leave it in their Ezekiel. 43.
bosoms.

Now they have heard what God has said to them; they may consider what they
have said to us, That we must be humbled for the idolatries and bloodshed in
our first Queen Mary's days. And all the Reason in the sacred word for this,
That we should be called forth to weeping and mourning now: for doubtless the
Lord is visiting now the sins committed an hundred years agon; And yet we
do not answer their call; We do not come-forth with our hands upon our
loins: Why? Surely because we do not see them (our Ministers some of them)
laying one hand upon their mouths, and the other upon their loins, breaking
their own hearts before us, so testifying their exceeding sorrow for all that
they have done in Gods House, To turn us away from the right-serving the Lord
there. We profess in the ears of God, Angels and men, we never accounted a
Table an Altar, nor did we bend there till we saw our Pastor (in name) bow and
cringe there first. Nor did we idolize the sacred Name, till we saw him put off
his cap. Nor could we think it so much as a civil or decent manner, To riot
and dance upon the Lords day, till our Rev. Minister, (so he would be esteemed,
though he did reverence neither God nor man in a true manner) told us, That it
was the day, which the heathen, in honor to their god, dedicated to the Sun,
and therefore we might, by the same reason, sanctify the same day with a
Taber, and a Pipe, or after a more heathenish manner: Ah Lord! surely we could
not have believed this, had not our Minister preached even so unto us, and
showed us Statute Law for it: Ah Lord! should not they be ashamed for their
Doings? so miserably seducing a poor dark people as we are? We humbly
conceive, That, though we are in a great transgression, yet not the first or
the chiefest therein: Therefore we expect that our Ministers, who went away
far from God when Israel went astray, which went astray away from Him after
Ezekiel. 44. 10.
their own gods, should bear their shame first, and their iniquity before all
the people. And, oh that the Masters of our Assemblies, the chief there, would
presse-on this great work of Humiliation, and be Examples unto others in this
matter, as Ezra and Nehemiah are Examples unto them; even these could spy-out
that, whereof they were ashamed; and site ^s^onied before their God. Surely
they that in seeking seek after Gods-way of Government in His Church (for what
has the Church to do with mans-way) these go forth weeping over their own
ways. They that look to be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a
royal Diadem in the hand of their God, these must be an humble people first;
They must lye-^^^ before their God, bearing their shame for all they have done
against Him. The (...), They that are indeed lovers of the Truth, and seekers
after Peace, do know assuredly, That they cannot have what they so dearly love;
nor find what they so earnestly seek, till there be a bitter lamentation taken
up for all that has been done, even by the Children of the Kingdom against
Gods Kingdom, and Royalties thereof, His Truth and Peace. Surely this is the
way; In the fear of God, so to do, then matters would slide on, The secret of
GOD would be with you, Truth would be revealed, Peace would be given, for it is
the Churches portion. Their Lord Christ has bequeathed it to His people.

But how do His people thrust it from them? how do they divide themselves one
from another; and set themselves one against another; and press one upon
another, as if they would devour one another? so doing as much, and working
more effectually their own ruin, then the Adversary does, or can do? Surely
we should be ashamed for all this; And for these divisions, strong prayers
should be put-up, That we may not throw down our selves with our own hands;
Nor thrust that further off, which we seem willing to put forward with all our
hands.

O! if ever, now sure it is a pleasant thing for brethren to dwell together in
unity! Ecce quam se m^ diligunt! never did you see a more pleasant prospect,
then when you see Christians bearing-up themselves like vine branches which
beare-up one another, all cleaving fast to that, which beareth-up them! Now
that the enemy rages, let not friends rage against themselves; The Adversaries
are joynted, shall we be dis-joynted? platted together like thorns they, shall
we touch one another like nettles? The enemy is resolved upon the question with
one consent; Come let us put out the light of Israel. Be we resolved, that we
will join heads, and hands, and hearts to magnify God, and our office, so to
exalt the light of Israel. The enemy says now a confederacy. We must not say a
confederacy, as if we were confederate, to cast shame and reproach each upon
other. The enemies are confederate against us; It teaches us how we should be
close with our God, and with our selves, shut up together as with a close
seal, That all may be said of us, as it Job 41. 15, 16, 17.
follows in that place, and is spoken of the Leviathans seals.

To persuade to all this, I will tell the Parable where with Bessarius would
persuade all Christian Princes, to hold together and join all their forces
against their sworn enemy (who was single with him, plural with us, The Turk
and the Pope) The Parable is this, The Wolves and the dogs were marching
on-ward one against the other, purposing to join forces next morning. The
wolves, that they might the better count their own cost, and know the strength
of their Adversaries, send forth a Master-Wolfe as their Scout (by which name I
will call him.) The Scout returns, tells his General with his Captain, and
fellow soldiers, That indeed, the Dogs, their enemies, exceeded them in
number, many more. But, says the Scout, no cause of discouragement at all, for
an observation I made touching our Adversaries, which is this; The Dogs are
not one like another, a few Ma^^ives there be, but the most are little Curies;
which will make a noise, and bark at the Moon, and be (...) at their shadow.
but that which comforted me most of all, and may put courage into you, was, I
observed them matching along, as if they were more offended with themselves,
than with us; not keeping their ranks neither, but grinning, and sharling, and
biting, sometimes tearing each other, as if, they would save us a labor.
Masters, said the scout, march-on resolutely, confidently; our enemies are
their own en^mies, enemies to themselves and their own peace; they bite and
devour each other, we shall devour them sure; they shall be bread and meat
for us. This is as soon understood as read, I need not expound the parable; nor
does Melancthon, from whom I took it: he gives a very short exhortation upon
it, but of infinite use, therefore I will enlarge it. Brethren, says he, I
beseech you by the mercies of Christ, show mercy one to another. By the
kindness of Christ, be ye kind; by the bowels of Christ, show that you have
bowels; by all Scripture obligations, and bands of the brotherhood, live like
brethren; be of one mind, and then ye shall know the mind of Christ. Be of one
judgment in the things of God, and ye shall escape the judgment of the world.
This is as possible sure, as it is Christian-like. Two men, that had the Devil
in them, lived in one place, and did agree, because they had the same spirit in
them both. Cannot you do so that look to live in one Heaven? and do profess,
that Christ lives in you, now you are upon the earth by His Spirit: Surely if
you have the Spirit of Christ you can live together on the same earth, keeping
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Amen. And yet I have not done; We
will take the Apostles admonition too, If there be any consolation, Phil. 2. 8.
etc. for we should proceed in the Chapter, where we shall find the strongest
bonds to bind us to the peace, and good behavior. But if we are such children
of Belial, we will cast away such cords; yet they that l^ve Truth heartily, and
seek Peace earnestly, may be grieved (as Sir you are) and offended, but not
discouraged it all that; for consider first; Truth is the strongest thing upon
earth, we all say, and as its strength is, so it shall prevail (we all know)
and get the victory at the last, which shall be the more glorious, the more it
is opposed. They that see their faces against their brethren like flint; and
their words as hard as steel, shall strike forth some sparks of Truth by this
contention, whereby to give more luster of clearenesse thereunto: Truth will be
a gainer by all a^ last.


A. I but, while Truth is pursued, ^eace is lost.


B. Yes, and that may be by our own fault; and it is but the Peace of the world
neither, and what wise man sets his heart upon that. The Peace of God is
perfected (that is the second consideration) by all this in the mouths and
hearts of His children. Let them look to the keeping of Truth, it is not
possible they should loose Peace or themselves: Because thou have kept the word
of My patience; Rev. 3. 10.
(that is, the word of Truth, not kept but by those in whom patience has a
perfect work,) I will also keep thee: See there! If we keep; God will keep; we
His word, and He us from the hour of temptation, which is now come upon all
the world to try the inhabitants there. A sweet promise! I will conclude with
the words of Luther upon the like subject, persuading the people by setting up
a faithful Ministry, to advance Truth The Sea (of Rome) of our trouble rises
high says he, The floods lift up their voice, (that is) our adversaties are
mighty. What are their wills and endeavors now? They will take* Truth from the
earth: [Eye^ when you see such stirrs, and tumults, the cause of God is in
hand, His Truth maintained, hence all our trouble; never any thing but Truth
was so opposed.] But (says Luther) beare-up against wind, and tide, storms
and tempests, and fear not your standing; we may be as fearelesse as our Rock
is; and our Rock fears Pe^ra nostra non pallet ad tonitrua, and ^ulgura non
^etuit, etc. Caelum ruat fiat voluntas tua. Luth. 2. vol. p. ^74. Nec (...)
hoc, nec mirum, st Princeps m^n^ d^viet. Quid aliud saceret. Psalm. 2.
not the rage of men, nor roar of the Devils; they roar now, and their
servants are mad, upon their Idols, and with rage. It is neither strange nor
wonderful; the contrary had been so; If the Prince, and Princes of the world,
did neither roar, nor rage, now, now that they see their Kingdom is in
danger, that had been a wonder indeed, a marvel in Heaven, What would you
have them do? What, but like themselves, roar and rage, and make tumults? But
he not dismayed at all this, but encouraged rather. Read Christians, (ye that
are Christians indeed) read and observe what ye read, That God laughs now*
and shall His servants cry now? No, God forbids it; they must be merry now, and
being merry, they must sing high, the 46. Psalm, and at every full point, a
Selah. God is our refuge and strength, Selah: A very present help in trouble.
Selah. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed: and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof
roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
Selah. There is a river, (whose floods are butter and honey, strong
consolations) the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God* Selah. The
floods are listed up, the floods have lifted up their voice (when ye have these
repetitions, you have a great observation before psalm. 93.
your eye) The floods lift-up their waves; Be not afraid (at all this) remember
the LORD, Who is GREAT. The LORD on high is mightier then the noise of many
waters: the mighty waves of the sea (that is) He is a Rock. This Rock answers
Neh. 4. 16.
all Objections; The Rock of Ages Isa. 26. 4. (...)
, in Him is everlasting strength: A ground sure and stable, whereon to build
everlasting confidence. Let us do our duty* fall close to our work, keep
close to our Rock, strong in Him, through the power of His might. Amen. (...)


Thus, Sir, I have given Answer to your Letter, with strong desire and
endeavor all along, to render it suitable to the good word of God; to the rule
and method of Charity there; to the example and practice of Gods best servants
there and every where; and best agreeing with the sweetness of your spirit,
wholly spent in the persuance of Truth and Peace: Now the God of Truth and
Peace, lead us into all Truth; give us peace by all means.


Amen.
Sir, I am Your most affectionate Friend, and, indeed, obliged servant, for
your faithful labor and unwearied pains in the work and service of the
Gospel. HEZEKIAH WOODWARD.
From my house in Aldermanbury 12. Aug. 1644.
To the Reader.
NOw thou may read the Books thou have, happily, heard much spoken against;
and may now give thy judgment thereupon: If before thou had so done, thou
might now judge thy self for being too hasty in so doing. The Book had
gone abroad a fortnight sooner, had I not desired heartily, and accordingly
prepared to affix unto it some after-lines, the issue and result of
after-thoughts. But these were not thought seasonable; not now to t^^ art and
cross (...) other, setting judgment against judgment, and standing single to
many, and those Divines at Sion (which yet my conscience tells (...), I could
do, and yet maintain the peace of Zion, and the bands of the brotherhood
whole and entire:) But the contrary war feared: and, thereupon, judiciously (I
speaks from my heart) concluded, with strong reference to our LORDS practice in
a different case, least we should offend them, who would Mat. 17. (...).
not be offended. That the after-lines must perish as an untimely birth; or lie
at the place of the breaking-forth of such children, the conceptions and issue
of our thoughts, formed and made legible to the world: so a bar was put-in
against them. Be it so, and best content I am, it should bb so, rather then any
the least and just offense should be given to them, who indeed should not be
offended.

Only this I would take leave to say, The searcher of all hearts knows; That,
what by His assistance I have done in the former, or the after-work, I have
done all, not to please or displease any man: And therefore, if men had been
displeased, (that was the fear) they are but men; As I cannot be careless of
it; so I cannot be careful about it, for my testimony is with-in, and my
witness above, That, All I did was done to please God: In strong references to
His glory; The beating-out the way of Christ; The making His Government (upon
His shoulders) glorious before our eyes; The composing these sa^d differences
amongst us, in special th^se, th^n have been occasioned by Mr Edwards his
Books; The rendering him more graceful to his people; his gifts and graces also
more useful to the Church in after-time: And that, if the Brethren have walked
as men; or, as it is suggested, then that they should be humbled for so
walking, give glory to God, take diligent care, to make their watch the
stronger, that they do so no more: And that they stand no longer at a distance
(as it is conceived they due) with those, who love them next to their own
souls; But rather to communicate to us, whose debtors also they are, their
Scripture light, whereby we may more clearly discern into their so questioned
way of Church-Governement, That so, the Truths there being cleared; The errors
there beaten-out, the one may be embraced, the other rejected: As all these
things before spoken, were the very bent and true intention of my soul, so
help me God, Amen.

I will close with the Apostles words, because I would leave them fixed upon
our hearts; Stand ye fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for
the faith of the Gospel. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries Phil. 1.
27, 28.
. No; though they are high now, yet be not terrified, God is still above them;
and we are not so low, but an Almighty hand can raise us up again: And if we
are at the lowest now, then now be not terrified, encouraged rather now; for
now will the hand of the Lord be stretched-out to work a glorious deliverance,
even now, now, now; so often repeated in one verse, to assure us, That God is
then nearest to His people, when they are at the lowest ebb of misery: and
farthest off from His adversaries, when they are at the highest pinnacle of
their seeming prosperity. Now I will up says the LORD: A gracious promise! we
must look unto it, and (...) upon it; The word is never more comfortable, then
now, now that the works and providence of God stand cross thereunto; and
Gods hand is rough and heavy upon the loins of his servants: Then the voice is
sweetest, when the hand is heaviest When the Church is up, and the Adversaries
are down, then seize has matter to feed upon: But when, as now, the Adversaries
(seem) to be high, and the Church low, then there is abundant matter, ^i^h
^ses for Faith to feed on.


A. Yea but now is the Adversaries day for mirth and laughter; they are gladded
to the heart now, in the day of their King; we can see them drunk with joy and
with wine too This is the manner of the Malignants rejoy^ing on the (...) of
their King, To take their fill of the creature, so as to (...) the reason to a
drunkenness in the day time; As five roarers were found to be the last Lords
day (Sept. 9) and paid for their drunkenness what the Law commanded them and
their Hostis: And one kissed the stocks to teach him more
, and then reaching forth their hands with scorners, Hos. (...). 5.

B. Let them laugh, it is their day, they think; and they know not, That their
day is coming. Give them leave to be merry, but not to be drunk; it is the
hour of their joy, and but for an hour. He that laughs anon, laughs too,
says the Proverb. But we must laugh manners, and render him more sober man.
now, and be heartily merry, after a godly sort now; for, now we see their day
is coming Psalm. 37. 13.
. Coming! It is come, if the Adversaries of the Lord be at the heightest, and
His servants at the lowest: Now we must be glad, because now will I arise says
the Lord; when? At this present time; therefore be nothing terrified,
encouraged rather when the enemy is raised high, even to the zenith of his
exaltation, then be encouraged, for hearken and hear; Now will I arise, says
the Lord; Now will I be exalted; now will I lift-up my Isa. 33. 10.
self; now, now, now; now expect, That the Lord will come-in to magnify
Himself before Israel, and before the Sun. And then the Adversary falls, then,
then, then; as that Adversary Senacharib did, by the sword of the Lord; In
whose hands I cannot tell, but by the sword of the Lord he shall fall; and the
lower his fall shall be, the higher his exaltation was, Amen. Therefore stand
fast in one spirit, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel; and be
nothing terrified by the Adversaries; but by all these providence be mightily
encouraged rather in the work and service of the Lord, through the Might and
Power of the Lord, Who has made-forth to His servants a sure word of promise,
That He will give them an expected End.

Imprimatur, JOSEPH CARYL.


