TACTOMETRIA. SEU, TETAGMENOMETRIA. OR, The GEOMETRY of Regulars practically
proposed; After a new, most artificial, exact and expeditious manner (together
with the natural or vulgar, by way of mensurall Comparison) And in the Solids,
not only in respect of Magnitude or Dimension, but also of Gravity or
ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned. Together with several useful
Observations and Experiments falling in by the way, concerning Measure and
Weight. And withal, the like artificial practical Geometry of regular-like
Solids (as I term them) in both the foresaid respects: And moreover, of a
Cylindricall Body, for liquid or Vessell-Measure (commonly called by the name
of Gauging) as is for solid measure; it being therefore a most exact and
expedite way of Gauging: With sundry new and exact Experiments, Observations,
and Rules concerning the same. And lastly, an A-TACTOMETRIE, or an APPENDIX,
for the most ready and exact discovering of the dimensionall quantity of any
irregular kind of Body, whether solid or concave, which in it self will not
admit of an ordinary or orderly way of measuring. And this from certain new and
exact Experiments also, made for that purpose. A Work very useful and
delightful for all such as are either ingenuously studious of, or necessarily
exercised and employed in the practice of the Art METRICALL. By J. Wybard

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT LEYBOURN, for Nathaniel Brooks, at the Angel in
Cornhill, MDCL.

(...): Vel, (...). PLATO. De quo PLUTARCHUS lib. 8 (...), prob. 2. Omnia
quaecunque a primaeva rerum natura constructa sunt, numerorum videntur ratione
formata: Hoc enim fuit principale in animo Conditor is exemplar. BOETHIUS
Arithm. lib. 1. cap. 2. Veniet tempus quo ista quae nunc latent, in lucem dies
extrahat, and longioris aevi diligentia. SENECA, not. quaest. lib. 7. cap. 25.
Est natura hominum novitatis avida. PLINIUS. TO All that are wel-willers to the
Mathematiques, in general: But more especially to the candid, impartial,
intelligent, and practical Reader.
THere is now two Lustres, or one Decade of years elapsed, and some more time,
(gentle and courteous Reader,) since I happened first to hit upon this
artificial kind of Mensuration (or more artificial practical Geometry for
regular and regular-like Magnitudes,) which I here deliver: and which was then
but in two or three Particulars thereof, here first of all laid down in the
three principal Propositions contained in the first Part, and the same
demonstrated practically. And so having since by degrees, very much enlarged my
Conceits and inventions herein (and indeed as far I think as possibly may be,
and that only by way of Mathematical exercitation and recreation from other
Studies and employments) I thought good at length, thus to put them together,
(with other things by the way, pertinent thereto,) and so to exhibit and
expose them to a public View, examination and trial in general, and in
special to thy candid and courteous censure: which I was the more emboldened
and encouraged to do, considering that when at first I propounded those things
which I had then conceived in this way, to several able Artists, not only in
several parts of this Kingdom where I happened then to come, and with whom I
had the opportunity to converse, but also in some parts beyond the Sea (where
not long after I fortuned to spend some time, for the prosecuting of other
Studies, which I then chiefly aimed at and intended, and have since for the
part followed and embraced) most of which were Professors and Teachers of the
Mathematics, and so such as are usually soonest acquainted with all the new
mathematical inventions that are any way made known) I found that it was to
them a mere novelty, (according as I conceived it would be) and that moreover
at first they somewhat doubted of the same, saying, that it were indeed an
excellent way, if it would generally certain and true; and so to some others of
less judgment, it seemed to be a thing so very improbable (they having made
no trial thereof) as that they would suddenly and unadvisedly conclude it to
be impossible, only that it might hit right now and then by chance, but not
constantly.

And then besides this, I having for my further satisfaction herein, taken the
pains (both at first, and also again of late) to make a strict search and
enquiry into all the chiefest Authors which have hitherto treated of
practical Geometry either in Latin or English, and more especially for
isntrumental practice, in the way of manual or mechanical Mensuration; could
not find the way here proposed, so much as barely hinted by any of them in the
least kind. And so have I now here at length (by the favor and permission of
God) according to my earnest desire, brought that to a General, which at first
I had conceived or apprehended only in a few Particulars, and so have
completed the Invention, as that I may think there is hardly any room left for
additi on thereunto.

Here then first (friendly and ingenious Reader) shall thou find the most
artificial and exquisite quadrature of a Circle, in a practical, or
organicall way, as to the immediate obtaining of it is Area in any measure
appointed. For as Joseph Scaliger says of the squaring of a Circle in a
general way, (or of the general quadrature of a Circle) Elem. Cyclomet. 1. or
Elem. Cycloperimet. Desin. 5. (...). Circulum quadrare, est Circuli areae
aequale Rectilineum invenire. that is, To square a Circle, is to find a
right-lined Plane equal to the Area of the Circle. Here shall thou find that
rectiline Plane to be the very Square of the Diameter, (or of the
Circumference) according to Quantity discrete; in which it is artificially
diminisht by a Line of measure, so as to be made equal with the Circle it
self, whereas naturally or geometrically it is greater then the Circle. And so
I may say, that more properly, precisely and nearly to square a Circle, is to
find an exact Square equal to the Circle given: And the like understand for
the squaring of any other regular Figure; and so thou shall here find the like
artificial quadrature of all rectiline regular Planes as of a Circle, by their
laterall, diametrall, and diagonall lines, for the immediate producing of their
superficial contents, which I have here performed (by way of practical
demonstration) in two of the first of them.

Then next shall thou here find the like most artificial and excellent cubing
of a Globe or Sphere, for the immediate producing of its solid content in any
measure assigned. And what was said before of the squaring of a Circle, both
general and particular or special, the like I may say of the cubing of a
Sphere; That the same generally understood; is to find a right-lined or plain
Solid, equal to the solid Area of the Sphere: and so more particularly and
properly, to cube a Sphere, is to find an exact Cube equal to the Sphere
given; which thou shall here find to be made artificially (in quantity
arithmetical) the very Cube of the Diameter (or of the correspondent
Circumference) which naturally, or in quantity geometrical, exceeds the Sphere
it self; and this not only in respect of solid measure, but also of gravity or
ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: And the like understand for any
other regular Solid: And so shall thou here find the like most artificial and
admirable cubature of all the five famous plain ordinate Bodies in Geometry, or
rectiline regular Solids, as of a Sphere, in both the foresaid respects; and
that not only as considered simply and absolutely in themselves alone, but also
in relation to a Sphere, as being described either within or about the same.
And what is here performed in all these regular Solids for their solid
dimensions, by way of cubature; the like is done in them for their superficial
dimensions, by way of quadrature; (and which therefore I conceive, may not
altogether unaptly and improperly be termed the Quadrature of these Bodies, as
to their superficial or external part.)

And then shall thou here find after the like artificial manner, the dimension
both solid and superficial of all such Solids, as are not exactly ordinate or
regular, but somewhat like the same, and so which I call regular-like Solids,
as namely right Cylinders and Cones; and all Prisms and Pyramids constituted
upon regular Bases; and both which Dimensions aforesaid, may sometimes happen
in these kind of Bodies, to be artificially of the same nature with those in
exact regular Bodies: viz. cubatory and quadratary; as I shall show in their
Dimensions; though indeed in their solid Dimension, there is always a
Quadrature, in respect of the Base. And here likewise what is understood for
solid measure, must be understood for gravity or weight, according to any
Metal proposed.

And all these several dimensions aforementioned, are here performed by Lines of
equal parts only, according to a decumane, decimane, or decimall division, in
which therefore consists the excellency of the performance: and the same
demonstrated, not only in respect of the practical use thereof, but also the
theoricall grounds and reasons, according to certain Propositions laid down for
that purpose. And which Lines are here generally set forth by Number, denoting
or expressing their magnitudes from any Measure given or appointed.

And now, although that learned Mathematician, Mr. Edm. Gunter (sometime
Professor of Astronomy in Gresham-Colledge in London, and long since deceased)
a man excellent for Isntrumental inventions, has (among other Lines) upon his
Sector, certain Lines of quadrature, (as he terms them) as for to make a
Square equal to a Circle given, by the semidiameter thereof, and contra: and
so for the like quadrature of certain rectiline regular Planes, by their sides;
yet those are of a much different kind and nature from ours, (as any one may
plainly see) being not several Lines of measure divided into parts any way,
whereby to give immediately of themselves, the side of the equal Square
arithmetically (as I may so speak) or in quantity discrete, as from any
certain, set, denominate Measure, according to a common way of measuring; as
our Lines do, (and consequently, the superficial content of the Square, for
the Area of the Figure) but only one Line, drawn twice over upon the Sector; or
(if you will) two like, correspondent, or congruall Lines, drawn upon each leg
or shank of the Sector, from the Center thereof, and undevided; containing in
them only certain points, in which the Sector must be opened, according to the
semidiameter of the Circle given, or the sides of the other Figures to which
they belong, being there expressed by the numbers of their Sides; and so give
the side of the equal Quadrat, only geometrically (as I may so speak) or by
Line, crossing the Sector between the two points of quadrature at the ends
thereof, and so parallel to the line for the semidiameter of the Circle, or
side of other Figure, to which the Sector is opened: and which line being taken
off from thence with Compasses, and so applied to any certain Line of measure
divided, will then indeed give the side of the equal Square in the parts of
measure, as our Lines of quadrature do: but yet Mr. Gunter does not apply his
Lines of quadrature to such a use, or any way mention the same, but only to the
laying down of the exact side of the Square equal to a Circle given, etc. and
so to reduce the Circle into a Square, geometrically, after a mechanical
manner: and which can hold but only in a small Circle, whose semidiameter (or
other ordinate Plane, whose side) may not exceed a convenient extent or opening
of the legs of the Sector, (or of a pair of Compasses) so as to take off the
side of the equal Quadrat, in its due place upon the Sector: for indeed, the
largest Sector or Compasses that are usually made, (or can be made convenient
for use) will open or extend (at the utmost) but to a very short line, in
comparison of those which frequently fall out to be measured; and therefore his
Lines (or way) of Quadrature, cannot extend to any large Dimensions, and so
serve for a general measuring as ours do, if they should be applied to the
very same use that they are, namely, the superficial dimension of Circles, and
other ordinate Planes, (in a quadratary way) according to any measure assigned,
and thereupon can serve but to very small purpose. Nor indeed had lacquainted
my self with those his Lines of Quadrature, or any other upon his Sector, when
I first apprehended and conceived in my mind this artificial way of measuring
which I here propose, (though I had often seen that Instrument, and had much
studied his Book in other things) nor till I had in a manner perfected the same
throughout all the Dimensions to be performed thereby, and so was come to the
Close of this Book. Neither did any of those Artists, to whom I ever yet
propounded the same (as aforesaid) mention to me thereupon in the least kind,
Mr. Gunter's Lines of quadrature (or any other upon his Sector) in reference to
any measuring; although some of them I am sure (if not all) were well
acquainted with Mr. Gunter's Sector, and all his other Instruments, and taught
the use of them to others. But this only by the bye. Nor do his Lines of
Superficies in general, upon the Sector, being also two like, congruall Lines
drawn on the two leg^ thereof from the Center, and divided unequally into 100
parts, serve for the measuring of Superficial Figures, as to the immediate
producing of their contents simply by themselves, in any kind of measure given;
but only in a way of proportion, to find out the superficial content of one
Figure, by the superficial content of another like (or unlike) Figure given or
known; together with several other uses noted by him. And so his Lines of
Solids in general, being two like Lines, drawn upon the Sector in like manner,
as the Lines of Superficies, and divided also into 100, (or rather 1000) parts
unequally, serve only for the like uses in Solids, that the Lines of
Superficies do in Superficies.

And then for his more particular Lines of Solids (as I may term them) upon the
Sector, called the Lines of inscribed, and of equated bodies; having reference
in particular to the five foresaid plain regular Solids, and a Sphere: the
first sort of them, in respect of the inscription of the said five bodies in a
Sphere; and the other sort, in respect of their equation to a Sphere, and
also of one to another; are of a different nature and kind from our artificial
Lines pertaining to these bodies, and a Sphere, for the immediate producing of
their solid contents in any Measure appointed, according to an exact, absolute
cubature, both simply in themselves, and also in respect of inscription and
circumscription to a Sphere given, as aforesaid: but are the first of them, for
the finding of the Sides of these five bodies, as being to be inscribed in a
Sphere, by the semidiameter thereof given; and the other, for the finding of
their Sides, as being equal in magnitude to a Sphere, and this by the Diameter
of the Sphere given; and contra: or as to be made equal one to another by
their sides: and all this in a mere geometrical sense; and thereupon these
latter Lines of his, will give off from the Sector, the side of the Cube equal
to a Sphere, by the Diameter thereof; and to any of the other regular bodies,
by the sides thereof given, in the same manner, that his Lines of quadrature
give the side of the Square equal to a Circle, by the semidiameter thereof,
and to the other regular Planes or Superficies, by their sides given; these
Lines of equated bodies (as also those of inscribed bodies) being of the like
kind and nature with those of quadrature, (which by the same reason, may as well
be called Lines of equated Superficies, for that they do not only equal a
Square to a Circle, or other ordinate Plane given; but also equal them all one
to another) and are drawn upon the Sector accordingly; and so are of no further
or better use then they are.

Then lastly, his Lines of Metals (so called) upon the Sector, (being inserted
with the lines of equated bodies, because there was spare room, and much of the
like kind with them, and so are contrived together on the same two lines, on
each leg of the Sector, being drawn from the Center) are not like our lines of
Metals (as I may so term them) which are for the immediate discovering of the
weight of a Sphere, or other regular (or regular-like) body made of any Metal,
in the very same (cubicall) manner, that their solid contents are obtained in
any measure, by their respective artificial Lines as aforesaid; but those
(together with his Lines of Solids) do serve only to find the proportion, as it
were, between several Metals (as he says) in their magnitudes and weights,
and that according to the experiments of Marinus Ghetaldus, in his book
entitled Archimedes promotus; that is (as he says) In like Bodies of several
Metals, and equal magnitude, by having the weight of the one, to find the
weight of the rest; and contra: together with two other uses noted by him.

These things (courteous and judicious Reader) I thought good here to insert by
the way from Mr. Gunter, to show the difference between his Lines and ours;
especially those of his, which for their use, may seem to come most nearly to
ours, namely his Lines of Quadrature, and of equated Bodies: and which as they
cannot be so generally useful as (or not considerable for their use, in
respect of) ours, according to what I showed before; so neither can they be
altogether so exact in the performance of those small Dimensions which they can
reach unto.

And what I have here performed Geometrically, or by Line (or Scale) in an
artificial way of measuring; I have also set forth Arithmetically, or by
Number, in a way of Proportion after the most exquisite manner that may be, as
from the natural Measure; according to the same division or partition of the
Unity, as is of the Lines of measure, both natural and artificial; and by
which therefore the artificial measure may be readily deduced from the
natural, or the natural Measure be reduced to the artificial: together with
a multitude of other metricall conclusions besides, in most of the geome^ricall
Figures which I have here particularly handled, by way of practical
demonstration; none of them having been done before by any man, that I do know
of; except those in the Circle, being set forth by Mr. Gunter, and from him by
Mr. Wingate, and perhaps some others; but yet not all of those Proportions in
so ample terms, as I have here done them, which therefore I extracted again
anew.

And then moreover shall thou here find, not only the most artificial and
expeditionall way of measuring thus all regular Bodies, and such as do come
very near a regular form (which therefore I call regular-like) but also of
such as are of an irregular form; and first, of concave Bodies, or Vessels for
Wine and Beer, (which commonly do somewhat imitate the form of a Cylinder, and
may be called Cylindroidall, and so admit of a Cylinder-like dimension, being
first reduced by art to a Cylinder: to which end I bestowed some considerable
pains (and a little cost too) in the making of sundry experimiments, for the
discovering of the true contents of the Standard-measures for Wine and Ale or
Beer, pertaining to the City of London, (which are kept at the Guild Hall) as
being commonly taken for the most generally received Measures for this purpose,
throughout the Kingdom; and by which I have seen the Measures which have been
made for some eminent Towns far remote from London, to be sized and sealed,
(though here I will not contend about them) and have here accordingly fitted a
gauging-Line to each of them, according to our artificial way of measuring,
being also therefore Lines or Scales of equal parts in a decimall division, by
which the liquid content of any Vessel will be obtained immediately in
Gallon-measure, after the same manner (and with the same expedition in a
manner, the irregularity of the Vessel being considered) that the solid
content of any exact Cylinder is had artificially, according to any Measure
appointed.

And then last of all, do I here show (by way of Appendix) the most easy and
exact way for the discovering of the solid capacities of all other irregular
kinds of Bodies whatsoever, both solid and concave, which of themselves are
altogether unmeasurable in the usual way of measuring (or whose Dimensions can
in no wise be taken by a Line of measure) which therefore is a work of a
contrary nature to all the former: and have here exemplarily illustrated the
same from experiment, in a certain regular solid body, easily and exactly
measurable, for a confirmation thereof; (and which way also, hathnot been set
forth by any man before, that I do know of) Together with several other new
mathematical experiments and observations, very useful, and worth the noting.
All which (friendly Reader) I commend to thy courteous consideration and
acceptance; hoping thou will receive no less delight (and benefit also) in the
perusing and practicing hereof, then I have taken delight and contentment in
the study and exercise of the same, though surely with no small pains and
industry, beside the expense of some time now and then, from my occasions of
serious concernment, according as the same would reasonably permit: and which
therefore I could do to no other end, then only to enlarge and advance (so far
as here I might) the practice and exercise of this so noble and admirable an
Art, being drawn thereunto by that Genius, which has heretofore much disposed
and inclined me to mathematical contemplation and exercitation in general: so
that, thy friendly acceptance hereof, is all I expect for my labor. And if
any after me shall happen to raise any further Conclusions from what I have
here laid down, in any particular thereof; then surely will these my pains be
yet thereupon so much the more to purpose. But now as I must expect this work
of mine will meet with some Momaicall or Zoilan Spirit, so I shall not regard
the same, or be terrified thereat, seeing that the best conceits and inventions
of men that were ever yet published to the world, have been obnoxious to the
obloquies and obtrectations of such malevolent and malignant spirits: and which
has been the complainr of the most learned men in all ages. And thus,
courteous, ingenious, and ingenuous Reader, I friendlily bid thee farewell,
resting,

London; the first of May, 1650. Thine hearty wel-wisher, J. WYBARD, DM.

THE General Contents of this Work, consisting (almost all) in measure alone.
PART I.
SECT. I. OF the artificial Dimension of regular and regular-like Figures, in
general Page 1. SECT. II. The Dimension of a Circle p. 9. The dimensional
Proportions in a Circle, in the most exquisite terms, and all the variety that
maybe. p. 19. The solid dimension of a Sphere. p. 21. The same another way; as
also another superficial dimension of a Circle, artificially. p. 28. The
superficial Dimension of a Sphere in both those ways. ibid. and p. 29. The
dimensional Proportions in a Sphere, both for solid and superficial measure,
like as in a Circle. p. 30. The solid Dimension of a Cylinder and Cone. p. 32.
The same another way artificially. p. 39.
SECT. III. The superficial dimension of a Cylinder and Cone. p. 45. The
dimensionall Proportions in the Cylinder and Cone both for solid and
superficial measure. p 54
SECT. IV. Of the differences between the natural and artificial Measure, in
the dimension of Figures. p. 56. And of the grounds or reasons of the
artificial Mensuration. p. 59.

PART II.
SECT. I. OF the artificial Dimension of right-lined regular Planes or
Superficies in general; and the same demonstrated particularly in two of the
first of them. p. 71. As also the dimensionall Proportions of the same two
Figures, expressed in all the variety that may be. p. 92 etc. The artificial
Dimension of Triangles in general. p. 78. And from thence, of any Rhombus,
Rhomboides or Trapezium. p. 103. 105.
SECT. II. Of the Dimension both solid and superficial of regular-based
Pyramids in general, etc. p. 106. And the same demonstrated particularly in
the three first kinds of them; and that (for solid dimension) in three of the
five plain ordinate Bodies, or rectiline regular Solids, viz. in the
Tetrahedron, Octahedron, and Dodecahedron, with a brief description of all the
said five Bodies. p. 108, 116, 119, 127. The dimensionall Proportions in the
said three first kind of Pyramids, both for solid and superficial measure.
between p. 136 and 137. Of the artificial Dimension of regular-based Prisms.
p. 137.
SECT. III. Of the Dimension of the foresaid five famous ordinate Bodies
(commonly called the Platonicall Bodies) both solidly and superficially,
several ways; after the most exquisite manner that may be. p. 139. SECT. IV.
The same Dimensions, with a multitude of other metricall Conclusions in the
said five Bodies, expressed Arithmet^cally by way of Proportion, in the most
exqu^site Terms that may be; like those of the other Figures beforegoing, here
particularly handled. p. 166 etc. SECT. V. Of the Dimension of all regular
Solids aforesaid, in reference to grav^ty or weight, according to any Metal
proposed; in the same artificial manner, as is for solid measure: And the same
demonstrated particularly in a Sphere of a certain Metal proposed. p. 198. The
P^oportions of gravity and magnitude together, pertaining to a spherical body
of that metal, expressed in the like Terms with the other Dimensio^s
beforegoing. p. 241. The like reason of Dimension, as before, for the gravities
of all regular-like metalline Bodies. p. 246 and 258. W^^re, a demonstration,
or illustration arithmeticall, of the artificial Lines for the solid dimension
of a Cylinder and Cone, in particular; according to Theor. 3. and consequently
thereby, for all the other kinds of Dimension in general, according to Theor.
1 and 2. And withal the general ground and reason of the same Dimensions
fully declared.

PART III.
SECT. I. Of the measuring or gauging of Vessels, in general. p. 262. SECT.
II. Of the Quantities of the Wine and Ale-gallons, in reference to Gauging;
from sundry new and exact Experiments. p. 264. SECT. III. The practice of
Gauging, from our artificial way of measuring; as also from the natural (by
way of comparison) for a confirmation of the other; as in all the precedent
Dimensions. p. 288.
Appendix.
FOr the most ready and exact discovering of the solid capacity or dimensionall
quantity of any such irregular Body whether solid or concave, as cannot of it
self be measured in a plain geometrical manner. p. 301. The Conclusion for the
more speedy absolving or expediting of all the foregoing Dimensions. p. 338
The more particular Contents of this Work, as falling in by the way, in
reference to the general: consisting most of them in measure and weight
together, and being experimental.
1. THe Proportions or Comparisons of all the principal Metals, in gravity and
magnitude, expressed in general terms; according to the experiments of Marinus
Ghetaldus. p. 201 2. The same laid down particularly in our Troy-weight, in
Spears of equal magnitude. p. 237. 3. Of the true magnitude of the Roman
Foot, and the same compared with our English Foot, according to the
observations and experiments of our Countreyman Mr. John Greaves. p. 206, etc.
4. The Roman Weight, and our Troy or Goldsmiths Weight compared together, from
the said Mr. Greaves. And so from thence, a proportion set between them, in the
least terms. p. 209. 5. Of the gravity of a certain serreall Sphere or Bulk,
both in Avoirdupois and Troy-weight, from a new and exact experiment. p. 217 6.
Several Proportions set between the Troy and Avoirdupois-weights, compared
together: And first in an Arithmeticall manner, according to the Doctrine of
Proportions. p. 220 and 232. And then the same compared, and examined by the
Balance upon the weighing of several Bodies. 223 and 276.
7. The proportion between forged or fine Iron, and cast or bullet-iron,
deduced from new exact experiments p. 225. 8. Of the weight of water, in
relation to it is solid measure; or the ponderall and dimensionall quantity of
water compared together, from several new experiments, for discovering the
solid measure of any irregular body thereby, whether solid or concave. p. 269,
270 and 287. The same compared together several ways from the foresaid
experiments, and that in measure both unciall and pedall, and in weight both
Troy and Avoirdupois: And so the nearest weight of one Inch, and of one Foot
cubique or solid of water: and conversly, the magnitude, or solid measure of
one Ounce, and one Pound, etc. and so, some apt terms of proportion raised for
a general and ready use. p. 302 and 305.
9 How to find out the solid content of any irregular body by the weight of
water, etc. p. 308. 10. How to find the exact quantity of water (or other-like
liquid body) which is equal in magnitude or dimension to a solid body given.
ibid. 11. How to find immediately the gravity of the water (or other like liquid
body) which is equal in magnitude to a solid body given, by the gravity of the
solid body only: And so the manner of weighing a solid body in Water, whether
it be heavier or lighter then the same. p. 310 and 311. 12. The three last
Conclusions beforeing, exemplarily illustrated from exact experiments made upon
a spherical Stone-Body, or Marble-Bullet; and so confirmed accordingly. p. 313,
etc. 13. Of the difference of gravity in water; or the different gravities of
several ^^rts of water, in relation to our Atactometricall practice, or
Dimension of irregular Bodies. 319. 14. The same most exactly experimented by
the Balance sundry times, upon eight several Waters; and all compared
together. p. 325.
WHosoever shall think good to make use of the Lines for Gauging, or for any
other Dimensions described in this Book: or of any other Instruments for
mathematical practice in general; they may have the same very accurately made
by Mr. Christopher Flower, dwelling in the Bulwark, near the Tower of London:
besides diverse others about this City.

Courteous Reader,
Seeing that hardly ever any Book passes the Press, free from Typographicall
errors, notwithstanding all the care and diligence that can be used (and in
which I was not here wanting) especially Books of this nature: and then that
they being commonly set at the end of the Book, are seldom taken notice of,
till the Book be read throughout; and so many times the mistakes of the Printer
are by ignorant or malevolent Readers, put upon the Author as errors:
Therefore the chief of those few faults which have here escaped, (the most of
them being but merely literal) I thought good to put at the beginning; that so
thou might in the first place know them, and consequently amend them:
assuring thee withal, that of that multitude of Numbers which are comained in
this Book (the most of them denoting Lines, and Proportions of measure; and so
upon which depends the speedy working and resolving of many excellent
practical Propositions: and are therefore specially to be regarded; and in
which a fault cannot be espied by bare inspection,) there is not one of them
defective in any one figure thereof; such was my (more then ordinary) care
therein.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 7. put (before commonly. l. 8. dele of. l. 20. r. partior. p. 7.
l. 28. for has, r. both. p. 8. l. 22, r. in respect of the Measure from which
it is taken, as also of the Figure etc. l. 30. dele the. p. 32. l. 11. r. Sect.
4. p. 59. l. 14. for matter of, r. manual or. p. 75. l. 2. r. whose. p. 91. l.
24. r. shall. p. 173. the beginning of the last line save one, r. And so. p.
214. l. 2. dele the comma at Measure, and put one after Diameter. p. 316. l.
14. dele the first as. Other faults thou may meet with, which being only
literal, and so not worth the noting here; thou may easily amend in the
reading.

Tactometria, Or the most Exquisite practical Dimension of all Regular, and
Regular-like Figures in general.
And first, of the Circle, Sphere, Cylinder, and Cone, in special. PART. I.
SECT. I. Of the nature and division of the Lines of Measure in general, for
the performing of all the aforesaid Dimensions.
FOras^uch as to the due measuring of any Magnitude or Quantity continual (in
practical Geometry) there is required some certain Measure first to be given
or appointed: Therefore first and more generally, by Lines, we do her understand
any right Line assigned for a certain Measure; such like as Euclid, Elem 10.
Defin. 5. calls (...), which is as much as certain, definite, determinate,
speakable or expressible by voice, or otherwise expressible by Number: And so
the most Noble, illustrious, and learned, Franc. Flus. Candalla, a most
diligent and industrious restorer of Euclid's Elements interprets it Certa, a
line certain, as first put or proposed and made manifest, and divided into
parts certain and known: And it is also called Famosa, a measure famous, that
is, (as P. Ramus, and Adr. Metius do note) first Ram. Geom. lib. 1. El. 8. Et
Schol. Mathemat. lib. 21 Adr. Met. Geom. pract. Par. poster. seu Gaeodaes.
spoken or expressed, etc. But most of the Latin Geometers do call! such a
line Rationalis, a Rational line, for that (as Ramus says in the places here
cited) it is rational to it self, as are all magnitudes equal among
themselves: and Clavius says it is called Rationalis, because Clavius in Def.
5, El. 10.
it is always put certain and known, whereas all other lines which are
compared to this (as lines infinite in multitude, may be according to Euclid in
the place forenamed) are not certain and known, though taken apart by
themselves, they are, seeing that every one may be divided into any number of
equal parts, and being compared to this for their Measure, they are all either
symmetrall or asymmetrall, and so are said to be either (...), or So put by
Theon, whereas it should rather be (...), ^s it is opposed privatlvely to
(...),:Sec Flussate upon the place, and also in Proem. 1^. Elem.
(...), in Def. 6, 7. explicable or inexplicable, rational or irrational;
(but with this point we meddle not here,) and so we here understand this Line
to be most properly called Rational, as comprehending or containing in it self
the dimensionall reason of allother lines measurable thereby. And therefore
here we (for brevity) will with most Latin Translatours and Commentators, and
also our H. Billingsley, a Citizen of London, and Lord (...). 1596*
English Translatour of, and Annotatour on Euclid's Elements, understand any
right line so first set, put or proposed, by the name of the Rational Line
(and this may be applied to any Measure whatsoever, and it is one of Euclid's
Data in Lib. Dator. Defin. 1.) or (in respect of the ensuing work) the prime,
simple, true, or natural Rational line. And this we mean when any where we
say simply the Rational Line.

Secondly, and more especially by Lines we here understand any such line
augmented or diminished by a certain convenient segment or portion of the same,
for the more artificial and speedy mensuration of the aforenamed Figures: And
this Line we may (not unaptly) call the second supposed or artificial
Rational Line, as being derived from the former, and so substituted in place
thereof: like as in Numbers the Logarithmes are usually called Artificial
Numbers, as being substituted instead of the natural numbers, from which they
are deduced, and whose place they supply in a most excellent and admirable
manner, by performing all arithmeticall operations with that facility,
expedition, and compendiousnesse (and exactness also in some cases, as I shall
afterward upon occasion show) which the natural numbers themselves cannot,
for that by these, the two most tedious and troublesome parts or species of
Arithmetic (to wit, Multiplication and Division) are wholly avoided and
abolished, and that most difficult branch (or operation) thereof called the
Extraction of Roots, is mightily abbreviated and facilitated: And so the
Arithmetic performed thereby is usually called artificial Arithmetic.

Now seeing that every continual or continued Quantity falling under Measure
(in practical Geometry) is referred and reduced to the discrete, that thereby
its dimension^ may be made more manifest to us; so that Geometry has
perpetually need of Arithmetic for the explicating and expressing of its
magnitudes in their dimensions: Surely no kind of Numeration can be so
accommodate to this thing, as that which considers the Intger of Measure (as
the Unit) in a decumane, decimane, or decimall solution, for that by this the
practical, isntrumental, or mechanical part of measuring, or of the art
Metricall, commonly and improperly called by Ramus, Metius, and of some others
Geodasia which properly signifies the division or partition of right lined
Superficies, as Pediasimus, de mensuratione and partitione Terrae, well
observes, saying Terrae mensuratio duas in parts dividitur, Geometriam, scil.
and Geodaesiam: Areae namque secundum aertem mensuratio, and terrae mensuratio
est et merito Geometria vocatur; Unius vero and ejusdem areae, seu loci divisio
inter diversas personas, partitio quaedam est terrae, and jure optimo Geodaesia
appellatur, (and which from him Clavius notes Geomet. pract. lib. 6.) for that
the greek words, (...), do (poetically) signify the same that the Latin
words divido and portior, and so of which, and the word (...), Terra, comes
(...), i. e. Ter^ae divisio seu partitio) is made much more facile accurate and
expeditious.

For indeed this Mathematical solution of unity or continuity, is of all
others the most absolute and certain, and the most perspicuous and rational,
and by how much the more numerous it is in the parts thereof, by so much the
more exact it is, and consequently the work effe^^ed by it. And what utility it
has brought to the Mathe^^atiques in general, may be sufficiently witnessed
by that ^ost noble and useful part of Geometry, called Trigonomeirie, and that
in the Radius of a Circle (which is the very Basis and Root of all
Trigonometricall operations) where (to wit) first, that greatly renowned
Mathematitian Johannes Regiomontanus, having for a long time used the
Sexagenary solution (as Ptolemy and others before him) did at last bethink
himself of the Decimall, as being much better (seeing that the Unit would
perform a far greater Compendium then the Senarie) and indeed the best of all
(and so put the Radius, to 10 millions of parts, and next after him, Rheticus
in his great Trigonometrical Canon, to 10000 millions, and afterward (to make
that his Canon most absolute and perfect) he proceeded to 1000 milliots (as I
term them) or millions of millions, whereby the art of Trigonometry and
consequently other Mathematical arts, as Astronomy, Geography, etc. depending
thereupon) did become, in the practice, far more facile and expeditious then
before: for where the first proportional Term of the Trigonometricall
proposition, is the Radius or total Sine (which very frequently happens, or
may be so made for the most part, as the learned Pitiscus excellently shows
amongst other his compends in working) there the proposition or question is
solved only by a This is to be understood in working by the Natural Numb.
conjunct or manifold Pitiscus, Trigo^. lib. 5.
composition (or mutual implication or induction) of the second and third
terms, seeing that the Unit alters nothing in a conjunct or manifold
resolution, but the Number of composition immediately becomes the number of
resolution, only distinguishing between the absolute or integrall, and the
fractionall part thereof. And moreover the benefit of this solution of unity is
excellently seen in that most excellent Arithmeticall operation, vulgarly
called The Extraction of Roots, wherein (to wit) seeing the Roots of numbers
not explicable or rational (which the Algebrists or Cossists commonly call
Surd Numbers, and so their Roots surd Roots) cannot be exactly had, then those
numbers are reduced into some kind of decimall parts (or parts of a great
denomination, as Ramus terms them) as C^ntesms, Millesmes, etc. and that
figurate, as Quadrate, Cubique, etc. that thereby their Roots may be had more
certain and nearer to the truth, Ramus lib. Geom. 12 de Quadrato and 24 de Cubo.
then they can by the natural or vulgar extraction, as Ramus shows in the
aforesaid Books, where he (the first) showed this See Wingate Arithm. 1 Book,
^1 Chap. 3 Sect.
kind of Extraction which to some seems to have been the very foundation of
Decimall Arithmetic, although Ramus has no where else in his Mathematical
Works made any other use of this kind of numbering, or made any mention of the
same: But indeed that of Regiomontanus in the Radius of a Circle seems to me to
have given the first light thereof to the World; so that the Trigonometricall
Numbers which now we use, may be termed Decimall, as they are derived from that
Radius: For all the Sines to a Quadrant, and the Tangents to an Octant or
semi-quadrant, are decimall parts or fractions of the Radius, but indeed the
least Secant is greater then the Radius: And so we will here make use of this
kind of Numeration, as being the fittest for our purpose, as we said before:
And indeed for that this present work of ours cannot conveniently be performed
by any other.

Now the Geometrical Figures which we have here first named, and so for which
we have first extracted these kind of metricall lines (or linear numbers) are
those four which Archimedes himself more especially treated of, and which are
as it were, the beginning and ground of all the rest, namely, the Circle,
Sphere, Cylinder and Cone, and accordingly the like Lines may be extracted for
all ordinate Planes and Solids whatsoever, as we afterward show; for that to
these four may be aptly referred all other regular and regular-like Figures;
As to the Circle may be aptly referred all ordinate Planes, to the Sphere, all
exactly ordinate Solids; to the Cylinder, all ordinate-based Prismes; and to
the Cone, all ordinatebased Pyramids: And though a Cylinder and Cone, and the
like, cannot properly be reckoned among Regular Figures, according to the
strict acception of an ordinate or regular Figure in Geometry, yet in respect
of the regularity of their Bases, and also the regularity and uniformity of
their other, and more special superficial part besides (whether the same
consist of one entire plane only, as in the Cylinder and Cone, or of several
planes equal and like, as in all right or erect regular-based Pyramids and
Prismes) the same may in a sort be termed regular (especially the Cylinder and
Cone) and which therefore, for distinction sake, I call regular like solid
Figures.

But now the quantities of the artificial metricall Lines, first extracted for
the four Figures first before named, according to any prime Rational Line,
and that to a Decumillenary division of the same, are numerally thus.

I. A Line for the most excellent superficial mensuration (or Diametrall
Quadration) of a Circle, is 1. 1284 ^ere. II. A Line for the most exquisite
Solid dimension (or Diametrall Cubation) of a Globe or Sphere, is 1. 2407.
III. A Line for the Square Solidation (as I may term it) or Rectangular
Parallelepipedation of a Cylinder, by its Diameter and Axis or Altitude (as to
an exact quadrate Base) is 1. 0838. IV. A Line for the like dimension of a
Cone, is 1. 5632 fere.
And so diverse other the like Lines, for the dimension both of these, and also
of other Figures has Superficial and Solid, I shall afterward show in their
several places.

Every such second supposed, or artificial Rational Line, must be divided
decimally, as is the first, true, or natural Rational Line, from which it is
taken, according as the length thereof can conveniently bear: But if the first
Rational Line cannot well admit of so many parts as are here set down, then
they may be abbreviated or contracted; as to Millesmes, Centesmes, or to prime
or simple Decimals (or Tenths) only; though indeed our least common Measure in
use, (viz. an Inch or Pollicar) may be distinctly divided in^o 100 (or 1000)
parts, if it be rightly handled according to the more artificial (or
Diagonall) way, as hereafter we shall have occasion to show. And so we have
here set forth the Rational line in parts of a large denomination, that so it
might serve for more exactness in use, because the more parts, or the greater
divisionall denomination the Integer of measure (or the unite) is of, the more
exact will be the work performed by it, as I noted before, and as afterward I
shall make plainly to appear.

Furthermore, every such artificial or supposed rational line, may be said to
be two fold, to wit, general or universal, and special or particular:
General, in respect of the number by which it is indicated and explicated, for
that the same linear number, does serve alike to all prime Rationalllines: And
particular or special in respect of the Figure (Superficial or Solid) to
which it is appropriated and applied, because that every such particular Figure
as is mentioned in this Book, does peculiarly and properly claim to it self
(and that several ways) such a line for its more artificial and
expeditionall mensuration.

Now the use of the four artificial Lines before-going, for the measuring of
the four first Figures aforenamed, we will deliver in the three practical or
problematicall Propositions following in the next Section; and withal the
magnitudes and uses of all the other artificial metricall Lines pertaining to
the said four Figures.

SECT. II.
PROP. 1.
If the Diameter of a Circle be taken by its proper Line of Measure (according
to any Rational Line) I say then, that the Quadrat of the Diameter shall be
the Area of the Circle (according to the same Rational line) which I prove
thus demonstratively.

geometrical diagram LEt the right line A B be put as Rational, and divided
into an 100 equal parts (or first into 10 parts, and then one of those only
into ten parts will be sufficient) And let the same line entirely taken,
represent the Semidiameter of a Circle: So the Diameter will be entirely A B,
2. and thereupon the Circumference (according to the ancient, and still
vulgarly received and retained Archimedean proportion of the Diameter to the
Circumference, svbtriple sesquiseptimall) will be 6 2/7, whose 1/2 viz. 3 1/7
being infolded with the Semidiameter AB1 produces the same for the Area of the
Circle. Or hence according to the proportion of the Quadrat of the Diameter to
the Circle it self, supertripartient-undecimall: Or again, the same according
to Euclid's tetragonismall reason, (as it is with Hero) by deduction of 3/24 of
the Diametrall Quadrat 4, viz. 6/7, and there rests 3 1/^ for the Circular Area
as before.

Now that there may be a comparing of our new or artificial mensuration with
the common or natural, and thereby a confirmation of the same: I draw the
right line C D, for the second, compound, supposed, artificial (or
quadratarie) Rational Line, to the length of A B, the primary, simple, true,
or natural Rational line, and moreover. 13 fere of the same (for so much is
the additament or additionall segment in centesimall parts) and then I divide C
D likewise into 100 equal parts (or first into 10 parts, and then only one of
those parts into 10 parts, which will be sufficient, as in the Line A B) which
done; I measure the line A B 2.00 (for the Diameter of the Circle) by the line
C D (the Line or Scale of quadrature) and find it to be thereof 1.77 (for the
line A B, simply upon the line C D, falls about the middle between.88 and.89,
and so the double of A B in one entire line at length being measured by the
Line C D will fall about the middle between 1.76 and 1.78, which is about 1.77)
which squared, gives 3.1329 for the Area of the Circle, agreeing with the
former area exactly in the integrall part: But now the fraction-part of that
area, viz. 1/7 being converted into decu-millesmes or square centesmes,
is.1428, which exceeds our measure by.0099, viz. 99 square centesmes, which
difference is not considerable in common practice, as I shall afterward
plainly show: but yet our measure wants of the true area, found by the more
new and true terms of Cyclometry, or Circular Tetragonisme (which here we use
in all Cyclometricall operations) not so much by 12 square centesmes, viz. but
87 such centesmes as I shall streightway show: For those of Archimedes, of the
Diameter to the Circumference 7 to 22 subtripla-sesquiseptima, Archim. de
dime^. Circ. prop. 2, 3.
and consequently of the Square of the Diameter to the Circle 14 to 11
supertriundecima, or supertripartiens-undecimas (though sufficient enough for
any ordinary mechanical use, as he only meant them, and that especially in
smaller Circles, yet) are in strictness of Art too large, and so give the area
somewhat greater then indeed it is, and the more, the greater the Circle is, and
hereupon has arisen that difficult and curious question so much controverted
among Artists about the Quadrature of a Circle; and in which many learned men
have bestowed great pains, as to the finding out of the nearest proportion
between the Diameter and Circumference, etc. among which that excellent Artist
Lib. de Circ. and Ad scrip. Here also is seen the excellent use and benefit of
decimall Numeration in the Quadrature of a Circle. Snel. lib. Cyclomr prop. 31.
See Lansberg. Cyclome^. lib 1. Porism^ 3. to 29 places, agreeing with Ceulen.
Ludolph van Ceulen (alias Cullen and Collen) has hitherto generally carried
away the greatest commendations, having set forth the same in decimall terms to
36 places, which he willed to be engraven upon his Tombestone, as a
Testimonial and Memorial of those his painfully sustained and finished
Labors (as W. Snellius notes, who afterward produced the very same number)
and which I have seen upon the same in the great Church in Leyden, called St.
Peter's Church, there being drawn thereupon a large Circle, and upon the
Diameter-line an unit with 35 ciphers for the number of the Diameter, and round
about the Circumference, the number for the same to 36 places; of which so many
as are needful here to deliver, as being sufficient for ordinary use, are
3.14159, answering to the Diameter 1.00000, or more briefly 3.1416, the
Diameter being 1.0000; which according to the foregoing Archimedean terms of 7
and 22, will be 3.1428, etc. But those of that famous Mathematician * Metius
the elder, sometime Geometrician to the Estates of the confederated or United
Belgic Provinces, of 113 and 355 do agree with the Ceulenian terms to the
first seven places, viz. 3141592, answering to the Diameter 1000000, for that
he demonstrateth the proportion of the Periphery to its Diameter, to be less
then 3 17/120 (that is 377/12) but greater then 3 15/106 (that is 33/106) whose
Metius in lib. advers. Quadratur. Circ. Simonis a Quercu. Et Adr. Met. in Lib.
Geomet. pract. part. prior. Cap. 10. prop. 3. and part. post. Cap. 4. prop. 1.
intermedian The mean Arithmeticall is in the least Terms ^ 1801/12720 which is
Decimally 3.1415880503, etc. and the mean Geometrical (or mean proportional)
is decimally 3.1415880493, etc. But his mean 3 16/1^3 is decimally 3.141592920,
etc. which exceeds both the other, and that of Cullen is 3.14159265, etc.
proportion is (says he) 3 16/113 (or 355/113) and which is a little larger
then that of Ludolph Van Cullen, yet so, as that the difference is less then
1/10^000. And this proportion does give the Area of the foregoing Circle 3
16/113, which is by Decimall conversion of the fraction-part into square
Centesms, 3.1416, agreeing exactly with that which is produced by the Ceulenian
proportion, and this is the true Area of the Circle: but the Area 3 1/7
produced by the vulgar or Archimedean proportions, being decimally to square
Centesmes 3.1428 exceeds this Area by 12 Square Centesmes (and so near the
old and new Cyclometry do here agree) and so the area of the circle found* by
our way 3.1329. wants of the true area but 87 square centesmes, as I said
before: and this defect (not considerable in common practice, as I noted
before) happens, in regard that the double of the first line measured by the
second, falls not precisely on 1.77, but is somewhat more, though indeed upon
the said line it self, it is very hardly discernable, being but very little:
Wherefore if both the Rational Lines were divided into more parts, as 1000,
10000, etc. then the work would prove still more and more exact (but indeed
here we could not draw a line actually capable of a greater decimall division,
or denomination of parts then 100, according to the plain, vulgar, simple, or
natural division of a Line, which here chiefly for plainness we have used:)
For first, if the prime rational Line (A B) be divided into 1000 parts; then
the second (C D) will be of the same. 1.128, and the first compared with the
second (being also divided into the like number of parts) will be.886 or near
thereabouts, which falls about the middle between.88 and.89 of the said
second line being 100, for these two converted into Millesmes are but.880 and
890, and so the double of the first Line measured by the second will be 1.772,
or near thereabouts, which is somewhat more then 1.77 upon the second Line
centesimally divided, for 1.77 converted into Millesmes, is but 1.770, which
shows that 1.77 was somewhat too little for to produce the true content of the
Circle: Now 1.772 being squared, gives 3.139984 for the area of the Circle
(which is in square Centesmes, 3.1400 fere) and the area produced by the truest
terms of Cyclometry, both Ceulenian and Metian, is to Milli-millesms, or square
Millesms, 3.141593 fere, (whereas the vulgar area 3 1/7 is 3.142857) which our
area is wanting of by.001609 fere, viz. 1609 square Millesms, or but 16 square
centesms, and agrees with the same in square tenths, viz. 3.14) which comes
much nearer the matter then the centesimall operation, and indeed as near as
need be desired: but yet this inconsiderable difference (by way of defect in
ours) happens also for the reason aforesaid, in that the double of the first
line measured by the second is not just 1.772, but somewhat more (as the first
line simply applied to the second, is not precisely 0.886 but somewhat more) and
therefore if the first be divided into 10000 parts; the second will be thereof
1.1282 fere, according to the ancient or Archimedean Cyclometry, but 1.1284
fere according to the later or Ceulenian and Metian Cyclometry: and so the
first line compared with the second (being also 10000) will be 0.8862 (or
somewhat more) and thereupon the double of the first, being measured by the
second, will be 1.7724, which shows that 1.772 was somewhat too little to
produce the true area, for this in decumillesms is but 1.7720, but our number
is 1.7724 (and indeed somewhat more) which squared yields 3.14140176 for the
C^rcular area, agreeing yet much nearer with the true area, which is now
3.14159265 (to which comes very near that of 3 16/113 being by decimall
conversion of the fractionall part into square decu-millesms 3.14159292,
beginning but now to exceed the true area produced by the Ceulenian
Cyclometricall terms) our measure wanting thereof now but 19089 square
decumillesms, which by contraction of the parts is hardly 2 square centesms.

And if we proceed one operation further, namely, to a centu-millenary solution
of the rational Lines (where A B being 100000, CD will be thereof 1.12838 fere)
our measure will be found to agree with the true natural measure, exactly to
square centesms, and to want thereof hardly 14 square millesms: for AB 2.00000,
being measured by CD, made 100000, will be found thereby 1.77245, (which shows
that the artificial or quadratary number in the precedent operation, was not
exactly 1.7724, but would fall about the middle between that and 1.7725 upon
the artificial line of measure, and so gave the area of the Circle short of
what it should be) which being squared affords 3.1415790025, for the area of
the Circle, which wants still of the true area (being now correspondently
3.1415926536 fere) 136511 square centumillesms, which by contraction of the
parts is but 1365 square decu-millesms, and about 14 square millesms, and not
one square centesm.

And if we go on yet further to a milli-millenary solution of the Rational
Lines (where AB being 1000000, CD will be of the same 1.128379) the natural
and artificial Measure will be found to agree exactly to square millesms: For
AB 2.000000 entirely taken, being measured by CD (put 1000000) will be found
1.772454 fere, whose Quadrat is 3.141593182116 fere for the superficies of the
Circle, which now exceeds the true measure (being here correspondently
3.141592653590 fere) by 528526 square milli-millesms, which by abbreviation or
contraction, is 5285 square centumillesms, or but about 53 square
decu-millesms, and not one square millesm.

By all which it is already sufficiently evident, that the more parts the Unit
or the Integer of measure given, is divided into, the more exact will be the
work performed by it, as I noted before, and as may be also further seen in the
following dimensions.

But indeed if the Rational Lines be divided but into 100 parts they will be
sufficicient for any ordinary use: For the greatest difference arising here
between the true natural measure and ours, being that in the first operation
(by centesms) where the superficial content of the Circle found by our measure
3.1329. falls short of the true content (found by the truest terms of
Cyclometry) 3.1416, by 87 square centesm^, is in vulgar terms but ^/115 of the
prime rational Line A B (as the Integer of the measure given) squared, which
is but as one part of a square unit divided into 115 parts; and surely this
difference is of no moment in common practice. And whereas in the other
operations, the differences happening between the true content and outs, in
parts of a greater denomination, may seem to such as do not well apprehend this
matter, to be very great; yet being reduced to vulgar Arithmeticall terms
(which are better understood by them) will appear to be still lesser and
lesser, and as nothing: As in the fifth or last operation of this first Example
or Demonstration, being under a solution of the Rational Lines to a million of
parts, where the area of the Circle found by its proper Line of diametrall
quadration, exceeds the true area by 528526 square milli-millesms, that is,
528526 parts of the prime Rational Line being 1000000 parts squared, and so
resolved into 1000000,000000 parts: which difference, though it may seem great
by reason of the multitude of the decimall fraction-parts, yet considering the
greatness of their denomination, and being reduced into common arithmeticall
terms (whose numbering part is 1) they will appear to be as nothing, being
hardly 1/1^92^54 of the entire prime Rational Line (as the Intiger or Unity of
Measure) squared, which is but as one part of a square Unit containing 1892054
parts.

And if the Line of Measure first given, be so short as that it cannot be
distinctly divided into 100 parts, according to its own self simply. then may
10 parts reasonably suffice: As suppose here a Rational Line to be of the
former line A B,.1, and divided equally into 10 parts, viz. A b. (which is A B
0. 10) then the second Line, or Line of quadration, viz. C d. will be thereof
1.1 (which is as A B 0.11) answering analogically to A B 1.10, and which
wants of the true additionall parts.03 fere, because the total additionall
centesimall segment of A B is. 13 fere, as was noted before) And let the
Diameter of a Circle, be A b, 1.5 (which is as A B 0.15) then the Peripherie
will be (according to the same division) A b 4.7 (which is as A B 0.47) whose
moiety A b 2.35 (or A B 0.235) together with the semidiameter A b 0.75.
produces the Circle it self in square Integers and parts of A b, 1.76. Now
the diameter A b 1.5 being measured by C d (being also of a denarie or simple
decimall division) becomes but 1.3, whose square is 1.69 for the superficies of
the Circle; which wants of the true content 7 square primes or tenths only,
viz. 7 parts, of the prime Rational Line, or Line of Measure first given, A b
10 parts (as the Integer or Unit of measure) squared, and so resolved into 100
parts, which in vulgar Arithmeticall esteem are hardly 1/14 of the same live
squared, the said line it self being then near 4 parts. Or the diameter being
taken in centesimal parts only of the Line A B, viz. 0.15 the content of the
Circle will be only in square centesms,.00176, exceeding the Square of the
quadratarie parts CD 0.13, viz. 0.0169 by 7 square seconds, or centesms only,
which in common account make but 1/1429 fere of A B squared (the line it self
being then near 38 parts) which is much less then 1/14 for the difference
between the two Measures: so that you may here see, how much 100 parts in the
Line of Measure are better then 10; and therefore they that understand the more
artificial way of dividing lines (commonly called the diagonall way) may
better divide the least Line of Measure, into 100 parts: For this latter
assumed Line A b being but. 1 of the first Line A B, and but about 1/4 of an
Inch or Pollicar may be distinctly divided into 100 parts, being taken
according to the power thereof, so as that any number of centesms may be taken
exactly therefrom.

And now for a further illustration of this our artificial mensuration (or
diametrall quadration) of a Circle. I will add to the former one demonstrative
example more, and that in a larger Circle, whereby the verity hereof may be
further manifested. geometrical diagram Therefore admit the diameter of a
Circle to be of the Prime Rational line in general, under a centesimall
solut^on, 14 (which may be here again for example fake, A B, 14.00) so the
Circumference will be (according to the common Cycloperimetricall Terms)
exactly 44, and thereby the Area, exactly 154. But according to the later and
better terms in a decimall expression before declared; the circumference will
be but (A B) 43.98 (according to the Cycloperimetricall terms in a more vulgar
expression, agreeing with the decimall to the first 7 places as before noted,
it is 4^ 111/113 which is decimally also 43.98 as before) and so the Area (to
square centesms of the Rational Line) but 153.9380 (or 153 106/113, which
agrees exactly with the other to square centesms, being by decimal conversion
153.9380) Now the said diameter (A B) 14.00, being referred to our Line of
Quadrature (or second Rational Line C D) for its measure, will be found but
12.41 fere; whose Quadrat is 154.0081 fere for the Area of the Circle, agreeing
almost exactly with the Area found by the vulgar or Archimedean Cyclometry,
which indeed differs here but little from the true Area, viz. 620 square
Centesms by way of exces, or 620 of 10000, which ma^e in vulgar account about
1/16 of a square unit. And our Measure exceeds the true measure by 701 square
centesms only, or 701 of 10000, which in vulgar terms make about 1/14 of a
square unit. But if the said Diameter be taken by its Line of Quadrature in a
millesimall partition, then it will be found, 12.407, and so being squared will
give 153.933649 for the Circul^r superfice, coming now much nearer the true
one, viz. 153.938040; it distering therefrom by way of defect, only so much as
1/228 fere of a square unit; though indeed it came before as near the same as
need be desired for any ordinary use.

And here we now gather these profitable and delectable proportional
conclusions in the Circle, and that to a millimillenary solution of the unite.

1 The proportion of the Diameter to the Circumference 3.141593 fere Side of
the Square ^quall to the Circle (which is the most near, precise, and proper
squaring of a Circle.) as 1.000000 to.886227 fere Side of y^ inscribed
square.707107 fere, q 1/2

geometrical diagram

Contrarily.
2 The proportion of the Circumference to the Diameter,.318310 fere Side of the
Square equal to the Circle, (which is the second most proper quadrature of a
Circle.) as 110.282095 side of y^ inscribed Square.2250^9

3 The proportion of the Quadrat. Diametrall or circumscribing to the Circle it
self, as 1 to.785398 Circumferential.079577

Contrariwise.
4 The proportion of a Circle to the Quadrat diametrall or circumscribing as 1.
to 1.273240 fere. circumferentiall 12.566371 fere.

And here you may observe the excellency of these proportions, as also of
those of the like kind in the Sphere, and all other the Figures following; in
that the antecedent or first Term is always an Unit, accompanied (or supposed
to be accompanied) with so many Ciphers, as are places in the second term,
which may here signify either a millimillenary composition of the Unity, or
the like resolution of the same, according as the Terms are taken; by means
whereof the solution of the question or proposition is mightily facilitated and
expedited, according to what I said in the beginning: and therefore in the
extraction both of these in the Circle, and also of those in all the other
Figures following, I have used all possible industry and exactness.

PROP. 2. Of the solid dimension of a Sphere.
If the Axis or Diameter of a Sphere, be taken by its proper Line of solid
Measure; I say, that the Cube of the Diameter shall be the solidity of the
Sphere, according to the prime Rational Line: which I thus demonstrate
practically.

ADmit the former Rational Line A B (divided as before) and let the Diameter
of a Sphere be of the same Line entirely taken 2.00, so the solidity thereof
(according to the commonly received Archimedean proportion of the Cube of the
Diameter to the Sphere, 21 to 11, super-decupartient-undecimall) will be 4
4/21: which appears also by the Circumference of the greatest Circle of the
Sphere, 6 2/7 (in respect of the subtriple sesquiseptimall proportion of the
Diameter to it) for this being infolded with the diameter, gives the total
unequal superficies of the Sphere, 1^ 4/7, whose 1/3, viz. 4 4/21 being infolded
in like manner with the Semidiameter (A B 1.00) or the 1/6 viz. 2 2/11
(answering to the square Plane or Base of the inscribed Cube) infolded with the
whole diameter, produces the total sphericall solidity 4 4/21 as before.

Now for the more artificial and expeditious dimension of this Sphere (and so
of all others by the same reason) and for the comparing of this our new way
with the vulgar or natural: I augment the line A B to.24 of the same, (for
just so much is the additionall segment in Centesimall parts) for the second,
supposed, compound, artificial, (or Cubatory) Rational Line, which is here
the Line E F, so that E F is A B 1.24, and then dividing the fame into 100
parts also: I measure the diameter of the Sphere A B 2.00 (being in one line
at length) by the Line E F, (the Line or geometrical diagram Scale of Cubature)
and find it to be of the same 1.61, which Cubed, gives 4.173281, for the solid
content of the Sphere, agreeing exactly with the former solidity in the
integrall part: But the fractionall part of that solidity, 4/21, being
converted into milli-millesms, or Cubicall centesms, gives.190476, which our
measure comes short of by 17195 cubecentesms, and which in common practice is
not considerable, being in vulgar terms but 1/58 of a Cube unit. But yet our
solidity wants of the truest solidity not so much by 1686 Cube-Centesms,
which in vulgar terms are but about 1/593 (for so much the former common
solidity does here exceed the true solidity:) For indeed the true solidity of
this Sphere will be found (according to the truest proportion of the diameter
to the greatest Circles circumference, noted before in the dimension of a
Circle, and so according to the truest proportion of the Cube of the Diameter
to the Sphere it self noted afterward) to be (in the more common
expression) 4 64/339. For the Diameter being 2, the greatest or true
circumference will be 6 32/113 and so by the mutual implication of these two.
the total sphericall superficles, 12 64/113, whose 1/3 viz. 4 64/339, together
with the semidiameter, or the 1/6 viz. 2 31/339 with the Diameter, will produce
the solidity of the Sphere, 4 64/339 as before; which the vulgar solidity 4
4^/21 exceeds by 12/7119, and which is very near equivalent to 1/5^3: Now this
solidity, 4 ^4/339 being expressed decimally to cubick centesms, is 4.188790,
and so the true solidity will be found to be by the decimall operation: For the
Diameter being 2, the greatest Periphery will be found 6.283185, and thereby
the total superficies 12.566370, whose 1/3 being 4.188790 will here be the
solidity of the Sphere, or the 1/6 viz. 2.094395 being augmented by the
Diameter, will produce 4.188790 for the solidity, as before; which the solidity
found by our way, 4.173281, wants of but 15509 cube-centesms, and which being
reduced to more vulgar terms, make not so much as 1/64 of a cubicall Integer or
unit. And yet this inconsiderable defect happens for the like reason that was
before declared in the measuring of the Circle: For that here the measure taken
by the Line E F for the Diameter of the Sphere (being the double of the Line A
B) is not precisely 1.61, but rather more, though upon the Line it self, it
cannot be distinguished therefrom, being so very little, but only by number (as
the first Line A B simply, compared with the second E F, is neither.80 nor.81
exactly, but will fall about the middle between them both, as you may perceive
if you divide the Line A B into 1000 parts (which may easily be done) for then
the Line E F will be thereof 1.241 fere, and then the first compared with the
second (being also divided into 1000 parts) will be 0.806, which points out
about the middle between.80 and.81, upon the Line E F being 100: for these two
are in millesms.800 and.810, but the true measure upon the Line E F is.806.)
And therefore the Line E F being made 1000 parts, A B 2.000 (for the diameter
of the Sphere) will be thereby 1.612, whose Cube is 4.1888^2928 for the
solidity of the Sphere, which now insensibly differs from the true solidity,
being here correspondently 4.188790205 fere, it differing therefrom (by way of
excess) only 62723 cube-millesms (or by contraction, about 63 cube-centesms)
that is, 62723 parts of the prime Rational Line A B (being 1000) cubed, and so
resolved into 1000000000 parts, which in vulgar terms make hardly 1/1^943 of a
Cube-integer or unit.

Again, suppose the Diameter of a Sphere to be of the lesser, or simple
decimall Rational Line A b, 1.5 (which is in parts only of the greater or
centesimall Line A B 0.15) so the greatest periphery will be of the same, 4.7
(in parts only of A B 0.47) as formerly in the second practical demonstration
upon the Circle) which two infolded together, do produce the superficies of the
Sphere in square or superficial Integers and prime decimall parts of A b,
7.05 (in square centesimall parts only of AB 0.0705) whose 1/3 viz. 2.35 (or
0.0235) being infolded with half the Diameter A b 0.75 (or A B 0.075) or the
1/6, viz. 1.175 (or, 0.01175) with the whole Diameter, A b 1.5 (or A B 0.15) do
produce the total Sphere in solid Integers and prime parts of A b, 1.762 (in
solid centesimall parts only of A B 0.001762) Now A b 1.5 for the Diameter of
the Sphere, upon E f the proper correspondent Line of Cubation (being A b, 1.2
(viz. A B 0.12) which in Centesms make but 1.20, wanting indeed of the true
additionall parts.04, for that the total segment of A B in centesms, to be
added, is.24, as before has been showed) divided also into 10 parts, is 1.2,
whose Cube is 1.728, for the solid content of the Sphere wanting of the true
content, only 34 cube-primes, or simple decimall parts, viz. 34 of 1000, which
in a common arithmetical account, are only about 1/29 of the Line A b (as the
Integer of measure) cubed, and which difference will be in the centesimall
operrtion (by parts only of the Line A B) but 34 cube-centesms, viz. 34 of
1000000, or more vulgarly 1 of 29412 fere: For that the Diameter of the Sphere
being put A B 0.15, the same will be upon the correspondent Line of Cubation E
F 0.12, whose Cube, 0.001728, is for the solidity of the Sphere, which wants
of the true solidity, 0.001762, only as aforesaid.

And here we may observe by the way, how this Sphere and the second Circle
before supposed, do agree, to wit, in that they both having the same diametral
number, have also the very same dimensionall or are all number, the one
superficial, the other solid; viz. in Integers and parts of the Line A b,
1.76, etc. in parts only of the Line A B.0176, in the Circle, and.00176 etc. in
the Sphere: which will further appear, if their common Diameter be taken
according to a more ample division (or partial denomination) of the Rational
Line, and so consequently, the superficial content of the one, and the solid
content of the other, how far soever they be extended decimally, (and then also
indeed they will be found somewhat greater.) And this may also plainly appear by
the more usual or common arithmeticall expression of their Diameter (and so of
their other parts of dimension) viz. A b 1 1/2, (or A B 3/20, in the least
proportional terms to A B 0.15) and so their periphery, in the reason of the
common (or Archimedean) Cycloperimetricall terms (7 and 22) A b 4 5/^; or
rather of the Metian terms, 113 and 355 (before noted) 4 161/226 (in proper
parts answering to A B 3/2^ is A B 1065/2260) whose 1/2 A b 2 161/452 (or A B
1065/4520) together with the semidiameter A b 3/4 (or A B 3/40) do produce the
area of the Circle, 1 1387/18^8; which converted into square primes, or simple
decimals, (according to the division of the Line A b) is 1.76: or the area in
parts only, 3195/180800 converted into square seconds or centesms (according to
the partition of the Line A B) is 0.0176, as before. Then the Diameter, and so
the Circumference of the Sphere being the same with those of the Circle, these
two conjunctly, produce the Sphericall superficies according to A b, 7 31/452,
(in parts only according to A B, 3195/^4520) whose 1/6 viz. 1 483/2172 (or
3195/27^2^^) together with the diameter 1 ^/2 (or 3/20) or the 1/3 viz. 2
483/1356 (or 3195/135600) with the Semidiameter 3/4 (or 3/40) do produce the
Sphericall solidity, 1 4161/3414, which in the decimall expression to millesms,
or cubicall prime decimall parts (according to the division of the Line A b) is
1.767 (and so much it is really; exceeding the solidity formerly cast up, by 5
cube-primes:) And the solidity in parts only, 9585/5424000 is in
milli-millesms, or cube-centesms (according to the division of the Line A B)
0.001767. So as that the superficiality of the Circle, and the solidity of the
Sphere being put in vulgar fractional terms (either proper in respect of parts
only, or improper in respect of Integers and parts) viz. the Circle 3195/1^^8
00, and the Sphere 9585/5424 000, they will be found to be proportional among
themselves, viz. as the Denominatours are each to other, so also are the
Numerators; for as 1808 -- 00 to 5424 -- 000, so 3195 to 9585, and so
convertibly.

geometrical diagram And here also (as before in the Circle) I have first used
smaller numbers in demonstrating the use of our artificial Line, for the
diametrall cubation of a Sphere: And therefore for a further and fuller
clearing of the same, I shall add one example in a larger Sphere, whose
diameter or Axis let be according to any Rational Line whatsoever, 21, exactly
(which for the present purpose may here also be A B 21.00) so its cube 9261,
and thereupon the total Sphere it self (according to the forementioned
vulgar proportional terms of the diametrall Cube to its Sphere,
super-decupartientundecimall) will be exactly 4851. For the Diameter being 21,
the greatest circumference of the Sphere will be (according to the most vulgar
Cycloperimetricall terms aforesaid) exactly 66, and thereby the total
Sphericall, exactly 1386, a sextant whereof, viz. 231 (answering to the Base of
the inscribed Cube which subtends the same) being infolded with the Diameter
(or a trient, viz 462, with the semidiameter 10 1/2) produces the solidity of
the Sphere (as before) 4851. which may beobtained diverse other ways, (as
Clavtus shows) but these are the readiest. But now according to the most
approved (decimal) Cycloperimetricall terms before declared, the diameter being
21.00, the greatest Clav. Geom. pract lib. 5. cap. 5. prop. 7
circumference will be but 65.97 (or according to the Metian terms before
noted, agreeing with the decimall to the first 7 places, it is 65 110/113) and
so the Sphericall, or the superficial Area (to square centesms of the
Rational Line) but 1385.4424 fere (or 1385 50/113) whose 1/6 viz. 230.9071
fere, or 230.907060 (or 230 615/678) together with the diameter, or the 1/3
viz. 461.8141, (or 461 92/113) with the semidiameter 10.5 (or 10 1/2) produces
the total Sphe^r or solid Area (to cube-centesms of the Rational Line) but
4849.048261 (or 4849 ^3/6^8, agreeing nearly with the decimall operation, this
la^^er being in decimall terms, 4849.048672) which is less then the sphericall
solidity found out first, by very near two integers or units. Now the said
diameter (A B) 21.00, being taken by its Line of Cubature (E F) will be found
16.93 fere, whose Cube is 4852.559557 fere, for the solidity of this Sphere,
exceeding the solidity first found, by 1.5, and the second by 3.^, the reason
of which differences I have declared partly in the former operations upon the
Sphere and the Circle, and more fully hereafter; though in ordinary measuring,
this difference is of but little account, especially in a Sphere of so great a
magnitude. But if the diameter be taken by a Line of 1000 parts, then it will
be found 16.926, which cubed, yields 4849.119178176, for the solidity,
differing now from the true solidity, 4849.048260, etc (by way of excess) only
as much as 1/14 of a Cube-unit. By which the verity of our diametrall-cubick
dimension, or diametrall cubation of a Sphere, sufficiently appears.

And here note, that what we have now done in the Diameter of the Circle and
Another superficial (or quadrate) dimension of a Circle, and solid (or Cubick)
dimension of a Sphere: viz. By their Circumfe: rences: and the Artificial
Lines of Measure for the same.
Sphere, to make the Square of the one, equal to its Circle, and the Cube of
the other equal to its Sphere: The like may be done also for their
Circumferences: so the Line for squaring the Circumference of a Circle, will be
of the prime Rational Line (under a decu-millesimal par^ition) 3.5449. and for
Cubing the greatest or true Circumference of a Sphere, will be 3.8978: and
which perhaps may be of more general use then those for the diameters, because
that commonly the Circumference of a Circle and Sphere (in materiate things,
where the Center is not apparent) must first be had, before their diameter can
exactly, (especially in a Sphere) for then that must be had by proportional
argumentation; though indeed the diameter of a Sphere may be taken at first as
well (if not better) by a pair of Callaper Compasses, where the same may be
had ready upon occasion, and then the Line for the diameter may better be used.

And other Lines also of the like nature may be fitted to the Diameter The
superficial dimension of a Sphere, only by squaring its Diam. and
Circumference. And the artificial Lines of Measure for performing the same.
and Circumference of a Sphere, as to Superficial Measure: As namely to make
their particular Quadrats, equal to the unequal sphericall superficies: So the
Line of measure for this purpose, will be for the diameter, of the Rational
Line (deficiently) ^q. Diam, ad periph. 1 viz..1 --.68-169. etc.
0.564 etc. (viz. as A B 10000, etc. --.4358, etc. from the segment of
diminution) and for the (greatest or true) Circumference (redundantly) ^q.
Periph. ad Diam. 1. as in page 19. and see page 30. and 31. Numb. 2.
1.772 etc. And hence we may here raise this practical proposition. viz. If
the Diameter or Circumference of a Sphere, be taken by their proper and
peculiar artificial Lines for superficial measure; That then their several
Quadrats, shall be equal to the Superficial Area of the Sphere (or to the
Sphericall) according to the prime or natural Rational Line.

ANd so supposing the former Sphere, whose diameter being first put (of the
prime Rational Line) exactly 21, the sphericall unequal superfice was found
(according to the true or greatest Periphery 65.97 etc.) 1385.4424. Now the
said Diameter being taken by its proper Line of Quadrature (in a centesimall
partition) will be found 37.22, whose Square is, 1385.3284, for the sphericall
superfice; agreeing almost exactly (in the very parts of measure) with the
other.

And so again likewise the greatest Periphery of a Sphere, being first put (of
the Rational Line) exactly 66, the true Diameter will be found (of the same)
21.008 etc. and thereby, the sphericall superficies, 1386.5579 fere. Now the
said Periphery being measured by its proper Line of Quadiature (under a
centesimall solution) will be found, 37.24 fere, which squared, gives 1386.8176
fere, for the unequal superfice, or the Surface of the Sphere; exceeding the
other, only about 1/4 of a square integer (or unit) as of the Measure first
appointed.

And here we now gather these useful and excellent proportional Corollaries
in the Sphere, viz.

1 The proportion of the Axis or Diameter to the Periphery of the greatest
Circle, and contra: is the same with that of the Diam. of a Circle to its
Circumference, and contra. Side of the Cube equal to the Sphere (which is the
nearest, precisest, and properest cubing of a Globe or Sphere.) as 1. to.806040
Side of the Quadrat equal to the unequal sphericall superfice, (which may not
altogether unaptly, be termed the squaring of a Sphere; but most truly the
squaring of the Sphericall: and that the nearest and properest also.) (fere.
1.772454

2. The proportion of the greatest or true Circumference to the Side of the
Cube equal to the Sphere (which is the next most proper cubing of a Sphere.)
as 1. to.256556 Side of the Quadrat, equal to the unequal superficies; (which
may be termed he next most proper squa^ing of the Sphaericall.).564189

3. The proportion of the Cube of the Axis or Diameter to the Sphere it self as
1. to.523599 Greatest Periphery.016887 f.

Contrariwise.

4 The proportion of the total Sphere to the Cube of the Axis or Diameter. as
1. to 1.909859 Greatest Periphery. 59.217626

5 The proportion of the Quadrat of the Diameter. To the total superficies as
1. to 3.14159, etc. being the same with that of the Diam. to the Circumf.
Periphery 0.318310 fere, being the same with that of the Circumference to the
Diam.

Conversly.

6 The proportion of the total superficie of a Sphere to the quadrat of the
Diameter Is the same with that of the Peripheriall Quadrat to the total
superficies, (or the Circumference to the Diameter.) Periphery Is the same with
that of the Diametrall Quadrat to the total superficies (or the Diam. to the
Circums.)

As for the proportion of the Diameter and greatest Periphery to the side of
the inscribed Cube; I shall deliver the same afterward, among the proportions
in the five plain Regular bodies inscribed in a Sphere, Part 2. Sect. 3.

PROP. 3. Of the solid dimension of a Cylinder and Cone.
If the (basiall) Diameter, and the Axis of a right Cylinder, be taken by their
proper Line of Measure, and the Quadrat of the Diameter be augmented by the
Axis; I say, that the resulting rectangle, regular-based Prisma or
Parallelepipedon, shall be solidly equal to the Cylinder. And the like in a
Cone. Both which I do here practically confirm.

AS suppose here the former Rational Line A B, and let the Axis of a right
Cylinder, be only A B 0.75, and the Diameter A B 0.25, So the Circumference
being of the same 0.78, the Base will be (in superficial centesms only of A B)
0.0487, which augmented by the Axis will produce the solidity of the Cylinder
(in solid centesimall parts only of A B) 0.036525. geometrical diagram Now for
the more artificial and expeditious dimension of the Cylinder, and also a
comparing of it with the former, vulgar or natural way, and thereby a
comprobation of the same: I draw the Line G H (for the second, supposed, or
artificial Rational Line) to the length of A B, (the primary, true, or natural
Line) and moreover.08 of the same, and so G H will be A B 1.08, which I also
divide here as the Line A B. Then comparing the Axis A B 0.75 and the diameter
A B 0.25, with their proper and peculiar Line of measure (or Line of
rectangleparallelepipedation) G H; I find the Axis to be of the same, 0.69,
and the Diameter, 0.23, whose Square 0.0529, for the Base, being drawn through
the Axis, does produce the Rectangle regular-based Prism, or Parallelepip.
0.036501, for che Cylindricall solidity, which falls short of the former
measure but 24 Cube-centesms only, which in common account, make but 1/41667
fere of A B cubed: which difference would be 24 Cube-primes (or 1/42 fere) if
the Cylinder were measured by the Lines of 10 parts (according as one of the
Circles and Spears before proposed) as A b the natural Line, and so the
correspondent artificial Line, whose quantity would here be G H 0.1. (being A
b 1.1 fere, viz. A B 0.11 fere) for then it would be in Integers and parts,
36.525 by the common or natural way, and 36.501, by our way. geometrical
diagram And by the same artificial Line of measure which is used in a
Cylinder, may the solid content of a Cone be also obtained; the Diameter of its
Base, and also its Axis being taken thereby, and so a Cylinder raised
thereupon, (according to the foregoing proposition) whose sub-triple will be
the content of the Cone; seeing that a Cone i^ the subtriple of a Cylinder of
equal base and altitude (by Eucl. 12. prop. 10.) As let the basiall Diameter,
and the Axis of a right Cone be the same with those of the foregoing Cylinder,
viz. naturally, A B, 0.25, (the said Diameter) and A B 0.75 (the Axis) then
will the solid content of the Cone be naturally, 0.012175, as being a trient of
the Cylinder 0.036525. And so the Diameter of the base being artificially G H,
0.23, and the Axis G H, 0.69, the solid content of the Cone will be
artificially, 0.012167, as being the sub-triple of the Cylinder. 0.036501,
which wants of the true or natural measure, only 8 solid Centesms, and which
in a more vulgar expression, are but 1/125000 of the prime Rational Line A B
(as the Integer of measure) cubed, the said Line it self simply (as the Root or
Side) being then just 50 parts.

But indeed (which is the most absolute, complete, and compendious way) the
very same artificial dimension which is used in a Cylinder; will hold good in a
Cone, and so may be as properly and fitly applied thereunto, (according to the
last Proposition) whereby the solid content thereof shall be immediately
produced, as that of a Cylinder (even as if it were a Cylinder) notwithstanding
the continual diminution of its body between the Base and the top or point.
And the artificial Line of measure for this purpose; I noted at the beginning,
to be of the Rational Line in general, 1.5632 fere, and which for the present
purpose will here be (according to the foregoing practical demonstrations) of
the centesimall Line, A B 1.56, which is here the Line I K, (divided as the
former Lines) By which the basiall Diameter of the fore-supposed Cone,
(naturally A B 0.25) being taken, the same I find to be thereof, 0.16, whose
Quadrat, 0.0256, is for the Base of the Cone: And then the Axis (naturally A B
0.75) being also measured by the same Line, becomes thereof, 0.48 fere, which
wholly infolded with the whole artificial Base, produces the solidity of this
accute-angled Cone, 0.012288 fere, which exceeds the true solidity
before-noted, viz. 0.012175, by 113 solid centesms only, and which in vulgar
terms, make but 1/8850 fere, viz. as one part of a solid Integer or unit,
divided into 8850 parts.

And thus having first wrought by smaller numbers of dimension (or parts of
measure) in the Cylinder and Cone, as before in the Circle and Sphere, for the
demonstrating of their artificial solid dimensions: I will here add one
example in larger numbers of dimension, which shall serve for both these Solids
together, whereby the sufficie^cie of this our artificial dimension in the same
may further appear. Let therefore the Diameter of a Cylinder be of the prime
Rational Line (whatsoever it be) 7. (or which may be here again for
demonstration-sake, A B 7.00) so the Base thereof will be immediately (according
to the common Tetragonismal terms. super-tripartient-undecimall, before
mentioned) 38 1/2. geometrical diagram Or the Diameter being 7, the
Circumference will be (by the common Cycloperimetry) 22. and thereby the base 38
1/2: or by Euclids tetragonismall reason (before declared) by diminishing the
diametral Quadrat 49 by 3/1^ of the same, viz. 10 1/11 and so there remains 38
1/2 for the Basial Area, as before. But by the later and better
Cycloperimetricall Terms, the Diameter being (A B) 7.00 the Periphery will be
but (A B) 21.99 (or by the more vulgar expression of the same terms, it will be
21 112/113, which agrees decimally with the former) and thereupon the Basiall
Area (to square centesms of the Rational Line) 38.4845 (or 38 219/452,
agreeing with the decimall Area.) Then let the Axis of the Cylinder be (A B)
12.00, into which being drawn the said Basiall Area, there will arise the solid
Area of the Cylinder, 461.814120 (or 461 92/113, which by the first base 38
1/2, is 462 exactly) Now the said Cylindricall Diameter (A B) 7.00 being tried
by its proper Line of Quadrature (G H) will be found 6.46 fere, for the
artificial Diameter, which squared, gives 41.7316 fere, for the Artificial
base: and the Altitude (A B) 12.00, being tried by the same Line, will be found
11.07, for the artificial Axis of the Cylinder, by which the said Base being
increased, there resulteth the Cylinder (according to the natural or prime
Rational Line) 461.968812 fere, agreeing with the former exactly in solid
Integers (of the same Line) and not considerably differing therefrom in parts,
it amounting but to 1/6 of a Cube-Integer or Unit, at most, by way of excess.

And so a Cone being of equal Altitude and Diameter (in the Base, and so of
equal base) with the foresaid Cylinder, the sub-triple thereof shall be the
total Oxygoniall Cone, viz. 153.938040 (or 153 106/113) which by the first
base 38 1/2, is 154 exactly; and which agrees exactly with the Circle last
handled whose Diameter was put 14) as appears by the most usual dimension of
a Cone, by enfolding the Base with a trient of the Altitude, which here being
(A B) 4.00, produces the Conicall solidity as before, (or a trient of the base
with the Axis produces the same.)

Now the Basiall Diameter (A B) 7.00, by its proper Line of Quadrature (I K)
will be 4.48 fere, for the artificial Diameter, whose Quadrat is 20.0704 fere,
for the artificial geometrical diagram Base of the Cone: And the Axis or
altitude (A B) 12.00, will be found by the same Line, 7.68 fere, (for the
total artificial Axis of the Cone) which infolded with the whole Base,
produces the total Cone in the natural measure (according to the prime
Rational Line) 154.140672 fere, which agrees nearly with the most true
measure, viz. 153.938040, it exceeding the same only about 1/^ of a Cubick or
solid Integer or Unit. And if these two dimensions were performed by Lines of a
more ample or numerous division, as 1000, etc. then they would be found to
agree still more and more with the natural, dimension, even in the very parts
of measure: though in these very operations, which we have here performed, they
agree sufficiently, to demonstrate the verity of our artificial dimension.

And here observe, that as in the Circle and Sphere, we showed, how that the
superficiality of the one, and both the superficiality and solidity of the
other, were obtained artificially, not only by the bare Quadration and Cubation
of their Diameters, but also of their Circumferences, by the like artificial
Lines of measure accommodated to them: So likewise in the Cylinder and Cone,
may the solidity be had, not only by the induction, implication, or involution
of the Quadrat of their Basiall Diameter into their Axis (as we have already
showed in both of them) but also of the Quadrat of their Basiall circumference
into their Axis, these being (both of them,) The solid dimension of a Cylinder
and Cone by their Basiall Peripheries, and their Axes together. And the
artificial Lines of measure for the same.
taken by one and the same Line of measure: So the Line for squaring the
circumference (of the Base) of a Cylinder, (for its Base) will be of the
Rational Line, 2.32489: and for squaring the Basiall circumference of a Cone,
3.3531; which two Lines being divided as the former, and the Basial
circumferences (as also the Axes) of these two Bodies taken thereby, may
sometimes prove to be of more satisfaction then those for the basiall Diameters,
to wit, where the basiall centers of these Bodies are not apparent, (especially
if the Bases of the Cylinder or Cone to be measured be very large) according as
I noted before in the Circle and Sphere. But indeed, where the Diameters may be
first exactly taken, either in these two Figures, or in the other two before
going, it will be much easier and readier in practice, then by the
Circumferences, in regard both, that the artificial Lines of measure serving
thereunto, are much shorter, and also that the Diametrall numbers being much
lesser or smaller then the circumferentiall, the Arithmetical operations
following thereupon, in casting up the superficial and solid contents, will be
sooner expedited, unless the same be performed Geometrically (as I may term
it) or Instrumentally, viz. by Scale and Compasses, or the like (as I shall in
the very close of this Book by way of conclusion declare) for then the latter
may be performed thereby, even as soon as the former.

And now you may observe here by the way, how that although the base of a
Cylinder and Cone be a Circle, and its Area be here had also, by the only
quadration of the Diameter or Circumference, as before was done in the Circle,
whereby the same artificial Lines of measure that are there used, might also
perhaps seem to serve here, (and which indeed in some sort may, as I shall
straight way show) yet for the obtaining of the solidities of these Bodies, by
the implication or induction of the Quadrat of their Basial Diameter or
Circumference into their Axis (either of these two basiall Lines, with the
Axis, in each of these two Bodies, being taken by one and the same proper,
distinct, artificial Line of measure, as before has been sufficiently showed)
the Lines there appropriated to a Circle cannot here hold for their Bases; for
the Diameters or Circumferences here of being taken by those Lines, will be
either greater or lesser (in the number or parts of measure; according to
quantity discrete) then by their own proper Lines; (and so their Quadrats for
the Bases, and consequently the solid contents will be greater or lesser then
they ought to be; what artificial Line of measure soever, the Axis should be
measured by.) For so in a Cylinder and Cone, the Diameter of the Base being
taken by the artificial Line belonging to the Diameter of a Circle, for its
quadrate dimension thereby (being simply and absolutely considered in it self
alone as a Circle) will be found in the Cylinder to be somewhat less, and in
the Cone much greater, (in the number or parts of measure, as in a Quantity
discrete) then being taken by its proper artificial Line for the quadrate
dimension of the Base, as in reference to the solid dimension of the Cylinder
and Cone, performed wholly by the said Line of Measure, from the Basiall
Diameter and the Axis together.

And then, both in a Cylinder and Cone, the circumference of the Base being
taken by the artificial Line, belonging to the circumference of a Circle
simply, for its quadrate dimension thereby; will be found less (as falling
under the notion or nature of a Quantity discrete, as aforesaid) then by its
proper, respective, artificial Line, for the squaring of the base thereby, as
in relation to the solid dimension of the Cylinder and Cone, wholly performed
by the said Line, from the Basiall Circumference, and the Axis together.

As in the Cylinder and Cone last handled; where the Diameter of the Base being
put naturally (A B) 7.00, the same was there found to be artificially (G H)
6.46 fere, and (I K) 4.48 fere, and which will be found by the Line (of
Quadrature) pertaining to the Diameter of a Circle, simply (C D) to be 6.20,
viz. somewhat less then that of G H, and much greater then that of I K.

And so there again, the Circumference of the Base being naturally (A B) 22
fere; the same will be found to be artificially, by the Line for squaring the
(Basiall) Circumference of a Cylinder (as in reference to its solid dimension
by the Circumference and Axis together) 9.46; and by the Line for squaring the
basiall Circumference of a Cone (as in relation to its solid dimension in the
like manner) 6.56, and which by the Line for the Circumferentiall quadration of
a Circle, simply, will be found 6.20 (as the Diameter before, by its proper
Line of quadrature (C D) which is less then either of the other.

Therefore, if the basiall Diameter or Circumference of a Cylinder and Cone, be
taken by the Lines of (Diametrall and Circumferentiall) quadration, properly,
peculiarly, and simply pertaining to a Circle, and so its Quadrat be made the
Base of the Cylinder or Cone; then must the Axis be taken by the Prime
Rational Line: (And so the dimension will be mixed.) For that here the Area of
the Base, will fall immediately, in the true, natural, measure, (as under the
dimensionall reason of the prime, true, or natural Rational Line) according as
has been demonstrated before in the dimension of a Circle.

As here the Basiall diameter of the Cylinder and Cone, naturally (A B) 7.00
taken by the Line C D is 6.20 (or 6.2, as I showed even now) whose Quadrat.
38.4400 (or 38.44 only) for the Base, (which was found before, to be most truly
and naturally, 38.4845) being drawn into the Axis, put before, naturally, (A B)
12.00, will give the Cylindricall solidity (in the dimensionall reason of A B)
461.280000, (or 461.28 only) and so the Conicall solidity, 153.76; which differ
(by way of defect) from the true, natural solidities (produced wholly by the
Line A B) viz. of the Cylinder, 461.814120, about 1/2 of a cubique Integer or
Unit, as of A B cubed: and so of the Cone, viz. 153.938040, about 1/6 of a
cube-integer only, as of the same Line Cubed; And the solidity of the Cylinder,
produced artificially by its proper Line of measure (G H) viz. 461.968812 fere,
differs therefrom (by way of excess) only about 1/6 of a cubeinteger; and
the solidity of the Cone produced in like manner, by its proper artificial
Line of measure (I K) viz. 154.140672 fere, only about 1/5 of a cubique or
solid Integer of the natural measure (as of A B considered cubically) as
before has been showed,

All which several solid dimensions (both natural and artificial, and mixed
of both) do so nearly agree one with another, as that their differences are
altogether inconsiderable. And the same will happen in the solid dimensions of
these two Bodies, by the other Line of Quadrature pertaining simply to a
Circle, as to the quadration of their Basiall Peripheries, for their basiall
Area's, and withal by the prime or natural Rational Line, as to the
dimension of their Axes or Altitudes.

And now, as for the Axis (or Altitude) of a right or erect Cone, you may here
observe, that though the same cannot immediately be taken Instrumentally; or by
a Line of Measure (as it is within the body of the Cone) as that of a Cylinder
(being parallel to, and so agreeable with the side,) by reason of the
inequality of its Body between the Base and the Cuspe, or vertical point; but
being obtained purely Geometrically, must be had by mediation of the Side (as
being the side of a rectiline rectangle Triangle, subtending the right angle,
and therefore potentially equal, or equally potent to the two containing,
comprehending, or including sides. by E. 1. p. 47.) and of the basiall Ray,
(being one of the sides about the right angle (and most commonly the lesser,)
and so the side of the Cone, and the radial line of its base, being first taken
Instrumentally or Mechanically, the Axis will be had Trigonometrically,
according to the reason of the forecited prop. of Euclid.) Yet may the same be
obtained most readily (out of the Cone) by a Line of measure, if from a Plane
constituted in the top, or vertical point of the Cone, parallel to the Base,
you let down a Perpendicular-line to the Plane on which the Base is, (and which
may fall precisely upon the Basiall periphery) for that (being measured) shall
be equal to the true Axis of the Cone. And thus also may the altitude of any
oblique, scalene, or inclined Cone be taken; and also of an oblique, scalene,
or inclined Cylinder; if from the top of the Cone to the Plane in which the
Base is set, or from the superior base of the Cylinder, to the Plane of the
inferior base, be let fall a perpendicular-line; for that (being measured)
shall be the altitude of the oblique, or inclined Cylinder or Cone; and so
being infolded with the whole base, if a Cylinder (whether measured by the
natural or the artificial Line of measure) shall make the solidity of the
same: or being infolded with a trient of the base, if a Cone, (or the base with
a trient of that) and measured by the natural Line; or else the whole
perpendicular of altitude with the whole base, if measured by the artificial
Line proper to a Cone, shall produce the solidity of the oblique Cone; seeing
that such a Cylinder and Cone, is equal to a right Cylinder and Cone, having
the same base and altitude See also E. 11. p. 31, and E. 1. p. 35, 36, 37, 38.
with it, (according to the reason of E. 12. p. 11, and p. 14.)

And after the same manner will the true altitude of any Pyramid, whether right
or oblique, be had, as of a right or oblique Cone, and the altitude of an
oblique or inclined Prisme, as of an oblique or inclined Cylinder; the
dimension of which bodies, especially the Pyramidal (both solidly and
superficially) according to our new artificial way (together with the natural
or vulgar, by way of dimensionall comparison) I shall show next after the
dimension of rightlined ordinate Planes or Superficies, seeing that upon any of
them may be erected or constituted a Pyramid or Prisme; as a Cone or Cylinder
upon a Circle.

SECT. III. Of the Superficial Dimension of a Cylinder and Cone.
ANd as we have here showed the most artificial and expeditious dimension of
the Cylinder and Cone, in respect of their Stereometry, or solid measure; so we
shall likewise demonstrate their dimensions in respect of Planometry, or
superficial Measure. And the artificial Lines for the performing hereof, I
find, for the Cylinder, (in respect of its Diameter and Side together) to be
of the prime Rational Line, the same with that which was formerly found to be
for the obtaining of the Superficies of a Sphere, by the only quadration of the
Diameter, viz. 0.564, etc. And for the Cone (in relation to its basiall
diameter, and its side conjunctly) 0.79788 (which according to the parts of
diminution, is as A B 1.00000 --.20212) and in relation to its basiall
periphery and side together, it will be 1.4142, etc, (viz. q 2) which several
Lines being exactly set off from the prime Rational Line, and then divided as
the same, and so the basiall diameter, and the side of a Cylinder, and of a
Cone; and also the basiall Circumference, and the side of a Cone together, be
taken by their peculiar, respective, distinct artificial Lines of Measure, and
so multiplied together, their several products shall be the superficial
contents of the Cylinder and Cone, according to the prime Rational Line:
where, by the superficies of a Cylinder and Cone, must be understood without
their Bases; for so the Superficies of these two Solids are generally taken by
Artists, and are called by the Latin Geometers, especialy Ramus, (in one word)
Cylindraceum, and Conicum, that is as much as to say in English, the
Cylindraceall or Cylindricall, and the Conicall; and so the Superficies of a
Sphere is called by them Sphaericum, viz. the Sphericall. But now for a brief
dilucidation of these superficial dimensions in the Cylinder and Cone, I shall
lay down an example in each of these three artificial Metricall Lines (though
here I do not draw them, but only express them by number) whereby the verity
of these our dimensions also, may plainly appear, to those that shall please
to make trial thereof. And first we may hereupon raise this practical
Proposition, viz.

If the (basiall) Diameter, and the Side of a right Cylinder; And the basiall
Diameter or Periphery, and the Side of a right Cone, be taken by their proper
and peculiar, distinct artificial Lines of Measure, and the same be severally
infolded together: That the resulting rectangle Parallelogram, shall be equal
to the Cylindricall and Conicall Superficies, (according to the reason of the
prime Rational Line.) THerefore, suppose here first the Cylinder last handled,
whose Diameter was put (of the Prime Rational Line) exactly 7, and so the
Circumference (according to the most common Cycloperimetricall terms) was
exactly 22, and the altitude (which is the same with the side) was put exactly
12, and these two infolded together, do produce the Superficies of the Cylinder
(without the two Bases) exactly, 264: whereby this Cylinder becomes absolute in
all its dimensions; But by the other Cycloperimetricall terms, the
Circumference was but 21.99 etc. (or 21 112/113) whereby, the Superficies
becomes now (to square centesms of the Rational Line) but 263.8938, (or more
vulgarly 263 101/113) Now if the Diameter of the Cylinder naturally 7, be
measured by its proper artificial Line of superficial measure (being as A B
0.56, made 100) the same will be found, 12.41 fere, and the Side of the
Cylinder naturally 12, being measured by the same Line, will be found, 21.27
fere, which two multiplied together, produce 263.9607 fere, for the superficies
of the Cylinder, agreeing with the true superficies, exactly in Integers (or
Units) of measure, and differing therefrom in the fraction-parts (by way of
excess) but as 1/14 of a square integer or unit. And if the first or natural
Line of measure be made 1000, and so the second or artificial Line (being
thereof 0.564) be also made 1000, then the said Diameter taken thereby, will be
12.407, and the Side will be 21.269, which two multiplied together, will produce
the Cylindrical Superfice, 263.884483, differing from the true one, viz.
263.893783 (now by way of defect) only as 1/108 fere, of a square integer or
unit of the appointed measure. Which excellent compend in the superficiarie
dimension of a Cylinder by its Diameter and Side only, will further and fullier
appear, if it be compared with the most natural or vulgar way, in respect of
the Side and Diameter only given: where, by the Diameter, the Circumference
being proportionally obtained, must then be multiplied into the side, to make
the Superficies (for that the Superficies of a right Cylinder is most
naturally, a Plane made of the Circumference and the side thereof) and the
obtaining of this by the Diameter and Side; Mr. Oughtred in his Book entitled
The Circles of Proportion, Part 1. Chap. 7. Sect. 10. delivers in this
proportional manner.

As 7 to 22, Or 1 to 3.1416.

So the Diameter and side multiplied together,

To the Superficies (viz. without the two bases.) And so in this our Cylinder,
the Diameter being put 7, and the side 12, I say,

As 7 to 22, or rather, 1 to 3.14159 etc. (or 113 to 355) So 7 into 12, viz. 84,

To 264, the Superficies,

Or rather 263.89378 etc (or 263 101/113) as first by the Circumference and
side together: which two several operations you see do consist of two several
Multiplications, and one Division, whereas ours consists of one
Multiplication only, to wit, of the Diameter and Side together.

And from this Analogicall operation used by Master Oughtred, for the
discovering of the superficies of a right Cylinder, by its side and (basiall)
Diameter, you may here note, how that it is demonstrated by Archimedes, Lib. 1.
de Sph. and Cylind. prop. 13. that the Superficies of a right Cylinder (without
the Bases) is equal to a Circle, whose Semidiameter is a mean proportional
Line between the side of the Cylinder, and the Diameter of its Base.

And so in this our Cylinder, the side being 12. and the Diameter 7, the mean
Proportional between them, will be 9 3/19, or rather by an immediate decimal
extraction of the parts, 9.16515 etc (whereas the other is decimally by
conversion of the parts, but 9.15789 etc.) which being put as the Semidiameter
of a Circle, and so the Square thereof 84, the Area of the Circle will be found
263.89378 etc. agreeing exactly with the Superficies of the Cylinder. Or the
Area is by the Metian Cyclometry, 263 101/113, for the Superficies of the
Cylinder, as before.) For seeing here, that the Semidiameter of the Circle
equal to the Superficies of a right Cylinder is the mean proportional
between the Side and (basiall) Dia meter of the Cylinder; and that the
Analogy holds the same from the Quadrat of a Circles Semidiameter to the
Circle it self, as from the Semidiameter to the Semicircumference, or the Quae
est ratio totius ad totum, ^adem est ratio dimidii ad dimidium: Et sie alic^rus
partis ad aliquam partim consimilim sin iogneminem.
Diameter to the Circumference, (only the one Analogy is Lineall, and the
other Superficial.) Therefore the Analogy of the side and (basial) Diameter
of a right Cylinder infolded together, to the Superficies thereof (without the
two Bases) will hold the same, as of the Diameter of a Circle to its
Circumference.

Again, supposing the basiall Diameter and the side of a right, erect, or
Isoskelan Cone, to be the same with those of the foregoing Cylinder, viz. 7 and
12; the superficies will be half the superficies of the Cylinder: for that the
superficies of a right or Isoskelan Cone is a rectangle Plane made of the
basiall semi-periphery and the side (or the basiall periphery and the
semi-side) and so the true Conicall superfice or surface, will be 131.9469, (or
131 107/113, agreeing decimally with the former, or by the most common account,
132 exactly) And the finding of thetrue, genuine superficies of a right Cone by
the side and basiall Diameter, the foresaid Mr. Oughtred also shows in the 8
Sect. of the same Chapter before named, by this Analogy, viz.

As 7 to 22, Or 1 to 3.1416:

So the Semidiameter of the Base multiplied with the side,

To the Superficies (viz. without the Base) And so the side of the Cone being
here put 12, and the basiall Diameter 7, I say,

As 7 to 22 (or 113 to 355) or rather 1 to 3.14159 etc.

So 3 1/2. (or 3.5) with 12, viz. 42. to 132 exactly:

Or more truly, 131 109/113, or 131.9469, just as before, for the Conical. So
that in both these ways also, are two several Multiplications and one
Division, besides the bipartion or mediation of the basial diameter: or the
same is performed by half the side with the whole Diameter, (for both come to
one pass.)

And from hence you may observe, that Archimedes, lib. 1. de Sph. and Cyliud.
prop. 14. (from whence the foresaid Analogy is deduced) demonstrateth the
superficies of a right or Isoskelan Cone (without the Base) to be equal to
that Circle, whose semidiameter is the mean proportional line between the side
of the Cone, and the Semidiameter of its Base. And so in this our Cone, the
Side being 12, and the basiall Semidiameter 3 1/2 (or 3.5) the mean
proportional between them is 6 6/13, or rather by immediate decimall
production of the parts, 6.48074 etc. (whereas the other is by decimal
reduction, but 6.461538 etc.) which being put for the semidiameter of a Circle,
and so the Quadrat thereof 42, the Area will be found 131.9469 etc. agreeing
exactly with the foregoing Superficies of the Cone: (or the Circular Area, is
from the Metiau Cyclometry, 131 107/113, which is decimally, 131.9469 etc.
agreeing exactly with the true Conicall Superficies, found out decimally at
first.

And here you may by the way take notice Archi^^. lib. 1. de Sph. and Cyl. pro.
15
of the next Proposition of Archimedes concerning the superficiary dimension of
a Cone, laid down Analogically thus, viz. That the superficies of every
Isoskelan Cone, has that rationality to the Base, as the side of the Cone has
to the Semidiameter of the Base. For so here,

As 12 (the side)

To 3 1/2, or 3.5 (the Radius of the Base)

So 131 107/113, or 131.9469 (the true superficies)

To 38 219/45^^ or 38.4845 the Base; (And so was the same found to be before,
in the solid dimension of a Cone, and of a Cylinder,) And contrariwise will the
reason of the Base be to the superficies of the Cone, as of the Semidiameter of
the Base to the Side of the Cone: For so,

As 3 1/2 or 3.5, to 12;

So 38 219/452 or 38.4845, to 131 107/113, or 131.9469. Now the Base being
added to the foregoing Superficies, there will arise the total Superficies of
the Cone, 170 195/452, or 170.4314 etc. which by the most common account, will
be 170 1/2, the Conical being just 132, and the Base 38 1/2.

And the very same Analogy with the former, holds in the right, erect, or
rectangle Cylinder, from the Superficies to the double of the Base, (or both
the Bases jointly) and contrar^ly; because that the Superficies of the Cylinder
is double to the Superficies of the Cone, having the same Side, and Diameter in
the Base, as I noted before: And so here,

As 12 (the Side)

To 3 1/2 or 3.5 (the basiall ray)

So 263 101/113 or 263.89378 etc. (the Superficies)

To 76 219/226, or 76.9690 etc. (the double of the Base, or the aggregate of
the two Bases.) And so contrarily, will the Analogy hold from the double of
the Base, or the two bases conjunctly (76 219/226, or 76.9690 etc.) to the
Cylindrical Superficies (263 101/113 or 263.89378 etc.) as from the Radius of
the Base (3 1/2 or 3.5) to the side of the Cylinder (12.) And lastly, if to the
foresaid Cylindricall Superficies 263 101/113, or 263.8938 fere, you add the
aggregate of the two Bases, 76 219/226, or 76.9690, you will have the total
external superficies of the Cylinder, 340 195/116, or 340.8628 fere, which by
the most vulgar account, would be 341 exactly; the Cylindraceal (or Cylindrical
Superfice) being just 264, and the two Bases together. 77

But now for a more speedy dimension of the Superficies of the foregoing Cone,
and first by the Side and basial diameter only, together: I say, that if the
side of the Cone (naturally 12) be measured by its proper Line of Measure for
this purpose (which is in centesimal parts only of the prime Rational Line,
0.80 fere) under a centesimal solution; the same will be found thereby, 15.04;
and the basial Diameter (naturally 7) measured by the same Line, will be found
8.77, which two being multiplied together, do produce 131.9008, for the Conical
Superfice, which wants of the true content, only 1/22 fere of a square or
superficial Integer or Unit of the Measure first assigned. And so again, if the
basial Periphery of this Cone, naturally, 22 fere: be taken by its proper,
respective, artificial Line of Measure for this purpose, (being of the prime
Rational Line, in a centesimal solution, 1.41) centesimally divided; the same
will be found thereby, 15.56 fere: and the Side of the Cone being also taken by
the same Line, will be found 8.48; which two multiplied together, do yield
131.9488 fere, for the Superficies of the Cone, which agrees somewhat more
nearly with the true Conical, viz. 131.9469, then that which was produced in
this kind by the basiall Diameter and the Side together, viz. 131.9008. for
this latter (by the basial periphery and the Side) differs from the true one
(by way of excess or redundancie) but 19 square or superficial centesms fere,
viz. 19 of 10000, which in a vulgar Arithmetical expression, are hardly 1/526
of the prime Rational Line (as the Integer or Unit of measure) squared: so that
both these ways for the finding of the superficies of a Cone, consist also but
of one Multiplication only, as that for the Cylinder.

But for finding the superficies of a Cylinder in this manner, by an
artificial Line of measure, peculiarly fitted to the Circumference and Side
together, the same is not to be done, seeing it is performed immediately by the
natural Line of measure, or the Prime Rational Line it self, with the same
expedition as that in the Cone by an Artificial Line; for that the Plane made
of the Circumference and Side of the Cylinder, taken by the prime or natural
Line of measure first appointed (according as I said at first) does constitute
the true Cylindraceall, or the Cylindricall superfice. And so from the
premises it appears, that as a Cylinder in regard of solid dimension, is the
triple of a Cone having the same Base and Axis, or Altitude: So in respect of
superficiary dimension, it is the double of a Cone having the same Base and
Side or Longitude.

And as for the Bases of a Cylinder and Cone, if they be required in their
superficiary dimensions, the same may most readily be obtained by either of the
Lines of Quadrature pertaining to a Circle, according as the Diameter or
Circumference thereof shall happen to be taken: For so the basiall Diameter or
Circumference of the foregoing Cylinder and Cone (naturally 7.00, and 22 fere,
viz. 21.99) being measured by the said Lines of diametrall and circumferentiall
quadration (under a centesimall solution) will be found each of them severally;
to be 6.20 (as I noted before in their solid dimensions) which squared, yields
38.4400 for the Base; and the true base was formerly found, 38.4845; from which
ours differs, (by way of defect) not so much as will make in vulgar terms, 1/22
of a square Integer or Unit.

And thus having sufficiently declared and demonstrated the dimension both
Solid and Superficial of a Cylinder and Cone (both theorically, and)
practically, according to the Isntrumental part of Geometry; and that as well
naturally (by way of metricall comparison) as artificially, for the
confirmation and verification of our artificial way of measuring: I shall next
lay down the same Dimensions numerally, in Terms analogicall (by way of
comparison) from the natural Measure to the artificial; and that under an
ample or numerous solution of the unity (according as I did in the Circle and
Sphere) by means whereof, the artificial Measure may readily be deduced from
the natural; or the natural measure be reduced to the artificial: And first
for the Cylinder,

The true or natural Measure is to the artificial, in respect of the Axis, or
Altitude, conjunctly with the (basial) Diameter as 1. to.92264 fere Solid
measure. Circumfer..430127. Side (which in a right, erect, or rectangle
Cylinder, is equal to the Axis or Altitude) with the (basial) Diameter, as 1.
to 1.772454 fere, (being the same with that which was noted before in the
Sphere, for the proportion of the Diameter to the side of the Quadrat equal
to the Spherical.) Superficiail Measure.

Then for the cone;

The natural Measure is to the artificial, in respect of the Axis (or
Altitude,) conjunctly with the basiall Diameter as 1. to.639839 Solid dimen.
Periphery.298377. Side (or Longitud) Diameter 1.253314 Superficiaty Dimension
Periphery.707107 [fere q 1/2.

The last of which proportions, is the same with that of the Diameter of a
Circle to the side of its inscribed Quadrat, noted before in the dimension of a
Circle.

SECT. IV. Showing briefly, the theoricall reason of the differences happening
between the natural and artificial Measure, in the superficial and solid
contents of Figures. And moreover, some observations concerning the grounds and
reasons of the Artificial Mensuration in general.
ANd now again, as for the differences happening between the superficial and
solid Contents of Figures, found by the natural or vulgar way of measuring,
and our artificial way; we have formerly showed, how small and inconsiderable
they generally are* and also the practical, instrumental (or Geometrical)
reason thereof; viz. that the several Lines of dimension in the several
Figures (either naturally belonging to them, or artificially and commonly
abscribed to them) as namely, the Diameters and Circumferences of the Circle
and Sphere; and so the Diameters. Circumferences and Axes, or Altitudes, and
Sides, of the Cylinder and Cone, before going, (and so of all the other Figures
following respectively) taken by their proper, respective artificial Lines of
Measure, are seldom or never exact and precise indeed in the parts of measure,
but either deficient or redundant in the same, and so give the are all contents
of those figures either a little lesser or greater, then indeed they are
(though for the most partlesse, especially in the two first decimal partitions
of the Lines of measure, viz. into Centesms, or only into prime or simple
Decimal parts, or Tenths) as appeared formerly (and will also afterward) by a
continual decimall augmentation (or subdecuplation) of the parts of those
Lines, whereby the Contents were had still nearer to the truth; Which reason
arises from (and so depends upon) the more true, natural, theoricall (or the
Arithmetical) reason of these differences, lying in the extraction of the
Square and Cube-Roots: For that the Roots of numbers not exactly Square and
Cubical, cannot be exactly had, but are always defective, so as that they
being inverted, or drawn again into themselves, do not render the numbers
precisely, out of which they were extracted; but the further that the
extraction is extended or continued decimally, by the adjection or apposition
of more Figures, (or of Ciphers where there is need) the nearer still to the
truth will the Root be had; as I noted at the Where I might also have
particularly expressed one thing more (to the young practitioner) amongst other
particulars concerning the decimal solution of Unity, (and which I may here,
not altogether un-opportunely do, though it be there included and understood in
the General,) viz. That thereby, all the tedious and troublesome operations of
Arithmetic in Fractions, by the vulgar way, are wholly avoided: for that here
all fractional numbers, whether coming alone by themselves, or together with
integrall numbers, are wholly and universally wrought as integrals, without any
manner of preparatory operation, (as Reduction or transmutation of terms, one
way or other,) which in the working of vulgar Fractions is necessarily required.
beginning, where I took occasion to speak of the excellency of Decimall
Arithmetic, as in reference to the work in hand: So that what error (though
inconsiderable) may at any time arise in our work, does proceed primarily and
principally from the extraction of the Square and Cube-Roots; our artificial
Lines of measure giving immediately the Square and Cube-Roots of the Figures to
which they are appropriated and applied, (or the sides of their equal Squares
and Cubes, as nearly, almost as may be) according as their dimension is
superficial or solid, as being naturally (as it were) procreated or derived
from them; except it be in the Cylinder and Cone, and the other regular-like
Solids following; as regularbased Pyramids and Prisms: but else in all truly
ordinate Superficies and Solids; as the Circle and Sphere beforegoing, and so
the equiterminall and equiangular Superficies and Solids following, it holds
so: And so likewise in the Cylinder and Cone, and other regular-like Solids,
both for solid and superficiarie dimension, where there is a congruity between
their Lines of dimension, by which their solid and superficial Conetnts are
obtained, as the Diameters, Peripheries, Sides, and other dimensionall Lines of
their Bases with their Axes or Altitudes for solid dimension, and with the
sides of their Bodies for superficial dimension. And therefore if there were
no defection in the aforesaid Radical extractions, there would be none in our
work; for that all our artificial Lines of measure (or Lines of artificial
measure) being thus Radically produced, are themselves in the nature of Roots
quadrate and cubique. And so also, all the Numbers or Terms of Quadrature and
Cubature, etc, by which the sides of the equal Squares and Cubes of Figures,
(in the natural Mensuration) and also some other particular lines, or numbers
of dimension, in the artificial Measure, deduced from the natural) are
proportionally obtained several ways (according to unity) as from their
several lines of dimension before named (and which also are immediately given
by our artificial Lines of measure) are produced by Radical extraction, from
the respective figures, to whose dimension (superficial or solid) they serve,
as being their Roots, or the sides of their equal Squares and Cubes, according
to their foresaid several dimensionall Lines, put unitly. But indeed, the
greatest error that can commonly arise here, (in respect of the difference of
our measure from the true measure, whether superficial or solid,) will be of
no moment, as I have showed before (and shall also show after) in several
examples. And if our measure agree with the true measure, but exactly to
integers or units (as it almost always does, and much nearer also; as even to
small parts of an Integer or unit, (superficial or solid) of the appointed
Measure) it will be sufficient in any matter of mechanical Mensurations; for
which, this our artificial way of Measuring, was chiefly devised and intended.

But now further, as to the ground and reason, briefly, of this kind of
dimension (or of these artificial metricall Lines,) the same may be understood
Concerning the grounds and reasons of the Artificial measure in general.
to be twofold, to wit, general or universal; and special or particular;
that consisting in Unity alone; this in the solution of Unity: For the general
reason is by it self absolute, simple, and certain, without relation or
limitation to any the proper, compounding, denominate (or other) parts of the
Rational Line, (as being the Integer or Unit of measure) but considers the
same generally (and absolutely in it self) as some one entire or whole thing,
(of which I shall (God willing) speak more fully afterward, in the close of
the second part of this Book, as being a place convenient.) But the particular
reason (which I shall chiefly insist and proceed upon) is limited and confined
to the certain, set, or commonly known parts of every particular rational Line
(they being considered discretely or Arithmetically (taken as a common, known
Measure, and that, according to several places and customs, (or such like other
parts, as the Geometer or Artificer shall in his mind think fit privately to
impose on the same for his use) and so comes by them to that of the General.
(Every particular, figurate Quantity or Magnitude, measurable in this
artificial manner, being here considered in those parts, according to their
powers Quadrate or Cubick (or the Parts considered in their said powers
Arithmetically, in every particular Figurate Magnitude, according as the
dimension is superficial or solid.) For every common or customary Line of
measure is usually divided into certain denominate parts, of which it does
primarily and properly consist: As our Foot is vulgarly said to be divided into
12 parts immediately, called Inches, which do compose or constitute the same:
Or (as in diverse Countries beyond the Sea) a foot may be understood with us to
be composed first (and that most nearly) of 4 Palms, or Hand-breadths; a Palm
(being composed) of 4 Digits, or Finger-bredths; and a Digit of 4 Grains or
corns of Barley; according to the Latin Distich,

Quatuor ex granis, Digitus componitur unus:
Est quater in Palmo digitus: quater in Pede palmus.
And this according to the description of Vitru^. Lib. 3. Architect, cap. 1.
the ancient Roman Foot by Vitruvius and others: So that thus the Foot contains
16 Digits, answering to 12 inches with us, for that a See Circles of
Propo^tion, Part 1 Chap. 9. Sect. 4.
Palm (namely Palmus minor) is said to be 3 of our Inches, and so 4 Palms 12
Inches: But we in England usually taking no notice of the Palm and Digit in
measuring, but only of the Foot and Inch (besides the Yard and Ell etc.) divide
the Foot immediately into 12 parts, called by the Latins unciae and Pollices
or Pollicaria, and so also was the Roman Foot anciently divided (and still is)
and so is the Foot in many other places. So that every such greater Measure is
commonly composed of the next lesser, being some certain times reiterated or
repeated: As our greatest common Geometrical Line of measure, viz. a Perch or
Pole. (for Land-measure) is commonly composed of Statute measure A^. 33. Edw.
1. other (customary) measures there be, as the Pole or Perch of 18 feet, usual
for Wood-land measure, etc.
16 1/2 Feet, a Foot being composed of 12 Inches (as I said before) and an Inch
of three barley-corns in length, picked out of the middle of the Ear: but a
Barley-corn being the least of all Measures (or rather no measure at all, being
but the very beginning of measure, as an Unit is usually counted no number it
self, but only the beginning of Number) cannot be composed of any other.

And although Arithmetic in general, naturally takes no notice of these
lesser Measures as the proper composing parts of the greater Measure given; but
immediately considers every particular Measure (as an Unit) according to a
simple or natural Arithmeticall division into parts (or a division into parts
simply or arithmetically denominate) as halves, quarters, and the like; or more
especially (and more exquisitely) as Decimall Arithmetic; into Tenths,
Centesms, etc. and so takes the Contents of Superficies and Solids, to such
parts thereof, Square and Cubick (or otherwise Superficial and Solid) in
general; as Square and Cubick parts of a Foot, and of an Inch; square parts of
a Perch or Pole; and so also, square parts of an Acre, etc. Yet this being
understood only by Artists, and so not sufficient to satisfy the vulgar: these
simple or natural Arithmeticall parts (or parts merely divisionall) must at
last be reduced to the proper compounding, denominate, or commonly known parts
of the Measure given or appointed; (or the Geometrical or mensurall parts of
the said Measure (as I may term them) they being by themselves alone, put as
measures certain, and entire, and so compounded of, (or dividuall into) other
the like kind of parts, or inferior Measures, (according as I noted even now)
and so are to be considered as Quantities continuate:) As the parts or
fractions of a Foot into Inches; of a Perch or Pole into Feet, (if they be
required) and so likewise of an Acre into Perches, etc.

And now again, the special, particular, or partial reason aforesaid, of this
artificial dimension (or of the Artificial Lines of Measure) or the Reason of
the Parts, as I may term it, from what I have declared before:) may be
considered in a twofold respect: viz. either more generally; as relating to the
denominate, compounding or Geometrical parts of every Measure first given or
appointed (as the prime or natural Rational Line) only for the discovering or
producing of the artificial Lines of measure, as considered in the general
Reason, (or the Reason of the Whole;, as I may call it, from what I have said
before concerning the same) such as are all the artificial Lines beforegoing,
and also the other following, being expressed by Quantity discrete, or number,
which show their Magnitudes (or quantities in measure) from the entire, prime,
or natural Line of Measure in general, from which they are to be taken; And
which therefore I may call (not unaptly, I conceive) their Indicant or Exponent
Numbers. Or more particularly, precisely and properly; as relating merely to
the foresaid parts of every particular Measure given (considered discretely or
Arithmetically) for the constituting of the said artificial Lines of Measure
so, as to give the superficial and solid contents of Here note another the
like artificial dimension of Figures (as the former) not mentioned before;
which is only according to the compounding, denominate (or Geometrical) parts
of Measures given or appointed.
Figures, quadrately and cubickly, etc. (or the sides of their equal Squares
and Cubes, etc.) from their several lines of dimension belonging to them, and
by which severally they may be thus artificially measured; as the forementioned
artificial Lines do) only, (or for the most part) according to those parts,
(being considered merely in the nature of such parts of the prime or natural
Line of measure appointed; which otherwise taken apart by themselves alone, may
be put as measures entire (or Integers of measure) as I noted even now; and
then are considerable in our general Reason of Measure, or Reason of the
Whole, before named.) And which Lines therefore being most properly considered
and laid down from the foresaid parts of the natural Measures appointed, (as
before, the Lines are from the whole entire Measures themselves) will alter
continually in every particular Figure, (in respect of quantity discrete,
according to their Arithmeticall Indices or Exponents, which express their
magnitudes in the forenamed parts of Measure) not only in regard of the
different dimensionall lines thereof, by which it may be propounded to be
artificially measured, as aforesaid, and so to which they are respectively
fitted: (as the artificial Lines beforementioned do, according to their like
Indices or Exponents before declared; especially for the most part; though it
does happen otherwise sometimes, as that one and the same artificial Line, is
found either wholly throughout, or sufficiently in part, (that is, in respect
of the fractionall or decimall part of the natural Line of measure, from which
it is taken, showed by the Arithmeticall Index or Exponent, how far soever the
same be continued or extended decimally) to serve unto several Dimensions; as
I show afterward, in Part 2. Sect. 3.) but also, in respect of each one and
the same particular dimensionall line thereof, by it self alone, according as
the said parts of the Measure proposed, do (arithmetically) alter: whereas the
arithmeticall Exponents of the first mentioned Lines, relating generally to any
whole Measure appointed (as I noted at the beginning) do continue the same
(without alteration) in every particular, distinct Dimension of one and the
same Figure, according to its several lines of Dimension aforesaid. And so
these two severally mentioned (or supposed) sorts of artificial Lines, will
hereupon differ in every several dimension of one and the same Figure, in
respect of quantity discrete or Arithmeticall, (according to their Indices or
Exponents of measure) though they do not, in respect of quantity continuate or
Geometrical; or of Measure it self in general, as I shall show by and by:
And then also they differ herein; That as the former artificial Lines being
immediately of the whole entire natural Lines (either redundantly or
deficiently, according as their Arithmeticall Exponents do show) considered
without respect of parts, compounding or Geometrical, (but only Arithmeticall,
or merely divisionall, as is always necessarily required, for the exactness
of measure) and so giving the Areall contents of Figures accordingly; are
themselves to be considered (in the artificial Dimension) as whole entire
Lines of measure in like manner: These latter mentioned (or supposed) Lines
must (for the contrary respects aforesaid) be considered (in the like
Dimension) as Lines of measure containing (or compounded, as it were, of)
certain parts, answering (Arithmetically) to the primary or compounding parts
of the natural Lines, from which they are (most properly) derived, and so
which they do artificially represent, and consequently, according to which
(chiefly) they give the superficial and solid contents of Figures (as
aforesaid.) And which Lines (for the reasons before alleged, as also for
distinctiorsake) we may well call, the particular or second artificial Lines
(or the Lines of parts) as the other may be called the prime or integrall
artificial Lines (or Lines of the Whole) And so the Measure arising there from
may accordingly be called, the one, the prime or integrall Measure (or Measure
of the Whole) as having its denomination simply and absolutely from the whole
entire natural Line of Measure appointed: And the other the particular or
partial Measure (or Measure of the parts) as being denominated chiefly from
the parts of the said Line of Measure.) And therefore, as those first Lines do
artificially represent the respective natural Lines from which they are taken,
considered simply and entirely in themselves, as the Integer (or Unity) of
Measure severally: So these second Lines, do accordingly represent the said
natural Lines, as they are composed of certain denominate, or mensurall parts;
(viz. of some inferior or lesser Measure, considered as a part of some greater
Measure, and so some certain times iterated or ennumerated, for the making up
of the same, according as I lately showed,) And so these second Lines are
really none other then the first, divided into the like number of parts, as are
the composing, constituting, (or Geometrical) parts of the respective natural
Lines from which they are deduced; and which parts of these (supposed) second
artificial Lines, we may conveniently call (by way of distinction from other
parts) their prime or Geometrical parts: and these being then divided
severally into some certain number of parts, as is requisite for the exactness
of Measure, as aforesaid (according as the correspondent parts of the natural
Lines are) especially decimall; we may call the same, their second or
Arithmeticall parts, (or the particles of measure, as being indeed only the
parts of the other Parts.) So that these second Lines are never exactly
decimall, as the prime Lines perpetually are, unless it happen, that the prime
or compounding parts of the natural Measure appointed be in a decimall number,
for then as the natural Line, so likewise the correspondent particular, or
secondary artificial Line will be exactly decimall; their said prime parts
being divided decimally; but yet however, they do generally perform the
Dimensions wrought by them, after a decimal manner (though secondarily, viz.
after a reduction of the Measure taken by them, into their prime parts, etc. As
first (for example) in the natural Mensuration; the most common, mechanical
way of measuring by the foot with us, is, as the same is vulgarly divided into
12 Inches, which are, as its composing, denominate, or Geometrical parts (for
so every measure is commonly said to be divided into the parts, of which it is
prop^rly composed) and each Inch divided into some certain parts (as is
necessary for exectnesse in measuring) which may best be decimall: and so the
lines measured hereby, do fall out most frequently, in Feet, Inches, and parts
of Inches together: Now if the sides or other dimensionall lines of any
Superficies or Solid propounded to be measured, be thus found (in this mixed
measure (as they will for the most part) then must the same be first of all
reduced into Inches, etc. before the content of the Figure, superficial or
solid, can be conveniently cast up, seeing that the Measure thus taken is mixed
(as it were) of several parts or kinds of measure, and so is of different
denominations; and therefore must be reduced into one kind of measure (or one
mensurall denomination:) And then if the parts of the Inch be decimall, the
work will be afterward performed in a decimal manner, in Inch-measure only:
But if the said lines thus measured, be found wholly in Feet (without Inches,
etc.) then will the contents be had immediately in whole Foot-measure, which
otherwise must be had in the like measure by Reduction from Inch-measure. And
so seeing that the second artificial Lines do represent the natural Lines,
only as being composed of certain denominate, or mensurall parts, and so are to
be considered themselves accordingly, as aforesaid: Therefore, if the side or
other dimensionall Line of any Figure measured thereby, for the obtaining of
its content superficial or solid, by way of Quadrature, Cubature, etc. and so
artificially representing the Side of the equal Square or Cube, etc. be found
mixtly, in Integers and prime parts, etc. of the same Lines; (as for the most
part they will) then must the Measure so taken, be first reduced wholly into
their said prime parts, etc. for the casting up of the content as aforesaid,
(according to what was showed before in the natural Mensuration, after the
most plain or vulgar way by a common natural Line of parts) And then those
artificial prime, or mensurall parts, being divided Decimally; the dimension
of the Figure proposed, will be performed in a Decimall manner, according to
those parts only: But if the side, or other line of the Figure to be measured,
do fall out in Integers only of the said artificial Lines, (viz. in whole
Lines without any parts;) then will the Areall content be obtained immediately,
and exactly, in Integers of the natural Measure appointed (according to the
reason of the prime artificial Lines, or Lines of the whole Measure) which
otherwise can be had in the integrall measure (or the measure denominated only
from the whole natural Line) only, by way of reduction from the primary,
compounding, denominate, o^metricall parts of the same, in which it is first
found, as before was showed.

And now therefore it appears from hence, that the artificial Dimension
performed by these second or particular artificial Lines, or Lines of parts,
so called; or the artificial Lines, as they are considered merely in the
particular or special reason of the artificial Dimension (or Reason of the
Parts) taken in the latter respect; is not considerable in comparison of the
artificial Dimension performed by the prime or integrall (or more general)
artificial Lines, or Lines of the Whole; or the artificial Lines, as they are
considered in the general reason of the said artificial Dimension (or Reason
of the Whole) they giving the sides of the equal Squares, and Cubes, etc. of
Figures (and so their superficial and solid contents accordingly) immediately
in In^egers (and decimall parts) of the prime Rational Line, of the natural
Measure appointed; which the particular Lines do give (for the most part)
mixtly in Integers and compounding parts and particles together (or in Integers
and parts primary, and secondary) and so we must come at last to the Areall
content in the former Measure, by way of reduction from those Parts, as
aforesaid. But yet however; for the variety of operation and Art, in this kind
of Mensuration, I thought it would not be amiss to manifest thus much
concerning this latter way; that so the ingenious Reader that shall please to
exercise himself (practically or experimentally) in this artificial way of
measuring, may (by comparing the effects or results of the general and
particular, or special reason thereof together, both in the extraction or
production of the artificial Lines themselves, and also in the said two
several ways of working by them) receive a more full satisfaction, and the
thing it self be accordingly confirmed.

And now seeing that the aforesaid parts of Measures given, are various (as in
quantity Geometrical, so usually in quantity Arithmeticall) according as the
Measures themselves are in magnitude various: therefore I shall first and
principally prosecute our said special or partial Reason of the artificial
dimension, and that chiefly in relation to the first, or more general
acception or consideration thereof, (namely, for the producing of the
artificial Lines, as they are considered in the general Reason, by the parts
of the Measure given (or the prime artificial Lines by the second, as we have
differenced or distinguished them first of all, in Quantity discrete, or in the
Number of their measure from the natural Line, according as the same is
understood, either without or with the foresaid kind of parts.)

And this I shall accordingly lay down in three special Theorematicall
Propositions (contained in the second part of this Work) answering to the three
principal Problematicall or practical Propositions beforegoing (laid down in
the Figures particularly handled in this first Part, namely the CIRCLE,
SPHERE, and CYLINDER, together with the CONE) and which will generally serve
for all other ordinate or regular, and regularlike Figures whatsoever, for the
like occasion (according to what I noted at the beginning) And the last of
these only I shall demonstrate or illustrate by Number, as being sufficient for
all, though indeed there needs no manner of demonstration or illustration of
any of them, they being all so very plain and perspicuous.

printer's device of Robert Leybourn, featuring an old man standing by a
olive tree with falling branches (McKerrow 310) NOLI ALTUM SAPERE


PART II. Containing the most artificial and expeditious practical Dimension,
of all right-lined ordinate or regular, and regular-like Figures in general.
SECT. I. Proposing the foresaid Dimension in all right-lined regular Planes or
Superficies in general: And demonstrating the same particularly in two of the
first of them.
THEOREME I. Exhibiting particularly, the fore mentioned Lines, for the
Quadrature of a Circle; from our particular or special grouna and reason
before declared. And consequently, the Lines for the like dimension of all
recti^ine or angular ordinate Planes in general.
IF the Diameter of a Circle equal to the Quadrat from the Parts aforesaid, of
the Rational Line, be found; The same shall be the respective Line of
Quardature, according to the Parts: And the reason between that, and the
correspondent or congruall Tetragonismall Line, according to the whole Measure
will be such as the reason between the Parts, and the Whole; which is as the
reason of their Squares. And the like for the Peripherie.

ANd the same Reason holds (as aforesaid) in all other ordinate, (or in all
angular or rectiline regular) Planes in general; as the equilateral and
equiangular Trigon, Pentagon, Hexagon, and all ordinate or regular Polygons
whatsoever, in respect of the several dimensional lines belonging, to them, and
by which they may be propounded to be thus artificially measured; as their
Diametral, Diagonal and perimetral or Lateral lines, etc. Of which Figures, we
will here practically demonstrate our artificial Dimension (as also the
natural, by way of metrical comparision) in the two first of those here
particularly named, to wit, the Trigon, and Pentagon, (according as we did
first of all in the only obliqueline or curviline ordinate Plane, namely the
Circle;) and the rather also, for that these two do concur to the composition
of four of the five famous ordinate plain Bodies, (or five angular or rectiline
regular Solids) commonly called the Platonical Bodies, namely, the Trigon, to
the Tetra-edron, Octaearon and Ficosa-edron; and the Pentagon to the
Dodecaedron. And then I shall next of all after, speak briefly somewhat in the
like kind, concerning the second angular or rightlined regular Plane, (which
goes to the composition of the other ordinate plain Body named Hexa-edron)
called specially and peculiarly (by way of excellency above and so distinction
from all other quadrangular and quadrilateral Planes) by the Greeks, (...), and
(...), and by the Latins more distinctly, Quadratus, and Quadratum. And
seeing, that the sides of the aforenamed Figures in general, are chiefly
considerable, being the only proper natural lines of dimension pertaining to
them, as bounding in and including their Area's, (they being considered simply
and absolutely in themselves alone, as such Figures; without any further
circumstances) and so are only apparent of themselves naturally in any
materiate thing coming under the form of any such Figure, to be measured; which
the other lines of dimension aforesaid usually are not, (according to what I
noted formerly in the Diameters of the Circle, Sphere, Cylinder and Cone,) as
being indeed no proper, natural, or essential parts of the same, but only
adventitial, adscriptitial, or accidental, (as it were) as happening to them
after they are made; being usually adscribed to them by Geometricians, as helps
chiefly, for the obtaining of their Area's (in any Measure assigned) after the
natural or vulgar way of measuring; which being once had, these lines are again
of no account; and so are usually drawn in books, obscurely, by small points or
pricks only. Therefore I will here demonstrate the dimension of the two
forenamed Figures only from their sides. And indeed these Figures in general,
should be rather denominated from their sides, as it were from the Cause, then
from their Angles, as from the effects: for so a Triangular Figure is defined
by Euclid, El. 1. def. 20 etc. from its three sides; whereupon it might better
be called a Trilater, or Tripleuron, (as from the Cause) then a Triangle or
Trigon (from the effect^) as Ramus speaks lib. 6 Geomet. El. 6.) especially
seeing that three sides with three angles, are in no wise reciprocal, or
convertible. For a Triangular Plane, may be quadrilateral, quinquilateral etc.
as Ramus there shows and also Sehol. Mathemat. lib. 6. but a trilateral Plane
cannot be quadrangular, or quinquangular etc. But seeing Custom and use has
taken up the name of Triangle for Trilater; and so of all other the like
Figures from their angles rather then from their sides; therefore we may most
conveniently here retain their Appellations accordingly, but in the Lateral
sense. And so now first to demonstrate the artificial dimension of an ordinate
Trigon, and that by its side only; Suppose here again, the former common
Rational Line, A B; and to this I would so accommodate another Line, as that
the side of an Isopleural or Isogonial Trigon, being measured thereby; its
Quardrat should be equivalent to the Area of the Trigon, measured by the Line A
B. geometrical diagram geometrical diagram Now the length of this other Line, I
find (according to the reason of the precedent Theoreme and also the general
reason of Measure beforesaid) to be A B 1.52; (or further in a decumillesimal
partition, it will be A B 1.5197 fere,) which is here the Line L M, divided as
the prime Line A B. Then let the side of such a Trigon be A B, 12.00; So the
Diametral or Perpendicular-line thereof, will be found by E 1. p. 47, and also
by E 6. p. 31. to be A B, 10.39. For seeing that in the Isopleuron or Isogon,
a, b, c, the Perpendicular a, d, bisects the same into two Orthogons, or
rectangle Trigons, viz. a, d, b, and a, d, c, the Sides a, b, and a, c, will be
the Hypotenusals (specially so called) of the said two Rectangle^; whole Power
severally, 144, being diminished by the Power, of the lesser containing side of
the right angle, viz. b d, or c, d; (being supposed A B 6.00) viz. 36, there
will remain the Power of the greater and common containing side, a, d, 108;
whose Root irrational, (A B) 10.39 etc. is the greater and common containing
side, a, d, sought for, or the Perpendicular (of Altitude) of the Isopleuron:
with which will be found to accord the Trigonometrical calculation of the same.
For seeing that in a plain or rectiline Triangle, all the 3 angles are equal to
two right angles, by E 1. p. 32. the Angle of the Isopleuron, or Isogon, in
general, must needs answer in measure to a Sextant of the Circular Periphery
described from any angular point, according to either side of the Trigon about
the angle, as the Radius; and thereupon, the side opposite to, or subtending
the same angle, must by consequence, answer to, or subtend the same Circular or
Peripherial arch; and so is the Hexachordon (as I may briefly term it) or
rather Hecto-chordon or the chord Hexagonall of the said Circle, as being the
side of the inscribed ordinate Hexagon and thereupon the Circle it self,
Hexachordal. And so the side of the Trigon in general, must subtend the double
arch of its exactly ambient Circle, (the sides of ye Trigo^, being indeed the
Subtenses or Chords of their opposite Angles, viz. of the Circular or
Peripherial arches which do compass those Angles, and are their double
Measures) and consequently, is the Tri-chordon (as it were) or rather
Trito-chordon, or Hypo-dia-trite, of the same Circle; being the Hypotenuse
Inser^pt, or Chord Trigonal thereof: the said ambient Circle being Trichordal.
Whereupon, (the Isopleuron, or Isogon, being bisected into two Orthogonials, by
its Perpendicular, as aforesaid) it follows, according to the reason of the
second proportional Axiom of plain, or B. Pitisc. Trigonom. lib. 3. Axiom.
2. Consect. 1 and 2. And Trigo. nom. Britan. lib. 2. par. 1. cap. 2. Prop. 3.
and cap. 4. probl. 4 and 5.
rectiline Triangles in Pitiscus, and more particularly, Consect. 1, and 2.
thereof; and so by the third general Proposition (or like Axiom) concerning the
same, in Trigonometria Britanica; most plainly, and briefly, (especially with
help of the artificial or Logarithmical Numbers) thus;

As a, d, b, or a, d, c, 90o -- 10,0000000 Rad. to a b, or a, c, 12 --
1,0791812.

So a b d, or a c d, 60o -- 9,9375306. S, A. to a d, 10.3923 etc. -- 1,0167118.

geometrical diagram

Or again, by the same reason;

As b, a, d, or c a d, 30 -- 9,6989700. S, A to b, d, or c d, 6 -- 0,7781512

So a b d, or a c d 60 -- 9,9375306. S, A to a d, 10.3923 -- 1,0167118. as
before. And other wales also may the same be found out; either by Sines alone,
or by Sines and Tangents together, according to Axiom. 1 Planor Pitisc. and
Consect. 1 and 2. And Prop. 1. and 2. Planor. in Trigon. Brit. and more
particularly cap. 4. before cited, probl. 1. 2. 3. But this way of working is
the most plain and vulgar.

Now the Diameter or Perpendicular of the Trigon, a d, 10.3923 being drawn into
the semi-base (or semi-side) b d, or c d, 6; there resulteth the Area of the
Trigon (according to the reason of E 1. p. 41.) 62.3538. Or the same Trigonal
Area will also be produced, by comparing each side of the Trigon severally,
with the semi-aggregate of all the sides, and then enfolding the said
semi-aggregate and the difference of each side thereto, continually together;
for so the Root quadrate of the total Result, shall be the Area of the Trigon:
As;

^ See upon this kind of Triangular dimension (or Geodesie, as Ramus terms it)
Ram. lib. 12 Geomet. theor. 9. but more espcially the reason thereof
demonstrated by him, in fine lib. ult-Schol. mathemat.


agreeing exactly with the Trigonall Area found before. Now the side of the
Trigon, put A B, 12.00, being measured by its proper Line of quadrature L M,
will be found thereof but 7.90 fere, whose Quadrat is 62.4100 fere, for the
Area of the Isopleuron, which exceeds the true Area, in the fraction-part,
only 562 square-centesms, viz. 562 parts of 10000, or in more vulgar terms 1/18
fere, of the Line A B squared. And if the Line L M be made 1000 parts; then the
side of the Trigon will be found thereby, 7.896, which squared, will give
62.346814, for the Trigonal Area; which wants now of the true Area, found by
both the former ways, 62.353829, only as much, as will make in vulgar terms,
1/143 fere of the Line A B squared, as being the Measure assigned. And the very
same Area will be artificially produced by the Perpendicular or Diameter of the
Trigon; 2 Line of measure being accordingly fitted thereunto; which will be
found by the reason of the foregoing Theoreme, etc. to be of the entire prime
Rational Line in general,.1.3161 fere, (which is qq 3) such as is here the Line
N O, according to the Line A B. geometrical diagram

The artificial Dimension of Triangles in general.
And here our artificial Mensuration, may be applied to any other kind of
Triangle, either regular-like, or altogether irregular, (as I may term them)
viz. Isoskelan or Skalene, for the finding of their areal contents; but it will
be in a way somewhat different from that of the regular or Isopleural and
Isogonial Triangle; (being indeed according to the vulgar or natural way of
measuring,) viz. in that, as there the Area is had immediately by the only
squaring of some one dimensional line of the Triangle, as the Side or
Perpendicular, etc. and so the same is the Quadrat thereof in Quantity
arithmetical or measure numeral: here it will be the Rectangle made of the
whole Base and Perpendicular together (as it is naturally and really the half
of that Rectangle, by E. 1. p. 41. before cited) which two lines, if they
happen at any time to be equal, then will the Area be produced under the form
of a perfect Quadrat, from either of them, as that of an Isopleuron, or regular
Trigon; seeing that the Rectangle made of them both, is no other then the exact
Quadrat of either of them singly: And so therefore, after this latter way may
an Isopleuron also be artificially measured, the way being general. And this
resembles the artificial dimension both solid and superficial of regular* like
Solids, as the Cone, and all regular-based Pyramids, etc. and so differs from
that particular and peculiar dimension of the ordinate or regular Triangle (and
of all other regular Planes) as the dimension of regularlike Solids does from
that of Solids exactly regular: And so, as the solid content of any oblique,
Scalene, or inclined Cone or Pyramid, etc. is obtained both naturally and
artificially, as that of a right, upright, or Isoskelan Cone or Pyramid etc.
(as was showed before in the dimension of a Cone, and shall be afterward in
the dimension of Pyramids) So is here the superficial content of any oblique
Scalenal or irregular Triangle obtained (as well artificially as naturally)
like that of an upright or Isoskelan Triangle by any side thereof, put as the
base, and the perpendicular lot fall from the opposite angle thereto, whether
that side need to be continued out or produced, or not; seeing that every
Skalene Triangle is equal to an Isoskelan, having the same base and
perpendicular of altitude, (or they being constituted upon the same base, or
equal bases, and in the same Parallels, as Euclid, and his interpreters do
speak) by E 1. p. 37. and 38. as every oblique or Skalene Cone and Pyramid,
etc. is equal to a right, or Isoskelan Cone and Pyramid, upon the same (or
equal) base, and of the same altitude, by the reason of E. 12, p. 11. and 14.
beforecited in the Cone, etc. and p. 5. and 6. afterward in the Pyramids, etc.
And now the Line of measure, for the performing of this latter or general
artificial dimension of Triangles, will be the same with that, which was noted
formerly for the superficial dimension of a Cone, by its side and basial
Periphery together, viz. of the Rational Line in general, 1.4142, etc. q 2. And
here the proportion of the natural Measure to the artificial, in the two
forenamed lines of a Triangle together, will be the same with that in the
foresaid Conical dimension; viz. 1. to.7071 etc. q 1/2 But indeed seeing that
the Area of any Triangle may be obtained as readily in a manner by the natural
Line of measure, or common way of measuring, as by this latter kind of
artificial Line, or general artificial way of Triangular dimension: (according
to what I noted even now about the same.) Therefore I shall press this point no
further, then what is only for variety of Art and operation in this kind.

geometrical diagram

SUppose next the side of the ordinate Pentagon, A B C D E, to be the same with
that of the ordinate Trigon before going, (as from the Rational Line A B,)
12.00; then the true Area thereof, will be found, 247.7487 etc. and not 240, as
Ramus makes it, showing the Geodesie (as he terms it) of ordinate Polygons in
general, and particularly of an ordinate Pentagon, whose side is 12; where he
makes the Ray of the inscribed Circle, (which in Ram. Geom. lib. 19. el. 1. p.
Ryff in Epitome Rami. And Oront. Fin. lib. Geom. pract. cap. 24.
this pentagonal Figure, is F G) to be exactly 8, (and consequently the Ray of
the circumscribing Circle F C or F D, just 10) and thereby the Area, but 240;
and which from him P. Ryff also has in his Epitomy of Ramus: And so Orontius
Fineus also measures this Pentagon; and thus they take it one from another (as
Ramus from Fineus, and Ryff from Ramus) without any further examination; And
hence they give the faid Pentagon, absolute in all its dimensional Numbers. But
indeed, the side of an ordinate Pentagon, being 12, the Ray of the inscribed
Circle, will be truly, 8.26 fere; and the Ray of the circumscribing Circle
(which here we need not) will be 10.21 fere, and so the Pentagonal area will be
exactly (to square centesms) 247.7487. All which we shall here demonstrate
Trigonometrically. For seeing that an ordinate Pentagon is a Triangulate,
consisting of, (or resolvable into) five equal and like Isoskelan or equicrural
Trigons, meeting vertically in the center of the Pentagon, (or of its
circumscribing Circle) and so whose Bases are the sides of the Pentagon, and
whose shanks are Rays of the said Circle; such as is the Triangle C F D; the
vertical (or Centricall) angle, F, will answer to a Fifth of the said
circumscribing Circle's circumference, as being measured thereby; which the
side of the Pentagon C D (as the base of the Isoskelan Trigon) subtending, the
same is consequently the Pempta-chord (as it were) or Hypodia-pempte of the
foresaid Circle, as the Hypotenuse, Inscript, or Chord Pentagonall thereof; the
said circumscribing Circle being Pentachordal. Which Isoskeles being biparted
or bisected into two Orthogonials, viz. C G F, and D G F, by its perpendicular
F G (which is a Ray of the inscribed Circle, as aforesaid) whose Hypotenusals
(specially so called) F C, and F D, as the two equal sides of the Isoskeles,
are two Rays of the Pentagon's circumscribing Circle, as aforesaid; the
semi-base of the Isoskeles, C G or D G, as the lesser containing side of the
right angle in the two foresaid orthogonial Trigons; will be 6 (as being the
semi-side of the Pentagon) and he Angle C F G or D F G, will answer to a Tenth
of the foresaid ambient Circle's circumference, as being half the vertical
angle of the Isoskeles C F D; and so consequently, the basial or greater
acuteangle F C G, or F D G, will be the complement of the other two angles to a
Semicircle (according to E. 1. p. 32) or the Complement of that other acute
angle to a Quadrant: and hereby the perpendicular of the Isoskeles F G, as the
perpendicular let fall from the center of the Pentagon to its side, (or the Ray
of the inscribed Circle) being the thing next to be inquired, will be found.
And therefore in the rectangle Triangle, C G F, or D G F, seeing all the angies
are given, together with the lesser containing side C G or D G; the greater and
common containing side F G required, will be had these two several ways
following: and first according to Axiom. 2 Planor. Pitisc. and Prop. 3. Trigon.
Brit. etc. beforecited, most easily and readily by Logarithmo-trigonometrical
supputation, or artificial Trigonometry, thus;

As C F G, or D F G, 36o -- 9,7692187. S A to C G, or D G, 6. -- 0,7781513.

So F C G, or F D G, 54o -- 9,9079576. S A to F G, 8.26 fere, viz. 8.25829 etc.
-- 0,9168902.

geometrical diagram

Or secondly; seeing that in a recti-line rectangle Triangle, any side may be
put for the Radius of a Circle, by Axiom. 1 Planor. Pitisc. and Prop. 1 Planor.
Trigonom. Brit. Therefore in the foresaid Rectangle C G F, or D G F, the lesser
containing side C G or D G given, being put as Radius; the greater (and common)
containing side, F G sought for, will (by the foresaid Axiom, and Prop. 2.
Planor. Trigon. Brit.) be the Tangent of its opposite angle F C G, or F D G;
Whereupon it follows accordingly, in this Trigonometrical Reason;

As C G, or D G, -- 10,0000000. R. to F G -- 10,1387390, T A, 54o.

So C G, or D G, 6 -- 0,7781513 to F G, 8.258 etc, -- 0,9168903 as before.

Which being infolded with the semi-perimeter of the Pentagon, A B C G, 30,
there will result the Area of the Pentagon, 247.7487, as I said at first. Or
the said F G, as the perpendicular of the foresaid Isoskeles C F D, being
infolded with the semi-side of the Pentagon, C G or D G, as the semibase of the
Isoskeles, produces the Area of the Isoskeles, C F D, 49.54974, etc. which
augmented by the number of the composing Isoskelan Trigons, produces the total
Pentagon, 247.7487 etc. as before; and which is most readily and accuratly
obtained by Logarithmical numeration, only by a simple composition of Numbers,
thus;

F G, 8.258 etc. -- 0,9168903 A

C G, or D G, 6 -- 0,7781513 A

Isoskeles C F D, 49.5497 etc. 1,6950416 aggreg. A

5 A 0,6989700 aggreg. A

Pentagon, 247.748745 etc. -- 2,3940116. aggreg.

geometrical diagram

Or, according to the first operation, more briefly thus;

F G, 8.258 etc. -- 0,9168903 A

A B C G, 30 -- 1,4771213 A

Pentagon, 247.7487 etc. -- 2,3940116, as before.

Now for a trial of this dimension artificially, by a Line for the quadrature
of an ordinate Pentagon by its side, being here the Line P Q, whose quantity I
find (by the reason of the foregoing Theoreme, etc) to be of the Rational Line
A B, (defectively) 0.7624 fere, the subductional segment being A B, 0.2376
fere, and which Line being divided in like manner; the side of the Pentagon,
supposed A B 12.00, measured thereby, will be found, 15.74, which squared,
yields 247.7476, for the Area of the Pentagon, which differs from the true
Area (deficiently) only 11 square-centesms, or geometrical diagram 11 of 10000,
which in more vulgar terms, is hardly so much as 1/909 of the Line A B, (as the
Measure given) squared; And this from a centesimal partition only of the
artificial Line of measure, P Q. which is as near the truth, as need be desired.

Now as to the Radius of the circumscribing Circle, which Ramus, and the others
beforenamed, do make exactly 10, (though here we make no use thereof, yet for
the truth's sake) we will demonstrate the same to be 10.21 fere, thus: And
first in the rectangle Triangle C, G, F, or D G Faforesaid; the lesser acute
angle C F G or D F G, and the lesser side about the right angle, viz. C G or D
G (as the semi-side of the Pentagon) subtending the said acute angle, as the
right Sine thereof, being first of all given: the Hypotenuse F C, or F D, being
the Ray of the ambient Circle, sought, will be found thus,

As C F G, or D F G, 36o -- 9,7692187. S A. to C G, or D G, 6 -- 0,7781513.

So C G F, or D G F, 90o -- 10,0000000. R. to F C, or F D, 10.21 fere, viz.
10.2078 etc. -- 1,0089326.

Or again secondly in the same Triangles, the greater acute angle F C G, or F D
G (being half the Pentagonal angle) and the greater and common side about the
right angies, viz. F G, subrending the two said equal acute angles, ^eing only
first given; the Hypotenusal side, F C, or F D, inquired, will be had thus;

As F C G, or F D G, 54o -- 9,9079576 S A to F G, 8.25829 etc -- 0,9168902

So F G C, or F G D, 90o -- 10,0000000 R. to F C, or F D, 10.2078 etc.
1,0089326, as before.

Or again, thirdly, in either of the said rectangle Triangles, where the
foresaid greater acute angle being only known and the lesser side about the
right angle, viz. C G, or D G, and the same put as Radius; the side subtending
the right angle, viz. F C, or F D inquired, will be the Secant of the said
greater acute angle, F C G, or F D G, (as the greater and common side about the
right angle, and the common Subtense of the said two acute angles, viz. F G,
was said before in the like case, to be the common Tangent of the same angles)
whereupon it follows in this Trigonometrical Analogy;

As C G, or D G -- 10,0000000, R. to C F or D F -- 10,2307813, Sec. 54o.

So C G or D G, 6 -- 0,7781513. to C F or D F, 10.2078 etc. 1,0089326, as
before.

Or fourthly, in either of the said Rectangles, the lesser acute angle C F G,
or D F G, being only given, and the greater containing side of the right angle,
viz. F G, and the same put for Radius; the Hypotenusal F C, or F D, will be the
Secant of the said lesser acute angle, (as the lesser containing side C G or D
G will consequently be the Tangent of the same acute Angle.) Therefore it
follows;

As F G -- 10,0000000 to F C or F D -- 10,0920424. Sec. 36o.

So F G, 8.258 ^c. -- 0,9168902 to F C or F D 10.2078 etc. -- 1,0089326, as
before,

Or fifthly and lastly, in the Isoskeles C F D, where all the angles and the
Base C D (as the side of the Pentagon) being known; the side of the Isoskeles F
C or F D sought for, will be obtained by the most common Trigonometrical
operation, thus;

As C F D, 72o -- 9,9782063. S A. to C D, 12 -- 1,0791812.

So C D F, or D C F, 54o -- 9,9079576, S A to C F or D F, 10.2078 etc. --
1,0089325, as before.

Now the Radius of the circumscribing Circle, viz. F C or F D (to which A F is
equal) being these five several ways found out, to be 10.21 fere; the same
with the Radius of the inscribed Circle, viz. F G found before, 8.26 fere, will
make up the total Diameter or Perpendicular of the Pentagon, viz. A G (which
is the altitude thereof) to be 18.47 fere; which according to the account of
Ramus, and the other Auth^rs before named, would be exactly 18. For that here
you may observe by the way, how that in all such ordinate Planes, as have their
angles and sides in an uneven or unequal number (and so the angles and the
sides severally, are not exactly opposite one to another, that is, angle to
angle, and side to side, but contrarily, (as the Trigon, Pentagon, Heptagon,
Hennea-gon, and the like; the Diameter is composed of the semidiameters of the
Circle circumscribing and inscribed: And in all such ordinate Planes, as have
their angles and Sides in an even or equal number, (and so the angles and sides
severally, are directly opposite one to another, that is, angle to angle, and
side to side) as the Tetragon, Hexa-gon, Octa-gon, Deca-gon, and the like; the
Diameter is no other then that of the circumscribing Circle. And so by these
Diameters may the areal contents of these Figures be obtained artificially as
by their sides, according as I noted at first: For so the artificial Line of
measure for squaring of an ordinare Pentagon by its said Diameter or
Perpendicular, will be found (by the reason of the foregoing Theoreme, etc.) to
be of the prime Rational Line in general, 1.1732 fere. And from The artificial
Line in general for the quadrate dimension of an ordinate Pentagon by it is
Diameter or Perpendicular of altitude.
the premises it appears, that if the Diameter of a Circle be measured by any
of the artificial Lines pertaining to the Diameters of the latter kind of
ordinate Planes here mentioned, the Quadrat thereof shall be equal to the
respective inscribed Figure; where, by the Diameters, are meant their angular
Diameters, or longer Diagonals passing between two extremely opposite angles,
through the Center of the Figure; where as there is to be understood another
Diameter, passing beween two opposite sides, through the Center, (and to which
is equal in the Hexagon the line passing between the ends of the two opposite
sides, and so subtending the Angle of the Figure, and which is more peculiarly
and specially called the Diagonall-line, or Diagonie of the same Figure) which
is no other, then the Diameter of the inscribed Circle; And so by this other
Diametrall line, may the said Figures be also artificially measured as before,
by Lines of Measure appropriated thereunto; And therefore, if the Diameter of a
Circle be taken thereby, the Quadrat thereof shall be equal to the respective
circumscribed Figure: And so also may these ordinate Polygonal or Polypleural
Planes in general, be artificially measured by their shorter Diagonal-lines,
which subtend their angles singly, (and are equal, neither to the diameters of
their Circles circumscribing, nor inscribed, nor composed of both) and are more
peculiarly called their Diagonials or diagonies; and which is in the Hexagon,
the Side of its inscribed Trigon; in the Octagon, the side of the inscribed
Tetragon; and in the Decagon, the side of the inscribed Pentagon, etc. And
which sort of line is drawn and handled (amongst others) in the next Pentagonal
figure, set forth for the dimensional proportions in a Pentagon. And so the
artificial Line for the quadrate dimension of an ordinate Pentagon by its said
diagonie, or angular Subtense, will be of the prime Rational Line, (in the
general Reason of Measure) 1.2336 fere.

As for the second (or intermediate) ordinate or regular Plane, namely, the
Tetragon, (or rectangle Isopleuron, or regular Parallelogram) there can be no
readier way for the geometrical diagram measuring of the same, then the vulgar
or natural way, by squaring its side, taken by the prime Rational Line: But
else the same might be artificially performed by the diagony or diagonial
thereof. And so whereas the diagony of the Tetragon, is naturally double in
power, to the side thereof, by the reason of E. 1. p. 47. and also E. 6. p. 31,
before cited; here it will be made artificially* equal (immediately in act, and
so in power, according to Quantity discrete) to the Side, taken naturally, or
by the natural The dimension of a Tetragon by its Diag^ny; And the artificial
Line for performing the same.
Line of measure. And so the artificial Line of measure for this purpose I
find (according to the reason of the precedent Theoteme etc.) to be of the
Rational Line in general, 1.4142 etc. viz: q2. (which was noted for two several
dimensions before, namely one in the Cone, and the other of Triangles in
general) which Line being divided as the former, and so the Diagonial of this
Figure taken thereby, it will be found to agree with the Side thereof, taken by
the prime or natural Rational Line; and so being squared, must needs produce
the same superficial Content: And therefore it appears hence, that if the
diameter of a Circle be taken by this Line, the Square thereof shall be the
measure of the inscribed Quadrat; where as the Square of the diameter, is
naturally, really, or geometrically, the circumscribed Quadrat.

And thus having demonstrated the dimensions of the three first ordinate,
Planes, geometrically, in every respect: we she next of all deliver the same
purely arithmetically, by way of proportion, as we have extracted them in all
the variety thereof that may be; some of which may be of singular use, not only
for the more easy and speedy superficial dimension of these Figures simply,
according to the natural Measure; but also for the solid dimension of the
Pyramids raised or constituted upon them (and so consequently of the soresaid
five plain, or rectiline regular Solids, after the natural and vulgar way of
measuring them, which is the most difficult) as to the speedy discovering of
the semidiameters of the Circles circumscribed to their Bases; and so thereby,
and by the side of the Pyramid together, the Axis or Altitude of the same; as I
shall show in the next Section; like as I did before, for finding the Axis of a
Cone. And first therefore for Linear Proportions (as I may term them) or
Proportions of Linear dimension, in the ordinate or regular Trigon.

1 The Side (a, e or a, ^) is to the Raie of the Circle, circumscribing (a. o.)
as 1. to.57735 q 1/3. inscribed (o. u.).288675. And so to the diameter or
Perpendicular (a. u.) as 1. to.8660254 q 3/4 or. 75. And vice-versa, the
Perpendicular (a, u) is to the Side (a, e, or a, i) 1.1547.

geometrical diagram

2 The Radius of the circumscribing Circle (a, o) is to the Side (a, e, or a
i,) as 1. to 1.73205 q 3. Raie of the inscribed Circle (o, u,) 0.5 dupla. And
consequently to the Diameter or Perpendicular, (a, u) as 1. to 1.5 subs^squi
^^tera.

3 The Radius of the inscribed Circle (o, u) is to the Side (a, e, or a, i) as
1. to 3.4641 Ray of the circumscribing Circle, (a, o,) 2. subdupla. And so to
the Perpendicular or diameter (a, u) 3. sub^ripla.

Whereby it appears, that the Radius of the circumscribing or containing
Circle, is 2/3 of the Trigonal Perpendicular or diameter, and the Radius of the
inscribed or contained Circle is 1/3 of the same, and which is farther manifest
by E. 14 p. 18.

Secondly, for superficial Proportions in the ordinate Trigon; or Proportions
of superficial dimension:

4 The Quadrat of the Side is to the Trigon it self, as 1. to.4330127
Diameter.57735. q 1/3.

Which latter, is the same with that of the side to the Raie of the
circumscribing Circle.

And contrarily;

5 The total Trigon is to the Quadrat of its Side as 1. to 2.309401 Diameter,
1.73205. q. 3

And so consequently.

6 The Side, is to the side of the Quadrat equal to the Trigon, as 1.
to.658037. Diameter,.759836 fere.

Next for the like proportions in the ordinate Pentagon; and first in respect
of Linear dimension;

1. The side of the Pentagon (a. b.) is to the Ray of the Circle circumscribing
(a. g) as 1. to.85065. inscribed (g. h.).68819. And so to the Diameter or
Perpendicular of the Pentagon (a. h.) as 1. to. 1.53884. Diagonall, or the
Subtense of the pentagonall angle (b. e.) Flussat. El. 16. p. 2.
cutting the Diameter by extreme and mean proportion) as 1. to 1.618034 fere.

4. The Radius of the ambient Circle (a. g.) is to the Side of the Pentagon,
(a. b.) as 1. to 1.17557 Ray of the inscribed Circle, (g. h.).809017 (And so to
the Pentagonall Diameter (a. h.) as 1. to 1.809017.) Pentagonall Diagonie, or
angular Hypotenuse (b. e.) as 1. to 1.902113.

geometrical diagram

3. The Radius of the inscribed Circle (g. h.) is to the Side of the Pentagon,
(a. b.) as 1. to 1.453085 Ray of the ambient Circle, (a. g.) 1.236068 (fere.
(And so to the Diameter or Perpendicular (a. h.) as 1. to 2.236068) Diagonal or
Hypothenusal (b. e.) as 1. to 2.351141

4. The Diameter of the Pentagon (a. b.) is to the Side (a. b.) as 1. to.
649839. Ray of the Circle (of which two circular Rays it is composed.)
circums. (a. g.) as 1. to.552786 inscrib. (g. h.).44721 Pentagonall Diagony (b.
e.) as 1 to 1.051462.

And to its greater portion or segment (f. h.) (being parted by the said
Diagonall or Hypothenusall, according to extreme and mean reason, as aforesaid)
as 1. to.618034, and to its lesser portion^ (a. f.) as 1. to.381966: which two
segments are Algebraically or Cossically, the irrational Apotomies, 1 1/4 (or
1.25) -- 1/2 (or. 5) for the greater segment; and 1 1/2 (or 1.5) -- 1 1/4 (or
1.25) for the lesser segment; according to a Cossicall invention of the said
two segments, agreeing exactly with the Trigonometricall.

geometrical diagram

5. The Diagonall or Hypotenusall (b, e) is to the Side, (a, b) as 1. to.
618034. Ray of the Circle circumscrib. (a. g.) as 1. to.525731 inscribed, (g.
h.).425325 And so to the Diameter, (a, h) as 1. to.951056. And to the greater
segment thereof (f, h) (as being divided by the Diagonall, according to extreme
and mean reason, as aforesaid) as 1. to.587785 And to the lesser segment of
that division or partition, (a, f) as 1. to.363271.

Which two Diametrall segments, are Cossically the irrational Apotomies
1.130635 etc. -- 0.475528, for the greater segment; and 1.426584 etc. --
1.130635 etc. for the lesser segment, according to a Cosficall computation of
these two segments, which we find to agree exactly with the Trigonometricall,
as the former.

Which Pentagonall proportions before-going, (those of the Diagony being
secluded) would be according to the Dimension of the foregoing ordinate
Pentagon, by Ramus etc. exactly rational in the least terms, thus;

1. The Side of the Pentagon to the Ray of the Circle circumscribing, as 6 to
5, sesquiquinta, (which is decimally irrational, 1. to.833333 infinitely, and
defective.) inscribed, as 3 to 2 sesquialtera, (which is decimally irrational,
1. to.66666 etc. infinitely, and defective.) And so to the Diameter, as 2 to 8,
subsesquialtera (which is decimally irrational 1. to 1.5, (or integrally,
rational, 10 to 15, defective.)

2. The Radius of the circumscribing Circle to the Radius of the inscribed
Circle, as 5 to 4, sesquiquarta, (which is decimally irrational. 1. to.8 (or
integrally, rational, 10 to 8. deficient. And consequently to the Pentagonall
Diameter, as 5 to 9, sub-superquadriquinta, or subsuperquadrapartiens-quintas,
(which is decimally irrational, 1. to 1.8 (or integrally, rational, 10 to 18
deficient.)

And so the Radius of the inscribed Circle, to the said Diameter, as 4 to 9,
subdupla-sesquiquarta, (which is decimally irrational, 1. to 2.25, (or
integrally rational, 100 to 225) and excessive or redundant.)

By which the reciprocal proportions may be had by inversion of the Terms:
And here the proportion of the Pentagonall Diameter to the side, will be the same
with that of the side to the Raie of the inscribed Circle, before noted, viz. 3
to 2 sesquialtera.

Then secondly in relation to superficiarie Dimension, the Pentagonall
proportions will be exactly, as follows.

1. The Quadrat Laterall is to the Pentagon it self, as 1. to 1.720477
Diametral 0.726543 fere Diagonial 0.657164 fere

And contrariwise

2. The Pentagon is to the Quadrat Laterall as 1. to.581234 Diametral 1.37638
Diagonial 1.52169

And so,

3. The Side is to the Side of the Pentagonall Quadrat, as 1.10 1.31167.
Diameter.85237. Diagonial.810656.

Which three last Proportions are the most precise and proper Tetragonismal
terms of an ordinate Pentagon; but chiefly the first of them.

And which superficial Proportions (secluding those sor the Diagony) would be,
according to the former Linear Proportions, deduced from the foregoing
Pentagonall dimension of Ramus, etc. in these Terms;

1. The Quadrat Laterall to the Pentago^ it self, as 1. to 1.666666
infinitely, and defective; being in vulgar terms, as 1. to 1 ^/^, or 5/1
sub-super-bitertia, or sub-super-bipartienstertias. Diametrall..740740,
infinitely, and excessive; being more vulgarly, 1 to 20/27,
superseptu-partiens-vigesimas; which is very near sesqui-tertia in the least
terms, it being superpartient 7/20.

Contrarily;

2. The Pentago^ to the Quadrat Laterall as 1. to.6 (or integrally, 10 to 6)
excessive; being more vulgarly, 1 to 3/5, super-bitertia, viz. superpartient
2/3. Diametrall 1.35, (or integrally, 100 to 135,) defective; being in vulgar
terms, as 1 to 17/2^, sub-super-septupartiens-vigesimas.

And so,

3. The Pentagonall. Side to the Side of the Pentagonall Quadrat, as 1. to
1.29099, desicient. Diam..86066, redundant.

But the former or Linear Proportions are erroneous; Therefore, the latter or
superficial.

Then as for the Proportions of dimension in the Tetragon; there be only these
two considerable; viz.

1. The Side is to the Diagony (or circumscribing Circle's Diameter) as 1. to
1.4142, etc.. 2. (which is the general Linear or Scalar Number, for Diagonial
Quadrature, noted before)

geometrical diagram

And Vice-versa.

2. The Diagony is to the Side, as the diameter of a Circle to the side of it is
inscribed Quadrat, noted formerly in the dimension of a Circle; viz. 1.
to.7071, etc. 1/2:

And so is the side to the semi-diagonie, (or the circumscribing Circle's
semi-diameter.)

And here, as the side of the Tetragon, is the Tetrachord, or the Chord
tetragonall of the circumscribing, comprehending, or containing Circle, (as
subtending a Quadrant of it is Peripherie) So is the Diagony, the like Chord of
the Circle described out of some angular point of the Tetragon, according to
the side thereof, as the Radius; viz. the Circle described about the diagoniall
Quadrat; the said Diagony being then the Side of the Tetragon inscribed; And so
those Circles are Tetrachordall.

And here we may take in by the way, another kind of tetragonall Plane, very
variable in respect of it is angles, but regular-like, (as I may term it) being
equilaterall, though notequi-angular, called Rhombus, being the only
obliquangle equilaterall Concerning the dimension of a Rhombus.
Parallelogram, and which therefore is a Quadrat, as it were, dislocated in
it is Terms, or compressed in the angles, as Ramus speaks lib. Geomet. 14. el.
7, 8, and so is a Triangulate, consisting as it were, of two equal and like
isoskelan Triangles, meeting upon one common base; And if the Triangles happen
to be equilaterall, equiangular, or exactly regular; then will the Rhombus be
artificially in the nature of an exact Quadrat, as that kind of Triangle is,
and so all other regular Planes artificially are: and so will admit of the like
artificial, or quadrate dimension, by it is side, (or by either of the
Diagonall-lines which may be drawn in it, and so by which it may be resolved
into 4 equal and like rectangle Scalenons; the lesser or obtuse
angle-diagonall, which is the common base of the said two Isopleurons, being
equal to the side of the Rhombus, as being a side of it is composing ordinate
Triangle) according to an exact Quadrature. And the artificial Line for this
particular Rhomball Dimension, will be (according to the reason of the
foregoing Theoreme, etc.) of the rational Line in general. 1.0745, etc.

Therefore for Examples-sake, Suppose a Rhombus were given to be measured,
whose side is found to be the same in measure with that of the foregoing
equilater Triangle, which was put of the Rational Line entirely, 12.00; and
the Diagonall passing between it is two ob^use angles, or subtending the two
acute angles, is found to be equal with the side, whereby the Rhomb is thus
bisected into, (or is composed, as it were of) two equal equilaterall
Triangles, the Area of which Triangle was found naturally, 62.3538. geometrical
diagram and which therefore doubled, gives the true, natural Area of the
Rhomb, 124.7076. Now the side of the Rhomb, 12.00, being measured by it is
proper and peculiar artificial Line of quadrature (centesimally divided) will
be found 11.17 fere whose Quadrat is 124.7689 fere, for the Area of the
Rhombus, agreeing very nearly with the true one; and which will be by the like
Line of quadrature for an ordinate Trigon, 124.8200 fere, the side of the
foresaid Triangle being formerly found thereby, 7.90 fere, and so the Area,
62.4100 fere. But if the said Line of Rhomball quadrature be millesimally
divided, then the side of the Rhomb will be found thereby 11.167, which
squared, yields 124.701889 for the Rhomball area, which now wants of the true
Area, viz. 124.7076^8 (being the double of the foresaid Triangle, viz.
62.353829) only about 1/1^^ of the prime Rational Line squared: as it
exceeded the same before in the centesimal operation, hardly so much as 1/16 of
the said Line squared; and which Area will be by the foresaid Line of Trigonall
quadrature, (in a millesimall partition) 124.693628; the content of the
foresaid Triangle it self, being found thereby, 62.346814. And so the Area of
this Rhomb produced by the Line of Trigonall quadrature, comes not so near the
true Area, as that which is produced immediately by the Line of Rhomball
quadrature it self.

And by the artificial Line for the dimension of Triangles in general, may the
Area of any Rhombus be obtained, it is two diagonal-lines being measured
thereby; for so the rectangle Parallelogram resulting therefrom, shall be
equal to the Rhombus; as the Rectangle of those two lines, is naturally and
really double to the Rhomb; or the Rhomb is half the Rectangle made of those
two lines, being measured by the natural Line of measure; viz. the Rectangle
from one whole Diagonall infolded with half the other. And thus also may be
artificially obtained the Area of any Rhomboides or Trapezium.

SECT. II. Setting forth the Dimension, both solid and superficial, of
regular-based Pyramids in general, and their Compounds: And demonstrating the
same particularly in the three first kinds of them.
ANd now having sufficiently showed our artificial Dimension in the three
first rectiline or angular ordinate Planes in particular; namely the Trigon,
Tetragon and Pentagon, simply in themselves, (but chiefly the Trigon and
Pentagon, as being in them, only requisite) and so consequently the like
Dimension of all ordinate polygonall or polypleurall Planes whatsoever, by the
same metricall reason: We shall next proceed to the like kind of dimension in
them, as in order and relation to all Pyramidall Bodies, both prime or simple,
and compound, (as I may so speak) or Pyramids, and Pyramidates, as being their
Bases: or the dimension of these Solids, being founded, (as it were)
constituted, or erected upon such Planes; and so denominated from them
accordingly, as I have said before. And this I shall particularly show in the
three first sorts of Pyramids, constituted or raised upon the three first
Planes before named; and more especially for that, as those three Planes do
concur superficially, to the composition, (or to the superficial
composition) of the five famous ordinate Bodies, or rectiline regular Solids,
as I said before; namely, the Trigon, to the Tetrahedron, Octahedron, and
Eicosahedron; the Tetragon to the Hexahedron, and the Pentagon to the
Dodecahedron: so the three kinds of Pyramids erected or constituted upon them,
do concur in like manner solidly, to the composition, (or to the solid
composition) of the said five Bodies, as I shall show particularly in each of
them.

And seeing that of all the kinds of Pyramids (which may be as infinite in
number, as the Figures, for their Bases, upon which they are raised and
constituted, and so from which they take their special denomination, as whether
the same be trigonall, tetragonall, pentagonall, or howsoever polygonall, and
so the respective Pyramids be denominated accordingly) there is but one kind
exactly ordinate or regular, and so is specially and peculiarly, (for the
excellency thereof) called Tetraedron, and by Euclid, simply by the name of
Pyramid, in E 13. p. 13; it consisting of four equal ordinate Trigons compact
together by solid angles (by E 11. d. 26) whih therefore are in number
subtriple the plain, superficial, or Trigonal angles constituting the same, (so
that to the constitution of one solid angle, do here concur three
superficial angles; and therefore this solid angle is contained under two
plain right angles precisely, and so is 2/3 of a solid right angle, as it is
composing or basiall angle is 2/3 of a plain right angle) and so the angular
lines, or sharp edges, called the sides of the Pyramid, (made by the connection
of the sides of the ordinate trigonall Planes) are in number, subduple the
trigonall sides constituting the same) And so any one of the said Trigonall
Planes may be put for the Base of this Pyramid, and thereupon the solid angle
opposite thereunto, made by the inclination, connection, or concursion of the
other three like Planes, (according to their vertical angles) shall be the top
or vertical point of the same; between which, and the Center of the Base,
shall be adjudged the perpendicular altitude, (or the Axis) thereof: We shall
first therefore show our artificial dimension (both solidly and superficially)
of the first kind of Pyramid, in the first of the foresaid five regular Bodies,
namely the Tetrahedron; and that by the Side of the Base, (which is the
general side of this Body) in answer to the foregoing quadrate dimension of an
ordinate Trigon by it is side) and the Axis together; which we shall compare
with the natural or vulgar dimension, according as we have done in all the
Figures beforegoing; whereby the same may withal be understood by such as are
yet to learn.

geometrical diagram And therefore first for solid dimension; Let the side of a
Tetrahedron be of the Rational Line in general, 12.00 (which is also the side
of the base) so the trigonall Plane for the Base, will be (as was found before
in the dimension of an ordinate Trigon) 62.3538. Now the Axis, or altitude of
the Tetrahedrum (and so of all right or isoskelan Pyramids whatsoever, The
solid dimensio^ of a trigonal Pyramid.
having regular bases) is had geometrically (in a Triangular manner) as was
formerly showed for the Axis of a Cone, according to E. 1. p. 47, etc. it being
the greater containing side of the right angle in the rectangle Triangle made
by the Axis of the said Pyramid, and the basiall Ray, (which is the ray of the
Circle circumscribing the ordinate trigonall base) for the lesser containing
side; and by the side of the Pyramid, being the Hypotenuse to the right angle,
in the Center of the Base: so that the Axis of the Pyramid, is the side of the
residuall or differentiall Plane, (taken quadrately) between the Laterall
Quadrat of the Pyramid, and the Radiall Quadrat of it is Base: which last
Quadrat, (seeing that the side of the base, as being the side of an ordinate
Trigon, is treble in power to the Ray of the Circle circumscribed to the base,
by E. 13. p. 12) will be here found 48; by which the laterall Quadrat of the
Tetrahedrum viz. 144, being diminished, there will remain the Quadrat of the
Axis, 96; ( viz. q 12 -- q 7 fere) whose Root, irrational or ineffable, 9
15/19, or rather (according to a decimall extraction of the quadrate Gnomon)
9.7979, etc. (whereas the other is decimally, but 9.7894, etc.) is the true
Axis or Altitude of this Tetrahedron: whereby it appears, that the Side of a
Tetrahedron is potentially sesquialter the Axis of the same; and so E 14. p.
31. Or again, seeing that the Side of the Tetrahedron is to the Diameter of the
ambient Sphere, potentially sub-sesquialter, because the Diameter is
potentially sesquialter the side, by E 13. p. 13, before cited; (and so the
Diameter of the said Sphere is potentially quadruple-sesquialter to the
semidiameter of the Circle circumscribing the Base of the said Pyramid
inscribed,) therefore the Diameter of the said Sphere will come forth here
potentially, 216; whose Root tetragonical, irrational or inexplicable, is
vulgarly 14 20/29, which is by decimall resolution, 14.6896 etc. or the said
Root is more truly, by immediate decimal production of the gnonomical
additament, or additionall Gnomon, 14.6969, etc. for the Diameter of the
ambient Sphere; whose subtriple doubled, viz. 9.7979, etc. is the altitude of
this ordinate trigonall or Tetrahedrall Pyramid, exactly as before; which then
being conjunctly compounded with the subtriple of the base, viz. 20.7846, etc.
or the whole base with the subtriple of that, viz. 3.26598, etc. there will
result the solidity of the Tetrahedron (to cube-centesmes of the Rational
Line, by a sufficient extension or production of the two foresaid terms of
consolidation) 203.646753 fere. So that a Pyramid, is naturally the subtriple
of a Prisme, having the same Base and altitude, by E 12. p. 7. as a Cone is the
subtriple of a Cylinder, of equal base and altitude, by E 12. p. 10. and
therefore if you triple the said Tetrahedrum, you will have a Prism, of an
ordinate trigonal base, according to the said E 12. p. 7, being in content,
610.940259 fere, and so of the same base and altitude with the Tetrahedrum.

And though a Cone do somewhat resemble a Pyramid, and a Cylinder, a Prisme;
yet a Cone cannot properly be called a Pyramid (as some do call it) nor a
Cylinder a Prisme; they being not plain Solids, rising from a rectiline or
angular Base; but various, or variable gibbous Solids, rising from a curviline,
obliqueline, or circular Base; but yet a Cone may be understood to comprehend
in it is self, any kind of Pyramid; and so a Cylinder to comprehend any kind of
Prisme; their Bases being the Circles circumscribed to the Base of the Pyramid
or Prisme, and so their whole Bodies circumscribed to the whole Pyramid or
Prisme, viz. their concave superficies just touching the angular lines, or the
sides of the respective Pyramid or Prisme inscribed. And contrarily, may any
Pyramid be understood to comprehend or include a Cone, and any Prisme a
Cylinder; the rectiline Planes of the Pyramid and Prism, just touching the
unequal Superficies of the inscribed Cone and Cylinder, (and so the angular or
rectiline base of the Pyramid and Prism, completely circumscribed to the
circular base of the Cone and Cylinder,) according to the nature of
Mathematical Inscription and Circumscription, as you may see it fully set forth
in E. 4. d. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, for Superficies; And E, 11. d. 31 and 32, for
Solids.

But now to the main thing in hand, to wit, the solid dimension of the
foregoing Pyramid, according to our artificial and compendious way (as before
in the Cone) and here, by the side of the Base, and the Axis, or line of
altitude; the artificial Line of Measure The artificial Line for the solid
dimension of a Trigonall Pyramid by the side of it is base and its Axis or
Altitude together.
for which purpose, I find (according to the reason of the 3d. Theoreme, etc.
following) to be of the prime or natural Rational Line in general, 1.9064,
fere; which being duly set off therefrom; the side of the aforesaid
Tetrahedrum's Base (put naturally 12.00) will be found thereby, 6.29, (in a
centesimall partition) whose Quadrat is 39.5641, for the artificial base: And
the Axis or Altitude of the Tetrahedrum, found geometrically before, 9.7979,
etc. (which according to a centenarie solution of the unit, or of the Rational
Line, is 9.80 fere.) will be found by the foresaid Line, 5.14, for the
artificial Axis; which being wholly infolded with the whole Base, will produce
the rectangle regular-based Prisme, or Parallelipipedum, 203.359474, sor the
artificial solidity of the Tetrahedrum; which differs from the true, natural,
solidity, viz. 203.646753, (by way of defect) not so much as 1/3 of the prime
Rational Line cubed, or 1/3 of a cube-unit. And by a further solution of the
two Lines of Measure, (viz. the natural and artificial Rational Line) the
difference will be found much less, according to what I have said, and also
plainly demonstrated in all the precedent Dimensions.

Now for the superficiarie dimension of this kind of Pyramid; if it be exactly
Concerning the superficial dimension of atrigonal Pyramid.
ordinate, as the Tetrahedron, then one of the Planes being had, the whole
Superficies is easily had, by the quadruplication of that Plane: As the Plane
of the foregoing Tetrahedrum, being found by the natural Dimension, 62.3538;
the whole superficies will be 249.4152: And which may be artificially obtained
by either of the Lines for the quadrate dimension of an ordinate Trigon; but
most readily and properly, by that for the side. As the side of this
Tetrahedrum being 12, will be found by the Line of Lateral quadration of a
Trigon, 7.90 fere (as before the side of the Trigon simply) and so the Square
thereof, 62.4100 fere, for the Plane of the Tetrahedrum; and the quadruple of
this, is 249.6400 fere, for the total superficies thereof; which exceeds the
former, or true superficies, not so much as 1/4 of a squareunit, or Integer.

But if the Pyramid be not exactly ordinate; then ought the superficies thereof
to be considered first, and most properly, as that of a Cone, called Conicum,
which I noted formerly in the Dimension thereof; to wit, without the Base; to
which must afterward be added the base, to make up the whole Superficies. For
so indeed the true Pyramidall superfice (what Pyramid soever it be) is most
properly to be esteemed; it being comprehended in a rectangle Plane arising
from the semperimeter of the Base, and the perpendicular-line of the isoskelan,
or laterall triangular Plane of the Pyramid, which is the altitude of the said
Plane, (not the angular line between the Base and the top, called the side of
the Pyramid, made by the meeting together of two of the Planes, according to
their sides, and so is no other then the side of the isoskelan Plane) bisecting
the same into two rectangle Triangles, upon the side of the base of the Pyramid
(which side is also the base of the said isoskelan triangular Plane; the
perpendicular falling thereupon from the top or vertical angle, by way of
bisection or bipartition) geometrical diagram As here the perpendicular a, d of
the Triangle a, b, c, representing the lateral Plane of the Pyramid, bisects
the same into two rectangle Triangles, a, d, b, and a, d, c, right-angled at d,
being the middle of the side of the ordinate Base of the Pyramid, b, c, which
is also the base of the said triangular Plane a, b, c; but the side of the
Pyramid is the same with the side of the said Plane (as noted even now) viz. a,
b, or a, c: and the rectangle Plane made by that and the semiperimeter of the
base, will much exceed the Pyramidall superfice before mentioned; which we may
conveniently demonstrate in the foregoing Tetrahedrum; whose side, or the side
of whose Plane, (which, may here be represented by, a, b, or a, c,) being put
naturally, 12; the perpendicular (which may here be a, d) will be 10.3923, etc.
(as was found formerly in the ordinate Trigon.) Now the side of this Pyramids
base ( b, c) being the same with the other, ( viz. a, b, or a, c,) the
perimeter of the Base will be 36, whose half, 18, being augmented, by the said
perpendicular. (or half the perpendicular, 5.19615 by the whole perimeter, 36)
there will result the superficies of this ordinate Tetrahedrall Pyramid,
without the Base as it were, or of three of the Planes, 187.0614; to which
being added the fourth equal Plane, for the more proper and peculiar base, as
it were, of the Pyramid, viz. 62.3538; the aggregate will be 249.4152, for the
total superficies, or surface of the Tetrahedrum, exactly as before, by the
true, natural dimension. But now the rectangle Plane made of the se^iperimeter
of the base, 18, and the side of the Tetrahedrum, 12, would be 216, for the
superficies of this Pyramid without the base (or of three of the equal Planes
only) which exceeds the former, by 28.9386, and so being joined with the base,
62.3538. would exceed the true total superficies accordingly.

Now for a trial of this dimension artificially, and that by the foresaid
perpendicular-line, and the Side of the base of the Pyramid together, whereby
the rectangle Plane made of them, shall agree with the rectangle Plane made
naturally of the semi-perimeter of the Base, and the said hedrall
perpendicular, for the true Pyramidall superfice, viz. without the proper base:
The artificial Line of Measure specially serving hereunto, I find (according
to the reason of the 3d. Theoreme, etc.) to be of the Rational Line in
general, deficiently, 0.8165 fere, (which is Apotomally in Number, The
artificial Line for the superficial Dimension of a trigonall Pyramid, by the
Side of its Base and the perpendicular-line of its laterall trigonall Plane,
(or the altitude of the same) together.
according to our general reason of Measure, 1 --.1835 fere) which being set
off from the said Line, and the side of the foresaid Pyramid's base measured
thereby (in a centesimall partition) will be found, 14.70 fere; and the
Perpendicular being also measured by the same Line, will be found, 12.73. fere;
which two being multiplied together, there will result the rectangle
Parallelogram, 187.1310 fere, for the Pyramidall superfice, beforementioned (
viz. without the Base) which exceeds the like superficies formerly found most
truly, 187.0614, not fully so much, as will make in vulgar terms, 1/14 of a
square-unit.

And thus much for the Dimension both solid and superficial of the first kind
of Pyramid in general, whether ordinate or inordinate, so as the Base be
ordinate: And so in special, of the first of the five ordinate plain Bodies,
namely, the Tetrahedron; according to a Pyramidall dimension only.

As for the first kind of Pyramidate, called in general Prisma, which I have
mentioned before in the first Part; I shall afterward speak a little of the
like dimension thereof, as is of a Pyramid it self.

Now for the second kind of Pyramidate, Concerning the Dimension of the
Icosahedron in a Pyramidal way.
called in general a mixed Polyhedron, of which sort are usually reckoned three
of the said five ordinate Solids, to wit, the Octahedron, Icosahedron, and
Dodecahedron, geometrical diagram seeing that the second of these is made up of
the first kind of Pyramid (but not exactly ordinate,) in number 20, and equal
and like, being comprehended under so many ordinate and equal Trigons, as their
Bases, by which they are only eminent, their whole Bodies besides being latent,
and meeting vertically in the Center of the Icosahedrum, (or of its
circumscribing Sphere) which bases or trigonal Planes being composed together
by solid angles, do therefore comprehend or contain the whole Icosahedrum,
according to E. 11. d. 29. and which solid angles (made by the connection or
concursion of the said Planes or bases, according to their angles) are,
therefore in number subquintuple the plain, superficial, or trigonal angles
constituting the same, (so that to the constituting of one solid angle, here do
concur five superficial angles) unto all which from the Center of the Body,
right lines being drawn, the whole Icosahedrum is thereby divided into 20 equal
and like trigonal Pyramids, according to what I said before: and the angular
lines called the Sides (made by the inclination of the said trigonal Planes
according to their sides, and so equal with the same) are in number, half so
many as the basial or hedral sides. Therefore I will next briefly touch upon the
dimension of this Body, how to perform the same, according to our artificial
way of Pyramidal Dimension before demonstrated; as it is vulgarly conceived to
be composed of Pyramids: For the solidity of one of the said compounding
Pyramids being first obtained (which is the usual way of measuring this, and
also the two other ordinate mixed Polyhedrums) the solidity of all the rest,
(and so consequently of the total Icosahedrum) is presently had, by the
vigecuplation only of that one Pyramid.

But now the whole difficulty of this Dimension of the Icosahedrum, (and ^o of
the other two soresaid Bodies) consists in the investigation of the Axis, or
line of altitude, of the compounding Pyramid (as it did before in the
Tetrahedron) if the same be inquired geometrically (as Geometricians speak) to
wit, by first having the side of the ordinate Solid only, and so coming at
length, after many tedious and troublesome operations, both arithmetical and
geometrical, to the said perpendicular-line of altitude, (which is no other
then the Radius of the Sphere inscribed within the plain Solid) which way
therefore I shall here pretermit, as being needless for me to demonstrate; the
same being showed by diverse practical Authors, especially Ramus and Clavius
in Latin; and more abundantly in English, by our Countryman, Mr. Digges long
since, in his learned Discourse of geometrical Solids, annexed to his
Pantometria, as a part thereof; to which Authors I therefore refer the
diligent practizer for a full satisfaction in this point; my intention in this
place, being only to bring in our new or artificial way of Pyramidal Dimension,
in the aforesaid ordinate Bodies, for the more easy and speedy obtaining of
their solidities in a Pyramidal way, the Hexahedron being excepted. And
therefore I shall here only show, how, instrumentally or mechanically to get the
said Pyramidall Axis or altitude, by getting first the altitude of the whole
body, (which (...) no other then the total Dimetient of the inscribed Sphere)
being according to what I showed before, for getting the altitudes of Cones and
Pyramids in general. Therefore, if from the superior Plane of the Icosahedrum,
being produced or extended, that is, from the inferior or interior superfice
of any Plane placed upon the uppermost Plane of the Icosahedrum, a
perpendicular be let down to the inferior or opposite Plane or Base thereof,
in like manner produced, that is, to the superior or exterior superfice of a
Plane placed under the Icosahedrum (and so, upon which the same lies) the said
perpendicular-line (being accurately measured) shall give the altitude of the
whole Icosahedrum, whose half shall be the Axis or Altitude of the composing
Pyramid sought for.

So that the great difficulty in the dimension of the Icosahedrum, arising by
the foresaid geometrical investigation of this Pyramidall altitude, is by this
means quite taken away, and the thing made very easy. Ane therefore whenever
you would measure an Icosahedron (or a Dodecahedron, for the same reason holds
in it for the altitude) it is best to use this way; for so the solidity of the
same will then be obtained with little labor, especially according to our
foregoing artificial pyramidal Mensuration; For the said Axiscr altitude of the
Icosahedron's co^posing Pyramid, being taken by the foresaid artificial Line
for the solid dimension of a Trigonal Pyramid, and the same be tiplied into the
Quadrat of the side, taken by the same Line; the product shall be the solid
content of the said compounding Pyramid; whose vigecuple will be the solidity of
the total Icosahedrum. But how, readily to obtain the Axis of the compounding
Pyramid, both of this, and also the other ordinate bodies (where need is) I
shall afterward show among the dimensional Proportions in these Bodies; by
first having the side of the Body, and which is very easily taken, without any
trouble at all.

And so the total superficies of this Solid, will readily be had by the Line
for the Lateral quadrature of an ordinate Trigon (according as I showed before
in the superficies of a Tetrahedron) for the side thereof being measured
thereby, its Quadrat will be the area of one of the bases or Planes, whose
vigecuple will be the total Icosahedral superficies.

Now for the second kind of Pyramid, to wit, the Tetragonal, upon a regular The
Dimension of a tetragonall Pyramid, showed in the Octabedron.
base, we shall next show our artificial dimension thereof, both solid and
superficial, and first in the other trigonal ordinate mixed Polyhedrum, or the
second trigonal ordinate Body, called Octahedron, seeing that the same is
composed of two equal and like tetragonal Pyramids of equal altitudes
(according to E. 14. p. 16.) meeting in their bases, and so making one common
base, which is a Quadrat described by the side of the Octakedrum, whereupon
this regular Solid is comprehended under twice so many equal ordinate Trigons,
as is the Tetrahedrum, being composed together by solid angles, which therefore
are in number, subquadruple the superficial or trigonal angles constituting the
same, (so that four geometrical diagram superficial angles do here meet to make
up one solid angle) And so this Body may also be considered under another
pyramidal composition, to wit, as composed of 8 equal and like trigonal
Pyramids, (according to the number of its trigonal bases, which shall also be
the bases of the said Pyramids) concurring vertically in the Center thereof (or
of its circumscribing Sphere) like as the Tetrahedron (though that be an
entire Pyramid of it self, and of the most simple kind of all, to wit, the
Trigonal) may be conceived to be composed of 4 equal and like trigonal
Pyramids, (according to its 4 bases or Planes) meeting vertically in the Center
of its body, or of its comprehending or containing Sphere. And so we shall here
show the artificial dimension of this Body in a pyramidal way, as being taken
in the first pyramidal composition, by showing the dimension of its tetragonal
Pyramid; which we will first perform by the natural way of its dimension for a
confirmation of our artificial way, according as we have done in all the
precedent Dimensions.

And therefore first (for example-sake) let the Side of the Base of a
tetragonal Pyramid, as also the true side it self of the Pyramid, be of the
Rational Line in general, the same with that of the foregoing trigonal Pyramid,
or the Tetrahedron, viz. 12.00: then the Diagony of the base, (which is also
the Diameter of its circumscribing Circle) will be 16.97; and thence, the Axis of
the Pyramid geometrical diagram 8.485, as being equal to the semi-diagony of
the base, (or semidiameter of its circumscribing Circle.) For seeing first, that
the Diagony of the Base, is double in power to the Side thereof, by E, 1. p.
47, etc. the power of the Diagony will be 288, whose Root irrational, 16.97, etc.
will be the Diagony it self; whose half therefore, 8.485, etc. is the semidiagony
(or Radius of the circumscribing Circle.) And then again, seeing that the Axis,
and basial semidiagony, as being the two sides about the right angle of the
rectangle Triangle made by the said two lines, and the side of the Pyramid, are
both together but equal in power to the said Pyramidal Side, as being the
Hypotenusal side of the said Triangle, by E, 1. p. 47. before-cited; if
therefore the Lateral power of the Pyramid, viz. 144, be diminished by the
semi-diagonial power, viz. 72; (which is just half the lateral power,) there
must needs remain the same for the power of the Axis; and so the Axis it self,
the same with the basial semi-diagony, viz. 8.485, etc. which (sufficiently
produced) being infolded with a trient of the Base, viz. 48; there will result
the true solidity of the Pyramid, (to cube-centesmes) 407.293506: and so half
the solidity of an Octahedrum composed of two such Pyramids; which therefore
doubled, will give 814.587013 for the whole solidity of the Octahedrum. Now for
the performing of this simple Pyramidal Dimension, by an artificial Line of
Measure proper thereunto, which, I find (according to the reason The
artificial Line for the solid dimension of a tetragonal Pyramid, by the side
of it is Base, and it is Axis or Altitude together.
of the 3d. Theoreme, etc. following) to be of the Rational Line in general,
1.4430, etc. The side of the Base of the foregoing tetragonal Pyramid put
naturally 12.00, being measured thereby (under a centesimal solution) will be
found 8.32, whose Quadrat is 69.2224 for the artificial base: and the Axis of
the Pyramid, being naturally, 8.48, will be found by the same Line, 5.88; which
two artificial numbers of dimension being wholly multiplied together (that is,
the whole base with the whole axis) there will arise 407.027712, for the
artificial solidity of the Pyramid; which wants of the true, or natural
solidity, only 1/4 fere, of a cube-unit: and this then being doubled, will give,
814.055424 for the artificial solidity of the Octahedrum, wanting of the true,
natural solidity before declared, only about 1/2 of a cube-unit, which is no
very considerable matter, And if the said artificial Line of Measure be made
1000 parts, and then the Axis of the Pyramid, and the side of it is base, be
measured thereby; they will produce the solidity still nearer the truth.

And if the solidity of an Octahedrum be immediately requiree; then the total
Axis or Diagony thereof (which is double to the Axis of the foresaid Pyramid,
and so no other then the Diagony of it is base, or the Diameter of the Circle
circumscribing the same, and also the Axis or Diameter of the Sphere
circumscribing the Octahedron) being infolded with a trient of the compounding
Pyramids base, (which is no other then the Octahed^on's Lateral Quadrat, as was
showed before) or the whole base wi^h a trient of the said Axis or Diagonial;
there will immediately result the solidity of the Octahedrum: For so the true
Axis or Diagonial of the foresaid Octahedrum, 16.97, etc. sufficiently produced
by Radical extraction, or otherwise, viz 16.97056274, etc. being infolded with
a trient of the aforesaid pyramidal base, viz. 48. (or the whole base 144 with
a trient of the axis, viz. 5.65685424, etc.) there, wilimmediatly result the
true total Octahedral solidity, 814.587012 as before. And so the total axis or
Diagony of the Octahedrum, found by the former artificial Line, (in a
centesimal solution) 11.77 fere, being infolded with the foresaid total common
base of the two compounding Pyramids, produced by the same Line, 69.2224; there
will also immediately result the solidity of the Octahedrum, 814.747648 fere,
which comes much nearer the true solidity, then the former dimension; this
differing there from (now by way of excess) not so much as 1/6 of a cube-unit,
or integer, of the appointed measure; which Octahedral solidity is exactly
quadruple to the foregoing Tetrahedral solidity, these two Bodies having here
one and the same side in measure. And here therefore it appears in brief, that
if the total Axis or Diagonial, and the Side, of an Octahedrum, be taken by the
foresaid artificial Line of measure for a Tetragonal Pyramid, and the Quadrat
of the Side be augmented by the Axis; the resulting rectangle regular-based
oblong Prism, or Parallelepipedum, shall completely contain the solidity of the
Octahedrum.

As for the Diagonial, Axis, or Altitude of the Octahedron, the same may be
also obtained instrumentally or mechanically, according to what I showed in the
Tetrahedron, and Pyramids in general; and also for the altitude of the
Icosahedron, and Dodecahedron; the altitude of this Body being considered
according to a perpendicular-line comprehended between its two opposite angles,
for as much as it is composed of two equal and like quadrangular Pyramids
joined together in their bases, as I said before.

As for the superficiarie dimension of this kind of Pyramid which now we have
in hand, the The superficial dimension of a tetragonal Pyramid; And the
artificial Line for performing the same by the Side of the base, and the
perpendicular line of the trigonall Plane together.
same may be most readily performed in the same artificial manner as that of a
trigonal Pyramid, to wit, by the side of the Base, and the perpendicular-line
of it is triangular Plane together. And the artificial Line of Measure for this
purpose, I find (according to the reason of the same Theoreme) to be of the
Rational Line in general, 0.7071, etc. 1/2, which is Apotomally in Number, as 1
--.2929 fere) which Line being set off there from, and divided in a due manner,
and then the two forenamed Lines of the Pyramid commensurable by the same, be
accordingly measured thereby, the product arising by their mutual
multiplication, shall be the superficies of the Pyramid, (to wit, without the
base) agreeing with that which is produced naturally, by the semiperimeter of
the base, and the foresaid trigonal perpendicular multiplied together,
according as I fully demonstrated before in the superficiary dimension of the
trigonal Pyramid. As in the foregoing tetragonal Pyramid, the side of the base
being 12, the perimeter thereof will be 48, and so the semiperimeter 24: and the
side of the Pyramid, or of its trigonal Plane, being the same with the side of
the base, the perpendicular of the said Plane, will be 10.39, etc. as was showed
in the superficiarie dimension of the Tetrahedron, and before that, in the
dimension of the Trigon alone; which two multiplied together, (the said
perpendicular being further produced, as formerly) there will arise 249.4153,
for the superficies of this Pyramid, without the base; agreeing with the total
superficies of the foregoing Tetrahedrum, the Planes of that and this, being
all one. Now the side of the base of this Pyramid (naturally 12.00) being
measured by it is proper Line, for superficial measure, will be found
artificially, the same that the Diagony or Diameter of its base is naturally,
viz. 16.97, etc. and the foresaid perpendicular will be found by the same Line,
(in a centesimal partition) 14.70 fere; which two multiplied together, do
produce 249.4590 fere, for the Pyramidal superfice aforesaid; exceeding the
true superfice, only so much as 1/23 of a squareunit or integer, it being
decimally,.0437, or 437 of 10000.

And thus may the superficies of an Octahedrum be obtained, it being only
double the superficies of its compounding Pyramid: For so, the superficies of
the foregoing Octahedrum, will be by this latter or artificial Measure, 498.9180
fere. And therefore if the side of an Octahedrum, and its hedral perpendicular,
be taken by this artificial Line, and one of them be doubled; the Rectangle
Plane made thereof, will be the total superficies of the Octahedrum: And so the
hedral perpendicular of the foresaid Octahedrum being taken by this Line, and
doubled, will be 29.39. which multiplied by the side of the Octahedrum, found by
the same Line, 16.97; the Plane produced therefrom, will be, 498.7483, for the
superficies of the Octahedrum; which comes a little nearer the true
superficies, then the former; that exceeding the same only,.0874 fere, which in
vulgar terms, is not fully 1/11; and this wanting thereof, but.0823, which in
vulgar account, is hardly 1/12; the true superficies being 498.8306, (double to
the superficies of the foregoing Tetrahedrum:) so that the side and hedral
perpendicular of an Octahedron being taken by the prime Rational Line, and
doubled; the Plane arising from their mutual multiplication, shall be the true
superficies of the Octahedrum; being no other then that of the basial
semiperimeter, and the trigonal perpendicular of its tetragonal compounding
Pyramid, doubled; As before, the double product of 24 and 10.39, etc. (or 12,
and 20.78, etc.) being now the single product of 24, and 20.78, etc. Or the
side being quadrupled, and the said perpendicular taken single, shall together
produce the same; being no other then that of the whole basial perimeter of the
foresaid Pyramid, and the perpendicular of its triangular Plane together, for
the double superficies of the Pyramid; which is the supersicies of the
Octahedrum: As here the product of 48, and 10.39, etc. Or the superficies of
this Solid, may be had again artificially by the Lines of quadrature
pertaining to the Trigon, as I showed before for the superficies of a
Tetrahedrum; for so, one of the Planes or bases being had; the Octuple thereof
shall be the total Octahedral superficies.

Now for the third sort of Pyramid, to wit, the pentagonal, upon an ordinate
Base; I shall next briefly show our artificial Dimension thereof, and that in
the third ordinate mixed Polyhedron, or The Dimension of a pentagonal Pyramid
demonstrated in the Dodecab^dron.
the pentagonal ordinate Body, namely the Dodecahedron; seeing that the same is
composed of this sort of Pyramid, in number 12, equal and alike, which are
comprehended under so many equal ordinate Pentagons, as being their Bases,
whereby they are only geometrical diagram eminent, their whole bodies besides
being hidden, and meeting vertically in the Center of the Dodecahedrum, (or of
its ambient Sphere) as those of the Icosahedrum, beforementioned; the
structure, or fabric of these two bodies being much alike: Which bases
therefore, or Pentagonal Planes, being compact together by solid angles, do
comprehend the total Dodecahedrum, by E, 11. d. 28. and these solid angles
(made by the inclination or connection of the said Bases or Planes according to
their angles) are thereupon, numerally subtriple the plain, superficial, or
pentagonal angles composing the same, which are just so many as the trigonal
angles of the Icosahedrum, the sides of these two Bodies, or the sides of all
their bases together, being numerally the same; (so that three superficiary
angles do here meet together, for the composition or constitution of one solid
angle, as in the Tetrahedrum; and this solid angle is the greatest of any of
the other Bodies, being contained or included by 3 3/5 plain right angles; and
so is in quantity 1 1/5 solid right angle, as its composing, or hedral angle,
is 1 1/5 plain or superficial right angle.) And so we shall here consequently
show our artificial Dimension of this ordinate Solid in a pyramidal way. And
this Pyramidal dimension I shall perform by the side of the base of the
compounding Pyramid, and its Axis together, as I did before in the Pyramid
trigonal and tetragonal, in reference to the Tetrahedron and Octahedron. And
the Line of measure The artificial Line for the solid d^mension of a
pentagonal Pyramid, by the side of it is base, and Axis together.
for this purpose, I find (according to the reason of the 3d. Theoreme, etc.)
to be of the Rational Line in general, 1.2036, etc. Therefore admitting the
side of the base of a Dodecahedron's compounding Pyramide (which is also the
side of the Dodecahedrum it self) to be of the Rational Line in general, 6.00;
then the Axis or altitude of the said Pyramid (being the semi-altitude of the
Dodecahedrum, or the semi-axis, or semi-dimetient of it is inscribed Sphere)
will be found, (according to the proportion of the side of a Dodecahedrum to the
Axis or Dimetient of its inferibed Sphere, noted afterward) to be 6.68; which
two Pyramidal lines being measured by the foresaid artificial Line, (in a
centenary solution) will be found, the first, 4.98, for the artificial side of
the Pyramids base, and the other, 5.55, geometrical diagram for the Pyramids
artificial Axis; Now 4.98, being squared, yields, 24.8004, for the artificial
Base; which augmented by 5.55, yields 137.642220 for the artificial solidity of
the compounding Pyramid singly; and which augmented by the number of the
compounding Pyramids, yields, 1651.706640, for the solidity of Dodecahedrum;
which indeed differs somewhat considerably (by way of defect) from the true
natural solidity, in respect of the total Dedecahedrum, though not of its
compounding Pyramid alone. For the side of the Dodecahedrum, or of its Pyramids
base, being naturally 6, the true area of the base, will be found (according to
the trigonometrical operations in the Pentagonal Dimensions before going)
61.9371, etc. whose subtriple, 20.6457, etc, being infolded with the whole axis
or altitude of the Pyramid, naturally 6.68, etc. there will arise the true,
natural solidity of the Pyramid, 137.936159 fere; which our measure wants of,
not 1/3 of a solid integer or unit; and the duodecuple hereof, 1655.233908
fere, is the true solidity of the Dodecahedrum. Or the Base and Axis of the
Pyramid being wholly increased together, there will result the Pentagonal
Prisme, 413.808476, containing three of the compounding Pyramids, (according to
the reason of E, 12. p. 7. before cited) being of equal base and altitude with
the Pyramid.) and so a quarter of the Dodecahedrum; whose quadruple therefore,
1655.233904, is the total Dodecahedrum; which agrees with the other natural
measure thereof, without any sensible difference.

Or again, seeing that the rectangle Solid ( Prisma or Parallelepipedum)
contained under the Perpendicular from the Center of any regular plain Body, to
any of it is bases or Planes, and a trient of the total superficies, comprehends
the solidity of the whole body (according to what I showed formerly in the
dimension of a Sphere, for the producing of its solid content by the
semidiameter, and a trient of the Superficies, the plain Solid arising
therefrom, being equal to the spherical Solid: or which is all one, the plain
Solid made of the whole Diameter, and a sextant of the spherical superficies,)
in as much as that which is contained under the said Perpendicular, (which is
here no other then the Axis of the compounding Pyramid, and the semi-axis of
the inscribed Sphere) and a trient of one of the bases or Planes (which is the
base of the compounding Pyramid, as aforesaid) comprehends the solidity of one
of the compounding Pyramids; and so consequently that which is contained under
the said Perpendicular, and a trient of all the bases or Planes together (as
being the bases of all the compounding Pyramids together) must needs comprehend
the solidity of all the Pyramids together, and so of the whole ordinate Body;
(as the rectangle Plane contained under the perpendicular from the Center of
any rectiline regular Plane, or superficial Figure, to any of it is sides, and
the semi-perimeter of the same, comprehends the Area of the whole Figure (as I
showed formerly in the Pentagon, and which answers to that of the dimension
of a Circle, for the producing of it is Area by the semidiameter, and
semiperiphery, the rectangle Plane or Parallelogram resulting therefrom (by
their mutual implication) being equal to the Circular Plane: or which is all as
one, the rectangle Plane made of the whole diameter and a quadrant of the
Periphery, or of the whole Periphery and a quadrant of the diameter) in as
much, as that which is contained under the said perpendicular, (which is no
other then the perpendicular of altitude of the Figure's compounding Trigon,
and the Radius of the inscribed Circle) and half the side, (as being, half the
base of the said Trigon) comprehends the supercies, or area, of one of the
compounding Trigons; and so, that which is contained under the said
perpendicular and half the perimeter of the Figure (as being half of the bases
of all the compounding Trigons together) must needs comprehend the superficial
Content of all the said Trigons together, and consequently of the whole regular
Figure it self.) Therefore the Base of the Dodecahedrum being 61.9371, etc. the
total superficies thereof, will be 743.2462 etc. whose subtriple, 247.7487, etc.
being augmented by the foresaid perpendicular (or axis of the compounding
Pyramid) 6.68, etc. there will result the total Dodecahedral solidity,
1655.2339, etc. exactly as before: which may be plainly seen by the subsequent
Logarithmical operations, whereby these Pyramidal and Dodecahedral dimensions,
are most readily and accurately performed.

Therefore first,

Side of the Dodecahedron, or of its compounding Pyramid's Base, 6.

^

Again, 2ly.

^

Or again, 3ly.

^

Which our Measure found by the foresaid artificial Line of Pyramidal
consolidation, falls short of indeed, about 3 integers, or units, and an
half: But then if the said Pyramidal Line of Measure be increased in its parts,
by a subdecuple solution of the former; the side of the aforesaid Pyramids base
(naturally 6.000) will be found thereby, 4.985, fere, whose Quadrat is 24.850225
fere, for the artificial base: and the Axis of the said Pyramid (naturally
6.681) will be found thereby, 5.551 fere; which two by a conjunct composition,
will produce 137.943598975 fere, for the solidity of the Pyramid (which now
exceeds the true solidity, being 137.936158730, hardly so much as 1/134 of a
solid integer or unit) whose duodecuple, 1655.323187700, is for the solidity of
the Dodecahedron; which now differs from the true solidity, being
correspondently 1655.233904760 (by way of excess) hardly 1/1^ of a solid
integer or unit.

As for the superficies of a Do^ecahedron, the same may be readily obtained by
any of the three Lines of quadrature pertaining to an ordinate Pentagon, but
that for the side is the most fit and proper (though all of them will produce
the same thing) for so the side of the Dodecahedron being taken thereby, the
Square thereof sh^l be the basial or hedral area, whose duodecuple will be the
total Dodecahedral superficies. But a far better way for the dimension both
solid and superficial of this, and the other plain regular Bodies, I shall show
in the next Section, which will be wholly taken up about the said five Bodies.

As for the superficial Dimension of a pentagonal Pyramid seeing it is but the
Concerning the superficial dimension of a Pentagon all Pyramid; And withal,
the artificial Line for performing the same, by the side of the base, and the
perpendicular of the trigonal Plane together.
same with that, which I have fully showed in the two preceding Pyramids, both
naturally and artificially, in the most ready manner that may be; to wit,
artificially, by the side of the Base, and the perpendicular-line of the
triangular or laterall Plane together: Therefore I shall not need to insist upon
the same in this last Pyramid here particularly handled, by way of exemplary
illustration; But shall only give the artificial Line of measure for the
performance thereof, as I find it to be from the natural Line of measure, or
prime Rational Line in general, deficiently, 0.63245, etc. (that is Apotomally
in number, from our general reason of Measure, as 1 --.36754, etc. the said
artificial Line being 2/5 of the natural Line, in it is power quadratick.

And thus may the Dimension both solid and superficial of this and all other
Pyramids, be performed artificially by the other dimensional lines of their
Bases (specified before in the dimension of those basial Figures simply, and by
which we said, they might be also artificially, or quadratically measured;) as,
the Diameters or Perpendiculars, and Diagonals, together with their Axes or
Altitudes, for solid measure; and with the perpendicular-lines, or altitudes of
their triangular Planes, for superficial measure: And which, though it be
needles, that by the side of the Base, (with the Axis and trigonal
Perpendicular) being most ready, and also most proper, according to what I
noted in the beginning of this Section, in the basial Figures: Yet having for
variety of Art in this kind, not spared the pains of extracting or eradicating
the artificial Lines serving thereunto; I thought it might not be amiss, to
set them down here also; as they are from the natural Line of measure, or prime
Rational Line in general, in a decu-millenary solution; those for solid
dimension, (as also the other beforegoing) being all of them, thereof
redundantly; and those for superficial dimension, all of them deficiently.

The artificial Line of Measure, is for the Pyramid, Trigonall, in respect of
the basial Diameter, conjunctly with the Axis, or Altitude of the Body, 1.7320
q 3 Solid measure. Tetragonal, 1.8172 c 6 Pentagonal, 1.6043. Trigonall,
Perpendic line, or altitude of the trigonal or lateral Plane. 0.7598 qq 1/3
Superfie measure Tetragonal, 0.8409 qq 1/2 Pentagonal, 0.7846 fere.

And for the Pentagonall Pyramid, in regard of the Basial Diagony with the
Axis, or Altitude, 1.6589 fere. Solid measure. Trigonall perpendic. 0.8045
fere. Superficial measure.

All which Pyramidal Dimensions beforegoing, in a Linear, instrumental, or
geometrical way, I shall next briefly express in an Arithmetical way, in the
proportional terms following, from an ample solution of the unit, (according as
I did before in the Cone and Cylinder,) by which, the artificial Measure may be
readily produced from the natural; or the natural Measure be reduced to the
artificial. Therefore,

The natural Measure is to the artificiall^ in the Pyramid Trigonal, or
Tetrahedral in respect of the Axis, or Altitude of the Body, conjunctly with
the Side of the Base, as 1. to.524587 Solid dimension. Diam..577424 Tetragonal,
or Pe^tahedral Side.693373 c 1/2 Diam..550321 Pe^tagonal, or Hexahedral,
Side.830824 Diam..623323 Diago^..602815 Trigonal, Altitude, or perpendicular of
the trigonal or lateral Plane conjunctly with the Side 1.224745 q 1 1/2
Superficial dimension. Diam. 1.316074 bq3 Tetragonal, Side 1.414213 q2 Diam.
1.189207 qq2 Pentagonal, Side 1.581139 q 2 1/2 Diam. 1.274597 Diago^. 1.243014
Place this between Page 136 and 137.


And what has been here delivered concerning the artificial Dimension of
Pyramids upon regular Bases; the like is to be understood for the dimension
(both solid and superficial) of Prisms upon the like bases, by artificial
Lines of measure peculiarly appropriated and applied to them for that purpose,
in regard either of any of the basiallines aforenamed, with the Axis or
Altitude for solid measure, or with the same Concerning the dimension of Prisms.
for superficial measure, (seeing the Axis or Altitude and the side, is all one
in right or upright Prisms, as in right Cylinders, which I showed formerly.)
But these I shall here pass by, leaving them to the industry of the ingenious
Practitioner, that shall please to exercise himself therein; and the rather for
that the artificial Lines of measure pertaining to the Pyramids, will also serve
(if need be) for the dimension of the corresponding Prisms, (as I showed
formerly between the Cone and Cylinder seeing that a Prism is only triple its
correspondent Pyramid, according to E, 12. p. 7. as a Cylinder is triple its
correspondent Cone, according to E, 12. p. 10, as I noted formerly; And as the
proportion of the Prism to the Pyramid is triple, for solidity; so it is double
for superficiety; the similitude, and so the reason between a Pyramid and
Prism, being the same (in both Dimensions) with that between a Cone and
Cylinder: And so the Lines of artificial Dimension, pertaining to the trigonal
or tetrahedral Pyramid, will serve for the trigonal or pentahedral Prism; And
the Lines for the tetragonal or pentahedral Pyramid, will serve for the
tetragonal, or hexahedral Prism: And the Lines for the Pentagonal, or
hexahedral Pyramid, will serve for the pentagonal, or heptahedral Prism; and so
forward: For as the Pyramid begins a Quaternario, So the Prism, a Quinario.

And by the same artificial manner of measuring (as by the natural) may be
obtained the solid content of any oblique or inclined Pyramid or Prism upon a
regular base, as readily as of a right or upright one, according Concerning the
dimension of oblique or inclined Pyramids and Prisms.
as I showed formerly for oblique Cones and Cylinders; the true altitudes of
these Bodies (not their Axes) being considered; seeing that every such oblique
kind of Body, is equal in solidity to the right or erect body, having the same
(or being of equal) base and altitude; by the reason of E, 12. p. 5 and 6, and
p. 11 and 14, and also E. 11, p. 30 and 31, as I noted formerly.

SECT. III. Exhibiting a more special and peculiar artificial way of
measuring both solidly and superficially, the four plain ordinate Bodies, or
rectiline regular Solids before handled, then was before; and this, after the
most exquisite manner that may be. Together with the like artificial dimension
of the other like regular Body, several ways.
HAving now showed our artificial Dimension several ways, in Pyramids, and
their Compounds, or Pyramidates; and consequently of the five forenamed
ordinate plain Bodies, or rectiline regular Solids, in a Pyramidal way: (the
Hexahedron excepted.) We shall next come to show the dimension of the said
Bodies in a far better way; and indeed, in the most excellent artificial, and
compendious manner that can possibly be found out: and that for superficial
measure, with the same speed, ease and exactnes, and so in the very same
manner, as that of the Circle, Trigon, God (...), etc. And for solid measure,
as that of a Cube, by the natural or vulgar way of measuring the same (which
weshal also here show by the like artificial way with the rest) And this only
by squaring and cubing any one of their dimensional lines (as in the Sphere) by
artificial Lines of measure convenient for the purpose: Which may indeed, I
almost despaired of, in regard of the great difficulty which I found to be in
the solid dimension of these Bodies, by the usual or natural way, according to
their Pyramidal compositions, (the Hexahedron excepted) especially the the two
last and greatest of them, namely the Icosahedron and Dodecahedron. But yet
considering the excellency of them in their compositions, constitutions, and
structures above any other solid Figures; from whence they are called by
Pappus, and other of the Greeks, (...), i, e. ordinata been ordinata; and
commonly the Pythagorean, and Platonicall Bodies, as being first invented (as
is generally supposed) by Pythagoras, and afterward set forth briefly by Plato
in Timaeo, de Anima Mundi, seu Natura.
Plato in the composition and fabric of the World, as in the Heaven, and the
four Elements; and so are also called therefrom, the Cosmical or mundane
Bodies; and so that in the knowledge and understanding of the natures,
properties and affections thereof, lies as great a difficulty, nicety, and
curiosity of Geometry, as may be; in so much as that Proclus makes the singular
and admiable end of the Mathematiques, to be in the knowledge of these five
Bodies, in respect of their constitution, adscription, and comparation,
collation, or application among themselves: And so thereupon our Countreyman
Billingsley, in his learned Annotations upon Euclids Elements in English, after
the 25th. defin. of the 11th. book, speaking of the dignity and excellency of
the said 5 Bodies; says, that they are as it were, the end, and perfection of
all Geometry, and for whose sakes was written, whatsoever was written in
Geometry: Therefore for the avoiding and removing of all difficulties in their
Dimensions, and so the facilitating of the same, as to the obtaining of their
solid and superficial Capacities (especially solid) as easily and exactly, as
of any other Figure whatsoever, and that several ways, both naturally and
artificially; I resolved (by Gods assistance) to prosecute my metrical conceits
and invention herein, as far as in any other Figure.

And seeing that the sides of these Bodies may more readily and accurately be
taken by a Line of measure, then any other their lines of dimension adscribed
to them, (and indeed very accurately, without any trouble) as being their only
natural lines of dimension, and so only apparent of of themselves in them;
(according to what I formerly said for rectiline Planes or Superficies in
general: Therefore I shall here briefly demonstrate their dimensions both solid
and superficial (by way of example) artificially by their sides only; and
withal, shall by the way, give artificial Lines for the like dimension of them,
by some other of their dimensional lines adscribed to them. And first for solid
dimension, the Lines for the Sides of these Bodies, (or for the cubick
dimension of them by their Sides) I find, by the reason of the 2d. Theoreme,
etc. following, to be of the prime Rational Line in general, (in a
decu-millenary solution,) as follows.

The artificial Line for solid Measure, or Line of Cubature is for the side of
the Tetrahedron, 2.0396 redundant Octahedron, 1.2849 Icosahedron, 0.7710
deficient Dodecahedr. 0.5072

Which Lines being duly set off and divided, as the former, and so the Sides of
these bodies measured thereby; the Cubes thereof, shall be the solid contents of
the same, according to the dimensional reason of the prime Rational Line: which
I shall briefly illustrate in three of these Bodies, by the foregoing Exammples
laid down in their Pyramidal dimensions, viz. the Tetrahedron, Octahedron and
Dodecahedron; to which, I shall here add the like for the Icosahedron.

geometrical diagram Therefore first; the Side of the Tetrahedrum before
handled, being put naturally, 12.00, the true solidity thereof, was there
found, by the natural Pyramidall Dimension, 203.646753, and by our artificial
Pyramidall Dimension, 203.359474. Now the Line of Cubature for the side of a
Tetrahedrum being first put under a centenary solution only, and the side of
the foresaid Tetrahedrum measured thereby, the same will be found 5.88, whose
Cube is 203.297472 for the solidity of the Tetrahedrum; which wants of the
true solidity, about as much as the foregoing artificial Pyramidal Dimension,
viz. 1/3 of cube-integer or unit only; which is near enough for any ordinary
use: But however proceeding by a decuple of the former parts, in the Line of
Cubation, viz. 1000; the solidity of this Tetrahedrum will be found thereby,
203.608800, etc. which now wants of the true solidity, hardly so much as 1/26
of a cube-integer; the side of the Tetrahedrum being now by this Line, 5.883.

geometrical diagram II. The Side of the foregoing Octahedron being put
naturally 12.00, the solid content thereof was found 814.587012, by the natural
pyramidal Dimension, and 814.055424, by the artificial. Now the Line of cubical
Dimension for the side of an Octahedron, being put in a centesimal partition;
the side of the aforesaid Octahedrum, will be found thereby 9.34, which cubed,
gives 814.780504, for the solidity of the Octahedrum, which exceeds the true
solidity, scarcely 1/5 of a cube-integer or unit. And this very measure would
be produced by the artificial Line for the solid dimension of a tetragonal
Pyramid, by the diagony of its base and its Axis together: it being the same
with the Line for cubing an Octahedron by its Axis or Diagonial, as I shall show
afterward; and the Axis of this Body being double to the Axis of its
compounding tetragonal Pyramid, and so equal to the Diagony of the said
Pyramids base, as I showed formerly.

geometrical diagram III. The side of the Dodecahedron formerly handled, being
put naturally, 6.00; the solidity thereof, was found by the natural Pyram.
dimension, 1655.233905 fere; and by the like artificial dimension (in a
millenary solution of the proper Line of Measure) 1655.323188 fere. Now the
side of this Dodecahedrum being taken by its Line of cubation (in a centesimal
solution) will be found thereby, 11.83 fere, whose Cube is, 1655.595487 fere,
for the solidity of the Dodecahedron, differing inconsiderably from the true
solidity, being (by way of excess,) but about 1/3 of a cube-integer. But
however if the said Line of Lateral Cubatnre be made 1000, the solidity of this
Dodecahedrum will be produced thereby, much nearer the true one, viz.
1655.175675, etc. which now differs from the true solidity (by way of defect)
hardly 1/17 of a cubique integer or unit: the side of the Dodecahedrum being
now by this Line, 11.829.

IV. The side of an Icosahedron being put naturally, 12.00, the solidity
thereof will be found by the natural Pyramidal Dimension, upon the very point of
3770: For the Axis of the compounding Pyramid, will be found (by the proportion
of the side of an Icosahedrum to the Axis of its inscribed Sphere, or altitude
of its own body, hereafter declared) to be 9.069, etc. which with a trient of
the base (being the same with that of the foregoing Tetrahedrum and Octahedrum,
viz. 62.3538, etc.) viz. 20.7846, etc. will produce the solidity of the
compounding Pyramid, 188.498398. (which by the proper artificial Pyramidal
Line, will be 188.325116,) whose vigecuple, 3769.967960, is the solidity of the
Icosahedrum: All which you may see most accuratly produced by the several
Logarithmetical operations or artificial Numerations following, according to
those formerly in the Dodecahedron. And therefore first.

geometrical diagram

^

Again, 2ly.

^

Or again, 3ly.

^

Or 4ly. (to come toward our present way of measuring here proposed) the same
will be most readily produced in a cubical manner, without any trouble of
Calculation, or arithmetical and geometrical operation; and that first by
comparing the Cube of the Icosahedrum's side with the Icosahedrum it self,
according to the most exquisite terms of proportion, noted in the next Section;
and this only by one simple composition of Numbers, from the artificial
Numeration, thus;

^

Or 5ly. and lastly; the same from thence, by finding the content of the Cube
equal to the Icosahedrum according to the most exquisite Proportion of the side
of the Icosahedrum to the side of that Cube or Hexahedrum, noted immediately
after the former Proportion; (to which does answer exactly, our present
artificial Mensuration, o^ organical, or mechanical Cubation) As,

^

Which several Logarithmical operations, do agree well with that Algebraical or
Cossical computation of Mr. Diggs in his forementioned discourse of geometrical
Solids. Probl. 14. where having Cossically cast up the solid content of this
very Icosahedrum, he says at last, that the same being reduced into rational
numbers, will fall between 3769 and 3770.

And with these several artificial Numerations, will be found to agree very
nearly, our present artificial Mensuration: For the side of this Icosahedrum
being measured by its proper Cubatorie Line, (taken in a centenary solution)
will be found thereby, 15.56 (as before, the side of its equal Cube, by the
artificial Numeration) which cubed, yields, 3767.287616, for the solidity of
the Icosahedrum, which indeed wants of the true solidity, between two and
three integers of the appointed measure; but one example is not to be regarded:
But however therefore, proceeding here in a more ample or numerous solution of
the Line^ of measure both natural and artificial, equally; the solidity of this
Icosahedrum will be thus artificially produced very near the true content. As if
the prime or natural Line be made 1000 parts, and so also the second,
artificial, or Cubatorie Line; then the side of this Icosahedrum measured
thereby, will be found 15.564 fere, whose Cube is 3770.193726, etc. for the
solidity of the Icosahedrum, which exceeds the true Content, not so much as
1/4 of the prime or natural Line, cubed; or 1/4 of a cube-integer, or unit.

Now for the like superficiary Dimension Concerning the superf^cial dimension
of the 4 regular Solids beforegoing, by way of exact Quadrature.
of these Bodies, the artificial Lines of quadrature for this purpose, I find
(according to the reason of the first and 2d. Theoremes etc.) to be of the
prime Rational Line in general (under the former solution) as follows.

The artificial Line for superficial measure, or Line of Quadrature, is for
the Side of the Tetrahedron, 0.7598 qq. 2/^ Octahedron, 0.5373 fere
Icosahedron, 0.3398 Deficie^t Dodecahedr. 0.2201 fere

By which Lines duly set off and divided, the sides of these Bodies being
measured; their Quadrats shall be the total superficies; which I shall also
briefly illustrate by help of the examples beforegoing in the Dimension of the
Trigon and Pentagon, which I made use of formerly in the superficial Dimension
of the Tetrahedron and Octahedron in a Pyramidal way.

Therefore first; the Side of the foregoing Tetrahedrum being naturally 12.00,
the true total Supersicies thereof was formerly found, 249.4153, (which by the
Line of quadrature pertaining to the side of an ordinate Trigon, was found,
249.6400 fere.) Now the Line of quadrature peculiarly appropriated to the side
of a Tetrahedrum (not having respect to the base or Plane simply, as being an
ordinate Trigon) being centesimally divided; the side of this Tetrahedrum
measured thereby, will be found, 15.79, whose Quadrat is 249.3241, for the total
superficies of the Tetrahedrum, which wants of the true superficies in
vulgarterms, only 1/11 fere, of a square integer or unit, of the measure
appointed.

II. The side of the foregoing Octahedrum being the same with that of the
Tetrahedrum, viz. 12.00; the superficial Content thereof will be double to that
of the Tetrahedrum, (as I showed before) viz. 498 8306. Now the side of this
Octahedrum being measured by its proper Line of quadration (in a centesimal
solution) will be 22.33, whose Square is 498.6289, for the Octahedro^'s total
Superficies, wanting of the true content, only 1/5 of a square-integer. Or the
said Line being made 1000, it will give the Octahedron's side, 22.335 fere, which
squared, gives the Octahedron's superficies, 498.852225 fere, which exceeds the
true Content, viz. 498.830633 fere, hardly 1/46 (in vulgar terms) of a
square-unit.

III. The side of the former Icosahedrum being the same with the side of the
Tetrahedrum and Octahedrum; the superficies thereof will be quintuple the
superficies of the Tetrahedrum, and so double-sesquialter the superficies of
the Octahedrum, (according to what I have formerly spoken in the superficial
Composition of these Bodies) viz. 1247.0766 fere: Now the side of this
Icosahedrum, being taken by its proper tetragonismal Line, under a centesimal
partition only, will be found 35.31, whose Quadrat is 1246.7961, for the
superficies of the Icosahedrum; which wants of the true superficies, scarc^ly
1/3 of a square-integer. But yet the side of the Icosahedrum being measured by
its said Line under a millesimal solution, will be found upon the point of
35.314, which quadrately, is 1247.078596 fere, for the Icosahedrum's
superficies, which now exceeds the true superficies, (being 1247.076581) in
vulgar terms, hardly 1/4^6 of a square integer or unit.

IV. The Side of the foregoing Dodecahedrum, being, 6, the true total
superficies thereof, was formerly found 743.2462, etc. Now the Line peculiarly
appertaining to the side of a Dodecahedrum, for the quadrate dimension of its
Superficies (not as relating to the Base or Plane thereof simply, as being an
ordinate Pentagon) being first laid down under a centesimal partition, and the
side of this Dodecahedrum measured thereby, will be found 27.26, whose Quadrat
is 743.1076, for the total Superficies of the Dodecahedrum, which wants of
the true superficies, only about 1/7 of a square-integer or unit.

And so again, the side of a Dodecahedrum being double to the former, and so
the same with the sides of the three Bodies before going; the basial or hedral
area, will be the same with the area of the Pentagon formerly handled, viz.
247.7487, etc. and so the total superficies (according to what I have said of
the composition of this Body) will be upon the point of 2973, viz. 2972..9844,
or more exactly, (by a further extension or production of the Pentagonal area)
2972.9849; which is quadruple the superficies of the former Dodecahedrum: the
base of this being quadruple the base of that. Now the side of this
Dodecahedrum being measured by its foresaid Line of Quadrature, will be, 54.52;
which squared, gives 2972.4304, for the Superficies of the Dodecahedron, which
wants of the true Content only about 1/2 of a square integer: But however,
proceeding in the partition of the Line of Quadrature, but one degree of parts
further, viz. to 1000; the Dodecahedron's superficies will be produced thereby,
2972.975625 (the side being 54.525) which now wants of the true superficies,
being 2972.984949 (in vulgar account) hardly 1/107 of a quadrate unite or
integer of the measure first assigned. As for the other ordinate plain Body,
namely the Hexahedron, (or orthogonial Isohedron, Concerning the dimension of
the Hexahedron.
or ordinate Parallelepipedon) the same cannot more readily be measured,
(especially for solid Measure) then by the natural way, which is by cubing it is
side, being taken by the prime or natural Rational Line: geometrical diagram
And so almost as readily for superficial also, by squaring its side, taken by
the same Line; whose sextuple will be the total super ficies: But else however,
both these Dimensions may be performed artificially, either by the Diagoniall,
Diameter, or Axis of its Body (which is no other then the axis or Dimetient of
its circumscribing or comprehending Sphere, and which in the Hexahedron cannot
immediately be taken, unless the same be concave, and one side or base open) or
else by the Diagony or Diameter of its Base (which is the same with the
Diameter of the Circle circumscribing the said Base, as I showed formerly in
the Dimension of a tetragonal Pyramid, and before that, of a Tetragon it self,,
by its Diagony.) And so, whereas the Diagoniall or Axis of the Hexahedron, is
naturally triple in potencie or possibility, to the side thereof, by E, 13. p.
15, (as the Diagony or Diameter of its base is naturally double in the same
manner, to the Side, by E, 1. p. 47, etc. which I showed before,) here it
becoms artificially equal (immediately in act, and so in power, quadrate and
cubique) to the side taken naturally, or by the prime or natural Line of
measure: And the artificial Line of measure for this purpose, in reference to
solid measure, I find (according to the reason of the 2d. Theoreme, etc.) to be
of the prime Rational Line in general, the same with The solid dimension of an
Hex^hedron by its Axis or Diagoniall according tocubatio^: And the artificial
Line for performing the same.
that which was formerly found for the solid dimension of a trigonal Pyramid by
it is basiall Diameter or perpendicular; and its Axis together, viz. 1.7320,
etc. 3. By which the Diagoniall or Axis of an Hexahedrum being taken, will be
found to agree with the Side thereof taken by the natural Line of Measure, and
so being cubed, must needs produce the same Content: Whereby it appears, that
if the Axis or Diameter of a Sphere be taken by this Line, the Cube thereof
shall be the inscribed Hexahedron.

II. Then for the superficial dimension of this Body by its said Axis or
Diagoniall; I find the artificial Line for that purpose, to be the very same
with that which was formerly found for the superficial dimension of a
tetragonal Pyramid, by the side of its The superficial dimension of the
Hexahedron artificially by its Axis or Diagony, according to quadration.
base, and the perpendicular of its trigonall plane together, viz. 0.7071, 1/2:
By which the said Axis or Diagony being taken; the Square thereof shall be the
total Superficies of the Hexahedrum: And therefore if the Diameter of a Sphere
be taken by this Line, the Quadrat thereof shall be the inscribed Hexahedron's
superficies.

III. As for the solid dimension of this Body artificially, by the Diagony of
the base; the Line of measure serving thereunto, I find to be the very same
with that which was formerly noted for the dimension of a The solid dimension
of the Hexahedron by the Diagony or Diameter of its Base, according to
Cubature, artificially.
Tetragon by its Diagony, and also for the superficial dimension of a Cone by
its whose basial periphery and side together, viz. 1.4142, 2: By which the
basial Diagony being taken, it will be found to agree with the side taken by the
prime Rational Line; and so being cubed, must needs produce the same Hexahedral
solidity.

IV. Then for the superficial dimension of this Solid, artificially, by its
said basial Diagony or The superficial dimensio^ of the Hexhaedron by its
basial or hedral Diagony, according to quadrature artificially.
Diameter; the Line of quadrate dimension for this purpose, I find (according
to the reason of the 1 and 2d. Theoremes, etc.) to be of the Rational Line in
general, (defectively) 0.57735, etc. which is Apot^mally in Number, 1 --.42265,
etc. the said artificial Line being 1/3 of the natural Line, taken in its
quadratique power or capacity. By which Line (first duly divided) the basiall
or hedral Diagony being taken, its Quadrat shall be the total superficies of the
Hexahedrum.

V. And so may the superficies of this Body, be wholly obtained in the like
manner, by its Side (which may be The superficial dimension of the Hexahedron
artificially by its Side, according to one exact quadrature.
termed the most precise and proper squaring of a Cube, as to it is
superficiety, or superficial part; as also the two former ways by the
Diagonial of the Base and of the total Hexahedron it self) and the Line of
quadrature convenient for this purpose, I find (by the reason of the foresaid
Theoremes) to be of the prime rational Line in general (deficiently) 0 4082,
etc. the Apotomal segment, or parts of diminution, being.5917, etc. the Line it
self being 1/^ of the foresaid Rational Line, in its power or capacity
tetragonical. By which (first duly divided) the Side of the Hexahedrum being
measured; its Quadrat shall be the total Hexahedral superficies; Which way, as
also that by the Diagony of the base, as they are more artificial and excellent
in themselves, so also more ready, for getting the superficies of an
Hexahedron, then the vulgar or natural way, by squaring the side taken by the
natural Line of measure, and then sextuplating that square, as being the Base.
And here it appears, that if the Diameaer of a Sphere be taken by this last
artificial Line, the Quadrat thereof shall be the total convexe superficies of
the circumscribed Hexahedron.

And this ordinate Body here last handled, may also be conceived or considered
together with the other 4 beforegoing, under a Pyramidal composition and
resolution (as al plain Solids generally are; even Pyramids themselves; as I
showed before in the first and most simple kind of all, to wit, the trigonal,
and that in the Tetrahedrum it self) according to its Bases or Planes, which
are to be understood, as the bases of so many Pyramids equal and alike, by
which they are only externally eminent or apparent, their whole bodies beside,
being internally latent, and so do meet in their vertical angles, in the center
of the hexahedral Body; (or of its ambient Sphere,) This Body being composed
superficially or externally of, or contained internally under, six equal
Tetragons, (according to E, 11. d. 25) compact together by solid (right)
angles, which are in number, subtriple the plain, superficial, or hedral
(right) angles constituting or including the same, as in the Tetrahedrum and
Dodecahedrum. And hereupon this regular Solid will also admit of a Pyramidal
dimension, for the obtaining of its solid Area, like as the other; which will be
most easily performed, seeing that the Axis or Altitude of its compounding
tetragonal Pyramid, is equal to half the side (or altitude) of its body; and
which conjunctly with a trient of the Base (or the whole Base with a trient of
that) will produce the Content of one of the composing Pyramids; whose sextuple
will be the Content of all the Pyramids together, and so of the whole
Hexahedrum: Or (more briefly) the said Pyramidal Axis conjunctly with the whole
Base, will produce the Content of three of the said Pyramids, for half the
Hexahedrum: And therefore hence it is, that the side of this Body, (which is
its altitude, and so double to the altitude of its composing Pyramid) being
infolded with the Base (that is, cubed) produces immediately the Content of all
the 6 supposed Pyramids together, for the ^o^al Hexahedrum.

And as the Hexahedrum; so also may the other four ordinate plain Bodies be
artificially measured, both solidly and superficially, (or cubically and
quadrately) by their other several lines of dimension, beside their Sides, (as
I noted before) as either by their Axes, Diameters, or Diagonials, which in the
Octahedron, Icosahedron, and Dodecahedron, are no other then the Axis or
Diameter of their circumscribing, comprehending or containing Sphere, as in the
Hexahedron, (as I noted occasionally in them before) or by their Altitudes,
(which in the Dodecahedron and Icosahedron, are the same with the Diameter of
their inscribed Sphere; as also in the Hexahedron, it being there the same with
the side, and in the Octahedron, is the same with its Diagoniall, or Axis,
being also the circumscribing Sphear's Axis, as I showed formerly.) Or by their
Basiall or hedrall Diameters or perpendiculars; and in the Dodecahedron, by its
basiall or hedral Diagony also, according as I showed in the Dimension of a
pentagonal Pyramid, and also of a Pentagon it self simply. The artificial
Lines, (or Lines of quadrature and Cubature) for some of which Dimensions, that
are most material, (though indeed none of them are absolutely needful, the
Dimensions of these Bodies being most easily and accurately performed by their
Sides, as I have suffciently showed before) I shall here deliver, as I find them
to be in relation to the prime Rational Line in general, under a decumillenary
solution, (according to the reason of the 2d. Theoreme, etc.) as follows;
beginning with solid dimension, as I have done in all the former Solids, as
being the most considerable in these and all other solid Figures: the first of
the two numbers belonging to each Body, noted with the letter c. expressing the
quantity of the Line for cubical or solid dimension, and the second number,
noted with q, the quantity of the Line for quadrate, or superficiary dimension.

The artificial Lines of Measure, or Lines of Cubature, and Quadrature, are
for the Axis of the Tetrahedron 1.6654 fere. c. 0.6204. q. Octahedron 1.8172
fere. c. c 6. 0.7598. q. qq 1/3. Icosahedron 1.4666 fere. c. 0.6464 fere q.
Dodecahedro^ 1.4215. c. 0.6168, fere, q. Altitude of the Icosahedron 1.1654. c.
0.5136. q. Dodecahedro^ 1.1296. c. 0.4901. q.

By the first Section of which Lines (being duly set off and divided) the Axes of
these Bodies being taken, the Cubes and Squares thereof, shall be their several
solidities and superficialities, according to the nature of the Line by which
they are measured: whereby it appears, that if the Axis of a Sphere be taken by
these Lines (except those which are for the Tetrahedrum) its Cube and Quadrat
shall be the solidity and superficiality of the inscribed Octahedrum,
Icosahedrum, and Dodecahedrum, according to the respective Lines of measure, by
which it is taken. And so the like may be done for the solidity and
superficiality of the inscribed Tetrahedron, by the Diameter of its ambient
Sphere: the Lines of measure for which purpose, I find to be of the Rational
Line in general, 2.4980, for cubique dimension, and 0.9306, etc. for quadrate
dimension.

By the second Section of these Lines, the Altitude of an Icosahedrum and
Dodecahedrum being taken; their Cubes, and Quadrats, shall be the solid and
superficial Contents of their proper Bodies, according to the nature of the
Line by which they are measured: And therefore, if the Diameter of a Sphere be
taken by these Lines, the Cube and Quadrat thereof, shall be the solidity and
superficies of the circumscribed Icosahedrum and Dodecahedrum, according to the
respective Line, by which it is measured.

And the like may be done in the Tetrahedrum and Octahedrum circumscribed; and
in all the five Bodies both inscribed and circumscribed, may the same be done
also, by the Circumference of the greatest or central Circle of the Sphere
(circumscribing and inscribed) for finding their sold and superficial Contents:
But the Lines of measure for these last-named Dimensions, as also for the
cubique and quadrate dimension, (or the cubing and squaring, as I may so term
them) of the four Bodies here last handled, by their hedral Diameters or
Perpendiculars, and hedrall Diagony also in the Dodecahedrum, (as I have
already showed in the Hexahedrum) I shall here omit, as needless and
superfluous; and shall show the chief of these Dimensions, as also all the other
beforegoing in these Bodies, which I have practically demonstrated by way of
example, in an arithmetical manner, from their several artificial Lines of
measure, (or Lines of Cubature and Quadrature) expressed only by Number;
together first with the Linear dimensions of these Bodies, (in regard of their
foresaid several lines of Dimension, except those here last of all named)
leading thereunto; in a way of Proportion, after the most exquisite manner that
may be, as from the natural Measure, according as I have done in all the
precedent dimensions. But before I go to these, I think it very fit and
expedient (for a conclusion of this Section) to give the practical Reader to
observe by the way, for the more ease and convenience in this kind of
Mensuration, or metricall practice, (or more artificial kind of practical
Geometry) which here we handle; and so to avoid multiplicity of artificial
metrical Lines or Scales, arising by the manifold particular dimensions here
considered and declared; what Lines of measure here already delivered and
expressed by Number, do agree, either in the whole throughout, or in part only,
in their measure or magnitude from the prime Rational Line, so far as is
generally needful for ordinary use, which is to centesimal parts only of the
Rational Line from which they are taken, and which division in that, for
setting off the artificial Lines therefrom, and so also in the artificial Lines
themselves for measuring thereby, is generally sufficient for ordinary use, as I
have both said, and exemplarily showed in most of the precedent Dimensions; it
having considerably failed but in three of all the foregoing practical
demonstrative Examples, which was first, in the solid Content of the Sphere
last handled, produced by the Line of Cubature pertaining to the Diameter: and
secondly, in the solid content of the Dodecahedrum in the Pyramidal dimension,
by the Line pertaining to a regular-based pentagonal Pyramid in general; where
yet it did agree sufficiently with the true, natural dimension, in the solidity
of the compounding Pyramid it self; and therefore not so considerable in the
Dodecahedrum: and then in the solid content of the Icosahedrum produced by the
Line of Cubature belonging to its side: But two or three particular Examples
are not to be regarded, in respect of the general; seeing that the like
artificial dimensions of the same kind of Figures, may in other Examples hi^
right enough; the reason of these defections having been showed sufficiently at
first, especially in the last Section of the first Part. And therefore observe,

I. That the artificial Line, for the quadrate dimension or squaring of a
Circle, by its Diameter, (expressed first of all by Number, from a
decumillesimal solution of the prime Rational Line, viz. 1.1284 fere) and the
Line for the cub^que dimension, (or cubing) of a Dodecahedron by its
perpendicular-line of altitude (or inscribed Sphear's dimetient) under the same
solution of the Rational Line, viz, 1.1296) will agree in part, viz. in a
centesimal solution of the Rational Line, being thereby 1.13 fere, which I
showed in the dimension of Circle, to be the Line C D, according to the primary
Line A B.

II. That the Line for the quadrate dimension of an ordinate Pentagon by its
Diameter or Perpendicular, (expressed numerally, 1.1732 fere) and the Line for
the cubick dimension of an Icosahedron by its perpendicular of altitude (or
inscribed Spheare's Axis) noted Numerally, 1.1654) will agree sufficiently in
part, viz. in centesimal parts of the Rational Line, being thereby, 1.17, the
first complete, the second incomplete; which difference is not considerable.

III. The Line for the dimension of a Tetragon by its Diagony, (or
circumscribing Circle's Diameter) and for the artificial dimension of Triangles
in general; and the Line for the solid dimension of an Hexahedron by its basial
or hedral Diagony; and also the Line for the superficiary Dimension of a Cone
by its Side and total basial periphery together, do agree in the whole
throughout, viz. 1.4142, etc. infinitely, being 2 of the entire prime Rational
Line (as the unit or integer of Measure) in it is power quadraticall: with which
very nearly agrees the Line for the cubing of a Dodecahedrum by its Axis or
Diagoniall, (or circumscribing Sphear's Dimetient) in centesimal parts of the
Rational Line, viz. 1.42 completely.

IV. The Line for the Quadrate superficial dimension of a Sphere, (or the
quadration of the Sphaerical) by its Diameter or Axis; and the Line for the
square-like superficiary dimension of a Cylinder (or the rectangular
parallelogrammation of its Superficies) by its Side and Diameter together, do
meet in the whole throughout, viz. 0.56418 etc, infinitely.

V. The Line for the quadrate superficial dimension of a Tetrahedron (or
quadration of its superficies) by its Side; and for the like dimension of an
Octahedron by its Axis or Diagoniall (or comprehending Spheare's Diameter) and
for the rectangular superficial dimension of a trigonal Pyramid, by the
perpendicular of its base, and of its other or lateral triangular Plane
together, do happen to be all one infinitely, in parts of the Rational Line,
viz. 0.7598, etc. being 1/3 of the entire prime Rational Line, in its
biquadratique potentiality, or capacity: with which agrees in part, viz. to
centesimal parts, the Line of quadrature for the Side of a Pentagon, (noted
formerly by Number, 0.7624 fere) viz. 0.76 complete, which in the Dimension of
a Pentagon, was demonstrated by the Line P Q. in parts of the Line A B. So that
here one and the same Line will serve thus far, for these 4 several
dimensions. And very nearly with this Line, agrees the Line for the cubing of
an Icosahedrum by its side (noted formerly in parts of the Rational Line,
0.7710, etc.) taken centesimally, viz. 0.77.

VI. The Line for the square-like solidation (as I may term it) or
rectangle-parallelepipedall dimension of a trigonall Pyramid by its Axis or
altitude, and basial Diameter or perpendicular together; and for the solid
dimension of an Hexahedron by its Axis or Diagoniall, (or ambient Sphear's
dimetient) do agree in the whole throughout, viz. 1.73205, etc, infinitely,
being 3, of the integrall Rational Line, taken in its power zenzicall or
tetragonicall.

VII. The Line for the rectangle-parallelipipedal Solidation of a tetragonall
Pyramid by it is Axis or Altitude, and basiall diagony or diameter tagether; and
for the cubique dimension (or Cubation) of an Octahedron by its Axis or
Diagoniall, (or containing Spheare's axis or diameter) are both one throughout,
viz. 1.817, etc. infinitely being 6 of the prime Rational Line considered in
its cubical capacity, or comprehensibility.

VIII. The Line for the square-like, or rectangle-superficiary dimension of a
tetragonall Pyramid by the side of its Base, and the perpendicular of its
trigonal Plane together; and for the exact quadrate-superficiary dimension of
an Hexahedron, (or the quadration of its superficies) by its Axis or Diagoniall
(or circumscribing Spheare's Diameter) do agree in the whole, viz. 0.7071, etc.
being 1/2 infinitely, of the prime Rational Line, in its power or capacity
tetragonical.

IX. The Line for the rectangle-parallelepipedation, or parallelepipedal
consolidation of a pentagonall Pyramid (as to an exact quadrate base) by the
diagonal line, or angular subtense of its Base, together with the Pyramids Axis
or altitude (noted formerly by number, 1.6589 fere) and the Line for the exact
Cubation of a Tetrahedrum by its Axis (noted in like manner, 1.6654 fere) will
sufficiently agree in part; as to centesmes of the Rational Line, viz. 1.66;
this latter complete, the former incomplete: but with so small a difference, as
that one and the same Line may thus far serve indifferently for both these
dimensions viz. 1.66.

X. The Line for the rectangle-superficiary dimension of a pentagonall Pyramid
by the foresaid diagoniall of its Base, and the perpendicular of its trigonal
Plane together, (viz. 0.8045 fere) and the Line for the like dimension of a
Cone, by the diameter of its base, and its side together, (0.7979 fere) do
agree in part, as to centesmes of the Rational Line, viz. 0.80. the first
complete, the second incomplete.

XI. The Line for the exact quadrate supersicial dimension of a Tetrahedrum, by
its Axis, (0.6204) and the Line for the like dimension of a Dodecahedrum by its
Axis or Diagoniall (or ambient Sphear's dimetient) viz. 0.6168 fere,
wilsussiciently accord, as to centesimal parts, viz. 0.62; the first complete,
the second incomplete.

XII. Lastly, the Line for cubing of a Dodecahedron by its side, (0.5072) and
the Line for the squaring (as I may so term it) of an Icosahedron, as to its
superficial part, by its perpendicular of altitude (or inscribed Spears
dimetient) viz. 0.5136) will sufficiently concur in part, as to centesimal
parts of the Rational Line, viz. 0.51; the latter complete, the former
incomplete.

So that here you may see, how that of all the several geometrical dimensions
before particularly expressed, being in number 62, as requiring so many several
lines of Measure, or Lines of quadrature, cubature, etc. the Lines for 28 of
them, are contracted into 13, in respect of a centesimal solution of the
Rational Line from which they are taken, but no further, (according to these 12
Notes or observations) And the Lines for 15 of the same dimensions, are
contracted into 6, in regard of an infinite resolution of the Rational Line,
according to the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 Notes. And so with the other 34 dimensions
not here named, having their particular Lines of measure differing in the
whole, (in respect of the fraction-part of the Rational Line, though not of the
integral part) the artificial Lines for all the 62 dimensions aforesaid, will be
contrived into 46, according to a centesimal partition of the prime or natural
Rational Line. And the like agreement of Lines as is here demonstrated, may
fall out between these and other the like Lines, for other Dimensions not here
particularly expressed; and also between other Lines, which are none of them
heresetdown: which I refer to the ingenious practiser to consider, according
as he may have occasion offered.

SECT. IV. Expressing the manifold Dimensions in the five plain ordinate, or
regular Bodies, Arithmetically, by way of Proportion, in the most exquisite
manner that may be.
ANd so having in the Section immediately beforeing, showed the Dimension both
solid and superficial of the 5 plain ordinate (Pythagorean or Platonic)
Bodies, according to our artificial way of measuring, in the most exquisite
manner that may be: (or isntrumental Cubature and Quadrature,) We shall in this
Section, lay down the same Dimensions, with variety of others, in these Bodies,
by Number, in the most exquisite Terms of Proportion that may be; such as have
not yet been done (no more then the former artificial way of measuring the
same) by any that I could ever meet with, or hear of: and which must needs very
much exceed those, tedious, obscure, confused, Cossical Terms which Mr. Diggs
in his forementioned discourse of these Bodies, has Theorematically delivered;
where yet, he has left out the most material and useful ones, for the ready
and speedy discovering of their solid and superficial Contents, as being
inscribed in, and circumscribed to, a Sphere, in relation both to the Axis or
Diameter, and the greatest Periphery of the Sphere, circumscribing and
inscribed.

And here I shall first begin with the Linear dimensions of these Bodies, in all
the variety thereof, according to the forenamed several Lines of dimension
belonging to them, as usually adscribed to them for their Dimensions, (as I did
in the other ordinate Figures before-going, namely, the Circle, Sphere, Trigon,
and Pentagon) and this, in relation to the first Dimension in Geometry, called
in general, from the Greeks, Euthymetrie, or Mecometrie, and fromthe Latins
Longimetrie; And which (in respect of the different kinds of Lines) I may call
more generally from the Greeks, Grammemetrie; and from the Latins, Linemetrie.

Therefore,

1 The Tetrahedron's Side, is to its Axis, as 1. to.816497 fere. 1/3 alike.
ambient Spheres Axis, as 1. to 1.224745 fere. alike.


2 The Tetrahedron's Axis is to its Side, as 1 to 1.224745 fere. alike.
ambient Spheres Axis, as 1. to 1.5, sub-sesquialtera.

3 The Axis of a Sphere, is to the inscribed Tetrahedron's Side, as 1 to.816497
fere. 1/3 alike.
Axis, as 1 to.666667 fere. viz..666666 infinitely, ses-quialtera.

4. The Side of the Octahedron, is to its Axis or Diagonal, or circumscribing
Spheare's Dimetient, as 1, to 1.414214 fere 2. Hexahedron, 1.73205. 3.
Icosahedron, 1.902113. Dodecahedron. 2.802517.

Contrarily,

5. The Axis, Diagoniall, or angular Diameter (or the ambient Sphear's
Dimetient) of the Octahedron, is to the Side, as 1 to.707107 fere. 1/2.
Hexahedron,.57735. 1/3. Icosahedron,.525731. Dodecahedron..356822.

6 The Diameter of a Sphere is to the Side of the circumscribed. Tetrahedron,
as 1. to 2.44949 fere. Octahedron, 1.224745 supdupla. Hexahedron, 1. aequalis,
seu una. Icosahedron, 0.66158. Dodecahedron. 0.449028 fere.

Contrariwise.

7. The Side of the Tetrahedron, is to the inscribed Spheare's Dimetient, as 1.
to.408248. Octahedron,.816497. dupla. Hexahedron, 1. aequalis, as before.
Icosahedron, 1.511522. Dodecahedron. 2.227033. fere.

And so the two last of these Proportions, are consequently of the Sides of
those two Bodies to their Altitudes.

And by the 6th. Section of Proportions, as also by the 5th. Sect. of the like
proportions, in relation to the correspondent Circumference of a Sphere, you
may observe, how that a Tetrahedrum and an Octahedrum being circumscribed to
one Sphere, the side of the Tetrahedrum will be exactly double to the side of
the Octahedrum: And so by the 7th Sect. beforegoing, you may observe
contrarily, how that these two Bodies having one and the same side, the
Diameter of the Sphere inscribed in the Octahedrum, will be exactly double to
the Diameter of the Sphere inscribed in the Tetrahedrum. And the like with
these, you may also observe afterward in the 5 and 6 Sections pertaining to
the correspondent Circumference of a Sphere. And the same proportion will the
Tetrahedrum here hold to the Octahedrum, both for solid and superficial
dimension, as it does for lateral dimension, as I shall show afterward.

8. Tetrahedron's Axis is to its inscribed Sphear's Axis, as 1. to.5 dupla. And
therefore contrarily.

9. The Axis of a Sphere is to the Axis of its circumscribing Tetrahedron, as
1. to 2. subdupla.

10. The Axis of Tetrahedron's ambient or external Sphere, is to the Axis of
its inscribed or internal Sphere, as 1, to.3333, etc. infinitely, viz. 3. to 1,
tripla. And therefore conversly,

11. The Axis of Tetrahedron's inscribed Sphere, is to the Axis of it is
circumscribing Sphere, as 1. to 3, subtripla.

12. The Axis, Diagoniall, or angular Diameter of the Hexahedron, Or their
circumscribing Sphear's Dimetient, is to their inscribed Sphear's Dimetient, as
1. to.57735. ^/3. Octahedron, Dodecahedron, Icosahedron..794654.

And so consequently, the latter of these two Proportions, is to be understood
of the Axes of those two Bodies, to their Altitudes.

Conversly.

13. The Inscribed Spheare's Dimetient, is to the circumscribing Spheare's
Dimetient, (or the Axis, or Diagoniall) of the Hexahedron, as 1. to 1.73205, 3.
Octahedron, Dodecahedron, Icosahedron. 1.258401 fere

And so the latter of these two Proportions, is of the Altitudes of those two
Bodies to their Axes.

By which two Sections of proportions in these 4 Bodies, and by the two last
proportions in the Tetrahedrum next before-going, viz. Sect. 10 and 11. it
appears, that these five regular Bodies, in respect of their Sphericall
inscriptibility and circumscriptibility, do require three several distinct
Spears, circumscribing or containing, and inscribed or contained: That is,
they being all severally inscribed within one Sphere, cannot then also be
exactly circumscribed about (or cannot completely comprehend with in them) one
Sphere, but three several Spears; whereof that which is inscribed in the
Tetrahedrum will be the least, and that inscribed in the Hexahedrum and
Octahedrum, will be equal, and that which is inscribed in the Dodecahedrum and
Icosahedrum will be also as one, and the biggest of all.

And so again contrarily, these five Bodies being severally circumscribed about
(or comprehending in them) one Sphere, cannot then again be exactly
comprehended or contained of one Sphere, but must have three several
comprehending, containing or including Spears; of which, that for the
Tetrahedrum, will be the greatest; that for the Hexahedrum and Octahedrum will be
alike; and that which is for the Dodecahedrum and Icosahedrum will also be of
equal magnitude, and indeed the least of all: (See M. Diggs his Discourse upon
these Bodies, Probl. 17.) And the like to these may be observed in these 5
bodies, as being inscribed in, or circumscribed about, one Sphere, in respect
of the Circles circumscribing their Bases, the Diameters of these Circles and
of the Body's circumscribing and inscribed Sphere, being compared together:
And therefore.

14. The Diameter of the Sphere circircumscribing the Tetrahedron, is to the
Diameter of the Circle circumscribing their Base, as 1. to,.942809. Hexahedron,
-- Octahedron,.816497 fere. Dodecahedron, -- Icosahedron..607062.

And so the second and third of these Proportions, are also of the Axes or
Diagonies of these 4 Bodies, to the diameters of their Base's ambient Circles:
which in the Hexahedron, is of the corporal Diagony, to the basial or
superficial Diagony.

15. The Diameter of the Sphere inscribed in the Tetrahedron, is to the
Diameter of the Circle circumscribing their base, as 1. to 2.828427.
Hexahedron, -- Octahedron, 1.414214. fere. Dodecahedron, -- Icosahedron.
0.763932.

And to the second of these Proportions, is consequently of the Hexahedron's
Side to its Basiall Diagony.

The Converse of these are,

16. The Diameter of the Circle circumscribing the Base of the Tetrahedron, is
to the Diameter of their circumscribing Sphere, as 1. to 1.06066. Hexahedron,
-- Octahedron, 1.224745. Dodecahedron, -- Icosahedron. 1.647278.

And so the second and third of these Proportions, are also of the diameters of
the basiall ambient Circles of these four bodies, to their Axes or Diagonies:
which in the Hexahedron, is of the basiall or hedrall diagony, to the total
corporal diagony.

17. The Diameter of the basial or hedral ambient Circle of the Tetrahedron, is
to their inscribed Spears Diameter, as 1. to.353553. Hexhaedron, --
Octahedron,.707107 fere Dodecahedron, -- Icosahedron. 1.309016.

And so the second of these Proportions, is of the Hexahedron's basial Diagony
or Diameter, to its Side.

And the last of these Proportions, is of the basiall ambient Circle's
Diameter, to the Altitudes of those two Bodies.

So that you may here see by these 4 Sections of proportions, how that these 5
bodies being described either within or about one Sphere, have only three
several circumscribing or containing Circles, for their Bases; whereof, that
which is for the Tetrahedrum is the largest; that for the Hexahedrum and
Octahedrum are both one, and the next to it; and that which is for the
Dodecahedrum and Icosahedrum are also equal, and the least of all; which Euclid
E. 14. p. 5, and 21, speaks of, only in respect of these body's
inscriptibility in one Sphere. As for the basial or hedral inscribed Circles of
these 5 Bodies, whether inscribed in, or circumscribed about one Sphere; there
is no such parity or agreement amongst them, but they are all different one
from another.

And as for the proportions of the sides of these Bodies to the Diameters of
their hedral Circle's whether circumscribing or inscribed; and to their hedral
Diameters or perpendiculars, etc. the same are to be had in the three ordinate
Planes before handled, viz. the Trigon, Tetragon and Pentagon: those for the
Tetrahedron, Octahedron and Icosahedron, out of the Trigon; those for the
Hexahedron, out of the Tetragon; and those for the Dodecahedron, out of the
Pentagon; But indeed, that of the Hexahedron's side to its hedral ambient
Circle's Dimetient (or its hedral Diameter) and e contra; is also noted in the
15. and 17. Sections.

And thus much for the linear proportions, in respect of the several lines of
Dimension in these Bodies, being considered both simply or absolutely in
themselves, and also as being inscribed and circumscribed, and that in relation
to the Diameter of the Sphere circumscribing and inscribed. And from these we
shall proceed to the like proportions, in respect of the Circumference answering
to the said Sphear's Diameter, which I have not yet found touched upon by any
man, in any kind whatsoever. And therefore.

1. The Circumference of a Spheare's greatest, or Centrall Circle, is to the
Side of the inscribed Tetrahedron, as 1. to.259899 fere. Octahedron,.225079.
Hexahedron,.183776. Icosahedron,.167345. Dodecahedron..113580. exactly.

Vice-versa.

2. The Side of the Tetrahedron, is to the circumscribing Sphear's greatest
circumference, as 1. to 3.847649. Octahedron, 4.442883. Hexahedron, 5.441398.
Icosahedron, 5.975664. Dodecahedron 8.804369.

3. The Periphery of a Sphear's greatest Circle, is to in inscribed
Tetrahedrum's Axis, as 1. to.212206. And so contrarily.

4. The Axis of a Tetrahedrum, is to its ambient Sphear's greatest or true
Periphery, as 1. to 4.712389.

5. The Periphery of a Spheres greatest Circle, is to the side of the ambient.
Tetrahedron, as 1. to.779697 fere. subdupla. Octahedron,.389848. subdupla.
Hexahedron, the same, as the Circumference to the Diameter, the Side of this
body being equal with the Spheres Diameter. Icosahedron,.210589. fere. I.
Dodecahedron..142930. D.

Contrariwise,

6. The side of the Tetrahedron, is to the inscribed Spheres greatest
Periphery, as 1. to 1.28255. dupla. Octahedron, 2.56510. dupla. Hexahedron, the
same as the diam, to the Circum^. for the reason aforesaid. H Icosahedron,
4.748589. Dodecahedron. 6.99643.

7. The Periphery of a Sphear's largest Circle, is to the Axis of its ambient
Tetrahedrum, as 1. to.63662:

And again conversly,

8. The Axis of a Tetrahedrum is to its inscribed Sphear's greatest Periphery,
as 1. to 1.570796.

As for the proportions of the circumscribing Spheare's greatest or Diametral
Circumference of these Bodies, to their inscribed Spheare's like Circumference,
and contra: And of the greatest Circumference of the Sphere both circumscribing
and inscribed, to the Circumference of the basial or hedral circumscribing
Circles of these Bodies, and contra: they will be the same with those which are
already expressed between the Diameters, viz. first in respect of the Sphere
circumscribing and inscribed, between themselves; and then of both these
Spears severally with the Circles circumscribing the bases of these Bodies, as
being described either within or without one Sphere (or several Spears of one
magnitude.)

Having thus expressed the Linear proportions in these Bodies, or the
proportions of linear dimension, as many as (and indeed many more then) are
here absolutely needful for the measuring of them: I shall now come to show the
proportions both superficial or quadrate, and solid or cubique deduced from
thence, and both these conjunctly (for brevity sake) in reference to the other
two Dimensions in Geometry, called from the Grecians, Embadimetrie (and
Plat^metrie) and Stereometrie; and from the Latins, Plan^metrie and
Solido-metrie: beginning with the latter of these as being most worthy and most
considerable in solid Figures, as I have said before, the superficial dimension
in them being not so useful or material, and also much more easily obtained;
especially in these five Solids; whether the same be done naturally or
artificially; And therefore first in respect of these Bodies considered simply
and absolutely by themselves, without any inscriptibility and
circumscriptibility, either spherical or mutual; the cubical proportions noted
by the letter c, and the quadrate proportions by the letter q. will be as
follows; the bodies being placed in order according to their magnitudes
increasing, both solidly and superficially.

1. The Laterall Cube and Quadrat of the Tetrahedron, is to the Bodies solidity
and superficies, as 1. to.11785113. c. T. 1.7320508. q. T.
Octahedron,.47140452. c. O. 3.464102 fere q. O. Hexahedron. 1.000000. c. H.
aequalis. sub-sextupla. 6.000000. q. H. aequalis. sub-sextupla. Icosahedron,
2.181695. c. I. 8.660254. q. I. Dodocahedron. 7.663119. c. D. 20.645729. q. D.

Hence,

2. The Side of the Tetrahedron, is to the Side of the Cube and Quadrat equal
to the Bodies solidity and and superficies, as 1. to.49028. c. T. 1.316074. q.
T. Octahedron,.778346 fere. c. O. 1.86121. q. O. Hex^^^dron, 2.44949. q. H.
Icosahedron, 1.29697. c. I. 2.94283. q. I. Dodecahedron, 1.971523. c D.
4.543757. q. D.

And hereby it appears, that these 5 Bodies having all the same side: the
Octahedrum is quadruple to the Tetrahedrum in solidity, and double in
superficiality: (and which I have showed before in their dimensions) The
Hexahedrum is bigger then both those together, both in solidity and
superficiality: the Icosahedrum is greater then those 3 together, in solidity,
but lesser in the superficies: and is herein quintuple to the Tetrahedrum, and
so double-sesquialter to the Octahedrum (as I have also showed before) And the
Dodecahedrum is larger then all the other together, both in solid and
superficial dimension.

3. The Cube of Tetrahedron's Axis is to its Solidity as 1.10 21650635. Quadrat
Superficies 2.59807621

Hence,

4. The Axis of the Tetrahedron is to the side of the Cube equal to its
Solidity as 1. to 600468. Quadrat Superficies ^611855 fere

Then for the Tetrahedrum in reference to a Sphere, by way of inscriptibility
therein, as to its Dimetient, it follows.

5. The Diametral Cube of a Sphere is to the inscribed Tetrahedron's Solidity
as 1. to.0641500299. Quadrat Superficies 1.1547005

Hence.

6. The diameter of a sphere is to the side of the Cube equal to the inscribed
Tetrahedron's Solidity as 1. to.4003123. Quadrat Superficies 1.0745699.

Next for the other 4 Bodies, both simply in themselves, and also in relation
to their ambient Sphere together, in respect of their common Axis or Dimetient,
it follows.

7. The Cube and Quadrat of the Axis, or Diagoniall of the Octahedron, or of
the circumscribing Spheres Dimetient, is to the Bodies solidity and
superficiality, as 1. to.166667 fere c. O. 1.7320508 q. O.
Hexahedron,.19245009. c. H. 2.00000. q. subdupla. H. Icosahedron..3170189. c.
I. 2.393635. q I. Dodecahedron,.348145. c. D. 2.628656 fere. q. D.

Hence,

8. The Axis, Diagoniall, or angular Diameter of the Octahedron, or the
circumscribing Spheres Axis or Diameter, is to the side of the Cube and
Quadrat equal to the Bodies solidity and superficiality as 1. to.550321. c. O.
1.316014. q. O. Hexahedron,.57735. c. the same as of the Spheres Diam. to the
inseribed Hexabedrons side, and so of its own Axis or corporal Diagony, to its
Side, noted before. H. 1.41421. q. H. Icosahedron..68186. c. I. 1.54714 q. I.
Dodecahedron..703483 fere c. D. 1.621313. q. D.

By which proportions, (as also by the 1. 2. and 5 Sections following of the
like proportions, in relation to the greatest Periphery of a Sphere) it
appears, that these five Bodies being all described within one and the same
Sphere, do retain the same order and rank among themselves, in respect of their
magnitudes or dimensions both solid and superficial, as they do, being of one
common, lateral dimension, but not in that proportion and difference of
dimension either solid or superficial; for that here the lateral Dimension
being different in them all, and that by way of diminution from the least body
to the greatest, the superficial and solid dimension become thereby different
in them all in like order, by way of augmentation; but nothing so much, as
being all under the same lateral dimension. And hereby it also plainly appears,

I. That the Hexahedrum is triple the Tetrahedrum inscribed in the same Sphere,
and so E 14. p. 32. And,

II. That the Hexahedrum is to the Octahedrum within the same Sphere, solidly,
as it is superficially, according to E 14. p. 27; and also as the Side of the
Hexahedrum is to the Radius of the Sphere by the same Prop. And.

III. That the Octahedrum is superficially sesquialter the Tetrahedrum,
according to E 14. p. 14. and so (by the same Prop.) the Tetrahedrum is
Basially or Hedrally, sesquitertian the Octahedrum. And,

IV. By the last named Sections of solid and superficial Proportions, together
with the 3. and 5. Sections of Linear Proportions beforegoing, between the
Diameter of a Sphere, and the sides of the 5 Bodies inscribed thererein; and
also the first Section of Proportions, between the greatest Periphery of a
Sphere, and the sides of the Bodies inscribed; it appeareh, how that the
Octahedrum is to the Triple of the Tetrahedrum inscribed in the same Sphere, as
its side is to the side of the Tetrahedrum; and so E, 14. p. 22. And,

V. That the Dodecahedrum is to the Icosahedrum in the same Sphere, both
solidly and superficially, as the Hexahedrum is to the Icosahedrum laterally,
according to E, 14. p. 9 and 11.

Then for these Bodies in relation to a Sphere, in respect of their
circumscriptibility about the same, as to its Dimetient; and so for the
Hexahedrum, Dodecahedrum, and Icosahedrum, simply and absolutely in themselves
also, in respect of their Dimetients of altitude, being all one with their
inscribed Sphear's Dimetient: their proportions both cubatory and quadratory,
will be as follows: the Bodies being here placed in order according to their
magnitudes both solid and superficial decreasing, which is according to their
due hedral order, in respect of their denominations from the numbers of their
bases or hedral Planes. And therefore,

9. The Diametrall Cube and Quadrat of a Sphere, is to the solidity and
superficies of its circumscribing Tetrahedron, as 1. to 1.7320508. c. T
10.3923048. q. T Hexahedron. the same as its Lateral Cube and Quadrat. H
Octahedron, 0.8660254. c. O 5.1961524. q. O Dodecahedron. 0.693786. c. D
4.162719. q. D Icosahedron, 0.631757 c. I 3.79054 q. I

And so the 4 last of these Proportions, are consequently, of the Cubes and
Quadrats of the Altitudes of those two Bodies, to the solid and superficial
capacities of the Bodies themselves.

10. The Dimetient of a Sphere, is to the side of the Cube and Quadrat equal
to the solidity and superficies of the ambient. Tetrahedron, as 1. to 1.200937.
c. T 3.223710. q. T Hexahedron, the same as in Sect. 2. the side of this Body
agreeing with the inscribed Spears dimetient. H Octahedron, 0.953193. c. O
2.279507. q. O Dodecahedron, 0.885269. c. D 2.040274. q. D Icosahedron,
0.858058. c. I 1.946932. q. I

And so the 4 last of these proportions, are of the Altitudes of those two
Bodies, to the sides of the Cubes and Quadrats, equal to their solidities and
superficieties.

Whereby, as also by the 3, and 7 Sections of Proportions following, it plainly
appears, how that these 5 Bodies being all described about one Sphere, the
Tetrahedrum is the biggest of all, both in solid and superficial dimension,
and is exactly double to the Octahedrum in both these dimensions (as it was
showed before to be in its lateral dimension) and very near as bigg as the
Hexahedrum and Octahedrum both together, in respect of both dimensions: And the
Icosahedrum is the least of all in both these dimensions; which is almost
contrary to the former course holden in these Bodies, being described within
one Sphere.

N^w for the like Proportions, in relation to the Circumference of a Sphear's
greatest Circle; and first, in respect of these Bodies spherall
inscriptibility; it follows,

1. The Cube and Quadrat of the greatest or centrall Circumfere^ce of a Sphere,
is to the solid and superficial capacity of the inscribed Tetrahedron. as 1.
to.0020689369. c. T.1169956. q. T Octahedron,.0053752557. c. O.1754934. q. O
Hexahedron,.00620681069. c. H.202642367. q. H Icosahedron..01022434. c.
I.2425259. q. I Dodecahedron,.01122822. c. D.266338. q. D

Therefore.

2. The circumference of a Sphear's greatest Circle, is to the side of the Cube
and Quadrat equal to the solid and superficial content of the inscribed
Tetrahedron. as 1. to.127423. c. T.342046. q. T Octahedron,.175173. fere. c.
O.418919. q. O Hexahedron,.183776. c. before for the side of the Hexahedron
inscribed..450158. q. before for the side of the Hexahedron, inscribed.
Icosahedron..2170427. c. I.492469. q. I Dodecahedron..223925. c. D.51608 fere
q. D

Then for the proportions cubatorie and quadratarie, in relation to a Sphear's
greatest, Diametral, or true Peririphery, in respect of these Bodies Spherall
circumscriptibility, it follows,

3. The greatest Peripheriall Cube and Quadrat of a Sphere, is to the solidity
and superficiality of its comprepending, containing, or including Tetrahedron,
as 1. to.055861296. c. T 1.0529606. q. T Hexahedron,.032251534. c. H.6079271.
q. H Octahedron,.027930648. c. O.526480314. q. O Dodecahedron..2237567. c.
D.4217715. q. D Icosahedron,.02037514. c. I.3840622. q. I

Whereupon.

4. The greatest, or Diametrall Pe^iphery of a Sphere, is to the Side of the
Cube and Quadrat equal to the solidity and superficiality of the
circumscribing or co^prehending Tetrahedron, as 1. to.3822701. c. T 1.0261387.
q. T Hexahedron.318309. c. the same as of the circumf. to the Diam. the side of
this Body agreeing with the Spears diameter. H.7796968. q. -- H
Octahedron..30340798. c. O.7255896. q. O Dodecahedro^.2817898. c. D.649439. q,
D Icosahedron.2731284. c. I.619727. q. I

Lastly, for these Bodies, and a Globe or Sphere compared wholly together,
both solidly and superficially; and that according, both to their inscription
and circumscription, the Proportions will be as follows, (the first or
uppermost of the two Numbers belonging to each Body in the two first Sections,
being for solid comparison, and the second for superficial)

5. A Globe or Sphere, is to the inscribed Tetrahedron. Solidly and
superficially together, as 1. to.12251753 T.3675526 fere. T
Octahedren.318309886. agreeing with diverse of the former
proportions..551328895. Hexahedron.3675526 fere. agreeing with the superficial
comparison in the Tetrahedron..6366^977. Icosahedron.6054614. I.76191789. I
Docecahedro^.6649087. D..8367272. D

Contrariwise.

6. The Tetrahedron. Is to the circumscribing Globe or Sphere, solidly and
superficially together, as 1, to 8.162097 T 2.720699 T Octahedron. 3.14159265,
agreeing with many of the foregoing proportions. O 1.81379936 -- O Hexahedron
2.720699. agreeing with the superficial comparison in the Tetrahedron H
1.5707963 -- H Icosahedron. 1.6516327 fere. I 1.312477 I Dodecahedro^ 1.503966.
D 1.195133. D

7. A Globe or Sphere, is to its ambient Tetrahedron both solidly and
superficiarily together (in one and the same reason) as 1. to 3.30797337.
Hexahedron 1.9098593. the same as of a Sphere to the Cube of its Axis, noted
formerly; the side of this Body agreeing with the Axis of the Sphere. H
Octahedron 1.65398668. subdu^plum Tetrahedri. Dodecahedro^ 1.325034.
Icosahedron 1.206567.

Conversly,
8. The Tetrahedron is to the inscribed Globe or Sphere, both solidly and
superficially together in one, as 1. to.30229989 Hexahedron.52359877, the same
as of the Cube of a Sphear's Axis, to the Sphere it self; the Cube of the Axis
being here the ambient Hexahedrum. H Octahedron.604599788. double to the Sphere
inscribed in the Tetrahedrum. Dodecahedro^.7546973. Icosahedron.8287974.

By the two last of which Sections of solid and superficial Proportions or
comparisons between the 5 ordinate Bodies and a Globe or Sphere, it appears;
that any of the said Bodies being circumscribed about a Sphere, the solid and
superficial capacity thereof, will be one and the same numerally, (or in the
number of a given Measure) viz. where the said two several Dimensions of the
inscribed Sphere are alike in number: That is, two like Bodies exactly
encompassing or environing two several, distinct Sphear's, whereof the
solidity of the one, and the superficiety of the other, are numerally alike;
there will the solid capacity of one of the like ambient Bodies, and the
superficial capacity of the other, be also alike in the number of measure. And
so likewise, two distinct Spears being inscribed in two several like Bodies,
whereof the solid measure of the one, and the superficial measure of the other,
are numerally the same; there will the solidity of one of the inscribed Spears,
and the superficiety of the other, be also numerally the same: and which I have
not found to be observed by any before.

Many more Proportions might here have been raised, if they were needful; as
namely of the Bodies among themselves in respect of their mutual inscription
and circumscription; and those also which are the converse of many of the
former, to wit, the Proportions of these Bodies solidly and superficially, to
the Cubes and Quadrats of their Sides, and of their Axes and Altitudes; and so
of the Diameter and greatest Circumference of their circumscribing and
inscribed Spears, whereby the sides, Axes and Altitudes of these Bodies, and
so the Axes or Dimetients, and greatest Peripheries, of their circumscribing
and inscribed Spears, might be obtained, by having the solidities and
superficialities of the Bodies only; and that after one Radical extraction,
quadrate or cub^que according as I delivered in the Circle and Sphere, for the
obtaining of their Diameters and Peripheries, by their superficial and solid
Contents; and so in the ordinate Trigon for the finding of its side, and
Diametral or perpendicular line; and in the ordinate Pentagon, for its side and
Diametrall or perpendicular, and Diagonal-line, by their are all or superficial
Contents: But that these kind of proporti(...) not so useful, being indeed
more of curiosity then (...) since the superficial and solid Contents of Figures
are more usually inquired out by their sides, Diameters, and other* the Lines
of Dimension, then these lines are by their superficial and solid Contents;
for that the thing chiefly (...) in the dimension of all Figures, is their
superficial (...) Contents (and in solid Figures, chiefly the so^^^ Conte^^
(...) I said before) which must be obtained by (...) of Dimension.

(...) ^^ving handled the five famous ordinate (Py(...) tonick) Bodies, or the
angular, or recti(...) both geometrically, in an instrumen(...) our artificial
way of measuring) (...) the most exquisite proportional (...) that may be, and
that chiefly in reference to their solid and and superficial dimensions: I
shall next come to the second theorematicall Proposition beforementioned, in
which, our more particular or special reason of our artificial instrumentary
dimensions (or mechanical Cubature and Quadrature) of these Bodies, like as
first of a Sphere, (as to the obtaining of the several artificial Lines of
measure for performing the same) is contained.

THEOR. II. Explicating particularly the foregoing artificial Lines for the
cubick dimension, (or Cubing) of a Sphere; from our particular or special
Reason of Dimension: And consequently, the Lines for the like dimension of all
the other regular Solids.
IF the Axis or Dimetient of a Sphere, equal to the Cube of the Parts of the
Rational Line, be had; The same shall be the correspondent Line of Cubature,
according to the said Parts. And the reason of that to the congrual Cubatorie
Line, in reference to the whole entire Measure, will be as the reason of the
Parts to the Whole; which is as the reason of their Cubes. And the like for the
correspondent Periphery, or the Circumference of the greatest Circle.

ANd the like in both these, for the superficiary (or quadrate) dimension of a
Sphere (or quadration of the Sphericall) only respect being here had to the
quadrate parts of the Rational Line, as there to the cubique: and so indeed
this may properly enough be referred to the first Theoreme, the reason here,
being the same with that.

And the same reason holds in all the five forenamed ordinate plain or
angular Bodies, both for solid or cubique, and for superficiaty or quadrate
dimension, whether simply in themselves, or in relation to a Sphere, by way of
inscription and circumscription, and that by any of their dimensional lines
formerly named, as their sides, and Axes or Diagonials, or angular Diameters
and Dimetients of altitude: And so by their circumscribing and inscribed
Sphear's Dimetient, and also greatest Circumference, and other lines of
dimension, according to the several Dimensions and dimensional Proportions
beforegoing: And also in respect of their relations one to another, by way of
mutual inscriptibility and circumscriptibility.

SECT. V. Showing the Dimension of all exactly ordinate, or regular solid
Bodies, artificially, for Gravity or Weight, as is for solid Measure: And
demonstrating the same particularly, in the first ordinate Solid here handled,
namely a Sphere.
ANd the like reason of Dimension to that before-going, will hold in a Sphere,
and the five plain regular (Platonic) Bodies, for gravity, or Quantity
ponderall (according to any Metal and Weight assigned) as for solid magnitude,
or Quantity dimensional; there being generally the same mathematical reason of
these two Quantities, in so much, as that they are usually by Mathematicians
compared together in several kinds of Bodies: Or diverse kinds of bodies are
compared together among themselves in this twofold reason of Quantity; to wit,
Magnitude or dimension, and Gravity, or Ponderosity, as you may see in
Archimedes, Ghetaldus, and others: And so these two do proportionally answer
each other, in so much, as that one may be deduced from the other; as Gravity
from Magnitude, and Magnitude from Gravity; or Weight from solid Measure, and
contra: And therefore the gravity or ponderosity of each one of the foresaid
regular solid bodies taken in some certain magnitude or bigness, being first
known according to some certain Metal, Weight, and Measure appointed; there
may be artificial Lines of measure extracted for every several kind of Body,
according to the said particular Metal, Weight and Measure, (and that
according to the foresaid several Lines of Dimension in those Bodies, by which
they have been showed to be artificially measured) so as that any one of the
said dimensional lines of each Body in any magnitude whatsoever, being measured
by its proper artificial Line or Scale for this purpose, and cubed, the same
shall be the weight of the metalline Body proposed: And which will therereupon
hold in a Sphere, and all the 5 plain regular Bodies, not only as considered
simply and absolutely in themselves alone, but also as in relation one to
another, by way of inscription and circumscription; and so in the said 5
bodies, not only in the said relations to a Sphere, as being inscribed in, or
circumscribed to the same, but also mutually one to another, as was said before
for solid (and superficial) measure: And so the Diameter or Circumference of a
Sphere, being taken by their proper, respective artificial Lines of Measure for
this purpose (according to any certain Body, Metal, Weight, and Measore
assigned) the several Cubes thereof, shall be the weight of the respective Body
inscribed, or circumscribed, according to which is proposed; And the first of
these, is the same (in respect of a Sphear's Diameter) with the artificial
dimension of the four greatest of the said 5 regular plain bodies, by their
Axes, Diagonies or angular Dimetients, (these being all one with their
circumscribing Sphear's Dimetient, as I have showed before) And the latter
agrees with the like dimension of the three last of those bodies, by their
Altitudes, (being the same with their inscribed Sphear's Dimetient; and is also
in the Hexahedron, the same with its Side, as I have likewise showed before)
And so the reason of the artificial Lines for this cubical dimension of the
foresaid Bodies, for weight, as for solid measure, may be partly referred to
the foregoing 2d. Theoreme; the difference being, that respect must be here had
to the (compounding, denominate) parts simply, of the Weight proposed, in such
manner, as is there to the cubical parts of the Measure proposed; So that these
artificial Lines may be easily produced therefrom; And therefore I shall not
need here to raise a particular Theoreme upon the same. All which might be
performed also Arithmetically by way of Proportion, from the natural Measure
appointed, according as all the former Dimensions: And both these ways I shall
here particularly demonstrate in the first regular Solid beforegoing, to wit, a
Sphere, or Globe, simply in it self, as coming most in use; and that in the
most usual and useful Metal for this purpose. But first I will give the
Proportions or comparisons of all the usual or principal (or commonly
received) kinds of Metals, according to the experiments and observations of
Marinus Ghetaldus, in his Archimedes promotus (who is generally supposed to
have come the nearest to the truth herein, of any man that has ever yet
written hereof) according as they are there delivered by him in the second
Table of that Tractate, next after after Theor. 9 or prop. 17: which Mr. Gunter
in the 5th. chap. of the 3d. Book of his Sector, has expressed in the same
terms, but more decimally, and that in whole numbers, by changing the natural
or vulgar fractions of those numbers into decimal, and so expressing his
natural mixed or heterogeneall numbers, in whole numbers, after a decimall
manner, putting the first number 10000, whereas Ghetaldus puts it but 100;
which I have here collected orderly into this Table following, in proportion
direct and reciprocal, in respect of the equal Magnitudes and gravities of
like Bodies of different Metals.

In like Bodies of several metals and equal magnitude, having the weight of
the one, to find the weight of the rest. Gold. 10000 3895 In like Bodies of
several metals and equal weight, having the magnitude of the one, to find the
magnitud of the rest. The converse of the former. Quicksilver. 7143 5453 Lead.
6053 6435 Silver. 5439 7161 Bresse. 4737 8222 Iron. 4210 9250 Tin. 3895 10000

Which meralline Proportions or comparisons. Mr. Oughtred in his foresaid Book
of the Circles of Proportion, Part. 1. chap. 10. has expressed in the Terms
following, being deduced from Ghetaldus his first Table of Comparisons (if I
much mistake not) which is from Prob. 5, and 6, or Prop. 12, and 13, of that
Treatise.

Gold 3990 Quicksilver 2850 Lead 2415 Silver 2030 Brass 1890 Iron 1680 Tin
1554

And for a further explanation Here, note that the number for Silver should not
be 2030 but 2170; which might be so set down by the negligence or oversight of
the Printer, though I find it not noted by Mr. Oughtred's Translatour, who set
forth his Book in English, among the typographicall errors collected by him in
the end of that Book; but else all the other Numbers do correspond with the
Numbers of the former Table.
and use of both these proportional Tables, I referr the Reader to the
forenamed several Authors, in the places fore cited (though I shall partly show
it afterward my self) And now of these Metals, seeing that Iron is most used it
the Body which here we inten^ chiefly to treat of and handle, namely a Globe or
Sphere, and that chiefly in reference to^ Bullet, especially the greater, or
Cannon-bullet (for the use of Gunners) which is commonly made of the foresaid
metal, (and which now a days is too much used among us) We will therefore here
show its cubicall dimension in the said Metal, according to its proper kind of
Weight with us, which is Avoirdupois-weight, beginning first with the Sphear's
Diameter. And the Line of equal parts for this purpose (according to the
common esteem of the gravity or weight of an iron-Sphear or Bullet with us, at
a certain magnitude, in a certain Measure given, expressed by and by) I find by
the reason of the second Theoreme beforegoing, in respect of the proper
composing, denominate parts of the integer of the weight proposed, (or
according to our general reason of Measure, in respect of the Integer of the
weight it self; the same reasons holding here for weight, that were formerly
exgressed for Measure, according to what I said before) to be of the common
denominate parts of a Foot with us, (in a centesimal solution) 1.92. Now
because we cannot distnctly divide the Line of measure first given for this
purpose, viz. an Inch or Pollicar, (as the prime Rational Line) into 100 parts,
(as is requisite to do) according to the simple, vulgar, or natural division of
a right Line: geometrical diagram Therefore we will here divide it by the
artificial way, commonly called the Diagonal or decimal way; according to the
rectangle Parallelogram, A B C D, whose length A C or B D being the Inch
divided into 10 equal parts, and so its breadth A B or C D (taken at pleasure)
divided in like manner: the whole Inch will be divided equally into 100 parts,
according to the small quadrangles or parallelogra^s, made by the several lines
of division, drawn direct according to the length of the Parallelogram, and
oblique or diagonal, according to the breadth; and these latter lines may also
be drawn exactly rectangular or tranverse to the former lines. And to this
Parallelogram is annexed another, viz. C D E F, whose length C E or D F, is A
C, or B D, 1.92, for the Line of ponderal Cubation, (as I may term it) or of
cubical gravity, proper and peculiar to the Diameter of a Sphere or Bullet of
Iron, in the foresaid kind of weight, according to the common Tenent here
following: which being likewise divided as the prime Line, according to the
rectangle Parallelogram C D E F, and so the Diameter of an iron Sphere or
Bullet be taken thereby; the Cube thereof shall be the weight of the bullet in
its foresaid weight Avoirdupois, according to the Integer of weight, viz. the
Pound. As for example: An ironbullet of 4 inches the Diameter, is commonly said
with us, to weigh 9li. avoirdupois. Now for a trial of this by our Cubatorie
Line of weight, or Line of cubical gravity; I measure the diameter of this
Bullet or Sphere (being of the Line A C, 4.00) by the Line C E, or the diagonal
Scale C D E F and find it to be thereof, 2.08, for the artificial Diameter,
whose Cube is 8.998912li. for the weight of the bullet, which reduced into the
proper parts of the foresaid kind of weight, the same will be 8 pounds, 15
ounces, 15 drams, and very near 1/4 of a dram, so that it wants of 9li. but
about 1/4 of a dram, which in such a thing is as nothing. But because the
diameter of such a Sphere, cannot be first measured, but must be had by means
of the Circumference, first obtained by a Line of measure, (unles there be a
pair of Callaper Compasses ready at hand) whereupon a Line for cubing the
Sphere by its Circumference, must needs be generally more convenient for use,
then that for the Diameter, according as I noted formerly in the general
dimension of a Sphere: Therefore, I will here also deliver a Line of weight for
cubing an iron-Sphear by the Circumference, which (by the reasons aforesaid) I
find to be of the Line A C, 6.04, (viz. 6.04 inches) which being divided either
diagonally into 100 parts, as the Line A C, or C E, or rather only according to
the length thereof simply, seeing it may sufficiently bear it: and so the
Circumference of an Iron-Sphear or Bullet be taken thereby; the Cube thereof
shall be the weight of the Bullet.

As suppose here again the former bullet of 9li. avoirdupois, whose diameter
being put 4.00 inches, the Circumference will be 12.57 inches fere which by its
proper Line of Cubature, will be found 2.08, as the Diameter before by its
proper Line, and therefore by Cubation, must needs produce the same ponderosity
as before.

But here note, that an Iron-Sphear of 4 inches the diametral magnitude in
Ghetaldus his measure, will weigh with him, 12li. 2. ounc. 1 scrup. 14 gr. and
2/37 of a grain; for so I find it to be by the former proportional numbers, by
comparing this Sphere with a Sphere of Tin of the same diametrall magnitude,
according as Ghetaldus shows in his foresaid book, and from him Mr. Oughtred
in his forenamed book: and which is also expressly noted by Ghetaldus in a
Table, wherein he has set down the weights of a Sphere, in all the foresaid
Metals, from 1/4 of an inch the diametral magnitude, to 12 inches, or the whole
Foot, proceeding all along by quarters of inches. But now 9li. avoirdupois is
in our Troy-weight, by Assize or Goldsmiths weight (according to the commonly
received proportion of the Pound-avoirdupois to the Pound-troy, 60 to 73) but
10 57/60 pounds, or 10.95 li. exactly; which is 10 pounds, 11 2/5 or 11.4
ounces; or according to the common division of the ounce-troy by penny-weights,
is 10li. 11 oun. and 8 penny-weights exactly.

Now Ghetaldus divides a Pound into 12 ounces; an ounce into 24 scruples; and a
scruple into 24 grains: so that his ounce weighs 576 grains, and his pound,
6912 grains: And we divide our Pound-troy, into 12 ounces (as he does his
pound) but the ounce-troy we usually divide into 20 penny-weights, and a
penny-weight into 24 grains, so that our ounce-troy weighs but 480 grains,
and consequently our Pound-troy 5760 gr. All which shows, that either his
Weight, or Measure, or rather both of them, do differ from ours, as I shall
further show: As for the Measure which he uses, he says it to be the ancient
Roman Foot, divided into 12 unciae, or inches as ours is, and which by his
description and delineation thereof, in his forementioned book, seems to
differ but very little from our English Foot, (if any thing at all) and that
deficiently, and which Mr Oughtred in his forenamed book also observes: But
Mr. John Greaves sometimes Professor of Geometry in Gresham College London,
and now Professor of Astronomy Concerning the magnitude of the Roman Foot.
in the University of Oxford, has in his Discourse of the Roman Foot, etc.
(published by him in English, Anno 1647; and deduced, not only from diverse
Authors, but also from his own observations and experiments, which in that his
learned discourse he seems to have made with greatpains and industry, in his
travails in foreign parts, but especially in Italy, and there at Rome) more
clearly expressed the Dimension or magnitude of the true Roman Foot; having
done the same not only linearly (by the half thereof, as Ghetaldus has done)
but also Numerally, in comparing it with the standard measures of England, and
diverse other Nations: For the draughts or delineations thereof in Books, cannot
give us the true length, in respect of the diverse accidents happening to the
paper whereon it is imprinted, and especially the contraction or shrinking of
it after the impression, (as both these authors do give us to observe) which
while it was moist in the Press, received the true Measure, but afterward
being dried, loses somewhat thereof; and so Ghetaldus in the last page of his
foresaid book, gives us to note particularly in his draught there of half the
Roman Foot, and how much is there to be added to it, to make up the true
measure. For although Mr. Greaves does conclude upon the same Measure of the
Roman Foot, which (he says) Ghetaldus does, (for the truest Measure) yet if we
compare their draughts or delineations of the half Foot, together, (in their
foresaid books) we shall find that of Mr. Greaves, to be shorter then that of
Ghetaldus, by almost 1/8 of Ghetaldus his Inch, as it is there set out; or 1/10
of our English inch exactly. And such like disagreement is to be found among
other Authors in their delineations or draughts of the same Roman Foot, for
the reason aforesaid.

Now the Foot which the said Mr. Greaves (among such a diversity of opinions
concerning the true Roman Foot, as are to be found, and so many Feet as are
taken to be Roman) pitcheth upon for the most genuine and true Roman Foot,
(being led not only by the anthorities of Ghetaldus, and diverse other learned
and judicious men, (as he says) but also by his own observations and
experience) is that which is commonly called by writers, Pes Colotianus, from
the place where it is (or sometime was) to be found, namely, in hortis
Colotianis in Rome, upon the Monument of Cossutius (which now he says to be
removed thence) The Roman and English Foot compared together.
which Foot he comparing with our English Foot, which he took from the
iron-Yard, or Standard of 3 Feet, at the Guildhall in London (for there is no
single Foot-standard) finds to be 967 such parts, as the English Foot
contains 1000; and so the English Foot to contain 1034.13, such as the said
Roman Foot contains 1000: whereby this Roman Foot should be 11.6 (or 11.604
exactly) such parts as our English Foot is 12; viz. 11.6 (or 11.604) inches,
and so wanting of the English Foot, only 0.4 inch, or 0.396 inch exactly. But
there are two other Roman Feet reckoned by him, which (by his account) do come
nearer to our English Foot; the first whereof is that on the Monument of
Statilius, in hort is Vaticanis in Rome, which he observed to be 972 such parts
as the English Foot is 1000, (and to be 1005.17 of the Pes Colotianus, being
1000) whereby this Foot will be 11.7 fere, of the English Foot, being 12, viz.
11.7 inches fere, it being 11.66; which wants of the English Foot, but, 0.34
inch. And the other Foot is that of Villalpandus, deduced from the Congius of
Vespasian in Rome, which he says to be 986 parts of ou^ English Foot
containining 1000, (and 1019.65, of Pe^ Colotianus, being 1000) and so is 11.8
of the English Foot being 12, viz. 11.8 inches, which wants of the whole
English Foot, only 0.2 inch. But the ancient Greek Foot does by his observation
more nearly agree with our English Foot, then this last Roman Foot, being (by
his collation) 1007.29, of the English Foot 1000, which is hardly.09 of an inch
above a Foot English, it being 12.087 inches english.

As for the Weights used by Ghetaldus in his forenamed Treatise, which he says
to be the Weights used in his time (which is not very long since) they are
surely the Roman weights (for he lived at Rome as I take it, when he wrote that
book) which have continued the same for many ages without alteration, as some
writers do attest: And which Mr. Greaves in his Discourse of the Denarius
(annexed to that of the Roman Foot) which he puts as an undeniable principle
and foundation from whence the weights of the Ancients may be deduced, as the
Roman Foot for the Principle of their Measures) The Roman Weight, and our Troy
or Goldsmiths Weight, compared together.
having collated with the Troy-weights from our English Standard for Gold and
Silver, by grains thereof, says, that the Roman Pound both ancient and modern
contains 5256 such grains, and so the Roman Ounce both ancient and modern,
438 of the same grains, the Troy-pound containing 5760 grains (as I noted
before) and so the Troy-ounce, 480: whereupon the Thomasius in the end of his
Dictionary, reducing the weights and measures, etc. of the Ancients, to those
in use with the English nation; says, that the Roman Pound is 10 oun. and an
half Troy: and so the Roman ounce is 3 quarters and an half of an ounce-troy.
By which account, the Roman pound will contain but 5040 english grains, or such
as our troypound contains, 5760, which comes short of Mr. Greaves his account
by 216 grains And so the Roman Ounce will contain but 420 such grains,
which falls short of Master Greaves his observation, by 18 grains. But herein
we rather give credit to the later and exacter observations and experiments of
Mr. Greaves. But yet how our Troy-weight may have been altered since Thomasius
his time, I know not.
Roman Pound and Ounce should be (in the least terms) but 73/80 of our English
pound and Ounce Troy-weight, and so the proportion of the Roman pound and ounce
to our Troy-pound and ounce (for the conversion or commuration of the Roman
weight to our Troy-weight) as 80 to 73 (which is the commonly received
proportion of the Ounce- avoirdupois to the Ounce- troy, for the like
conversion, as I shall show afterward, and which is decimally, as 10000 to 9125
exactly.) As for the division of the Roman ounce immediately by scruples, in
number XXIV which Ghetaldus uses, Mr Greaves speaks not of it, but only by
drams, in number VIII, as the Ounce is commonly divided by the Physicians of
all Countries, and the physical or medicinal weights which we use in England,
are the same with the Troy-weights for Gold and Silver; only the Ounce-troy is
commonly by our Goldsmiths divided into 20 penny-weights (as I showed before) a
pennyweight consisting of 24 grains: and the Ounce by Physicians is universally
divided into 8 drachmes; a Drachme into 3 scruples; and a scruple (by an evil
custom received in shops) into 20 grains, which ought to have (according to
the ancient custom) Morellus in cap. 1. Prolegom. ad composit. medicament.
24 grains, and so be equal with a pennyweight; so that the Number of grains in
the medicinal Pound and Ounce, is the same with that in the Troy: For the
scruple being 20 grains, the Dram will be 60, the Ounce 480, and so the Pound
5760, as before-noted: whereas else the Scruple being made 24 grains, (as
anciently it was) the dram would be with us, 72 gr. the Ounce 576, and so the
Pound 6912 gr. as Ghetaldus has it; but the number of grains contained in the
Roman Pound or ounce, with the Romans themselves, Mr. Greaves shows not,
whereby we might find what the difference is between their grain and ours: But
collating the number of grains contained in the Pound or Ounce used by
Ghetaldus (which we take to be the same which Mr. Greaves notes for the
Roman-pound and Ounce, both ancient and modern) with the number of grains from
the English-Standard for Gold and Silver, contained in the said Roman-pound and
Ounce, (which we showed even now from Mr. Greaves) we shall find the Grain (such
as the Roman-pound contains 6912, and the Ounce 576, according to Ghetaldus, as
we lately showed) to be (in the least terms) but 73/96 of the English grain,
(such as the Roman pound contains 5256, and the Roman Ounce 438, according to
the observations and experiments of Mr. Greaves) So that the Romanegrain should
be to the Troy grain, from the English-Standard (for the conversion of Roman
grains to our Troygrains) as 96 to 73; and so consequently the Roman-weights in
general (as pounds and ounces) reduced into the proper grains, will be to our
Troy-weight in grains, accordingly.

And according to these collations and proportions of these two Weights the one
to the other; the former iron-Spheare weighing with Ghetaldus 12 li. 2. oun. 1
scrup. 14 2/37 gr. or 84134 2/37 grains Roman (according to his measure of the
Spheare's Diameter by inches of the Roman Foot) will be in Troy-weight from the
English Standard, 11 li. 1 oun. 2 drams, 16 1^4/111 gr. (or according to the
vulgar Division of the ounce-troy by penny-weights, 11 li. 1 oun. 5
penny-weights, and 16 1^4/111 gr.) or 63976 104/111 gr. which is very near
63977 gr. For first, I say,

As 80 to 73, So 12 li. 2 oun. 1 scrup. 14 gr. Roman, (viz. 12 li. 2 oun. 38
gr.) or 146 38/576 oun. Roman, to 133 6^^1/23^40 ounces-troy; which is 133 oun.
and 137 gr. fere: and these reduced into libral weight, are 11 li. 1 oun. 2 dr.
or 5 p. w. and 17 gr. fere, as before.

Then secondly; As 96 to 73, So are 84134 2/37 gr. Roman, to 63976 104/111 gr.
Troy, as before.

Which exceeds the former troy-weight of this Sphere (deduced from its
avoirdupois-weight, according to the common proportion, 60 to 73) viz. 10 li.
11 oun. 3 drams, and 12 gr. (or 10 li. 11 oun. and 8 penny-weight, as before)
or 63072 gr. by 1 oun. 7 dr. and 5 gr. or 1 oun. 17 p. w. and 17 gr. or 905 gr.
which difference in the Troy-weight here, may arise not only from the
difference between Ghetaldus his Weight and Measure, and ours, but also from
some difference in the Metal it self, which I shall speak of afterward. Now if
we shall reduce his measure of the Spheare's dimetient, being 4/12, or 4 inches
of the Roman Foot, (which we showed before, to be the Pes Colotianus, as being
most approved of by him, for the true ancient Roman Foot) to inches of our
English Foot (according to Mr. Greaves his foresaid collation of these two Feet
together) the said Spheare's Dimetient will be less then 4 inches of the
English Foot, viz. but 3.868 inches-english (the whole English Foot, or 12
inches. English, being 12 (...) inches Roman, according to Mr. Greaves his
pro(...) Foot to the English Foot, 1000 to (...) before noted) and so the
former (...) the Sphere, 12li. 2 oun. 1 scrup. 14 2/37 gr. with Gheta^dus, or
11 li. 1 oun. 2 dr. 17 gr. fere, with us in Troy-weight, (which according to
the common proportion of the Troy librall weight, to the avoirdupois librall
weight, 73 to 60, is 9 li. 2 oun. and 1.057 dr. avoirdupois) answering to the
Spheare's diametrali magnitude of 4 inches upon the Roman Foot, will answer to
3.868 inches upon the english Foot. Or again; if we shall reduce our english
measure of the said Spheare's dimetient, 4 inches (and so commonly holden to
weigh 9 li. avoirdupois, which is 10.95 li. troy, as we showed before) to Roman
measure in inches, we shall find the same (according to the former Pedal
Collations) to be more then 4 Roman inches, viz. 4.136 inches, and the gravity
of an iron Sphere of this Diameter, will be in Ghetaldus his weight, 93044.86
grains, or 13 li. 5 oun. 4 dr. 20.86 gr. (or according to Ghetaldus his
Division of the ounce) 13 li. 5 oun. 12 scrup. and 21 gr. fere) which is in our
Troy-weight (according to the former Collations of these two weights) 70752.86
gr. or 12 li, 3 oun. 3 dr. 12.86 gr. (or by the common division of the
ounce-troy by penny-weights, 12 li. 3 oun. 8. p. w. and 0.86 gr.) Archimed.
promot. theor. 9. prop. 17.
For seeing that Spheres of the same kind, are among themselves in gravity, as
the Cubes of their Dimetients are in magnitude: Therefore the weight of the
iron-Spheare, whose Diameter is 4 inches Romane-measure, or 3.8 68 inches
english-measure, being found as before; the weight of the other Sphere of the
same kind, whose diameter is 4 inches english-measure, or 4.136 inches
Roman-measure, will be found also as before: Or more readily, by having the
weight of such a Sphere, whose Diameter is one inch, which by Ghetaldus his
Measure and weight, is 1314 22/77 grains. or 2 oun. 6 scrup. 18 22/^7 gr. and
so in our troy-weight, 999 71/111 grains, or 2 oun. 1 p. w. and 16 gr. which
weight therefore will answer to an iron-Spheare whose Diameter is 0.967 inch,
english-measure, for this answers to one inch-Roman; and so the weight of such
a Sphere who^e Diameter is one inch-english (which is 1.034 inch-romane)
should be by this account, 1105.51 graines-English, or 2 oun. 2 dr. 25.5 gr. or
2 oun. 6 p. w. and 1.5 gr. troy (which are in Roman weight, 1453.83 gr. or 2
oun. 4 dr. 13.8 gr. or by Ghetaldus his division of the ounce; 2 oun. 12 scrup.
and 13.8 gr.)

Or (here briefly to show the use of the former proportional Numbers for Metals
among themselves) in respect of two Spheres of different kinds of Metals, and
like magnitude) the same weight of the foregoing Sphere of Iron, of 4 inches
english-measure, or 4.136 inches Roman-measure, the diameter maybe produced as
before, by the weight of a Sphere of any other Metal first had, being of the
same magnitude: As for example, a Sphere of Tin, (for so Ghetaldus commonly
deduceth the weights of other metalline Spears from a stanneal Sphere, or a
Sphere of Tin) whose diametrall magnitude is 4 inches-english, or 4.136
inches-Romane, I find to weigh by Ghetaldus, 86066.5 grains (or 11 li. 5 oun.
10 scrup. and 2.5 gr.) which is with us in Troy-weight, 65446.4 gr. (or 11 li.
4 oun. 2 dr. 46.4 gr. or 11 li. 4 oun. 6p. w. 22.4 gr.) Now therefore,
according to the foresaid propo^^onall Numbers for Tin and Iron, I say; As
3895 to 4210 (which is with Ghetaldus in his forementioned second Table of the
Comparison of diverse kinds of Bodies in gravity and magnitude, as 38 18/19 to
42 1/19) or more accurately (the former terms being incomplete and unabsolute)
As 1554 to 1680 (which is with Ghetaldus in his foresaid first Table of the
like Comparisons, as 1 to 1 3/37, that is, as 37 to 40, and which is decimally,
as 1. to 1.081,081, infinitely; or integrally, 1000 to 1081, or 1000,000 to
1081, 081 completely) So is 86066.5 gr. (or 12 li. 5 oun. 10 scr. 2.5 gr.) the
Sphere of Tin in Ghetaldus his weight, or 65446.4 gr. (viz. 11li. 4 oun. 2
dr. 46.4 gr.) the same Sphere in our Troy-weight, to 93044.86 gr. (or 13li. 5
oun. 12. scr. 21 gr.) the Sphere of Iron in Ghetaldus his weight; or to
707.2.86 gr. (viz. 12li. 3 oun. 3 dr. 12.86 gr.) the same Sphere in our
troy-weight, as formerly: which being converted into Avoirdupois-weight,
(according to the former terms of proportion between these two Weights) will be
10.0961. li. viz. 10li. 1 oun. 8.576 dr. according to the common division of
the Pound-avoirdupois into 16 ounces, and so of the ounce into 16 drams, and
under which division or parts of weight, they go not; this kind of weight
serving with us for all kind of coarser or grosser Commodities, it being the
common Mercatory weight, (and called by a French name, Avoirdupois) and so for
the weighing of all Metals, but Gold and Silver, to which only the Troy-weight
is assigned: Neither indeed is there any need of such exactness in the weight
of a bullet or any other Body of Iron, or other like base Metal, as to
grains, but only to satisfy Art it self in the curiosity thereof.

But now whether the common Tenent of an iron-bullet of 4 inches the diameter,
to weigh just 9li auoirdupois, were deduced from any certain and exact
experiment or no, is a question here to be made; Nor was it my purpose to try
the same, having not conveniences and accomodations thereunto: but only having
the true weight of a Sphere or Bullet of Iron of any magnitude, in a certain
measure given (as Inches) thereby to show a way for the exact and most speedy
obtaining of the weight of a Sphere or bullet of any magnitu^e whatsoever,
which I have partly declared and demonstrated already, and shall more by and by:
And looking in several books of Gunnery, wherein are set down the weights of
iron-bullets (or round shot, as they call it) fitted to all the usual pieces of
Ordnance with us in England, according to the diameters of their bore, mouths,
or concavities (abating usually 1/4 of an inch of the Gun's said diameter, for
the diameter of the bullet) I found in one of them, the weight assigned to an
iron-bullet of 4 inches diameter or crassitude, to be just 9li. and in another
book this weight assigned to a bullet of 4 1/2 inches the diameter and so in
other books, other weights assigned to a bullet of the same magnitude: And
therefore finding such a discrepancie among our Masters of Gunnery in this
thing, so that I could not discover from them any certainty in the weight of an
iron-Sphear or bullet, at a certain magnitude or crassitude: I repaired one day
in August 1648, unto Mr. John Reynolds, one of the Clarks of the Mint in the
Tower of London, (and sometime Assay-master at Goldsmiths-hall) a man much
noted by artists for his industry and ingenu^ty in the Mathematiques; (and so
indeed I find him to be) who very courteously entertaining me at his house in
the Tower, with discourse about many exexperiments made by him in the
Mathematics, and showing the same to me (as he had once done in some of them,
long before) among which were those concerning the weights of Metals, and their
proportions one to another: I desired of him to be resolved in this point of
art concerning the weight of a Sphere or bullet of Iron, according to some
certain magnitude or crassitude, knowing him to have all accomodations fit for
the finding out of the same; and he thereupon produced me an experiment made by
him not long before, upon a large bullet, which he then showed me; but I
observed the same to be very unfit to ground an experiment upon, being not only
much rusty, but also having several holes and cavities therein, (which seemed
to be chiefly from the antiquity of it) which might well hinder the finding of
the true weight, according to its diametrall magnitude, and which himself then
doubted much of: whereupon I importuned him for another the like experiment,
which might be exact; And so both for his own satisfaction, and mine also, he
soon after, got another bullet, which was very sound and solid, and clear
enough from rust, and also as round every way, as could well be imagined; whose
Diameter we thereupon took by a pair of Callaper Compasses (conceiving it to be
a surer way to find the same, then by the Circumference) as precisely as
possibly we could, and measuring the same upon a line of inches, found it to be
4.8 inches; and then for my further satisfaction, I took the Circumference of
the bullet with a thread, by means of the small crease or Circle which
encompassed the bullet exactly in the middle, being made by the Mould in which
it was cast, and measuring the thread upon the said line of inches, we found it
to be 15.25 inches, which by Cycloperimetricall proportionality, gives the
diameter as before; so that we might well conclude, the magnitude of this bullet
to be rightly found by us. Then for the weight thereof, we tried the same with
all possible preciseness, both by Avoirdupois-weights, and Troy-weights, and
found it to weigh, 15 li. 12 1/4 oun. avoirdupoiz; and 19 li. 1 25/32 oun.
Troy, viz. 19 li. 1 oun. p. w. 15 gr. According to which experiment, an
iron-bullet (made of cast iron, such as bullets are usually made of, and which
weighs much lighter then forged iron) of 4 inches the diameter, will weigh
upon the point of 9 li. and 2 oun. avoirdepois, which differs not much from the
common Tenent.

And so according to this our experiment (to which we will adhere for the
finding out of the weight of any Sphere or bullet made of cast-iron) the
artificial Line of measure, or cubatory Line of gravity, for the speedy
discovering of the weight of any Sphere or bullet whatsoever, made of
cast-iron, by the Diameter or Circumference thereof, as was formerly showed,
will be 1.91 inch, for the Diameter, and 6.01 inches for the Circumference; and
these in respect of librall weight, as the two former Lines, viz. 1.92 inch,
and 6.04 inches, deduced from the former common Tenent of the weight of an iron
bullet of 4 inches diameter, which differ but very little one from another, as
they are here set, from a centesimal division of the Inch. Now these two latter
Lines being divided as the former, and the Diameter and Circumference of the
foresaid Sphere or bullet measured thereby, the same will be found severally, to
be 2.09 fere (which by the other Lines were 2.08) which cubed, yields 9.129329
fere. for the weight of the bullet, which is 9 li. 2 oun. 1 dr. averdepoiz,
differing from the true weight (by way of excess) only 1 dr. which is not
considerable.

But now what sort of Iron, Marinus Ghetaldus in his experiments upon the same,
for the weight thereof, and so its proportion to other Metals, means, whereby
a Sphere of 4 inches diameter, english-measure, (or 4.136 inches Roman-measure)
should weigh according to him, 10.096 li. avoirdupois (as being deduced from
12.283 li. troy and that from 13.461 li. Roman) we know not, if Mr. Greaves his
foresaid collations and comparisons of the Roman weight and Measure (used by
Ghetaldus) with the English, be true, (as we are willing to believe they are)
and also the foresaid proportion of the Troy-poundweight to the
Avoirdupois-pound-weight, as it is commonly holden, viz. 73 to 60; although the
aforenamed Mr. Reynolds will have it to be, as 17 to 14; deducing the same from
a general The Troy and Avoirdupois Pound compared together.
Maxim, and undeniable Principle (as he says) that 136 pounds-Troy, and 112
pounds Avoirdupois are equilibral, or equivalent in weight, which are in the
least terms of proportionality, 17 and 14; and which indeed I find by
experience to be the truer, as I shall afterward show: And this is to be
understood properly (as the Terms here stand, from the greater to the less)
for the reduction of Troy-poundweight (or Troy-pounds) to
Avoirdupois-pound-weight (or Avoirdupois-pounds) in as much as 73 li. Troy, make
but 60 li. Avoirdupois; or rather 17 li. troy make but 14 li. avoirdupois: and
so the Avoirdupois Pound, is (in the least terms) 73/60, or rather 17/14 the
Troy-Pound; whereas else, if we will precisely compare the Pound-troy simply,
as the less, with the Pound-avoirdupois, as the greater; then must the Terms
be rather taken the contrary way: And thereupon the Pound-troy will be to the
Pound-avoirdupois, as 60 to 73, or rather, 14 to 17: And so the Pound-troy will
be (in the least terms) 60/73, or rather 14/17 of the Pound-avoirdupois. And
which several Terms of proportion, though they seem, to differ but very little
in the Reason thereof it self; yet may the difference of the weights of
things, produced severally thereby (by way of conversion or reduction of one
kind of weight to the other) be many times considerable; and the more, the
greater that the quantity of the weight so reduced, is; as I shall plainly show
afterward: And so I will here first compare these two several Proportions
together (and that according to the common acception of the Terms, from the
Pound-troy to the Pound-avoirdupois, viz. the greater Term as antecedent, to
the less, as consequent, and so the reasons of the Terms will be of the
greater inequality; and the rationality of the first, or common Terms, will be
(by prolation, from the Parabole of the said Terms, or Quantity of the Reason)
super-tredecupartiens-sex agesimas, viz. superpartient 13/6^: and of the other
Terms, supertripartiens quartas-decimas, viz. superpartient 3/14, and so the
difference of the Reasons, or the differentiall Reason, but that of 1. to 420,
viz. 1/420, according to a plain or simple subduction, or differencing of
Reasons, by reduction of them to one common or conjunct Consequent, which
imitates the subduction Romans Arithm. l. 2. c. 2 and 3. a Laz. Schon. Et Clav.
de Proport. composit. in fine 9 Elem. Eucl.
of Fractionall Numbers, by reduction to one common or conjunct Denominatour;
and which is the most genuine, proper, and rational subduction, or
discrimination of Reasons (both as Clavius, Ramus and diverse other of the best
Authors do teach) thus;

Or more plainly thus, after the manner of Fractions.

And which may also be seen by the like operation in the superpartient terms
only, thus:

And not according to that operation of Reasons or Proportions, which some do
falsely and improperly call the subduction or subtraction of Reasons (as Clavius
also says in the place forecited) being indeed the true division or
Resolution of Reasons, and which is as the division of Fractions; whereby they
make the quotall Reason to be the differentiall or residuall Reason; and which
would then be here by prolation, of the greater inequality, viz. 1 1/510,
according to the terms 511/510 (whereas the other or true differentiall
Reason, is of the less inequality, by very much) but approaching very nigh
unto a Reason of equality, or unity, or a Reason singular and individual; and
this latter is also unexpressible or indenominate as the former, and is had by
a conjunct composition only of the alternate or heterologall terms, thus.

Anteced. 73. 17 1022 511 Quotient. Conseq. 60 14 1020 510 Quotient.

Or more plainly thus,

Or yet more plainly and readily, by permutation of the terms of the dividing
or resolving Reason, in respect of their places; for so the work of Resolution
will be changed into a Composition of the terms, according to the ordinary
Multiplication of Fractions, thus,

And the latter of these Proportions between the Troy and Avoirdupois-pound,
makes the Pound Troy to be more of the Pound Avoirdupois, or to come nearer the
same in quantity, then the other or common Proportion does; as may be more
plainly discerned, by reducing the said several Proportions into decimal
Terms, for so, the Proportion of the Pound-troy, to the Pound-avoirdupois from
the Terms of 73 to 60, will be, as 1.0000. to.8219, and from the terms of 17 to
14, as 1.0000 to.8235. Or by taking the Terms the contrary way, (as for the
conversion or reduction of Avoirdupois-pounds to Troypounds) the
Pound-avoirdupois will be to the Pound-troy from the terms of 60 to 73,
decimally, as 1.00000, etc. to 1.21666, etc. infinitely; and from the Terms of
14 to 17, as 1.00000, etc. to 1.21428, etc. and so here the Pound Avoirdupois
is by these latter Terms, less of the Pound Troy, (and so comes nearer the
same) then by the other Terms. And the Reason of these latter Terms (as they
here stand, from the less to the greater,) will be greater then the Reason of
the first or common Terms (according to the exact comparing of Proportions or
Reasons together, as you may see in the forecited places of Ramus and Clavius)
in regard that the two several Reasons being reduced to one common Consequent
(as aforesaid) the new, compound or correspondent Antecedent of the latter
Proportion, will be greater then the like Term of the first; or the foresaid
Antecedent of the latter Proportion, will be more of the common Consequent, then
the like Antecedent of the first Proportion (as in the former operations, the
contrary happened, where the Terms of Proportion were put the contrary way,
viz. from the greater Term as antecedent, to the less, as Consequent) as you
may here plainly see by these several subsequent operations.

Or more plainly thus, in a Fractionall manner.

Or again, the same will appear by a contrary operation, which is by reducing
the two several Proportions (as the terms be here put) to one common
Antecedent; for so the new, compound, or correspondent Consequent of the latter
Proportion or Reason, will be less then the like Te^^ of the first or common
Proportion, (and thereby the Reason of these latter Terms, will accordingly be
greater then that of the other Terms (according to the forecited Authors) as
you may plainly see by this next operation following; the compound Antecedents
of the operations next beforegoing, being here changed into the like
Consequents.

And here the difference of the Reasons (or the differentiall Reason) will be
that of 2 to 1241, viz. 2/1241, as you may see in the first of these two
operations before-going.

And now according to these latter termer terms of Proportion of the
Po^nd-troy to the Pound-avoi^dupois, viz. 17 to 14; the foresaid Sphere of Iron
will be in avoirdupois weight, 10.1158 li, which (by conversion of the
fractionpart into the proper parts of this weight) is 10 li. 1 oun. 13.6 dr.
whereas by the common terms, it was 10 li. 1 oun. 8.6 dr. and so the difference
of weight, 5 dr. exactly. But I co^ceive (as in all probability and reason I
should) the Iron used by Ghetaldus in his experiments, to be the finer sort of
iron, or forged Iron, which weighs heavier then cast, coarse, or drossie
iron, the proportion of weight between them, being (as I have deduced it from
the experiments of Mr. Reynolds; and partly of my self also, upon this Metal)
in general, such as is between 1000000 and 951832 arguing from forged Iron to
cast iron, as from the more to the less: and so contrarily from cast-iron to
forged iron, as from The Proportion between forged iron and cast-iron.
the lesser to the greater, the proportion of weight, will be such as of 1000000
to 1050605: For the said Mr. Reynolds found the weight of a cube-inch of fine
Iron, which had been kept in the Treasury of the Tower of London, ever since
King Henry the 7th. his time or longer (and that very neatly in a velvet-Case)
to be 4.169 ounces Troy, viz. 4 oun. 3 p. w. and 9.12 gr. troy. which is
0.3474li. troy: And from the former Bullet of cast-iron of 4.8 inches the
Diameter, which we found to weigh 19 pound, 1 oun. 15 penny-weight, and 15.
grains troy, or 229. ounces, 15 p. w. and 15 gr. (which is 229 25/32 ounces
troy) we gather the weight of one cube-inch of cast-iron to be 3.968 oun. troy;
which is 0.33068li. troy. And so according to this experiment, a Sphere or
bullet of one inch Diameter, made of fine, or forged Iron, will weigh a.18288
oun. troy, which is 0.1819li. troy: and so a Sphere or bullet of 4 inches
Diameter, made of the same metal, will weigh 11.642 poundstroy (or 11 li. 7 oun.
5 dr. and 38.17 gr. or 11 li. 7 oun. 14 p. w. and 2.17 gr.) which being
compared with the weight of an iron-Sphear of 4 inches Diameter
(^nglish-measure) decuced from Ghetaldus before into our Troy-weight, viz.
12.283li. etc. troy, or 12li. 3 oun. 3 dr. 12.86 gr. or 12li. 3 oun. 8 p. w.
and 0.86 gr.) it will be found to want thereof, 7 oun. 5 dr. 34.11 gr. or 7
oun. 13 p. w. and 22.11 gr. (according to the difference between 12.283483 li.
and 11.642044 li. being 0.641339 li.) And so the weight of a Sphere of fine
Iron of 1 inch diameter, here found 2.18288 oun. troy, viz. 2 oun. 1 dr. 27.78
gr. or ^ oun. 3 p. w. 15.78 gr. being compared with the weight of a ferreall or
iron-Sphear of the same Diameter, deduced formerly from Ghetaldus into our
troy-weight, viz. 2.30315 oun. or 2 oun. 2 dr. 25.5 gr. or 2 oun. 6. p. w. and
1.5 gr. it will be found to want thereof 57.7 gr. viz. 2 p. w. 9.7 g. which
operations agreeing so nearly one with another, it is thereby manifest, that
the Iron meant by Ghetaldus, is the finer sort of Iron, or purely forged iron;
But that we cannot make his experiments and ours exactly to agree in a Sphere
of this Metal; may happen not only in respect of the difference between his
weight and measure and our^, and the uncertainty of the proportions between
them, whereby the one might be exactly reduced to the other; but also in
respect of the difference between the Metal used by him and us; for that all
Iron (or other Metal) of the like sort, is not always of the same gravity or
ponderosity precisely because all is not of a like finesse or coarsnesse, and
so that which is finest, will still be heaviest.

Now Ghetaldus beginning to find out the weights of metalline Spheres,
according to the usual known Weights with him, found that no diligence or
industry of man could make a Sphere so exact as it ought to be, and therefore
he procured a Cylinder to be made, and that of Tin, equal in height to the
Diameter of its Base (which were of a certain magnitude in inches of the Roman
Foot) for that this might be turned in a Lathe much exacter, and more easily
then a Sphere: and hereby found, that a Cylinder made of Tin, being of one
inch or 1/12 of the Roman Foot in its crassitude and altitude, did weigh 3 oun.
4 scrup. which reduced into grains of his weight, is 1824 gr. whose 2/3 being
1216 gr. is the weight or gravity of a Sphere of the same Metal, whose
diameter is equal with the diameter or height of the Cylinder; according to the
demonstrations of Archimedes, lib. 1. de Sph. and Cyl. prop. 32. It being there
showed by him, that a Cylinder, whose Base is equal to the greatest Circle in
a Sphere, and its altitude equal to the diameter of the Sphere (or of the
said Circle) is sesquialter the said Sphere. And so Ghetaldus having found the
weight of one Sphere of Tin (at a certain magnitude) from thence he
deduceth the weight of any other Sphere, and that not only of the same Metal,
but also of any other metal, by the proportions of Tin to the other Metals
(in like Bodies of equal magnitude) found out by him at first.

Now the foresaid weight of 1216 gr. (or 2 oun. 3 scr. 16 gr.) for a Sphere of
Tin of 1 inch the diameter with Ghetaldus, will answer to the like kind of
Sphere whose diameter is 0.967 inch from the English Foot, (according Mr.
Greaves his foresaid comparison of the Roman Foot with the English) which being
converted into our Troyweight (according to Mr. Greaves his foresaid comparison
of the Roman weight with our Troy-weight) is 924 2/3 gr. (viz. 1 oun. 7 dr. 24
2/3 gr. or 1 oun. 18 p. w. 12 2/3 gr.) and hence we gather the weight of a
stanneall Sphere, whose diameter is 1 inch, or 1/12 of the English Foot, to be
1022.6 gr. english, (viz. 2 oun. 1 dr. 2.6 gr. or 2 oun. 2 p. w. 14.6 gr.)
whereby we may easily obtain the weight of any other Sphere of the same
Metal, and also of any Sphere of any the other metals, by means of the
foregoing proportional Numbers between Tin and those other Metals: For so a
Sphere or Bullet of Gold (supposed fine) of one inch diameter English-measure,
will be found, (according to the proportion of 3895 to 10000, which is with
Ghetaldus in his second Table of the comparison of several sorts of Bodies in
gravity and magnitude, 38 18/19 to 100) or rather (the former terms being
uncompleat) of 1554 to 3990 (which is with Ghetaldus in his first Table of the
comparison of the same Bodies in gravity and magnitude, 1 to 2 21/37, and
that is as 37 to 95 in the least rational and absolute terms) to weigh 2625.6
gr. english, (which is 5.47 oun. ^roy, viz. 5 1/^ fere, being 5 ou. 3dr. 45.6
gr. or 5 oun. 9 p. w. 9.6 gr.) And so the like Body of fine Silver, of the same
magnitude, will be found, (according to the proportion of 3895 to 5439, which
is with Ghetaldus in his foresaid second Table of the Comparison of several
Bodies in gravity and magnitude, 38 18/19 to 54 22/57) or more accurately (the
former terms being not absolute or comp^eat) of 1554 to 2170, (which is with
Ghetaldus is his forementioned first Table of the like Comparisons, 1 to 1
44/11^, and that is as 111 to 155, in the least term^s rational and absolute,
and which are by decimall numeration, as 1. to 1.396, 396 infinitely; or
integrally, 1000 to 1396, or 1000, 000 to 1396, 396 exactly) to weigh 1427.95
gr. english (viz. 2 oun. 7 dr. 47.95 gr. troy, or 2 oun. 19 p. w. 11.95 gr.) In
like manner will be deduced the weight of Iron and the other baser sort of
Metals, from Tin^e (in Bodies of like form and magnitude) But because the other
Me^als besides Gold and Silver, as usually weighed with us, by the common
Mercatory weight aforesaid, called Avoirdupois. Therefore for the more
immediate and speedy obtaining of their weights from Tin (in sphericall
bodies) it is best to have the weight of the foregoing Stanneall Sphere of one
inch diameter, viz. 1022 ^/5 gr. english, or 2.1304 oun, troy, (viz. 2 oun. 2
p. w. 14.6 gr. as before) reduced into avoirdupois unciall weight, and that
decimally, whereby the weight of the like kind of Sphere of any other
magnitude may be readily obtained; and so consequently the weight of any other
metalline Sphere therefrom, in its proper weight of Avoirdupois. Which said
weight therefore of 2.1304 oun. troy, will be inavo^rdupois unciall weight
(according to the commonly received proportion of the Troy ounce-weight to the
avoirdupois ounce-weight, 73 to 80) 2.3347 oun. (viz. 2 oun. 5.355 dr.) But
according to Mr. Reynolds his proportion of these two weights the one to the
other, which is, as 51 to 56 (being deduced from his proportion of the
Troy-pound-weight to the Avoirdupois-pound-weight noted before, and which
proportions of weight are the nearest aod truest that may be, as I shall
straightway show) the same sphere will be 2.33928 oun. avoirdupois (viz. 2
oun. 5.428 dr.) which exceeds the former weight only.073 of a dram, which in
this kind of weight is altogether inconsiderable.

Or for the ready obtaining of a Sphere of Tin, of any magnitude, (and so of
any other Metal therefrom) in librall-weight, it is convenient to have the
foresaid Sphere of Tin of 1 inch diameter, in libral-weight, both Troy and
Avoirdupois, and that decimally; which will here be in Troy-weight, 0.17753li.
and in Avoirdupois-weight, (which is here chiefly to be regarded) according to
the commonly received proportion of the troy-weight to the avoirdupois weight)
0.1459189li. and according the other (and better) proportion, 0.146205li. the
difference of which from the other (by way of excess) being hardly, 0.0003li.
viz. 3 parts of a pound-avoirdupois, divided into 10000 equal parts; Which
difference of weight, although it be here of little or no value (as also that
in the operation immediately preceding) in regard of the smalnesse of the Body
here handled, whereby the difference between the common Proportions of the
Troy-weight to the Avoirdupoisweight, and the other proportions, may seem to be
very small, and inconsiderable: Yet if we go to to reduce a metalline (or
other) Body of a greater magnitude or dimenon, out of one of these Weights into
the other (according to the said several proportions beforegoing) we shall find
the difference of weight (in one and the same kind) to be still greater, and the
greater or weightier that the Body is, the greater will be the difference of the
weight produced by the said different terms of proportion, in respect both of
librall and unciall weight, insomuch as that the difference of weight will many
times be considerable: As in the foregoing Sphere of iron, of 4 inches the
diameter, (english-measure) whose weight being found from Ghetaldus, to be
13.461li. Roman, and from that, to be in Troy weight (according to Mr. Greaves
his collations of these two kinds of weight the oue with the other) 12.283li.
and then the same converted into Avoirdupois weight, according to the two
several proportions between these two weights; the difference of weight was
there found to be 5 drams auoirdepois, which is almost 1/3 of an ounce. And
greater differences of weight (in this respect) then this, I shall show by and
by, and also more afterward.

Now therefore, for the proportion between the Troy-ounce, and the
Avoirdupois-ounce The Troy and Avoirdupois Ounce compared together; as also the
several Proportions assigned between them.
according to the Terms 51 and 56 (deduced from the foresaid Maxim or
Principle of librall weight, that 136li. Troy, and 112li. Avoirdupois are
eqvilibral, or equiponderant, and so accordingly from thence, 1632 oun. Troy
and 1792 oun. Avoirdupois, which are in the least terms of Proportion, 51 and
56) the same being compared with the foresaid common terms, 73 and 80, will
seem indeed to differ but little therefrom in the Reason it self, and that
deficiently, as the terms here stand, from the less to the greater, like as
the correspondent Terms before for librall weight, did from the common terms,
being taken from the greater term to the less, viz 7^ to 60, and Thomasius in
the forecited place of his Dicti^n^^y, says, that the Goldsa^ith, (or Troy)
Ounce has to the Avoirdupois Ounce, proportion ^^squiund^cimal, So that (to
wit) 11 ounce troy are exactly equal to 12 ounces avoirdupois: and which (he
says) he proved by a m^st just and exact Balla^c^. But this Prop^rtion is
som^what greater then either o^ the other two here noted, and makes the ounce
Averd. to be more of the ounce Troy then either of those tw^.

Mr. wingate in his A^ithm. l. 1 c. 1. Sect. 34. says, that the avoirdupois.
P^und is composed of 14 ^un. troy, and 12 p. w. viz. 14.6 oun. troy; which is
according to the commonly r^ce^ved Prop^^tiors between the Avoirpois and
Troy-weight: But according to the other proportions, it will be most truly but
14 oun. 11 p. w. and 10 2/7 gr. troy.


17 to 14: the Reason of the common terms, as they here stand from the less as
the Antecedent, to the greater, as the Consequent, being by prolation, of the
less in^quality, or inequality of the less, sub-super-septupartiens
septuagesimas-tertias, viz. sub-super-partient ^/73; and of the other Terms,
(standing correspo^dently) sub-super-quintupartiens quinquage simasprimas viz.
sub-superpartient 5/51; and so the difference of the Reasons, or the
differentiall or residuall Reason (according to the plain, simple and proper
subduction of Reasons before showed) that of 1 to 560, vix. 1/56^; And this,
for the conversion or reduction of Troy-unciall weight to the like
Avoirdupois-weight; and so the Ounce-troy will be (in the least terms) 80/73 or
more truly, 56/51 the Ounce-avoirdupois: Or else, the Terms, in this position,
from the less to the greater, might seem rather to be taken contrarily
(according to an exact comparison) for the proportion of the Avoirdupois-ounce,
(as the less) to the troy-onnce (as the greater) for so the Avoirdupois-ounce,
will be 73/8^1 or rather 51/56 of the Troy-ounce. And these latter Terms of
proportion, do make the Ounce Troy more to exceed the Ounce-avoirdupois, then
the first or common Terms do, and so make the Ounce-avoirdupois to come short
of the Ounce-troy (or be less of the same) accordingly; as may more easily be
seen, by reducing of the foresaid Terms of proportion into decimall terms; for
so, the proportion of 73 to 80, will be as 1.00000 to 1.09589, and of 51 to 56,
as 1.00000 to 1.09804 fere: And contrarily; by permutation of the Terms, the
proportion of 80 to 73, will be decimally, as 1.0000 to.9125 exactly (as I
showed formerly, upon another the like occasion,) and of 56 to 51, as 1.0000
etc. to.9107 etc.

And therefore, now to show (by the way) the difference between the foresaid
The two foregoing several Proportions between the Troy and Avoirdupois Weights
compared, and examined experimentally, by the Balance, in the foregoing Iron
Bullet.
several proportions of the Troy and Avoirdupoiz weights both librall and
unciall, the one to the other, by comparing them with the weight of some Body,
taken both by Troy and Avoirdupois-weights, and that especially in one and the
same Balance, and so converting it out of the one kind of weight into the
other, by the said two several kinds of proportions between them, whereby may
be known which of these are the nearer and truer, as most agreeing with the
Balance it self: We will here take the foregoing Cannon-bullet of cast-iron,
of 4.8 inches the diameter, whose weight we found (as I have noted before) in
the Tower of London, by an exact Balance, with Weights both Troy and
Avoirdupois, to be 19li. 1 oun. 15 p. w. 15 gr. Troy (which is 19li. and 1
25/32 oun. or wholly in librallweight, 19 29/12^ or 19.1484375li. exactly) and
15li. 12 1/4 oun. Avoirdupois (which is wholly in librall-weight, 15 49/64 or
15.765625li. completely) Now if we shall convert the said Bullet from its
Troy-weight to Avoirdupoisweight, according to the common proportion of the
Troylibrall-weight to the Avoirdupois-librall-weight, viz. 73 to 60, we shall
find the same to be (in the least terms) 15 1725/2336 or 15.73844li.
Avoirdupoiz, which wants of the true weight from the Balance, 0.02718li.
whcih is by reduction or conversion into the proper denominate, compounding
parts of this weight 0. oun. 6.958 drams avoirdupois, which is upon the point
of 7 dr. and that is almost half an ounce avoirdupois. But according to the
other proportion of the Troy librall-weight to the Avoirdupois librall weight,
viz. 17 to 14, the said bullet will be found to weigh (in the least terms) 15
837/1088 or 15.7693li. Avoirdupoiz, which exceeds the weight, not fnlly one
dram, being but 0.94 dr. as will appear by reduction of the fractionall terms
into the proper denominate parts of this weight, and which is not considerable.

Again; if we will reduce the said Bullet taken wholly in Troy-unciall-weight,
being 229 25/32 or 229.78125 oun. exactly, into Avoirdupois unciall-weight,
according to the said several proportions of the one to the other, we shall
find the very same differences necessarily to happen: for according to the
common proportion of the Troy-unciallweight to the Avoirdupois, viz. 73 to 80,
it will be found (in the least terms) 251 119/146 or 251.815 oun. avoirdupoiz,
which wants of the true or ballance-weight, (being 252.25 oun.) 0.435 oun.
which by reduction, gives 6.96 drams as before: But according to the other
proportion of the Troy unciall-weight to the Avoirdupoiz, viz. 51 to 56, it
will be found 252 21/68 oun. or 252.3088 oun. avoirdupoiz, which differs from
the ballance-weight (by way of excess) only 0.0588 oun. which is by reduction,
0.94 dr. as before.

And so again contrarily, if we work from the Avoirdupoiz-weight to the
Troy-weight, we shall find the like proportional differences of weight
accordingly. For first if we convert the foresaid bullet, out of its true
avoirdupoisweight from the Balance, 15 40/64li. or 15.7656, etc. into
Troyweight, according to the vulgarly received proportion of 60 to 73, for
librall-weight (being the converse of the former) we shall find the same to be
(in the least terms) 19 697/384^, or 1815104li. Troy, which differs from the
true weight of the Balance (19 19/12^ or 19.1484375li) by way of excess,
0.0330729li. which is by conversion into the proper, compounding denominate
parts of this weight 0. oun. 3 dr. 10.5 gr. troy, or 0. oun. 7 p. w. ^2.5 gr.
But according to the other proportion of 14 to 17, it will be found (in the
least terms) 19 129/896, or 19.1439732li. Troy, which differs from the true
weight (by way of defect) only 0.0044643li. which is by a continual reduction
into the least parts of weight, but 25.7 gr. or 1 p. w. and 1.7 gr. which is of
little or no value in this thing.

And so likewise if we reduce the said Bullet out of its true avoirdupois
weight taken wholly in ounces (according to the Balance) being 252 1/4 or
252.25 oun. into Troy weight by ounces; first, according to the common
proportion of 80 to 73, for unciall-weight (being the converse of the former)
we shall find the same to be (in the least terms 230 57/320 oun. troy, or
230.178125 completely, which exceeds the true weight, 229 25/32 oun. troy, or
229.78125 exactly, by 0.396875 oun. troy exactly, which is by reduction into
the least parts of weight, 3 dr. 10.5 gr. or 7 p. w. 22.5 gr. as before from
librall weight: But according to the proportion of 56 to 51, it will be found to
be (in the least terms) 229 163/224 oun. troy. or 229.727678, which is
deficient from the true weight, only 0.053572 oun. which by the like reduction,
is but 1. p. w. and 1.7 gr. as before from librall weight.

By which operations it is sufficiently evident, that these latter Proportions
between the Troy and Avoirdupoiz weights, are the truer, (and indeed the
nearest and truest that may be found) and which I shall (upon the like
occasion) further confirm afterward by a double experiment from the weight of
a liquid body, in the measuring of Vessels.

And thus much by the way concerning Weight and Measure in general, in
reference to the work here in hand, (being the like artificial Dimension of
metalline regular Bodies, for the speedy discovering of their gravities or
weights, and more particularly of a ferreall or iron Sphere, as was formerly of
a Sphere in general for solid measure) being induced thereunto by Ghetaldus in
his foresaid work of Metals, in which he differs from us in both these, as we
have abundantly showed.

And so these operations beforegoing in the particular metalline Spears
aforenamed, for the weight thereof, are from the experiments of M. Ghetaldus,
and reduced from his weight and measure to ours, according to the observations
and experiments of our Countreyman Mr. Greaves upon the same, and his
collations of them together, as aforesaid; And also in one of them, from my own
experience, according to our English weights and measure; with which we must
rest contented, til some other experiments be produced, both in these, and also
in the other Metals, from our English weight and measure, and which we may
expect from Mr. Reynolds aforesaid, who has taken great care and pains, and
used much industry therein.

As for the weights of Metals compared in Spears of one and the same
magnitude, set down in the latter part of Mr. Ponds Almanac, in Troy-weight
(where also are noted the foresaid common proportions between Troy and
Avoirdupois weights) they are arcording to the experiments of Ghetaldus, being
deduced from his proportional or comparative numbers, into the parts of
Troy-weight, though not very precisely; which therefore I have here put most
correct and exact thus; supposing (with him) first a Sphere of Gold, to weigh
just one pound-troy, and from thence, the other metalline Spears of the same
magnitude, to weigh accordingly, as follows.

oun. p. w. gr. mi. gr. 1. G. 12. 00. 00. 00. 5760. 1 2. Q-S. 8. 11. 10. 6.
fere 4114 2/7 2 3. I. 7. 5. 6. 6. 3486 6/19 3 4. S. 6. 10. 12. 12. 3132 12/19 4
5. B. 5. 13. 16. 8. 2728 8/19 5 6. I. 5. 1. 1. 5. 2425 5/19 6 7. T. 4. 13. 11.
7. 2243 7/19 Jupit; 7

But now to return a little to our foregoing work of the artificial dimension,
or diametral and Circumferentiall cubation of a Sphere of cast-iron, for the
weight thereof, which as we showed before by the Integer of weight it self (or
by librall weight) So we will next show how to perform the same by the
composing, denominate parts thereof immediately, viz. ounces avoirdupoiz (or
uncial weight) And the Line or Scale of equal parts for this purpose, in
respect both of the foresaid common Tenent of the weight of an iron-Sphear or
bullet, and also our own experiment, I find (according to the reason of the
precedent second Theoreme, and also our general reason) to be for the Diameter
of such a Sphere, (as to a centesimal partition of the measure given) 0.76
inch, which is but very little above 3/4 of an inch: and the Line for the
Circumference, according to the common Tenent, to be 2.40 inches fere, and
according to our experiment, 2.39 inches fere, (so that here also one and the
same Line of measure may indifferently serve in both) which two Lines being
divided as the former, and then the Diameter or Circumference be taken by their
proper respective Line or Scale, and cubed, the same shall be the weight of the
Sphere or Bullet in ounces and decimal parts immediately: For so the Diameter of
the foresaid bullet of 9li. and 2 oun. fere avoirdupois, (viz. 9.123626 li.
fere) being 4 inches, and the Circumference, 12.57 fere, will be found each of
them, by their proper cubatorie Line or Scale, for unciall gravity, (being made
100 parts) to be 5.27 fere, which cubed, yields 146.363183 fere, for the weight
of the Bullet in ounces, which exceeds the true weight being 145.978009 oun.
by 0.385174 oun. fere, which by conversion or reduction, yields about 6
drams, and which in a thing of this nature is not considerable: But yet if we
will stand more precisely upon the weight of this Bullet, if then we divide the
two foresaid artificial Lines of measure for this purpose into more parts, as
1000 (for the natural Line, or the Inch being so divided, the artificial Line
will be thereof, for the Diameter, 0.760 fere, and for the Circumference, 2.387
fere) and so measure the Diameter and Circumference of this Sphere or bullet
thereby, we shall find the same to be severally, 5.265, which cubed, gives
145.946984625 ounces for the weight of the bullet, which wants of the true
weight aforesaid, hardly half a dram, which in this kind of weight is as near
as need be desired.

And so again in the other Bullet of 15li. and 12 1/4 oun. avoirdupoiz (or
252.25 ounces) weighed by us; if the Diameter or Circumf. noted formerly, be
taken by these Lines under a centesimall division, they will be found each of
them to be 6.32 fere, whose Cube is 252.435968 oun. fere, which exceeds the
true weight, only 0.185968 oun. which by conversion, gives near upon 3 drams,
and which is not considerable: But being measured by the same Lines under a
millesimall partition, they will be found each of them, 6.318, which cubed,
affords, 252.196389. etc. ounces, which now wants of the true weight, not fully
one dram being but 0.86 dr.

And so also if the Diameter or Circumference of this Bullet be taken by their
proper respective Lines of measure for librall weight beforegoing (viz. 1.91
inch, for the Diameter, and 6.01 inches, for the Circumference) the same will be
found severally (according to a centesimal partition of the Lines) 2.51 fere,
whose Cube is 15.813251 fere for the weight of the bullet, (which by reduction
is 15li. 13 oun. and 0.19 dr. avoirdupois) exceeding the true librall weight,
viz. 15.765625 li. (or 15 li. and 12.25 oun.) only 0.047626 li. fere, which by
conversion into the proper parts of this weight, gives about 3/4 of an ounce,
viz. 12.19 dr. But being measured by the said Lines in a millesimal partition,
(for the natural Line, or the Inch, being 1000 parts, the artificial Line will
be thereof for the Diameter, 1.914, and for the Circumference 6.014 fere) they
will be found severally, 2.507, which cu bed, yields 15.756617, etc. (viz. 15li.
12 oun. 1.69 dr) wanting now of the true weight only 2.3 drams.

Now if any shall upon occasion, make use of the Troy-weight in a Sphere of
this The artificial Lines of measure, for the most speedy discovering of the
weight of a Sphere or Bullet of cast-Iron, in Troyweight, both librall and
unciall.
metal (though indeed this kind of weight is not usual for any Metal besides
Gold and Silver, as I have noted before) then the artficial Lines of measure
for the speedy discovering of the weight thereof by the diameter, will be 1.794
inch for librallweight, and by the Circumference, 5.636 inches: And the Lines
for unciall weight, will be for the Diameter, 0.784 inch fere, and for the
Circumference, 2.462 inches.

And now albeit no art or industry of man, can make a Sphere of metal or
other matter, so very exact and precise indeed, as it ought to be (according as
I noted before from Ghetaldus) Yet considering that the weight of this and the
other coarser kind of Metals in any thing, is not so precisely stood upon as
the weight of Gold and Silver, (being precious Metals) So the exactness of a
Sphericall body made of any of them for ordinary use (as a Cannon-bullet, which
is commonly made of cast-iron, as I noted before) is not so much stood upon, so
as it come something near the same: and indeed there is hardly any
Cannon-bullet, or other bullet for shooting, but is so round (being cast in a
Mould) as that the Eye can hardly adjudge or discern it to be not exactly
orbicular or sphericall; and so the weight thereof can be very little mistaken,
being obtained by the diameter or Circumference of the same, taken in a
certain set Measure, either natural, as Inches, or the like; or artificial,
as deduced therefrom, according as I have here showed at large. And which
several dimensions with many other the like metrical Conclusions pertaining
hereunto, and the Converse of the same (and all chiefly in reference to
Gunnery) I will next express proportionally by Number, (from our foregoing
experiments) according to the aforesaid Metal and Measure commonly used in
this thing, and the Weight both Avoirdupoiz and Troy, and in each of these,
both by the librall and unciall-weight together, which in the several Sections
of proportions following, are (for brevity-sake) noted by the letters of
distinction, l, and u.

1. The Cube of the Diameter in measure, is to the Sphere it self in weight,
as 1. to.1425566. l. Avoirdupoiz. weight. 2.280906. u..17314487. l.
Troy-weight. 2.0777384. u. Circumfer..00459767. l. Avoirdup..07356273.
u..0055841877. l. Troy..06701025. u.

Conversly.

2. The Sphere in respect of weight, is to the Cube of its Diamet. in respect
of measure, as 1. to 7.0147552. l. Avoirdup. cubique measure. 0.4384222. u.
5.7755104. l. Troy. 0.4812925. u. Circumf. 217.50144. l. Avoirdup. 13.59384. u.
179.07707. l. Troy. 14.923089. u

Hence,

3. The Diamet. is to the side of the Cube equal to the Sphere in weight, as 1
to.522391. l. Avoirdup. Linear measure. 1.316343. u..5573609. l. Troy.
1.276038. u. Circumf..16628227. l. Avoirdu..41900507. u..1774135. l.
Troy..4061755. u.

Then for the speedy discovering of the weight of a sphericall or any other
body whatsoever made of this Metal, by the solidity thereof, in the Measure
aforesaid: and contrariwise the solid content by the weight thereof, both
Avoirdupoiz and Troy, and in each of these both librall and unciall weight, the
Proportions will be as follows.

1. As 1. to.27226314. l. Avoirdupois. Weight. 4.3562103. u..33068234. l. Troy.
3.968188. u.

Contrariwise.

2. As 1. to 3.672917. l. Avoirdup. Solid measure. 0.229557. u. 3.02405. l.
Troy. 0.25200418. u.

And so likewise for discovering the gravity of any Body of fine or forged Iron
by the magnitude, in the foresaid Measure, and contra: the proportions will be
from the forementioned experiment made upon this Metal, as follows.

1. As 1. to 0.3474. l. Troy. Gravity. 4.169. u. 0.2861. l. Avoirdupois.
4.5777. u.

Conversly.

2 As 1. to 2.878, l. Troy. Magnitude. 0.2399 fere u. 3.495. l. Avoirdupois.
0.218. u.

And thus having showed our artificial Mensuration in regular Solids, as well
for gravity or ponde^osity, as for solid (and superficial) measure; I shall
now close up this Section and Part, with our third theorematicall Proposition,
(answering to the third principal problematical or practical Proposition in
the first Part) and the practical demonstration thereof, in which our more
particular, or special reason of the like dimension of all regular-like Solids
(as particularly of a Cylinder) in the several respects aforesaid (in
reference to the producing of the artificial Lines of measure, for performing
the same) is contained.

THEOR. III. Expressing particularly, the artificial Lines for the solid
dimension of a Cylinder, from our particular or specia^l ground and reason
formerly declared: And consequently, the Lines for the like dimension of a
Cone, and all other regular-like Solids in general.
IF the two proper Dimetients aforenamed, of a (right or erect) Cylinder,
exactly adequate to the cubicall, (composing or resolving) Parts of the
Rational Line, shall be obtained according to an exact congruencie or
congruity; The same shall be the proper, respective artificial Line of
Cyhnoricall solidation, according to the Parts: And th^^e will be of them to the
correspondent or congruall* Lines or d^m^nsion according to the whole Measure,
the Reason that is of the Parts to the Whole; which is as the Reason of their
respective Cubes.

THe like reason holds for the Cylindricall Circumference conjunctly with the
Dimetient of altitude: and also for both these in the Cone, in respect of its
basiall Dimetient and Periphery with the Dimetient of altitude, for solid
dimension, and with its Side for superficiary dimension; and also for the
basiall Dimetient of a Cylinder with its Side, in respect of superficial,
dimension: And so the like with these, for all Pyramids and Prismes constituted
upon regular Bases, in respect both of solid and superficiary dimension,
according to the several ways formerly declared and demonstrated in all these
Figures: only respect being had in all these, to the quadrate parts of the
Rational Line for superficiary dimension, as is here to the cubique parts for
solid dimension.

And the like reason will here hold in all these solid Figures, in respect of
weight or gravity in any Metal whatsoever, as for their solid measure,
according to what I showed before in the Sphere, and consequently in the other
re-Bodies, being made of Metal (respect being here had to the parts of the
weight proposed, as in the Theoreme it self, is to the parts of measure, as I
showed before in the like case upon the 2d Theorem) so as that the like
artificial Lines of Measure being extracted for these Figures severally in
reference to weight, according to any Metal, Weight, and Measure proposed;
their gravities will be thereby obtained in the same manner as their solid
magnitudes or measures, according to the several ways formerly declared and
demonstrated for the same.

And now because of the two several Dimetients (or dimensional Lines) here
continually concurring, there occurreth some more variety, then in the two
preceding Theoremes: Therefore I will here give a full demonstration or
illustration of this, in an Arithmetical manner; by which those two (with all
the things necessarily depending on them) as well as this, may be plainly
understood, seeing they be all grounded upon one and the same reason.

THerefore, let the Rational Line (in respect of its properly composing
denominate parts) be R 12. So the Cube thereof, CR, 1728; to which be conceived
or constituted a Cylinder, exactly agreeable for magnitude or dimension, and so,
as that its two foresaid Dimetients, be in exact Congruencie, or Congruity
(such as the Greeks (Euclid and Proclus) call (...), or (...); the Latins, (as
Congruentia, or Congruitas: and so the greek Eucl. Axiom. com. 8. Ram. Geom.
lib. 1. ^l. 9. and Schol. mathemat. lib. 8. prop. 4.
words do generally signify) which therefore we are here next to enquire.
Therefore seeing then that like Solids in general, do mutually hold in a
triplicate or cubique reason of their homologall Terms by E 8. p. 19 and 27;
and more particularly, E 11, p. 33. and E 12. p. 8. and so in special,
Cylinders of their basial Dimetients (or other like Terms) by E 12. p. 12. To
this I assume another Cylinder, whose two Dimetients are already given in the
same kind, with those supposed in the former Cylinder, which (in the first
Numbers from an unit, absolute, making the whole Cylinder absolute in all its
dimensions, according to the more ancient and vulgar Cyclometricall terms (in
respect of the Base) but not the newer) let be (under the general notion of a
Binomiall in relation to the Rational Line taken as before) A=D R 12+2;
whereupon will arise the Cylinder, rational and absolute (according to the said
vulgar Cyclometrical Terms, in respect of the Base, and binomially in reference
to the Cube of the Rational Line taken as before) CR, 1728+428; but according
to the newer, and most approved ^etragonismall Terms, in respect of the base,
and first in the more vulgar or Metian expression noted formerly; for the
performing of this operation after the more usual or vulgar way of Numeration,
(and for that this expression is finite and limited in it self, whereas the
decimal expression runs infinitely) it will be irrational and inabsolute, CR,
1728+427 15/113 (which is by decimal conversion of the fractionall terms, CR,
+427.132743, etc. very nearly agreeing with that which is produced by the
proper decimall Cyclometricall terms, in respect of the base of the Cylinder;
and that both from themselves simply or naturally, and also artificially, from
their ^ogarithme, as shall be showed by and by) then by E. 12. p. 12 a^oresaid,
and also by the reason of ^. 7. p. 19. it holds in a triple or cubicall
reason of the aforesaid Cylindrical Dimetients conjunctly, as the Terms
homologall, thus;

CR 1728+427 15/113. CR 1728:: CR 1728+1016 (viz. CA=D.R 12+2 in CR 1728+427
15/113): CR 1728+472 38416/24353^ or (by their greatest common Divisour, or
number of exact commensuration, 686) 472 56/355 in the least terms of the same
reason (viz. CA=D in CR 1728) which is decimally, CR 1728+472.157746, etc.
whose Root or Side irrational or ineffable, (and binomiall in reference to the
Rational Line, taken as before, and according to a decimall extraction of the
Cubicall Gnomon) R 12+1.0062, etc. is A=D in CR 1728, being the thing first
sought for; or the artificial Line according to the parts of the natural Line
of measure proposed: which from the most admirable invention of the
Logarithmes, is most speedily performed by a simple Composition and Resolution
of Numbers, together with a Trichotomie of the Cubicall Logarithme; the first
or greater Cylinder, being raised from the most exact Cyclometricall
Logarithme, (in respect of the Base) answering to the most exact decimall Terms
aforesaid.

^

Or again, seeing that between two like Solids, there do necessarily intercede
two mean Proportionals, by E. 8, p. 12, and 19; the two Means between these
two Cylinders, will be found (binomially, in relation and comparison to the
foresaid Rational Cube, and according to a decimall enumeration of the cubick
Gnomon) CR 1728+274.15289, etc. and CR 1728+132.03231, etc. most compendiously
and exactly, by Logarithmicall Computation, thus;

CR 1728+427.13256, etc. 3, 3334739884 S CR 1728 3, 2375437381 S Dif. 0,
0959302503 A 1/3 dif. 0, 0319767501 A CR 1728+132.0323, etc. 3, 2695204882
lesser Mean. CR 1728+274.152, etc. 3, 3014972383 greater Mean.

Or the same may be obtained more plainly, (though not so readily) in a
dis-junct manner, at two distinct operations, by the Analogy which holds from
the Cube of one Solid to the Cube of the mean Proportional falling next to it,
as does from that Solid to the other propounded, between which the two mean
Proportionals are required.

Then seeing the greater Mean serves here our present purpose; it follows
according to E 7. p. 19 thus; CR 1728+427.13256, etc. CR 1728+274.15289, etc.::
A=D, R 12+2: A=D, R 12+1.0062, etc. as before: which appears plainly and
briefly, by Logarithmicall or artificial Numeration, thus;

CR 1728+427.13256, etc. 3, 3334739884 S CR 1728+274.15289, etc. 3, 3014972383
A A=D, R 12+2 1, 1461280357 A Sum. 4.4476252740 A=D, R 12+1.0262, etc. 1,
1141512856. Dif.

Agreeing exactly with the first Logarithmicall operation.

Or again, the said A=D in CR 1728 required; found more briefly yet, after this
manner.

CR 1728+427.13256, etc. 3, 3334739884 S CR 1728 3, 2375437381 S Dif. 0,
0959302503 1/3 dif. 0, 0319767501 S A=D, R 12+2 given, 1, 1461280357 S A=D, R
12+1.00622, etc. inquired. 1, 1141512856 Dif.

Which being found out these three several ways; it follows lastly,
according to the Consectarie of the third Theoreme, in this simple Analogy. R
12: R 1:: A=D, R 12+1.0062, etc. A=D, R 1+.0838, etc.

Which last found Number, is for the said congruall Dimetients of a Cylinder,
according to the unity of measure; and so for the artificial (or second
Rational) Line according to the whole entire natural (or prime Rational) Line
in general.

And what manner of working is used here, for the investigation of this
artificial Line in the Cylinder; the same is to be used for the like in the
Cone: and which (though needless) I will here further illustrate in the same.

Therefore, suppose here the foresaid Rational Line (taken in its composing,
denominate parts) R 12. and to its Cube, C R 1728, a (right, or Isoskelan) Cone
exactly adequate (as the Cylinder before) having ^ts two like proper
Dimetient-lines exactly congruall (as those of the Cylinder) in the
investigation or inquisition whereof conjunctly, consists the first operation.
Therefore seeing then, that as Cylinders (and other like Solids) so Gones, are
respectively one to another, in a triple or cubicall Proportion of their
Basiall Dimetients (or other correspondent Terms of dimension) by E 12. p. 12
aforesaid: To this be supposed another like Cone, of given or known Dimetients,
and exactly congruall, as the former; which let he the same with those of the
foregoing Cylinder, included in the Binomie, A= D, R 12+2; whereupon this Cone
will be subtriple that Cylinder, viz. according to the vulgar Numeration, from
the Metian Cyclometricall-Terms, as to the composition of the Base (under the
common acception of an Apotome, in reference to the foregoing Rational Cube)
irrational or unabsolute, C R 1728-1009 211/339 (which is by decimall
conversion of the ^raction-part, 1728-1009.622418, etc. and which very nearly
agrees with that which is produced by the most exact (decimall) Cyclometrical
terms in regard of the Base, and that both naturally or simply from
themselves, and also artificially from their correspondent Logarithme; being C
R 1728-1009.622480. as will appear in the Logarithmicall operation following)
Then by E 12. p. 12, and also by the reason of E 7. p. 19 before cited, it
holds in a triplicate or cubique reason of the aforesaid Conicall Dimetients
conjunctly, as the Terms homologall, thus;

C R 1728-1009 211/339: C R 1728:: C R 1728+1016 (viz C A=D, R 12+2 in C R
1728-1009 211/339):C R 1728+4872 115248/24353^; or rather in the least
homologall fractional terms (by their greatest common Measure, or Number of
exact Symmetrie, 686) C R 1728+4872 16^/35^, viz. C A= D in C R 1728; which by
decimall di^umeration, is C R 1728+4872.473239, etc. whose Root or side
cubicall, and irrational or inexplicable, is (binomially in reference to the
foresaid Rational Line, and according to a decimall eradication, or resolution
of the cubique Gnomon, R 12+6.7723, etc. for A= D in C R 1728, being the thing
first inqu^red; or the artificial Line of measure, according to the parts of
the natural Line proposed: And which may most easily and readily be obtained by
Logarithmicall or artificial Numeration, by a simple Composition and
Resolution, or Prosthaphereticall suppu^ation only; and that the several ways
which I showed before in the Cylinder; whereas the working out of these things
by the natural Numbers (or the vulgar way of Numbering) is most laborious, and
intricate, by reason of the many large and tedious Multiplications, Divisions,
and Radical extractions, both quadrate and cubique, arising from; which
notwithstanding I have also done both in this of the Cone, and that of the
Cylinder, and likewise in other Figures, where the same might be conveniently
performed after this manner, as in the Circle and Sphere, for the finding out
of their respective artificial Lines of Mensuration before set forth.

But now to the operation of our present question in the Cone, by the
artificial or Logarithmicall Logistique; according to a cubicall proportion of
the aforesaid homologall Terms, thus;

^

Which differs from the number found by the natural operation, in the
decimall fraction, but very little, that giving it.7723 etc. this.7582 etc.
which breeds no sensible difference in the Conclusion of the work; but
however the number produced by the Logarithmicall operation is the truest; the
second assumed Cone (though the first in place here) being produced from the
exactest Cyclometricall Logarithme, as to the composition of its Base, upon
which it is raised and constituted.

Or again secondly, by finding out the two Mean Proprotionals between these
two Cones, which is most speedily and accuratly performed also by virtue of the
Logarithmes, as before in the Cylinder; and so they will be found (under the
two common Apotomies, in reference to the Rational Cube, and according to a
decimall Analysis of the cubicall Gnomon) C R 1728-765.465285 etc. for the
lesser Mean; and 1728-438.3256268 etc. for the greater Mean, thus,

^

Or the same may be found more disjunctly, according to the Analogy before
declared in the Cylinder, for the finding of the two Means; the reason being
the same here.

Now the lesser Mean serving here our purpose; it follows thence
Analogically thus: C R 1728-1009, etc.: C R 1728-765.465, etc.:: A= D in C R
1728-1009, etc. viz. R 12+2: A= D in C R 1728, viz. R 12+6.7582, etc. as
before; as appears briefly and plainly, by this subsequent Logarithmeticall
Calculation.

^

Exactly agreeing with the first Logarithmicall operation.

Or again thirdly and lastly, the same Dimetients in the Cone, C R 1728, found
out conjunctly and congrually, most briefly of all, thus,

C R 1728-1009.6224 etc. 2,8563527 S C R 1728-3,2375437 S Dif. 0,3811910 1/3
0,1270637 A A=D, R 12+2 given 1,1461280 A A=D, R 12+6.7852, inquired 1,2731917.
aggreg.
Which being had these several ways; it follows lastly thereupon, according
to the reason of the Consectary of the foregoing Theor^me, by way of Analogy,
in these Terms; viz,

R 12: R 1:: A=D, R 13+6.7852 etc: A= D, R 1+.56318 etc. Or R 12: R 12+6.7852
etc.:: R 1: R 1+.5632 fere. Which last found Number is for A=D in the Cone
answering to C R 1; and so for our artificial Line of rectangle
parallelepipedation (according to an exact quadrate Base) or parallelepipedall
consolidation of a Cone desired, in reference to the whole entire natural Line
of measure in general.

And after the same manner may be found cut the like artificial Lines for the
consolidation of a Cone, and Cylinder, by their basiall Peripheries and
altitudinary Dimetients together, as has been here done, by their basiall and
altitudinary dimetients together: (which basiall Dimetient and Periphery do
continue the same throughout the Cylinder, it being of equal crassitude, but
continually alter in the Cone) And these Lines we showed before in the
practical demonstration and use of the other two Lines of solidation
pertaining to these two Bodies, to be for the Cylinder, of the Rational Line,
2+.3266 etc. and for the Cone 3+.3531 etc. and these by the natural way of
working, from the Metian Cyclometricall terms, in respect of the Base of the
Cylinder and Cone: and by the artificial or Logarithmeticall way, I find the
same to be for the Cylinder 2+.32489 etc. (very little differing from the
other) and for the Cone, exactly agreeing with the former: And therefore I
shall not need (I conceive) to make any more ado about the demonstration
hereof: And the same way holds for the extraction of the like artificial
Lines for the Superficial dimension of the Cylinder and Cone, and also for the
dimension both solid and superficial of all regular-based Pyramids and Prisms:
And for all these Figures, not only in respect of solid and superficial
measure, but also of gravity or weight, according to any Metal proposed; as I
have noted before upon the 3d. Theorme.

And all these things, together with the like in the other Figures,
beforementioned, may be yet more readily obtained, and that according to our
general ground and reason of this artificial Dimension (or of our artificial
metricall Lines) which was formerly said to consist in unity alone. For as in
our particular, partial, or special Reason thereof, every particular Measure
propounded (as the prime or natural Rational Line) being considered according
to its Parts, (composing or constituting, or otherwise dividing) every
particular kind of Figure, or figurate Magnitude, measurable in this way, was
consequently said to be considered in the first or second Power of the same (as
in the powers of Number) according to the nature and kind of the Dimension; for
the producing of the artificial Lines, (according to the three foregoing
Theoremes) So here in our general Reason, or Reason of the Whole, or of Unity;
every Measure being considered in it self simply and absolutely, (as was
formerly declared) every such figurate Magnitude (as aforesaid) is to be
considered accordingly, in the like Powers of Unity (as of the whole entire
Measure in general) according to the nature of the Dimension. And so again, as
in the performance of these Dimensions, by the natural Measure proposed (or
the prime Rational Line in general) in an Arithmeticall manner, by way of
Proportion (according as has been showed in the several dimensions
beforegoing, among the dimensionall Proportions) for the more immediate
producing of the sides of the Squares and Cubes, etc. equal to the Figures
proposed to be measured, and which are immediately given by our artificial
Lines of measure; we begin with Unity simple, and proceed from that to Number
simple or linear, being some Root of a Figurate Number superficial or solid;
and so to the figurate Number it self; as from some dimensional line of a
Figure (by which the same is proposed to be measured in a quadratary or
cubatory manner, according to the nature of the Dimension; or by which the side
of the equal Quadrat or Cube of the Figure is to be produced, either naturally
in an arithmetical analogicall manner, as aforesaid; or artificially, by a Line
of measure convenient for the purpose) to the side of the equal Quadrator Cube;
and so come to the Content of the Figure it self? Or we come to the same more
immediately, and also most naturally and properly; proceeding from Unity taken
in the power thereof, prime or second, (according to the nature of the
dimension propounded) to Number figurate, and then from that to the
correspondent Root thereof; as from some dimensional Line of a Figure, in the
aforesaid powers thereof, to the Figure it self; and then from that to the side
of the equal Quadrat or Cube. So in this (for the immediate producing of the
artificial Lines) we proceed from Unity figurate in the first or second power
thereof, according to the nature of the Dimension, to a Number figurate or
potentiall, accordingly, and from that to the correspondent Root thereof; as
from every kind of Figurate Magnitude in general, falling under our artificial
Dimension, to the like powers of some one of its dimensional lines by which it
is proposed to be thus measured (or squared and cubed, or otherwise
artificially measured, according to the nature and kind of the Magnitude
propounded, and of the Dimension it self) and so from thence to the said
dimensionall line it self of the Figure, for the artificial Line of measure
required: which as in all exactly ordinate or regular Figures, it is but one
such line simply; so in all regular like-Figures it is of two together
according as we have lately showed. And so we might hereupon raise a 4th. and
general Theoreme, if it were needful; but that which I have already said
concerning the same, is very sufficient.

And what has bin here spoken for solid Figures, in reference to their solid
measure, is to be understood in the same accordingly, for gravity or weight
(according to any Metal, or other like ponderous matter proposed) For as
before, according to our particular or special reason, every Integer of weight
whatsoever proposed, was said to be considered in its parts taken simply in
number; and so every kind of metalline, or other like ponderous (regular and
regular-like) Body, was accordingly to be considered in the same, as in the
like parts of Unity: So here the Integer of weight propounded, is to be
considered simply absolutely and entirely, as in the nature and reason of unity
it self; and so every kind of metalline (or other like ponderous) regular and
regular-like body, is to be considered accordingly, for the producing of the
artificial Lines of measure therefrom, for the speedy discovering of the
gravity or ponderosity of any such Body proposed, in any magnitude whatsoever.

PART III. Containing that kind of Dimension, or metricall practice, which is
commonly called, the Gauging of Vessels; after a most artificial, exact, and
expeditionall manner.
SECT. I. Concerning the measuring or gauging of Vessels, in general.
ANd what has be^^ here done for the solid Dimension of a Cylinder (or the
dimension of a solid Cylinder) by artificial Lines found out for the same,
according to any Measure appointed: the like may be done for the liquid
dimension of a concave Cylinder (or Cylindricall Vessel) for the more speedy
finding out of the liquid Content, according to any Liquour and Measure given.
As our Vessels for Wine and Ale, or Beer (which two, most commonly come to be
measured) and other liquid things, which though they be not absolute Cylinders
in themselves, yet may be (and commonly are) conceived or supposed as
Cylinders, (being reduceable by Art thereunto) for the better measuring of the
same, by finding out and taking the Mean between the Diameter at the Head, and
the Bung of the Vessel (or otherwise the Mean between those two Circles) and
so obtaining the liquid Content thereof; which is commonly called Gauging of
Vessels; the Measure by which these Vessels are thus valued or estimated,
being usually a Gallon, and which is the greatest of our liquid Measures, and
but the beginning, as it were, of Vessell-Measure; but in Wine, and Ale or
Beer, holds not one and the same; but differs very sensibly, as is
commonly known: And therefore we will next briefly show the measuring or
gauging of these Cylindricall Vessels (or Spheroidall, as some will have it,
this kind of Vessel being more commonly taken for a Sphaeroides, having the two
ends equally cut off; though for mine own part, I conceive this kind of Vessel
may more properly be termed a Cylindroides, by the same reason that a
Sphaeroides and Conoides are so called; this having the same similitude or
resemblance to an exact Cylinder, that those have to an exact Sphere and Cone)
by Lines of measure peculiarly appropriated and applied to them (as we did
before in the Cylinder in general for solid measure) according to the different
kind and quality of the Liquour, and so the different quantity or magnitude of
the liquid Measure given, in relation to solid Measure in inches.

SECT. II. Setting forth the Quantities of the Wine and Ale-gallons, in
reference to the gauging of Vessels.
IT is generally holden by Artists about the City of London, that a Wine-Gallon
contains in its concave Capacity, 231 cubicall or solid inches, or is
insensibly differing therefrom: But for the Ale or Beer-Gallon, I find the
same to be as generally controverted among them. Mr. William Oughtred, a
reverend Divine, and most eminent Mathematician, before-named, after some
experiments made by him to find out the solid content of this Gallon in inches,
besides the experiments of some others which came to his sight, finding some
difficulty therein, in regard both of the irregularity which he observed to be
usually in the several Standard-Gallons which he met with, and also their
disagreement one from another in their Contents, as himself confesses and
declares in his foresaid book of the Circles of Proportion, Part 1. chap. 9.
looks back there to the first ground and principle of our English Measuring
from Barley-corns: and so at length he comes to a rational conjecture of the
Ale-gallon (and that very neatly, and pretty nearly also, as I shall straightway
show) in cubique inches, according to the number of the square-parts or Feet in
the common Statute-Pertch or Pole, viz. 272 1/4, as you may see in the place
forecited.

But Mr. John Reynolds aforenamed also, (who seems to have been as
industrious in this, as in many other mathematical experiments) will have this
Gallon to contain 288 3/4 cubique inches; holding that the Wine-gallon (which
he strongly affirms to be 231 inches) is to the Ale-gallon in such proportion
precisely, as 4 to 5; or rather for the reduction of Wine-measure to
Ale-measure, as 5 to 4; which is according to Mr. John Goodwyn long ago, in
his little Tract entitled, A Table of gauging, published above 50 years since,
and dedicated to the then Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London:
wherein he showing how to reduce Wine-measure into Ale-measure, and contra;
says, that 5 gallons of wine-measure make but 4 gallons of Ale-measure: with
which very nearly agrees the opinion (not certain experiment perhaps) of some
others, who will This Mr. Goodwyn was Master in the Mathematics to Mr.
Reynolds, as himself has told me.
make this Gallon to contain just 288 inches upon this ground, that a cube-Foot
should hold in its concave capacity just 6 Alegallons, and so consequently one
ale-gallon must contain just 288 inches, which that learned gentleman Mr. Edm.
Wingate, a Barrester of Grayes-Inne (a man eminent for his mathematical
abilities) first declared to me by word of mouth, and soon after I found the
same noted in his book of the use of his Rule of Proportion, chap. 10. And
these two jump so nearly together, as if one were borrowed from the other: but
I declaring this to Mr. Reynolds at my first seeing of him, he said that he had
not observed this thing.

Now as for Mr. Oughtred's Ale-gallon of 272 1/4 inches, the said Mr. Reynolds
indeed allows of such a Gallonmeasure, but not for any liquid thing, but for
dry things, as Corn, Coals, Salt, and other dry things measurable by this
kind of Measure; and so calls it the dry Gallonmeasure: And thereupon he will
have to be 3 several Gallons (or other like Measures) one for Wines, (which
also serves for oiles, strong water and the like) Another for Ale and Beer,
and a third for Corn, Coals, and the like; and this he makes lesser then the
Ale-measure, whereas surely it should rather be greater, if there be any
difference at all between them: And these three several Gallonmeasures, he
compares together, or differenceth by these three Numbers, viz. 28, 33, 35. as
to show their proportions one to another: viz. the Wine-Gallon (231) to the dry
Gallon-measure (272.25) as 28 to 33. which is so in the least terms, rational
or absolute; but otherwise in the least proportional terms, irrational or
unabsolute, and finite or limited, I find them to be as 7 to 8.25. And the said
Wine-Gallon to his Ale-Gallon (288.75) as 28 to 35, which in the least
rational terms, is indeed as 4 to 5; but otherwise in the least terms
irrational (but finite or limited) I find them to be as 1. to 1.25. and which
again is integrally rational, 100 to 125: And the dry-Measure to the
Ale-measure, as 33 to 35, which cannot be abbreviated in terms rational.

And surely, evil Custom seems to have brought up three such distinct
measures (and which the foresaid Mr. Wingate has also expressed to me) For at
the Guild Hall in London, where is generally holden to be the true Standard for
these Measures, and so from which all others of the like kind throughout the
Kingdom, are usually derived, there are but two such distinct Measures only
(as we have been there informed for a certain truth) viz. one for Wines (and so
for strong water, oiles, and the like) and the other for Ale, Beer, and dry
things, as Corn, Coals, Salt, and the like; which latter is commonly called
the Winchester Measure, and from this are taken the bigger dry Measures, as
the half-Peck and Peck, and so on to the Bushel, which is the greatest of our
dry Measures: Which said Standard-Measures at the Guild Hall, the foresaid Mr.
Reynolds confessed to me (going to him on purpose to receive some satisfaction
from him about the Wine and Ale or Beer-measures (which was in June 1646, and
then he gave me in writing under his hand, the solid content of the Ale-gallon
to be 288 3/4 inches, and so its Proportion to the Wine-gallon, to be exactly
as 5 to 4 (or for the reduction of Ale-measure to wine-measure, as 4 to 5) that
he had never made any trial of them, (neither could I find that any other had,
or if they had, it was surely to small purpose) but only of those Measures in
the Tower of London (which he pleads for to be the most ancient and true
standard Measures) and at Cowpers-Hall, and some other such places, which seem
to be but some particular Customary measures, differing from the generally
received Standard-measures at the Guild Hall.

And therefore to be fully satisfied in this point, concerning the true Wine,
and Ale or Beer Measures, according to the common Standards, (and more
especially about the Ale or Beer-measure, finding such a diversity of opinions
concerning the same, and in so vast a difference, as that between Mr.
Oughtred's and Mr. Reynold's Ale-gallon, being 16 1/2 cube-inches) My self and
one Mr. Baptist Sutton, (a man well known in the City among artists) did agree
to go together to the Guild Hall, where he was well acquainted with the keeper
of the Standard-measures and Weights, who otherwise I found to be very nice and
scrupulous in showing of them; and for our further satisfaction herein, we made
known our intention to the foresaid Mr. Wingate, who much approved of the same,
expressing his desire also of it: And so August 9th. 1645; we repaired together
to the Guild Hall, carrying along with us two large square glasse-vials, which
we first weighed in a Goldsmiths Balance by Troy-weights, (as being the best)
which were supoosed to be exact enough; and afterward filling the two
brasse-standard-Gallons for Wine, and Ale or Beer, with fair water from the
Cisterne, and that with all possible preciseness, we powered forth the same
with the like accuratenesse, into the said two glass vials, and then weighed
the Glasses with the water in them by the same weights: and so comparing the
weight of each Glass alone, with the weight of the glass and water together,
we found the Wine-Gallon of water to weigh 117 ^/4 ounces-Troy, and the
Ale-gallon of water 140 9/16 ounces, (which last, according to the common
division of the Ounce-troy by penny-weights, is 140 ounces, 11 penny-weights,
and a quarter) which do hold in proportion (from the lesser to the greater) as
10000 11937, which comes very near, as 5 to 6. Then seeing that Weight and solid
measure do hold in proportion one to another, so as that one may be deduced
from the other, as I have showed before; if we compare these two Gallon-weights
of water, with several experiments made by my self, and Mr. Reynolds,
severally (and conferred together) for the finding out of the true weight of
water in relation to its solid measure in inches, (or for the comparing of its
gravity and magnitude together, which thing is most admirable and excellent
use, as I shall show more afterward) we shall thereby discover the solid
capacity of the said two Gallon-vessels in inch-measure; which is the very
groundwork of Gauging.

Now as to the foresaid experiments; the said, Mr. Reynolds did first (amongst
other things to this purpose) cause a Vessel to be made of Wood, by an exact
Mr. John Thomps^^ in Hosiar Lane.
Workman, in the form of an oblong rectangle Parallelepipedum, (or long Cube
as some term it, though improperly, as they call an oblong rectangle
Parallelogram a long Square) whose Base was 4 1/2 inches square, and the
height, depth, or length, (which you will) 14 inches, and so the solid capacity
thereof, 283 1/2 inches; and which was closed up at both the ends or bases,
saving that in the middle of one end, was made an hole for the pouring in of
water, and which was no bigger, then that he might guess in the filling
thereof to a drop or two of water, more or less: which Vessel therefore being
precisely filled with fair settled Rainwater (as being the fittest, as I shall
show afterward) and then as precisely weighed by Troyweights, he found the
water thereof alone to weigh 12 li. and 5 1/4 oun. or 149 1/4 ounces troy. And
he not being contented with this own experiment, he caused such another Vessel
to be made, every way like and equal in its dimensions with the former, and
that by the same Workman; which he filling with the like water, found it to
agree in weight exactly with the former. But yet he not resting fully satisfied
with these two experiments, he procured such another Vessel to be made, by
another Workman, of the very same Dimensions with the former; which he filling
with the like water as aforesaid, found the weight of the said water alone to
be 12 li. and very near 6 oun. Troy, (or 12 1/2 pounds-Troy fere) exceeding the
former weight about 3/4 of an ounce, and which he conceived to be the truer,
(notwithstanding the exact agreement between the two former experiments) by
comparing these experiments with some other of the like kind, which had been
made before by himself, or some other body; And this difference of weight
seems to proceed chiefly from some difference of measure in the Inch, by
which the two first Vessels, and the last were made, being done by two several
Workmen. And therefore (considering the difficulty in a work of this nature, in
respect of the nicety and curiosity of the experiment) he comparing these with
some observations which I had then made by the bye, to this purpose; we
concluded together at length, that the nearest and indifferentest weight of the
water exactly filling up the foresaid Vessel of 283 1/2 cubick or solid inches,
would be 12 li. and 5 1/2 oun. Troy (or 149 1/2 ounces) and this to stand good.

And then after this, I got an exact cubical Vessel to be made of thoroughly
seasoned wood, with all the accuratnesse and preciseness that could be, being
6 inches the inside, (or the base thereof exactly 6 inches square) and so the
whole Cube in its concave capacity, exactly 216 inches; and which then, to keep
it from sucking in water in any part, or any water to soak into it, was well
primed all within, with a thin oile-colour (yet of a sufficient body) having
afterward a Cover put on it, with a little hole in the middle thereof, about
3/4 of an inch wide, as the foresaid Vessels of Mr. Reynolds had: And which
cubicall Vessel I then filling with all the exactness and preciseness that
might be, with fair settled Rainwater, at Gold-smiths-Hall; and so having the
same as exactly weighed by the Standard Troy-weights; I found the weight of the
water alone (deducting the weight of the empty Vessel it self first of all
had, from the weight of the vessel and water together) to be upon the very
point of 114 ounces, or 9 li. and 1/2. without any considerable difference
therefrom: and thus I found it to be, at two several trials. Now according to
the two first observations of Mr. Reynolds, aforesaid; 216 inches of the
forenamed water, should weigh 113.7 oun. Troy, viz. 113 oun. and 14 p. w. which
comes short of our observation, by about a quarter of an ounce; and according
to his last observation the same should weigh 114.3 oun. fere, viz. 114 ounces,
and near upon 6 p. w. which exceeds the weight found by us, just so much as the
other wants of the same; So that the weight of this cubical body of water
produced by our experiment, falls directly in the middle between the several
weights of the same deduced from his foresaid experiments, upon one and the
same kind of vessel. And according to this our most exact observation; the
weight of 283.5 cubick or solid inches of the foresaid water, (being the
content of each of Mr. Reynolds his th^^e foresaid vessels) will be 149.625
ounces troy exactly, which is 149 oun. 12p. w. and an half. And this is the
very arithmetical Mean beween his two first observations, agreeing one with
another, being 149.25 oun. and his last, being 150 oun.

And so now according to this experimental Conclusion of mine own; I shall
proceed exactly in the subsequent operations upon the Wine and Ale-Gallons: For
so the weights of the two several Gallons of water aforesaid, being compared
severally with this experiment, the solid capacity of the Wine-gallon, will be
found 223.105 inches, and of the Ale or Beer-gallon, 266.329 inches.

But I not resting fully satisfied with this one experiment in the said
standard-Gallons (though we conceived the same to be performed with as much
care and diligence as might be) and so desirous to try the same thing over
again, to see how nearly two several trials would agree to confirm the matter;
knowing that two testimonies upon any thing are much better then one; I again
moved the said M. W^^gate and Mr. Sutton (whom I still desired as witnesses to
what was done) for another trial of this thing, and that diverse times; but
could not accomplish my desires herein, til about two years after: And so in
July 1647, I and Mr. Sutton went together again 2d. experiment upon the wine
and ale-gallons.
to the Guild Hall (Mr. Wingate having promised to go along with us, but was
hindered by other occasions) carrying along with us two other great glasse-Vials
like the former, into which first pouring the foresaid Standard-gallons of
water exactly filled, and then weighing the said Glasses with the water in them
severally, by the great standard-Ballance there, with Avoirdupois-weights, and
afterward the empty Glasses severally (being well dried first) by the same
weights, and so comparing them together as before; we found the weight of the
Wine-gallon of water alone, to be 8 li. 1 oun. 3 dr. avoirdupois (or 129 3/16
ounces avoirdupois) and of the Ale-gallon of water, to be 9 li. 9 oun. 12 dr.
(or 153 3/4 ounces avoirdupois) which are in Troy-weight (according to the most
exact Proportions of the Avoirdupois weight to the Troyweight before noted,
viz. 14 to 17. and 56 to 51) 9 li. 9 oun. and 5.223 dr. or 13 p. w (which is
117.65 oun. troy) the Wine-gallon; wanting of the first observation or
experiment (viz. 9li. and 9.75 oun. or 117.75 oun.) only 0.1 oun. troy, which
is 2 p. w. or 4/5 of a dram-troy, which difference is of no moment. And for the
Ale-gallon, 11li. 8 oun. and 5/28 of a dram-troy, or 25/56 of a p. w, viz. 10
5/7 gr. (which is 140 5/224 oun. or 140.0223 oun. troy) wanting also of the
first experiment (viz. 11li. 8 oun. and 11 1/4 p. w. or 4 1/2 dr. or 140 9/16
oun. or 140.5625 oun. troy, (about half an ounce-troy, and which difference is
of small moment in the matter of gauging; but yet this latter experiment is the
truer, as more nearly agreeing with the other experiments and observations
following.

Now these two Gallons of water in this second experiment, are in proportion
(from the lesser to the greater) as 100000 to 119013, which comes near the
former proportion: And being compared with the foresaid experimental
Conclusion made by me, (for the weight of water in reference to solid
inch-measure) will give the solid content of the Wine-gallon, 222.9 inches, and
of the Ale-gallon, 265.3 inches; which wants of the former solid measure in
the Wine-gallon, not fully 1/5 of an inch, and in the Alegallon, about 1 inch.
Whith difference between these two experiments, especially in the Ale-gallon,
though in the matter of Gauging, the same can breed no sensible error or
difference, as will afterward plainly appear, when we come to show our
gauging-Lines: yet for my further and fuller satisfaction in this nice and
curious piece of art, so much handled and controverted by Artists, as I said
before; and that I might come as near the matter as possibly might be; I urged
again for another trial: And thereupon in November next following, I again 3d.
experiment upon the Wine and Ale-gallons.
repaired to the Guildhall, carrying ^^^h me two other large glasse-vials,
(^iffering much in form from the other before used, though indeed this be
nothing material to the purpose,) which I first caused to be weighed severally
by the standard- avoirdupois weights there; and then (with the help of the
keeper of the Standards) filled both the standard-Gallons with fair water from
the Cistern, with all the accuratnesse that might be, as before; and which with
the like accuratenesse being poured out into the said two Glasses: I caused the
Glasses with the water in them, to be weighed severally by the same weights and
Balance, and that as exactly as might be, and thereupon found (by the
Comparison aforesaid) the Wine-Gallon of water to weigh alone, 8li. 1 oun. 11
dr. avoirdupois (or 129 11/16 oun. avoirdup.) and the Ale-gallon of water, to
weigh 9li. 9 oun. 15 dr. avoirdupois, (or 153 15/16 ounces) which do exceed the
second observation, in the weight of the wine-Gallon 8 dr. or half an ounce
avoirdupois, and in the weight of the Ale-gallon, only 3 dr. or 3/16 of an
ounce avoirdup. And these two last Gallon-weights of water, do hold in
proportion (from the less to the greater) as 100000 to 118699 fere, which is
very little less then the former proportions. And these also being collated
with our foresaid experiment of 216 cube-inches of water, to weigh 114 ountroy
(or 9li. and an half) which is in Avoirdupois-weight according to the nearest
proportions of the Troy-weight to the Avoirdupois, before declared and
demonstrated, 125 9/51 oun. (or 7 14/17 li.) do give the solid capacity of the
Wine-Gallon, 223.784 inches, and of the Ale-gallon 265.629 inches; which do
exceed the first experimental observation, in the Wine-gallon, by 0.679 inch
only; and the second, by 0.86 inch; and does want of the first observation in
the Ale-gallon, only 0.7 inch; and exceeds the second, by 0.3 inch only; which
last is very little.

But I being desirous to be further satisfied in the weight of these two last
Gallons of water: So soon as I had performed the same at the Guild Hall by the
Avoirdupoiz weights there; I caused the said Glasse-Vials with the Gallons of
water in them, to be streightway carried unto Gold-smiths-Hall, to be tried by
the great Standard-Ballance of Troy-weight there (as being the most exact kind
of weight) where first weighing each Glass together with its water, and
afterward each Glass alone (being thoroughly dry) I found (by comparing the
one with the other as before) the weight of the Wine-gallon of water alone, to
be 118 1/16 oun. troy, viz. 118 oun. and 1/2 dr. or 1 1/4 p. w. (which make
9li. 10 oun. 0.5 dr. or 1.25 p. w.) and the weight of the Ale-gallon of water
alone, to be 140 oun. and 4 1/4 p. w. or 1.7 dr. (which is 11li. 8 oun. and
4.25 p. w. or 1.7 dr. Troy) And these two Gallon-weights do hold in proportion
(from the less to the greater) as 100000 to 118761, which exceeds that which
was produced by the avoirdupois-weight, (viz. 118699 fere) by 62 parts of
100000. And being conferted with our foresaid experiment for finding the
proportion between the ponderall and dimensionall quantity of water, or its
gravity and magnitude; will give the solid content of the Wine-gallon, 223.697
inches, and of the Ale or Beergallon, 265.666 inches: which exceeds the first
experiment, in the wine-gallon, by 0.59 inch; and the second by 0.776 inch; and
wants of the third experiment in the same, from the avoirdupois-weight by the
balance, only 0.087 inch. And it wants of the first observation in the
Ale-gallon, 0.66. inch; and exceeds the second by 0.36 inch only; and this
third by avoirdupois-weight from the balance, only by 0.04 inch fere, which is
as much as nothing.

And here having a fit occasion and opportunity, I shall (by way of Digression)
The foresaid several Proportions between the Troy and Avoirdupois Weights,
compared again together, and examined by the Balance upon another Experiment.
speak somewhat more concerning the Proportions between the Troy and Avoirdupois
weights, for a further confirmation and verification of what was said forme^ly,
and also demonstrated upon a Cannon-bullet concerning the same: And therefore
the weight of these two last Gallons of water, taken first by
Avoirdupois-weight at the Guild Hall, (viz. 8li. 1 oun. 11 dr. or 129 11/16
oun. the Wi^e-gallon, and 9li. 9 oun. 15 dr. or 153 15/16 oun. the Ale-gallon)
being converted into Troy-weight, and that first, by the more common terms of
proportion, viz. 60 to 73 for pound-weight, or 80 to 73 for ounce-weight, will
give the Wine-gallon, 9li. 10 oun. 6 p. w. and 19.125 grains exactly, or 118
oun. 6 p. w. and 19.125 gr. or 118 oun. 2 dr. and 43.125 gr. troy: and the
Ale-gallon, 11li. 8 oun. 9 p. w. 8.62 gr. or 140 ounces, 9 p. w. 8.62 gr. or
1^0 oun. 3 dr. and 44.62 gr. troy, which do exceed the true weight taken from
the Balance at Goldsmiths-hall, by 5 p. w. and 13.125 gr. or 2 dr. and 13.125
gr. in the Wine-gallon, and by 5 p. w. and 2.62 gr. or 2 dr. and 2.62 gr. in
the Ale-gallon. And then by the other terms of proportion, viz. 14 to 17 for
librall weight, or 56 to 51, for unciall-weight, the Wine-gallon will be 9li. 10
oun. 2 p. w. and 3.96 gr. or 118 oun. 2 p. w. and 3.96 gr. or 118 oun. 0.5 dr.
and 21.96 gr. troy: and the Ale-gallon, 11li. 8 oun. 3 p. w. and 20.7 gr. or
140 oun. 3 p. w. and 20.7 gr. or 140 oun. 1 dr. and 32.7 gr. troy; which differ
from the true weight of the Balance, (by way of excess) in the Wine-gallon,
but 21.96 gr. or 22 gr. fere; and (by way of defect) in the Ale-gallon, only
about 9 gr. which differences are very inconsiderable, the greatest of them not
amounting to a penny-weight, whereas the least of the differences produced by
the vulgar proportions, is above a quarter of an ounce-troy. And hereby it is
again most manifest, that these latter Proportions between these two kinds of
weight, are much the truer, and surely the nearest and truest that may be
found, and are therefore generally to be received.

And these our experiments beforegoing for the discovevering of the solid
Contents of the foresaid Wine and Alegallons at the Guild Hall, may be
confirmed by some other experiments which I afterward made upon the same. For
before my second observation of this thing, by the weight of the Gallons of
water, I caused a concave Cube to be made of Brass, of 4 inches the Side
exactly, and so the whole Cube, 64 inches; 4th. experiment upon the Wine and
Alegallon.
into which (being set level) my self, and Mr. Sutton aforenamed, together
pouring out the two Gallons of water in the Glasses which we had from the
Standard-Vessels at the Guildhall, as aforesaid, with all the accuratenesse and
preciseness that might be (at several times) we found first the Winegallon to
fill the Cube three times, and then half the Cube (as ne^rly as we could
possibly measure it) which being computed, do make 224 cube-inches exactly,
for the solid content of the Wine-gallon; And then we found the Alegallon to
fill the Cube 4 times, and moreover to arise to such an height of the said
Cube, (viz. 0.7 inch) as being computed, did make 11.2 cube-inches; all which
together do give 267.2 cube-inches for the solid capacity of the Ale-gallon.
Both which do so nearly agree with the former experiments (especially in the
Wine-gallon) as that this experiment may sufficiently confirm the former; this
being as plain and demonstrative an experiment as ^ay be. And if it had been
performed by a cubicall Vessel so large, as might have received into its
concave capacity each of the Gallons of water wholly at once (which indeed I
afterward wished had been done, but my forementioned Cubicall Vessel of wood
was made long after the trial of this Experiment) then the same might probably
have yet come nearer the truth; for that the often filling of this small Cube,
might cause some small error, which by a more large or capacious Vessel, might
have been avoided, wherein the solid content of each Gallon might have been had
at once, by the height (or depth) of its water; though indeed the difference
between this which we tried, and some of our former experiments (in the
Wine-gallon) is in a manner insensible, and between all of them, in respect of
both Gallons, is altogether inconsiderable. And this experiment by the brass
Cube, I afterward tried again by my self, and found it to differ as much as
nothing from the former. But indeed to have the solid Contents of the Wine and
Ale-gallons so very exactly and precisely by their liquid Contents, as can be
imagined according to the str^ctnesse of Art, is (I may say) impossible,
unless the Standard-Vessels were so narrow-mouthed, as that in the filling
thereof, one might be able to guess at a few drops of water, which in the
Standard Vessels at the Guild Hall (and I think in-all others) cannot be done,
they being so wide at the mouths or tops, as that a spoonful of water more or
less in the filling thereof is hardly discernable, or so much more, as might
breed the difference of half an ounce more or less, in the weight of the
water, and so consequently of one inch more or less, in the solid content;
seeing that one inch cubick or solid of water weighs (as we shall show anon)
half an ounce-troy, at least: And yet in all these several experiments and
observations compared together, the greatest difference of solid measure is but
about one inch and an half, and that in the Ale-gallon: but yet setting aside
the experiment made by the brass Cube, (which is too large;) the greatest
difference in the same will be but one inch solid, which will breed no sensible
error in the matter of gauging, as I, said before. And which may show how very
near the matter we have come, for the discovering of the true Contents of the
common standard-Gallons for Wine and Ale or Beer, and surely as near the truth
as can well be gone.

But yet that there might no likely way be left unatrempted, for the discovery
of this thing, I will add to the former, one experiment more, 5th. exper^iment
in the Ale-gallon alone, by taking it is Dimensions.
being very demonstrative, which I made last of all in the foresaid brass
standard Ale-gallon at the Guild Hall, by taking the proper linear Dimensions
thereof, it being indeed an exact segment of a Cone (or Calathoidall) the
internal or concave superficies from the top to the bottom, being very
straight and smooth, as well as the external or convexe Supe^ficies, and also
exactly circular throughout; only a little shelving or arching at its meeting
or connection with the bottom, and this not precisely plain, but rather a
little hollowish, yet not so much as to make any sensible error in giving the
solid capacity of the Vessel, as will straightway appear, by comparing the same
with the observations before-going, and also one other observation following
after. Which standard-gallon Vessel, as it is some what like in form to one of
those which Mr. Oughtred speaks of in the ^orecited place of his Circles of
Proportion, concerning Gauging (as being showed Circles of Proportion. Part 1
chap. 9. Sect. 4.
unto him, and also the measures thereof first given him, by that great
Antiqua^y Mr. William Twine of Oxford, whom he faith to have undergone great
pains and charge in finding out the true Contents of our English Measures (and
whom I well knew at Oxford, being of the same House with him) So also it comes
very near it in all its dimensions: For by the Diameters of the top and
bottom, and the height of that Vessel which they together measured, (and
which you may see in the forementioned book) they found, that the same would
contain in its concave capacity, 268.85 cubick inches, which exceeds the
measure of our Gallon-Vessel, produced by the experiment of the brass Cube
aforesaid, but little more then one inch and a half; and the measure deduced
from the first experiment by weight, about two inches and an half; and that
which was deduced from the second experiment, by weight, (being the least of
all) by about three inches and an half: But indeed, beside that the sides of
that standard Ale-gallon were a little arching (as Mr. Oughtred says) he
observed diverse other irregularities in the said Vessel, which might well
hinder the discovering of the true Content thereof, by some few inches.

Now the linear dimensions of the Standard Ale-Gallon at the Guild Hall (which
I took as exactly as I could, and I believe insensibly differing from the
truth) I found to exceed those of Mr. Twine's Vessel (taken both by him and
Mr. Oughtred together, as I noted before) in the Diameter of the top, but 0.33
inch; and in the Diameter of the bottom, but 0.1 inch; and to want of that in
the perpendicular height (or the depth) 0.8 inch; by which I find the solid
dimension of this Conicall Vessel (or of this decurtate or detruncate Cone) to
be 265.5 inches, according to a multiple or conjunct composition of the
aggregate of the two Bases, and their mean Proportional (produced most
exactly by Logarithmicall supputation) with a trient of the Altitude, thus,

^

Which comes very near the solid Content of this Vessel produced by all our
former experiments; especially the second and third, from which it differs as
much as nothing; the one of them, giving 265.3 inches, and the other 265.6
inches:

And all these our experiments in the Alegallon, 6th. Experiment in the
Ale-gallon, taken from the half-Peck: and that from the Bushel.
may yet be further confirmed by another observation or experiment being taken
from the half-Peck, which they hold at the Guild Hall, to be equal in Content to
the Ale-gallon, as being taken therefrom (and so I find it to be) and which I
shall deduce from the Bushel, according to the Dimensions thereof, established
by an Act of the Common Council of the City of London, and yearly published by
authority of the Lord Major, which ordains the breadth or wideness of a
Bushel to be 19 inches, and the depth 7 2/2 inches; which being cast up
according to a Cylindrical dimension, will be fonnd to contain in in its concave
capacity, 2126.5 cubick or solid inches, whose 1/8 for the half-Peck, is 265.8
inches, from which the solid Measure of the Ale-gallon, found by most of our
former experiments, does insensibly differ in a manner, especially that of the
third experiment (by weight both avoirdupoiz and Troy, from the balance) which
gave the same, 265.6 inches; or somewhat nearlier, that from Troy-weight, 265.7
fere. And if we shall mediate between that of the first observation, being the
greatest (except that of the brass Cube, which is too large) viz. 266.3
inches, and that of the second, being the least, viz. 265.3 inches, (as is
usually done in such like cases, where several observations or experiments
made upon one and the same thing, do a little differ, and as they for the most
part will, let all the art and industry be used that may be) the Mean between
them, will be just 265.8 inches, for the solid capacity of the Ale-gallon,
exactly agreeing with that of the half-Peck.

And nearly agreing with the foresaid Bushel, I found the Content of a
standard-Bushell of Queen Elizabeth, which I was informed to be in the hands of
the City-Founder, which was made of Brass, in the last year but one of her
reign viz. Anno 1601 having her Inscription or Title about it; and somewhat
resembling a segment of a Cone, it being wider at the top then at the bottom,
whose dimensions there fore I took with all the accuratnesse that might be, and
found the Diameter of the top (or upper base) to be one foot, and 7.5 inches,
or 19.5 inches: the Diameter of the bottom (or lower base) one Foot and 5
inches, or 17 inches: and the depth (or height) 8 inches (or more accuratly,
8.1 inches) which being cast up, according as the Ale-gallon beforegoing; the
solid capacity thereof will be found, 2122.165 inches; thus,

^

Which wants of the London-Bushell, (being 3126.465 inches) 4.3 inches: But
indeed this Bushel was made a little turning or winding outward near the edg or
top thereof, (which was made very sharp or thin) which might give so much more in
the solid content thereof, as to make it equal with the City-bushell; and so I
suppose this Londonbushell was first intended to be made equal with that of
Queen Elizabeth, as nearly as might be; And indeed the true Diameter of the top
(from edge to edge) I found to be 19.6 inches, according to which if the solid
capacity of the Bushel should be computed, the same would be found, 2134
inches, but that is too large: and the other comes nearer the truth: And the
8th. part of this last, for the half-peck, and so for the Ale-gallon, will be
but 266 3/4 inches.

Another measure of an Ale-gallo^, Mr. Oughtred There came into the hands of
the City-Founder, together with the foresaid standard-Bushell of Queen
Elizabeth, a standard A^e-gallon of the same Queen, made of Brass in the very
same Yea ^f her Reign, having also her Epigraph about i^: and which, I went
with an intent chiefly to have measured; but indeed before my coming thither,
it was sold away to a Town in Yorkshire called Whitby: But the same having been
compared with the standard Ale-gallon at the Guild Hall, by the measure of
water; was found to agree there with, without any considerable difference, both
as one of the Founders men, and also the under-keeper of the Standards for the
City, told me, who were present at the trial thereof: which may be a means to
confirm that at the Guild Hall: And these two standard Gallons, as they were
both of a like capacity, so also of a like form.
makes mention of in the place forecited, as being presented to him also by
the foresaid Mr. Twine, it being (as he calls ^t) a Standard-Gallon of Queen
Elizabeth, which the said Mr. Twine had tried by another Vessel made of
brass, in manner of a Parallelepipedum, whose base was exactly six inches
square and the Sides divided into inches, and twentieth parts: into which he
pouring out the said standard-Gallon filled with water, found it to arise un^o
such an height therein (viz. 7.6 inches) as being computed, wouldgive 273.6
cubique inches for the solid content of the said Ale-gallon. And hereabout Mr.
Oughtred conceives might be the true Content of the other Ale-gallon measured
by him and Mr. Twine.

All which experiments and observations aforegoing, (with some others made by
Mr. Oughtred) may sufficiently demonstrate, the true Ale-gallon not to be of so
large a capacity, as to contain 288 cubick inches, and upwards, as Mr.
Reynolds, (and some others) will have it.

As for the discovering of the solid measure of the Standard Wine-Gallon at the
Guild hall, in a geometrical manner, by the Linear dimensions thereof, as
before of the Ale-gallon; the truth is, I attempted not the same, in regard of
the irregularity which I found in that Vessel, by the much arching or curvity
of its Sides (whereby it is much like to that Ale-gallon which Mr. Oughtred and
Mr. Twine thus measured; only this is wider at the bottom then at the top,
whereas that was wider at the top then at the bottom, as the Ale-gallon at the
Guild Hall) which makes it to differ from a segment of an exact Cone, and so
may rather be taken for a ^egment of a Conoid.

But having by our two last experiments (especially the 5th.) most plainly and
manifestly discovered in a geometrical manner, the dimensionall quantity of
the Ale-gallon in inch-measure, as nearly as may be (which two most plain and
demonstrative experiments do not considerably differ, the difference between
them being but.3 of an inch-cubique) and then by the 2d. and 3d. experiments
the ponderall quantity thereof, in respect of the weight of the water exactly
filling the same, (which two experiments also do not considerably differ; the
difference being but 3dr. avoirdupois, as we there showed, or about 1 1/3 dr.
troy, being near 1/6 of an ounce-troy) especially the 3d. experiment (which I
take to be the most exact for this Gallon, in this respect) we may thereby
(collating them together) be able to discover that which was experimented by
me, from my large cubicall Vessel of 216 inches: and also confirm the same;
and so consequently likewise confirm the solid Contents of the Wine and
Ale-gallon, first of all discovered or produced thereby: For the solid measure
of this Ale-gallon, being found most plainly and demonstratively by our two
last observations or experiments, to be very nigh 266 inches: and the weight of
the water exactly contained in it, found most nearly (by the 3d. experiment) to
be (in Troy-weight) 11 li. 8 oun. and near about 4 p. w. or 140.2 ounces: the
weight of the water exactly contained by our foresaid Cubicall Vessel, will be
found thereby (according to geometrical proportionality) 113.86 oun. which
wants of that found by us, only 0.14 oun. which is but about 3. p. w. And so
likewise may the same be very nearly confirmed by the Wine-Gallon, according to
our 4th. and most plain demonstrative experiment for the same (by the brass
concave Cube) by which the solid measure thereof being found 224 inches; and by
the three former experiments (conferred together) the weight of the water
contained exactly in the said Gallon-vessel, very near about 9 li. and 10 oun.
Troy, or 118 oun. the weight of the water exactly contained in the foresaid
large cubicall Vessel of 216 inches, will be found thereby (according to the
foresaid proportionality) very nearly as before, viz. 113.78 oun. which wants
of the true weight found by us, but 0.22 oun. and which is only about 4 p. w.
or 1/5 of an ounce-troy.

Moreover for a further confirmation of this thing, and that very nearly, I
shall produce another experiment, which I made upon the foresaid brasse-Cubicall
Vessel of 64 inches: For so soon as I and Mr. Sutton aforenamed, had measured
out the Standard Wine and Ale-Gallons thereby, as aforesaid; we first weighed
the said concave Cube by a small Balance of his, with Troy-weights, and then
again filled the same with fair water, as precisely as possibly we could; which
we also weighing together, found the additional or differentiall weight (take
it which way you will) to be (as nearly as we could possibly guess) 33.5
ounces, for the water alone; And afterward I being desirous to make a further
and exacter trial of this experiment, I carried this Cube unto
Goldsmiths-hall, where I procured the same to be weighed first alone, by the
exact Standard Troy-weights, with all the accuratnesse that might be; and then
filling the Cube with fair settled water, as precisely as possibly I could, had
the same weighed together, with the like accuratnesse; and so by collating
these two several weights together, found the weight of the 64 inches of water
alone, to be exactly in a manner as before, viz. 33.5 oun. (or but some few
grains over) and this the Assay-master judged to be the nearest weight thereof
that could be given, considering the wideness of the Vessel, to be such, (and
that fully open on one side) as that some few drops of water more or less in
the filling thereof, were not very discernable. Now according to our former
experiments, the weight of this cubicall body of water, will be found, 33.7 oun.
troy; (or rather 33.8 fere) which comes pretty near the other: but indeed this
last being deduced from our experiments made by Vessels of a much greater
capacity (or by a greater quantity of water) must needs be the truest; so that
the other is somewhat wanting of the true weight. And these our experimental
Conclusions upon the weight of water in reference to its solid measure; or the
comparing of its quantity ponderall with its quantity dimensionall, I shall
also afterward as nearly confirm by a manifest experiment made last of all by
me, upon a solid body of a known magnitude in inch-measure, in respect of its
gravity taken both in the air and in the water, and the same compared together.

SECT. III. Containing the practice of Gauging, according to our artificial
way of measuring: together with the natural Dimension (by way of comparison)
for a confirmation of the same.
HAving by the several ways and means before-going, discovered the nearest
quantities of the common standard-Gallons for Wine and Ale or Beer, in solid
inches; and that of the Wine-Gallon, to be at the most but 224 inches, and of
the Ale or Beer-gallon, but 266 (which two are in proportion very nearly as 5
to 6; being as 5 to 5 15/1^) We shall now proceed to the practice of Gauging it
self; or the discovering of the liquid Contents of Vessels for Wine and Ale or
Beer in Gallon-measure; and that in the most easy and speedy manner that may
be, according to our artificial way of measuring, being here, as the solid
dimension of a Cylinder, before declared and demonstrated, (as I have already
noted) by the like artificial Lines of measure: though indeed the reason
thereof cannot be exactly referred to the 3d. Theoreme before-going, which is
for Cylindricall Dimension in general; nor yet to our other, or general
Reason of measure, fully expressed soon after that; according as the prime
Integer of Vessel-measure (a Gallon) is here considered; to wit, in the nature
of a solid (Cylindricall) body, expressed in some certain solid measure,
according to the capacity thereof: whereas else the same being considered
either simply, absolutely, and entirely in it self, as such a liquid Measure,
or in its Parts compounding, etc. (as being by themselves apart taken for other
lesser or inferior liquid Measures) like as the Integer of measure (or of
Weight) in general, was formerly; then will the Reason of this Dimension (as in
reference to the quantities of measure in the artificial gauging-Lines) be the
same with that of Measure (or Weight) in general; especially according to our
first or general acception or consideration thereof; but will exacty agree with
that of weight, in both the respects of Reasons aforesaid. And thus the
quantity of the artificial gauging-Line for Wine-measure (according to the
Gallon of 224 inches) will be 6.58 inches; and for Ale or Beer measure,
(according to the Gallon of 266 inches) 6.97 inches. But yet considering the
loss that happens in Wine by the dregs or lees thereof, and much more in Ale
and Beer, by the frothing and otherwise: therefore we have thought it meet and
convenient, to allow one inch more at least in the measure of the Wine-gallon,
and 4 inches in the Measure of the Ale or Beer-gallon; and so make the
Wine-gallon to be 225 inches, and the Ale-gallon 270 inches; which we conceive
to be the most near and indifferent measures (in a general respect,) for these
two Gallons, that may be: And these two do hold in proportion, exactly as 5 to
6: And in this proportion we might suppose they were first intended,
considering how very near the same, the true Contents thereof do come: And
therefore according to these two measures, we shall proceed in the work of
Gauging. And the length of our artificial gauging-Line serving hereunto, will
be for Winemeasure, 6.59 inches, and for Ale or Beere-measure, 7.00 inches:
which being divided decimally (as all the former Lines) into 10, or rather 100
parts, or more, (and so turned over several times upon a Rod or Rular of a
convenient length) and then the Diameters and lengths of Vessels taken thereby;
their Contents shall be obtained in Gallonmeasure immediately, as the solid
Contents of Cylinders were formerly had, according to any Measure appointed.

But seeing these Vessels are not exactly Cylindricall (as I said at first) but
Cylindroidall (or as others will have them, Spheroidall) and so the Diameter
alters between the middle and the end of them, or the bung-hole, and the
head; Therefore must a way be first had for the finding out of such a mean
Diameter, as may reduce this unequal Body into an absolute Cylinder, or so
near the same as possibly may be; that so the true Contents thereof may be had,
or very near the same: By which mean Diameter, must not here be understood a
Mean either arithmetical or geometrical, but a third sort of Mean differing
from them both: the discovering of which, is the first and main thing in the
practice of Gauging, next after the discovering of the Contents of the Wine and
Ale-gallons in solid inch-measure. And which we shall show, most easily and
speedily how to perform, by this first Rule next ensuing.

RULE I. How to find the mean or equated Diameter of any Vessel.
Augment the difference of the two Diameters, by.7, and add the Product to the
Diameter at the Head: the aggregrate shall be the mean or equated Diameter.

^

But Mr. Oughtred neglecting, and indeed wholly rejecting a mean Diameter,
has regard to the mean Circle (as it were) between that at the Bung, and that
at the Head, being composed of 2/3 of the Circle at the Bung, and 1/3 of the
Circle at the Head, and thereby reduces the Vessel to a Cylinder; and See
Circ. of proport. part. 1. chap. 9.
which two portions of those two Circles, he shows how to find most readily,
by this twofold Analogy, viz.

1. As 1. is to 0.5236: So is the Square of the Diameter at the Bung, to 2/3 of
the Circle at the Bung. 2. As 1. to 0.2618: So the Quadrat of the Diameter at
the Head, to 1/3 of the Circle at the Head.
Or, for the more exactness in working, these Proportions might better be
somewhat extended in the Terms; And so the first of them, will be, as 1. to.
523599 fere: And the second, as 1. to. 261799.

And so accordingly in this our Example, the Square of the Diameter at the
Bung, being 1085.7025; the 2/3 of the Circle at the Bung, will be 568.47, etc:
and the Square of the Diameter at the Head, being 694.8496; the 1/3 of the
Circle at the Head, will be 181.91, etc. and which will also be had, by finding
the whole Circles at the Bung and Head, according to their Diameters: For the
whole Circle at the Bung, will be found, 852.7087, whose 2/3 is 568.4725: and
the whole Circle of the Head, will be found 545.7336, whose 1/3 is 181.9112 as
before: which two portions or sections of these two Circles being added
together, do make, as it were, the mean Circle, between them, 750.3837 which
must stand for the equated Base, as it were, of the Cylindricall Vessel,
supposed to be reduced by this means to an absolute Cylinder: the Diameter of
which Circle therefore, may not unfitly be called the mean or equated Diameter;
and which will be found to differ but very little from ours, it being 30.910
fere, and ours is 30.973, and so the difference only about 0.06 inch, which in
my slender judgment is scarcely considerable: And therefore I see no just cause
why Mr. Oughtred should so much inveigh against Mr. Gunter, for his mean
Diameter, as he does, in the forecited place of his Circles of Proportion:
though I must needs confess this way proposed by Mr. Oughtred, for finding a
mean Circle, is the most ^ationall and demonstrative. And which way of Dolial
Dimension, is (amongst others) laid down as the most sacile, though a little in
another manner, by that great Geometrician, of famous memory. Mr. Henry Briggs,
in his Arithme^ica Logarithmica, (first written and published by him in Latin)
cap. 24. viz. by finding the Circle at the Bung (or of the middle crassitude of
the Vessel, as he calls it) and at the Head, by the Diameters thereof; and so
raising f^o^ them and the height, (or length) of the Vessel, two exact
Cylinders, and then taking the difference between them, whose 2/3 being added
to the lesser Cylinder; or the 1/3 subtracted from the greater; shall give the
solid capacity of the Vessel; as I shall show by and by, among the other
operations of this kind.

Now the arithmeticall Mean between the Diameter at the Bung, and the Head, in
this our example, is 29.655. and the geometrical Mean (or the mean
Proportional) is 29.47, which is less then the other, and that is less then
the aforesaid mean Diameter.

Having thus showed most briefly how to find out the mean or equated Diameter;
I shall next show as briefly how to find out the Content of any Vessel in
Gallons, either of Wine or Ale and Beer, according to the common or natural
measure by Inches, and that by a twofold Aualogisme, in reference to the two
aforesaid Gallon-measures.

RULE II. How to find the Content of any Vessel in Gallons.
As 286.5 fere (if Wine-measure) or 343.8 fere (if Ale or The like Analogisme
for Wine-measure, according to the Gallon of 231 inches, will be by the Number
294: and for Alemeasure, according to the Gallon of 272 1/4 inches, by the
number 346.6. And here from our Gallonmeasures, the gauge point (according to
M. Gunter) would be for Wine-measure, 16.93 inches; and for Ale-measure, 18.54
inches: But with these points we meddle not.
Beer-measure) to the length of the Vessel in inches: So is the Square of the
equared Diameter, to the Content in Gallons.

The reason of these two Numbers, or of this Analogisme, is deduced from that
of a Circle to its circumscribing or Diametral Quadrat, which is vulgarly, as
11 to 14 (but more accurately, 1000000 to 1273239, or in the nearest rational
terms, according to Metius, as 223 to 284; but more truly, according to his
Cycloperimetricall terms, it will be in terms irrational, as 88.75 to 113)
Wherefore if the cubick inches contained in a Gallon, be augmented by the
consequent term, and the product be resolved by the antecedent, the Quotient
shall yield the first analogismall term.

Now for a trial of this Rule: Suppose a Vessel to be in length, 39.54
inches; the Diameters at the Bung and Head as before: the Square of the mean or
equated Diameter (found by our way) is 959.326729, which multiplied in the
length, gives 37931.77886, etc. cubique or solid inches, which divided by 286.5
(if Wine-measure) gives in the Quotient, 132.40688, etc. gallons of Wine: or
being divided by 343.8, (if Ale or Beer-measure) gives 110.339 gallons of Ale
or Beer. For the mean or equated Diameter, being by us, 30.973 inches, the
Circle answering there^o (for the equated base of the Vessel) is 753.45345
square or superficial inches, which multiplied into the length, gives the
solid content of the Vessel (as if it were a just Cylinder) 29791.54945, etc.
cubique or solid inches; which being divided by 225 (if Wine-measure) gives in
the Quotient, 132.4068, etc. gallons of wine, as before; or by 270 (if
Ale-measure) gives 110.339 gallons of Ale or Beer, as before also. But now
according to Mr. Oughtred, the mean Circle between that at the Bung and that at
the Head (for the eq^^ted base of the Vessel to be reduced to a Cylinder) being
but 750.3837 inches, the same multiplied by the length of the Vessel, will
produce the solid Content thereof, but 29670.17149 inches. And which will also
be produced by Mr. Briggs his way before declared: For so the Circle at the
Bung, or middle of the Vessel (as the greatest Circle of the Vessel) viz.
852.7087. etc. inches, being multiplied by the length of the Vessel, 39.54
inches, will produce the solid content of the greater of the two Cylinders
beforementioned, 33716^10396, etc. inches. And the Circle of the Head, or end
of the Vessel (as the least Circle of the Vessel) viz. 545.7335, etc. inches,
being multiplied by the same length of the Vessel, will produce the solidity
of the lesser Cylinder aforesaid, 21578.30654 etc. inches. All which are most
accurately and easily produced by the Logarithmical Logistique, and not
otherwise; or else not without a great deal of pains and trouble of
Calculation; and either of which here to show, is altogether needless and
superfluous. Now the difference of these two Cylinders, is 12137.79742, etc.
inches, whose 1/3 viz. 4045.93247, etc. being deducted out of the greater
Cylinder, or 2/3 thereof, viz. 8091.86494, etc. being added to the lesser
Cylinder; there will either of these ways, result 29670.17149 inches, for the
solid capacity of the Vessel, as before: and which you may see performed all
together, in this subsequent operation;

Which divided by 225, (for Wine-measure) affoordeth 131.8674, etc. gallons of
Wine: or by 270 (for Ale-measure) yields 109.8895 gallons of Ale or Beer,
which our account exceeds in the Wine-measure, about 0.5395 gallon, which is
somewhat more then half a gallon: and in the Ale-measure, 0.4495 gallon, which
by conversion or reduction into the proper parts of liquid Measure, is about 3
pintes, and an half, and which differences in so big a Vessel, arescarcely
considerable.

But now to apply these natural operations in vesselmeasure, to our
artificial way of Gauging, that thereby the use of our gauging-Lines may be
the better understood, and the verity thereof demonstrated; I will lay down the
several dimensions of the fore-supposed Vessel, according to the same,
delivering first a brief Rule for the use thereof, which is thus;

First, take the diameter at the Bung and Head of the Vessel, by these Lines,
and thereby get the mean Diameter as before is showed: Then, multiply the
Square thereof by the length of the Vessel, taken by the same Lines; and the
Product shall be the Content in Gallons.

1 Example, in Wine-measure.

Which fraction above 132 gallons, gives somewhat more then half a gallon,
viz. 4.32 pintes exceeding our former measure of 13^.40688 gallons, by about
one pint: and the measure of 131.867 gallons, (deduced from the solid content
of the Vessel in inches, found by Mr. Oughtred's, and Mr. Brigg's way;) by
somewhat more then 5 pintes. But indeed the Diameters and the length of this
Vessel, here set down from the artificial gauging-Line, are a little larger
then what they really should be; according to the quantities of the said
dimensional lines of the Vessel, laid down before from the natural or vulgar
Measure, being arithmetically compared with the said artificial Line taken in
its true quantity from the natural Measure, according to a more ample or
numerous partition thereof: and so they give the liquid content of the Vessel
in gallonmeasure, somewhat more then otherwise they would. But these falling so
very nearly upon whole parts, or Integers of the artificial gauging-Line;
therefore for more plainness and readiness of working, I thought good to
express them artificially in whole Numbers only.

And the liquid content of this Vessel, would be according to the solid content
of the Wine Gallon, commonly taken to be The artificial gauging-Line will be
according to this Gallon, 6.65 inches.
231 inches; but 128.4423, gallons; which is 128 gallons, and somewhat more
then 3 1/2 pintes: and which wants of the true measure, (being 131.8674 gal.
according to the foresaid Standaru-Gallon of 225 inches) 3.425 gal. which by
reduction of the parts, is 3 gal. and 3 2/5 pintes.

2 Example, in Ale or Beere-measure.

Which parts above 109 gallons, do yield 7 pintes, and near upon 1/5 of a
pint: and which does want of our former measure of 110.339 gallons, about 3
pintes and an half; but exceeds the measure of 109.8895 gallons (deduced
from the foresaid solid content of the Vessel found by Mr. Brigg's and Mr.
Oughtred's way) only about 0.08 pint, which is altogether inconsiderable. But
yet the more parts these Lines are divided into, the more exactly still will be
produced thereby, the content of any Vessel in gallon-measure, according to
what was said and demonstrated in all the other Dimensions beforegoing, upon
the several artificial Lines of measure: So that this kind of Gauging-Line,
is as exact as any whatsoever.

And as I formerly showed in the solid dimension of a Cylinder, how the same
might be performed artificially, not by the Diameter and the height (or length)
thereof together, b^ also by the Circumference with the height: So here in like
manner, may the Content of any Vessel be had in Gallon-measure, not only by
the mean Diameter with the length thereof; but also by finding a mean
Circumference between that (...) the Bu^g and that at the Head; whose Square
being ^^^^iplied in the length of the Vessel, shall g^^^ the liquid capacity
thereof immediately in gallons: And the quantity of the artificial Line of
measure, serving hereunto, will be for Wine-measure (according to to our
foresaid Gallon) 14.14 inches, and for Ale or Beermeasure, 15.03 inches. But
because the usual way, by the Diameters, is the easies^ and readiest, and also
that the Circumferences of the in-sides or Co^caves of Vessels (especially at
the middle or bung) can hardly be taken; therefore I will use no more words
about this thing.

But here it may perhaps be expected, that I should show the ready manner of
taking the Diameters of Vessels at the Bung and Head, and theirlengths, by our
gauging-Lines or Rods; but this being a thing easily understood by the pregnant
Practitioner, and the same also fully showed in books particularly for Gauging,
long since published; I shall pass them by, having said sufficient for the
practice of Gauging; it being not mine intent and purpose, here to set down
every particular Circumstance pertaining to Gauging; but briefly to show the
making and use of these new artificial gauing-Lines or Scales, and that
according to our new experiments and observations for the measure of Wine and
Ale, or Beer.

A-TACTOMETRIA. OR An Appendix, for the dimension, (or the discovering of the
solid quantity or capacity,) of any irregular kind of Body whatsoever; after
the most exquisite manner that may be.
HAving now fully finished the Dimension of regular and, regular-like
Magnitudes in general, according to our artificial way of measuring, (or more
artificial kind of practical Geometry) at first proposed; together with the
natural or vulgar, by way of metricall comparison: and of the Solids both
regular and regular-like, as well in respect of gravity, or quantity ponderal
(according to any Metal assigned) as of magnitude, or quantity mensurall: And
then in the last Part, the like dimension of that irregular kind of concave
Body, (or Vessel) which is chiefly used for the containing or keeping of our
most common potable Liquours, viz. Wine, Ale, and Beer; I shall now at last (by
way of an Appendix) add somewhat, for the most easy and exact discovering or
obtaining of the solid capacity, or dimensionall qnantity, of any other kind of
Body whatsoever, how irregular soever it be; whose Dimensions can in no wise be
taken by a Line of measure (especially so as it be but of a reasonable
bigness) and so whose solid content cannot be obtained in any certain Measure
proposed, after the manner of geometrical Mensuration. And this I shall show
from our forementioned experiments made upon the most common liquid Body, for
the comparing of its gravity and magnitude, or ponderall and dimensionall
quantity together; drawing first from thence some apt and brief Notes or
Conclusions, for the more easy and ready performing of this kind of Dimension.
And so from thence we gather, the nearest and truest weight of one Inch cubique
or solid of clear or fair settled water in general, to be 0.527 oun. troy, or
rather, 0.528 fere, being 0.52777, etc. which is but little more then half an
ounce, it being (by conversion or reduction into the proper parts of this
weight) 4 dr. or 10 penny-weight and 13 gr. precisely in a manner. And yet
afterward, for further curiosity in this thing, I caused to be made of brass,
a concave Cube of one inch, open on one side, but having a lid or Cover made
very exact, to clap close on it, with an hole in the middle thereof, no bigger,
then to receive through it a small drop of water, that so I might be able to
fill the same precisely to the least drop: (but indeed this Cube was made too
scanty, and so wanted of it is true magnitude, as I found by comparing it with
other exact cube-inches; and it being filled with fair water, and weighed by a
very curions Balance at Goldsmiths-hall, as precisely as might be; the weight
of the water alone, was but half an ounce troy, and about 2 gr. over, and this
I tried twice over: though yet for all this, I well knew that the true weight of
one inch of water (or of any other humid or liquid body) could not be so
exactly deduced from a Vessel or Body of one inch only, as from a Vessel or
body containing many inches; in regard of the exceeding nicety and curiosity in
the making of so small a Vessel, and then in the filling and weighing of the
same; over there is in a larger Vessel: and for that in the filling of so small
a Vessel, the least drop of liquour more or less, is of some moment, whereas in
a large Vessel, a few drops more or less are not considerable, so as to make
any sensible or considerable difference in the weight of one inch being deduced
therefrom. (Nor is our foresaid cubical Vessel of 64 inches, so very sufficient
for this purpose, as to ground so nice and curious an experimental Conclusion
thereupon.) And therefore we must proceed herein, a majori ad minus, from a
greater quantity to a less, both for the discovering of the weight by the
measure (as before) and also of the Measure by the weight: and not a minori ad
majus, from a less to a greater; for that will not hold good in this thing. But
indeed in a solid Body, of what matter soever it be, the thing will hold just
contrary to the former, in both the foresaid respects: For herein, we must
rather go a minori ad majus, then otherwise: And so the weight of one inch
cubick or solid, may more exactly be had from a Body of one inch cubick only
(being exactly made, and which I find is hard to do) then from a Body of many
inches; and consequently, the gravity or ponderosity of any bigger body (of the
same matter) may be had most exactly and speedily therefrom: For thus Ghetaldus
in his experiments beforementioned, for the comparing of sundry Metals
together, in gravity and magnitude, and so to determine exact proportions
between them; began upon small quantities, and from thence deduceth greater
quantities: And so in particular, for finding the gravities of spherical
Metalline bodies by their Diametrall magnitudes, he first began with a Sphere
of a small magnitude; Or rather, because he could not have such a body exactly
made (as I noted formerly) he procured a metalline Cylinder to be made, (which
might be more exactly done) of equal Diameter and altitude; and the same to be
but two inches from the Roman Foot; and thereby he obtained the gravity of a
Sphere, of the same metal, whose Diameter was equal with the Diameter, and
altitude of the Cylinder, etc. and from this he deduceth the gravity of any
other Sphere of the same Metal, of what magnitude soever, as I formerly showed.
And so likewise have I seen our Countryman Mr. Reynolds beforenamed, in
making the like experiments, for finding the proportions of gravity, etc. in
Metals, perform the same by Bodies of one Inch cubique only, holding it a surer
way, so to obtain the weight of one inch cubick or solid of any Metal (or
other solid substance) then by a body of a greater magnitude: Though yet (for
mine own part) I conceive there may not be altogether so much curiosity or
difficulty in this, as in the former; but that the weight of a solid body of
one inch in magnitude, may as (if not more) nearly be deduced from the weight
of a body of a greater magnitude or dimension, (of the same matter) as the
weight of a liquid or humid body of one inch in magnitude or bulk, can be
deduced from the weight of a liquid body (of the same kind) of a greater bulk
or crassitude; by how much, the weight of any solid body in general, may be
had more exactly then the weight of any liquid body; since that a solid body is
weighed immediately by it self in the Balance or Scale, without the help of any
other thing to contain it; whereas a liquid body (especially one so thin and
fluid as water is) cannot well be weighed by it self (unless it be in a small
quantity) but by means of some Vessel to hold it, whose weight must also be had
first or last by it self (though indeed, it is not absolutely material or
requisite to take notice of the same, as to any certain, known, regular,
denominate weights, unless the Vessel be last of all weighed by it self, for
otherwise any irregular indenominate weights will serve to poize it, if it be
first weighed alone, before it receive the liquid Body whose weight is
required. But this by the way.

Now one inch of water weighing, 0.5277, etc. oun. Troy, viz. 0.528 oun. fere
the same will be found in Avoirdupois-weight, to be 0.5795 oun. (which are in
librall or pound-weight, 0.04398 li. troy, and 0.03622 li. avoirdupoiz) And The
dimensionall and ponderall quantity of water compared together several ways.
from the same experiment I find, that a body of water of 40 inches, will weigh
21 oun. troy almost exactly, and 23 oun. avoirdupois almost as nearly; and that
36 inches of water will weigh 19 oun. troy exactly, but which will be in
avoirdupois-weight, 20 44/5^ oun. or 20.86, etc. And so contrariwise, arguing
from the gravity or ponderall quantity of water, to its magnitude or
dimensionall quantity; the solid measure of one ounce- troy, will be (in
unciall or inch-measure) 1.8947 inch; and of one ounce avoirdupois, 1.72556
inch; (and consequently in Pedall or Foot-measure, 0.001096, for Troy-weight;
and 0.00099859 for Avoirdupois-weight.) And so the solid measure of one
pound-troy of water, will be, Uncially, 22.7368; and of one pound-avoirdupois,
will be Uncially 27.609: and the same will thereupon, be Pedally, 0.013158 fere,
for troy-weight, and 0.015977, for avoirdupoisweight. And so from our foresaid
experiment made by the large cubicall Vessel, which was an Octant of a Foot
cubique; the weight of a Body of water of a just Foot in magnitude, (or the
weight of a cube-Foot of water) will be eactly, 912 oun. Troy, and which is just
76 li. Troy: And this will be in Avoirdupois-weight 1001 21/51 oun. or
1001.41176 oun. and so 62 10/1^ li. or 62.588 li.

But indeed, of all these terms of proportion or comparison, between the
gravity and magnitude, or the ponderall and dimensionall quantity of water,
those of ^1 ounces, to 40 inches (in respect of Troy-weight, which is here the
best) are the efittest for a generalluse: for that I find them to answer
indifferently to all the several experiments that have been made by me, and
Mr. Reynolds severally, for the foresaid purpose; which said several
experiments, though in the weight of one Inch of water, and so in the solid
measure of one Ounce, they may make some small difference, so as some what to
alter the decimal numbers, by which the same are expressed (the said numbers
being produced or extended beyond two or three figures in the fraction; and in
which all our best experiments do concur, viz. as to make the weight of one
cubick inch of water, 0.527 oun. troy, or very near thereabout; and so the
solid measure of one ounce-troy of water, about 1.895 cube-inch) and so to make
some little difference in the operations performed thereby, especially the
greater that the quantity of water used, is; yet they all agree in this, as to
give to 40 inches of water the weight of 21 oun. troy, (and so contrarily, to
21 oun. troy of water the solid measure of 40 inches,) without any considerable
difference: And then besides that these two numbers thus answering each other
reciprocally, they may also more easily be borne in memory, then the decimall
numbers, which denote the gravity of one inch of water, and the magnitude of
one ounce of water: And the like will be for 23 ounces to 40 inches, where the
operation is performed by Avoirdupoiz-weights, for want of Troy-weights. But
yet again after all this, considering the foresaid experiment of the large
cubick Vessel, made by me, was as exact, (I may be bold to say) as well may be,
or as need be desired; then the foregoing quantities of 19 oun. troy of water
to 36 inches of the same, (which are those of 114 oun. and 216 inches, in the
least Terms) may be generally used, (being as easily born in memory as those of
40 inches and 21 oun.) to express the Proportion between the gravity and
magnitude, or the ponderall and dimensionall quantity of water; and so for the
producing or discovering of the solid measure of any irregular body, as I shall
next of all show.

Having therefore thus discovered the weight of water in general, in relation
to its solid measure, etc. (and that as nearly we conceive, as may be, or need
to be) or the proportion between the gravity or ponderall quantity, and the
magnitude or dimensionall quantity thereof, and the same laid down here in all
the fittest terms that may be, for a general and speedy use; we may thereby be
able easily and exactly to discover the solid content of any solid Body
whatsoever, how inordinate How to find out the solid capacity of any irregular
Body, by the weight of water.
or irregular soever it be; by conferring it with the foresaid common liquid
Body. according to magnitude; and that is, by finding out or discovering such a
body or quantity of water, as is equal in bulk, magnitude or crassitude, which
the solid body, whose measure is required: Which water being exactly weighed,
and then the dimensionall quantity or solid measure thereof, deduced from its
weight, by means of the foregoing terms of proportion for that purpose: the
same shall be also the solid measure of the solid body required. And this may
be performed by any irregular kind of Vessel whatsoever, by filling the same
exactly with fair water, How to find the exact quantity of water (or other
liquid body) which is equal in magnitude or dimension to any solid Body given.
and then sinking in the solid body, so low at least, as wholly to cover it:
for so the water forced out of the Vessel by the solid body, shall be equal in
bulk or magnitude thereunto; the solid body now taking up the same room or
space in the Vessel, which that did. And the quantity of water so forced out of
the Vessel, may be found, either by first weighing the Vessel full of water,
and then the Vessel with the remainer of the water left therein, after the
taking out of the solid body, (for here the weight of the Vessel alone need
not be had) whose difference of weight shall be the weight of the water
effluxed: or else (which is much easier and exacter, especially if the Vessel
be so great, as that it cannot conveniently be weighed) by making a small hole
near the top of the Vessel, or a nick or notch in the very edge, brim, or top
thereof; and so filling the Vessel exactly up to the said hole or notch,
through which the water forced out by the solid body may run, and so be
received into some other smaller Vessel; which may be done exactly to a drop,
if there be a quill or some such like things as a pipe or spout, closely
fastened in the said hole or notch, whereby to convey the water cleary away
into the other Vessel, without spilling any; for so the weight of this water
(which is equal in magnitude to the solid body) being taken; and then the
solid dimension thereof produced thereby, (according to some of the foresaid
proportional Conclusions for this purpose) the same shall be the solidity of the
body, given to be measured. And herein, it makes no matter, whether the solid
body be sunk into the Vessel of water, any lower then just to cover it, or not;
for it comes all to one pass, seeing that it still takes up but the same room
or place in the water; and so consequently causes but the same quantity of
water to flow out. And so may the solid measure of any part assigned, of any
solid body be had, by sinking that part only into the Vessel of water, and then
observing the quantity of the water effluxed thereby; for this shall be of
equal bulk or magnitude with that part of the solid body; and therefore the
solid content thereof being found out by its weight (as before) the same shall
be the solid content of the said assigned part of the solid body, as was
required.

And thus also may the capacity of any irregular concave Body or Vessel
whatsoever, be discovered in solid measure, by the weight of the water exactly
filling the same (or the solid measure of any part thereof assigned, by the
weight of the water exactly filling that part) if the bigness thereof hinder
not the convenient weighing of it; according as I formerly showed for
discovering of the concave capacities of the City-Standard-Gallons for Wine and
Ale or Beer, in solid inch measure; and both which Vessels were of an irregular
form, especially the Wine-Gallon, whose dimensions could not be rightly taken
by a Line of measure, as I then noted.

Or again, the weight of the water equal in magnitude to any irregular solid
body, whose measure How, to find the gravity of the Water (or other liquid
body) which is equal in magnitude to solid body given, by the gravity of the
solid body only. And so the manner of weighing a solid body in Water.
is disired, may be had by the weight of the solid body only; the same being
first exactly weighed in the Balance or Scale, after the usual manner; and
afterward out of the Scale, in water; which is (according as Archimed. promot.
post exempl. 1 prob. seu 8 prop.
Ghetaldus teaches) by hanging the solid body by one of the Scales of the
Balance, into the water, so as it may hang freely therein, being covered
therewith, and that by an horsehaire, (which hesaith to be, in a manner, of
equal weight with water, and so neither adds to, nor takes from the gravity
in the Body to be weighed) or many such hairs joined together, if the gravity
of the Body require them; but with due consideration had of such part thereof
(in respect of weight) as hangs out of the water, that is (as he says) as
hangs out of the Scale to which the Body is fastened, even to the Body it
self; by putting the like quantity of hair in the other Scale where the
weights must be put; l^st that the many hairs together, should add some weight
to the Body, (and so neglecting that part of the hair which is wound about the
body, or with which the same is bound up, because that is supposed to be
equally weighty with the water, as being with the Body in the water, and so to
have no gravity therein) for so the Scales shall become equiponderant; and then
the Body hanging freely in the water (and so as neither of the Scales touch the
water) the same shall be ponderated or poised, as if it hung in the air; and
will be in the water so much lighter then it is in the air, as is the gravity
of that portion of water, which is equal in magnitude or bulk to the solid
body: and which Archimedes demonstrateth, and from him Ghetaldus in the
Archimed. lib. 1. (...) ((...)) seu de iis quae insident aut vehuntur in
humido, sive liquido, (Vel (...) in aqua, ut vulgo dicitur) prop. 7.
forecited prop. of his Archimed. promot. And therefore the difference between
the gravity of the solid body taken in the air, (which is the true gravity
thereof) and the gravity in the water, shall be the gravity of so much water,
as is equal in magnitude to the solid body. But this must be understood of
such a solid body or Magnitude, as is heavier then water; that is, being put
therein, will sink, or be carried down into the same, of its own accord:
Whereas else, if it be a solid body which is lighter then the water, that is,
being put into the same, will not sink, or descend down of it self; then the
gravity of such a portion of the water, as is equal in magnitude to this solid
body, must (in this way) be had by the adjection or apposition of some other
solid body, which is weightier then water, (whose gravity both in the air and
water are first had, as also the gravity of the lighter body in the air) so as
these two several Solids being joined together, may make up (as it were) one
Body; which being let down into the water, may voluntarily sink or descend: And
both which Solids thus put together in one, will be lighter in the water, then
the heavier Solid alone, (as Ghetaldus shows in the forenamed place) And will
be also lighter therein, then they are in the air, (both their true weights
being taken together) by so much, as is the gravity of the water equal in
magnitude to them both, (according to that of a solid body alone which is
heavier then water) And this shall exceed the gravity of the water equal in
magnitude to the lighter body alone, by so much, as is the gravity of the water
equal in magnitude to the heavier body; and therefore the gravity of the water
equal in magnitude to the lighter body (which was required) is thereby
immediately obtained. And what has been here spoken concerning Water, the like
understand of any other liquid or humid body, in which a solid body may be thus
weighed. And indeed this latter way for the finding of the gravity of the water
(or other liquid body) which is equal in magnitude to a solid body given, by the
gravity of the solid body only (and thereby to discover the quantity or capacity
of the solid body, according to a certain measure appointed, as before; which
is in my judgment, the mostexcellent and beneficial use that can be made of
it) is much more neat, then the former, but withal much more curious and
difficult in the performance; and therefore I shall rather refer the
Practicioner to the first way, as being very plain, easy, and exact.

But now, that I might be found not more wanting in the practice and experience
of these things, then of the other before going (for with the bare speculation
of things I could never yet well content my self, though they were never so
likely in themselves, (as many men do, and so take up all things upon trust) I
will here produce a manifest experiment made by my self, of both these ways.
under one, in reference to the discovering A double experiment upon the
foregoing Conclusions. Apr. 12.1649.
of the dimensionall quantity of a solid body, by such a body of water as is
equal in magnitude thereto, whereby the verity of all these mathematical
Conclusions may plainly appear. And therefore to this end and purpose, I sought
to get some solid body of Metal or Stone, of a reasonable bigness, which
might not suck or receive water into it, and be also wrought into some such
regular form, as that the solid content thereof might be exactly obtained by a
Line of measure, according to the plain and usual way of measuring, and also
such an one, as might easily be hanged in a string; without any fear of
slipping out when it was in the water; as some Prismall or Cylindricall body,
or the like; but which (though with much seeking up and down) I could not meet
with ready to my hand, nor otherwise easily obtain: And so after all this ado,
I could procure none that might any way serve the turn, but one which was of a
sphericall form, and that was a Marble-bullet, made as round and smooth as
might well be imagined, (and which therefore was the most troublesome for the
performance of this experiment, that could be, being the most difficultly hung
in a string, of any other kind of body) whose diameter I therefore first took
most exactly by a Callaper Compass, and applying the same to a Diagonal Scale
of an Inch, I found it to be 4.95 inches, and from thence the solid Content,
63.5 inches: which being done; I immediately carried the Bullet to
Goldsmiths-hall (where I was to make my experiment) and there got the same
exactly weighed in the Scale; and so found the weight thereof, 89 oun. 2 p. w.
(which are 7 li. 5.1 oun. troy) Then for the discovering of the weight thereof
in water, as also for the performing of the other Conclusion, for the finding
out of the quantity of water equal in magnitude thereunto, both under one: I
got presently an earthen Vessel, very broad and deep, which held about a good
Paile-full and an half, or more; causing first a small hole to be drilled
through it near the top, and then a pipe of Tin to be fitted thereto, and
fastened therein so close, as that no water might pass through the hole beside
the pipe; and then I next prepared several small lines or strings of
horse-taile hairs twisted together, with which I girted the Bullet several
times about, till it would hang firmly, and not slip out (and which I found
very tedious and troublesome to do, by reason of the smoothness and
weightinesse of the body, and the slipperinesse of the horse-haire together)
continuing the said strings or lines out together from the bullet to a
convenient length, and tying them together, whereby the bullet might hang down
in the water from the Balance: which done; I fastened the said strings (not to
one of the Scales, as Ghetaldus seems to intimate, but) to one end of the
Beam, where the Scale is hung, which I conceived to be the best way;
especially considering the weightinesse of the Body: And then because in that
respect, it required a strong Beam whereon to hang, and that the Scales
belonging to the great Beam would be troublesome, and an impediment in the
way, in respect of their largeness: therefore I, and the Assaymaster of
Gold-smiths-hall together, conceived it best to put in their place a small
pair of Scales, which might be sufficient to hold the Weights; and so the Body
might hang freely down by the Scale without interruption; which being done; I
set the foresaid earthen Vessel under that end of the Beam on which the Body
hung, and then filled the same with fair water exactly up to the hole therein,
till the water entered the pipe, (letting it run a few drops till it stayed of
it self, for so I was sure of the exact filling thereof to a due height) under
which I then set a glasseviall with a little Funnell in it, which might receive
the water forced out of the Vessel by the bullet, to a drop; and then sinking
the said Body gently into the water, (affording it so much string therein, as
might keep it fully covered all the time) I had the Weights put into the other
Scale, together with near about such a quantity of horse-haire, as was
contained in the several small strings joined together, by which the bullet
hung (neglecting that part thereof which was wound or wrapped about the bullet
in the water, for the reason before alleged) and so the bullet hanging freely
in the water, we found it to weigh 55 ounces and 3 quarters, Troy (which is 4
li. and 7.75 oun.) and thus I let it hang in the water duly poized, till all
the water was run out into the Glass, which it could make to flow out; for
this water thus effluxed, was of equal magnitude with the said Bullet. And this
being finished I repeated one part of my experiment the next day, by filling up
the Vessel again to the hole thereof exactly as before; and then setting
another Glass with the Funnell in it, under the pipe, I sunk the said bullet
into the water, letting itabide therein, till it had forced out all the water
that it could, to the last drop (not one drop running beside the pipe) and then
afterward weighing the said several Glasses of water effluxed out of the
Vessel by means of the bullet, I found them to differ insensibly; the weight
of the water alone being 33 ounces, and 8 p. w. or 33.4 oun. troy, (which
nearly agrees with our experiment made upon the brass Cubicall Vessel of 64
inches aforesaid, whose water we found, to weigh 33.5 oun. troy) Now the
difference between the weight of the Bullet in the air, or the Scale, 89.1 oun.
(or 89 oun. 2 p. w) and its weight in the water, 55.75 oun. (or 55 oun. and 15
p. w.) is 33.35 oun. (or 33 oun. 7 p. w.) for the weight of the water equal in
magnitude with the bullet; which you see differs (defectively) from the weight
of the water forced out of the Vessel by the bullet, only 1 p. w. which is not
considerable: And yet had I been so curious in weighing the bullet in water, as
to have put in the Scale where the weights were, the same quantity of
horse-hair, ^s precisely to an hair, as were contained in the lines or s^rings
by which the bullet hung, except those which were about it in the water
(according as Ghetaldus directs) then happily might the weight of the water
equal in magnitude with the bullet, produced thereby, have exactly agreed with
the weight of that which was forced out of the Vessel by the bullet; but inded
I think there wanted about so much hair in the weight-Scale as might have made
the bullet to weigh in the water, 1 p. w. less: But I conceived there was no
need of so great curiosity in such an experiment as that was, especially upon
so great a body; neither do I conceive it absolutely necessary and requisite to
perform the same by horse-hair, but that silk or thread might serve the turn,
putting so much in the Scale with the weights, as is used about the body to be
weighed, and this can breed no sensible error, unless it be for the
performing of some very nice and curious experiment indeed; as to find the
exact difference and proportion between the weight of a Metal (as Gold or
Silver especially) other thing, in the air, and in the water, and the like;
then indeed Ghetaldus in A^chimed. p^omot. post prop. 19. speaking of his new
artifice, whereby he would find out the quality of Gold from the gravity only
which it has in the air, and in the water; says, that the weight of pure
Gold, which is in the air 19, will be in the water 18. And the weight of Silver,
which in the air is 31, will be in the water 28: And so the weight of air,
which is in the air 9, will be in the water 8.
to use horse-haire, and in that strictness and preciseness, as Ghetaldus
speaks of, will be altogether requisite, for the reason before del^vered: And
now you see how these two experimental Conclusions do manifestly confirm one
another, and so both of them do confirm our former experiments for the weight
of water in relation to its solid measure, (and so for the solid measure
thereof in reference to its weight) for thereby the weight of 63.5 inches of
water, (the same as the solidity of the Marble-Sphear aforesaid) will be upon
the point of 33.5 ounces troy: And so (to come to the point in hand, which is
the discovering of the solid capacity of this spherical body in inch-measure,
by the weight of the water which is of equal magnitude with the same) the solid
measure of 33.4 oun. troy of water (the quantity of water agreeing exactly in
magnitude with the Bullet) will be thereby 63.3 inches, for the solid content of
the bullet, which wants of the solidity found at first by the Diameter 63.5
inches, only 1/5 of an inch. And indeed the solid Content thus found by water,
I may adjudge to be the truer measure, in regard there was a small flotting in
one place of the bullet, which might well make the solid content thereof lesser
by so much then it was, being taken according to a full rotundity or
sphericalnesse every way, without any flatting in the same, and according to
which the Diameter was taken. And therefore in any solid body, of how regular a
form so ever it be, where there is any such flatting, dent, or hollowishnesse,
or other like defection in any part of the superficies thereof, which may
diminish somewhat of the true solid dimension which it naturally obtaines and
ought to have, according to such a form (and which yet will be fully deduced
from its linear Dimensions, according to a plain way of measuring, as if there
were no such defection) there the solid Content (in the state the body then is)
will be most truly discovered by water (as I have here showed two several ways)
for that the water will search out the true quantity of those defections, which
a Line of measure cannot, and so give the solid content of the Body accordingly.

And this way for discovering the measure of any irregular Solid, must needs be
generally better then that which Mr. Diggs has delivered in his Pantomet. lib.
3. cap. 14.
Stereometry; to be performed by an exact Cubical, or other rectangular prismal
or parallelepipedal Vessel, with water; and that in the usual way of measuring;
by taking the Dimensions of the Vessel, as to the finding of the superficial
content of it is rectangle Base, taken according to the concavity thereof; and
then noting the ascent of the water, in the Vessel, when the solid body lies
covered therein, and also when it is out, whose difference being infolded with
the superficicies of the water (or of the foresaid rectangle Base of the
Vessel) gives the solid measure of the water equal in bulk or magnitude with
the said Body, and so withal of the Body it self; Clav. Geom. pract. l. 5. c.
11.
and which way Clavius also speaks of, as being the way vulgarly noted and
used by Artists: whereas the way delivered here by us, may be performed by any
kind of Vessel whatsoever, how irregular soever it be (as was the Vessel by
which I performed my foregoing experiment upon the Marble-Sphear or Bullet, for
the discovering of its solid measure by water) and not only for the discovering
of the Content of any irregular solid or gross body, but also of any irregular
concave body, according to a solid dimension, as I have both said and also
experimentally showed before. But however that common way delivered by Mr.
Diggs and also by Clavius and some other Latin Authors, need not to be tied or
confined wholly to such a kind of Vessel as they speak of, but the same may be
as well performed by any other kind of prismal, or any Cylindrical Vessel, such
as a Pail or other circular Vessel, being exactly made: but that indeed the
Bases of these Vessels, will not be altogether so readily obtained as those of
an exact cubicall, or other rectangular Vessel, unless it be by our
artificial way of measuring, where the base of the Vessel is equilateral or
exactly circular. And of this way I would have produced an experimental
example, as well as of the other, and that by the same regular body, to have
compared them together, if I could have met with ever a Vessel fit for the
purpose: but however the thing being so very plain and perspicuous of it self,
there needs no example either from experiment or otherwise, to illustrate it.

But now whereas after all this, it may Objection. concerning the difference of
gravity in Water, in reference to the foregoing Dime^sion of Bodies.
be objected, that all water weighs not alike; but that different kinds of
water (as Rainwater, Fountain Water and Riverwater) are of a different
gravity; and therefore our foregoing experimental Conclusions for the weight of
common water in general, in relation to its solid measure (or for the comparing
of its gravity and magnitude, or ponderal and dimensional quantity together)
cannot hold generally true: To this I answer; that albeit these several waters
Answer.
do usually differ somewhat in gravity, (which I cannot deny, but must needs
acknowledge, and that not only from natural reason it self, but also from my
own experience, which I shall now come to show,) yet not so much, as to make
any notable, or considerable difference in the solid content of a Body produced
severally thereby (especially Rain and River-water) for which end those
Conclusions were aymedat, and intended by us; but that any one of them may be
indifferently used in this thing, without the committing any considerable
error, as I shall show by and by, in discovering the gravities of several
waters and comparing them together. And Marinus Ghetaldus in all his several
experiments made upon Water, for the comparing of it and diverse other bodies
both solid and l^quid, together, in respect of gravity and magnitude, speaks
only of water in general, without any difference or distinction.

Now the water by which Mr. Reynolds made his experiments upon his 3 several
parallelepipedall Vessels of 283 1/2 inches, formerly mentioned, to find the
true weight thereof, was (as he told me) fair settled Rainwater; And such was
also the water, by which I made my experiment upon the cubicall Vessel of 216
inches, as I noted formerly, it being the most simple kind of water, and so
generally the best for that purpose: for so that learned Mathematician W.
Snellius going about to discover the true weight of the Rhynland-Foot, in its
cubicall capacity (which he will have to be exactly equal to the old Suel. in
Eratosth. Batav. l. 2. c. 2. And where he pitcheth upon the same Roman Foot (by
name,) for the truest, which Mr. Greaves and most others do; namely, Pes
Colotianus aforementioned: but differs in the magnitude thereof from Mr.
Greaves; for that he makes it greater then the English Foot; whereas Mr.
Greaves makes it lesser. For he says that the London-Foot, which is generally
used throughout England, and whose measure was taken from the Iron Standard of
3 Feet, kept in the Guild Hall; and so transmitted to him, is 968 parts, such
as the Leyden-Foot, vulgarly called there the Rbynland-Foot, (which he makes
exactly equal with the foresaid Roman-Foot) is 1000, Eratosth. But. l. 2. c.
1. whereas Mr. Greaves makes the very same measure of the English-Foot to be
1034.13, such as Pes Colot. is 1000: and the Rhy^land-Foot (or that of
Snellius) to be 1068.25 of the same parts. And so this Foot to be 1033 such
parts as the said english Foot contains 1000 (and the foresaid Roman-Foot to be
but 967 such parts as was formerly showed) and consequently the English Foot
will be from thence, 968 such (...) ^s the Rhynland Foot is 1000, which ^^tees
exactly with the observation of Snellius. But indeed Snellius takes the
dimension of Pes Colot. chiefly from the bare description and de^ineation
thereof made by Ph^l^nder in his Commentaries upon Vitruoius, Architect. l. 3.
c. 3. (who there faith, that he found this Foot ^o agree with that of
Statisius) presuming upon that typograp^icall ssenent, which he had received
about the contraction of letters and Lines upon the paper, after their
impression, by a 60th part. For so says he in Eratosth. Bat. l. 2. c. 1.
beforecited, Charta uda dum praelo subiicitur and typum patitur, ipsa pressura
and humore quem antea imbiberat, non nihil extenditur and seipsa^ fit amplier,
qua post modum siccate, iterum contrabitur, and simul linearum measuras quas
receperat, ju^sto exhibet minores. Pars enim sexagesima typorum and formoiuns
longitudini excusis decedit, quemadmodum a diligentibus and peritis Typographis
sciscitando edoctus sum. Which last must needs be erroneous and uncertain, and
cannot hold, generally true, as reason it self (besides the experience of my
self and others) may plainly demonstrare, according to what I formerly: said
concerning this point.
Roman-Foot) in water, that thereby he might (as it seemed to him) transmit the
measure thereof so much the more certainly and easily to posterity, (like as
many eminent men together had done before at Rome, for the determining and
establishing of the exact measure or quantity of the said Roman Foot (as
Ciaconius out of Lati^us Lati^ius his * observations of the Roman Foot
reports, who was one of the eight that made the experiment together at Rome)
and so two others, by name, Lucas Paeius, and Villalpandus, by two other
Vessels; conceiving it to be a surer way to discover (or recover) the same,
then by hairs, grains of Corn, digits, palms, and the like) did above all
other waters, choose Rainwater, because that (says he) being fallen from the Sea M. Greaves his Discourse of the Roman Foot. page 12. 13.
heaven, brings down with it no taincture of any earthy dregs; and moreover for
that it seemed to be alike in a manner, in all places; and this he used after
many days settling, being thereby made very pure and clear.

And then, the water with which I measured the Standard- Wine and Ale-gallon at
the Guild Hall, to find the weight thereof, and thereby the solid Content in
inches, was from the new River of Ware (commonly called Middleton's River, and
which water is in a manner of equal weight with Rainwater, as I shall show by
and by) as also that at Goldsmithe-hall, with which I measured my two brass
concave Cubes, the one of 64 inches, and the other of 1 inch, to find the
weight thereof: (and the less Cube also another time with rainwater) and also
by which I performed my last experiment there, upon the weighing of a solid
body in water, etc.

As for Rainwater compared with Fountain, Spring, or Wellwater, Est in aequali
mole ratio aquae plaviae ad distillatam, quemadmodum 1000000 ad 997065 pluviae
au^em ad putealem, ut 1000000 ad 1007522. Eratosth. Bat. l. 2. c. 5. The last
of which I find indeed to be so, according to the Weights of those two waters
set down by him, or more completely, as 10005000 to 10075216. But the first of
these I find according to his weights of the waters in the Vess^ll by which he
made the experiment, (and so of his cube-Foot of the same waters, which I
exactly deduced from thence) to be as 1000000 to 997117. being more completely,
as 10000000 to 9971167.
in respect of gravity; Snellius observed the proportion to be, as 1000000 to
1007522; and of Rainwater natural, to the same artificial, or distilled, to
be as 1000000 to 997065: For that he might have his Rainwater exactly
defecated, or cleansed and purified from all earthy dregs or grownds, it seemed
good to him (as he says) to use for the experiment of the exact weight of a
cubicall Foot of water, chiefly that which might again be collected into it
self from vapors and exhalations, and so betook himself to Chymicall
distillation, according to that form, which they usually call by a technicall
or artificial term or expression, Balneum Mariae, seu Maris, because that is
in no wise forcible or violent, but very gentle; And then moreover he used
pure Fountain Water, to try what his cubicall Foot might alter in gravity, in
these three waters: And this experiment he performed by a Cylindricall Vessel
made of brass with all the accuratenesse that might be, having its altitude
and Diameter equally semi-pedall, from whence he deduced the weight of a
cube-Foot in Water.

But if we will be so very curious concerning the difference of gravity in
several waters; then we may as well question, whether all water of the same
kind; be of the same gravity or not (except Rain and Snow-water, which we
conceive to hold alike in all places, without any sensible difference) as
whether all Fountain, and all River-water do weigh alike, especially the first
of these two, but that it may alter and differ in gravity as well as in other
things, according to the different nature and quality of the Earth where it is
engendered, and of the veins and passages thereof, through which (as it were
through Channels) it runs, and so the various matter wherewith it is mixed; and
more especially, if one water be a mere simple water, and another be a mineral
(for so Naturalists do usually distinguish waters) for then these will more
sensibly differ in gravity; and so will several mineral waters among
themselves, being of a different nature: And indeed most of our River-water
seems to come from Fountains or Springs; and also for that Aristotle gives to
them both, the same original of generation, Aristos. l. 1. Meteor. c. 13.
to wit, from vapors and fumes (or air) in the caves and passages of the
earth, condensed and concreted into water by the coldness of the Earth. And
therefore seeing that the generation Magir. Physiol. peripatet. l. 3. c. 4. Com.
and l. 4. c. 7.
of fumes and vapors. (and thence of water) under the earth, is continual; it
follows, that the flowing, and the course of Rivers is perpetual: so that a
River is, as it were, no other thing then the water of a perpetual Fountain or
Spring, continually running on in a great body or bulk. Keckerm. System.
physic. l. 2. c. 15.


But now as for the difference of gravity in waters homogeneall, (or of the
like kind and denomination) I shall prove the same by experiment, from four
several Fountains, or Springs (and partly from two Rivers) in comparing them
with Rainwater several times: and which is as much as (if not much more then)
any other has done in this kind, that I could ever yet hear of: And the waters
which I first tried by way of ponderall comparison; were first, Rainwater, as
being the Base of the Experiment, in regard of what has been said there of
before; and so to which all the other waters are here compared; and which I
received into a clean Vessel as it fell from the Clouds, that so I might have
it as pure as might be, without the mixture of any earthly matter: And the
Fountain-waters which I now used, were from the Conduit in Grayes-Inne Fields,
commonly called by the name of Lambs-Condait, which is a pure Spring of it
self; and from the Standard in Cheap Side, which is conveyed under ground by
pipes, from a Spring at Padington, being a Village about 3 miles distant from
London to the N-W. (as also is the water of the other two Conduits at the two
ends of the said Street, from the same Springhead) and yet is received as pure
and cle^r at the said Conduit, as if were taken at the Springhead it self: And
then the River-waters were from the Thames, and from the new River of Ware, or
Midleton's River aforesaid. And with these I tried Snow-water, (which was pure
Snow as it fell, having never touched the ground nor other thing, beforeit came
in the Vessel where it was put, and there dissolved.) Which other several
Waters aforesaid, I took the pains to see always fetched from the right places,
thereby to avoid all errors and mistakes which might happen by trusting to any
messenger alone; and so had them carried to Goldsmiths-hall (where I was to
make this experiment also) leting them stand there a settling for 2 days:
(though indeed the Fountain-waters being so very pure and clear, needed not so
much settling) And the Vessel, by which (as a Standard or Gage) I first tried
these six several waters, was the same by which Mr. Roynolds had formerly made
the like experiments (though not upon so many waters, unless aritificiall
waters, as distilled strong water, and wines, and some other liquid
substances, as he told me) and that was a glasse-Phiall which held almost 3
quarters of a Wine-pinte, having the neck thereof done about with lead or
pevvter, and a top or Cover of the same metal made to screw on, which upon
the proposal of my intention to him concerning this experiment, and his good
liking and desire of the same, he courteously offered to lend me, and I as
courteously accepted; for I could not then meet with one so fit for that
purpose as that was, save those which were too small; for this was at the
smallest. And so the 21th of March 164 8/9, I made my experiment at
Goldsmiths-hall by the said Glass with all the exactness that possible I
could, I experiment for the gravities of several waters, and the same compared
with Rainwater. Mar. 21. 164 8/9.
both in filling the said Glass with the several waters one after another
as they were weighed (beginning with Rainwater) still screvving on the said
top, to keep in the water from falling out, as nearly as I could, and then in
the vveighing of them; and thereby I found first the Snovv-vvater to 2 grains
less then the Rainwater, and the two Riverwaters to weigh each of them I gr.
more then Rainwater; and so also the Standard-water in Ch^ap-side, (and
thereupon these 3 to be of equal weight) and the Lambs-Conduit-water to weigh 4
gr. more then Rainwater. But indeed finding this Glass to be very uncertain
for the performing of this so nice and curious an experiment, in regard both
that as I still screwed on the top or Cover thereof after the filling it, to
keep in the water that none might fly out, there still issued forth some water,
and besides also that the mouth of the Glass was somewhat too wide,
(considering the smalnesse of the Glass) for the filling of it with every
several water exactly alike to the least drop as was requisite to do in do:
small a Vessel; since that I observed, that one ordinary drop of water more or
less would alter the weightfull 2 grains more or less; which made me
continually to iterate the experiment by the said Glass upon every several
water, by filling up the Glass again, and then drying the outside thereof
before I put it again into the Scale^. But however being doubtful of the same,
and that I might make this experiment with all the exactness that might be; I
did thereupon for my further satisfaction, repair to the Glasse-house in
Broad-street, and there cau^^d a Glasse-Phiall to be presently blown before me,
which might hold a Wine-pinte, as near as could be guessed I for this I
conceived would be a convenient bigness, so ^s it being filled with water,
might be conveniently weighed in a small Balance that would turn upon some
small part of weight, as that was which we had used for the other Glass, being
a very nimble and subtle Balance, that would turn upon the 4th. or 5th. part
of a grain, which was as much as could well be expected from a balance to
weigh a Vessel of this capacity being filled with water or other liquour,) and
was also blown round, somewhat after the manner of an Urinall, but made flat at
the bottom, so as to stand upright, and very smooth and even at the top, and
with so small a mouth or orifice, as that it might be alvvaies filled alike to
the least drop; for that, when I came to fill the same, not one drop could be
shaken out, till a little was first sucked out with a quill, (insomuch as that
one might have carried it full of water in their pocket, with the mouth
downwards, and not have spilt one drop therein:) and which being thus exactly
made for the purpose; I weighed the very same waters therein, which I had done
before by the other Glass, having let them stand all the while in their
several Glasses, with an addition of two other Fountainvvaters, which in the
mean space I had been told of, as being generally accounted the two finest
waters abo^t London; the one near the Post^rne-gate on Tower Hill, called the
Postern-Spring; the other on the backside of St. Giles-Church at Cripple-gate,
called there by the name of Crowders Well; both which are commonly accounted
exceeding good for all manner of soar eyes; and have a very pleasant taste,
like that of nevv-milke, (especially that of Upon the weighing of this water,
the Assaymaster of Gold-smiths-Hall, by name, Mr. Alexander Jackson (who was
pleased with much ccurtesie, humanity, and patience, to assist me in these and
all other the experiments which I th^re made; as to the work of the Balance,
or the matter of weighing, and which he performed with his own hands, with all
the accuratnesse that might be) told me that he once knew an ancient man in
this City, who whenever he was sick, would drink plentifully of this water,
and was thereby immediately made well: and so, being overcome with Drink (as he
often would be) would presently drink of this water to make him sober, as
finding it to be the most speedy remedy.
Crowders-Well, which much exceeds the other for sapour and gravity) and
which therefore for their virtue and gravity above the rest, may be taken for
mineral. And so by this new Glass, and the foresaid 2d. Experiment, for the
gravities of several waters etc. Mar. 31. 1649.
Balance, I found first the Snowwater to weigh one grain lighter then
Rainwater; as also the new River-water (and so these two to weigh alike) and
the Thames-water not to differ sensibly in gravity from Rainwater, and the
Conduitwater in Cheap Side to be 2 gr. heavier then Rain; and and the Lambs
conduit-water to be 3 gr. heavier then Rain; and then, the
Postern-Spring-water, to weigh 7 gr. more then Rain; and St. Giles-water, (or
that of Crowders-Well) to weigh 12 gr. or half a pennny-weight more then
Rainwater; and so to be weightier the^ the Postern-Spring-water by 5 gr. And
so as I weighed each water, I continually iterated my experiment upon the same,
by putting out a few drops, and then filling up the Glass again; and so
afterward still drying the Glass thoroughly on the outside, I again
committed the same to the Balance, and so found the several waters to weigh as
before; save only the Thames water now weighed one gr. more then Rainwater,
which whether it was in the filling of the Glass, or in the weighing, I cannot
justly say: But soon after this it happening to rain, I took some pure fresh
rainwater, and withal, such other of the aforesaid Waters as were near the
place of observation, fresh again, viz. the Conduit-water in Cheapside and the
two foresaid River-waters, and (after due settling) tried them over again by
the same Glass and Balance; as also the Snowwater 3d. Experiment for the
gravities of several waters. Apr. 7th.
which I had used before (for fresher I could not then get) and found them all
to weigh exactly as at first by this Glass; and so the Thames water to be of
equal gravity with Rainwater.

And then I having a small Glass standing by me, whose mouth was rather less
then that of the pinte-glasse and held little more then 2 ounces-troy and an
half; I thought good to make an experiment by the same, upon some of the
foresaid waters, 4th. Experiment for the gravities of several waters. Apr. 21.
viz. Rain and Snow-water, and the two Riverwaters: (because these did
neerliest agree one with another) and thereby found the Snow-water to be half a
grain lighter then Rainwater; and the two River-waters, to be each of them of
equal weight with the Rainwater as before. And this was performed by a very
small and subtle Balance, which would easily be turned with one mite, or the
20th. part of a Grain.

And thus having discovered the difference of gravity in several waters by
smaller Vessels, (or quantities of water) I conceived it very convenient after
all this, to make one experiment or observation more upon all the foresaid
several waters, by a much larger quantity; confidering that these smaller
quantities were not so sufficient to discover the difference of gravity, as to
ground or determine Proportions of gravity thereupon; and so that the greater
the quantity of the waters was, the greater and more apparent still would be
their difference of gravity; and so to see how this would agree in Proportion
with the other: And to this end I got the largest vitreall Vessel or Vial that
I could meet with fit for the purpose; which was one that held near about five
wine-pintes and an half, having a very small neck, done about with lead or
pewter, and a ^op or Cover to screw on very close (like the Glass by which I
made my first observation in this kind) and which in the screwing on, would not
force the least drop of water out of the Glass, being exactly filled; and the
mouth of the Glass not being half an inch wide: And so having provided all the
foresaid eight waters fresh again (except the Snow-water, which could not be
had fresher then that which I used before) and the same duly settled; I found by
this Glass (from the great 5th. experiment upon several waters, in respect of
gravity. May 3d.
Standard-ballance, which would sensibly turn opon one grain) first the
Snow-water to weigh 8 gr. less then Rainwater; and the two River-waters to be
equi-ponderant with the Rainwater: and the Conduit-water in Cheap Side, to
weigh 14 gr. more then Rain; and the Lambs-conduit-water to weigh 24 gr. (or 1
p. w.) more then Rain: and the Postern-Spring water to be heavier then
Rainwater, by 2 p. w. and 9 gr. (or 57 gr.) and lastly, the water of
Crowders-Well, to be weightier then Rainwater, by 3 1/2 p. w. or 84 gr. and so
to exceed that of the Postern-Spring in gravity, by 1 p. w. and 3 gr. viz. 27
gr.

So that now from these several exact experiments and observations, it is
manifest, that all waters homogeneall (or of the same kind) are not of the same
gravity, but do sensibly differ therein, as we have here proved from four
several Fountain or Spring-waters, all of them differing in gravity one from
another; and that in the very same continued order and proportion in a manner,
from all the several experiments by which they were tried: as that of the
Conduits in Cheapside (from Padington-Spring) to be the lightest; and the next
above that, the water of Lambs Conduit (in Graies-Inn fields) and then the next
to exceed that, the Postern-Spring water (on Tower Hill) and then the heaviest
of all, the water of Crowders-Well at St. Giles. Cripplegate; and which thing I
was very desirous to demonstrate* And therefore consequently, that no certain,
positive Proportion can be determined between Rain and Fountain, or Pluviall
and Puteall water, as Snellius has done; and which I cannot but wonder, that
he (so intelligent an artist) should do, from one single experiment or
observation only, having used but one Fountain Water (by what I can perceive
from him) as if he took all Fountain or Puteall waters to be of the same
gra^ity. And that which he used in that experiment, seems to be much heavier
then the heaviest of those fountain-waters which we have here made use of; as
appears by his comparing it with Rainwater the proportion being (as I showed
before from him) as 1000000 to 1007522; whereas the proportion of Rainwater to
the weightiest of, the Fountainwaters which we have here experimented, will be
(by our l^st and largest experiment, which is the best for that purpose) but as
1000000 to 1002104 fere, and from which the Proportion between these two
waters, deduced from the observation made by my new-pint-Glasse, will but little
differ, (and that by way of defect) it holding there from Rainwater, to St.
Giles-Well-water, as 1000000 to 1001925 fere, both which by a millenary
contraction, will be in a manner the same, viz. 1000 to 1002; and by a
decumillenary contraction or abbreviation, the one will be as 10000 to 10019,
and the other (and better) as 10000 to 10021. and both which by arithmeticall
mediation, will be as 10000 to 10020; and so between 1001925 and 1002104, the
intermedian proportion arithmeticall, will be as 1000000 to 1002014.

But indeed, if we should have yet further tried the same by a larger quantity
of the waters: then probably might the proportion have still risen higher; and
so have come somevvhat nearer that of Snellius, according as we have still
observed from our several experiments; that as the vessel or quantity of each
particular water has been greater, so the higher has risen the proportion of
gravity between them, (though very little) according as the difference of
gravity has become somevvhat greater then perhaps it should: For that surely,
whether the same be experimented by a lesser or larger quantity; yet the same
proportion of gravity should arise, according as the the difference of gravity
should be proportionably the same; and which has nearly happened in these
several observations by several quantities of waters, except those of the
first experimene^^^ the imperfect Glass. And which would continually happen,
in case the gravity of each particular water could still be taken in every
several Vessel, or Quantity, so very precisely to the least part of weight, as
might be imagined: but which, considering that every Balance (as an
Instrument or Organ, consisting of diverse parts) is continually subject to
mutation upon every small occasion, (especially those smaller, nice, nimble, and
subtle Balances, such as we used in most of our experiments of this kind,
which by the ordinary breath of one's mouth or nostril (any thing near at hand)
or the least motion of the air, or noise, or sound, vvil be sensibly diverted
from their due course and positure, to which they tend) and so not infallible;
therefore the same cannot well be expected, though notvvithstanding we here
continually used all the sedulity and solicitude that could be; taking
continually the gravity of each particular water, upon an exact equilibrity or
equiponderancy of the Scales, according to the most precise perpendicularity or
rectitude of the Index, or Tongue of the Balance; as nearly, as by the sight
might possibly be adjudged; insomuch as that we could not perceive any sensible
error or mistake to be committed therein. And moreover for a further avoiding
of errors herein; I performed each particular experiment upon the several
waters (according as they are set down orderly before) still at one time,
according to one and the same setting, or rectifying of the Balance;
conceiving it to be more convenient and sure so to do, then at sundry times
apart, for that there are hardly any Scales to be met with, but at several
times, will require a several setting or rectification.

But for the determining of a certain, positive Proportion between Rain and any
other (...), (or between any other two particular waters) it is best surely to
use as large a quantity of those waters, as can conveniently be weighed,
(consideration being had of the bigness and ponderousness of the Vessel to
contain them) But the vitreall Vessel or Vial, by which I made my last
observation, would hold welnigh as much as the aereall Cylindricall Vessel by
which Snellius made his observation, as I have computed it, by comparing his
Weight and Measure with ours.

And by most of our several observations, we find the two River-waters
aforesaid to be of like gravity with Rainwater, without any sensible
difference, and so to be equiponderant in themselves. And for Snow-water, we
find the same by every particular observation (even from the least vessel or
quantity of water, where the difference of gravity was least discernable) to be
sensibly lighter then Rainwater, and so the lightest of all; and in which, our
experimental observations will agree with natural reason it self, which
shows Snow to be a much lighter substance then Rain; and in which all Zanard.
Disput. de Vniverso el^memari, part. 3. qua^st 22. Aliara dispositionem habet
nubes nivis ab ea quae est aquae: nam nubes pluviae habet, quod sit magis
densa, magis obscura, and magis unita in anum locum: Nivis autem nubes est
tenuis and subtilis, and cum multum de aereo continet, est clara and quasi
alba, and per aerem sparsa, etc.
Philosophers do agree; that the Cloud or matter of which Snow is engendered, is
more hot and dry then that of which Rain is, and also more aerie, and so the
humor or moisture resolved out of Snow, is aerie, and very light, and as it
were a froth or some, whereupon it so nourishes and cherishes the Earth: And
because it contains much of air, it behooveth that it should contain also much
of warmth and moisture, although yet it is drier then water. And so Aristotle
likeneth Snow to Froth or Foame (and also calls it so) in respect of its
whiteness, which he says to arise chiefly by means of those parts thereof
which are more aerie; for that for Tenet multum de calido aereo nubes nivosa
etc. Zanard. ibidem.

Aristor. lib. 2. de generat. animal. cap. 2.

Plin. not. hist. lib. 17. cap. 2. and Keckerm. Syst. phys. lib. 6. cap. 9.
Theor. 1. and 2. de nive.

Colleg. Conimbr. in Aristot. meteor. Tract. 7. cap. 5.

Magir. physiolog. p^ripat. lib. 4. cap. 6.


this reason also, Froth (says he) is white; and so water having oil mingled
with it. And so also Pliny calls Snow aquarum coelestium spumam, which his
english Translatour Dr. Holland interpreth, the foam or froth of Rainwater
from Heaven, concerning which see Keckerman. And the Conimbricensians
(according to Aristotle, lib. 1 Meteor. cap. 11. and lib. de mundo, c^p. 4)
say, that Snow is a Cloud conglaciated, or frozen together in a friable
density; and which Cloud obtaines so much a greater ficcity then that which is
changed into water, by how much it congeales or grows together by the power or
efficacy of the more prevalent Cold; since that the Cold while it binds, does
express, or force out the moisture, etc.

Seeing therefore that the matter of Snow, is more hot, and dry, and more aerie
thin and subtle then that of Rain; and consequently more light; and that
Snowwater is no other then Snow dissolved, and so still retains the nature of
Snow: therefore also will Snowwater be necessarily lighter then Rainwater.

As for the Proportion between these two Waters, I may from all our several The
Proportion of Rainwater to Snow-water.
observations and experiments beforegoing, conclude the same to hold generally
from the heavier to the lighter, as 10000 to 9998. For by 2 or 3 several
observations made by the new Glass of almost a wine-pinte, where the gravities
of these two waters (and so the difference of gravity) were found still the
same; the proportion will be as 100000 to 99984, fere: and by the last
observation, being made by the great Glass of about 5 1/2 wine-pintes, holding
about 7 pounds-troy of water, it will be as 100000 to 99980 fere (and which I
take to be the truer,) and if we will take the intermediate proportion
arithmetical, the same will be 100000 to 99982 fere. Or the former proportion
will nearly happen, if we shall mediate between that which* will be produced
from the least Glass of all, (which was that of about 2 1/2 oun. troy) being
as 10000 to 9996 completely, and that which we have here produced from the
greatest Glass of all, viz. 10000 to 9998 in a manner completely; which will
be 10000 to 9997.

And now from these our several experim^ents beforegoing, for discovering, for
discovering the gravities of the several kinds of common, simple, or natural
Waters, as in reference to the finding out of the solid quantities or
capacities of Bodies altogether inordinate or i^^egular, which will not in
themselves admit of an ordinary or regular kind of Dimension, but their
contents must be obtained by some extraordinary or unusual kind of way, as we
have lately showed; it is manifest, that the way here propounded by us for the
same, may be performed by any such kind of Water in general, as we have here
tried, according to the experiments formerly laid down by us for that purpose,
from Rainwater, (and so upon which this our Atactometricall practice is
grounded, as being the most indifferent water for a general use in this kind:)
for that in our last observation, which was made by the greatest quantity of
the several Waters asore-named, weighing about 84 oun. or 7li. Troy, the
difference of gravity between Rainwater and the heaviest of the Fountain or
Spring-waters, was but 3 1/2 p. w. or 84 gr. And which said quantity of water
is much more then double the quantity of that which was found to be of equal
magnitude with the foresaid sphericall stone-body, and so from whose gravity we
obtained the content of the said solid body, in the measure propounded; and
therefore had the same been thus inquired from both those Waters, that is, the
lightest (except S^owwater) and the heaviest, (though the Water by which it was
done, we have showed to be of like gravity with Rainwater) there could have
been no considerable difference therein.

THE CONCLUSION. For the more speedy absolving or expediting of all the
foregoing Dimensions in general.
ANd now for the more easy and speedy performance still of all the Dimensions,
and metrical Conclusions contained and mentioned in this Book, I shall subnect
this one thing as a Coronis to the whole Work, by way of advertisement and
advice to the practical Reader that is not yet acquainted with the most
compendious ways of arithmetical Calculation, which is, that he would use
continually all along with his geometrical Lines, or Lines of measure, (whether
natural or artificial) that most excellent artificial arithmetical Line (as I
may so term it) or Line of Numbers (so called by the author and contriver
thereof, Mr. Edm. Gunter, being deduced by See also Mr. Edm. Wingates Rule or
Scale of proportion, of the like kind. And, Mr. Oughtred's Circles of
Proportion; or rather the same converted into ^ Spirall Line.
him from the Logarithmical or artificial numbers, and so being, as it were, a
Line or Scale of Logarithmes) by which all Mathematical Questions and
Conclusions to be wrought by Proportion, (as indeed what are there, which may
not be reduced to a way of proportion) are cast up, or computed in a most
compendious manner (as it were geometrically or mechanically) merely by Scale
and Compass, without the labor of the pen: For all those our artificial
Dimensions, which consist merely upon the squaring of some one number, or of
one simple quadrature only, (such as are of all ordinate or regular Planes or
Superficies, and whether taken simply in themselves alone as Figures, or many
of one kind conjunctly, as constituting the total Superficieties of regular
Solids,) will be absolved by one extent of the Compasses only, being doubled,
or once repeated upon the said Line, according to the Analogism of
Multiplication. And that will be, as from an Unit upon the said Line of
numbers, to the linear number or term taken by the artificial Line of measure,
or Line of quadrature, (for some dimensional line of a Figure whose superficial
Content is required therefrom, as representing artificially the side of the
equal Square) so from that, to the quadrate number. for the superficies of the
Figure.

And all those artificial Dimensions which depend merely upon the cubing of
some one number or term (such as are of all ordinate or regular Solids, for
their solid measure) will be absolved by one and the same extent of the
Compasses being trebled, or twice repeated upon the said Line of artificial
Numbers, according to the foresaid Analogisme (in a compound or double
Multiplication) which will be, as from an Unit, to the linear number or term
taken by the artificial Line of measure, or Line of Cubature, (for some
dimensionall line of a regular Solid given to be measured thereby, it
representing artificially the side of the equal Cube) so from thence to the
Square thereof; and from that to the Cube, for the solid content.

And all those artificial Dimensions which consist not of cubing, but yet of a
twofold Multiplication; the one whereof is a Quadrature, (such are of all
regular-like Solids, as Cylinders, Cones, and the like) will be absolved by two
several extents of the Compasses, each of them being doubled or once iterated
upon the said Line of numbers; which will be first, as from an Unit to the
quadratary term taken by the artificial Line of measure, representing some
dimensionall line of the ordinate Base; So from that, to the Quadrat thereof,
for the artificial Base: Then, as from an Unit to that Quadrat; So from the
other number or term taken by the same artificial Line of measure, for the
Axis or Altitude of the solid Figure to be measured; to the solid area of the
Figure. Or it will be, As from an Unit, to the number for the Axis or altitude;
So from the quadrate number for the Base, to the rectangular solid number, for
the whole solid Figure it self. And here, if the two foresaid lines of a
regular-like Solid, to wit, the Axis, and the basiall line (whatsoever it be)
do happen to be equal (as they very rarely do) then will the Dimension be
cubicall, as that of an exactly ordinate Solid by some one of its dimensional
lines; and so be absolved upon the Line of Numbers accordingly. Then lastly,
for the superficial Dimension of these regular-like Solids, consisting of one
Multiplication only, and that commonly of two unequal Terms, and therefore not
an exact Quadrature; the same will be absolved by one extent of the Compasses,
once repeated upon the said Logarithmeticall Line, or Line of Proportion,
according to the Analogism of Multiplication; which will be, as from an Unit to
one of the two linear Numbers or terms taken by the artificial Line of measure
(which do represent some one dimensionall line of the Base, and the side, or
other line upon the superficies of the solid Figure, according to the nature
thereof,) So from the other, to the rectangle superficiary Number* for the
superficial Area of the solid Figure (the Base* thereof being secluded) And
here also, if the said two dimensionall lines of the regular-like Solid, do
happen at any time to be equal (as they v^ry seldom will) then this Dimension
will be exactly quadratary, as the superficial dimension of an exact regular
Solid, by some one of its dimensionall lines.

And the like with these, understand for the more speedy computing of the
gravities, or ponderall quantities of regular and regular-like metalline
bodies, being inquired out artificially in the same manner as their solid
measures: and therefore, as there the last proportional number or term upon
the said Line or Scale of Numbers, denotes solid measure, here it will denote
gravity or ponderosity.

And so likewise in the work of Gauging, for the speedier computing of the
liquid Contents of Vessels in Wine or Beer (as was of the solid content of a
Cylinder, or any other regular-like Solid, from our artificial way) where,
after the mean Diameter of the Vessel being had, according to the artificial
Gauging-Lines; it will hold upon the foresaid Logarithmical Line (or Line of
Numbers) by a twofold extent or opening of the Co^passes, thus; viz. first, as
from an Unit to the mean Diameter, So from that to the Square thereof; Then, as
from an Unit to that Square; So from the length (or height) of the Vessel to
the liquid content thereof in Gallon-measure. Or as from an Unit to the length
of the Vessel, so from the Quadrat of the mean or equated Diameter, to the
liquid measure aforesaid.

And so with the like expedition by this Line, understand all Atactometrical
operations to be absolved, in computing the solid quantities of irregular
bodies from the gravity of the equal body of water, according to the Terms of
Proportion or comparison between the gravity and magnit^de, or the ponderall
and dimensional* quantity of this liquid Body, delivered by us in our
Atactometrical Discourse.

And so all metrical operations arising here ^^o^ the natural Measure, will be
thus expedited, according to the dimensional Proportions delivered in this
Book, both for measure and weight (and all others of the like kind, not here
particularly expressed) according to what I said before. And thus I put a
Period to these my mathematical Contemplations and Exercitations.

Soli Deo universipotenti, qui omnia (ut loquitur Sapiens) mensura, numero, and
pondere disposuit, sit gloria, honos and laus, in saecula, and omnem
sempiternitatem. AMEN.

