FORMS OF PRAYER FOR A FAMILY.

COMPOSED By the Late Pious and Learned John Worthington D. D.

PUBLISHED By the Right Reverend Father in God Edward, Lord Bishop of
Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

TO THE READER.
THE following Prayers for a Family being hereafter to accompany the
Scripture-Catechism, which I published soon after the Author's Decease; It was
thereupon desired by some Friends that I would recommend these additional
Prayers to you: And I could not but comply with their Request, though the
Author's Name is sufficient to bespeak their Acceptance.

I gave a brief Character of that Excellent Person, in a Preface to the
Catechism: And the little that is there said (which I need not tell those that
knew him, he highly deserved, and a great deal more) is abundantly enough to
invite all good People to the perusing of any of his Writings.

And as to these Prayers, Whoever reads them, must needs judge them well fitted
for the Use of Families: The more so, for their being for Substance penned in
the Words and Sentences of the divinely-inspir'd Writers, which are the aptest
of any to excite Devotion; and in this Respect they have the Advantage of all
the Prayers that I have seen.

This and other Instances of their Excellency and Usefulness, I might here
insist upon; but I think it wholly needless, they being easily to be discerned
by a serious Reader.

I will add a few Words concerning the daily worshipping of God in our
Families, which I cannot forbear, having this Opportunity.

This is a Duty very shamefully neglected in this loose Age. And no wonder it
is so, by such as are irreligious, and can be content to live in gross
Ignorance and the disacknowledgment of him in whom they live, move and have
their Being. But that so many of those who are well instructed in Religon, and
keep themselves from the more scandalous Pollutions of the World, and make
Conscience of attending on the Public Worship of God, and of Secret Prayer,
should be able to satisfy themselves constantly to Neglect Family Worship, is
very unaccountable: Especially since not only pious People in all Ages have so
commended it by their Practice; but also, that nothing seems more clearly
discoverable by Natural Light than that it is the paying of a most Reasonable
Service; and nothing does more plainly tend to the begetting, keeping up, and
increasing a sense of Religion in Families, than this does.

In a Word, since the Divine Providence watches over Families as such, what
serious Christian can doubt whether the Governors of them are strictly obliged
to call them every Day together; thankfully to acknowledge the daily care God
takes of them, and the great Obligations he continually heaps upon them; to
make a penitent Confession of their daily Offenses against him, and to
deprecate the Punishment deserved by them; and to put up humble Petitions to
the Throne of Grace, for the Continuance of those Spiritual and Temporal
Blessings they enjoy, and a Supply of those they want?

And that we may be more generally awakened to a Sense of this great Duty, as
also that the following and all other good Helps for the better Performance
thereof, which pious Persons have given those who stand in need of them, may
have the Divine Blessing accompanying them, is the Hearty Prayer of,

Your Faithful Servant, Edw. Gloucestr.

Morning-Prayer FOR A FAMILY.
I.
EVER-Blessed Lord God, the God that hear Prayers, and therefore should all
Flesh come unto thee Ps. 65.2.
; Thou who have promised that where two or three are met together in thy Name,
there thou will be in the midst of them Matthew. 18.20.
: We thy poor and unworthy Servants, who are less than the least of all thy
Mercies Genesis 32.10.
, desire in all Humility to offer up unto thee this our Morning-Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving; we acknowledge, O Lord, that it is of thy Mercies that
we are not consumed, because thy Compassions fail not, they are new every
Morning Lam. 3.22.
. Thou have not dealt with us after our Sins, nor rewarded us according to our
Iniquities Ps. 103 10.
: But thou have spared us according to the greatness of thy Mercy Nehem. 13 22.
, and kept us unto this present Moment: In thee we live and move and have our
Being Acts 17.28.
, with all the comforts thereof: Thou, O Lord, have preserved us from the
dangers of the Night past, whereas we might have slept the Sleep of Death Ps.
13.3.
; and thou have raised us up to the Light of another Day, to walk before thee
in the Land of the Living Ps. 116.9. Ps. 56 13.
. What have we, O Lord, which we have not received of thee 1 Cor. 4.7.
? The Mercies of this Life, the means of Grace, and the Helps and Advantages
for that better Life which is to come; they are all from thee: And by these
Mercies we should have been persuaded to offer up our selves a Living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto thee, O God, which is our reasonable
Service Romans 12.1.
.

II.
BUT we confess, O Lord, that we have not rendered unto thee according to what
we have received from thee 2. Chr. 32.25.
: We have been unthankful, and have not glorified thee as God Romans 1.21.
.

We confess, O Lord, we have sinned against thy Law written in our Hearts Romans
2.15.
, and against the Light shining in our Consciences.

We have sinned against thy righteous Law, declared in thy Holy Word; whereas
thy Word should have been a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto our Paths Ps.
119.105.
.

We have sinned against the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ 2 Cor. 4.4.
, against the Precepts and Promises of the Gospel; nor have we walked agreeably
to that excellent Pattern of Holiness shining out therein, even the Life of
Christ, who left us an Example, that we should follow his Steps 1 Pet. 2.21.
.

We have sinned, O Lord, against thy Mercies, and against thy Judgments and
Corrections; against the Motions of thy Holy Spirit; against Purposes and
Promises of better Service and Obedience.

Father, we have sinned against Heaven and in thy Sight, and have made our
selves unworthy to be called thy Children Luke 15.21.
: And therefore to us belongs nothing but shame and confusion Dan. 9.8.
of Face, and the Wrath to come 1 These. 1.10.
.

III.
BUT there is forgiveness with thee, O Lord Ps. 130.4.
. To the Lord our God belong Mercies and Forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him Dan. 9.9.
. Thou have declared thy self in thy Word to be the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful, gracious, and long-suffering; forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and
Sin Exodus 34.6.
; not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance 2
Pet. 3.9.
: Thou willest not the Death of Sinners, but had rather they should turn from
their evil Ways and live Ezekiel. 33.11.
: Thou did so love the World, that thou gave thine onely-begotten Son Jesus
Christ; that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life John 3.16.
: Thou did send thy Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins, that we might
live through him 1 John 4.9, 10.
.

IV.
GOOD Lord, give us such a sight and sense of our Sins, as may beget in us an
holy hatred of them, and that godly sorrow for them which works Repentance
not to be repented of 2 Cor. 7.10.
. Give us therefore to repent and turn to God, and do Works meet for repentance
Acts 26 20.
; and by repentance fit us for remission and pardon of sin. Lord, help our
Unbelief Mark 9.24.
, and enable us by Faith to receive Christ as Prophet, Priest and King. Make us
willing to be taught by him, and to obey him in all things Acts 3 22.
. Enable us by Faith to embrace the Promises, and obey the Precepts of the
Gospel. Bless us, O Lord, with all spiritual Blessings in Christ Ephesians. 1.3.
. Bless us in forgiving our Iniquities Romans 4.7.
; and bless us in turning every one of us from our Iniquities Acts 3.26.
. Wash us in the Blood of Jesus Christ, that Lamb of God which takes away the
Sins of the World John 1.29.
; and purge our Consciences from dead Works to serve thee the living God Heb.
9.14.
.

V.
AND let thy Holy Spirit sanctify us wholly and throughout, in Spirit, Soul
and Body 1 These. 5.23.
. Let our Minds and Hearts be renewed more and more; that being transformed by
the renewing of our Minds, we may prove what is that good and acceptable and
perfect Will of God Romans 12.2.
; that we may be enabled to know it as we ought to know 1 Cor. 8.2.
, and delight to do thy Will, O our God: And let thy Law be within our Hearts
Psalm. 40.8.
.

Give us so to know Christ and his Life, that he may be formed in our Hearts
Gal. 4.19.
, and that he may live in us Chapter 2.20.
; that the same Mind may be in us which was in Christ Phil. 2.5.
, and that we may be in the World as he was in the World 1 John 4.17.
.

Give us so to know Christ and his Death and Sufferings, that we may be made
conformable to his Death Phil. 3.10.
; that we may feel the Virtue and Power of the Cross of Christ within us, in
being crucified to the World, and having the World crucified unto us Gal. 6.14.
; in crucifying the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts thereof Gal. 5.24.
; that the Body of Sin may be destroyed, and that henceforth we may not serve
Sin, nor obey it in the Lusts thereof Romans 6.6.
.

Give us so to know Christ and the Power of his Resurrection Phil. 3.10.
, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the Father,
so we also may walk in newness of life Romans 6.4.
, and may mind and seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God Col. 3.1, 2.
.

Let the Love of Christ constrain us, his Love in dying for us; and let us not
live unto our selves, but unto him which died for us, and rose again 2 Cor.
5.14.
.

Enable us to walk worthy of the Gospel and the Grace of God; and, as we are
taught thereby, to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godlily in this present World Tit. 2.12.
.

Help us, O Lord, to consider our selves to be but Strangers and Pilgrims here
on Earth Heb. 11.13. 1 Pet. 2.11.
, and to behave our selves as those that seek and desire a better Country, that
is, an Heavenly Heb. 11.14, 16.
. Let our Affections and Conversations be in Heaven Phil. 3.20.
, and make us meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in light Col. 1.12.
.

Give us, O Lord, to consider our latter end Deuteronomy. 32.29.
, and to prepare for it; and to work out our own Salvation with fear and
trembling Phil 2.12.
. So teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom
Psalm. 90.12.
.

VI.
KEEP and deliver us, O Lord, from the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life 1 Ioh. 2.16.
; that no Temptation of worldly Pleasure, Profit, or Honor, may prevail over
us: And enable us by thy Grace, to live a Life of Purity and Chastity, a Life
of Temperance and Sobriety, a Life of Humility and Self-denial; help us to deny
our selves, and to take up our Cross and follow Christ Matthew. 16.24.
.

Keep and deliver us, O Lord, from all worldly Cares and Fears, from all
discontent with our own estate, from all distrust of Providence: And help us to
sanctify thee in our Hearts, to make thee our fear and our dread 1 Pet. 3.15.
Isai. 8.13.
; help us to cast our Care and Burden upon thee 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 55.22.
, to commit our selves unto thee in well-doing as unto a faithful Creator 1
Pet. 4.19.
. Prepare us for all disposals of thy Providence, and make all Things work
together for good unto us Romans 8.28.
.

Keep and deliver us from the temptations either of Prosperity or Adversity;
that in fullness and prosperity our Hearts may not be lifted up and forget the
Lord our God Deuteronomy. 8.14.
; that in Adversity and time of Trial we may not forsake thee, nor murmur and
repine against thee: But enable us to possess our Souls in Patience Luke 21.19.
, and to endure unto the end Matthew. 24.13.
: Make us to know both how to be abased, and how to abound, to do all Things,
or to suffer all Things through Christ strengthening us Phil. 4.12.
.

Deliver us from all coveting, envying and grieving at the Good of others, or
from rejoicing at their Evils and Sufferings: And enable us to be content with
our own Estate and Condition Heb. 13.5.
, and to love our Neighbor as our selves, and to do to others as we would they
should do to us Matthew. 7.12.
.

Deliver us from all bitterness, wrath and anger Ephesians. 4.31.
, from all hatred and malice and desire of revenge: And give us to put on
Bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of Mind, meekness, long-suffering Col.
3.12.
; not rendering evil for evil unto any 1 Pet. 3.9. 1 These. 5.15.
, but overcoming evil with good Romans 12.21.
.

Keep and deliver us, O Lord, from the wrath and craft of Satan and his wicked
Instruments: Make us sober and watchful 1 Pet. 5.8.
against temptations: Make us strong in the Power of thy might, that we putting
on the whole Armor of God, may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil
Ephesians. 6.10.
. Thy Grace is sufficient for us 2 Cor. 12.9.
; give us the victory over Satan, the World, and the Flesh, and all those Lusts
that would war against our Souls 1 Pet. 2.11.
.

Deliver us from all Blindness of Mind 2 Cor. 3.14.
, and from all Hardness of Heart Romans 2.5.
: And give us a right Understanding in all things 2 Timothy 2.7.
. Enlighten thou the Eyes of our Mind Ephesians. 1.18.
, and give us an Heart of Flesh Ezekiel. 11.1^.
: Put thy Laws into our Hearts, and write them in our Minds Heb. 10.16.
; and put thy Fear into our Hearts, that we may not depart from thee Ier. 32.40.
.

VII.
AND now, O Lord, who have brought us to see the Light of another Day, lift
thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us Psalm. 4.6.
, and watch over us for good Ier. 44.27.
; keep and preserve us this Day from all Evil Psalm. 121.7.
, from all Sin and Danger. Thou have been our Helper, leave us not, nor forsake
us, O God of our Salvation Psalm. 27.9.
. Preserve our going out and our coming in from this time forth and for
evermore. Psalm. 121.8.
.

Direct our Thoughts, our Words and Ways, that we may walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing Col. 1.10.
. Give us Grace to walk circumspectly, redeeming the time, because the Days are
evil Ephesians. 5.15.
. Enable us to keep our selves unspotted from the World James 1.27.
. and herein to exercise our selves to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward Men Acts 24.16.
.

Bless us in our Callings, in all lawful Endeavors and Employments.

Bless all that belong to us.

Bless all that are nearly related to us; let them be near unto thee, and find
favor in thy sight. Be thou their Refuge and Strength, a very present help in
trouble Psalm. 46.1.
. Let them obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need Heb. 4.16.
.

VIII.
NEITHER are we mindful of our selves alone; but we beseech thee that thou
would manifest thy Goodness and thy Power throughout the World.

Have mercy upon the Jews and all other Infidels. Bring in both Jews and
Gentiles, that there may be one fold, as there is one Shepherd the Lord Jesus
Christ, that good Shepherd John 10.16.
who laid down his life for the Sheep ver. 15.
.

Give grace unto all those Nations that name the Name of Christ, to depart from
all Iniquity 2 Timothy 2.19.
, and so to live as becomes the Gospel of Christ Phil. 1.27.
.

Purge and purify all Christian Churches from all corruption of Doctrine and
Life; and let the Doctrine and Truth which is according to Godliness 1 Timothy
6.3. Tit. 1.1.
, prevail more and more in the World against the spirit of Error 1 John 4.6.
and all false Doctrine whatsoever.

Bless the Protestant reformed Churches with Peace among themselves 1 These.
5.13.
, Sanctify them through thy Truth John 17.17.
, make them sound and steadfast in the Faith Tit. 1.13. 1 Cor. 16.13.
, Defend and deliver them from the Oppressions of their Enemies. Save thy
People, and bless thine Inheritance; govern them and lift them up for ever
Psalm. 28.9.
.

IX.
IN mercy, O Lord, look down upon these Realms and Dominions. Cause us to
repent and to turn our selves from all our Transgressions; so Iniquity shall
not be our ruin Ezekiel. 18.30.
. Take away all our Iniquity, and receive us graciously Hos. 14.2.
. Give us in this our Day to know the things that belong unto our Peace Luke
19.42.
.

Look down in mercy upon all from the highest to the lowest.

Establish the King's Throne in Righteousness Prove. 25.5.
. Bless him in his Relations; in his Council.

Let the Judges judge the People with just Judgment Deuteronomy. 16 18.
.

Let Magistrates rule in the fear of God 2 Samuel 23.3.
.

Cloth thy Ministers with Righteousness Psalm. 132.9.
, make them burning and shining Lights John 5.35.
; thou who art the Lord of the Harvest, send forth faithful Laborers into thy
Harvest Matthew. 9.38.
.

X.
IN mercy look down upon all ranks and estates of Men. Visit the sick,
strengthen the weak, pity the afflicted and remember them in their low estate
Psalm. 136.23.
. Succor the tempted, heal the broken in spirit; and let those that sow in
tears reap in joy Psalm. 126.5.
. Instruct the ignorant, and enlighten those that are in darkness. Convince and
humble those that are presumptuous and secure, and give them repentance unto
Life. Confirm and comfort the converted, and establish them in every good Word
and Work 2 These. 2.17.
; that they may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation Phil. 2.15.
; that they may be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, as knowing that their Labor is not in vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15.58.
.

XI.
THESE Mercies, and whatever else thou know to be needful for us or for
others, we humbly beg of thee for the sake of thy dear Son and our Savior
Jesus Christ; in whose Name and Words we further call upon thee.

XII.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this Day our daily Bread; And
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

Matthew. 6.
Evening-Prayer FOR A FAMILY.
I.
MOST Holy and Glorious Lord God, Infinite in Goodness, and Wisdom, and Power;
the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort 2 Cor. 1.3.
: We thy unworthy Creatures desire in all humility to offer up unto thee this
our Evening Sacrifice of Praise for the Mercies of thy Providence over us this
Day. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with his Benefits, even the God
of our Salvation Psalm. 68.19.
: Thou art Good, and do Good Psalm. 119.68.
.

Thou art unwearied in doing us Good; O let us never be weary in well-doing
Gal. 6.9.
: While we live let us praise thee, and sing Praises unto our God, while we
have any being Psalm. 146.2.
. Let us praise and glorify thee in ordering our Conversation aright Psalm.
50.23.
, in devoting our selves to thy Fear Psalm. 119.38.
, and consecrating our lives to thy Service.

Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive Glory and Honor and Power; for thou have
created all things, and through thy Pleasure they are, and they were created
Rev. 4.11.
. Thou art worthy to be loved by us with all our Heart, with all our Mind, and
with all our Strength Mark 12.30.
.

II.
BUT we confess, O Lord, we have not given thee the Glory due unto thy Name
Psalm. 96.8.
: We have been Lovers of our own selves, and Lovers of Pleasures more than
Lovers of God 2 Timothy 3.4.
: We have loved this present World 2 Timothy 4.10.
, and the things that are in the World 1 John 2.15.
. How have we wandered from thy Commandments Psalm. 119.10.
, and walked contrary unto thee Levit. 26.21.
, in walking in the ways of our Heart, and in the sight of our Eyes Eccles.
11.9.
: And therefore thou might walk contrary unto us, and make us feel that it
is an evil and a bitter thing to have forsaken thee the Lord our God Ier. 2.19.
: If thou, O Lord, should mark our iniquities, we could not stand in thy
sight Psalm. 130.3.
.

III.
BUT with the Lord there is Mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption
Psalm. 130.7.
. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has visited and
redeemed his People Luke 1.68.
: Who sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law, from the curse thereof, that we might receive the
adoption of Sons Gal. 4.4, 5. Chapter 3.13.
. And Blessing, and Honor, and Glory be unto Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God,
who was slain that he might redeem us unto God by his Blood Rev. 6.9, 13.
.

IV.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, that thou would fit us and prepare us more and more
for that eternal Redemption, and the Benefits thereof, which Christ has
obtained for us Psalm. 51.10.
. Create in us clean Hearts, O God, and renew right Spirits within us Heb. 9.12.
. Give us that broken Spirit, which thou will not despise Psalm. 51.17.
; that contrite and humble Spirit, which thou delightest to revive Isa. 57, 15.
. Give us that repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ
Acts 20.21.
, as may fit us for pardon and peace, for Mercy and Grace; that in Christ we
may have redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins, according
to the riches of thy Grace Ephesians. 1.7.
. And give us Grace to live as the Redeemed of the Lord, and to walk worthy of
Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works Tit 2.14.
. We are not our own, but are bought with a price, even with the precious Blood
of Christ; O let us therefore glorify God in our Bodies, and in our Spirits,
which are God's 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 Cor. 6.20.
.

V.
FIT and prepare us also, O Lord, for the Influences of thy Light and Love:
Make us meet to be living Habitations and Temples of thy Holy Spirit 1 Cor.
6.19. Chapter 3.17
; and do thou delight to dwell in us 2 Cor. 6 16.
, and make thine abode with us John ^4.23.
, and manifest thy self unto us Verse. 21.
.

Fit us for the guidance and the powerful assistances of thy Spirit, and fit us
for the comforts of thy Spirit. Let us not grieve Ephesians. 4.30.
, nor resist the Holy Ghost Acts 7.51.
; but always follow thy good Spirit as our Guide, that we may enjoy thy Spirit
as our Comforter John 14.26.
.

Let thy Grace always prevent us, and accompany us, and enable us to persevere
unto the end. Make us, O Lord, perfect in every good Work, to do thy Will,
working in us that which is well-pleasing in thy sight, through Jesus Christ
Heb. 13.21.
.

Father of Mercies, O God the God of our Strength Psalm. 43.2.
, and of our Salvation, never leave us nor forsake us: Our Eyes are unto thee,
O God the Lord, in thee is our Trust, leave not our Souls destitute Psalm. 141.8.
. Let thy presence be with us, while we are here in this Wilderness; and lead
us through it to the heavenly Canaan: Let us take heed of grieving or provoking
thee through Disobedience or Unbelief Heb. 4.85.
; but enable us by Faith in thy Goodness and Power, to resist and overcome our
spiritual Enemies, Sin and Satan; enable us to follow the Lord fully Numb.
14.24.
, and to continue patiently in well-doing Romans 2.7.
, that through Faith and Patience we may inherit the Promises, and enter into
thy Rest Heb. 5.1.
. Guide us, O Lord, with thy Counsel, and afterward receive us to thy Glory
Psalm. 73.24.
.

VI.
AND now, O Heavenly Father, we recommend our Souls and Bodies unto thy
Fatherly Care and Keeping this Night. Thou that neither slumberest nor sleep
Psalm. 121.4.
, watch thou over us for good Ier. 44.27.
: Preserve us from the Dangers and Fears of this Night; hide us under the safe
shadow of thy Wings Psalm. 17.8.
: Refresh us with quiet Rest and Sleep: Let us lie down in peace Psalm. 4.8.
, in thy Love and Favor; and raise us up in health of Body, and ability of
Mind, to serve thee faithfully the next Day. Cause us to hear thy
loving kindness in the Morning, for in thee do we trust Psalm. 143.8.
.

VII.
MERCIFUL Father preserve all our Relations and Friends: Withhold not thou thy
tender Mercies from them, O Lord; let thy loving kindness and thy truth
continually preserve them Psalm. 40.11.
. Bless them with all spiritual Blessings in Christ Ephesians. 1.3.
. Bless them with Health and Peace, with all the Necessaries of this life, and
with Contentment; and give them all things that pertain to life and godliness 2
Pet. 1.3.
.

VIII.
BE merciful, O Lord, unto all the Nations of the World that are without Christ
Ephesians. 2.12.
. Send unto them able and faithful Ministers of the New Testament 2 Cor. 3.6.
, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God Acts 26.18.
. Make thy Son to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
People Israel Luke 2 32.
; and let him be thy Salvation to the ends of the Earth Isa. 49 6.
. Let the Earth be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as Waters cover the Sea
Isa. 11.9.
; and let all the Kingdoms of the World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ Rev. 11.15.
.

Let those that enjoy the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ 2 Cor. 4.4.
, walk as Children of Light Ephesians. 5.8.
, and show forth the Virtues and Praises of him who has called them out of
Darkness into his mavelous Light 1 Pet. 2.9.
.

Preserve thy little flock, and deliver the afflicted Churches of Christ out of
all their troubles: Weaken the Power, and disappoint the Devices of their
Enemies: Bless thy People with Peace Psalm. 29.11.
; and let all those that love thy Name, be joyful in thee Psalm. 5.11.
.

IX.
HAVE mercy upon these Realms and Dominions. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord,
and we shall be turned Lam. 5.21.
; Give us Grace thoroughly to amend our ways and our doings Ier. 7.5.
, and to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance Matthew. 3.8.
; and do thou rejoice over us to do us good Ier. 32.41.
. Establish us in Truth, Righteousness and Peace.

Be merciful to all Orders and Degrees amongst us, from the King who is
Supreme, to all subordinate Magistrates and Rulers; that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty 1 Timothy 2.2.
.

Let Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream Amos
5.24.
.

Let the Word of God run and be glorified 2 These. 3.1.
; and let it appear to be the Power of God unto Salvation Romans 1.16.
, in the turning of many Souls from Sin to Righteousness and true Holiness.

X.
IN mercy remember all the Children of affliction. Be unto them the Father of
Mercies, the God of Comfort 2 Cor. 1.3.
, and the God of their Salvation. Let Patience have its perfect work in them
James 1.4.
; and make all things, even afflictions, work together for good unto them Romans
8.28.
.

XI.
O LORD hear, O Lord, forgive, O Lord hearken and do Dan. 9.19.
abundantly for us above all that we can ask or think Ephesians. 3.20.
. Answer us and accept us in the beloved Ephesians. 1.6.
, thy dear Son Col. 1.13.
, Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all Praise, and
Love, and Obedience, this Night and for evermore. Amen.

XII.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this Day our daily Bread; And
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Matthew. 6. Luke 11.
PRAYERS To be said Before the reading of the Holy Scriptures.
I.
BLESSED Lord God, who alone can teach us to profit Isa. 48.17.
, enlighten our Minds, and give us a good understanding in all things 2 Timothy
2.7.
. Open our Hearts, that we may receive the love of the Truth 2 These. 2.10.
. Enable us, O Lord, to receive the Word with meekness James 1.21.
, and with all readiness of mind Acts 17.11.
; and to mingle it with Faith Heb. 4.2.
. Let thy Holy Spirit (which thou have promised to give to them that ask Luke
11.9.
) enable us to know as we ought to know the Holy Scriptures, which are able to
make us wise unto Salvation; that we may thereby be thoroughly furnished unto
all good Works 2 Timothy 3.15, 17.
. Give us as new born Babes to desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may
grow thereby 1 Pet. 2.2.
; that we may grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, to whom be Glory both now and for ever. Amen 2 Pet. 3.18.
.

II.
O GOD, the Father of Lights, from whom comes every good and perfect Gift Iam.
1.17.
, Give us the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge Isai. 11.2.
, that the Eyes of our understanding being enlightened Ephesians. 1.18.
, we may know the Great Things of thy Law Hos. 8.12.
, and the Mysteries of the Gospel. Make us, O Lord, to see and taste how
gracious thou art Psalm. 34.8.
in thy Promises, which are exceeding great and precious 2 Pet. 1.4.
; how holy in thy Precepts, which are all just and good. And let us not be
Hearers only, but Doers of the Word, lest we deceive our own Souls James 1.22.
. Let it be the Power of God unto our Salvation Romans 1.16.
. Enable us to walk as Children of Light, having no Communion with the Works of
Darkness Ephesians. 5.8, 11.
; to walk in the light, as thou art in the light 1 John 1.7.
; that we may have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ
Ver. 3.
, and may be made meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
light Col. 1.12.
; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRACES.
Before Meat.
I.
MOST gracious God, bless us, and all thy Mercies unto us: And make us thankful
and obedient unto thee in all things, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

II.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, to bless us; and these thy Creatures provided for us;
that being refreshed and strengthened by them, we may live to the praise of
thee, the God of all our Mercies and Comforts, and serve thy Will in our
Generation, through Jesus Christ enabling us; to whom be glory and thanksgiving
for evermore. Amen.

After Meat.
I.
BLESSED and praised be thy Holy Name, O Lord, for feeding our Bodies at this
time: We beseech thee to feed and nourish our Souls unto everlasting Life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
O GOD, the Father of Mercies, who have refreshed our frail Bodies with thy
good Creatures; blessed be thy Name for these and all thy Mercies, for thy
Mercies to our Bodies and to our Souls. Enable us, O Lord, to return unto thee
according to what we have received from thee: And bless us with all spiritual
Blessings in Christ; to whom be all Praise, all Love, and all Obedience, now
and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
(...). A Form of Sound Words: Or, A Scripture-Catechism; showing what a
Christian is to Believe and Practice, in order to Salvation. Very useful for
Persons of all Ages and Capacities, as well as Children. Together with Two
short Prayers for the Use of Children. Composed by the Pious and Learned John
Worthington D. D. deceased. The Fifth Edition.
Books written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
THe Rules and Exercises of Holy Living and Dying. The Sixteenth Edition, newly
printed, in Octavo. The Golden Grove; A choice Manual, containing what is to be
believed, practiced, and desired or prayed for: the Prayers being fitted to the
several Days of the Week; also Festival Hymns according to the manner of the
Ancient Church. The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the
Matter of each Psalm: whereunto are added Devotions for the Help and Assistance
of all Christian People in all Occasions and Necessities. The Tenth Edition; in
Twelves. A Collection of Offices, or Forms of Prayers in Cases Ordinary and
Extraordinary; taken out of the Scriptures and the ancient Liturgies of several
Churches, especially the Greek. Together with a large Preface in vindication of
the Liturgy of the Church of England. The Second Edition, in Twelves.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, now Lord Bishop of Ely.
THE Christian's Sacrifice: A Treatise, showing the Necessity, End, and Manner
of receiving the Holy Communion together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Third Edition corrected. The Devout
Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, a Book of
Devotions for Families, and particular Persons in most of the concerns of
Human^ Life. The Eighth Edition, in Twelves. Advice to a Friend. The 4th.
Edition in Twelves. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and Nonconformist,
in Octavo, Two Parts. The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books; written in
Latin by Hugo Grotius, and now Translated into English, with the Addition of a
Seventh Book against the present Roman Church, in Octavo. A Book for Beginners;
or, A Help to young Communicants, that they may be fitted for the Holy
Communion, and receive it with Profit. The Countess of Morton's Daily Exercise:
or, a Book of Prayers and Rules how to spend the time in the Service and
Pleasure of Almighty God.

