A Parallel between Robert late Earl of Essex, and George late Duke of
Buckingham.

Written by Sir Henry Wotton, Knight, etc.



Printed at London, 1641.

O^^^^bert Devereux, Earl of Essex: AND G(...)illiers, Duke of Buckingham.
Some Observations by way of Parallel in the time of their Estates of favor.
AMongst those Historical Employments, whereunto I have devoted my later
years, (for I read, that old men live more by memory than by hope) we thought
it would be a little time not ill spent, to confer the Fortunes and the natures
of these two great personages of so late knowledge, wherein I intend to do
them right with the truth thereof, and my self with the freedom.

The beginning of the Earl of Essex, I must attribute wholly or in great part
to my Lord of Leicester: but yet as an Introducer or Supporter, not as a
teacher: for as I go along, it will easily appear, that he neither lived nor
dyed by his Discipline. Always certain it is, that he drew him first into the
fatal Circle from a kind of resolved privatenes at his house at Lampsie, in
South Wales, where after the Academicall life, he had taken such a taste of
the Rural, (as I have heard him say (and not upon any flashes or fumes of
Melancholy, or traverses of discontent, but in a serene and quiet Mood) that he
could well have bent his mind to a retired course. About which time, the said
Earl of Leicester bewrayed a meaning to plant him in the Queens favor; which
was diversely interpreted by such as thought that great Artizan of Court to do
nothing by chance, nor much by affection. Some therefore were of opinion, that
feeling more and more in himself the weight of time, and being almost tired
(if there be a satietie in power) with that assiduous attendance, and intensive
circumspection which a long indulgent fortune did require, he was grown not
unwilling for his own ease, to bestow handsomely upon another some part of the
pains, and perhaps of the envy.

Others conceived rather, that having before for the same ends brought in, or
let in Sr. Walter Rawleigh, and having found him such an apprentize as knew
well enough how to set up for himself, he now meant to allie him with this
young Earl, who had yet taken no strong impressions: so though the said Sir
Walter Rauleigh was a little before this, whereof I now speak by occasion,
much fallen from his former splendour in Court; Yet he still continued in some
luster of a favored man, like billows that sink by degrees, even when the
wind is down that first stirred them.

Thus runs the discourse of that time at pleasure; yet I am not ignorant,
that there was some good while a very stiff aversation in my Lord of Essex,
from applying himself to the Earl of Leicester, for what secret conceit I
know not; but howsoever that honor was mollified by time, and by his mother,
and to the Court, he came under his Lord.

The Duke of Buckingham had another kind of Germination; and surely had he
been a plant, he would have been reckoned amonst the Sponte Nascentes, for
he sprung without any help, by a kind of congeniall composure (as we may
term it) to the likeness of our late Sovereign and Master of ever blessed
memory, who taking him into his regard taught him more and more to please
himself, and molded him, (as it were) Platonically to his own Idea,
delighting first in the choice of the Materials; because he found him
susceptible of good form) and afterward by degrees as great Architects use to
do in the workmanship of his Regal hand, nor staying here, after he had
hardened and polished him about ten years in the School of observance, (for so
a Court is) and in the furnace of trial about himself, (for he was a King
could peruse men as well as books) he made him the associate of his heir
apparent, together with the now Lord Cottington, (as an adjunct of singular
experience and trust) in foreign travailes, and in a busin^sse of love, and of
no equal hazard (if the tenderness of our zeal did not then deceive us)
enough (the world must confess) to kindle affection even betwixt the
distantest conditions; so as by the various and inward conversation abroad
(besides that before and after at home) with the most constant and best natured
Prince, Bona si sua Norint, as ever England enjoyed. This Duke becomes now
secondly seized of favor, as it were by descent (though the condition of that
estate be no more than a Tenancie at will, or at most for the life of the first
Lord) and rarely transmitted, which I have briefly set down, without looking
beyond the veil of the Temple, I mean into the secret of high inclinations,
since even Satyricall Poets, (who are otherwise of so licentious fancy) are in
this point modest enough to confess their ignorance. Nescio quid certe est
quod me tibi temperet Astrum.


And these were both their springings and Imprimings as I may call them. In the
profluence or proceedings of their fortunes, I observe likewise not only much
difference between them: but in the Earl not a little from himself; First, all
his hopes of advancement had like to be strangled almost in the very Cradle,
by throwing himself into the Portugal Voyage without the Queens consent, or
so much as her knowledge; whereby he left his friends and dependants near six
months in desperate suspense what would become of him. And to speak truth not
without good reason: For first they might well consider, That he was himself
not well plumed in favor for such a flight: Besides that now he wanted a Lord
of Leicester at home (for he was dead the year before) to smooth his absence,
and to quench the practices at court. But above all, it lay open to every man's
Discourse, that though the bare offense to his Sovereign and Mistress was too
great adventure, yet much more when she might (as in this case) have fairly
discharged her displeasure upon her Laws. Notwithstanding, a noble report
coming home before him.

At his return all was clear, and this excursion was esteemed but a Sally of
youth: Nay, he grew every day more and more in her Gracious conceit: whether
such intermissions as these do sometimes foment affection, or that having
committed a fault, he became the more obsequious and plyant to redeem it: Or
that she had not received into her Royal breast any shadows of his popularity.

There was another time long after, when Sir Fulke Grevill (late Lord Brook) a
man in appearance intrinsecal with him, or at the least admitted to his
Melancholy hours, either belike espying some weariness in the Queen, or
perhaps with little change of the word though more in the dangersome marks
toward him, and working upon the present matter (as she was dexterous and
close) had almost superinduced into favor the Earl of Southampton; which yet
being timely discovered, my Lord of Essex chose to evaporate his thoughts in a
Sonnet (being his common way) to be sung before the Queen, (as it was) by one
Hales, in whose voice she took some pleasure; whereof the complot me thinks,
had as much of the Hermit as of the Post: And if thou should by Her be now
forsaken,
She made thy Heart too strong for to be shaken.


As if he had been casting one eye back at the least to his former
retiredness. But all this likewise quickly vanished, and there was a goodwhile
after fair weather over-head. Yet still I know not how, like a gathering of
Clouds, till toward his latter time, when his humors grew Tart, as being now
in the Lees of favor; it brake forth into certain sudden recesses;
sometimes from the Court to Wansteed, other whiles unto Greenewitch, often to
his own Chamber, Doors shut, Visits forbidden, and which was worse, diverse
Contestations (between) with the Queen her self (all preambles of ruin)
wherewith though now and then he did Wring out of her Majesty some petty
contentments, (as a man would press sower Grapes) yet in the mean time was
forgotten the Counsel of a Wise, and then a Prophetical Friend, who told him
that such Courses as those, were like hot Waters, who help at a pang, but if
they be too often used, will spoil the stomach.

On the Dukes part, we have no such abrupt straynes and precipees as these,
but a fair fluent and uniforme course under both Kings: And surely as there
was in his natural Constitution a marvailous equality, whereof I shall speak
more afterward; so there was an image of it in his Fortune running (if I may
borrow an ancient comparison) as smoothly as a numerous Verse, till it met with
certain Rubs in Parliament, whereof I am induced by the very Subject which I
handle, to say somewhat, so far as shall concern the difference between
their times.

WHen my Lord of Essex stood in Favor, the Parliaments were calm: Nay, I
find it a true observation, that there was no impeachment of any Nobleman by
the Commons, from the Reign of King Henry the sixth, until the eighteenth of
King James, nor any intervenient president of that Nature, not that something
or other could be wanting to be said, while men are men: For not to go
higher, we are taught easily so much, by the very Ballads and Libels of
Leicestrian time.

But about the aforesaid Year* many young ones being chosen into the house of
Commons, more then had been usual in great Counsels (who though of the
weakest Wiugs, are the highest Flyers) there arose a certain unfortunate and
unfruitful Spirit in some places; not sowing, but picking at every stone in
the Field, rather then tending to the general Harvest. And thus far the
Consideration of the Nature of the Time has transported me, and the occasion
of the subject.

Now on the other side, I must with the like Liberty observe two weighty and
watchful Solicitudes (as I may call them) which kept the Earl in extreme and
continual Caution, like a Bow still bent, whereof the Dukes thoughts were
absolutely free.

First, he was to wrestle with a Queens declyning, or rather with Her very
settling Age (as we may term it) which besides other respects is commonly even
of it self the more umbratious and apprehensive, as for the most part all
Horizons are charged with certain Vapors toward their Evening.

The other was a matter of more Circumstance, standing thus, viz.
ALl Princes, especially those whom God has not blessed with natural issue,
are (by Wisesome of State) somewhat shye of their Successors, and to speak
with due Reverence, there may be reasonably supposed in Queens Regnant, a
little proportion of tenderness that way, more then in Kings. Now there were in
Court two names of Power, and almost of Affection, the Essexian and the
Cecilian with their Adherents, both well enough enjoying the present, and yet
both looking to the future, and therefore both holding correspondency with some
of the principal in Scotland, and has received advertisements and
instructions, either from them, or immediately from the King as Induciat Heir
of this Imperial Crown.

But least they might detect one another; this was Mysteriously carried by
several instruments and Conducts, and on the Essextian side, in truth with
infinite hazard, for Sir Robert Cecill who (as Secretary of State) did dispose
the public addresses, had prompter and safer conveyance; whereupon I cannot
but relate a memorable passage on either part, as the story following shall
declare.

The Earl of Essex had accommodated Master Anthony Bacon in a partition of his
House, and had assigned him a noble entertaynement: This was a Gentleman of
impotent feet, bu^ of a nimble head, and through his hand run all the
intelligences with Scotland; who being of a provident Nature (contrary to his
brother the Lord Viscount Saint Albons) and well knowing the advantage of a
dangerous Secret, would many tim^s cunningly let fall some Words, as if he
could amend his Fortunes under the Cecilians (to whom he was near of alliance
and in blood also) and who had made (as he was not unwilling should be
believed) some great profer^ to win him away; which once or twice he pressed
so far, and with such tokens and signs of apparent discontent to my Lord
Henry Howard, afterward Earl of Northampton, (who was of the party, and stood
himself in much Vmbrage with the Queen) that he flies presently to my Lord
of Essex, (with whom he was commonly primae admissionis, by his be^ side in
the morning, and tells him that unless that Gentleman were presently satisfied
with some round sum, all would be vented.

This took the Earl at that time ill provided (as indeed oftentimes his
Coffers were low) whereupon he was feign suddenly to give him Essex-House;
which the good old Lady of Walsingham did afterward dis-ingage out of her own
store with 25^0. pound; and before he had distilled 1500. pound at another
time by the same skill; so as we rate this one secret, as it was finely
carried at 4000. pounds in present money, besides at the least 1000. pound of
annual pension to a private and bedridden Gentleman; what would he have gotten
if he could have gone about his own business?

There was another accident of the same nature on the Cicilian side, much more
pleasant, but less chargeable, for it cost nothing but Wit. The Queen having
for a good while no^ heard any thing from Scotland, and being Thirsty of
news, it fell out that her Majesty going to take the Air toward the Heath
(the Court being then at Greenewich) and Master Secretary Cicill then attending
her: A Post came crossing by, and blew his Horn. The Queen out of curiosity
asked him from whence the dispatch came; and being answered from Scotland; and
he stoppes her Coach, and calls for the Packet. The Secretary though he knew
there were some Letters in it from his correspondents; which to discover, were
as many S^rpents; yet made more sh^we of diligence, then of doubt to obey; and
asks some that stood by (so sooth in great have) for a knife to cut up the
Packet (for otherwise he might perhaps awaked a little apprehension,) but in
the mean time approaching with the Packet in his hand, at a pretty distance
from the Queen; he tells her it looked and smelt ill-favouredly coming out
of a filthy Budget, and that it should be fit first to open and air it,
because he knew she was averse from ill Sents.

And so being dismissed home, he got leisure by this seasonable shift, to
sever what he would not have s^ene.

These two accidents precisely true, and known to few, I have reported as not
altogether extravagant from my purpose, to show how the Earl stood in certain
perplex ties wherewith the Dukes days were not distracted. And this has bee^e
the Historical part (as it were) touching the difference between them in the
rising and flowing of their Fortunes.

I will now consider their several ^ndowments both of Person and Mind, and
t^en a little of their Actions and Ends.

The Earl was a pretty deal the Taller, and much the stronger, and of the
abler body: But the Duke had the neater limbs and freer delivery; he was also
the uprighter, and of the more comely motions, for the Earl did bend a little
in the neck, though rather forwards then downwards, and he was so far from
being a good dancer, that he was no graceful goe^. If we touch particulars,
the Duke exceeded in the daintiness of his leg and foot, and the Earl in the
incomparable fairness and fine shape of his hands; which (though it be but a
feminine praise he took from his Father) for the general Air, the Earl had
the closer and more reserved Countenance, being by nature somewhat more
cogitative, and (which was strange) never more then at meals when others are
least: Insomuch as he was wont to make this observation of himself, that to
solve any knottie business which cumbred his mind, his ablest hours was when
he had checked his first appetite with two or three morsells, after which he
sat usually for a good while silent, yet he would play well and willingly at
some games of greatest attention, which showed that when he listed he could
license his thoughts.

The Duke on the other side, even in the midst of so many diversions, had
continually a very pleasant and vacant face (as I may well call it) proceeding
no doubt from a singular assurance in his temper. And yet I must here give him
a rarer Elogie, which the malignest eye cannot deny him. That certainly never
man in his place and power, did entertain greatness more familiarly, nor
whose looks were less tainted with his felicity, wherein I insist the rather
because this in my Judgment was one of his greatest virtues and victories of
himself.

But to proceed, in the attyring and Ornament of their bodies, the Duke a fine
and unaffected politenesse, and upon occasion costly, as in his legations.

The Earl as he grew more and more attentive to business and matter, so less
and less curious of clothing: Insomuch, as I do remember those about him had
a conceit that possibly sometimes when he went up to the Queen, he might
scant know what he had on, for this was his manner, his chamber being commonly
stived with friends or Suitors of one kind or other, when he gave his legs,
arms, and breast to his ordinary servants to button and dress him with little
heed, his head and face to his Harbor, his eyes to his letters, and ears to
Petitioners, and many times all at once, then the Gentleman of his Robes
throwing a cloak over his shoulders he would make a step into his Closet, and
after a short prayer, he was gone: only in his Baths, he was somewhat
delicate, for point of diet and luxury, they were both very inordinate in
their appetites, especially the Earl, who was by nature of so different a
taste, that I must tell a rare thing of him (though it be but a homely note)
that he would stop in the midst of any Physical potion, and after he had
licked his lips, he would drink of the rest, but I am weary of such slight
Animadversions.

To come therefore to the inward furniture of their minds, I will thus much
declare.

The Earl was of good Erudition having been placed at study in Cambridge very
young by the Lord Burleigh, his Guardian, with affectionate and del^bera^e
care, under the oversight of Doctor Whitgift then Master of Trinity College,
and after Archbishop of Canterbury: A man by the way surely of a most reverend
and sacred memory, and (as I may well say) even of the pr^mitive temper, when
the Church in lowlynesse of temper, did flourish in high examples, which I have
inserted as a due recordation of his virtues, having been much obliged to him,
for many favors in my younger time.

About sixteen years of his age (for thither he came at twelve) he took the
formality of Master of Arts, and kept his pu^lique Acts, and here. I must not
smoother what I have received by constant Information, that his own Father
dyed with a very cold con^eit of him, some say through the affection to his
second son Walter Dever^^x, who was indeed a ^yamond of the time, and both of
an hardy and delicate temper and mix^ure: But it seems this Ear^ like certain
vegetables, did bud and open slowly: Nature sometimes delighting to play an
after game as well as fortune, which had both their turns and tides in course.

The Duke was Illiterate, yet had learned at Court, first to sift and question
well, and to supply his own defects by the drawing or flowing unto him of the
best Instruments of experience and knowledge, from whom he had a sweet and
attractive manner, to suck what might be for the public or his own proper use,
so as the less he was favored by the muses, he was the more by the graces.

To consider them in their Pure Naturalls, I conceive the Earls intellectual
faculties to have been his strongest part, and in the Duke his practical.

Yet all know that he likewise at the first was much under the expectation of
his after proof: such a sudden influence therein had the sovereign aspect, for
their Abilities of discourse or pen, the Earl was a very Acute and sound
speaker when he would intend it, and for his writings, they are beyond example,
especially in his familiar letters and things of delight at Court when he would
admit his serious habits, as may be yet seen in his Impresses and inventions of
entertainment, and above all in his darling piece of love, and self love, his
Style was an elegant perspi^uity, rich of praise, but seldom any bold
Metaphors, and so far from Tumor that it rather wanted a little Elevation.

The Dukes delivery of his mind, I conceive not to be so sharp as solid and
grave, not so solid and deep as pertinent, and apposite to the times and
occasions.

The Earl I account the more liberal, and the D. the more magnificent, for I
do not remember that my Lord of Essex in all his life time did. build or adorn
any house, the Queen perchance spending his time, and himself his means, or
otherwise more inclyning to popular ways, for we know the people are apter
to applaud housekeepers then house-raisers, they were both great cherishers of
Scholars and Divines, but it seems the Earl had obtained of himself one
singular point, that he could depart his affection between two extremes, for
though he bare always a kind of filial reverence toward Doctor Whitguist,
both before and after he was Archbishop, yet on the other side, he did not a
little love and tender Master Cartwright, though I think truly with large
distinction between the persons and the causes, howsoever he was taxed with
other ends, in respecting that party.

They were both fair spoken Gentlemen, not Prone and eager to detract openly
from any man, and in this the Earl has been most falsely blemished in our
vulgar story: Only against one man, he had forsworn all patience, namely
Henry Lord Cobham, and would call him ( per Excellen^iam) the Sycophant (as if
it had been an Emblem of his name) even to the Queen her self, though of no
small insinuation with her and one Lady likewise (that I may civillie spare to
nominate for her sex sake) whom he used to term the Spy^er of the Court, yet
generally in the sensitive part of their Natures the Earl was the worse
Philosopher, being a great Resenter and a weak dissembler of the least
disgrace: And herein likewise as in the rest, no good Pupil to my Lord of
Leicester, who was wont to put all his passions in his pockquet.

In the growth of their fortunes, the Duke was a little the swifter, and much
the greater, for from a younger brothers mean estate he r^se to the highest
degree whereof a Subject was capable either in Title or Trust* therein I must
confess much more consortable to Charles Brandon under Henry the eight, who
was equal to him in both.

For matter of Donative and addition of substance, I do not believe that the
Duke did much exceed him, all considered under both Kings.

For that which the Earl of Essex had received from her Majesty, besides the
Fees of his Offices, and the disposition of great Sums of money in her
Armies, was a out the time of his arraignement, when faults use to be
aggravated with prece^ent benefits, valued at three hundred th^usand pounds
sterling in pure gift for his only use, to the Earl of Dors^t then Lord
Treasurer; who was a wise man, and a strict Computist, and not ill affected
toward him. And yet it is worthy of note in the Margent of both Times, that
the one was prosecuted with silence, and the other with murmr, so undoing a
measure is popular judgment.

I cannot here omit between them a great difference in establishing of both
their Fortunes and Fames.
FOr the first, The Duke had a care to introduce into near place at the Court
diverse of his confident Servants, and into high places very sound and grave
Personages; whereas except a Pensioner or two, we cannot scant name any one
man advanced of the Earls breeding, but Sir Thomas Smith having been his
Secretary, who yet came never further (though married into a noble House) then
to the Clearke of the Council, and Register of the Parliament; not that the
Earl meant to stan^alone like a Substantive (for he was not so ill a
Grammarian in Court) but the Truth is, in this point the Cecilians kept him
back, as very well knowing that upon every little absence or dissaduity, he
should be subject to take cold at his back.

For the Other, in the managing of their Fames, I note between them a direct
contrary Wisdom; for the Earl proceeded by way of Apology which he Wrote and
dispersed with his own hands at large, though till his going to Ireland they
were but ayery objections. But of the Duke this I know, that one having offered
for his ^ase to do him that kind of Service; He refused it with a pretty
kind of Thankful scorn (saying) that he would trust his own good intentions
which God knew, and leave to him the pardoning of his Errors; and that he saw
no fruit of Apologies but the multiplying of discourse, which surely was a
well settled Maxim. And for my own particular (though I am not obnoxious to
his memory) in the expression of Taci^u^, Neque injuria, neque beneficia,
saving that he showed mean ordinary good Countenance. And if I were, yet I
would distinguish between Gratitude and Truth, I must bear him this
Testimony: That in a Commission la^ed upon me by Sovereign Command to examine
a Lady about a certain filthy accusation grounded upon nothing but a few
single names taken up by a Foote-man in a Kennell, and straight baptized: A
list of such as the Duke had appointed to be empoysoned at home, himself being
then in Spain: I found it to be the most malicious and Frantic surmize, and
the most contrary to his nature that I think had ever been brewed from the
beginning of the World, howsoever countenanced by a Libellous Pamphelet of a
fugitive Physician even in Print; and yet of this would the Duke suffer any
answer to be made on his behalf, so constant he was to his own Principles.

In their Military Services the Characters of the Earls employments were
these, viz.
His forwardest was that of Portugal before mentioned.

The saddest, that of Roan where he lost his brave Brother.

His fortunatest piece I esteem, the taking of Cadiz Malez, and no less
modest, for there he Wrote with his own hands, a censure of his Omissions.

His jealousest employment was to the relief of Callais besieged by the
Cardinal Archduke: about which, there passed then between the Queen and the
French King, much Art.

His Voyage to the Azores was the best, for the discovery of the Spanish
weakness, and otherwise almost a saving Voyage.

His blackest was that to Ireland, ordained to be the Sepulcher of his Father,
and the Gulf of his own Fortunes.

But the first in 88. at Tilbury Camp, was in my judgment, the very poison of
all that followed, for there whilst the Queen stood in some doubt of a
Spanish Invasion (though it proved but a Morris dance upon our Waves) she made
him in Field Commander of the Cavalry (as he was before in C^urt) and much
graced him openly in view of the Soldiers and people, even above my Lord of
Leicester: the truth is from thenceforth he fed too fast.

THe Dukes employment abroad in this nature, was only in the Action of the I Will
of Reez, of which I must note somewhat for the honor of our Country, and of
his Majesty's times, and of them that perished and survived, and to redeem it
generally from misunderstanding. Therefore after enquiry amongst the wisest
and most indifferent me^; of that Action I dare pronounce, that all
Circumstances pondered, a tumultuary banding o^ our part, with about one
thousand in the whole on theirs ready to receive us with two hundred hors^,
with near two thousand foot, and watching their best time of advantage, none
of their foot discovered by us before, nor so much as suspected, and only some
of their Horse descried straggling, but not in any bulk or body: their Cavalry
not a Troop of Biscoigners mounted in have, but the greater part Gentlemen of
Family, and of picked Resolution, and such as charged home both in Front and on
both flanks into the very Sea about sixescore of their two hundred horse
strewed upon the S^nd, and none of them but one killed with a great shot, and
after this their foot likewise coming on to charge, till not liking the
business they fell to flinging of stones and so walked away.

I say these things considered and laid together, we have great reason to
repute it a great impression upon an unknown place, and a noble argument that
upon occasion we have not lost our Ancient vigor. Only I could wish that the
Duke who then in the animating of the soldiers showed them very eminen ^
assurance of his valor, had afterward remembered that rule of Apelles, Manum
de Tabula. But he was greedy of honor, and hot upon the public ends, and too
confident in the prosperity of beginnings, as somewhere Polybius that great
Critique of war observes of young leaders whom fortune has not before
deceived. In this their Military ^are and dispensation of reward and
punishment, there was very few remarkable occasions under the Duke, saving his
continual vigilancie and voluntary hazard of his person and kindnesses to the
Soldiers, both from his own table and purse, for there could b^ sew disorders
within an Island where the ^roops had no scope to disband, and the Inferior
Commanders were still in the sight.

In the Earl we have two examples of his severity, the one in the Island
voyage where he threw a Soldier with his own hands out of a Ship, the other
in Ireland where he decima^ed certain troops that ran away, renewing a piece
of the Roman discipline.

On the other side we have many of his L^nitie, and one of his facility, when
he did Connive at the bold Trespass of Sir Walter Rawl^igh who before his
own arrival at Fy^ll, had banded there aginst his precise Commandment, at
which time he let fall a Noble word being pressed by one (whose name I need
not remember) that at the least he would put him upon a Martial Court. That I
would do ( said he) if he were not my friend.

And now I am drawing toward the last Act, which was written in the book of
necessity.

At the Earls end I was abroad, but when I came (home though little was left
for writers to gleane after judges) yet, I spent some curiosity to search what
it might be that could precipitate him into such a prodigious Catastrophe, and
I must according to my professed freedom, deliver a circumstance or two of
some weight in the truth of that story, which was neither discovered at his
araignment nor after in any of his private Confessions.

There was amongst his nearest attendants one Henry Cuffe, A man of secret
ambitious ends of his own, and of proportionate Counsels smoothered under the
habit of a Scholar, and slubbered over with a certain rude and Clownish
fashion, that had the semblance of integrity.

This person not above five or six weeks before my Lords fatal irruption
into the City, was by the Earls Special Command suddenly discharged from
all further attendance, or access unto him, out of an inward displeasure then
taken against his sharp and importune infusions, and out of a glimmering
oversight, that he would prove the very instrument of his Ruin.

I must add hereeunto, that about the same time my Lord had received from the
Countess of Warwick (a Lady powerful in the Court) and indeed a virtuous
user of her power, the best advise that, I think, was ever given from either
Sex. That when he was free from restraint, he should (...) take any
out-lodging at Greenewich, and sometimes when the Queen went abroad in a good
humor, (whereof she would give him notice) he should come forth, and humble
himself before Her in the field.

This Counsel su^ke much into him, and for some days he resolved it: but in
the mean time through the intercession of the Earl of Southampton, whom Cuffe
had gained, he was restored to my Lords ear, and so working advantage upon
his disgraces, and upon the vain foundation of vulgar breath, which hurts many
good men, spun out the final destruction of his Master and himself, and
almost of his restorer, if his pardon had not been won by inches.

True it is, that the Earl in Westminster Hall did in general disclose the
evil persuasions of this man; but the particulars which I have related of his
dismission and restitution, he buried in his own breast for some reasons
apparent enough. Indeed (as I conjecture) not to exasperate the Case of my
Lord of Southampton, though he might therewith a little peradventure have
mollified his own. The whole and true Report I had by infallible means from
the person himself that both brought the advice from the afore-sayd excellent
Lady, and carried the discharge to Cuffe, who in a private Chamber was stricken
therewith into a Sound almost dead to the Earth, as if he had fallen from some
high steeple, such Turrets of hope he had built in his own Fancy.

Touching the Dukes sudden period, how others have represented it unto their
Fancies, I cannot determine, for my part I must confess from my Soul, that I
never recall it to mind without a deep and double astonishment of my
discourse and reason.

First of the very horror and attrocity of the Fact in a Christian Court,
under so moderate a Government, but much more at the impudency of the
pretense, whereby a desperate discontented Assassinate would after the
perpetration have honested a mere private revenge (as by precedent
Circumstances is evident enough) with I know not what public respects, and
would feign have given it a parliamentary cover howsoever. Thus these two great
Peers were dis-roabed of their Glory, the one by judgment, and the other by
violence, which was the final distinction.

Now after this short contemplation of their diversities, for much more might
have been spoken, but that I was fitter for Rapsody then commentary, I am
lastly desirous to take a Summarie view of their Conformities, which I verily
believe will be found as many, though perchance heeded by few as are extent in
any of the ancient Parallel.

They both slept long in the arms of For^une: They were both of ancient blood,
and of Foreign extraction: They were both of straight and goodly stature, and
of able and active bodies: They were both industrious and assiduous and
intentive to their ends: They were both early Privy Counselors, and employed
at home in the secretest and weightiest affairs in Court and State: They were
both likewise Commanders abroad in Chief, as well by Sea as by Land; both
Masters of the Horse at home; both chosen Chancellours of the same University,
namely, Cambridge. They were indubitable strong and high minded men; yet of
sweet and accostable Nature, almost equally delighting in the press and
affluence of Dependants and Suitors, which are always the Burres, and
sometimes the Briers of Favorites. They were both married to very virtuous
Ladies, and sole Heirs, and left issue of either Sex, and both their Wives
converted to contrary Religions. They were both in themselves ^^re and
excellent examples of Temperance and Sobriety, but neither of them of
Continency.

Lastly, after they had been both Subject (as all Greatness and splendour is)
to certain obloquies of their Actions; They both concluded their earthly
felicity in unnatural ends, and with no great distance of time in the space
either of Life or Favor.

And so having discharged this poor Exercise of my Pen according to my
knowledge and Reality, let us commit those two noble Peers to their Eternal
rest, with their memorable abilities remaining in few, and their compsssionate
infirmities common to all.

FINIS.

