MONARCHY ASSERTED OR The STATE Of MONARCHICAL and POPULAR Government IN
Vindication of the Considerations Upon Mr HARRINGTON'S OCEANA.

By M. WREN.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. OXFORD, Printed by W. HALL for
F. BOWMAN. Anno Domini M. DC. LIX.

To The REVEREND DR WILKINS WARDEN OF Wadham College IN OXFORD.
THE Present I am about to make You is like the Legacy, of that old Grecian,
who bequeathed his Friend, a Widow without a Jointure, and a Daughter without a
Portion: These Papers come to live upon You, and to put You to charges to
maintain them. My first Application to you in the Considerations on the
Commonwealth of Oceana, having made the Author of that Book look upon you as
one averse from his Principles and Designs, It is very likely that these
Discourses which now address themselves to you, (being augmented in their
Offense to Him as well as their Bulk) will excite the utmost rage of that
Passionate Gentleman. But this being a matter Sir, I have so often seen you
laugh at, takes up no part of my Cares. But I must profess my self deeply
afflicted, that I have been used as an Occasion of throwing so disingenious a
Contumely upon your University, as MR Harrington in his last Book goes about to
fasten upon it. Though I never was a Member of your Body, I have always had
thoughts of the highest Veneration for you, And my inclinations are thus far
founded upon Gratitude, that I have for some years breathed your Air, and
been admitted to a Familiarity with your geatest, both Dead and Living
Treasuries of Learning. Though I have no confidence that these Discourses bear
Testimony of my profiting by that Converse, I must always own my obligation
for it, both to the University in Common, and to those particular Persons with
whose Friendship I have been honored: That you are one of these, Sir, it is my
Glory to declare, and to be known for

Your most constant Humble Servant. M. WREN.

THE PREFACE To The READER
THAT Mr Harrington In Epist.
who undertakes to vindicate the reason of Popular Government and I who have
professed my self a Friend to Monarchy, should from the observation of the
same Natural Causes, and of the same Actions in History, form different
Judgments, is no more a wonder then that two Men viewing the same Object by
various lights, should judge it to be of various Colors. But it seems a little
strange that even in such things where We both make use of the same light, and
where it is my interest to be of his Opinion, our Jugements should not be
reconcilable. I speak this in reference to the Apology He makes for Private
Men's dealing in State Affairs, and obtruding Models of Government upon the
World, or teaching new arts of Policy to those Men whose Experience has rendered
them Masters of that Trade: Which though I always reputed a great Vanity, I
conclude more blamable since I have seen the Excuses he is able to make for it.
For though it is not to be denied that Aristotle, Machiavel, and Sr Thomas More
are great Persons, and may by their Authority give Protection to any man who is
admitted into their Train, yet the Question still remains, Whether this
Privilege can be extended to every little Writer that puts himself into their
Livery. The works of those Persons have met with an applause in the World
equal to their merit, because keeping themselves within general Terms, The
have preserved the Freedom of Philosophers; Or if at any time They have
descended to particulars, it has been without any reflection upon a particular
Time or Place; This can be no justification to a Book which professes to have
nothing of Fiction or Romance, but to be adapted to the Occasions or
Necessities of a particular Juncture, And is not proposed with the Temper and
Moderation becoming a Philosophical Opinion, but with the heat and passion
belonging to a Design. Which way of writing has no more affinity with the
other, then a Libell has with a serious Tract, or a Pasquin with History; Those
men indeed who can ^e persuaded that Christoph. Columbus made Praefat.
(...) Card in his Cabinet that found out the In^ies may perhaps believe also
that Mr Harrington may frame a good Commonwealth without any Experience in
State Affairs; But they who understand that Columbus must first have been at
the Indies before he could make a Card to teach other Men the way thither, will
go near to suspect Mr Harrington's Abilities in Modelling a Commonwealth,
till he has spent some years in the Ministry of State. I must therefore
acknowledge that I do not lay claim to Pardon for having thrust my self into a
Dispute of Government, by any part of the Apology Mr Harrington has made for
it: But I do not despair of doing it by representing, That what I have said is
all by way of Universal Position, without any private Aim or Design; That I
was not without reluctance at first drawn to it by the Authority of some
Friends, from whom Mr Harrington did by all imaginable Importunity endeavor to
extort something by way of Objection; That afterward I was willing to preserve
the Freedom of my own and other Men's Opinions, and not suffer that They who
pretend so much to Liberty, should with insupportable Tyranny bring a slavery
upon our Discourse and Reason.

I wish that this could have been effected by some other Method then by
managing a Controversy; For that way of writing has a suspicion of ill Nature
upon it, and looks more like an improvement of Contention, then an inquiry into
Truth. It is by a very happy Metaphore called drawing the Saw, For the Noise We
make tears the Ears of such as stand by, And the Dust We raise puts out their
Eyes. Besides when one Book is shackled to another (like Spaniels in Couples)
It is impossible by ranging to spring new Matter, or to give the Reader any
thing of Delight or Diversion.

But I am more then ordinarily unfortunate by having to deal with an Adversary
who multiplies upon Me all the inconveniences of Controversy, by having
banished from it that Calmness of which it is Capable, and that Sincerity with
which it ought to be managed; For to speak modestly, Mr Harrington's Arguments
are not always Demonstrations nor his Expressions Complements. But for my part
I intend not to enter into Competition with him for being either an able
Sophister or Calumniator; but I will preserve that Temper which belongs to a
Man who disliking Passion in other People, ought to detest it in himself; And
notwithstanding all his provocations, I will more consider what it is fit for
Me to speak then Him to hear. In my present Answer to his Reply to the
Considerations on Oceana, I have not been curious of any other Method then his
own, but have made twelve Chapters confronting his, in discussion of the twelve
Questions he has propounded; And in the Margin I have by the leter H. cited
such Passages of his Book to which my Answers are particularly applied.

To confess a secret, I am so much gratifyed by something in Mr Harrington's
Book, that I know not how to be offended with Him. In several places he
insinuates as if the Considerations on his Commonwealth of Oceana were not my
own, but had been composed by the University, or at least by some eminent
Persons in it: This is beyond measure obliging, For with those men who are
persuaded by him that the Considerations had not much of sense in them, the
Discned it slides off from me upon other People; But if any man shall still
retain a good Opinion of that Pamphlet, It must need be infinitely advanced by
the thought, That so renowned an University should in any measure concur to it.

Yet I could have been well contented He would have afforded me his Belief,
when I assured him I had no relation to the University: That would I am sure
have saved him a great deal of unnecessary Pains, And He should not need so
vainly to have pursued Me through the various shapes of a Divine, a Doctor, an
Head of a College, a Professor, a Prevaricator, a Mathematician. He might also
by that have concealed the Pique He has so unjustly taken up against
Universities and Mathematiques, and some particular persons who have an
interest in both. One passage of his referring to this Head, is a little less
intelligible then so fine a piece ought to be, and therefore I will do Him and
the World the right to make a short Comment upon it. He has said in h^ Epistle
Delicatory, That the University Wit^ or good Companies, are good at two things,
at diminishing a Commonwealth and at Multiplying a Louse. In the first place it
must be known that the thing he alludes to is a limb of Mathematiques, and
therefore it is not to be expected that Mr Harrington, who holds no
understanding either with Mathematiques or Mathematicians, should take care for
expressing himself properly about it; What he call Multiplying a Louse ought to
have been Magnifying, for the thing is done by a Microscope or Magnifying
Glass; But about this no man need be troubled. We are then to understand That a
Gentleman in the University who is both a Divine, a Doctor, an head of a
College, and a Mathematician, has the Satisfaction to see frequently at his
Lodging an assembly of Men who are known both at home and abroad to be of the
most learned persons of this Age; The employment of this Company is by making
Experiments and by communicating their Observations to carry on a discovery of
Nature, in order to which They have sometimes had occasion to inquire, by the
help of a Microscope, into the Figure and position of those smaller parts of
which all Bodies are composed; At other times applying the Microscope to some
little Animals, as a Flea, a Louse, or a Mite, They have been convinced that
the Fabrik of them is Artificial to wonder, and that the Wisdom of the great
Architect of Nature is not more conspicuous in the larger Bulks of an Elephant
or Camel, then in these little Creatures. The pictures of these Animals in that
enlarged proportion which the Glass represents them in are drawn by a
Mathematician a member of this Assembly, who has invented a way to measure the
apparent magnitude of them, and are seen with Delight and Instruction by all
Strangers; And not only so, but have been received with applause by Foreign
Princes. This is that multiplying a Louse, for which Mr Harrington laughs at
the University wits, though he might have made a more serious and profitable
use of it; As it is said Monsieur Peiresk did, who having put a Louse and a
Flea into a Microscope, He observed that the Louse growing Gassend. in vita
Peresk. lib. 6.
angry, his blood ran up and down from head to foot, and from foot to head
again; Whence he gathered how great a Commotion of Humors and Spirits, and
what a disturbance of all the Faculties, Anger must needs make, And what harm
that man avoides who shuns passion. I know not whether this sight would have
had the same operation upon Mr Harrington, in freeing him from his Choler, But
I am sure it inclines me to no unpleasant thoughts, by putting me in mind of a
certain Author, who aestuates and torments himself, and yet an hair is enough
to hold him.

The only Complement I have for the Reader remains, which is to assure him
That this is the last time He shall receive a Trouble from Me in this
Controversy, I do not expect that Mr Harrington should give over, but I
promise my self He can not reply any thing to which an Answer may not be
easily fitted out of those Reasons and Maxims which I have already laid down.
I have cause to think by his last Book, that his stores of Reason and Arguments
are brought very low, but withal I believe his Treasures of Reproaches are
inexhaustible: And to silence such a person is as impossible as to disarme that
Man who can use the next Dunghill for a Magazin.

MONARCHY ASSERTED. OR, THE STATE OF MONARCHICAL AND POPULAR GOVERNMENT.
CHAP. I.
Whether Prudence be well distinguished into Ancient and Modern.

FOr the Vindicating the Considerations on the Commonwealth of Oceana, I shall
not need to do much more then give a true and accurate state of the Points that
fell in question between Mr Harrington and Me; for ^e being equally careless
of what I have said, and what He himself says, does almost always fly of
^^om the true subject of the debate between us. And I do not know any more
proper Method of ^eclaiming such Extravagant Writers, then what men take with
starting Horses, To bring them close ^p to take a View of that at which before
they boggled. In effecting which if Mr Harrington be sometimes put to feel the
Rebukes both of the Spur and Bit, no blame can justly befall Me, who am
necessitated to so rough a Manage.

Mr Harrington at the very beginning of his Commonwealth of Oceana, had laid
down a division of Government (pretended to be taken out of Giannotti) into
Ancient and Modern Prudence, the Ancient unanimously followed by the Greeks
and Romans ending with Caesar, the Modern introduced by the Barbarous Nations:
Now knowing that Antiquity is considered with Veneration by almost all Men, and
that even They who profess to slight it, make great Advantage of it when they
imagine it is on their side, He intitles to Ancient Prudence that way of
Popular Government which his Book applauds, and fastens upon Modern Prudence
that Monarchical Government which it Decries. And that He is not wronged by
Oceana p. 2.
this Interpretation of his Design, appears manifestly by his subsequent
Definitions of Government. Against this Partition of Prudence into Ancient and
Modern, and the Application of it that way, the Author of the Considerations
advanced these objections.

1. That though the Greeks and Romans despised all the World but themselves, We
had no Reason to do so, it being in them no better then Pride, Pedantry, and
slavery to narrow thoughts.

2. That the Examples of the Assyrian, Persian, and Egyptian Monarchies would
not consist with this Division, all of which were more ancient then the Greeks
and Romans.

3. That Macedon one of the Noblest parts of Greece it self, had always been
under the Power of Monarchs.

4. That in the rest of Greece Regal Government was more Ancient then Popular;
for which (to avoid the useless Prolixity of particular Proofs, which are
almost infinite) one General Authority was produced out of Thucydides.

5. That in Rome also Popular Government must give the precedence of Time to
Monarchy.

He that after all this, will maintain Prudence to have been well distinguished
into Ancient and Modern, and that by Ancient Prudence is to be understoodthe
Policy of a Commonwealth, gives us great Occasion to expect from him Evident
and Satisfactory Answers to every one of these Objections.

But to the first of them Mr Harrington's Answer (when all the Foame is wiped
away) comes only to this, that the Greeks and Romans who were H. p. 57
such Jealous Conservators of Liberty, and Masters of such excellent parts of
knowledge can not with any Truth or Sense be charged with Pedantry, or slavery
to narrow Principles. To which it may be replied in short (for the dispute
taken thus is become very remote from the Principal matter) that both Romans
and Greeks were indeed a brave and a wise People, and such as put a great Value
upon themselves, which when done upon just grounds is an effect of Magnanimity;
But they have withal been ever Responsible to the learned part of the World,
for their Arrogance in not acknowledging how much they profited by the Eastern
Nations, from whom it is demonstrable They borrowed the greatest part of what
they had of Arts and Sciences. The Greeks and Romans possessed Much, yet what
they wanted was More; But they taking the Much to be All, were in that Slaves
to their own thoughts which were much Narrower then the Nature of things.

To the second Objection, Mr Harrington gives somewhat an unexpected Answer;
That having opened the Policy of Turkey, He has not neglected ibid.
that of the Babylonians and Persians, which are summed up in the other. The
Controversy is about the Antiquity of Regal and Popular Government, And
because it is manifest that many Commonwealths are more Ancient then the
Turkish Monarchy, which is of about three or four hundred years, Must it
therefore be concluded also that they are Antienter then the Assyrian and
Persian Monarchies, which are of three or four thousand years standing? We
are not more beholding to Mr Harrington for his Discovery of the Balance, then
for the Invention of this excellent form of Arguing.

The third Instance is by Mr Harrington passed over in wise silence.

As little Answer is returned to the Fourth. But upon occasion of a Citation
out of Thucydides, Mr Harrington pleases himself that He has found something
in that Author that makes for the Balance, which (slipping from the subject in
hand) He runs away with, and prosecutes at large. But this Discourse being
somewhat unfortunately scattered in this Place, with Mr Harrington's Permission
it shall be transplanted to the Chapter See cahp. 3.
of the Balance, a soil more proper for it. And well we can part so; For it
is to be doubted whether the Considerer is like to get so well off another
place of the same Author; Never, says Mr Harrington, did man make a more
unlucky Choice for himself then the Considerer has H. p. 3.
of Thucydides, seeing what He affirms to have been Ancient Prudence, is
deposed by his own Witness to have been the Imbecility of Ancient Times.
Thucyd. lib. 1. Page 3. Truly the Considerer is a very unhappy Man, but his
unhappiness lies not in the mistaking of Thucydides, but of Mr Harrington, from
whom he expected to have seen some Probation, that the Prudence which was
Ancient belonged not to Monarchies; But He finds the Question fraudulently
transferred from the Antiquity, to the Prudence of Monarchical Government,
which in this Place came never before into Debate, and was supposed by Mr
Harrington himself both in his Division and Definitions of Government. The
Considerer will thank any man to tell him, Who is the Prevaricator now?

Having thus detected the Cheat which was out of Thucydides put upon us
concerning the Antiquity of Monarchical Government among the Graecians, I
shall not need to do more then admonish, That (in answer to the fifth Objection)
the same is endeavored out of Florus in Reference to the Romans.

I make no Doubt there is enough said for my own Vindication; but it were a
criminal In justice to the memory of the excellent Giannotti, if I should not
extend this Vindication to Him also, and bring him off from that share of the
Absurdity into which Mr Harrington has drawn him, by making him Author of the
Division of Prudence into Ancient and Modern. It is no longer a Wonder to Me
that Mr Harrington's Adversaries are used with so little Civility, when I see
his Friends meet with so little Honesty; The injury he does Giannotti is very
apparent, seeing the two Limits or Epocha's of time which Giannotti fixes have
no reference to Prudence, or Monarchical and Popular Government, but respect
only the afflicted Gi^n. p. 7.
Condition of Italy; One of these, says He, in which was the beginning of the
ruin of Italy and the Roman Empire, was when Rome was oppressed by the Arms of
Caesar: The other, in which was the height of the Italian misery, was when
Italy was overrunne and sacked by the Hunnes, etc. This surely has nothing to do
with the Government of King and People, or Ancient and Modern Prudence; That
Distinction is Mr Harrington's own, and Giannotti is not at all Responsible for
the Impropriety of it, then which nothing can be greater.

There is besides these Answers to my Objections something in Mr Harrington's
first Chapter relating to the University (for which He had not from Me the
least shadow of an Occasion) which approaches very near to Raving, and gives
Me cause to suspect I have fallen into a wrong Course of curing his Political
distemper, For whereas I think to do it by giving him more Light, knowing men
are of Opinion, that I ought to have closed up the Windows, and admitted no
Light at all.

Now then after all, I resolve to join issue with Mr Harrington, and let the
Reader know He need look no farther then this Chapter to see what Answer has
been made to the Considerations on the Commonwealth of Oceana.

CHAP. II.
Whether a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a Government of Laws, and not
of Men, And a Monarchy to be the Government of some Man or few Men, and not of
Laws.

IN the very Entrance of this Chapter I am charged by Mr Harrington with an
Habitual Falsehood and Fraudulence in reciting his Words, for which I am
thankful to him, as for a seasonable Discovery of his good Nature. The only
Evidence to make good this Accusation will be found to be, that instead of the
Word Art, as it was in his Book, Act is twice printed in the Considerations.
That this is an Error of the Press, I might appeal to my own Copy, if it
were not sufficient to appeal to the Indifferent Reader, whether there can be
any frandulence in such a Variation, of which I make no Use, and which is not
in the least conducing to my Design. I envy Mr Harrington this handsome
Confidence, that having been himself so miserably handled by Printers, He
should think fit to make Me responsible for all the sins of the Press. But
though I praise his Confidence, I cannot imitate his slender Ingenuity, by
laying at his Door the Nonsense and Mistakes in this last Book, though order
be there taken, that they should be imputed unto the Author himself, In as
much as the Printer pretends (upon the last Page) to have corrected the Errors
of his Press.

The Question under Debate in this Chapter is little more then a Controversy
about Words and Names, yet cannot be safely omitted because by the use of those
Names the People have been always deluded, and have (taking a Cloud for Juno)
embraced them as Substantial Goods: Laws and Liberty being the only True
Charms, that I know of, in Nature, which by the mere sound of Words produce
Great and Real Effects.

That Law proceeds from the Will of Man, I H. p. 7.
have Mr Harrington's own Confession, and consequently am justified for having
said, That Government is not in the Law, but in the Person whose Will gave a
being to that Law. But I am complained of for wanting Honesty to Consider that
this Will must have a Mover, and that this Mover is Interest. I never knew,
that to be Honest, it was necessary to see more in another Man's business then
He sees himself: I was at that time only concerned to find somewhat in
Government beyond Laws, and such was the Will of the Person which creates
those Laws; If Mr Harrington does now think fit to consider that this Will
must be moved by Interest, I neither need nor mean to oppose him in it. I can
be not only Honest but Liberal to Mr Harrington, yet not to that Excess as to
give him an Alms, when he begs no less then the whole Question; For so much it
amounts to where he says, That the Interest of the whole ibid.
People coming up to the Public Interest may be truly called the Empire of
Laws and not of Men, In order to this, let Me demand of him Whether the
Commands imposed upon the Public by One or a few Men are to be accounted
Laws? He has already taught Us they are to be so accounted where he says That
Law equally ibid.
proceeds from Will, whither of the whole People as in a Commonwealth, of one
Man, as in an Absolute, of few Men as in a Regulated Monarchy If so, what
pretense of Reason can there be, That an Absolute or Regulated Monarchy should
be esteemed less a Government of Laws then is a Commonwealth? On the other
side let Me ask Him, Whether though one single Person, or Ten or an Hundred
Persons making Laws are to be looked on as Men, yet if they amount to Ten or an
hundred thousand Persons, or include the whole People, They shall then cease to
be Men? Unless He will affirm this, How is it possible that a Commonwealth
should be less a Government of Men, then either an Absolute or a Regulated
Monarchy? To be plain, If the Declared Will of the Supreme Power be considered
as the Immediate Cause of Government, then a Monarchy is as much as a
Commonwealth an Empire of Laws and not of men: If we look further back, and
consider the Persons whose Will is received as Law, a Commonwealth is as much
as a Monarchy an Empire of Men and not of Laws. This is so manifest, and yet
Mr Harrington so firmly resolved not to understand it, that considering his
Temper I must needs applaud his Resolution of having nothing to do with the
Mathematiques, For half this Obstinacy would be enough to keep him from
apprehending, That the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two Right
Angles.

Though I have said more then enough in Answer to this double Question, Whether
a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a Government of Laws, and not of Men,
And a Monarchy to be the Government of some Man or few Men, and not of Laws;
Yet I may seem to have said too little, unless I take notice of an Argument
which by Occasion of this Dispute has been started against Monarchy. Let it be
admitted, may some Democratique say, that Monarchy is as much as a Commonwealth
an Empire of Laws, yet a Commonwealth must necessarily be an Empire of better
Laws ibid.
then a Monarchy; For in a Monarchy the Laws being made according to the
Interest of one Man or a few Men, must needs be more private and Partial then
suites with the Nature of Justice, Whereas in a Commonwealth Laws being made
by the whole People, They come up to the Public Interest, which is Common
Right and Justice. This Proposition has indeed Sense in it, which the other
wanted, but not any more Truth, as will be apparent if We examine the Differing
Tempers of a single Person, and of a Multitude enacting Laws.

When a single Person or Monarch begins to think of establishing any Law, He
must in all Reason be then most sensible of those Vast Cares which are never so
pressing as at the undertaking an Action which draws after it a long Train of
Consequences; For upon the Establishment and Execution of Good Laws depends
that Justice which preserves every Man in his own; The fruits of Justice are
the Satisfaction and Welfare of the People, and from these flow Public Peace
and Security, which are a Princes first and Greatest Interest: Hence it is
evident that when a Monarch acts the Legislator's part, He ought to be so far
from Partiality or respecting his own private Interest, that He is then
chiefly to Direct his Thoughts to the Common Good, and take the largest
Prospect of Public Utility, in which his own is so eminently included. Nor
do I believe there can be many Examples produced of Princes who in enacting
Laws have considered their own private Personal Interest, since almost every
where We see that in buying and selling, and other private Contracts, Princes
are Content to tie themselves up to the same Rules which they prescribe to
others. And even in those Cases where the Laws made by Princes seem most
directed to their own Interest, before We condemn them, It ought to be
examined, Whether such Laws be not Requisite to the attaining the Ends of
Government, And Whether the Advantages in Power which Princes gain by them be
not absolutely Necessary for the Conservation of Public Peace and
Tranquillity; For then the Private Interest of the Prince, and the Public
Interest do no longer differ, but are one and the same thing.

On the other side there cannot be a fonder Imagination then to think That when
a Multitude is assembled to enact Laws, is is necessary their Resolutions
should be consonant to Public Justice, and the Universal Interest; For a
great Part will not for want of Capacity comprehend what this Justice and
Interest is; The abler sort will presently be divided into factions and Iuntas,
and under Pretense of Public Interest will prosecute their own Designs. I
cannot understand how it is the Public Interest of the whole People to Govern
and make Laws, but indeed to be so Governed and live under such Laws, that
Justice may be impartially administered, and Every Man preserved in the
Enjoyment of his Own, which I have shown to be a Monarch's chief Care. It is
to be remembered also that the greatest Part of Laws concern such Matters as
are the continual Occasion of Controversy between the People of a Nation;
Such are the Laws which respect the Regulation of all Contracts and Bargains,
the Privileges of Companies and Corporations, the Encouragements and
Limitations of Manufactures, the Licenses and Prohibitions of Traffic, with
many more of the same Nature, by all which some Part of the People being
Gainers, and another Part Loosers, They cannot where their Interests are thus
divided be so fitly qualified for Legislators, as is a Prince who having no
private Concernment going, can have no aim but the Common good. After all, it
being essential to Popular Assemblies that the Plurality of Votes should
oblige the whole Body, those Laws which lay claim to the Consent of all, are
very often the Resolutions of but a little more then half, And must
consequently go less in their Pretensions to Public Interest.

Let Us see how these Things have been carried in Experience: And We shall
every where find, That those Laws which are reputed the People's greatest
Security against In justice and Oppression have been established by the
Authority of some Prince; Thus Alfred, Edward, Lewis, Alfonso, in their
several Ages and Dominions, have been excellent Legislators; But above all,
Several of the Roman Emperors, and chiefly Justinian, have (by the Advice of
a few private Men whose Assistance they voluntarily thought fit to make use of)
fabricated those Laws so much admired for their Reason and Equity, which have
stretched themselves further then ever the Roman Legions were able to march, and
which are still embraced by those People who have long since ceased to
acknowledge the Roman Empire.

But on the other side, Those Commonwealths which have been most celebrated
for their Laws, have received them from the hands of a sole Legislator, as
Athens and Sparta; Or else the People conscious of their own Incapacity that
way, have invested some few Men with a Supreme Power for the Constitution of
Laws, as the Romans did the December viri. And therefore it may well be doubted,
whether these People thought so well of themselves as Mr Harrington seems to
do of all Popular Assemblies, while He with such repeated Confidence asserts
that the People never fail to judge truly of the Public Interest where the
Senate Oceana p. 183.
discharge their Duty; If the Senate divide well He undertakes for the People
they shall be sure, to make a good Choice. For my part I confess that this is
too hard for my Faith, and that I rather think if Anacharsis were again in the
World, He would meet with Occasion to renew the Observation He made of the
Grecian Popular Assemblies, That wise Men propounded Plut. in Solon.
Matters, and Fools decided them.

To discover all the weak Arguments and false Inferences of Mr Harrington is a
Work, to Others of so small Profit, and to my self of so little Glory, that I
resolve to pass very slightly over that Paragraph where He tells Us, That it
is not the Declaration of the Will of the Sovereigne Power which constitutes
and revokes Laws, but that it is with Laws as with a Bond, which continues in
force till all the Parties agree to repeal or Cancel it: He foresaw the
objection against this Example, That it is a private One, And therefore puts
the Case between several Princes H. p. 8.
States, or Governments, or between several States of the same Principality or
Government. But though it may suit very well with Mr Harrington's Occasions to
Put this Case, it will not become Us to admit of it, who ought to understand
that the Leagues and Confederacies between several Princes or States have
nothing of the Nature of a Bond in them; For when either Party thinks fit to
recede from them (though in it self it may be an Act of Injustice) there is no
superior Tribunal to appeal to, by which the Party can be constrained to
stand to the Obligation, but the Business must be determined by a War. Much
less have they any thing of the Nature of Law in them, unless, as Mr
Harrington seems to be of Opinion, Princes or States may make Laws not only
for themselves but for their Neighbors too; Which Maxim agreeing so well with
his Legislative humor, may one day serve to produce as fine Models of
Government for France or Spain, as he has given us for England. Nor is the
Case altered by putting it between the ibid.
several States of the same Principality or Government, For if any one of
these States have, in Case of Difference, a just Power to force the obedience
of the Other, it is all one as if they were private Persons; But if no One of
them be acknowledged to have such Power over the Rest, Then in case of their
Disagreement, there remains no known Sovereigne Power, but that Nation is
reduced to the State of War; From whence it is evident That they were not at
first to have been considered as several States of the same Government, but as
equal Independent Ones which were only joined together by some League or Union.

Before I finish this Chapter I must retract an Error of which Hr Harrington
has convinced Me: He had affirmed That for Mr Hobs to say Aristotle and Cicero
wrote not the Rules of their Politiques from the Principles of Nature but
transcribed them into their Books out of the Practice of their own
Commonwealths, was as if a Man should say of famous Harvey that He transcribed
his Circulation of the Blood, not out of the Principles of Nature; but out of
the Anatomy of this or that Body: To which I replied, That the whole force of
the Objection amounted but to this, That because Harvey in his Circulation has
followed the Principles of Nature, therefore Aristotle and Cicero have done so
in their Discourses of Government. I confess, The Affirmation not being of it
self manifest, and I ignorant of any Obligation to take it upon Mr
Harrington's Word, I thought the Probation of it must lie in the Resemblance of
Aristotle's and Livie's Books of Government with Harveys of Circulation: But
this was an Error in Me, and an Injury to Mr Harrington, For in his last book
He has assured H. p. 9.
Me, that He produced it only as a Similitude, and never intended that any Man
should look for Reason or Argument in it. I heartily crave his Pardon, and by
way of Reparation to him, I make here a solemn Declaration, That for the future
He shall have no Cause to accuse Me for expecting Reason or Argument in any of
his Discourses.

CHAP. III.
Whether the Balance of Dominion in Land be the Natural Cause of Empire.

I Shall lie under a very great Discouragement in the Prosecution of this
Contest with Mr Harrington, unless some such Rules may be established between
Us, as are observed by the Champions at a Country Wake; That He who gets a
broken Head is for that Time Horse du jeu, and must not take up the Cudgels any
more. For if Mr Harrington may continue the Liberty of repeating
(notwithstanding my Answers) whole Pages of his Oceana without any Addition of
Argument, It will be easy for him every Month to impregnate the Press with a
New great Book. Of this his Repitition I give Notice once for all, being
unwilling to be so frequent in the Admonition as He is in the Practice of it.

Yet We are not to think that there is nothing New in his last Book, for though
his Reasons stand at a stay, his Confidence improves hugely, and He now tells
Us, that (in Despite of Mathematiques) by the Doctrine of the Balance He H.
p. 11.
has made the Politiques the most Demonstrable of any Art whatsoever. I am
sorry I have so little Credit with Him, else I should soberly advise him to
obtain from this Word Demonstration, for though it fiils his Mouth admirably,
some have taken Occasion to doubt it has left a great dealeof empty room in
his Head.

The Invention of the Balance He jealously asserts to be his own; Though in
another place he begins to doubt that Phaleas the Chalcedonian may dispute it
with Him; And that with great Reason, seeing it is evident out of Aristotle
(though it be rejected by him, as I shall hereafter discover) that Phaleas did
many Ages since light upon the same Fancy, I fear also that He will in
another Respct prove of the younger house, for many Months before the
Publication of his Oceana, there came forth a Letter, pretended to be sent from
an Officer of the Army in Ireland to his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR,
concerning his changing of the Government, in which the Doctrine of the
Balance, was not obscurely hinted. But this last will (it may be) trouble Mr
Harrington but little, since it is not unlikely the Author of that Letter goes
a share in the Commonwealth of Oceana. However, I shall not make my self Judge
of this Controversy, but rather, being Mr Harrington has thought fit to walk
over the same Ground again in this Chapter of the Balance, take that Occasion
to apply my self to a more accurate Discussion of the whole Question, then I
before thought Necessary. Which will be best performed by these Graduall
Assertions.

First, That Dominion in Land is a mere Effect of Empire, and therefore cannot
be the Cause of it, unless to be the Cause and the Effect be but one and the
same thing. Originally every man had Right to every thing, and no One Man had
more Title to one Piece of Land, then He had to any other Piece, and then Every
Man had to the same Piece: Or if this Assertion be thought too large, at least
There was no settled Propriety before the Establishment of Empire, nor could any
Man be said to have the Dominion of that Land, from whence He might be
immediately ejected by the Violence of the next Invader. But after the
Establishment of Empire, when the United Force of those who became Subject to
One Sovereign Power was grown greater then could be resisted by Particular Men,
Then and not before was Propriety and Dominion in Land fixed according to such
Rule and Proportion as the Sovereign Power thought Requisite. As for those two
ways of Natural and Violent Revolution by which Mr Harrington imagines
Propriety may come to have a being before Empire, they are not to be admitted
further then in Reference to this or that particular Empire, and so indeed
Propriety may be said to be before Empire, as the Propriety of the Families of
Nassau or Brederode to their Lands, was before the Empire of the States of
Holland: But then this Propriety depended upon some former Empire, and would no
longer continue to be Propriety if the succeeding Empire, (be it either by
Natural or Violent Revolution) did not allow and Authorize it. Wherefore it is
evident, That seeing Dominion in Land depends merely upon Empire, it must needs
be a gross Absurdity to say, That the Balance of Dominion in Land is the
Natural Cause of Empire. If notwithstanding this it can be made out, that
there is such a Complication of Empire with the Balance in Land that the
Conformity of the Balance is necessary to the health and long Life of Empire,
To fit Empire to the Balance is to set the Sun by the Clock, The Dominion in
Land being in that Case to be reduced to such a Balance as best suits with the
Empire: Which inverts the Aim, and at once overthrows the whole Model of the
Commonwealth of Oceana.

But in the second Place, This Illation need not be persued, because I think it
may with very good Reason be asserted That Justice is that by which all Empires
subsist, and come to be (as far as humane Instability permits) Eternal. It is
an Error to think (as has been already touched) that the Generality of a People
are infected with a Desire of Sovereign Power, and will not be satisfied with
Protection in their present Possessions, and Encouragement in Acquiring more by
the way of a Regular Industry. The Multitude, Arist. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 13.
and lib. 4. cap. 8.
says Aristole, are not disgusted at being excluded from the Government, but
rather are very well pleased to sit Quiet and be at leisure to follow their own
Business, unless they are oppressed and see their Governors make havoc of the
Public. If a Prince be careful of the Administration of Justice, and do not
by any Public, or signal private Violation of it exasperate his Subjects, He
need not fear the want of their Assistance for the Defense of his Throne, All
Popular Commotions that happen in a Nation being grounded upon Pretense, at
least, of some Injustice in the Governor. And though this Prince be
overballanced in Land by any Part of the People, it does not therefore follow,
That they will refuse to continue under his Government, as long as it is
administered with Justice: For it is a chief Part of the Function of the Supreme
Magistrate to be as it were a Public Arbitrator, to whom the Decision of all
Controversies among his Subjects is referred, and We know that in an
Arbitrator, it is not Riches but Integrity and Ability that Men look after; Nor
have I heard any reason why a Poor Man, if known to be honest, may not be
trusted to keep stakes in a Wager for more then his Estate comes to.

Yet because the Actions of a Prince though in themselves just, may though
Mistake or Malice not be considered as such by a People, I do not mean that a
Prince should be divested of all Power but what He gains by the Opinion of his
Justice and Innocence; And therefore in the third Place I descend to examine
how far Riches conduce to Sovereign Power, and Whether an Estate in Land is
naturally Productive of Empire more then any other Revenue.

The Reparation of our Substance by continual Supplies of Meat and Drink, And
the Defense of our Bodies (in cold Countries especially) from the Injuries of
the Weather by Garments and Habitations, are the first and most Natural Cares
of Mankind; We did not long continue satisfied with what was purely necessary
of this Sort, but soon grew up to desire Convenience and the Real pleasing our
Senses, And at last came to seek after things of Luxury and Vanity, which
depend altogether upon Opinion. And because no Man by his single Power could be
secure in the Possession of any of these Things, there was an early Willingness
in Men to submit to Empire, that by their United Force (which is that We call
Sovereign Power) They might be maintained (upon such Terms as the Sovereign
Power pleased to establish) in the Acquiring and Possessing such Things as
tended to the Ends already mentioned: This was the Introduction of Propriety.
At first this consisted only in the Fruits of the Earth and Cattle, And He who
had Land enough to bring forth more of these then He could consume, was a Rich
Man, and might with the Superfluity drive some little Commerce by way of
Exchange with the Neighborhood. But after that Men had found out a way of
Intercourse with People far remote, and a more considerable Traffic began to
be set on foot, Something was fixed upon by general Consent which might be the
Common Measure of the Value of all Things needful to Man; This is called Money,
which by it is Portability and Currentness having a great Advantage in the Use
of it, a Value came also to be put upon That, known by the Name of Usury or
Interest. And now He that abounds with Money, need not be in want of such Things
as are Useful to him, because other Men will for his Money be glad to let him
have part of their Superfluity.

Out of this We may infer, That since the Establishment of Propriety by the
Sovereign Power has rendered it neither Free nor Safe for particular Men to make
Use of Force in gaining such Things as they stand in need of, Riches do highly
conduce to Power; For Men that are unprovided of other means of acquiring such
Things as They can not want, are feign to apply themselves to the Rich for
obtaining of them, Who do not use to part with them, but in Exchange of some
Service or Subjection by which they grow Powerful. Yet this Power gained by
Riches is always dependant upon the Sovereign Power which Institutes and
preserves Propriety; For against a Force strong enough (such as are Conquests
and succesfull Rebellions) to overthrow the settled Propriety by the Subversion
of the Sovereign Power, Riches are not of any Defense, but rather matter of
Invitation to an Enemy by the greatness of the Booty.

We may also infer That where there is no Traffic or Money, as in new
Plantations, the Riches which conduce to Power consist in Dominion of Land able
to produce such Things as are necessary or Convenient to Subsistence; But in
other Places where the Estimate and Purchase of all useful things is reduced
to Money, there the Influence which Riches have upon Power flows not from an
Estate in Land only, but principally and immediately from ready Money; Or to make
use of Mr Harrington's Words, The Balance of Dominion in Land is not the
Natural Cause of Empire.

This was of old known to Aristotle, who having related the Project of Phaleas
the Chalcedonian to settle a Government by reducing Estates to an Equality,
with the expedient invented by him to bring it to pass, At last He rejects it
for this Reason chiefly; That He had not considered aright of Arist. Polit.
lib. 2. cap. 7.
this equality, having only endeavored to introduce it in Land, (What is this
but Mr Harrington's Balance in Land?) Whereas Riches consisted as well in
Slaves, and Cattle, and Money, and Furniture, in all of which He ought to have
settled the same Equality or Moderate Proportion, or else altogether to have
omitted that Fancy.

In this Particular also Mr Harrington seems to have lost ground to the
Considerer; for whereas He at first maintained that the Balance Oceana p. 5.
in Money can be equal to that of Land only in Places of great Trade and little
no Land as H. p. 14.
Holland and Genoa, He is now feign to confess that in Israel and Lacedaemon
too, the Countries being narrow and the Lots at a low scantling, if Usury in
the One and in the other Money had not been forbid, Money would have eaten out
the Balance of Land. This is upon the Matter to surrender the whole Question,
and to Allow that in all Places where there is money enough to hold any
considerable Proportion to the Land (And the Considerer was not so senseless to
think there could be weight in empty Bags) There the Balance in Money does
concur to Empire as much as that in Land.

So then Mr Harrington's Assertion is not a little straightened, and He that
undertook to make good in the General that Empire rests upon the Balance in
Land, is content it should prove so only in a Territory of such extent as H. p.
15.
Spain or England, where the Land can not be overballanced by Money. For this He
offers three Arguments, the first of which belongs not it seems to the Matter
but the Man. The Considerer had said that to make Wisdom or Riches the first
Principle of Government, were as unjust as it would be to oblige Mr Harrington
to give his Cloths or Money to ibid.
the next Man he meets Wiser or Richer then himself. If he had said stronger,
says Mr Harrington, he had spoiled all. It Is very true, the Considerer knew
that, and therefore did not say so. Is that a Crime? He has in more then one
place of the Considerations made appear what Influence He thinks force had
Originally upon Government, and therefore there is no Reason to take it ill
that He did not in this place contradict his own Opinion: But, Mr Harrington
continues to urge, The Richer as to the Case in Debate is the stronger, and if
the People have Riches, that is Clothe; or Money of their own, they must rise
out of the Propriety or Cultivation of Land, and so the Balance of Land must
of Necessity be in the People themselves, who having that will never give their
H. p. 16.
Clothes or Money or Obedience unto a single Person or a Nobility, though these
should be the richer in Money, whence it is evident that in such a Territrry as
England or Spain, Money can never come to overballance Land. A fine Modest
Argument this, which though it be called a Demonstration, I should never
suspected to have been meant for a Mathematical One, but that I find it going
upon certain Data or Postulata, two of which by Misfortune happen to be the
very things which were to be proved, As first, that if the People have Riches
they must rise out of the Propriety or Cultivation of Land, And then that Ready
Money though in never so great a Quantity cannot outweigh the Balance in Land.
To speak freely, This whole Passage has so little Affinity with sense, that I
must believe Mr Harrington was in Choler, and intended it as a Piece of Revenge
against the Considerer, for having dared to put a Supposition that any Man
could be Wiser then the Author of Oceana.

His second Argument (and that is called a Demonstration too) is that Henry the
seventh, ibid.
though the richest in Money of English Princes did by making Farms of a
Standard, and cutting of Retainers begin that Breach in the Balance of Land,
which has since ruined the Government. But did that Ruin swallow up the
Government while that ready money was in being? Or did not his Son Henry the
eight by his Pleasures and unprofitable Wars exhaust all that Treasure in a few
of the first years of his Reign? I may with Modesty and Truth enough let Mr
Harrington know that if the Exchecquer had eighteen years ago been as well
furnished as Henry the seventh left it, He might now probably have wanted the
Occasion of showing his Skill in Modelling a Commonwealth.

The third Argument is, That the Monarchy of Spain since that King had the
Indies, stands upon the same Balance in the Lands of the Nobility, on which it
always stood. This it seems We must believe for Mr Harrington's sake without
any further Proof, though the Opposite Assertion, That it does not stand upon
the same Balance, was proffered as an Instance against him by the Consider; Who
can now fortify his Side by this Observation, That from the Discovery of the
American Mines to the year 1640 (a Tract of time of more then 120 years) the
Crown of Spain has not been disturbed by any Domestic sedition of the
Nobility, for which there cannot any so Probable Reason be assigned, as the
Increase of the King's Revenue in ready Money by which he is enabled to maintain
a Force that overballances their Estates in Land.

Mr Harrington's Arguments being thus fitted with Replies, it will be expedient
to resume the Consideration of those ways by which a Revenue both Private and
Public may be raised, that so We may the better judge, Whether in such a
Territory as Spain or England Money may not come to overballance Land: But I do
not think it belongs to Me to do this with the Accurateness either of a
Philosopher who discourses (as Aristotle does in the second of his Oeconomicks)
of all the several possible ways of managing an Estate, Or of a Financier who
makes a Proposition for the raising a present sum of Ready Money. It will be
enough to observe in general the most ready and Natural Methods by which a
Considerable Revenue may be obtained.

The First of these is by the Propriety and Cultivation of Lands, which is a
very general Way, and the sole Considerable One in such Places where the
Methods hereafter expressed are not practicable. Out of this, in some Places, a
certain Tax or Proportion is payable to the Sovereign Power, by which the Owner
looses no part of his Propriety, yet has as it were a Rent Charge laid upon his
Estate.

The second is taken from the Bowels of the Earth, which in some Parts are
fertile of those Metals that need only the stroke of an Hammer to make them
Current Money; These are either belonging solely to the Supreme Power though
taken out of other Men's Ground, as here in England, Or at least a great share
of them belongs to the Prince, as it is with the King of Spain in respect of
all the Gold and Silver of America.

The third is by Traffic and Commerce; And that either Private and Domestic,
as carrying the Commodities of a Man's own Grouth to Market, and Mean Artisans
selling their Work to the Neighborhood, which are often charged by the
Public with some Excise or Gabell; Or else Public and Foreign, when by
Public Authority Companies are formed for the better Exportation and
Importation of Goods and Manufacture: And out of these some considerable Duties
and Customs, do almost every where issue to the Public Revenue.

The fourth and last is from the Profit of Money by Usury, And that also either
Private, when every Man puts out his own Money, upon which some Assessement,
payable by the Lender, to the Public ought in all Reason to be imposed,
Usurers being otherwise very unprofitable Members of a State, and the only Men
who contribute nothing to the Public Charge: Or else Public under the
Inspection and Security of the Supreme Power, commonly known by the name of
Banks, by which no small Revenue uses to accrue to the Public.

Now to show that in Spain or England the three last ways of raising a Revenue
may be more considerable then the first, Or, which is all One, that Money may
overballance Land, will not be difficult, if We consider that Spain (And if
Henry the seventh had given ear to Columbus his Profer England had been
Mistress of the same Treasures) is possessed of all the Bullion of the West
Indies amounting annually (not to mention greater Sums gained at the first
Discovery of those Countries) to 3 or 4 millions of our Money, which is by Mr
Harrington's Calculation a full third of all the Land in England. Next, Spain
or England are either of them by Nature endowed with all Advantages for taking
the whole Traffic of the World into their Hands, and are inferior to the
Dutch who enjoy it, in nothing but Industry: What the Importance of this is or
might be, the Dutch will best help Us to Understand, Who by that alone without
any considerable Land, have been able to baffle Spain, and contest with
England. And if Spain or England have or may have such a Traffic; They may
also when they please erect a Bank for any the Greatest sum of Money.

Against this Mr Harrington has but One Objection in store, which is, That the
Purse of a Prince never yet made a Bauke, nor till Spending H. p. 17.
and Trading Money be all one, ever shall; Where there is a Bank, Ten to One
there is a Commonwealth. This does Us no hurt, For if England or Spain were a
Commonwealth, their Balance in Money might then outweigh that in Land, which is
the Thing contended for. But He will be in Danger to loose his Wager, and his
Credit to boot; For some Monarchs have been as great Traders as any
Commonwealths; The example of the Medices he yields Me, to that I will add the
Crown of Portugal, which presently after the Discovery of the Cape of good
Hope did manage that mighty Lucrative Traffic which now the Dutch and English
share with them: The Examples of the Mogor and other Eastern Princes may also
be alleged, who though Monarchs are very great Traders. And where there is a
Traffic, it is undeniable but that, if it be found expedient, there may be a
Bank; Or is Antwerp a Commonwealth, or the Monti at Rome planted in a Popular
Government?

It would not be unfit also that before We consent to resolve that in such a
Territory as England Money can never overballance Land, We did a little reflect
upon the Successes of our last Wars, and inquire Whether it was not the Money of
the City of London which turned the Scales.

Having thus examined what the Influence of Riches is upon Empire, What the
Importance of Propriety in Land, and What that of ready Money, in such a
Territory particularly as Spain or England, I may with reason expect not to be
thought to have strained very much at the H. p. 18.
Doctrine of the Balance, much less, to have been choked with it. I consess I
cannot swallow it so fast as Mr Harrington, but that, it may be, does not
hinder Me from digesting it better. At least I have leisure to observe that
while He attributes so much to the Balance, He commits an Error in making an
Army depend merely upon the Riches of those who have the Disposing of it: For
though it be true That an Army is a Beast with a great Belly which subsisteth
not without very large Pastures, It is as true that this Beast is none of those
tame Ones that are kept within Fences, or imprisoned in a Several: When an
Army is once on foot, the Enclosure of the Law is too weak to hold it in, And
Propriety is no better then an Hedge of rotten Sticks. It was the Observation
of Him who had Wit and Experience enough to be the Founder of the Roman
Monarchy, That Men Dion. Cass. lib. 42.
and Money are the two Things by which Power is acquired and preserved, And that
these two do mutually support One another; For as by Money an Army is brought
together, So He that has Arms in his hand need not want Money. Thus even after
the Settlement of Propriety by Government and Laws, Force goes a share with
Riches, and is not wholly excluded from concurring to the Establishment of
Empire.

Nay further, If there comes to be a Contest between Gold and Iron, the
Advantage generally remains with the harder Metal, And He that has Arms in his
Hand, may when He pleases both command the Money in his Neighbors Pocket, and
also gather the Rents of his Lands: As it of old fell out among the Thurians,
Where the Nobility had ingrost all Offices and Magistracy into their own Hands,
and had bought (though against the Law) the Lands of the Arist. Polit.
whole Country; Yet the People being exercised and inured to the Wars, proved
too hard for the Nobility and their Guard, And dismissed them of their Power
and excessive Possessions in Land. From which Example these two Corollaries are
evidently deduceable, That an Agrarian Law is not a sufficient Provision for
fixing the Balance, And that the Conformity of the Balance to the established
Government does not necessarily secure a State from Changes and Revolutions.

One thing more remains to dispatch this Question of the Balance, And that is
to produce Examples of such Governments as have been settled contrary to the
Balance in Land; But I find by the whole Course of Mr Harrington's Reply to
Me, that this way of arguing is of no great Efficacy with Him, For either He
takes no Notice of such Examples, or by some pitiful unmanly Cavil seeks to
elude them. Wherefore I am put to make use of another Method, that is to bring
him as a Witness against himself, and to prove this Point by the Authority of
his own Assertions. In the 73 page of his Discourse concerning Ordination
against Dr Hamond, He has imparted this Lesson to Us; The People of Egypt till
having sold their Lands they came to loose their Popular Balance, were not
servants unto Pharaoh, wherefore when Joseph was made Governor over all Egypt
they were Free. And in Consequence to this We are told by him H. p. 56.
in another Place, That the Balance of absolute Monarchy or of a Nobility came
into Egypt by the Purchase of Joseph. But it is evident that the Exercise of
Sovereign Power was before belonging to the Kings of Egypt in a most Absolute
manner, seeing the People when not only their whole Fortunes and Estates, but
their very Lives also lay at stake by the Extremity of the Famine, had not
force enough to break open the Granaries and take out Corn for their
sustenance, but were feign to buy it of the King at his own Price. And if the
People of Egypt had not in the Case of extreme hunger (which uses to inrage the
most abject and slavish People of the whole World) Power enough to serve
themselves when there was enough of Corn in the Land, It is ridiculous to
think they could retain any Power or Liberty in reference to the Government.
Wherefore the Balance of Egypt being Popular, and the Government Absolute
Monarchy, Mr Harrington himself has furnished Us with a clear Example of a
Government that has been settled contrary to the Balance in Land.

I might by this time lawfully hope for a Release from this Dispute of the
Balance, if I were not engaged by my Promise in the first Chapter, to examine
that place of Thucydides, which by diverting the Discourse gave Mr Harrington
the Opportunity of saying something upon a Subject in which He must otherwise
have been silent. But what He has there said is so extravagant and wandering
from the true meaning of Thucydides, that I must needs think either He has
parted with his own Understanding, or believes his Readers willing to part with
theirs. Let the first 12 or 14 Pages of Thucydides, which serve as an
Introduction to his History, be considerately perused, And it will be found to
be the Author's aim to make it appear, That the Actions he goes about to
describe were more great and considerable then any had formerly been performed
by the Graecians. To this end He relates, That of old, Greece was not
constantly Thucyd. p. 2.
inhabited, but that at first there were often Removals, every One easily
leaving the place of his Abode to the Violence of some greater Number. Every
Man so husbanded the Ground, as but barely to live upon it without any stock of
Riches, and planted Nothing, but made account to be Masters in any Place of
such necessary Sustenance, as might serve from day to day. And for this Cause
Id. p. 3.
they were of no Ability at all, either for greatness of Cities, or other
Provision. And the Imbecility of Ancient Times is not a little demonstrated
also by this, That before the Trojan War nothing appears to have been done by
Greece in Common. This then is Manifest to have been the oldest Condition of
Greece, That though the People were not absolutely destitute of Civil Society,
yet those Societies being of very small Numbers were too weak to improve by
Plantation or Traffic, but were forced to abandon their Habitations to the
Violence of such whom the fatness of the Soil invited thither. And as these
Societies of Men were of themselves weak and inconsiderable, so were they
without any League or Union in Common, by which this their Imbecility might
have received a Cure. Suitable to their Condition was their manner of living, To
wear Iron, or be always in Arms, Id. p. 4.
and to count Theeving the best means of their living, being a Matter at that
time no where in Disgrace, but rather carrying with it something of Glory. But
Minos having built a Navy, Navigators had the Sea more free, For He expelled
the Malefactors out of the Islands, and in most of Id. p. 5. and 6.
them planted Colonies of his own. By which means They who inhabited the Sea
coasts, becoming more addicted to Riches, grew more constant to their
dwellings; Of whom some grown now Rich compassed their Towns about with Walls.
For out of desire of gain, the meaner sort underwent Servitude with the
Mighty; And the Mighty with their Wealth brought the lesser Cities into
Subjection. It appears by this that the first considerable increment of Greece
was by King Minos, who having suppressed the Pirates, and rendered Navigation
safe, the Maritime Cities by their Traffic soon began to grow Rich, and for
their Security fortified themselves, and by these Advantages (People in want
flocking to their Service) they prevailed over the lesser Cities, and grew up
to some indifferent Force, with which the War of Troy was undertaken: Which
Enterprise though of greater Name then any before it was through want of Money
but weak, and Id. p. 8.
in fact beneath the Fame and report which, by means of the Poets, now goes
of it. After the Trojan War also the Graecians continued still their Shiftings
and Transplantations, insomuch as never resting they improved not their Power.
But after a long time Greece had constant Rest, and shifting their seats no
longer at length sent Colonies Id. p. 9.
ahroad. When the Power of Greece was now improved, and the desire of Money
withal, their Revenues being enlarged in most of the Cities there were erected
Tyrannies. (For before that time Kingdoms with Honors limited were
Hereditary.) And the Graecians built Navies, and became more seriously addicted
to the Affairs of the Sea. Yet was not their Navall force very great, for
having spoken of such Fleets as had been brought together either by Tyrants or
Cities, and of the Actions performed by them, He concludes, That if Men
consider of the War he describes by the Acts done in the same, It will manifest
it self to be greater then any of those before mentioned. These Id. p. 13.
are the Passages of Thucydides out of which Mr Harrington goes about, by an
unheard of Chemistry, to extract the Doctrine of the Balance; But He must give
Me leave to observe these Errors and False Consequences in his Operation.

First He says that When out of desire of gain the Meaner Sort underwent
Servitude with the Mighty, It caused Hereditary Kingdoms with Honors limited;
As happened also with Us since the times of the Goths and Vandals. Good! So H.
p. 2^
We will be content to acknowledge this imaginary Force of the Balance, that
Prudence which He himself calls Modern, and will have to be first introduced
into the World after the breaking of the Roman Empire, shall be allowed to be
more ancient then the most ancient Republiques. But I beseech him Where does He
find that the Servitude the meaner Sort underwent with the Mighty caused
Hereditary Kingdoms? Thucydides owns no such Causality, Nor do those two
passages of His thus joined together by Mr Harrington appear to have any
Reference to one another. Nay on the contrary it is manifest that Hereditary
Kingdoms were before that Servitude, seeing that Servitude happened not till
after Minos, who was a King, had by scouring the Seas of Pirates and destroying
their Nests, given Security to Traffic, by which and not by the Balance of
Land these Cities grew Potent.

In the second Place, He attributes the Power of Pelops to the Balance in
Land, Whereas Thucydides says expressly, He obtained this Power by the
abondance of Wealth He brought with him out of Asia, to Men in want. Did He
transport his Land with Him? Or is not this a clear Instance of the Prevalence
of Money against the Balance in Land?

But then thirdly, He at the same time supposes no Propriety in Land till after
the Trojan War, And yet makes before that War the Overballancing of the Mighty
to be the Cause of Hereditary Kingdoms. This has the aspect of a
Contradiction, into which it is likely he slipped, by not having a true
apprehension of Thucydides, who does not affirm there was in those remote Ages
He treats of, a time when there was no Propriety, but only that Men being not
yet united into great Nations, but living in small Clans, there joint Force was
not sufficient to defend them against the Violence of such who had any small
odds in Number, which was the Cause of so frequent Transmigrations.

Fourthly, He will have the Revenues of Greece which were enlarged about the
Time of erecting the Tyrannies, to consist only in Land, unless forsooth We can
show there was Usurie at that Time: He must pardon Me for this also, It is
enough that there then began to be great Trading, which is plainly testified by
Thucydides where He says That the Graecians became more seriously addicted to
the Affairs of the Sea.

Fifthly, He imagines the difference between the old Hereditary Monarchies and
the new erected Tyrannies to have been only in the Peoples Apprehension of
them, who being grown Rich called that Government Tyranny, which before during
their Poverty, They had been content to own for a lawful Monarchy. This is
indeed to be a true Servant to his own Supposition, but not to be a faithful
Historian of the Actions of other Men; For in some of these Tyrannies the
change from Monarchy must be attributed to the Princes themselves, Who upon
Arist. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 15. and lib. 5. cap. 10.
the increase of Wealth having put off the Sobriety and Moderation of their
Predecessors, and addicted themselves to Avarice and Luxury, or as Thucydides
expresses it, Their desire of Money being improved with their Power, governed
their People with all manner of Insolence and Oppression. But most of the
Tyrannies were then at that time first erected, for the old Monarchies having
by the failing of the Royal Arist. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 14. and lib. 5. cap. 5.
Lines, or by the remisseness of the Princes been changed into Commonwealths,
the Supreme Power was afterward usurped by such Persons who having no just
Claim, were forced to secure themselves by Violent and Tyrannical Courses.

Last of all, Because Thucydides comparing only the Actions of the old
Graecians with those He is about to describe, gives the Advantage to the
latter, calling the other the Imbecility of Ancient Times, He would therefore
have it thought, that the Considerer has made an unlucky choice of Thucydides
his Testimony. But it is easy for Me to convince him, that though I had on my
side no other Testimony (which by the way is untrue, the matter being attested
by all the Greek Histories of those remote Ages) but this of Thucydides I were
upon Terms secure enough: For first Thucydides mentions this Imbecility only
in reference to the times before the Trojan War, and not the whole time that
Greece was governed by Hereditary Monarchs; And then again, this Imbecility is
no diminution of the Antiquity of that Government, (which was the sole thing at
that time in Debate between Us) nor yet any Imputation to the Prudence of it;
For it is not to be understood of any Moral or Political Imbecility
radicated in the Nature of that Government, but of a Natural one equally
attending the Infancy of all Governments; Arms, Shipping, Money and the other
Provision by which a Nation frees it self from this Imbecility, being not
original or essential Members of any Government, but like Hair the
Productions of Age and Grouth.

I could not at a less Expense of Time and Pains satisfy my Promise to
consider these Passages of Thucydides; To some Readers it will not, possibly,
be unacceptable to have been rescued from an Erroneous Apprehension of of that
excellent Author; For my own part I gain by it the satisfaction of observing
that I am not the only Person who suffer by Mr Harrington.

CHAP. IV.
Whether the Balance of Empire be well divided into National and Provincial;
And whether these two, or Nations that are of distinct Balance, coming to
depend upon one and the same Head, such a mixture create a New Balance?

TO make recompense for the length of the last Chapter, this shall be a very
short one. The Question was put by the Considerer, Whether there may not be a
Mixture of the National and Provincial Balance, so that the several Parts
of an Empire may come to poise one another, and by that produce a New Balance?
To this Mr Harrington gives a Solution in the H. p. 22.
Negative, by saying that No one Government whatsoever has any more then One
of two Balances; That of Land which is National, or that of Arms which is
Provincial. I might without Prejudice to my Cause abstain from any further
Discussion of this Question, for coming just now from digging up the Roots of
the Doctrine of the Balance, these Branches of it must of themselves wither
and fall off. Yet to show that I did not at first without Reason propose the
Question, this shall be added in Explication of it.

There is scarce any one of the Considerable Dominions of Europe which is not
(like a rich Fur composed of Tips of Sables) made up of several Pieces; Spain
consists of the Crowns of Castile, Arragon, Navarre and Granada, besides diverse
Kingdoms Islands and Provinces in distant Parts of the World: France, though
it looks like an entire Piece, is constituted by several Provinces which have
by various Occasions come to be united in that Potent Kingdom: In Spain the
power of the Castilian Kings was more absolute then that of the Aragonese; In
France some of the Provinces retain Privileges not enjoyed by the rest, as the
Liberty of Assembling their particular Estates, and the like. The Considerer,
to prove the Mixture of the Balance, made Instance in the Kingdom of Arragon,
where since the Union with Castile, the Regal Power is very much advanced, And
yet without reducing it to a Provincial Balance, seeing Arragon is still, as
to the maine, governed by their own Laws, and by their own Officers, and not
by an Army. This Instance is rejected by Mr Harrington, because the Balance
both in Castile and Aragon being that of a Nobility, They both, says He,
continue National. I am desirous of giving him all fair Satisfaction, and
therefore am Content to lay aside this Instance, and instead of it fix upon One
in France which is not liable to the same Objection, And this shall be the
Imperial Cities of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun. These Cities were free Members of
the Empire, governed in the way of a Republique by their own Citizens, as
Strasbourg and other Imperial Cities are at this day, and by Consequence their
Balance must necessarily have been Popular: They were somewhat more then an
hundred years ago surprised by the French, who have since incorporated them
into the Crown, the Balance of which is by a Nobility; And the last King of
France erected a Parliament there, after the manner of the other Members of
that Crown.

Now I am to demand of Mr Harrington Whether the Balance in these Cities be
changed from Popular, to that by a Nobility? If He affirms it to be changed, We
shall not be obliged to believe him unless He brings Proofs strong enough to
overthrow the Vehement Presumption that We may have for the Contrary, by
observing that these Cities continue still to be of great Traffic, which must
of Necessity keep the Wealth in the People's hands. If He replies that the
Balance of them is Provincial, It will be very difficult to apprehend the
Truth of that Answer, seeing the Inhabitants of them enjoy all the Privileges
of French Subjects, and are governed by the same Laws, and the same Form of
Administration of Justice with the rest of France. It Is true indeed they live
under the Power of a Governor, but in that They differ not from Picardie,
Champagne, Languedoc and all other Parts of that Kingdom, whose Balance
notwithstanding is not therefore Provincial; Nor can it be denied that they
have a Garrison upon them, but in this their Case is the same with all the
Frontire Towns in France, which are secured with Garrisons, not so much out of
Jealousy of the People, as of a Foreign Enemy.

If then the Balance of these Cities can neither be said to be the National
One of the Crown they live under, nor yet Provincial, I had Reason to put the
Question, Whether there might not be a Mixture of the National and Provincial
Balance, or a poising of one another by the several Parts of an Empire. Of
which We may with facility obtain this farther Conception, That as the
pretended force of the Balance in any one Country, secures the Power in the
Hands of such Persons on whose side the Balance is, So in the Union of
several Countries under One Empire, the Power remains with those to whom the
Balance resulting from the whole belongs: And as in one Single Country, Men
are necessitated to submit to the Balance, because they despair of Power to
Oppose it, So in the Union of Several Countries, Some one of them may be
obliged to live under a Government different from their own Balance, as
knowing themselves to be outweighed by the Balance of the Rest.

CHAP. V.
Whether there be any Common Right or Interest of Mankind distinct from the
Parts taken severally; And how by the Orders of a Commonwealth it may best be
distinguished from private Interest.

IF I had not been taught by Mr Harrington himself that many Passages of his
are to be understood by way of Similitude only, not of H. p. 9.
Argument or Probation, I should have been very much at a loss how to answer
this Chapter: But now by the help of that Instruction I perceive this is
intended for a Chapter of Similitudes, And it would be too unkind a Part to
oppose a Gentleman in the choice of such Similes as He thinks fit to make use
of for the adorning his style. I am sensible of my having already erred in this
Point, and justly incurred Mr Harrington's Anger, by thinking his Similitudes
Chap. 2.
included somewhat of Reason in them, Therefore I shall employ my Care in this
Chapter to impart that Caution to the Reader which I my self have received,
least He should do these Similitudes or their Author so much wrong as to
mistake them for Reasons.

The first Place where this Care may be seasonably employed, is about a
Similitude which, though it be taken from Beasts, We are not to expect should
have four Feet. Diverse of the Beasts (it is Grotius who has observed it)
abstain from their own Profit, either in regard of Oceana p. 5.
those of the same kind, or at least of their Young. Mankind then (infers Mr
Harrington) must either be less just then the Creature, or acknowledge also his
Common Interest to be Common Right. To go about upon this Occasion to discover
the Causes of that Affection which Brute Creatures bear to their Foetus, And
how a Part separated from an Animal to which it had been long united may by the
Perpetual stream of Effluviums emitted from it, continue to have an Operation
upon that Animal, would be a Disquisition too remote from our present Subject.
I will rather make Mr Harrington a Gift of the whole Inference, and allow That
Men have the same Affections with the Creatures, And do deny themselves their
own Profit for the Advantage of their Family: But what will He gain by this
Concession? This will at most serve to prove something of a Common Interest of
every Family within it self, but falls infinitely short of making out a Common
Interest of all Mankind; And I do justly suspect He will not be much gratified
with any Instances taken from Paternity, or the natural Administration or
Interests of Families, seeing there is not in that whole Economy one
Particular, which does not largely disfavour the Pretensions of Popular
Government.

And therefore He calls in another Similitude to the Rescue, and tells Us out of
Hooker, That even stones or heavy things forsake their ordinary mont or Center,
and fly upwards, to relieve the H. p. 24.
Distress of Nature in Common. If I should now take this Hint to discourse of
Vacuum Disseminatum, of Magneticall Motion, of the Gravitation and Impulsion of
Air, of the Protrusion of less heavy Bodies by those that are more Heavy, and
of several other Principles belonging to this Subject, Mr Harrington would
think Me very Fond of my Natural Philosophy, and more then ordinarily
Covetous of an Occasion to divulge it. It is enough that this is but a
Similitude, and as such did very well become Mr Hooker in a Rhetorical
Exaggeration, Nor shall Mr Harrington be denied the same Liberty while He
appears either as Poet or Orator, but when He acts the Legislator's Part, and
pretends to fix the Principles of Government, He must not wonder if We remain
unsatisfied with such thin Discourses.

Indeed He himself seems to place no great Confidence in them, but has thought
fit to H. p. 25.
give Us this farther Demonstration: All Civil Laws acknowledge that there is
a Common Interest of Mankind, and all Civil Laws proceed from the Nature of
Man, therefore it is in the Nature of Man to acknowledge that there is a Common
Interest of Mankind. How? Do all Civil Laws proceed from the Nature of Man?
This New Maxim will make strange Havoc among the pore Schoolmen and Authors
de Legibus, and quite Ruin all their Divisions and Definitions of Jus
Natural, Jus Gentium, and Jus Civil; But of all Men honest Vspian will be in
the worst Condition who has had the ill Fortune to give us this Account of
Civil Laws; Jus Civil est quod neque in totum a Naturali Digest. de Just.
and Jur. leg. 6.
vel Gentium recedit, nec per omnia ei servit: Itaque cum aliquid addimus vel
detrahimus juri communi, Jus proprium, id est Civil efficimus. Which is beyond
Dispute thus far true, That the Obligation of Civil Laws consists properly in
such Things to which Men were not bound by Nature, nor by any other Argument
but their Subjection to the Power which constitutes those Laws; For otherwise
the same Civil Laws must obtain through the whole World, seeing all Men are
equally bound to what proceeds from Nature: But though Mr Harrington's
Assertion were true, the Considerer were not at all concerned in it, For He at
first denying there was any Common Interest of Mankind, only with Reference to
Mankind before they had voluntarily listed themselves into Societies, and so
rendered themselves Subject to Civil Laws, is not now with any Equity to be
oppugned by any Observations taken from the Condition of Mankind after it was
become Subject to the Power of Civil Laws. I must always assert, That though
Originally in the State of Nature, and Antecedently to all Society, there was
no Common Interest of Mankind distinct from the Parts taken severally; (the
Obligation laid upon Families by Paternall Power only excepted) but that every
particular Man had Right to prosecute his own Advantage, though to the Ruin of
other Men, yet since the Institution of Government, Men are obliged besides,
nay in many Cases above, their own Private Interest, to advance the Public or
Common One: The reason of which is taken from hence, That unless Every private
Man does divest himself of his private Interest as well as his private Power,
and contribute it to the Public, the Sovereign Power will be disabled from
effecting the Design and Aim of Government; And Particular Men will in vain
expect from that Power, which has by themselves been so unwisely limited,
Protection and the Benefit of Laws: By this Protection and Benefit of Laws,
Every Man's Power and Interest which He had parted with, comes home to him
again with Increase, the Observation of such Laws as the Sovereign Power finds
useful for the Preservation of Society being in an Eminent Manner the Interest
of every private Man: For Instance, A man that Steals is put to Death; This is
not only the Public Interest, but the Private Interest of every Particular
Man, who by the Terror of such a Punishment is in some Measure secured from an
Invasion on his Propriety. This Assertion is I confess contradictory to Mr
Harrington's, That a Man who steals is not put to Death for H. p. 25.
any Man's private Interest, in which, as in this whole Thing called
Demonstration, I meet with so little Reason, that it pities Me there is nothing
in it which might make it pass for a Similitude.

Seeing then the Addresses of Reason have been so unsuccessefull, I do not
wonder to find The other Potent Rival Passion, has obtained so far upon Mr
Harrington's Soul. He pretends That the whole Philosophy of the Soul which
concerns Policy is demonstrated throughout the Commonwealth of Oceana, And that
it consists in deposing Ibid.
Passion and advancing Reason unto the Throne of Empire. But it will not be
Rational to believe this of a Commonwealth whose Author and Legislator is
himself a slave of Passion, and not a Subject of Reason; And I make my Appeal
to all uninteressed Persons, Whether through his whole Reply Reason or Passion
bear the greatest sway with Mr Harrington, And in reference to this particular
Chapter, I desire them to Judge, Whether it be not an heap of very Pitiful
Petulancies and Calumnies. Yet it is not to be thought but that in this Anger
He has Wit, of which if any Man be unconvinced, He is to be remitted to that
admirable Oration He makes to the two Girls, which being a Treasury of such
Rare Conceits, ought in all Prudence to be inserted with the other Speeches
into the following Editions of Oceana.

But though his Wit be admirable, his Discretion still has the upper hand; To
repeat 40 or 50 lines out of his Commonwealth of Oceana, was not very
troublesome, but to examine the Reasons alleged by the Considerer to prove
that the Case of the two Girls dividing and choosing their Cake was not
applicable to the Institution of a Commonwealth, was too stubborn a Matter to
be wrought to his Purpose, and is therefore silently past over. It is but
Justice that I should have leave to repeat too, and put Mr Harrington in mind
that He goes upon a false Supposition; For unless the two Girls lived under
some Power greater then their own, (And if so they were Members of some
Society, and obliged in Disposing of their Cake to behave themselves according
to the established Laws of it) They would never have divided the Cake, but the
stronger of the two Girls would have taken the whole, or at least so much of
it as She thought useful to her.

In like Manner, If some One Person or Persons who have acquired the Supreme
Power (by what Method or Artifice is not as to this purpose Material) shall
think fit to frame a Government where the whole People shall be divided into
two Assemblies, with one of which shall be the right of dividing or Debating,
and with the other that of choosing or Resolving, there is no great Reason to
doubt but that this Temper may be effectual to the attaining the Ends of
Government: Yet even in this Case, it will be a Necessary Caution, That by
mixing the Function of the several Members of the Government, it be not
rendered disputable in which of them the Sovereign Power resides, For this
destroys the Design of Government, and must frequently reduce things to the
State of War. But all this while this is nothing to Mr Harrington's Purpose,
and serves not at all to make out the Natural Right of a Commonwealth, seeing
this Frame of a Commonwealth depended upon some former Sovereign Power; And to
imagine that without the Influence of such a Power, Men unreduced or broken to
the Rules of Society, should of themselves contrive themselves into two
Assemblies, One of which should divide and the other choose, And that the
strongest would not rather engross the whole Right both of dividing and
choosing, Is to suppose that which can never be granted, And for which I do not
believe there can ever be any stronger Reason produced then Mr Harrington's
bare Affirmation.

For as for that Notion of a Natural Democracy and a Natural Aristocracy, Or
that among H. p. 27.
twenty Men there will be some few (perhaps Six) excelling the Fourteen in
greatness of Parts, It is altogether Arbitrary and destitute of any good ground
in Experience; Among the twenty perhaps there will be but One, perhaps Sixteen,
who excel the Rest in Parts: Or if this Proportion of about a third be allowed
him, it will not be enough to help him over the style; For though among twenty
Men (not related to one another, nor as yet united in any Society) Six be
apparently Wiser then the Fourteen, Must the Fourteen therefore necessarily
entrust the Six with the Debate of such things as concern their Interest? Is it
not much more Natural to every Man to think himself Wise enough to advise
about his own Affairs, and to suspect all Persons of a greater Reach then
himself? Indeed upon a Supposition that there were any known Common Interest of
these twenty Men, it were not improbable that such of them as by Experience
were known to be the Wisest, might be entrusted by the Rest with their Common
Affairs; But it has been already demonstrated that there can be no such Common
Interest ( I add now also, Nor no such Experience of one another's Abilities)
unless those twenty Men had been before united in some Society, that is,
reduced under some Government. Wherefore Mr Harrington stands Convict of
Obstinacy in this Paralogisme, That He by Supposition puts the twenty Men into
a Condition that of Necessity infers them to be already reduced to some
Government, And yet at the same time Imagines them free to dispose of
themselves as if They lived under no Government, and did but then begin to
think of Constituting One.

To go yet a little farther with him, Admit that at first by some strange
Accident a People should happen thus to distribute themselves into two
Assemblies, a dividing One, or Senate, and a choosing One or Popular Assembly:
Is this Foundation firm enough to sustain the whole Weight of a Commonwealth?
May not either of these Assemblies repent of the Bargain, and endeavor to draw
the whole Power both of the Debate and Result to themselves? That the Senate
may do it by deluding the People, and confounding their Judgments in the Choice
or Result seems not improbable; Nor is it Antidote enough to say that The
People in a Commonwealth are their own Army, unless it were also Certain that a
more subtle Party never had nor could dispossess a simple and ignorant One of
the Power of the Sword. But that on the other side the People should not invade
the Function of the Senate and take upon themselves the Right of Debate as well
as of the Result, can not without some shame be denied by him who has
complained of the Athenian, Carthaginian, and Roman People for this very thing.
It is true None of these People did go about to take away the Senate wholly,
but the difference is not great between dissolving an Assembly, and rendering it
altogether Insignificant by robbing it of that Employment for which it was at
first Instituted. When the Lion is to choose, the Fox knows his Division must
be such as gives all to One side and leaves nothing to the other; If a People
be once enraged, the Senate will find themselves concerned to please them in
the Division as well as in the Choice. And this was the Condition of the Senate
of Capua after the Fright they were put into by Pacuvius, I am vero nihil in
Senatu actum aliter, quam si Plebis ibi esset Consilium. That whole Live.
Scene was laid by Pacuvius with a Design to preserve the Senators and satisfy
the People, and by that at once bring them both into a Dependence upon himself;
His surprise of the People was indeed very Ingenious, but had He given them
time to consider, They would without doubt have found out some among themselves
whom They would have thought Wise enough to make a Senate: If not, It must have
been for want of Instruction in Mr Harrington's new Doctrine, That the
pretended Depth and Difficulty H. p. 133.
in Matter of State is a mere Cheat. From the beginning of the World unto this
day, you never found a Commonwealth, where the Leaders having Honesty enough,
wanted skill enough to lead her unto her true Interest at home or abroad.

By this it appears, That there is no Common Right or Interest of Mankind
(except that of Families arising from Paternall Power) antecedent to the
Reduction of Mankind under Government; As also, That the Office of Dividing, or
debating, and Choosing or Resolving, Or the different Functions of the Senate
and People in a Commonwealth, are not founded upon any Natural Right, but
merely upon an Artificial One proceeding from the Designation of some
preceding Sovereign Power. And this being the true Case of a Commonwealth, the
two distinct Assemblies of the Senate and People have not as to this any more
advantage then is between any Parties who give and take Counsel; Counsel is
nothing but Ratiocination about the Affairs of another Man, and Ratiocination
is the Addition or Subtraction of Propositions; The Operation belongs to the
Person who gives Counsel, and the Proof or Examen of it remains in his hand
who receives the Counsel: This Mr Harrington is pleased to call dividing and
choosing, which in this Sense belongs to a Monarchy as much as to a
Commonwealth; For when a Prince asks any Man his Advise (and I think there
never was Prince who advised not with some Body) that Man divides, and the
Prince makes the Choice; Only here is the Difference, an able Prince if his
Counsel has committed an Error in the Operation knows both how to detect and
Rectify it, but a Popular Assembly being of themselves unfit for a Debate, are
forced to acquiesce in the Division or Debate of the Senate.

And what if after all the Popular Assembly, fixes upon the wrong Member of the
Division? To judge of the Utility or Disutility of a Proposition in matter of
State, is I hope another thing from discerning which is the biggest or least
Piece of a Cake, And a Discourse about which much of understanding and
Experience must be employed, is not of so easy and certain Dispatch, as a
Matter which is submitted to the Determination of sense. In one respect, the
Choice or Result is an Action of greater Difficulty then the Division or
Debate, For an Active Fancy which suddenly Ranges over a great deal of
ground, may easily find out the various Methods of which any Business is
Capable, but to discern which of them is the most conducing, is the Work of an
exact and well-poised Judgment. To affirm That because every Man has an
Interest H. p. 27.
what to choose, therefore that which suits with every Man's Interest, comes
up to the Public Interest, Is in the first Place not true; For it most
frequently falls out that Particular Men have a Private Interest of their own
differing from if not contrary to the Public One, by which they are more
potently inclined then by their Affection to the Public; But secondly if it
were always true the Difficulty is left still remaining; For to suppose that
every Man in a Popular Assembly should in a matter of State be able to discern
his true Interest, is to suppose the Meanest and most unqualified of the People
infallible in those things, where the most Consummate Politicians do often
mistake, And is besides repugnant to the Experience of all Commonwealths, whose
Histories are full of Examples of pernicious Councels which have been embraced
by the People.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, it must be confessed that a
Commonwealth gains one great Advantage by the Debate of the Senate; For the
People being composed of Ignorance, Obstinacy, and Tumult would certainly in a
Moment tear to pieces any Business that should be thrown among them; Whereas
by reserving the Debate to the Senate, the People have no other employment but
to let fall a little piece of Linen at all Adventures into one of two Boxes,
So that being thus brought within a Disjunction of the Matter, It can be but an
even lay against them that they do Miscarry.

CHAP. VI.
Whether the Senatusconsulta, or Decrees of the Roman Senate had the Power of
Laws?

IN discussing this Question it will in the first Place be necessary to make
known what is to be understood by the Word Laws. And though it be easy to take
up several Definitions of Law, none is so appropriate to the present Subject
as that of Justinian. Lex est quod Populus Romanus Senatorio Magistratu
interrogante (veluti Instit. de jur. not. Parag. ^ 4.
Consule) constituebat. This Definition puts a difference between Leges and
Plebiscita, which having not been attended to by Ateius Capito in Gellius, He
involves himself; For the Plebiscita were such Constitutions as without the
Senate or the Intervention of any Senatorian Magistrate were framed by the
Common People under the Authority of their Tribunes. At first Obedience was due
from the Romans only to such Laws as were established by the Votes of the
People (including the Senate,) and had been proposed by some of the greater
Magistrates: But after that the Plebs or Common People had by their Seditions
gained ground so far upon the Senate, as to obtain the Tribunes a Magistracy
elected out of their own Body, They soon began to frame Orders called
Plebiscita, which at the beginning obliged only their own Order, and concerned
not the Nobility, but were after a while improved to the full Authority of
Laws. whether this were enacted by the Lex Horatia, the Lex Publilia, or the
Lex Hortensia, as is by various Authors variously reported, Or Whether the
later of these Laws were any more then a reviving of the former, We shall not
be concerned to inquire; It will be enough to take notice that the Plebiscita
having attained the Power of Laws, Pomponius had Digest. de Orig. Juris leg. 9.
very good Reason to observe Quod inter Plebiscita and Legem species
constituendi interessent, Potestas eadem esset.

As the Plebiscita or Decrees of the Common People were not Laws, nor ever so
called, and yet had the whole Power of Laws, So the Senatusconsulta or Decrees
of the Senate had the same Power. Senatusconsultum est quod Instit. de jur.
not. Parag. 5.
Senatus jubet atque constituit. Nam cum auctus esset Populus Romanus in eum
modum, ut difficile esset in unum eum convocari, Legis sanciendae causa; aequum
visum est, Senatum vice Populi consuli. And least Justinian should be thought
to have lived in too remote an Age, to be a Witness in this Case, We have a
much earlier Testimony of Pomponius to the same Purpose. Quia difficile Plebs
convenire coepit, Populus multo difficilius in tanta turba hominum, Necessitas
ipsa curam Reipublicae ad Senatum deduxit. Digest. sup. eod.
Ita coepit Senatus se interponere: and quicquid instituisset observabatur.
Idque jus appellabatur Senatusconsultum. With which agrees that of Digest. inf.
de Leg. and SC.
Vlpian, Non ambigitur Senatum jus facere posse.

To determine at what time the Senatusconsulta attained to the Power of Laws,
is more then I will undertake; It is very probable that this was not
established at Once, but grew on by insensible Degrees. But for Mr Harrington
without the least profer of any Probation to affirm, That the Senatusconsulta
were not Laws in that they were Senatusconsula, or proposed by H. p. 31.
the Senate, but in that They were allowed by Justinian or the Prince, in whom
was now the Right of the People, is to take to himself greater Authority then
ever was given to the Dictator. For in the first Place it is manifest by the
order of the Discourse both in the Institutions and the Digests, That the
Senatusconsulta had attained the Power there affirmed to belong to them before
the time of the Emperors. And then the Occasion by which the Senatusconsulta
are said to have grown into that Power, was the Difficulty of Assembling the
People for making of Laws, by which it is necessarily inferred, That the
People had not then passed away the Right of making Laws, nor by the Lex Regia
invested the Emperor with it.

I need not conceal that Mr Harrington in this Point walks in a Path traced
out for him by Hotoman; Who indeed accuses Tribonian of Error or Assentation,
And says that the Senatusconsulta had not the Power of Laws before it was
given them by the Emperors, who by that thought to fortify the Power they had
usurped over the People. But We must be cautious in admitting Hotoman's
Judgment in these Matters; For He was not only a professed Condemner of
Tribonian's Labors in compiling that Body of Civil Law which is at present
extant in the World, but having been during the Civil Wars of France engaged
in a Popular Faction, He acquired there some Bitterness of Spirit against
Kings, which He frequently discovers in his Writings. If it be Hotoman's
Authority which must bear Me down in this Point, I shall cover my self with
the Authority of Cujacius, Connanus, Rivallius, Tholosanus, Gothofred, Calvin,
Schardius, and the whole stream of Interpreters who run on the other side: If
Hotoman's Arguments are thought strong enough to carry it, I must desire they
may be examined, and then they will appear to prove no more then this, That
whereas Caesar had left the Election of half the Magistrates, with some other
small Remains of Power in the Peoples hands, Tiberius transferred all to the
Senate: Which is so far from making good his Assertion, that it is a strong
Presumption of the Contrary, Seeing it is not likely that by such an Innovation
in Favor of the Senate, Tiberius would have incurred the Discontent of the
People, if they had not been habituated in other Cases to see such Power in the
Senate's Possession.

It was not then by any new Power conferred by the Emperors, but only by their
Permission to retain an Ancient One, that the Decrees of the Roman Senate had
the Power of Laws, and as such found place in the Compilement of the Roman
Laws by Justinian. That the S C. Macedonianum (which I wonder so great a
Master as Mr Harrington should call Macedonicum, and not have skill enough to
distingnish the Adjective derived of Macedonia, One of the Noblest Provinces in
Greece, from that other which sprang of Macedo an infamous Usurer at Rome in
the time of Vespasian) is of a younger Date then the first Roman Emperor I
willingly allow, and make no difficulty in confessing as much of almost all the
S C. mentioned in the Body of the Law: For the more ancient Ones having from
time to time been wholly repealed, or in part reformed by succeeding
Constitutions, they were omitted by Justinian in his Compilement, whose Design
it was to cut off all antiquated and useless Laws, and leave only such new
Ones as continued in Force. We are deprived of the accurate knowledge of Aymar.
Rival. Hist. Jur. Civ. lib. 3.
these Ancient Senatusconsulta by the loss of that Instrument into which both
They and the Plebiscita, from the time of their first Institution, were
collected by Vespasian: Yet it is not very hard to pick out considerable
Footsteps of them, As the two Senatusconsulta against the passing of Rubicon by
any Roman General with an Army, still extant upon old Marbles; The S C.
Antonianum, Fannianum, and others mentioned by Gellius; The Form of the SC.
Summum or Supremum, by which the whole Commonwealth was put into the Hands of
One or both the Consuls, from whom after that lay no Appeal to the People; The
several Senatusconsulta so frequently spoken of by Cicero, both in his
Epistles and Orations; And finally in the Body of the Law it self (not to hunt
after other Places) Digest. de Colleg. and Corp. l. 3. The Senatusconsulta
there referred to were One of them made A. V. C. 685. L. Caecilio and Q. Marcio
COSS. And the other A. U. C. 697. Lentulo and Metello COSS. (both before
Caesar's second Consulate from which the Roman Empire bears Date) as is out of
Cicero and Asconius proved by the learned Gothofred.

The Solution of this Question may give Birth to a New One, Whether Mr
Harrington be the better Civil Lawyer or Mathematician?

CHAP. VII
Whether the Ten Commandments were proposed by God or Moses, and Voted by the
People of Israel?

THis Chapter is a Peculiar, and claims an Exemption from the Ordinary Rules by
which Political Disputes are Governed; For though God has declared Universally
That by Him Kings reign, yet in reference to the People of Israel He was
pleased to own a more particular Concernment, And did by an express Declaration
of his Will to and by Moses, both at first enact their Laws and Model their
Government, and reserve to himself the Result of their most important Affairs.
So that whereas an Error concerning the Frame of any other Government amounts
at most but to a Deficiency of Understanding or Diligence, a Mistake in that of
Israel may easily become an Impiety, in as much as it may imply a false or
Scandalous Conception of God's Actions. The Consideration of this begat in Me
at first a Tenderness in Reference to this Subject, and presently after a
Resolution to leave it in the hands of the Clergy, upon whom it had also been
obtruded by Mr Harrington. At present I must go on to profess that his having
in his last Book singled out so weighty a new Adversary, can be no Temptation
to Me to change that Resolution, or undertake any part of this Dispute.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether a Commonwealth coming up to the Perfection of the Kind, come up to the
Perfection of Government, and have no flaw in it.

I Am not ignorant of the Advantage Mr Harrington may seem to gain in this and
the two next Chapters, by having inverted the Order of his own Assertions and
my Replies; For passing by the first and second, He falls here upon his third
Assertion, and in that fixes upon the fourth and fifth Branches. But I am not
willing to contend about a Matter of no greater Consequence, but will rather
embrace his own new Method, and take the Question as He has stated it, first
examining the fourth Branch or matter of Fact, concerning Lacedaemon and
Venice, And then giving my Opinion about the Fifth, That a Commonwealth
notwithstanding all its pretensions to equality, is not secure from being
infested with Sedition.

Mr Harrington was told by the Considerer, That if there appears to have been
a more then Ordinary Calm in the state of Lacedaemon, this was not so much to
be attributed to the Form of their Government, as to their severe Education and
affected Poverty, by which all things that served as Baits to Sedition, were
driven out of the Country: So that it can not be Rational to expect the same
Effects from the same Government, where the same Education and manner of Life
is wanting. Since He has been content to spare himself the Pains of taking
Notice of this, I shall suppose it does not stand in need of any farther
Elucidation, unless perhaps in the Discovery of the Lacedaemonian Agrarian it
prove convenient to insist a little upon it.

To descend then to his Answer to what I had objected about the frequent
Insurrections of the Helots; He says that Lacedaemon is H. p. 40.
either to be considered as not taking in the Helots, and then she was an
equal Commonwealth, or taking them in, and so she was unequal. This is just
the Man in the Fable who inquired of the Oracle, Whether the Sparrow in his
Fist would come out Dead or alive, when it was in his own Power to make the
choice; So Mr Harrington will have the Power, according as it suits with his
Occasions, to make Lacedaemon an equal or an unequal Commonwealth. But to
make short, If she were an equal Commonwealth, What has He to say to the
Seditions of the Helots? If she were Unequal, Why did he play the Mountebanck
in using her as the Example of an Equal One?

A second sort of Instances alleged by Me to prove Lacedaemon not to have been
free from Seditions, were the Contests which have happened about the Succession
to the Crown. These, says Mr Harrington, being determined by the Ephori, that
is by a Court of Justice, H. p. 41.
and not by the Sword, it is most ridiculous to infer from thence that the
Government is Seditious. Hold a little; Can those Controversies be said to be
determined by a Court of Justice, when the Interessed Parties make their
Appeal to their own Sword, And are able to persuade a Foreign Prince to draw
his also in their Quarrel? If any Member of a Commonwealth being discontented
have Interest and Power enough to fill his Country with Foreign Armies, I
think that Man would not seem very Sober who should at that time go about to
applaud that Country for not being Subject to Seditions.

But this was after Lysander and the Spoils Ibid.
of Athens had broken the Agrarian and so ruined Lacedaemon. When I first made
use of these Examples, I could not foresee that Mr Harrington would be so easy
in parting with those Advantages which He pretended to draw from the Agrarian
of Lacedaemon: But now that He is willing to allow the Agrarian of Lacedaemon
was not sufficient to preserve that Commonwealth, but was it self overballanced
by the ready Money brought in by Lysander, I have no reason but to be content
also, and to remit him for my farther Thoughts in this Particular to the
Chapters of the Balance and Agrarian. Only I must desire Him that when among
his Proselytes (whether it be in the Circle or the Ruelle) he Plumes himself
over the Commonwealth of Lacedaemon, He would be so Ingenuous as to strike all
the time after Athens was taken, which is a matter of 200 years, out of the
Account, And shut up the Glories of that Commonwealth with the Actions of
Lysander, from which by a Common mistake of History, they have hither to been
thought to bear Date.

The Considerer brought Instances of a third sort of Seditions in Lacedaemon,
which it seems prove not for Mr Harrington's Convenience to remember; There is
no scarsity in History of such Instances, and it will not be unseasonable to
commend a few more of them to his Forgetfulness. First the Sedition of those
young Men who (Because their Mothers were unmarried Women, such as the state
had for greater Population enjoined to make use of a Promiscuous Propagation)
were called Partheniae, and after they were suppressed Arist. Polit. lib. 5. c. 7.
were sent to inhabit Tarentum in Italy. Then the Sedition of them who during
the Masseniac War demanded a new Division of the Lands. After that the Attempt
of King Pausanias to make himself absolute Master of the Commonwealth. And then
the two dangerous Conspiracies in the Neck of one another during the Theban
Invasion, in the first of which about 200 discontented Persons had seized upon
the Temple of Diana, one of the strongest and most defensible Quarters of the
City, from whence it Plut. in Ages.
would have been very difficult to drive them out, had not Agesilaus by a
sudden Fetch of Wit cheated them out of their Post and Resolution; The second
consisted of a Caball of Spartans of good Quality who had their secret
Assemblies for the Innovating Public Affairs, And when they were detected,
the Senate durst not bring them to an open Trial, but they were privately
executed by the Authority of Agesilaus and the Ephores, whereas before that
time no Spartan had ever been put to Death without the due form of Justice.
These Instances being all either older then Lysander, or immediately upon his
time, are not liable to any of Mr Harrington's exceptions, but serve abundantly
to evince, that Lacedaemon has not been exempted from the Fate of all other
Commonwealths, but has had her Portion of seditions.

As for the City of Venice, though she be possessed of several Advantages by her
situation, yet she is not at all beholden to that, if we believe Mr Harrington,
for her tranquillity within Doors; For says he, she is like a man in a H. p.
41.
Citadel who thereby may be the safer from his Enemies, but nere a whit the
safer from Diseases. But before we can allow of this similitude, We must desire
him to remember, That as in the Body of man, so in a Commonwealth, some
Diseases are like Feavors caused by a Disorder in the Blood or Humors, others
like Plagues are communicated by an External Contagion; From the first indeed
the situation of Venice gives her not any security, but against the last it is
a sovereign Antidote, And of this Family are the Diseases most frequently
incident to a State. Of old the Lacedaemonian and Cretan Republiques scarce
differed in their Constitution, the Lacedaemonian being but a Copy wrought by
Lycurgus after the Cretan Original; yet the Cretans were never molested with
any insurrections of their slaves, from which the Lacedaemonians, in any the
least Public Adversity, were rarely free; And the cause of this Diversity
assigned by Aristotle is, That the Argives, Messenians and Arcadians, all
neighboring States, did continually foment the Discontents of the
Lacedaemonian slaves, But Crete being an Island, no Enemy was near enough to
tempt their slaves to a Defection. In like manner the Venetian Republique being
comprehended within her Islands, she by that situation is secured from those
Practices by which her Enemies might endeavor to excite seditions among her
subjects.

Though the City of Venice it self is seated out of the reach of all Enemies,
her Frontire extends to two very dangerous Ones, the great Turk, and the House
of Austria, whose known Rapacity obliges her to a great deal of Modesty and
Reservedness at home; And though the Frontires of all states are bounded by the
Territories of other Princes, Yet all have not such Potent Neighbors, against
whom their whole Care and Power is always necessary: Those who have, will in
all Probability think themselves concerned not to weaken their Force by any
Domestic Tumults, there being nothing more Natural then That the Fear of a
Common Enemy should preserve Union and Agreement between Friends. This Truth is
observed to have been very Operative with the Romans, who were not overrun with
the Seditions of the Nobility and People, before that by the Destruction of the
emulous Power of Carthage, They were freed from the Fear and Danger of any
Common Enemy.

If I produced Examples of Seditions at Venice; which are older then the last
Reiglement H. p. 40.
(this Word was thought no bad English by the Lord Bacon) in the time of Piero
Gradenigo, I made Use of my just Liberty, Mr Harrington having not any where
put in a Bar against such Examples: Yet now that He has restrained the Inquiry
within the Compass of that Reformation, I am willing to omit the Mutiny upon
Occasion of the new Impositions in Duke Rinieri Zeno's time, with all other
examples which might be added of Seditions before the Reign of Gradenigo. And
if the Matter be thus stated, What hurt if We grant him all that He demands?
That in the whole World, through the course of all Ages, there may be found one
Commonwealth, which by the help of those concurring causes already mentioned,
has for something above 300 years been free from Seditions. Is this that Giant
Argument which must extirpate Monarchical Government out of the World, and in
spite of Fate reduce Us all to a Commonwealth?

Yet even this Liberality is more then Mr Harrington can with Honesty receive,
as long as the Actions of Bocconi, Tiepoli, and Faliero, manifest that Venice
has been disturbed with Seditions even since her last Reformation. He
endeavors indeed to persuade that those Actions do not imply any Sedition in
the Government; For says He, Bocconi would have killed the Duke and was hanged
before he could do it, H. p. 42.
Felton did kill a Duke and was hanged afterward. Under favor the Cases are
not at all alike; Felton (though perhaps animated by zeal) killed the Duke
upon a private Revenge; Bocconi went about to kill the Duke that he might
afterward change the Government; Felton made use of no other assistance but his
own Arm, Bocconi engaged many Accomplices. If We would find a Parallel in the
Venetian story for Felton's Assassinate, We must not take Bocconi, but Andrea
Contarini, who being repulsed in his suit for an Employment, grew into that
Vindicative Passion against Duke Foscaro, that Sabell. Dec. 3. lib. 1.
He attempted his Life, and had undoubtedly taken it away, if the blow had not
been diverted by the next Person from Foscaro's Breast to his Face. But this
being only the Issue of a private Quarrel, He does not find Me making any
Advantage of it, Faliero and his Accomplices, continues He, would have destroyed
the great Council, but were hanged before they could do it, Vaux and his
Accomplices would have blown up the Parliament but were hanged before they
could do it; Therefore England was in this Relation a Seditious Government,
else why was Venice? I do not know that the Considerer ever undertook to prove
that the Government of England was always free from Seditions; If He had, that
One Instance of the Powder Treason had been enough to confute Him. Such
attempts, as they are of a more dangerous Nature, so they deserve a Name of
more Horror, then Seditions: For Seditions, like storms gathered a far of, give
some warning before They fall, There is Room for Prudence to seek some way to
divert them, The Interposition of Moderate and Acceptable Persons does often
prevent or soon pacify them, At worst their Fury may be avoided by a speedy
Retreat; But these secret Conspiracies, like violent subterraneous Eruptions,
in a Moment destroy all, And if they be not discovered before the Execution
(which no state be it either a Monarchy or Republique can by it is Orders have
any Security to do) the Public is involved in an inevitable Ruin.

The Conspiracy of Tiepoli Mr Harrington confesses came to blows, yet can not
Venice be called a Seditious Commonwealth. You find no H. p. 43.
man accusing Rome of Sedition in that she had a Manlius or a Melius who
dangerously affected Monarchy, etc. Yet Florus has placed the Account of
Manlius his attempt under the Title de Seditionibus, and Livy in relating the
same Action imploies the word Seditio five or fix times: But to let that pass.
It would have been fairly done and might have prevented many mistakes, if
where He interprets the Words of his Lexicon, He had told Us what He
understands H. p. 84.
by this Word Sedition: In this Place He seems to limit it very odly, allowing
it only to signify, in a Commonwealth the Dissension of the People and Senate,
in a Monarchy by a Nobility that of the King and Nobles, in a Monarchy by Arms
that of the Prince and Soldiery, because these only can be derived from the
Orders of the Government. By this Rule the Contest of the Fregosi and Adorni at
Genova, not being between the People and the Senate, but between two Factions
of the Nobility, was no Sedition; Nor by the same Rule are the late
Insurrections at Naples and Moscow to be reputed Seditions, For they were not
excited by the Nobility or Soldiery, but by the Common People. This is a very
poor Evasion, for there was incumbent upon Mr Harrington an Obligation to
prove, That an equal Commonwealth (of which he produced Venice as an Example)
had no flaw in it, and was such as No Man could have the Interest or Power to
disturb with Sedition. Of this He has not performed the least part, but
endeavors to put Us of with an impertinent Nicety about the Notation of the
Word Sedition. Now for what Purpose serves this Pretension to shut the great
Gate of Sedition, if so many back Doors of Disorder be left open by which
Misery and Destruction may enter into a Commonwealth? As if it were not all
One, if a Man must necessarily receive a Mortal Wound, Whether it be given him
with a Scimitar or a Penknife. Besides all this Mr Harrington bestows a large
Fallacy upon Us in the Application of this Example: For if the Freedom of
Venice from Seditions be only to be understood in reference to the Agreement of
the Senate and People, the Commonwealth of Oceana is like to gain very little
Credit or Security from it; In Venice the People (as We are often told) are the
Grand Counsel, all of them Men of Noble Extraction and Excellent education,
not actually armed, constantly residing under the view of the Magistrates, in
number not exceeding three thousand, so that the Public Employments being
very many make swift Returns as they circulate through them. In Oceana the
People are no less then two hundred thousand, having Arms in their hand, made
up of Men of all Ranks and Conditions, inhabiting the face of a wide-spread
Country, and few of them having Rational hopes to attain any Considerable
Magistracy. Let any Man weigh the Oppositions in the Temper of these
Commonwealths, and then judge whether there can be any good Inference made from
the Quietness of the One to the stability of the other. To Me the Consequence
looks like that of the Young Gentleman, who because he had never seen a storm
upon his Father's Fish Pond, concluded there could not be any upon the Caspian
Sea.

But though all what has been said concerning Lacedaemon and Venice should be
admitted, Mr Harrington is still secure; At most He can but loose a brace of
Examples, and be put to say (as He does of Florence and Genua in a like Case)
that if Lacedaemon and Venice have been disturbed with Seditions, then they
also must have been unequal Commonwealths: For in H. p. 46.
general it is most certain, That a Government which attains to perfect
equality has such a Libration in the Frame of it, that No man in or under it
can contract such Interest or Power, as should be able to disturb the
Commonwealth with H. p. 36.
Sedition. And the whole Commonwealth of Oceana being the Exemplification of
such an equal Government, If Men are still to seek for a Commonwealth that has
been free from Seditions, the Fault is their own that they make no more have to
come under so happy a Government. This then is a state of the Question which
ought to be determined by Experiment rather then Argument; But the Ingredients
to the Experiment (the safety of three Nations) being of two great Expense, We
are obliged to better Husbandry, and must be content to make our Judgment of
the future Successes of this Government by the Paper Model of it which has
been given Us, And examine Whether that contains any Security, that this
Government has no Possibility of being disturbed with Sedition: The Truth or
Falsehood of which Proposition will best be discovered, by referring the
particular Frame of the Commonwealth of Oceana, to the General Idea of
Government.

The Apprehension of a Disability in every particular Man (or at least in every
particular Family) of preserving by his own single Power either his Life or
any thing useful to life, was the first inducement of Mankind to come under
Government; Now it was impossible to establish any Government without a
Sovereign Power vested in some One Man or Assembly of Men, For without that
Every particular Man must still have been left to the Protection of his own
strength, and must have continued to do all other Men whatsoever Mischief did
any way conduce to his own Profit or Preservation, the avoiding the
Inconveniences of which Life was that which Men intended by submitting
themselves to Government; And therefore every Particular Man was necessitated
to part with his Native Power and entrust it with the Sovereign, whose Actions
He did thereby Authorize and make his own. The Sovereignty being thus fixed, The
next work was to enact Laws, or prescribe Rules of behavior both in Reference
of the Service to himself which the Sovereign thought fit to require, and the
Intercourse or Commerce between every Particular Man united under him. But here
it soon began to appear how irregular the Passions of Man are, and how infirm
and Erroneous his Discourse, For Men presently endeavored to resume the
Liberty which They had so lately parted with, and violated those Laws which
had been newly Authorized by themselves. Yet the Inconvenience was not great,
as long as this Irregularity exceeded not a few Persons, such as were
apparently too weak to resist the Sovereign Power; For then these Offenses, as
Murder, Theft, and the like, were presently attended by the Punishments
ordained for them by the Sovereign, and the Facinorous Persons being made
Examples of Justice; served to contain other Men within the Bounds of their
Duty.

But if the Number of those who were Desirous to resume the Power they had
parted with, or who otherwise by reason of their Crimes were concerned that the
Course of Justice should be intercepted, did at any time prove great enough to
bear up against the Sovereign Power, Then were Matters reduced again to a
Condition of War, and Government with all the Pacts on which it had been
founded trampled under Foot. It may seem contrary to Reason that the Motives
which were at first strong enough to make Men submit to Government and Laws,
should afterward prove too weak to enforce their Obedience to them; And
without doubt if Men did in all their Actions govern themselves by Calm and
solid Reason, They would never hearken so far either to the stimulations of
their own Passions, or to the Incitements of other Men, as to be engaged in a
Design of reversing the Sovereign Power, For the greatest Mischiefs that can be
suffered by any Government, are not comparable to those Occasioned by the
Absence of Government when Men live in the Wild and Lawless condition of War,
Nor can it be any thing but Madness voluntarily to expose ones self to Misery
for the taking away a Power, in room of which another equal Power must of
Necessity be substituted. Yet Experience teaches Us that this is too little to
make the World Wise, at which We ought no more to wonder, then that the
Certainty of Punishment should not be enough to make men abstain from violating
Laws, Nor the Fear of Hell Torments (even to those who are sufficiently
persuaded of the Certitude of them) to keep Men from sinning. So that the
Wisdom of those Men is a little to be suspected, who think any Governors can
be secured, by the unreasonableness that would be in their Subjects
Disobedience; For there ever were and will eternally be some Men who will
mistake in this Point, and think it their Interest to subvert the Sovereign
Power.

This False Opinion has been very much helped forward by the Sense of those
Pressures which are sometimes sustained under Government; For whilst Men
considering only their private Utility expect to live free from all
Incommodity, They usually charge the Government with those Grievances which are
inseparable from the infirm Condition of Humanity, or perhaps are Consequences
of their own Inconformity to the true and Necessary temper of Subjection; There
being nothing which Men more Naturally forget, Then that the Exercise of
Sovereign Power requires a large Expense, toward which it is necessary for
every particular Man to contribute a Part, thereby to secure the Rest to
Himself.

Yet it can not be denied That sometimes there has been much of Iniquity in the
Manage of Sovereign Power; At first, it is likely, the Person or Assembly
trusted with it were known to be of just and Generous Principles, but by
Succession the Power being devolved upon Men Weak or Vicious, They have
frequently trifled away the Lives, Honors, and Fortunes of their Subjects,
which They ought not to have employed but upon just and Probable Occasions. The
Desire to prevent this Inconvenience brought forth an Expedient into the World,
commonly known under the Name of mixed Government, in which, Though there seem
to be a Sovereign Instituted, the People do not part with their whole Power to
him, but retain some Part of it in their own Hands; So as to some Actions in
which the Lives and Fortunes of every particular Man seem most concerned (such
are the making Laws and raising Money, and the like) the Sovereign in
appearance can do nothing by himself, but the Consent of the People by their
Collective or Representative Body is still necessary. But this Expedient
(though in some Places it might be for a while by reason of some external
Accidents not unprosperous) fell short of effecting the thing desired, And had
besides this irreparable Breach in it, That while the Persons to whom the
several Parts of Sovereign Power were thus committed, fell into little
Jealousies and Contests about their several Respective Rights and Privileges,
the Government was weakened, and left as it were without Legs or Arms; And when
these little Jealousies came to be improved into open Dissensions, the several
Parties assuming to themselves the Exercise of the whole Sovereign Power, and
the Advantages remaining with either not being conspicuous enough to determine
the Matter otherways, the Nation which happened to be the Seat of so
unfortunate a Controversy was necessarily reduced into a State of War; From
which it has seldom been known to have been redeemed, but by destroying that
Mixture which was pretended to, and rendering one of the Parties absolute in
their Power.

Beyond this I know but of One Artefice to which Humane Invention has
pretended, and that is to contrive a way how the People may govern themselves
without Instituting any Sovereign, so that the Ends of Government may be
attained and yet no Man divest himself of his Native Power and Liberty. It is
confessed by those Men who endeavor to introduce this kind of Government, that
the People in their diffused condition are incapable of all Government;
ignorant of such Counsels as are necessary to their Preservation, and unable to
put the least part of them in Execution: Therefore it is of Necessity that the
People should be assembled together, that there should be a Senate to consult,
and Magistrates to Execute. But the advantage of this Government is pretended
to consist in this, That the People not parting with their Power, but reserving
to themselves the last Result in all Business, They are secured from all
Injury and Oppression, seeing the People can not be supposed to agree to do
themselves Hurt: And as for the Magistrates and Senate they can not be Authors
of any Violence, because they shall have only a very limited Power, the
Exercise of which also is terminated within the Compass of a few Months, after
which they are again to be melted down into the Mass of the People, from which
They were at first separated. In Fabricating this great Engine, and contriving
all the Movements and Ressorts belonging to it consists the whole Mystery of
Popular Government; Of which the most perfect Model, that ever was produced Mr
Harrington assures Us is his Commonwealth of Oceana. So that we need only to
examine that Commonwealth by the Notions and Maxims already laid down, to know
Whether Popular Government has that advantage over all other Governments, as to
have no Flaw in it, and not to be exposed to a Possibility of being disturbed
with Sedition.

In the first Place it is manifest that Popular Government is equally with any
other Government exposed to this Inconvenience; That Particular Men will have
an Interest to disturb it with Sedition; For it being impossible there should
be any Government without Laws, and all Laws consisting either in a
Prohibition of doing somewhat which before it was free to do, or in a Command
of doing somewhat which before might have been omitted, Men must under Popular
Government also needs regret the loss of that Liberty which was Natural to
them. If it be objected that under Popular Government Men give their Consent to
the enacting of all Laws, and therefore can not be rationally thought averse
from what was their own Act, It must be remembered that in all other Government
also, every Man did by that One General Act of resigning his Power and
Authorizing the Actions of the Sovereign, give his Consent to all the
established Laws, which notwithstanding is known to be insufficient for
enforcing a Plenary Obedience to Laws. And it is little less then ridiculous
to think, That when under Popular Government Men have committed such Crimes as
by the Laws of it deserve Death, They should not apprehend it to be their
Interest, by disturbing the Government with Sedition to secure, if it be
possible, their own Lives. Whenever therefore under Popular Government, the
number of those whose offenses have rendered them liable to the severity of
Laws, is considerable enough to qualify them for the Attempt, Popular
Government has no more security than any other of being free from Seditions. Of
this Original and Extraction as to the main, was Catalines Attempt upon the
Roman Commonwealth.

Secondly, The Constitution of the Commonwealth of Oceana supposing a Senate
and a Representative of the People called the Prerogative Tribe, consisting of
about thirteen hundred Men, I ask Whether that Representative (taking the
Senate and present Magistrates with it) be endued with the Sovereign Power,
that is such as cannot be resisted by any Man or Men within the Commonwealth of
Oceana? If they have such Power, Then it is manifest They may whenever they
think it their Interest, perpetuate this power, and by repealing the Orders of
Rotation, render themselves a standing Assembly, which dashes to pieces the
whole frame of popular Government, and puts the public Affairs (which is
contrary to the Design and supposition of a free Commonwealth) into the hands
of a Sovereign Assembly. Now that the Representative may come to think this
their Interest is manifest also; For the Desire of Power being Natural to man,
a far greater share of Power remains with every particular Man, when the
Svereign Power is divided among thirteen hundred, then when the same Power is
divided among two hundred thousand men. It is very true, as Mr Harrington has
observed That the Power or Effect of a greater People is H. page 39.
proportionably greater then the Power or Effect of a lesser people; But that
is not to be brought to account under this Head, For it is not now inquired,
Whether the Power of thirteen hundred or two hundred thousand Men be greater,
but Whether if the same Power belong to thirteen hundred or two hundred
thousand men, Every particular person of the thirteen hundred will not have
more Power than every particular person of the two hundred thousand men. And
what has been said of Power the same is to be understood of Riches. So that in
the Commonwealth of Oceana, the Magistrates, Senate, and Prerogative Tribe for
the time being, have both power and Interest to dissolve the Frame of the
Government. And that a Representative is not incapable of making such an attempt
as this, will, (it is not improbable) easily find Belief with those who are
acquainted with the Actions of these last eighteen years.

But now let us resume the other member of the Disjunction, and suppose that
the Magistrate, Senate and Prerogative Tribe, have not the Sovereign power, but
that it remains still with the Body of the People in Oceana. Hence it must
follow that in the Commonwealth of Oceana there is no Sovereign power at all,
And that the People of it are either in a Condition of War, or ready to fall
into it. For the people of Oceana being too numerous and too much dispersed to
Assemble Personally in one place, They cannot concur to any Act but by their
Representative; But that Representative not having the Sovereign power, there
is not any such Power constituted, and consequently every Particular Man is
left to the Protection of his own Power and strength, which is the Condition of
War, and implies the Absence of all Government.

It will, perhaps, be replied that the Sovereign Power resides in the lesser
Assemblies, as the Parish, Hundred, or Tribe, where the People personally
concur to the Election of their Deputies: But this is not to make One but a
great many Sovereign Powers, and to shatter One great Commonwealth, into as
many little Ones as there are Parishes in Oceana. Nor is the Difficulty removed
by it, For these lesser Sovereign Assemblies being not put into any Method of
concurring in any Common Opinion, but by the Deputies they send to the
Representative or Prerogative Tribe, If those Deputies be sent with Sovereign
Power, the Commonwealth relapses into the Danger before insisted on of being
supplanted by that Representative.

But if these Deputies be not sent to the Prerogative Tribe with Sovereign
Power, then the Prerogative Tribe has no such Power and by Consequence can not
make Laws, or impose any other Resolution upon the Commonwealth; If
notwithstanding this the Preragative Tribe does de facto make Laws, the
Authority with which they are armed, is not that of the Representative it self,
but of the lesser Sovereign Assemblies, who in that They do not declare their
Dissent, are presumed to allow of such things as have been resolved on by their
Deputies. So that upon the Matter, Oceana, is not a Single Commonwealth, but a
Compunded One made up by a tacit League of so many Commonwealths as there are
lesser Sovereign Assemblies in Oceana. Now the Leagues between Sovereigns are
of no longer Duration then their Common Interest, which whenever it happens
to be divided, such Leagues Vanish; And therefore whenever the lesser
Sovereign Assemblies in Oceana come to be divided in their Interest, the
Commonwealth must fall in Pieces. But that They may come to be so divided is
probable, if not necessary; Anciently They were divided both in respect of the
Saxon Heptarchie, and the Welsh Princes under the Norman Kings; The difference
of Language (One of the greatest separators of Men's Affections) is not quite
worn out; The inhabiting the same Island is not a sufficient Argument of Union,
for then Scotland and We should make but One Nation; In fine, there can be no
cause assigned of the Union of this Nation under One Government but the Power
of former Princes, which by the Institution of this new Commonwealth is quite
obliterated. More then all this, The Concernments of the Several Parts of this
Nation are very different in Reference to Propriety and Riches; some Parts
subsist upon Mines and Cole, Others upon Manufacture, Some upon Corn, Others
upon the Profits of Cattle, London and the Sea Ports upon Exportation and
Importation; And it is not possible but that when those several things come to
be regulated by Laws, the Different Parts of the Nation must necessarily
espouse very Different Interests.

This is also very conformable to Experience; Greece was a Country much less
then England, The People of it (with an inconsiderable variety of Dialect)
spoke the same Language, They had the same Common Enemy the Persian, and were
united in many other particular Interests: Yet all this was not enough to
reduce them into one great Commonwealth, but We find among them almost as many
Republiques, as Cities. The Condition of Sicilie, Magna Graecia, and the Coasts
of Asia serve also to make good the same Observation. Nay in Israel (which Mr
Harrington will have pass for a Commonwealth) though the Country was so
Narrow, the People all descended of one Family, and cemented together by a
Million of common Concernments and Obligations, this Thing is very apparent
also; For though it did not produce a total Dissolution of the Government, yet
It for some time suspended it, and threw the People into a Civil War, as in
the Case of Jephthah between the Men of Ephraim and Gilead, Jud. cap. 12. and
20.
and in that of the Levites Concubine, between the Tribe of Benjamin and the
rest of Israel.

There is but One imaginable case more to be put concerning the Sovereign Power
in the Commonwealth of Oceana, Which is, That though the People have parted
with their Power, They have not entrusted it all in One hand, but have so
equally divided it among the Magistrates, Senate, and Prerogative Tribe, that
No public Action can be performed without the Concurrence of all; Now there
is nothing more improbable then that all these should concur to the Oppressing
the People, changing the Government, or disturbing it with Sedition; Then which
greater Security is not attainable in Matter of Government. But all this rises
no higher then the Case of mixed Government. For the Power being wholly past
from the People, and divided equally among these several Persons, This
equality of Power must upon their Disagreement reduce the Commonwealth to a
Civil War, seeing it is not otherways to be judged which of them has the
Sovereign Power, and by that a Right to the Obedience of the Rest. Now that
they cannot long Agree, is a Consequence of that Desire of Power which is
confessed to dwell with Man, and will not permit him to rest satisfied with Part
of that Sovereign Power, which He may fairly hope to possess Entire. And if
there are any Examples of Persons thus Possessed of equal Power, who have for a
while maintained a good Correspondence with one another, and so preserved the
Commonwealth in Peace, This must not be attributed to the Frame or Temper of
the Government, but to some external Cause, such as the Apprehension of some
Common Impending danger, Or an over high Estimation of one another's strength,
by which there is generated in them a mutual Fear of one another: As two
Armies when neither of them has any Visible Advantage of strength, do very
often forbear engaging out of a mutual doubt of the Success, which
notwithstanding is not a state of Peace, seeing both are intent upon the
Opportunities of procuring one another Ruin.

It having been thus Proved, That the Commonwealth of Oceana, which was given
us as the Example of a most equal Commonwealth, is which way soever the Case
be stated, liable not only to Sedition, but which is more, to a total
Dissolution, It is at the same time evinced, That a Commonwealth coming up to
the Perfection of the kind, comes not up to the Perfection of Government, but
has a Flaw in it. I do not suspect that after this Mr Harrington will any
longer think fit to accuse Me of hudling things together H. p. 40.
or neglecting of Principles; It is true I can not admit of his Principles,
because, as I have often told him, They are merely Effects and Consequences of
Government, that is no Principles at all. And while He thus goes astray in the
Principles, His Labor must needs be unprofitable, both in examining the Models
of Former Commonwealth's, and in proposing New Ones of his own; For at this
Rate New Models of Government may be contrived with as much ease, as a French
Tailor invents new Fashions. It is the Foundation of Government upon undeniable
Principles, and the Diductions from them, which render Politiques a Complete
Science, without which the greatest Conversation with particular Commonwealths
can but at most make Men Empiricks in Policy.

CHAP. IX.
Whether Monarchy coming up to the Perfection of the Kind, come short of the
Perfection of Government, and have some Flaw in it?

IT can not be with Reason expected that I should assert Monarchy to be so far
Privileged as not to have a Flaw in it; For having in the preceding Discourse
laid it down for a Maxim, That Men will eternally mistake the Point of
Government, and think it their Interest to Subvert the Supreme Power, I should
now contradict my self by affirming that of Monarchical Government in
particular, which I before denied of all Government in General. Yet does not
Mr Harrington gain any Advantage by this, For though I confess that Monarchy
comes not up to the imaginary Perfection of Government which He dreams of, but
is indeed neither in a Monarchy nor a Commonwealth, nor yet in Nature, I am
not at all diffident of making Good, That a Supreme Hereditary Monarchy
attaines to a greater Degree of Perfection, and has fewer Flaws in it then a
Commonwealth or any other kind of Government.

I do not think it needful to repeat either the Principles or Conclusions of
the last Chapter, Only it will be useful to examine somewhat more at large the
Causes or Reasons why Men are not content with the Government they live under,
but do by a continual Endeavor to subvert the Sovereign Power, disturb it
with Sedition. Of which in General three Reasons may be assigned.

The first is a Desire of Immunity from Punishment in such Persons as have by
their Crimes rendered themselves obnoxious to the Laws; For it being
impossible as long as Men are subject to Passions, but that such Faults will be
committed as the Sovereign Power has thought fit to punish with Death or the
loss of Estate, The Persons who have committed those Faults will indubitably
seek to avoid the Punishment, which can not be done but by raising a Party able
to resist the Sovereign Power. And as Criminal Persons seek to avoid
Punishment for Crimes already committed, So Persons extremely in Debt or
Indigent, who being destitute of that Industry which might procure them a
Subsistence in a Regular Way, know not how to live but by Rapine and Invading
other Men's Propriety desire to disturb the Government that they may find
Security in those Crimes which for the Future they resolve to Commit.

The second is a Want of Judgment to discern the Miseries which attend War; For
when a People have so long enjoyed Peace that the Memory of the wretched
Effects of a Civil War is defaced, They are very Frequently deaf to the
Admonitions of Wiser Men, to the Histories of former times, and to the Example
of other Nations, And so out of mere Wantoness throw away their own Happiness,
by suffering themselves to be engaged in a War against the Sovereign, the
Consequences of which they had never taken the least pains to Consider. And to
this they are very easily brought, whenever those Men who are by some other
Motive engaged to seek the subversion of the Government, have Credit enough
with the People to impose a Cheat upon them, by making Use of the Names of
Religion or Liberty, or some other like specious Pretense.

The third is that Desire of Power which Men commonly understand by the Name of
Ambition; This seems so twisted with the being of Man that it is thought
natural to him, and no more separable then his Affections or Passions. Yet if
any Ambitious Man should take himself to a strict Account, and demand a Reason
of his own Thoughts and Actions, If He should contemplate Power with all the
Dangers, Cares, and Inquietudes intayled upon it, And strip it of that gaudy
Dress with which the Deluded World has adorned it, He would find his Pursuit of
Power extremely Irrational, unless so far as it did necessarily conduce to his
own Preservation. The Desire of self Preservation was (as I said formerly) the
first step to Government, and the Institution of Sovereign Power was the
Caution that every Man had of every other Man for his Preservation; Yet this
did not satisfy, because it quickly appeared that though good Laws were
ordained for every Man's Protection, yet they could not always come in time
enough to prevent particular Mischiefs, So that Men judged it Rational,
besides the general Protection they enjoyed from the Sovereign, to arm
themselves with a particular Power against particular Dangers. Nor did Men stop
here, but out of their incurable Suspicion of all other Men, They became as
much afraid of the Sovereign Power as they were before of one another, And so
continually endeavored to acquire such Power as might even defend them from
the Sovereign, which Design could never be thought fully attained by them
until the Sovereign Power it self was in their Possession.

The Desire then of such a Power as may preserve a Man, in such Cases where the
Laws are not sufficient to do it, from other private Men, implying a Submission
to the Sovereign, and acting in a Method not prohibited by him, can never bring
danger to Government. But the Desire of a Power able to defend them from the
Sovereign, is properly that Ambition which is the Fountain from whence flow
the chiefest Dangers that threaten Government, And is always unjust though
more or less condemnable according to the Temper of those who enjoy the
Sovereign Power; For if They are just and Virtuous Persons, and use not to make
any Invasions on the Lives and Fortunes of their Subjects, this Ambition is the
more Criminal because the first Motive to it was false and Irrational; But if
they are known Oppressors of the People, and such who consider not that They
injure themselves by trampling upon the Lives and Fortunes of their Subjects,
It is a little more excusable, being an endeavor (though by an unjust Method)
of preserving such Things as deserve not to be wilfully thrown away.

I have studiously abstained from reckoning the Desire of Riches among the
Causes of Sedition; For if it be a Desire of Moderate Riches such as are
subservient to the Necessities or Conveniences of Man's Life, or to the
attaining Innocent and Honest Pleasures, They may with far greater ease and
Probability be acquired by private and Legal Industry then by disturbing the
Government; And it is in Experience that those Men who are most taken up with
this Design, are of all People the least turbulent, and do most abominate
Commotions. But if it be a Desire of excessive Riches, such Riches can not be
desirable in themselves but only as They are the Instruments of Power; And so
this Desire is to be reduced to the Desire of Power.

If Revenge, Love, or any other Passion has sometimes given the first Impulse
to the Dissolution of Government, these Accidents are so Particular and
Infrequent, that they can not deserve to have Place in a General Discourse.

Having thus in general discovered the first Causes of Sedition in all
Government, the next Work must be to show by what Art or Providence the
Sovereign may prevent the Mischief, and suspend the Effects in their Causes.
And for obviating the first Cause of Sedition, many particular Cares are
necessary; As the diligent Execution of Laws, that so every Offense may be
overtaken by the Punishment; then the Encouragement of Manufactures and
Traffic which fetching Wealth from abroad, cure the Subject of Want and
Necessity at home; After that a Prohibition of Excess in such things (as
Gaming, Clothes, and the like) by which Men go in Chase of Poverty; And last of
all, When notwithstanding all these Cares, Criminal and Indigent Persons grow
Numerous, A seasonable Dreyning of them away by a Foreign War or Plantations.

The Prevention of the second Cause of Seditions consists in having the People
sufficiently instructed in the Sad and Miserable Consequences of a Civil War,
in Comparison of which the greatest Pressures under the worst of Governments
are no Evils. But it must be confessed that this is a Text upon which the Wise
part of the World has used in vain to Preach to the Fools, And therefore
there is a mixture of Fortune in it, which very much secures those Princes who
come in just upon the last Act of a Civil War; For there being no Man then
alive in whom there is not a fresh Memory of the Calamities of War, They have
them in such Detestation, as that They are willing to suffer any thing rather
then be a second time plunged into that miserable Condition.

Against the third Cause of Seditions, the Virtue and Innocence of the Prince
is a Grand Remedy; for if his Subjects find Protection from him against all
other Men, and have no just ground to suspect any Prejudice from him in their
Lives or Fortunes, It would be desperately unreasonable to enter into any
Diffidence of Him, or out of an Ambitious Desire of Power, to seek to subvert
the Government. Yet because all Mankind are not Philosophers, And a great part
of those over whom Sovereign Power is to be exercised, are not guided by
Reason, but misled by Passion and false Consequences, It will be necessary to
arm a Sovereign with somewhat more then his own Innocence, and give him a Power
sufficient to repress those Brutish and Irrational Subjects.

Here then it will concern Us to inquire what are the Advantages of the
Sovereign over his Subjects. It is manifest that these consist not in the
personal strength of a Monarch, nor yet of a Sovereign Assembly; For the first
is but the strength of one Man, and the other but of a few Men, who bear no
Proportion to those who are to be governed by them: Therefore the Advantages of
the Sovereign Power proceed from this, That their Subjects have given up their
particular strengths to be employed at the Discretion of the Sovereign, So that
in the Sovereign the diffused strength of a Multitude is united in One Person,
which in a Monarchy is a Natural Person, in a State an Artificial One
procreated by a majority of Votes. The Desire in particular Men of retracting
this Gift, or Reassuming the Power they had conferred upon the Sovereign,
(which proceeds from some of the Causes already mentioned but most particularly
from the third) is the beginning of all Sedition; This at first can be the
Desire of but One Man, who upon discovery of Symptoms of like Inclinations may
impart it to some Few, and they afterward Communicate it to more, so as at
length to be able to form a Party sufficient to disturb the Government with
Sedition. So that in Effect, the Advantage of the Sovereign over his Mutinous
Subjects, is the same that an United strength has over a divided One, or an
Army over a greater Multitude of dispersed and Scattered People. In consequence
of which it may be inferred, That the Great Art of Governing (next to that of
withdrawing the Causes and Matter of Sedition by the Virtue and Innocence of
the Sovereign's Actions) consists in being verst in those Methods by which a
Number of Discontented Persons may be hinderd from becoming a Party, that is
framing such a Correspondence among themselves as to be able to Act with one
Common Consent and Design.

To discourse of the Vigilance of the Sovereign in observing all the Motions of
his Subjects, or of the Intelligence He ought to maintain for discovering all
their Cabals, belongs not to this Place; These things are according to the
different Complexions of Times and Affairs infinitely various, and depend
every where upon the particular Sufficiency of the Ministers. Only I may
observe, That where there are constant Assemblies of any considerable part of
the People which depend not wholly upon the Sovereign, both as to the times of
their Convention and Dissolution, and as to the Matter and Manner of their
Consulations, such Assemblies do easily become the Cradles of Sedition, and are
therefore very Dangerous, and scarce to be with Prudence permitted by the
Sovereign.

Let Us therefore consider a Sedition as ready to go alone, and just fitted to
walk abroad and take the Air. The first Steps of it must necessarily be infirm
and staggering, For They who first Discover themselves are sure to be
immediately attaqued by the United Force of the Sovereign, against which They
can have little hope to prevail; For their own Party being unsettled and Raw,
And that of the Sovereign formed before hand the Odds must needs be very
Great; And therefore the Broachers of Seditions, are generally Men altogether
Desperate, who despise the Certitude of those Dangers by which all Considering
Men are deterred. This then is the Grand Security of all Sovereigns, whether
single Persons or Assemblies, That the united Force of their Subjects with
which They are invested, is sufficient to suppress the Beginnings of all
Seditions, And beyond this No Government has any Amulets that can preserve it;
For if some Seditions have been suppressed after they were broke out into
actual Civil Wars, That has not been by any Virtue of the Government, but is
to be attributed to the same Causes that serve to determine the Successes of
Wars between distinct Sovereign Powers. And therefore No Sovereign ought to
expect his safety from any Frame or Temper of the Government, or from the
settled orders of the Commonwealth, but from his own Virtue in withdrawing the
Matter, his Prudence and Dexterity in preventing the Contrivance, And his
Celerity and Resolution in suppressing the Beginnings of Seditions.

What then remains is only to take a View of the particular Method which a
Monarch is capacitated to observe, in order to his Security, And to Compare it
with the Methods of other Governments. Seeing the first Compact of every Man to
part with his private Power, upon which Sovereignty was founded, is by
experience found too weak to support the Government, All Monarchs have found it
necessary to communicate some Part of this Power with which themselves are
vested, to some subordinate Ministers who by this have a more peculiar Interest
in the safety of the Monarch then the rest of his Subjects, and therefore are
more likely in any Danger to stand by him: This Power according to the several
Intentions of the Monarch, either upon the Death of the Person to whom it was
committed reverts again to the Monarch, or is transmitted to his next Heir, as
one from whom the Monarch has reason to expect the same Services; This last
Case is the Generation of a Nobility, who use to be distinguished from other
Men by such Titles with which the Monarch has thought fit to adorn them. And
because Riches (whether in Land or other Revenue) are a principal Fountain of
all such Power as is subordinate to the Sovereign Power, either the Nobility
uses to have considerable Riches conferred upon them by the Sovereign, or else
such Persons as by their own Industry have attained considerable Riches are
advanced to be of the Nobility. Thus has a Monarch attained the first Degree of
his Security, That there are a considerable Number of Persons who being
entrusted with some Portion of Power by him, have by that both an Ability and
Interest to defend him against all such as go about to disturb the Government
with Sedition; For some of these Persons being present in all Quarters of the
Dominion, and enjoying by the Monarch's Authority an united Power, can not be
supposed to fail in suppressing the Weak and Disjoynted beginnings of all
Seditions.

It has been and still is a Question, Whether it be most advantageous for a
Monarch to communicate this Power only by Commission to such Persons as He
finds most capable of doing him Service, and that without any Promissory
Obligation upon himself either to continue it to their Posterity, or to
themselves longer theu his Good Pleasure, Or whether it be best for Him to
transmit it to their Posterity, and by that to constitute a Nobility. But I
think it will not be hard to determine the Question in favor of a Nobility out
of these Considerations.

First, That there is more Safety in a Nobility then in the other way of
temporary Commissions, against a Foreign Enemy; Seeing it is the Interest of
the whole Nobility to defend to the utmost Extremity that Monarch, from whom
They and their Posterity enjoy a greater share of Power then They have Reason
to expect from a Conqueror.

Secondly, That even against his own People the Security a Monarch gains by a
Nobility is greater then He can have the other Way; For there being a radicated
Power in a Nobility, the Impressions of Awe and Reverence upon the People are
greater from them, then they can be from any temporary Commander.

Thirdly, It being so natural to all Men to desire the Welfare of their
Posterity, a Nobility has greater Interests to preserve the Monarch by whose
Favor both They and their Children are possessed of a confiderable Power, then
They can have who wanting a Promise from the Monorch for the Continuation of
this Power, may justly look upon themselves as Tenants at Will, And so may have
a Concernment to endeavor by some Innovation in the Government, to asscertain
this Power to themselves.

Yet this is not to be taken Absolutely and without Restriction; For seeing a
Nobility, is subject to the same Passions with other Men, a Monarch is not to
make Account that the Greatness of the Benefits They enjoy by Him, should be
enough to keep his Nobility within the Bounds of Duty: Nay farther, That
Ambition which We have Defined to be a Desire of Power sufficient to defend one
from the Sovereign Power, is chiefly incident to the Nobility, because They
possessing Much, are most apt to think themselves a Prey considerable enough to
tempt the Sovereign's Avarice. And therefore as a Nobility is a Monarchs Guard
against the People, so a Monarch may stand in need of another Guard against the
Nobility, to secure him against such Dangers as otherwise He might incur from
their Ambition.

These Dangers are of two kinds; For either They proceed from some particular
Persons of the Nobility, excelling the rest of their Order in Power or Dignity,
Or they arise from the whole Body of the Nobility. If a Monarch has out of the
Consideration of neerness of Blood, or his own Affections, or Greatness of
Merit, conferred a large share of Power upon one Person or Family, with leave
to transmit it to their Posterity, this Power may easily become Matter of
Danger, if not to Him, at least to his successors. Thus the Successors of
Charles the Great in Germany, and this Hugh Capet in France, by conferring
upon some of the Nobility an Hereditary Power over Provinces large enough to
raise and maintain an Army, broke those two great Monarchies into a Multitude
of little Ones, though the latter of them has had the Fortune to recover, and
be again consolidated into one great Empire. At first, no doubt, there were
some such Duties reserved by the supreme Monarch as served to manifest the
Dependence of these lesser Ones upon him, But they easily degenerating into
Matters of mere Form and Ceremony, and the People wanting Eyes to look beyond
the next Object; These Dependant Monarchs were by their Subjects soon
considered as Absolute Ones, and thought to shine by their own Native Light
though it were at first derived to them from the great Luminary of the
Sovereign Power. Where the Error of former Monarchs has thus deformed the
Natural shape of Empire, and rendered Government a Monster with more Heads
then One, It is it vain for the Prince to expect Security, or for the Subjects
to hope for Peace and Tranquillity: For if the exorbitant Power of these Great
On^s among the Nobility can not be retrench't, the State can have no Assurance
of Safety but that casual One which is obtained from the Content and
Satisfaction of these Great Persons; And that is not like to continue longer
then they are taken up with some considerable Employment abroad, they being in
this like tame Lions, whose Keepers are no longer out of Danger of being torn
in Pieces, then they maintain them full gorged.

The Dangers that arise from the whole Body of the Nobility, are when the
Nobility is possessed of a Right to Assemble themselves for the Electing a
Successor to the Monarchy, or for making of War and Peace, or for nominating
the great Ministers of State, or for performing any other Act which by the
Nature of it is inseparable from the Sovereign Power. This Happens either when
the Monarch did at first, out of Covetousness of Reigning, accept of the
Kingdom with a less share of Power then was necessary for attaining the Ends
of Government, or has since parted with this power out of an erroneous belief,
That Sovereignty could subsist without it. And if in these Cases the Government
has been Seditious, this can be no Argument against a Soverign Monarch, because
those Cases suppose the Prince to want that power which was requifite to make
him Sovereign. Though even in these Cases, there want not examples of some able
Princes who by their Artifice in Ballancing the several Factions of the
Nobility, have for a long time preserved themselves and People in safety.

Where neither some few persons of the Nobility are possessed of excessive power
and Command, nor where the whole body of the Nobility has a Right to assemble
for the ends before mentioned, It is not imaginable how a Nobility should be
dangerous to a Monarch; For though the Nobility are not so great a multitude as
the People, yet they are a multitude, and by Consequence exposed, in proportion
to the same Difficulties and Dangers in carrying on a Design for disturbing
the Government; and the same remedies are applicable against them, which were
by them made use of against the People.

These Remedies are in general two; First that the Monarch have continually in
pay a sufficient Militia to be always ready to march for suppressing the first
motions or tendency toward a Sedition; Secondly that seeing every Country has
some places of strength where a few may be secure against a great number, these
Places be kept at the Monarch's Devotion by a convenient proportion of
Soldiers, for in this case the Nobility wanting places of Defense to secure
themselves at the beginning of their Attempt, And knowing assuredly that they
shall be exposed to the danger of being cut in pieces by the Militia
entertained by the Monarch, They cannot be supposed so Irrational as out of
vain and uncertain Hopes of greater power to incur the forfeit of that of which
they are already possessed.

To assign the number of this Soldiery can never be done, not only because
Different Monarchies stand in need of Different Proportions, but the same
Monarchy may require Different proportions at different times; Only in
general, it may pass for a necessary Maxim, That this Militia ought not to
amount to a complete full Army; For besides that the Expense would devonr any
Monarch, The experience of the Roman and Turkish Emperors and all other
Princes who have kept great Armies as a guard to their Persons and Empire,
teach us that this is to walk upon precipices, There being no possibility of
preventing such an Army (especially if they lie still without Employment) from
acquiring an Interest distinct from that of the Prince. Therefore this Militia
must be so instituted as that it can have no Interest besides the Pay it
receives from the Monarch, nor any hopes of being safe in their own strength if
they should withdraw themselves from the Service and Obedience due to him.

This is that mixture of a Monarchy by a Nobility, and a Monarchy by Arms in
which consists the perfection of Monarchical Government. Nor do I enter into
despair of living to enjoy my share of the Felicities which will belong to the
Subjects of such a Government, though Mr Harrington be positive in asserting,
That the wit of man never found, nor shall find this H. page 72.
Monarchy, there being no such thing in Nature. And his Reason for this most
Tyrannous Confidence, is only this That there is nothing in H. page 71.
Nature that has not had a natural effect by some example. I believe Mr
Harrington would not think himself sincerely dealt with, if he should be told,
There is no such thing in nature as an equal Commonwealth, because there is
nothing in Nature that has not had a Natural Effect by some Example; But the
Commonwealth of Oceana is (by his own Confession) Ocena. p. 23.
the first example of a Commonwealth that is perfectly equal. It is his own
Argument for a Commonwealth, and therefore I do not understand how he can
prohibit me the use of the same Logique in Defense of Monarchy, That it is the
ibid.
Government which if it have been seditious, it has not been from any
Imperfection in the kind, but for want of this mixture in the particular
Constitution; which where ever the like has happened must have wanted this
mixture.

He is willing to suppose that I understand H. page 70.
France as an instance of this mixture; But that France cannot be an Instance
of it is manifest by this, That the Princes of the Blood do there possess such
an excessive power, as I have declared inconsistent with this mixture, a
consequence of which power have been all the considerable seditions of France
in this last age. In many other things I allow that France is not far remote
from this mixture, much of which also may be discovered in the Castilian
Monarchy, in the administration of the Duke of Florence's Government, and the
Pope's Temporal Domiuion in Italy. But it must be remembered, That to make good
the possibility of this mixture, I am not obliged to produce the Example of a
Monarchy that has continued free from Seditions, since I have endeavored to
prove that it is impossible any Government should be altogether free from them:
It is abundantly enough if the Reigns of able Monarch; have not been troubled
with Seditions, or only with such as have been immediately suppressed, For the
art of apprehending and preserving this mixture is not attainable by any
universal Rules or Frame of Policy, but is a personal Effect of the Capacity
and Experience of every Monarch: And therefore to expect that a weak Prince can
long continue to Govern securely by the maxims and Constitutions of a wise
predecessor, is all one as to imagine that the Tools of some excellent
Artificer falling into the Hands of an ignorant person should serve to make
good work.

And this seems to be the only considerable objection against us, That this
mixture cannot H. p. 72.
be durable, because the Nobility in this case would not keep down the People,
but fetch them up (as did the Barons) into their scale, that together they
might weigh down the Army; which is the infallible Consequence of this mixture.
Where the Nobility has already got too great Head, and where the Prince by the
unseasonable application of an Army goes about to reduce them, I deny not but
this may perhaps be the Consequence; But then this Case supposes the Nobility
possessed of a power from which They will be excluded by this mixture; And as
this mixture takes from them the power so does it the Interest also, it being
impossible for the Nobility to League with the People, or fetch them up into
their scale, without loosing some part of that power which by the Monarch they
enjoyed over the People. This Case of the Nobility and People uniting against
the Monarch can never happen unless the Monarch is at once become through his
own Vices and Cruelty universally odious, and through his Imprudence and
Irresolution universally contemptible; And I do with much readiness confess,
That such Princes are not to look for security, it being not in the Design of
God or Nature, or in the power of Art to make those men Happy who will not
cooperate toward the attaining their own Happiness.

This Temper of a Monarchy is the Highwater Mark beyond which no Government
can rise; That all other Government must needs fall a great deal short of it I
am in the last place to make Evident. And that a popular Government or
Commonwealth must do so is apparent by the last Chapter, where it has been
proved That this kind of Government is necessarily exposed not only to Sedition
but total Dissolution. For a Government by a Sovereign Assembly or
Aristocracy, As it is exposed to all the same Original Causes of Sedition with
a Monarchy, so it wants the Remedies which consist in Secrecy and Celerity,
that are the peculiar Advantages of a single person's Administration: Besides,
this Inconvenience belongs particularly to a Sovereign Assembly, that one or
more persons of it carrying on a secret Design to change the Government may
have Credit enough in the Assembly to corrupt their Consultations, and so make
the Assembly an Instrument to their own subversion. Lastly for a Monarchy
either by Arms or a Nobility taken singly, This Mixture of both curing the
Infirmities of each must necessarily have the Advantage of them.

If Mr Harrington be of Opinion that I ought to have laid down a particular
Model of this kind of Government, I must in this also acknowledge the
Difference of my Judgment from his; For though a General Discourse concerning
Government may fairly become any Gentleman, the proposing (or imposing rather)
a particular Model seems to relish too much of a Design, and wants that
Modesty and submission that ought to be in all Private Men.

CHAP. X.
Whether a Commonwealth that was not first broken by her self, were ever
conquered by the Arms of any Monarch.

IN this Chapter Mr Harrington is forced to be of the Considerer's mind, though
to keep up his Credit, He seems to be upon high Contradictions with Him. For He
tells Us that He is not to be argued against out of the little Cities in Asia,
which having no considerable Army, if H. page 75.
they should be subdued by some potent Monarch, concerns the Government no more
then if they had been overwhelmed by some Inundation or swallowed up by some
Earthquake. This is perfectly conformable to the Considerers sense, who has
declared that He thinks the Inference Fallacious which is made from the
success of Arms to the perfection of Government. But it concerned Mr
Harrington to have thought of this sooner, it being now too late to Retreat
with Honor, or to clog that Proposition with Restrictions which had before been
so positively and universally laid down by him, That a Commonwealth was never
conquered by any Monarch from the beginning of the world unto this Day.

Yet that the Considerer may have no Temptation to be proud, Mr Harrington lets
Him see how he lies at Mercy, and how his project of a Monarchy (whenever it
shall be thought fit to use so killing an Argument) may be totally H. p. 74.
ruined by the Example of the King of Yvetot: I acknowledge the great importance
of that Argument, and am willing to come to terms with him about it; And so
long as he will consent to suppress this Example of Yvetot in exchange of the
kindness I promise him not to draw any Argument for the Advantage of Monarchy,
from the Ancient and Illustrious Reign of King Oberon.

But the Considerer must not seem to be left in the possession of any truth,
And therefore the first general Answer will not serve Mr Harringtons turn, but
he goes on to deny that there is any truth in the instances which I brought to
prove that Commonwealths have been conquered by Monarchs. The first of those
was taken from the Commonwealths of the Grecians planted on the Coasts of Asia,
concerning which I am challenged to show that they H. p. 75.
came under the power of the Lydian and Persian Monarchs by Conquest, or
otherwise then by the purchase of Croesus his money. I am ashamed that Mr
Harrington should thus go on to oblige me; He has taught a new way by Me near
thought on, for the dissolution of a Commonwealth; Let a People be united into
a Republique, Let their City be fortifyed with Walls, let them have Arms in
their Hands, Nay let the Balance be fixed by an Agrarian Law; To what purpose
serves all this? There comes one with a little ready Money in his purse, and He
for twenty years Purchase or thereabouts) buys Lands, Balance, Laws,
Liberty and all; And as Larks are caught with Daring, this People being dazzled
with a little Gold, are of Free Men content to become slaves to a Monarch. This
is so pretty, that I am sorry I can not leave it thus, but am obliged to
examine what Herodotus has said in Reference to the way by which Croesus
obtained the Asiatick Cities. This Croesus was the first Barbarian We know
Herod. lib. 1
of who forced some of the Graecians to become his Tributaries, and made others
of them his Friends; The Jonians, Aeolians, and Dorians which inhabit Asia, He
forced to pay him Tribute, and the Lacedaemonians he made His friends But
before the Reign of Croesus all the Graecians were Free. This for their
Subiugation by the Lydian Monarch, concerning the Persian We will once more
try our Fortune with a Testimony out of Thucydides; As others by other Thucyd.
lib. 1. page 10.
means were kept back from growing great, so also the Jonians by this, That
the Persian Affairs prospering, Cyrus and the Persian Kingdom, after the
Defeat of Croesus, made War upon all that lies from the River Halys to the Sea
side, and so subdued all the Cities which they possessed in the Continent; And
Darius afterward, when he had overcome the Phoenissian Fleet did the like to
them in the Islands. Both which Testimonies are summed up by Strabo, where He
tells Us, That the Persians were the first who obtained Dominion over the
Strabo. l. 15.
Graecians, For though the Lydians had Command of them, it was not through all
Asia, but only of a small part of it which lies within the River Halys, and
that only for a small time during the Reigns of Craesus and Alyattes. But they
being overcome by the Persians, lost to them whatsoever Glory they had gained.
For the Persians as soon as they had subdued the Medes, presently made
themselves Masters of the Lydians, and brought into Subjection the Graecians in
Asia. Upon the Defeat of Croesus the Asiatick Republiques had, it seems,
recovered their Liberty so far, as to be in a Condition to dispute it with
Cyrus, which is clearly employed by Herodotus, when having related the Successes
of that War, He says It was the second time those Graecians were brought into
Servitude. And though during the prosperous Fortune of the Europaean Graecians
many Attempts were made to free the Asiatick Ones from that Yoke, They were
finally necessitated to submit to it, being by an express Article of the
Xenoph. Gr. Hist. lib. 5.
Peace concluded between Artaxerxes and the Graecians (which from the
Lacedaemonian Envoye who negotiated it was called the Peace of Antalcidas) left
under the Power of the Persian Kings. With Permission then I say it, This
Example does more then presume. It concludes as firmly as can be done by
Historical Proofs; And what Mr Harrington has so confidently H. page 74.
assumed, That these Cities can not be shown to have had the Command of any
Considerable Army will not serve to enervate it. Of the Jonians were eleven or
twelve Cities, of the Aeolians as many, of the Dorians five, with their
Territories, all united by Leagues and Confederacies; Now by granting that
these had no considerable Army (which lies under a great Suspicion of
Falsehood, for they had one good enough to venture the hazard of a Battle with
Harpagus one of Cyrus his Lieutenant Generals) He grants the Vanity of his own
Conceit, That military Virtue should be the necessary Effect of Popular
Government, Or that Commonwealths have merely by Virtue of their Policy been
preserved from being conquered by Monarchs.

In the Example of the Sicilian Republiques which I next made use of, Mr
Harrington says H. page 75.
there is not so much as a Presumption in my Favor; But either his skill or
his Fidelity in point of History is so slender, that We can not rely upon his
Word. The Condition of Sicilie, in the Age We dispute about was not unlike that
of Greece, the Seacoasts being planted with several Populous and Opulent
Cities, which enjoying their Liberty, made so many distinct Commonwealths
subsisting by themselves, and joined only by Leagues not durable, but transient
and changing according to the Exigence of Affairs. The chief and most
considerable of these was Syracuse, which knew so ill how to conserve her
Liberty, that for the greatest Part she lived under the Power of Absolute
Princes, Whom the Popular Graecians, then the only Masters of Appellations,
taught the World to call Tyrants, though some of them are known to have been
Princes of excellent Virtue and Goodness. That these were entrusted by the
Syracusians themselves, and so can not be accounted to have come to their Power
by Conquest I have no need to deny, For Mr Harrington erres very much if He
thinks these are the Examples I at first intended; I shall only insist upon
such Acquisitions as have been made by these absolute Princes of Syracuse over
the Sicilian Republiques, in respect of whom their Arms were Foreign, and
their Successes pure Conquests. It being only a piece of Ostentation to heap
together a multitude of Examples, I will neglect such as the Reigns of Gelon
and the first Hiero do furnish, and fix only upon those of Dionysius the Elder.
This Prince, it is true, did from mean beginnings clime up to a great Fortune,
and at length juggled himself into the Throne; But yet his Government was
signalised by many great Actions, against the Carthaginians especially who had
newly begun to settle in Sicilie: But that in which We are concerned, is the
Advantage he obtained over some Diod. Sic. lib. 14.
of the Sicilian Commonwealths, three of which, Naxus, Catana, and the
Leontines, He reduced in one Expedition, destroyed their Cities, and
transplanted the People into other Places. A while after the Tauromenians,
abandoned by the Carthaginians, did not run a much gentler Fortune. From thence
let Us follow him into the Southern part of Italy, (which, though in the style
of a later Age, is Sicilie too) and there We may observe him Defeating in a
very great Battle, the Crotoniates with the Confoederate Forces of all the
Grecian Republiques in Italy, the Ruin of one of which called Caulonia, was
the first consequence of his Victory. The year after, Rhegium a Commonwealth
so powerful as to have a Fleet of threescore and ten Galleys at Sea, was after
an obstinate Siege of eleven Months forced to surrender to Him, and those
Inhabitants which survived the War and Famine, were put to their Ransom, or
sold for Slaves. These are the Instances by which the Sicilian Commonwealths
are truly asserted to have been conquered by the Arms of a Monarch.

To these many other Examples out of ancient History might easily be added,
but that Mr Harrington is not in a Disposition to profit by them. The several
Republiques conquered by Darius might be enumerated, The Cities of Cyprus and
Phoenicia that were subdued by Euagoras might be inquired into, The
Commonwealths in Asia (One of which that of the Sambestans brought an Army of
sixty thousand Foot and six thousand Horse into the Field) that stoop't to
Alexander's Victorious Sword might be insisted on; But they shall be all let
pass, since it is not the Number but Evidence of Arguments by which Truth is
established.

The two Modern Examples of Genova and Florence remain; Concerning the first of
which Mr Harrington's Confession that She was subdued saves Me the Pains of
proving the Matter of Fact: What He has to object is but this, H. page 76. and
77.
First That though she has been under, being yet standing she can not be said
to be conquered, but remains as she was before Doria was born: And then That
there is nothing plainer then that this Commonwealth was subdued by her own
Sedition. But if a Commonwealth has been subdued by a Foreign Prince, has by
her Magistrates sworn Fealty to Him, has received a Governor and Garrison, and
has lived under this Power many years, (all which things concurred in the case
of Genova) Shall she still be said not to have been conquered, Because by the
Assistance and Protection of another Foreign Prince she afterward happened to
recover her Liberty? We may as well maintain that because the Israelites were
restored to their Country and law by the Medes and Persians, They can not be
said to have been conquered by the Assyrians. Nor does Genoa remain as she did
before Doria was born, as will be apparent to him that will take the Pains to
examine the Histories of those times and Actions: Of doing which there is the
more need because Mr Harrington (I will not give him one of his own
Compliments, H. page 6.
and say he does it, as is usual with him, falsely and fraudulently) has
confounded the Distinct and different Conditions of this Republique before and
after the Restoration of it by Doria. To the next Point, That this
Commonwealth was subdued by her own Sedition, I have no more to say, but That
this Reply is fitted for all Arguments, and would serve for a Million of
Instances (if so many could be produced) as well as for this, there being no
vanquished State which has not in some Measure cooperated to it is own Ruin. In
the mean while I know not whether I should laugh at or Pity my self, for being
put to deal with a Man, who thinks his own and a Commonwealth's Credit secured
by such Answers.

The History of the Florentines and Family of Medicis is not so sincerely
deduced by Mr Harrington, that We should abstain from making some Remarques
upon it. Though Cosimo and Laurence of Medicis had, for a Commonwealth, obtaind
a very extraordinary Power at Florence, And though Peter had indiscreetly
stretched, it farther then the other two had done, yet was that Family far from
being absolute Masters of Florence, their Power being all this while Sotto
nome, and con dimostrationi quasi civili; The Signorie, the Supreme Magistracy
Guicciard. lib. 1.
of the Commonwealth continued still on foot, which upon the first Discredit
that Peter's Affairs were fallen into at the approach of the French Army, had
Authority enough to proclaim him Rebel, and drive him out of the City. Peter
de Medicis being thus banished, Florence returned to a Popular Government,
which had fair leisure to settle it self, meeting with no disturbance from the
Medici ex^ one little Conspiracy not well managed, whose Detection served only
to confirm the Government by the Execution and Exile of Peter's best friends.
But in the year 1512, and 18 years after the expulsion of the Medici, yet
before Leo was Pope or Charles Emperor, (for Leo was not made Pope till after
the first Restitution of his Family to Florence, and was dead before the
second, So that He could not be, as Mr Harrington has represented him Author H.
page 77,
of either) the Medici were restored to Florence by the Arms of the King of
Aragon under the Conduct of the Viceroy of Naples: For it being perceived that
there was no Possibility of withdrawing the Florentines from the Friendship of
the French unless by altering the Government, the Viceroy suddenly fell with
his Army into Tuscany, and having by the storming of Prato, made the
Florentines despair of being able to defend themselves, the City came to an
Accommodation with him; And He to secure his Master of their Affections for the
Future, restored the Medtci to the Power their Family enjoyed before the year
1494, yet still with an Appearance of a Commonwealth, a Counsel of about 50
Jovius.
Persons (some Authors make them more) being constituted in whom should reside
the Power of the whole People. The succeeding Reigns of Pope Leo the tenth, and
Clement the seventh, both of the Family of Medicis, conduced not a little to
the Confirmation of their Power in Florence; Yet all p^^as blown up again in
the year 1527, When the Florentines animated by the Sacking of Rome and Pope
Clement's Imprisonment, revolted from the Medici and reestablisht their
Commonwealth which continued in being until the Mysterious and unexpected
Reconciliation of the Pope and Emperor; In consequence of which the Emperor
having by Hist. del Council. Trident.
a difficult War, brought the Florentines to submit upon Discretion gave the
Command of the City to Alexander de Medicis, and his Heirs for ever. It is now
127 years that they have continued in possession of this power, And if Mr
Harrington's thoughts had not been wholly taken up on the other side the
Apennine at Venice, he could not but have observed, That as the Authority of
the Prince is scarce any where more absolute, so the Peace and Prosperity of
the People is no where greater.

What does he mean then to tell us, That the purse of Cosimo had done that long
before H. p. 75.
which is here attributed to the Arms of the Pope and Emperor? To state the
matter with the greatest advantage to him, We will imagine that those sums
which Machiavel says the Considerable Men of Florence had received from
Cosimo, were still unpaid and might be demanded by his Heirs; But this would
have made it the Interest of all those particular Men to maintain the
Commonwealth, and keep out the Medici, because by that Course they would also
have avoided the payment of their own Debts: And in Effect, When after the
Death of Cosimo, his son Peter did by the advice of Machiav. ^ Hist. lib. 7.
Dietisalvi Neroni call in those sums his Father had freely lent, It excited
such a Tempest in Florence as came within a little of sinking him and his whole
Family. The money that was borrowed of Cosimo having been thus repaid to his
son Peter it must needs be impertinent to attribute to the purse of Cosimo such
good Fortune as befell his Posterity fifty years after his Death, before which
time the Riches he left behind him were so much dissipated, that Hist. lib. 8.
Machiavell assures us, the Commonwealth was feign to affist his Grandchild
Lawrence of Medici with a great sum of Money. I do not see how it can be
avoided, but we must believe the Purse of Cosimo had besides the money, an old
Charm in it, which made the Florentines let fall their Arms, and suffer the
Medici to reassume the Government: Without doubt there is somewhat of
Witchcraft in it, For if the Purse had wrought it by any natural virtue, It
had been much more easy to have kept the Medici in their possession, then to
restore them when they were fallen from it.

But is it not still more strange that Florence Guicc. lib. 2.
should not deserve the name of a Commonwealth? Had she not her private
Councels debating, her Great Council resolving, and her Magistrates Executing?
Was not the Rotation too provided for by the Annual Election of her
Gonfalionere? All these things which sound so big in Westminster Hall, in
Florence are not to be counted such Orders as deserve the name of a
Commonwealth. Truly it is not generously done of Mr Harrington thus to add to
the Afflictions of a poor unfortunate Lady Republique. But to what purpose do
we dispute any longer? If Genova be shown to have been conquered by a Monarch,
We are told She was subdued by her own Seditions; If Florence has run the same
Fortune, she had never attained such Orders as deserve the name of a
Commonwealth. What pity is it that a worthy Patriot should be forced to take
Sanctuary in a Mousehole? In this posture I confess I know not how to come at
him, but must leave him as a fit imploiment for the formidable H. in Epist.
Rat-catcher of his own Erection.

After so liberal a taste of Mr Harrington's ingenuity in reference to these
examples both Ancient and Modern, I am never to be persuaded He means Good
Faith when he calls for Reason and Experience to decide the Question H. p7. 77
about the Fate of Empires. In Humane Actions the Dependence of Effects upon
their Causes is so obscure, That the wisest Historians do but make conjectures
when they endeavor to penetrate into them; Nor can any Discourse of that
Nature be so convincing from which so great a Master of Cavils as Mr Harrington
may not find an Evasion. Yet if I were to convince any Rational uninterested
Person, That the Fate of Empires has not born a proportion to the Perfection of
their Government, I need only put him in mind that the Chinese and Persians
did for perfection of Government very far excel the rude Tartarians, by whom
they have been more then once conquered; That the Greek Emperors had a better
Policy then the wild Arabians, to whom they lost so great a part of their
Dominions; That the very Roman Empire can not be thought to have been at such a
decay of Policy and Government, but that it was still at a better pass then
the Barbarous Nations by whom it was rent in pieces; For by that time it was
pretty well cured of its worst Malady, the Insolence of the Soldiers, who
were grown less dangerous after the Empire came to be in a manner Hereditary.

But He proceeds to tell us, That the Arms of ibid.
Israel were always victorious till the death of Josua, whereupon the Orders
of that Commonwealth being neglected, they came afterward to be seldom
prosperous. Had it not first been fit (seeing the state under Josua, Be it what
it will from the first to the last was but of ten years) He should have torn
the History of David's forty years succesfull Reign out of his Bible? The Arms
of Rome during the popular Government were at such a pitch as if Victory had
known no other Wings but those of her Eagles. How then came it about that
Augustus and Trajan brought the Parthians to Reason, who had destroyed Crassus
and the Commonwealth's Army? Alexander with an H. p. 80.
handful of freer men overcame the hugest Army, the most vast and populous
Empire in the world. But with what did he overcome the Thebans who were freer
men than his? Or why was He not overcome by those several thousands of freer
Grecians who under Memon the Rhodian and Choeredemus served Darius? I wonder
that a man should take such pains to be ridiculous, and should not rather
apprehend this easy distinction, That though success belongs to valor and
Military discipline, Valor and Military Discipinle belong not to one form of
Government or Policy, but are attainable in any,

What he observes out of Sr Francis Bacon about the French and English, comes
to little more then this, that the one affecting to fight on horseback and the
other on foot, the French have had a good Cavalry, and the English, a good
Infantry; Though that too be now almost out of Date, for at present the English
fight well enough on horseback and in French on foot. The successes of the
English in France were never durable enough to have any thing of this Nature
inferred from them; And we may observe they always followed the Person of the
Prince: With us Edward the third, and Henry the fifth wise and valiant Princes
gaining, Richard the second and Henry the sixth weak Princes loosing; With them
John and Charles the sixth Men of no Ability loosing, Charles the fifth and
Charles the seventh Brave Princes recovering. Nor does Mr Harrington now stand
in need of being taught that during the Wars between the English and French,
France was scarce half what she is now, We then always finding a Duke of
Britain or Burgundy to take our part.

In one point Mr Harrington has dealt very H. p. 97.
discretly, when putting off the Robe of Legislator, He takes to him the Mantle
of Prophet, and with as little remorse as an Almanackmaker when he plays the
interpreter to a Comete, predicts what shall befall Europe: For this not
belonging to the present Age, will not be to be confuted bu^t by our
Great-Grandchildren. Yet I am not aware of any Reason he can have to enter into
so Tragical an Humor for if he be offended that the Wars of Europe are of no
more Dispatch, Paruta's Discourses would have furnished him with several
Reasons for it, of which this is one, That Europe being parcelled out into
several States, all Armed and watchful over their own and their Neighbor's
Interest, the grouth of any one State is presently balanced by a League of
some of the other; At which work the Ministers of state are every where become
so expert, that to keep Europe equally poised, is little more with them then to
trim a London Wherry. If I were disposed to take my turn of Prediction, I
might let Mr Harrington know that when by the Accession of some Marriage, or
any great unthought of Revolution, the Houses of France and Austria cease to be
a drawn Match, then will he see those great changes in Europe, which before it
will be but in vain to expect. In the mean while he ought not to impute this
to any Defect of Policy either in Germany or Europe, more then of old in
Greece, when being Cantoned into a multitude of Republiques she did from the
Peloponesiac War to the Reign of Alexander fight so long time to so little
Purpose.

For Ragusa and San Marino, Mr Harrington takes them by the wrong handle; They
were not by Me made use of to show that a Commonwealth has been conquered by
the Arms of a Monarch, but only to prove that the Success of Arms has no
necessary Dependence upon Perfection of Government, Seeing these Commonwealths
have a good Government, yet never were successful in Arms. Which part of the
Argument is by Mr Harrington left untouched and in full Force.

There has been enough said to evince the Falsehood of Mr Harrington's first
Assertion, That a Commonwealth was never Conquered by any Monarch from the
beginning of the World to this Day; In discussing which, Occasion has been also
given to manifest the Vanity of another of his Conceptions, That the Success of
Arms depends upon the Perfection of the Government or Policy. His second
Assertion was, That a Commonwealth was the Government, which has frequently
led mighty Monarchs in Triumph. This the Considerer replied was to run upon the
Foil, it being only the Conversion of the First: Upon this Mr Harrington
Triumphs too as well as his Commonwealth, and would have it thought that the
Considerer took this for a Logical Conversion of the Terms. But where H. page
80.
did the Considerer reveal this to Him? If Mr Harrington had not been at such
Enmity with Mathematiques and Mathematicians, He might have learned there is a
Conversion of Proportion, or of the Consequence of things; And that this is not
such an one He will never be able to show till he has made new Laws of
Ratiocination as well as of Government.

If any Man should chance to wonder how Mr Harrington's last Paragraph comes to
belong to this Chapter, He is to be advertised that the Coherence is both
Elegant and Natural, And consists in this, Burning the fingers, and Blistring
the tongue, Blistring, You know, uses to follow Burning. This Blister forsooth,
is raised upon the Considerers tongue for having entitled Mr Harrington to this
Assertion, That the Senate of Venice at the first institution took in the whole
People, Whereas he affirmed it not of the Senate but Commonwealth of Venice.
But in doing this I wronged my self more then Mr Harrington, it being neither
my intention nor concernment to disprove that Assertion to be true of the
Senate, but of the Grand Counsel in which consists the Commonwealth. Now that
tha Grand Counsel or Commonwealth did not, H. p. 81.
even at the first institution, take in the whole People of Venice, will
appear to be more then Perhaps. Gianotti does by very many and those
concluding Arguments make it out, That the first Institution of the Grand
Counsel was in the Reign of Sebastian Ciani, which began Anno 1175, And the
bringing of it to Perfection in Gradenigo's time who entered upon the Government
Anno 1297. This Council never consisted of more then 4500 Persons, And that
these should be the whole People is repugnant to all Histories of the Increase
and Power of the Commonwealth at that time. Giannotti also says plainly, That
it took in only such of the People as were considerable for Estate and Quality.
Nor is it material that Machiavel whom Mr Harrington follows is of the
contrary opinion, for his Discourse carries its own Refutation along with it,
in as much as He supposes the Grand Counsel or distinction of Gentlemen and
People to have been made at the very Match. Disc. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Institution of the Commonwealth, whereas Giannotti has proved it to be of a
later Original by many hundred years. A great part of the People being then
excluded from the Government, which in respect of them was unequal, The
inquiry was how these were kept in Obedience, of which an account was given out
of Contarini. This account Mr Harrington cannot accuse of any thing but an
improper speech (for the intention plainly looks another way) whilst I
attributed that to the Senate which belongs to the whole Commonwealth; For
which also He saves Me the pains of making any Apology, since He confesses it
to be a way of Locution made use of by very good Authors.

CHAP. XI.
Whether there be an Agrarian, or some Law, or Laws of that Nature to supply
the Defect of it in every Commonwealth: And whether the Agrarian as it is
stated in Oceana, be equal and satisfactory to all Interests.

BEcause it concerned Mr Harrington to show his utmost Activity in this
Chapter, That the Reader might take the less notice of the Slights and Tricks
that were to be put upon him, he first of all confounds the state of the
Question, by complicating several distinct Particulars; These I have untwisted
and they resolve themselves into three Questions, Of the Agrarian in every
Commonwealth, Of the Laws supplying the Defect of it, Of the Agrarian as it is
stated in Oceana. To each of which separately.

I do not intend to be so far carried out of the way by keeping Mr Harrington
Company, as in this place once more to repeat the Doctrine of the Balance; It
will be enough to reflect how in that Chapter it has been proved, First That
Riches do put in part, and that dependantly upon the Sovereign Power which
constitutes Propriety, conduce to Empire; And secondly, That so far as Riches
do conduce to Empire, it is to be understood indifferently of all sorts of
Riches and not to be restrained to Propriety or the Balance in Land unless in
such places where there is no considerable Wealth but what arises immediately
from the Revenue or Cultivation of Land. This I might justly plead as a
Privilege to exempt Me from handling this Chapter, seeing Mr Harrington's
Propositions about an Agrarian are no otherwise Material, then upon a
supposition that his Doctrine of the Balance remains firm and unconfuted.

Yet not to refuse any leap Mr Harrington sets Me, I will in the first place
examine Aristotle's opinion of the Balance, whom Mr Harrington does here
pretend to bring to his side by helping the Translation a little. And that the
Gentleman has indeed been a Translator of Poets is not unknown, but that he
should in translating a Philosopher in Prose use a Liberty more then Poetical
seems not very alowable. He will have the words (...), and (...) rendered H. p.
85
by the Words Political Balance, understood as He has stated the thing. Let
him then produce one Interpreter of Aristotle or one Lexicographer who is of
his mind, and I will yield my share in the Question; Nay let him show how it is
possible this should be Aristotle's meaning, when He has directly condemned,
not without Derision, Phaleas the Chalcedonian for having introduced the
Balance and Arist. Polit. lib. 2. c. 7
Agrarian into his Commonwealth. If He can do neither of these, He must give Me
leave to tell Him, that He offers an Intolerable violence to the Text and
Sense of Aristotle. This he does as often as he cites Aristotle in this
Chapter, but let one Instance serve for all. Inequality is the source of all
sedition, as when the Riches of one or a few come to cause such overballance as
draws the Commonwealth into Monarchy or Oligarchy; For preventing of which the
Ostracism has been of use in diverse Places as at Argos and Athens, The words
of Aristotle run thus; (...) (the Verb (...) or the like must be understood)
(...) Here he renders (...), by Riches that came to cause an Overballance,
though nothing can be more manifest then that Aristotle in this place is not to
be understood of Riches only but of Interest, Reputation, Command, and all
other things which may any way contribute to supreme Power. This will be put
past all Contradiction if we observe that Aristotle in this place speaking of a
Disease in a Commonwealth, gives an account also of the Cure, For by the Method
of the Cure the Disease may be certainly known: And for this excess of power,
this (...) that was greater then suited with the (...) of the Commonwealth, We
are told that at Athens the Ostracism was prescribed. Now the Ostracism both by
the Institution and Practice of it is known not to have been levelled at the
Riches of men only, but at any extraordinary Power, Credit, or Interest they
had acquired in the Commonwealth; Aristides was banished by the Ostracism for
having rendered himself Popular by his equity in arbitrating Law suits, And
when he dyed He was so poor that the City was fain to be at the Charges of his
Funeral, and to give his Daughters Portions. Again, How could the Ostracism be
a preservative against the Overballance in Riches, when notwithstanding the
Ostracism a man retained the possession of his whole Estate? It is therefore
evident to be against all Reason that Mr Harrington should render the words
(...) by the H. p. 8^
words Political Balance, understood as He has stated the thing; And his own
Dilemma recoiles upon him, For He will not have the more of Authority in this
point of the Balance, since Aristotle knew of it only to disapprove it, Nor
yet the less of Competition in it, because it was so long since stumbled upon
by Phaleas the Chalcedonian.

Having thus traduced Aristotle, in the next ibid.
place he does as much for the Considerer, whom he accuses for throwing only
at Israel Lacedemon and Oceana, when he had set him all the Commonwealths in
the World. But is it fair play to say He set Me that which while now He kept
in his sleeve? Are there in Oceana any examples of Commonwealths proposed that
are pretended to be equal in their Agrarian, except Israel and Lacedemon? Is
it not expressly said by him that Athens and Rome were unequal as to their
Agrarian, that of Athens being infirm, that of Rome none Ocena. p. 26.
at all? For those new examples of Venice, Germany, etc. which Mr Harrington
does at present pretend to set Me, I may with great Reason refuse to throw at
them, as being false money; Not one of them amounting to an example of an
Agrarian, but at most of such Laws as have been instituted to supply the
Defect of one.

I pass on then to make good what has in the Considerations been objected
against the Agrarian of Israel taken in Mr Harrington's sense; And that is
reducible to these Heads. 1. That the Division of the Land of Canaan was not a
Politic Institution intended as the Basis of the Government, but was an
Effect of Gods Promise to Abraham, that He would give that Land to his seed
after him; 2. That this is manifested by the Law of the Jubilee, which
otherways had been a weak provision, near fifty years time being by that
afforded for any man to multiply his Lot to that Height as would necessarily
have subverted the Government; 3. That the Government of Israel had subsisted
forty five years without the pretended Agrarian; 4. And finally, That in the
Division the Lots must needs have been very unequal, it being else impossible
there should on the one side have been hereditary Princes of the Tribes, and on
the otherside men so extremely poor as to sell themselves for slaves.

The first of these propositions he plays with very wantonly, and asks, If
the Right of an H. p. 87.
Oceaner unto his Land must derive from the Promise of God unto Abraham? Now to
ask him again, Who says so? Is no toying, but very good earnest. And Mr
Harrington, if he had intended to deal fairly, might perceive He was bound to
show, That the like division of the Lands in Oceana is necessary
notwithstanding there be no such cause, as was the promise of God unto Abraham
upon which the Division of Canaan inseperably depended. But he continues his
gay Humor, and (as Tumblers divert the Company with an Hoope) frisks about
this Circle, He proposes the Division of the Lands in Israel as an equal
Agrarian on whch their Popular Government was founded; He is told by Me, That
this division of the Land Gceanap. 26.
looked not at the Government, but followed the promise of God unto Abraham,
And that there is not any Footstep of the other Defign in the whole Bible. He
replies, That God in ordaining the Balance of Israel having ordained the
Cause, ordained also the Effect which was Popular Government. Thus supposing at
all adventures that Government to be Popular, he will have the Agrarian (that he
Fancies) to be the Cause and Foundation of it, And at the next step to show
that this Agrarian is the Cause, He supposes Popular Government to be the
Effect. What can any Reasonable man desire more of a new Beginner? But he must
pardon Me, I am still upon the same Ground; He must by some express place of
Scripture (for that place Number. 26. 53. going no farther then Tribes or at most
then Families falls short of doing it as I have showed Consid. page 57.) prove,
That the division of the Lands by Lot was intended for the foundation of the
Government, Or He must not think by such weak and precary Diductions from his
own Notion of a Balance to peswade us that God had any such Design in it.

What he answers about the Jubilee is mere Cavilling; For it belongs not to Me
to show how in fifty years one Lot might be so increased as to subvert the
Government, but to him to show that the possibility of this was prevented by
the Agrarian Law contained in the Jubilee. Yet a man may without giving occasion
to be H. p. 86.
accused of boasting, own Mathematiques enough to demonstrate how if not one,
yet a few men (which as to to the present subject creates no Difference) might
come to be owners of the whole Land of Canaan in the tme between two Jubiles.
For the Israelites being no where forbid Merchandise, let it be supposed that
some few of them addicted themselves to Traffic, and by the success of it
annually improved their estates twenty in the hundred, which a mong Merchants
is not reputed an immoderate gain. The increase of 20 per Cent. in 50 years
which is the distance of two Jubiles, multiplyes an estate 7676 times, as will
be manifest if in a Geometrical Progression of 50 Terms, according to the
proportion of 100 to 120, or 5 to 6 the last Term be found out. Now the whole
Number of Lots in the Land of Canaan was 600000, which being divided by 7676
gives Us 78 for the Number of Men who might in the time between two Jubiles
acquire the Propriety of the whole Land. But it is enough to H. p. 12.
possess three Parts in four to cause an overballance, Wherefore Sixty Men
might notwithstanding the Jubilee come to overballance the rest of Israel and by
that overthrow the Popular Government; By which it appears that the Jubilee
could not be intended for an Agrarian Law, to lie at the Foundation of the
Government.

Nor is his Exception against the Argument drawn from that space of 45 years
during which the Government of Israel subsisted without this pretended
Agrarian, fraught with any honester meaning: It is not to be doubted, that the
Israelites received many Laws in the Wilderness that were not to be put in
Execution, till after their Settlement in the Land of Canaan, Of which that was
one, Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates. But He has
taught Us to put a Difference between H. p. 88.
the Foundation and the Superstructures: Therefore though the Government of
Israel subsisted well enough in the Wilderness without an Order that depended
totally upon their local Distribution in the Land of Canaan, This is no
Argument that it might do so without an Order which is represented as Necessary
and Fundamental to the Government. Before they had Gates, They neither could
have nor needed Judges in them, but that does not make the Wonder cease how
their Government could subsist 45 years without an Agrarian, if that must be
reputed the Basis of their Commonwealth. And whereas Mr Harrington says, The
Israelites under Moses were an Army, What is that to purpose unless this Army
must be thought to have been governed by Him by Martial Law? Which can never be
affirmed by Mr Harrington, who has made their Government bear Ocean. p. 16.
Date, and exemplified in some of the most important Orders of it, so many
years before.

But all the Considerer's Faults have been hitherto but Peccadillos, He is now
accused of no less then taking part with the Devil, and that H. page 90.
for having said He was not aware of any Prerogative of Authority belonging to
the Israelitish more then any other Republique, If any Man will take the Pains
to look upon that Passage of the Considerations page 39. He will find two
Advantages of Authority expressly there set down by Me, which the Jewish had
above all other Commonwealths; If there be any more, Mr Harrington would have
done Honestly to inform Us; But not having been able to do that, and yet to
charge Me with the quite contrary of what I asserted, will leave it out of
Dispute which of Us takes part with the Devil, who We know, was a Liar from
the Beginning.

For as to his Distinction of the Power and Authority of a Commonwealth, it is
in it self Insignificant, and as to this Place and Purpose, Impertinent; The
whole Authority of the Jewish Republique is included in those two Points by Me
explained in the Considerations. And what if the Romans being resolved to erect
a Popular Government, to save themselves the pains of contriving, were content
to borrow their Twelve Tables of the Athenians? Must We therefore be enforced
to have recourse to the Jews, though We neither have Need of nor Room for any
of their Particular Constitutions? This may give just cause to suspect his
Design is to introduce the Judaicall Law, And that there is nothing to choose
between James Harrington Legislator, and William Medley Scribe. Concerning the
Jewish Agrarian then, it is enough that Mr Harrington's Replies to the
Considerer's Objections are thus manifested to be unsatisfactory.

All that is alleged in Opposition to the Considerer's Apprehensions of the
Lacedaemonian Agrarian is so Insignificant, that I can have Nothing to reply;
For of Nothing is produced Nothing. I will therefore make use of this Leisure
Mr Harrington affords Me, to make out a little more fully, from the History of
Lacedaemon my former Assertions about the Agrarian of that Republique.

Lycurgus when he had begun to new Model the Commonwealth, finding the greater
part of the People to be desperately Poor, and some few very Rich, out of a
Design to banish on the one side Envy and Insidiation, on the other Insolence
and Luxury, and together with these, Riches and Poverty, the Mother Diseases of
a Commonwealth, He persuaded them to come to a New and equal Division of
Lands; And that for the future they should live upon equal Terms with one
another, not aiming at Priority in any thing but Merit, and reputing there
ought to be no difference between Man and Man, but what arises from the Praise
of Virtue and Reproach of Vice. After He had accomplished this, They say that
passing through ibid.
the Country in Harvest, and seeing the Shocks of Corn all of a size, He
smiled and said the Country looked as if it belonged to Brothers who had newly
parted their Inheritance. In setting out these Lots He seems to have looked
only at fitting the People, by a bare and necessitous Life, for the Trade of
War; without that He might have made their Lots as large again, having
Territory enough ((...)) Plut. in Solon.
for twice as many People, the surplusage of which, perhaps, lay wast, or was
enjoyed by their Slaves. Nor was it lawful for any Spartan to improve this Lot
to the best, by living upon it, for they were strictly prohibited all
Occupations, even that of Agriculture, and their Hinds or Helots paid Plut. in
Lyc.
them only an Annual Quantity of Corn, Wine and other Fruits. This
Institution had served to little purpose, if it had been free for the
Lacedaemonians to possess what Personal Estates they thought fit, and
therefore Lycurgus (having failed in attempting a like Division in Movables)
first forbid the Use of Gold and Silver, and then by the extreme debasing of
their other Coin, cut off all possibility of Traffic with their Neighbors;
So that No Man of any Art or Trade tending to Elegancy, Vanity, or Luxury
could have any hopes of gaining a Livelihood at Sparta: And withal such
Offenses as are every where committed out of Desire of money, did of themselves
soon cease, Money it self being become of so little worth. In all other Points
also the Institution of the Lacedaemonians was very severe, and serving merely
to accustom them during Peace to the Incommodities of War. Therefore the
Raillery of that Italian was sharp enough, who said Plut. in Pelop.
the Lacedaemonians did no great matter in being so daring in the Wars, if it
were only to free themselves of a laborious and miserable Life.

Though these things had been with so much Care provided for by Lycurgus, his
Laws were exposed to the same Fate with those of all other Legislators, and
wanted a Power to make themselves be observed. It was very early, in Croesus
time, that the Lacedaemonians began to cast amorous Glances upon Gold, for
being corrupted by him, they connived at the Paus. Messen
Slavery he brought upon the Grecian Republiques in Asia. Their Agrarian also,
so far was it from being the Immovable Basis of the Commonwealth, was soon
confounded as well as those of the Argives and Messenians, and that, as
Aristotle intimates, by the defect of Lycurgus his own Laws; For though Polit.
lib. 2. cap. 9.
he forbad Men to alienate their Lots by sale, He left it free for them to give
and bequeath what they thought fit. So that Arist. P ol lib. 5. c. 7.
during the Messeniac War, a sedition was raised of them who demanded a new
Division of the Lands. I know that is generally held these innovations were of
a much later Date, and Plutarch names Epitadeus one of the Ephores as author of
them, But the obligation is Mr Plut. in Agid.
Harrington's not mine, to reconcile these Authors. However it is manifest,
that this Breach in their Laws was soon taken, for they preserved themselves in
the Integrity of their Manners and Institution, till after the taking of Athens
by Lysander. But the Booty gained in that War being very great, Lysander
prevailed, that the Gold and Silver might be brought to Sparta for the erecting
a Public Treasury, without which it would be impossible to carry on the
Design of making themselves the Captains and Leaders of all Greece. This was
with some reluctance consented to, yet not without this previous Caution, That
the money should serve only for Public Uses, and that it should be Death for
any private man to have Gold or Silver in his house, which Law was put in
Execution upon the person of Thorax, But it was in vain to forbid Plut. in
Lysand.
that in Private, which was allowed in Public; For with the possession of
money imediately entered Covetousness; and after that an inclination to Ease and
Luxury, which presenly overthrew the sober and masculine temper of their
Commonwealth. Instead of that Probity toward their Friends and Neghbours which
accompanied their Poverty, now Pride, Insolence and Avarice took Place. So that
becoming weak and Effeminate at home, and Odious abroad, their Commonwealth
soon fell from all its Virtue and Glory. And this showed the Providence of
Lycurgus who knowing that the equality of their scant Lots was not a
sufficient. Bar to the mischiefs produced by Riches, had at the beginning
condemned the use of Gold and Silver; for these miseries befell the State a
good while before they grew so expert at breaking of Laws as to violate their
Agrarian. At length that went after the Rest, and the Commonwealth being
totally abandoned to Luxury and Corruption (having first made a weak attempt
or two to revert to her ancient Discipline) came to utter Ruin.

Thus have I given you a Crayon of the Commonwealth of Lacedaemon in reference
to her Agrarian; Which appears to have been instituted by Lycurgus: only as a
necessary Provision for attaining that Poverty and Virility, which he intended
to incorporate with his Commonwealth. Against this Mr Harrington will scarce
have any more to object then he has done already, which is in effect just
Nothing. He brings indeed Aristotle and Plutarch to a false Muster, but
Aristotle has been already rescued from his Abuses, and the Place of Plutarch
is the same (excepting only his want of sincerity in citing it) with that I
first produced in this Discourse.

I am now delivered from this first Question of the Agrarian, and, according to
the Method I proposed, the second Question which belongs to Such Laws as
supply the Defect of an Agrarian in several Commonwealth's, comes to be
discussed; In doing which I shall not have occasion to spend much Time.

The first Instance Mr Harrington gives, is of H. page 86.
the Ostracism which supplied the Defect in the Grecian Cities of an Agrarian.
That the Ostracism was not inflicted upon Men for their excessive Riches, so
much as for diminishing the Power and Credit which by their Virtue and Great
Actions They had attained to in the Commonwealth, I have already made appear;
And by Consequence Mr Harrington's Fancy that it supplied the Defect of an
Agrarian taken in his Sense must needs be without Ground. To which it will only
be needful to add, that when the Athenians thought of putting Nicias to the
Ostracism, (then the Richest Subject of Greece, and most obnoxious to a Law
that studied to prevent excess of Wealth) their Motives were, His reserved,
stately, and unpopular Manner of Life, together with his Firmness in adhering
to the Public Good, and opposing the rash Desires of the People: And though
his Riches also are mentioned by Plutarch among the rest, yet so as that they
were the Object of their Envy rather then their Fear. I wonder why Mr
Harrington, who goes off Fist after every Fly, did not mention the Petalism of
Syracuse as well as the Ostracism of Athens in imitation of which it was
invented: But it is to be presumed he abstained from it because of the Success,
which discovered how pernicious this Device was to the Public. For upon the
Institution of this Law, the Syracusans of better Quality (a People, it seems,
not of so unquiet and enterprizing a Temper as the Athenians) who by their
Wisdom and Experience were capacitated to have served the Commonwealth,
retired themselves from all Public Affairs, thereby to avoid the danger of
Banishment. And so the Care of the Public being abandoned to the most
indigent and Impudent Persons, who took Diod. Sic. lib. 11.
care of nothing but how to slatter the People in their Orations, the
Commonwealth was plunged into so many Disorders and Seditions, that there was
no hopes of her Recovery, unless by repealing the Petalism, to invite Men of
worth to resume the Conduct of Affairs.

For what concerns the Agrarian of Rome, Mr Harrington has long since said it
was none at Ocean. p. 26.
all, and in effect says now the same; For if They did but strive for it, it
is evident they never obtained it.

That at Venice the Officers of the Pomp should supply the Defect of an
Agrarian, will scarce be believed by him, who knows how slightly the Accurate
Giannotti passes over the Description of that Office. I think also it will not
be easy to comprehend how a Law that preserves the Nobility from laying
themselves out upon vain and Gaudy. Apparencies should tend to the limiting
their Estates. But, he says, a Venetian that H. page 86.
should keep a Table or have his house furnished with Retainers would be
obnoxious. Does any Italian affect that expensive way of Popularity? Or how
should a Noble Venetian need to do it, when he may notwithstanding entertain in
Pension eight or ten Bravos?

Follow him to the German Republiques, and You will find they have no more to
supply the Defect of this Law, then that Estates descending are divided among
the Children: And grant this in Oceana, and You grant the whole Agrarian. By
these Republiques sure We are not to understand Nuremberg, Strasburg, etc. but
the Princely houses of Austria, Saxony, the Rhine, etc. all which maintain
this Custom: But these are all Monarchies by a Nobility, or at least Members
of that Great one the Empire. Wherefore Mr Harrington commits a great Error in
his Apprehension of the German Agrarian, or has incurred a far greater one in
his Model of a Commonwealth, in proposing that Agrarian as fit for an equal
Commonwealth, which by his own Confession belongs to a Monarchy by Nobility.

And this brings Me to the third Question, concerning the Agrarian as it is
stated in Oceana; Which as it has no community with that of Israel in the
original of its institution, so has it very little Resemblance with that of
Lacedaemon in the aim and Method of its Establishment. This was acknowledged
long since by the Considerer, and Mr Harrington could not but see it, though He
makes so pitiful an Endeavor to mistake my Meaning. But I am at a Loss; The
Dialect of the next Pages makes Me think I am fallen into the Company of
Cheats, And that it is not Aristotle or Plutarch that can now bring Me off, but
that the late Act of Parliament against Gaming must do it. This is at least
made evident by it, That Mr Harrington is conversant in the Mysteries of other
Boxes besides Ballotting Ones, and is no less Qualified for Secretary to the
Comb-makers Ordinary, then to a Commonwealth. I envy not his high endowments,
but I must soberly let him know, that though, while he maintains the Dignity of
a Philosopher, and a Gentleman, I count my self obliged to return him a Serious
Answer, When he thinks fit to play the Buffoon, I can laugh as unconcernedly as
any other Man. And to Laughter only (my Pity excepted) am I disposed by seeing
how he disports himself in shaking the 15 false Dice he pretends to find in one
of my Throws: Gentlemen, (for it is necessary I should appeal to the Lookers
on) the Dice I threw were all true, for which he has in taking them up, set
down these False Ones; Not any one of those 15 Absurdities belongs to Me, but
are all framed by himself, either by a willing Mistake of my meaning, or by a
childish Distortion of my Words. My first Argument therefore, That his Model
of an Agrarian is unjust, remains unconfuted, and is not ever to be answered by
any Man who, like Mr Harrington, makes Propriety the Ground H. p. 93.
of Government. He ventures indeed to say, that his Agrarian does not alter
Propriety, but only obliges a great landed Man to divide it among his Children:
But he ought to have remembered that the Liberty of disposing as a Man thinks
fit of his own, is Essential to the Propriety We now Dispute of; And if it be
the Piety of dividing the land among all the Children he is taken with, his
Hypocrisy may be a little suspected, in regard he has made this Law only to
concern the Surplusage of 2000l. p. an.

The second Argument which in the Considerations I made use of against the
Agrarian of Oceana was this, That the Rate of 2000. l. p. an. at which it is
stated can never be fixed, but that it will continually be in danger of being
still brought lower, till at length it be so far debased, That the keeping it
from going any lower will be the Concernment of a greater Number of Men, then
They make up who have an Interest in the further debasing of it. This Argument
Mr Harrington has thought sit to anticipate, by pretending to answer it in his
eight Chapter. I must therefore go back to that Place, which I find to be not
only dislocated, but so strangely shattered, that it will be very hard for Me
to Splinter up the broken confused Pieces of it. But to make as much of his
Answer as I can, He seems to say in the first Place, That the People are
naturally incapable H. p. 44.
of such a Design as Levelling or reducing the Standard of Estates to the
lowest Rate, seeing never any People (except a faint Attempt of the Romans)
went about it; And if there be any such thing familiar with the Nature of the
People, why appeared it but once, and vanished without Effect? This Method of
arguing a non esse ad non posse, or affirming because a Thing has not yet been
it can never be, is peculiar to Mr Harrington; But there is some reason to
doubt, other men will not look upon this as sufficient Security, especially if
They consider how the People are now taught Principles before unknown to them,
That the Balance of Dominion in Land is the Natural Cause of Empire, And That
the Balance ought to be fixed by an Agrarian Law. For in Oceana every Man (who
is not a Servant) above 18 years of age being obliged to have Arms, and every
Man above 30 being capable of Magistracy, the People finding the Empire in
their own hands, must of necessity conclude the Balance ought to be there too,
and consequently must endeavor to take down the standard of the Agrarian so
low as that the Land may come to be divided among the whole Body of the People.
And if the People in other Governments, for Example under the late Monarchy,
did never H. page 44.
so much as think of Levelling the Nobility, It was partly because They did not
then apprehend it, as They will do now, to be a thing just and necessary; And
partly because They wanted Power to do it, their Arms depending upon the
Nobility, And their Vote in the Commons house being insignificant without the
Consent of the King and Lords. But in the Commonwealth of Oceana the People can
not want Power and Interest to effect it, either by the way of Arms or Vote: By
the way of Arms, the People amounting to 200000 armed Men, with Commanders and
Officers chosen by themselves out of their own Body, and having a certain
Rendezvous appointed in reference to their Musters, need but declare their
Resolution to have the Agrarian taken down to a less Rate then 2000l. p. an.
And the whole Business is dispatched. For They who can have an Interest to keep
it up at that Rate, not being above 5000 Men, can not possibly resist so much a
greater Multitude, that is already armed and formed into a Body. So that the
People of Oceana ought not to be deterred from this Attempt by the Fear of a
Civil War, and the Loss they may sustain by it, (Though, by the way, If that
Reflection were enough to keep the People Q^uet, there would be little need
ever to fear their stirring) seeing the 5000 Men can not do otherwise then
immediately submit, as being apparently too weak to maintain themselves in the
State of War. But if the People of Oceana choose rather to manage this Design
by the way of Vote, They may with more ease effect it; For the Elders or Men
capable of Magistracy in Oceana, being 100000 in number, And they who possess
2000l. p. an. being but 5000 in number, The same Proportion, according to an
equal Calculation, must hold in the Deputies at the Prerogative Tribe;
Wherefore in the Representative or Prerogative Tribe there will be twenty for
one who will have an Interest to Vote the Agrarian down to a lower Standard.
Yet I do not think that this will come to absolute Levelling, or giving to
every Man (as Mr Harrington computes it) ten pounds H. page 45.
a year; But I do not see how it is possible it should stay sooner then at
about 200 pounds a year; But that being made the measure of the Agrarian, or
the greatest Estate which any man can possess in Land, there can not be less
then 50000 Persons concerned to keep it from going lower, which number will, it
is likely, prove considerable enough to fix it at that Rate.

In his Answer to my third Argument, He takes Pleasure in straying out of a
plain Way, and will understand Me as if I had said, The old Jews during their
being Inhabitants of Canaan were great Traders. I am not aware that any
Ambiguity in my Words could give him an Occasion of this Thought; But
howsoever, I am content to explain my self better by declaring that I meant
this of the Modern Jews, who though dispossessed of Canaan, are every where so
Rich, that unless perhaps in Solomon's time, their Ancestors could never have
compared Estates with them. And as They having no Land are all Merchants, so in
Oceana the Possession of Land being limited, Men who aimed at farther Riches or
Power, would convert their stock into Traffic, by which Emporium would be
increast beyond the Proportion consisting with the Security of the
Commonwealth. These were the Considerer's thoughts, which Mr Harrington seems
not to disallow of, but only in the last particular, that the greatness of
Emporium can prove dangerous to the Commonwealth of Oceana. To make this
Probable, I must begin a Good way off. Of Commonwealths both Ancient and
Modern, some have been founded upon one Great City, in which are Resident not
only the Magistrates and Senate, but also the whole Body of the People which
constitues the Commonwealth; Such were of old, Athens, Syracuse, Carthage,
Rome, at present Venice and Genoa. These Cities are both the Heart and Head of
their several Commonwealths, In them the Principal Actions of Life are
performed, and from thence Blood and Spirits are conveyed into all the Parts:
Their Increase is the Augmentation of the whole, and as long as they continue
in Health, the Republique can not die. Hereupon have all wise Legislators
contrived and encouraged the Increase of these Cities both in Population and
Riches, for the whole Commonwealth being in a manner comprehended within their
Walls, their enlargement can never cause any inequality or Danger to the
Public. If it be Ocean. p. 147 H. p. 98.
thought that I commit an Error in placing Rome in this Classis of
Commonwealths, seeing her Rustic Tribes were the most considerable both for
number and Reputation. My inducements to it were, First that at the Institution
of the Rustic Tribes they were so near adjacent to the City, that there was
scarce any difference, as to the facility of Assembling together, between them
and the Inhabitants of the City it self; And then secondly, That before Rome
had attained any considerable Greatness, the Tribes were no longer to be taken
in a Local acception but only as so many divisions of the People, to some one
of which every Citizen wheresoever inhabiting must necessarily relate; As with
us every freeman of London must be of some one of the old Companies. And it was
in this sense that the Patricians chose to be of some Rustic Tribe, which is
no more then that my Lord Major is a Skinner or a Merchant Tailor. But thirdly
though Rome had her Rustic Tribes, and Athens her (...) or Populations in the
Country, none of these had Right to assemble within their own precincts, for
choosing Magistrates or nominating Deputies to represent them, nor had any
capacity of dealing in Public Affairs, unless They in person repaired to the
Capital City, so that this City still remained the Seat of the Commonwealth,
all Public Business being transacted within her Walls.

Other Commonwealths have not been raised upon the greatness of one City, but
have consisted of the Confederacy or League of many, of which sort so many
examples occur among the Grecians it is needless to name any; Of Modern ones
the Union of the Netherlandish Provinces is of this Nature. And in this case no
one City can acquire an extraordinary Greatness without danger to the Liberties
of all the rest, or at least of Dissolution to the Union: Thus the City of
Thebes being grown Powerful, took away the Liberty of the Boeotians their
Confederates: And thus the Elians being inrich't by the Conflux of People to
the Olympian Games, incroch't upon the Privileges of the Neighboring Towns.
That Amstredam of late years hugely advanced by Traffic, is in a Condition
to do as much for the United States; and has in part attempted it, was
intimated by the Considerer: The Actions are fresh, and those Relations and
Discourses which are Published, make every man a judge; If Mr Harrington be
satisfied that their actions resisted not H. p. 98.
the Interest of Liberty, but of a Lord, He may deserve a pension in
communicating this satisfaction to them of Zealand, Frizeland and Overyssell.

A third sort of Commonwealths are those which consist not of Leagues or
Unions, neither are seated in some one great City, but are diffused through a
whole Nation, and are not to be assembled but by the Mediation of a
Representative Body: Of this kind you are not to expect many Examples; Israel
(when it shall be evinced to have been a Commonwealth) must needs have been
such an one, and such an one is the proposed Model of a Commonwealth for
Oceana. In these the disproportionate Greatness of any one City, becomes still
more dangerous, for now this City is no longer to be reputed the Head or Heart,
but the Spleen or Liver, whose overgrowth brings the rest of the Body to Decay
or Ruin. Any one City so overtopping the Rest constitutes Rem-publicam in
Republica, and the Inhabitants of it will always stand united in reference to
their own Interest even when it looks a squint upon that of the Commonwealth.
In Israel indeed they need not to fear this Inconvenience, for it does not
appear that before the establishment of the Monarchy, any one City had so much
advantage over the rest as to claim the Dignity of a Metropolis. But in
Monarchies the Mischief has been frequent; Paris both formerly and in our time
has been the Rise and Retreat of several Rebellions, Ghendt and Liege have
more then once done as much for their Princes, In Spain the War de las
Communidades took its beginning from Toledo, Valladolid, Valentia and two or
three more great Towns. And that the mischief should be multiplied in a
Commonwealth, I have one reason more to think, which is that a Monarch can by the
Residence of his Court, that brings so ample profit to a City, lay an
obligation upon them, which in a Commonwealth can amount to very little, or
rather Nothing. To make an end, the City of Emporium is already so Potent That
it may will be doubted whether she will be content with that portion Mr
Harrington has allowed her in his Commonwealth of Oceana, and whether when she
looses the Honor of obeying a Prince, she will not think her Common Council as
good as the Prerogative Tribe, and her Commander in Chief as the Strategus of
Oceana.

Therefore those of the Nobility who have disposed of their Sons in the City
may fairly expect to see them Princes, The rest may do well to consider
whether the Beare's skin will keep them warm while it is upon the Bears back,
and whether they can live upon the reversion of those Estates Mr Harrington has
promised H. p. 100.
them in the first Provinces his Commonwealth conquers.

The fourth Argument was taken from the difficulty of making the Agrarian
equal and steady in reference to the inconstant value of money: But this says
He, was sufficiently provided for H. p. 101.
where it is said that a new survey at the present Rent being taken, the
Agrarian should ordain that no man should thenceforth hold above so much Land
as there is valued at the rate of 2000l. per an. Though this was omitted in the
Order, I deny not that it was hinted in one of the speeches; but this is to
recompense one error by committing another that is greater, or to cure an Ague
by a Feavour; The value of mony'tis true is always in motion, but not in so
swift and irregular one, as the Improvement of Land I speak not of the
improvement of Rent, or the advantage the Landlord makes upon the Farmer, but
of that Natural one which sometimes consist in the Meliorating of the soil it
self, as by derivation of Water; Sometimes in the Discovery of a profitable
Mineral; And sometimes by employing the ground to a new Husbandry as the
planting Tobacco, Hops, and many other things which have already and may for
the future be invented. By all these ways, the value of Land may come to be
many times multiplied, and consequently the Agrarian notwithstanding this
Provision must soon recede from the first Design of its institution. He need
not now have been put in mind of this, if he would have learned this Lesson of
Aristotle, That those Orders in a Commonwealth Pol. lib. 5. cap. 8.
which relate to the Census or Valuation of Estates, must be renewed and
adapted continually to the Census through all its shiftings and Changes, and
this at furthest once in five years.

That the Agrarian does not stem, but follow the Tide of Custom in this
Nation, will scarce meet with Belief, notwithstanding Mr Harrington's
undertaking, as long as We have before our eyes so many examples of Elder
Brothers and great Purchasers. But I mean not to trouble him with any
Discourses about keeping or breaking old Customs; That would be as to this
subject but a Common place of talk, and if the Agrarian be a thing so
customary, his pains in discovering of it, merit the less of thanks from the
Public; For though we usually give Money to those who show Us an Hare or
Patridge, it has not been made a fashion to reward such as bring Us to a Crow
or a Jack-Daw.

After all this, that an Agrarian is necessary H. page 102.
unto Government be it what it will, and as much to Kings as unto
Commonwealths, I can not give my assent; The Reasons of my not doing so, have
been made out abundantly, unless I have had the ill fortune to throw away all
that has been said in this Chapter and that of the Balance. I do not deny
that these Notions are of good concernment, if taken in general, and without
this severe Restriction to Estates in Land. I lay it for a ground that Princes
ought to consider Riches as one of the principal instruments of Governing;
That in order to this They should not think a Crown worth wearing, unless
provided with a Constant Revenue, (or at least a way of raising it) large
enough for all Public Occasions; That they wear the Key of their Treasury,
with the same Jealousy as their Sword, permitting neither to be taken out of
their own hands. For the rest, That they take care those men whose interest is
dependant upon the Prince's may be possessed of such estates as shall bring them
a Return of Respect and Power. The favor of the Prince, the Profit of
Offices, the Advantages arising from Public Employment both Military and of
State, joined with other Arts of Governing, will in a Monarchy put fair for
attaining this, without the necessity of an Agrarian Law: Nor on the other side
does a Prince stand in need of that help to abate the Power of any Subject that
is grown dangerous, but is readily presented with some more silent way of
effecting it from the present Juncture of Business. And indeed universally
Monarchies have this advantage over Commonwealths, that Commonwealths are like
Engines which being wound up can not in the greatest necessity vary from the
Designation of the Artificer, but Monarchies are animate Bodies, moving and
acting according to all exigencies by virtue of their own Souls: The former
like the wooden Eagle which met the Emperor limited in her flight by the will
of the Engineer, The other has Wings of her own, and when she sees the Quarry,
fails not to make a gallant flight.

CHAP. XII.
Whether Courses or Rotation be necessary to a well ordered Commonwealth, etc.

IN this long Chapter the Considerer has a very small share. It is intended
against another sort of People who though they are passionate Doters on a
Commonwealth, profess to dislike the Introduction of a Rotation. This has
proceeded so far as to cause a Schism among the Commonwealths-Men, For whilst
some of them think that without the Rotation a Commonwealth must (like
Pharoah's Chariots) clog and drive heavily; others suspect this continnall
whirling would produce nothing but giddiness and a Danger of overturning. Yet
there is some Reason to doubt this Difference is not rooted in their Judgments
so much as in their Interests: They who expect to fill a place in a standing
Counsel, are not pleased to think of resigning, after a certain Term, their
Cushions to new Comers; But such who despair of that advantage, rather then
be wholly shut out would willingly take Turns, governing themselves by the
Advice of our wise Ancestors, rather to be content with half a Loaf then have
no Bread.

But this being matter of conjecture, I will let it pass, left I happen to
mistake their meaning as much as Mr Harrington does mine; Who all along this
Chapter treats me as one of those who maintain a Commonwealth while she is fixed
upon standing Counsels and Armies, to be better ordered then when she goes upon
Rotation. But this is manifest; That I concede Rotation to have been the
practice of Ancient Republiques, and I do not any where discover that I think
a Commonwealth can be safe without it. It is true that judging Rotation to be
in it self not very just, and often prejudicial to public Affairs, I can not
approve of that Government which stands in need of such an Order; so that my
Quarrel lies not against Rotation where I find it in a Commonwealth, but
against Commonwealths because they are by the necessary care of their
Preservation, forced to embrace Rotation.

The Examples therefore of Israel, Athens and Venice do not any way concern Me:
Though it were an easy matter to show that the Proofs of a Rotation in Israel
are very wild and unconcluding, if I had not an Obligation upon Me to abstain
from inquiring any further into that Government. Concerning Venice, as He has
brought forth nothing that is new to one who is not a stranger to Giannotti, so
will his Riddle easily meet with a Solution out of that Author. If he would
make 2 or 3 dozen of these Riddles, and put them into Rhyme, (which to him
cannot be difficult) if they did not please the Counsel of State, they would
at least be admirably useful to the new Junta of Political Ladies, who by
them would find Diversion for Winter Evenings, without descending from the
Gravity of their new affected studies, Laws and Government.

All then that I need to do is to make good this Assertion, That Commonwealths
have by the Observation of their Rotation been put upon great and Dangerous
Inconveniences. To prove this the Examples of Veturius, Varro, Mancinus and
other weak and passionate Commanders employed by the Romans, were insisted on
by the Considerer: Which Mr Harrington interprets most extravagantly as if
there were but H. page 122.
three weak or unfortunate Generals in the whole course of Rome. He that names
three, with the addition of a general clause comprehending the rest, is not, I
conceive, with any Honesty to be understood, as if he thought there were but
three in all. If it be any pleasure to Mr Harrington to view a List of
unfortunate Roman Generals, let him cast his eyes upon the Fabii, Sulpitius
Longus Q. and P. Servilius, Claudius Pulcher, Sempronius, C. Flaminius,
Vitilius, Plautius, Popilius, Manilius, Lentulus, Piso, Hypsoeus, L. Cassius,
Scaurus, Coepio, Rutilius, and many more which might be reckoned up if it were
my design to count the black days in the Roman Calendar. I selected those
three because by their want of Experience and Conduct Rome received the
greatest and most ignominious defeats that ever befell Her.

Veturius (or Posthumous if he will needs lay the miscarriage chiefly upon him)
threw away himself and the Roman Army very ridiculously; For having taken no
Care, by Spies or Intelligence of his own, to be informed of the Posture and
Condition of the Enemy, He relied wholly upon the Report of Prisoners, which
Live. lib. 9.
is always uncertain and very often Suborned. Being thus put upon a long March
with a thought to find that Enemy at Luceria who was then close by him, he
engaged the Army in a deep Valley shut up on every side with steep Rocks and
thick Forests, accessible only by two narrow and difficult Passages: And here
he committed an Error far more gross and withal irreparable; For either he did
omit, contrary to the known Maxims of War, to discover the Country through
which his March lay, or knowing it (as is more probable) he neglected, by a
strange Stupidity, to secure himself of either of the two Passes; So that
finding the furthest guarded and barricadoed by the Enemy, before he could get
back the other was surprised also, and the whole Roman Army caught in this
Trap. Now it is evident that this loss befell the Romans, not by the Valor or
Experience of their Enemies, but merely by the Insufficiency of their own
Commanders, who probably had never been employed, but for the Orders of their
Rotation; The Commonwealth had at that time Fabius, Papyrius, and many other
brave Commanders, who in submitting to the Rotation were fain to resign the
Conduct of the Army to such raw Men as could Court the Suffrages of the People
for the Consulship.

As for Varro, it is observable that his Election (like that of Flaminius the
Consul of the Live. lib. 22.
former year who lost the great Battle at the Lake of Thrasimene) was carried
merely upon a Faction against the Nobility, without any other Merit in the
Person, then his Sycophantry in accusing the Conduct of the Senate, and
flattery to the People in promising them to put a sudden end to the War: In his
year was that Stupendous defeat received at Cannae which is by Polybius wholly
imputed to his ill Manage We may fairly take notice that the Dangers into
which Rome was so often precipitated during the War with Annibal, took their
Rise from the frequent Change of Commanders; For there is just ground in the
Histories of those Actions of believing that if Scipio the elder, Fabius, or
Marcellus had had the sole manage of the War, Hannibal could never have settled
himself in Italy, but being consumed by want and small Skirmishes must
presently have abandoned the Country; Whilst on the other hand, the Commanders
being changed every year, unexperienced Men came to be at the head of the
Army, who hoping to get Honor, at the Charges of the Commonwealth, put things
upon the hazardous Issue of set Battles And this is naturally and directly to
be charged upon their Orders of Rotation.

Concerning Hostilius Mancinus, the foulness of his miscarriage appears in
this, that having 30000 Men he was defeated by 4000. Numantines; And that the
fault was only in the General, was the Judgment of the Romans Florus and Brev.
Livii. lib. 55. and 57.
themselves, who therefore committing the care of the War to Scipio (though
expressly against their Laws of Rotation) he made an end of it with the same
Forces which had been so often beaten. But it can not escape our wonder, that Mr
Harrington should think fit to communicate H. p. 125.
the Guilt of those Miscarriages to Pompey the Great, who had no being in the
World till thirty year after: It is true that Q. Pompeius Rufus received a
foil from the Numantines, Anno V. C. 616. but by what secret Participation of
Guilt can this concern Cn. Pompeius Magnus who was not born till about the
year V. C. 647? We might with equal Justice make the Translator of Virgill be
responsible for all the faults in the Translation of Orlando Furioso.

Having thus sufficiently proved that these three great Defeats befell the
Romans merely through the weakness of their Commanders, as also that these
weak Commanders could not, (in all Probability) ever have come into that
Employment but through the Orders of Rotation, it would be altogether useless
to accumulate any more Examples out of the Roman Stories. I may then go on to
confirm the same Observation out of the Athenian History; Which Commonwealth
besides the annual Rotation of her Generals, was good at another Trick often
made Use of by Republiques out of a Jealousy of trusting too much Power in one
hand: This was to confer the Command, not upon any one Person, but to place it
upon many, or in a Commission, so that They have frequently had at once in one
Army ten Generals. At Aegos-potamos they were no fewer, and their Sottishness
as well as their Number considered, I can not study out any Term to fit them so
properly as that of a Rabble. Conon was indeed a brave Commander, but his
single Vote could not prevail against the Obstinacy of his Companions. At that
time Alcibiades was the only Thueyd. l. 6.
Man who had credit and Ability enough to have saved the Athenian State; But He
out of the Peoples Jealousy of him, and by the Orders of their Rotation being
laid a side, Tydeus, Philocles, and as many as served to make up the half
Score of Generals, were entrusted with the whole Navall Power then remaining to
the Athenian Commonwealth, Plut. and Xenoph.
which they totally lost at Aegos-potamos by one of the most Palpable and
wilful Errors that perhaps, was ever committed in War. It is not to be
expected I should bring another Example from the Athenian History, since this
Error was one of those which can not be committed twice, and Athens it self
being a while after taken in Consequence of this Defeat, They had not any more
Fleets or Armies to throw away by their Rotation.

But, replies Mr Harrington, had there been formerly no Rotation in Athens how
should there have been Men of Valor and Conduct to lie by the Walls? And if
Rotation thenceforth should H. page 125.
have ceased, how could those Men of Valor and Conduct have done other then
lie by the Walls? So this unavoidably confesses, that Rotation was the Means
whereby Athens came to be stored with Persons of Valor and Conduct, and They
to be capable of Employment. In Answer to this goodly Argument, let Me inquire
of him, What Rotation was there in the Armies of the Netherlands? Yet we know
there was a time when almost all the able Soldiers of Christendom came out of
that School. Or let him show Me the Orders of Rotation at present in France,
which Crown notwithstanding abounds with more Persons capable of high Commands,
then all Europe besides. In small Employments, it is not Rotation, or the
passing through many hands, that can beget able Men, and in great Actions Men
of great Abilities will grow up without the help of Rotation; So that if Athens
or Rome have produced such Illustrious H. page 126.
Examples, it is very Impertinent to attribute this to Rotation or the
Integrity of Popular, Suffrage, but to the great Employments, in which by
reason of their continual Wars, those Commonwealths brought up their Subjects.

Since He has mentioned the Integrity of Popular Suffrage, it must not be let
pass without our Animadversion, where he says That the Ibid.
Ballot bars Canvasing, beyond all Possibility of any such thing. No doubt the
Secrecy introduced by the Ballot, is a fair Guardian of Liberty in Voting; but
if We examine the matter more narrowly, We shall easily perceive that this
hardly extends to more then a removing the Awe imposed upon Men by Fear, and
that all the Engagements of Affection, Flattery, and Bribery are not in the
least weakened by the Ballot. And therefore We may justly infer that the Orders
of Oceana are in this point Defective, (for the Provision in the ninth order
falls far short of a Cure) as were those of Venice before the Introduction of
the Censor's Office: For till then, notwithstanding the Ballot, the Gentlemen
held secret Correspondences for the mutual gratifying one another's Ambition,
and some directly sold their Votes; which makes Giannotti judge, That, without
the Censors who have power given them to prevent it, This single Disorder had
been enough to have everted the Commonwealth. And conformable to this is the
Experience of the Conclaves held for Electing of the Popes, where since Gregory
the 15, all ways of making the Pope are forbid, but that of secret Scrutiny
which is so managed that in effect it is the same thing with the Ballot: And
yet the Examples of succeeding Conclaves Relat. Ital. M. S. delli Conclavi.
testify, That the Power and Influence of the Heads of Factions over their
Creatures, is scarce at all diminished by this Course.

To return to Rotation, As the mischiess by it derived upon a Commonwealth are
apparent, in the next place I am to show how it has not been counted so Sacred,
but that it has often been sacrificed to the Public Exigencies. Machiavel
furnishes Me with the early Example of Publilius Philo at Palepolis. When the
Numantines had by the bravery of their Resistance provoked the Rage and Disdain
of the Roman People, not to trifle out the War any longer under weak
Commanders, The People gave Scipio the Consulship, though he were then
incapable of it by the Law of Rotation which required a Vacation of ten years
between two Brev. Live.
Consulships. The Lacedaemonians indeed were more Hypocritical, while out of
scruple of violating their Rotation they cheated themselves with the Name and
outside of things; The case I refer to was in Lysander, who had in the year
Plut. Xenoph.
of his Admiralty laid great Designs for carrying on the War against Athens,
and rendered himself very acceptable to the Lacedemonian Confederates on the
coasts of Asia; At Sparta there was a Law that no man should be twice Admiral,
and yet it being highly expedient for their Affairs to give Lysander the
Command again, They fell upon an expedient somewhat ridiculous in the hands of
Wise men; Aracus an inconsiderable Person was made Admiral, and Lysander had
the Commission of Viceadmirall with the whole Power and authority of Admiral.
Such shifts are those States put to who think the supreme Public interest
can be regulated by any certain Laws?

If then the Laws of Rotation have so frequently veiled Bonnet to the Ambition
or Desire of Acquisition in Commonwealths, it cannot seem strange they should
do so in case of necessary preservation. In all the course of the Roman
Affairs We can scarce meet with a time more destitute of great Actions, and by
consequence of great Commanders, then that immediately following the third
Punick and Numantine Wars: Yet in that time the blackest and fiercest tempest
broke upon the Romans that ever they were exposed to, except that which some
hundreds of years after shipwrackt their Empire; The Cimbres, Teutons, and
Ambrons, fierce Northern Nations, to the number of at least 300000 fighting
men; besides an aequall Company of Women and Children to supply them with
Recruits, poured themselves down upon Italy; Four Roman Armies had Plut. in
Mar.
been defeated by them, nor could the Alps and Winter to boot, be any obstacle
to their March; In this condition what should the Romans do? They had but one
Commander C. Marius, to whom in the Public Judgment the manage of the War
could be with any safety committed, And he was at that time incapable by the
Laws of Rotation: Should they violate the Law? Or suffer the Barbarous Nations
to come up to Rome without Opposition? The grave Statists were for the
observation of the Law, but here it was the Peoples turn to be wise, and their
fears were their best Counselors. They thought fit to make bold with the Law
for the Public Utility, and gave three Consulships together to Marius, in
whose hands only they counted the Commonwealth secure. Brev. Live. Lib. 3. cap.
3.
Actum erat, says Florus, nisi Marius illi soeculo contigisset.

That this Prolongation of Empire to Marius, was the first step toward the
Destruction of the Commonwealth is observed by Mr Harrington out of Machiavel;
And yet it is the consent of Png. 126, 127, and 128.
Historians that without the help of Marius the Commonwealth had then been
destroyed by the Cimbres; This does beyond all Exception fortify my Notion,
That a Commonwealth is an Imperfect form of Government, since she may be
reduced to that Exigence as by either observing or violating her Laws to
plunge her self into a certain Ruin. If Machiavel has observed no other
Dilemma in this, then That if a Commonwealth will not be so slow in her
Acquisition as is required by Rotation, She will be less sure then is requisite
to her Preservation, I am not responsible for his Inadvertency: But it was
reasonable for me to expect that Mr Harrington, when I had presented him with a
pair of Spectacles should have seen a little better and have taken notice that
the prolongation of Empire to C. Marius was not in order to Conquest or
Acquisition, but to the Preservation of Italy, and Rome it self.

We have all this while advanced very little, if this Flaw which in Reference
to Rotation, has been discovered in Commonwealths, be no less discernable in
Monarchies; For then it is not a weakness seated in one Limb or Member, but a
Disease that has seized upon the whole Body of Government: And this Mr
Harrington insinuates when he tells Us, That a Prince whose H. p. 129.
Providence supplies not the defect of Rotation with something of like Nature,
exposes Himself if not his Empire as much unto Danger as a Commonwealth. Here
I must put him in mind of the Difference, formerly observed by Me, between the
Actions of a Prince and a Commonwealth even when they do the same Thing. A
Commonwealth having no eyes of her own is forced to resign her self to the
Conduct of Laws, which are blind too, though in a known Road they faithfully
and without wandering perform the part of a Guide; But if a stone be laid, or a
pit be dug in this Path, the Blind leading the Blind, they both fall, and
then she runs a danger of her Neck. If in this Case a Commonwealth be beholding
to some hand to lead her to avoid the Danger, it is odds she will never be
able to free herself of the new Guide, who carrying her through unknown Ways
in the end ravishes or strangles her. But a Prince having his Eyes about him
chooses his own Way, and though for the General he keeps on the High Way of
Laws, yet when that leads to a Precipice, he can see how to go about, till
having escaped the Danger, he may safely return to the common Road. In
disposing then of Public Employments a wise Prince observes no other Rotation
but what is measured by the Ability and Integrity of the Person's employed, the
present Necessity and future security of his Affairs, from the due mixture of
all which results the Princes behavior as to the Placing, Displacing and
Transplacing his Public Ministers whether Military or Civil; And all this is
performed without being liable (unless by a particular error of the Princes
Judgment) to mistake or Danger. Whereas a Commonwealth that is tied up by the
Laws of Rotation, knows not how to refuse the service of her weakest Subjects,
or to embrace her most Able and Faithful ones (even in her greatest
Exigencies) during the time of their Vacation, unless at the same moment she
open a Gap to the Ambition of such men who will of servants endeavor to become
her Masters. And this befalls a Commonwealth as she is a Government of Laws,
which being framed upon an universal prospect, can not possibly, be fitted to
particular incident occasions; so that a Government making profession to
regulate it self in all things by Laws, must need be sometimes at a Loss, and
is not unlike the great Land Crabs in some parts of America which walk always
in a strait Line, and will rather then vary from it, climb over an house or a
Tree.

To what purpose then serves the Pompous Enumeration of such Princes as have
been supplanted H. p. 129.
by their Favorites, or deposed by the Generals of their Armies? Yet it must
not pass without Animadversion, That this Tragical List is in great Part made
up of such Persons (as Sejanus, Perennis, Ruffinus Stilico, Wallestein etc.)
whose unsuccesfull Ambition serves for an excellent Lesson to keep great men
within the bounds of Duty and Moderation. But at worst, if some weak and
careless Princes by neglecting the Oportunities of their own Safety, have fallen
by the hands of such as they trusted, this is no more an argument for Rotation,
then it would be for going unarmed because some men have been killed by their
own swords. I rather suspect that upon this occasion Mr Harrington intended a
secret blow at the Head of Monarchy, by showing how liable that Government is
to be ruined by the Usurpation of such Persons to whom Princes commit any
extraordinary Power either in Civil or Military Affairs. But this he will
find to be a common Calamity, not to be prevented by the Orders of any
Government, but only by the particular Dexterity and Prudence of a Prince: I
add not, Or of the Chief Ministers of a Commonwealth, because the Cure in a
Commonwealth is in a manner Desperate, it being scarce Possible that any
Citizen should arrive at so much Power as to become Dangerous, but that at the
same time he will have Barricadoed all ways tending to the public
Preservation, since those Counsels where it is to be debated, will be filled
with his Friends and Dependents. And therefore we may put in the other scale, a
great Heap of Instances of such Commonwealths as have been oppressed by those
Persons to whom they had committed the conduct of their Affairs. Thus
Pisistratus became Master of Athens, Cypselus, and after his Family Timophanes
of Corinth, Dionysius and Agathocles of Syracuse, Panoetius and Icetes of
Leontium, Cleander of Gela, Anaxilaus of Rhegium, Theagenes of Megara,
Abantidas of Sicyon, Aristomachus o Argos, Polyphron of Larissa, Machanidas and
Nabis of Lacedaemon. By this Caesar was enabled to convert the Roman
Commonwealth into a Monarchy. And after that out of the Ruins of this Monarchy
(like some goodly Palace pulled down to build Tenements) several Republiques
had been erected, They almost all were exposed to the same Fortune. Thus Pisa
came under the Power of Vguccione della Faggivola, Lucca of Castrucio
Castracana, Siena of Petrucci, Florence of the Duke of Athens, Milan of the
Count Francis Sforza, to omit the Examples of all the smaller Commonwealths. If
I can not follow Mr Harrington into the East, it is because that wiser Quarter
of the World have not been known to own any other then Monarchical Government.

But let other Commonwealths answer for their own Follies or Misfortunes, the
Commonwealth of Oceana is promised better success, and assured that she shall
never want Men of Honesty and Ability to lead her to her true Interest at home
and abroad. Nay more, Her Education for her Subjects is so excellent, that
three years Experience will serve to make them all very able H. p. 1^3.
Leaders. Is this a wounder to you? It is a mere Cheat this pretended Depth and
Difficulty in matter of State; The Business rests upon the skill in managing
the Balloting Box, and if a man have but the the Wit to know the Difference
btween White and Black, and Red, What can hinder him P. 130.
from being a very expert Statesman? Though no man can continue longer then
three years in any Magistracy, his going of the Stage will but make room for
one as able as himself, otherwise how came it about that in Athens and Rome,
where every body pressed forward toward Magistracy, (which with them was
annual) the Magistrates were for illustrious Examples, more in weight and
number then are to be found in all the rest of the World? Of this I have newly
given an account, and will only add, That at Rome the Senate (which bred the
able men) was perpetual, and both in Athens and Rome the Body of the People
inhabiting within the walls of those Cities, they might continually be
conversant in Business, and have a share in all Public Transactions: Whereas
in England the People being dispersed through the whole Nation, are incapable
of Business unless by their Representatives, which being all limited to Terms
and Vacations, their Time of acquiring Experience may with very probable reason
be thought too short. The only proper Judge of this Controversy is Experiment,
and in that I think Mr Harrington, as well as the Nation, very Fortunate, that
He is delivered from all Probability of seeing his Project reduced to Practice,
For that would be more Terrible to Him, then a thousand Reames of Objections,
and would easily detect those Errors and Defects in his Model of Government,
which at present are but lightly viewed in passing, or not at all discovered.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX By way of reply to what Mr Harrington calls A full Answer to all
Objections.
IT is a pretty Artifice in Mr Harrington to insinuate that because no man has
gone about to discover any Contradiction or, Inequality in the Model of his
Commonwealth; therefore it must be taken for granted his Commonwealth has not
any such in it, and must consequently be void of all Internal causes of
Dissolution. By this he endeavors to draw the world into an Opinion that his
Commonwealth is Invnlnerable, and at the same time to fix a Disreputation upon
the Author of the Considerations, as if he had failed in making out what he
undertook. For what concerns Me as Author of the Considerations, having at the
beginning made profession to restrain them to the first Preliminaries of
Oceana, Mr Harrington is injurious in accusing Me in neglecting that which was
no part of my Business, and which I always declared I did not intend to meddle
with.

But before that other Men make a surrender of their Judgment to Mr Harrington
and believe upon the credit of this Argument that his Commonwealth has attained
unto full Perfection, It will be convenient They should reflect, That in a
Model of Government the Conformity of the several Parts to one another is not
a sufficient argument of the Perfection of the whole; For as in a Fiction, the
several Members may be so contrived as not to give one another the Lie, but be
all contained within the limits of verisimilitude, and yet the whole remain
without the least syllable of Truth; Or as for the Explication of any Motion in
Nature, various Hypotheses may be excogitated including no Absurdity within
themselves, and yet perhaps, not any one of them prove to be the true Method of
Nature; so in Government, It is not difficult to invent variety of Forms, the
parts of each of which taken separately, may maintain a fair Correspondence
and Agreement among themselves, and yet the Whole be far enough from attaining
to Perfection.

The Materials of Government are Mankind, and the Architect woe disposes of
these Materials is man also; so that Government is nothing else but an Art by
which one part of Mankind disposes of the other for attaining the Common
Utility of both, which consists in ariving at such a Degree of Plenty and
Security as Mankind is capable of by society. This Art is not obliged to one
solitary Method for attaining the End and Design proposed to it, but has
sometimes made use of a Monarchy, sometimes of an Aristocratie, sometimes of a
Democratie, and in all these of several Frames and Models. But this art of
Governing has a very disadvantageous Difference from all other Arts, for in
them the Artificer makes choice only of such Materials as have the greatest
aptitude for his work but in Government the Artificer is obliged to his
Materials, and must grapple with all the Stubborness and Reluctance He meets
with in them; And it is an Error very incident to Mankind, that every
particular Man thinks Government was instituted for his peculiar Advantage,
which if he meets not with in a degree suitable to his Desire in the Government
He lives under, He presently endeavors to subvert that Government out of hopes
to meet with it in the next: Which is just as if the steel of which the Index
of a Watch is composed should refuse to move out of a Discontent it was not
employed about the Spring or Balance; and at this rate I believe the ablest
Watch-maker would despair of giving us a true movement. So that though it
should be allowed Mr Harrington that his Commonwealth has no Inequality in it,
yet it would fail of attaining the perfection of Government, seeing there is
an inequality in the Nature of Man, which is not rectifyed by the Model of his
Commonwealth. What this Inequality consists in, how far it is capable of Cure,
and how Mr Harrington has failed of performing it, was the subject of my 8th
and 9th Chapters, and therefore is not now to be repeated.

I do not intend to employ my self in picking the Feathers off Mr
Harrington's Cloak, or going in search of the Inequalities or Contradictions
in the orders of his Model; but I would be glad to know, Whether He be not
unequal to Himself as well as the Nobility in such orders as particularly
concern them Having by his Agrarian reduced the Nobility (under which name I
also comprehend the Gentry of higher Quality) unto the Condition of clypt Money,
He Ocean. p. 25.
notwithstanding appears very solicitous They should still be current, and not
be refused in the uses of the Commonwealth. To This purpose distinguishes the
whole people into Horse and Foot, making the Horse to consist of such as have
above one hundred pounds a year, and has provided that the Horse shall have
diverse advantages as that (to omit the lesser ones) the Senate and Great
Magistrates shall consist of Knights elected out of their Number. But this
favor to them is all this while but an handsome piece of Dissimulation; For
though there be care taken that at the Assembly of the Hundred and Tribe such
and such Magistrates shall be elected out of the Horse, there is no necessary
provision there should be any Horse there, out of which to elect; For the
Deputies at the Hundred and Tribe consisting of the Deputies elected at the
Parish, It is a mere chance if in the Parish there were any Horse at all
elected: The Elector or Proposer at the Parish are designed by the hap of
drawing a Golden Ball out of the Urn, and these Electors or Proposer nominate
the rest of the Deputies to be proposed to the Ballot, so that unless one of
the Horse chance to prove an Elector by drawing a Golden Ball, the nomination
is wholly in the power of the Foot, who would be very senceless, by nominating
any of the Horse to part with that power which Fortune has put into their
Hands. Now what small probability there is that any of the Horse should chance
to draw a Golden Ball, will appear by the great disparity in number between
the whole Body of the People and such as may only be capable of being of the
Horse; It is confessed by Mr Harrington there is nothing in the Nature of the
Agrarian to hinder, but that the whole Land in Oceana may come into the hands
of 5000 Men; But the Elders or Men capable of Election are confessed to be 100000
Men; Wherefore the 5000 Men or the Horse (though they should as is most
unprobable, be all of 30 years of Age and so Capable of Election) are but a
twentieth part of Foot, and by Consequence it is twenty to one that at every
Election of the Parish not any of the Horse come to be elected. By which it is
evident there is a very great inequality in his Commonwealth, seeing by the
orders of it Matters may with great Probability be reduced to that pass, That
those men who have the whole Propriety in Land may be wholly excluded from
having any share in the Government. It is apparent also, That the upper Rooms
of his Commonwealth, such as are the Hundred, Tribe, Senate and Prerogative,
are built upon a most ruinous Foundation, the Basis of the Parishes being too
weak to support them, Thus having reduced the Nobility and Gentry to 2000l.
per an. and having divested them of all the Advantages of Birth and Descent, He
leaves them also after all at the discretion of their good Neighbors with the
High shoon, in reference to their whole interest in the Government.

But for all this he has dealt more kindly with the Nobility and Gentry, then
with the three Faculties of Divines, Lawyers and Physicians; For though the
Balance of Land, prove unprofitable to the Nobility, yet the Balance of Beef
remaies still with them, And if against an Election Day they Feast my Lords of
the People handsomely, They may still have hopes to be nominated by some of
them; But the other are beyond all Possibility of retriving it, excluded from
having any share in the Government; And that for this general Reason, They who
take upon them the Profession of Theology, Physic or Law, are not Ocean. p.
224
at leisure for the Essays whereby the Youth commence for all Magistracies,
Offices and Honors in a Commonwealth. It seems that he who has under a stall
employed his Life in the Reparations of old shoes is qualifyed to fall to
work with the Breaches of the State; And he whose converse has been nothing
but whistling to Horses, has a sufficient Capacity to give Law to Mankind; But
if any man's Education has been laid out in Pursuit of Truth and in a
Familiarity with such Universal Notions and Reasons of Things, as tend to the
advancement of Humane Nature, If He has afterward addicted himself in
particular to such Studies upon which depend the safety of every Man in
private, and of society in Common, That man must be deposed from the Privelege
of a Citizen, and forfeit that Liberty which is the Foundation of all Popular
Government, That every Man should concur to the making those Laws by which He
is to be governed.

The Clergy then or Divines will have Occasion to make use of all the Patience
and Humility they preach to others, in reference to their submission to a
Government which treats them as People incapable of the Common Privileges of
Men; The Quality of Ambassadors from Heaven which is usually attributed to
them seems to be understood literally by Mr Harrington, For He considers them
as Aliens, and so denies them the Liberty due to all English Men; And he has
made a little bold with the Apostles argument, by changing the Inference of it,
That because They serve at the Altar, therefore they are to be used as Slaves
and Helots.

For the poor Physicians I least of all understand why They should be shut out
from the Government whilst their Apothecaries are admitted to it, And why the
Farrier should be made a better man then the Doctor. But there is no Help, They
must be content to swallow this Pill, unless They can out of hand find
Hellebore enough for our new Legislator.

As to the Lawyers, there is a particular reason why they should have nothing
to do with making of Laws, because it is enough for them that they can
understand them when they are made; Yet there may be some cause to doubt,
whether the whole Bench, and all the Innes of Court could find the way to
understand such Laws as would be made by those men who are themselves obliged
not to understand any. Howsoever Mr Harrington has that good persuasion of the
whole profession of Lawyers, that He thinks they would betray the Public
good, to the profit of their own Practice, and therefore resolves to banish
them from all Interest in the Government; so that the Lawyers are in this, at
least, highly obliged to Him, That he has given them fair leisure to turn
their Books.

Though every branch of these Orders be fertile of very dectructive
Consequences, I do not intend to prosecute any of them, but am Content in
general to observe, that the Commonwealth of Oceana which pretends so much to
Equality, does wholly shut out the Professions of Divinity, Law, and Physic
from any share in the Government, and leaves the Nobility and Gentry in a great
probability of being reduced to the same Condition.

WHile a Government is under Dispute, the Liberty of proposing one's sense
about it ought not to be denied; But if it come once to be settled, Private men
have nothing left but obedience. Having through the whole Book acted by the
first Branch of this Maxim, it is fit I should now show how I can comply with
the latter. And being conscious of a Disability in serving the Commonwealth of
Oceana in any more important matter, I desire to show a respect to the
Gentlemen of the Academy of the Provosts by presenting them with these
following Collections.

A Catalogue of such pieces of Wit in Mr Harrington's last Book which (though
in themselves inimitable) may serve as a Ocean. p. 130.
Pattern for the Gentlemen of the Academie.

THE Considerer has doft his considering Cap. in Praefat. A pig of my own Sow.
p. 13. Monti and Banks, Mountebanking. p. 17. A man to be made of Gingerbread,
and his veins to run Malmesy. p. 21. You tumble Dick upon Sis. p. 23. The
Ostracism of Billinsgate. p. 26. Paralogism and Parakeetism. p. 28. My
Hypothesis, his Hypothites. p. 30. Sons of the University, Brothers of the
College, Heads and Points. ibid. If she who should have some care of the
Vineyard of Truth, should lie pigging of wide bores to grunt in this manner and
fear with the Tush, and I happen to ring some of them, (as I have done this
Marcassin for rooting) there is nothing in my faith why such trial of their
Noses should be sin. p. 76. Besides these a great number of choice Metaphores
from Bowling, Carding, Dicing, and the like.

An account of several Forms of Complement and Address used by Mr Harrington,
which may be serviceable to the great Design of improving Civility and
Conversation, Ocean. p. 130
which is entrusted with the Academie.

PRaevaricator, Infidel, Wretch, Rude fellow, Uulucky Boy, Tom Thumb, Bestia,
Parrat, Ape, Tinker, Neither Honest Man nor good Bowler, Cheat, Blind Bayard
etc. these are applicable to a person. For a Book such appellations as these
may be used. Most victorious Nonsense, Slanders, Fopperies, Vagaries, Knavery,
Tittle tattle, Verjuice. A Doctor is to be saluted thus; You are a Doctor of
fine things, Your Cap is squarer then your play, you have more in your sleeves
then the scarlet, etc. You are a Bog, Informis limus, stygiaeque Paludes, This
would do admirably to our neighbors of the Low Countries. You jole your
presumptuous head not only against ancient prudence but against God himself.
You take part with the Devil etc.

FINIS.

