HISTORIA HISTRIONICA:

AN Historical Account OF THE English-Stage.

SHOWING The ancient Use, Improvement, and Perfection, of Dramatick
Representations, in this Nation.

IN A Dialogue, of PLAYS and PLAYERS.

-- Olim meminisse juvabit.

LONDON. Printed by G. Croom, for William Haws at the Rose in Ludgate Street.
1699.

THE PREFACE.
MVch has been Writ of late pro and con, about the Stage, yet the Subject
admits of more, and that which has not been hitherto touched upon; not only what
that is, but what it was, about which some People have made such a Busle. What
it is we see, and I think it has been sufficiently displayed in Mr. Colier's
Book; What it was in former Ages, and how used in this Kingdom, so far back as
one may collect any Memorialls, is the Subject of the following Dialogue. Old
Plays will be always Read by the Curious, if it were only to discover the
Manners and Behavior of several Ages; and how they altered. For Plays* are
exactly like Portraits Drawn in the Garb and Fashion of the time when Painted.
You see one Habit in the time of King Charles I. another quite different from
that, both for Men and Women, in Queen Elizabeth's time another; under Henry the
Eighth different from both; and so backward all various. And in the several
Fashions of Behavior and Conversation, there is as much Matability as in that
of Clothes. Religion and Religious matters was once as much the Mode in public
Entertainments, as the Contrary has been in some times since. This appears in
the different Plays of several Ages: And to evince this, the following Sheets
are an Essay or Specimen.

Some may think the Subject of this Discourse trivial, and the persons herein
mentioned not worth remembering. But besides that I could name some things
contested of late with great heat, of as little, or less Consequence, the
Reader may know that the Profession of Players is not so totally scandalous,
nor all of them so reprobate, but that there has been found under that Name, a
Canonized Saint in the primitive Church; as may be seen in the Roman
Martyrology on the 29th of March; his name Masculas a Master of Interludes,
(the Latin is Archimimus, and the French Translation un Maitre Comedien) who
under the Persecution of the Vandals in Africa, by Geisericus the Arian King,
having endured many and greivious Torments and Reproaches for the Confession of
the Truth, finished the Course of this glorious Combat. Says the said
Martyrology.

It appears from this, and some further Instances in the following Discourse,
That there have been Players of worthy Principles as to Religion, Loyalty, and
other Virtues; and if the major part of them fall under a different Character,
it is the general unhappiness of Mankind, that the Most are the Worst.

A DIALOGUE OF PLAYS and PLAYERS.
Lovewit, Truman. LOvew. Honest Old Cavalier! well met, 'faith I Am glad to see
thee.


Trum. Have a care what you call me. Old, is a Word of Disgrace among the
Ladies; to be Honest is to be Poor and Foolish, (as some think) and Cavalier is
a Word as much out of Fashion as any of 'em.


Lovew. The more's the pity: But what said the Fortune Tellers in Ben. Johnson's
Mask of Gypsies, to the then Lord Privy Seal, Honest and Old!
In those the Good Part of a Fortune is told.



Trum. Ben. Johnson? How dare you name Ben. Johnson in these times? When we
have such a crowd of Poets of a quite different Genius; the least of which
thinks himself as well able to correct Ben. Johnson, as he could a Country
School Mistress that taught to Spell.


Lovew. We have indeed, Poets of a different Genius; so are the Plays: But in
my Opinion, they are all of 'em (some few excepted) as much inferior to those
of former Times, as the Actors now in being (generally speaking) are, compared
to Heart, Mohun, Burt, Lacy, Clun, and Shatterel; for I can reach no farther
backward.


Trum. I can; and dare assure you, if my Fancy and Memory are not partial (for
Men of my Age are apt to be over indulgent to the thoughts of their youthful
Days) I say the Actors that I have seen before the Wars, Lowin, Tailor,
Pollard, and some others, were almost as far beyond Heart and his Company, as
those were beyond these now in being.


Lovew. I am willing to believe it, but cannot readily; because I have been
told, That those whom I mentioned, were Bred up under the others of your
Acquaintance, and followed their manner of Action, which is now lost. So far,
that when the Question has been asked, Why these Players do not receive the
Silent Woman, and some other of Johnson's Plays, (once of highest esteem) they
have answered, truly, Because there are none now Living who can rightly Humor
those Parts, for all who related to the Blackfriars (where they were Acted in
perfection) are now Dead, and almost forgotten.


Trum. It Is very true, Heart and Clun, were bred up Boys at the Blackfriers; and
Acted Women's Parts, Heart was Robinson's Boy or Apprentice: He Acted the
Duchess in the Tragedy of the Cardinal, which was the first Part that gave him
Reputation. Cartwright, and Wintershal belonged to the private House in
Salisbury-Court, Burt was a Boy first under Shank at the Blackfriars, then
under Beeston at the Cockpit; and Mohun, and Shatterel were in the same
Condition with him, at the last Place. There Burt used to Play the principal
Women's Parts, in particular Clariana in Love's Cruelty; and at the same time
Mohun Acted Bellamente, which Part he retained after the Restoration.


Lovew. That I have seen, and can well remember. I wish they had Printed in the
last Age (so I call the times before the Rebellion) the Actors Names over
against the Parts they Acted, as they have done since the Restoration. And
thus one might have guest at the Action of the Men, by the Parts which we now
Read in the Old Plays.


Trum. It was not the Custom and Usage of those Days, as it has been since.
Yet some few Old Plays there are that have the Names set against the Parts, as,
The Duchess of Malfy; (...) Picture; the Roman Actor; the deserving
P^^^^urite, the Wild Goose Chase, (at the Blackfriars) the Wedding; the
Renegado; the fair Maid of the West; Hannibal and Scipio; King John and
Matilda; (at the Cockpit) and Holland's Leaguer, (at Salisbury Court.)


Lovew. These are but few indeed: But pray Sir, what Master Parts can you
remember the Old Blackfriars Men to Act, in Johnson, Shakespeare, and
Fletcher's Plays.


Trum. What I can at present recollect I Will tell you; Shakespeare, (who as I
have heard, was a much better Poet, than Player) Burbadge, Hemmings, and others
of the Older sort, were Dead before I knew the Town; but in my time, before the
Wars, Lowin used to Act, with mighty Applause, Flastaffe, Morose, Vulpone, and
Mammon in the Alchymist; Melancius in the Maid's Tragedy, and at the same time
Amyntor was Played by Stephen Hammerton, (who was at first a most noted and
beautiful Woman Actor, but afterward he acted with equal Grace and Applause, a
Young Lover's Part) Tailor Acted Hamlet incomparably well, Jago, Truewit in the
Silent Woman, and Face in the Alchymist; Swanston used to Play Othello:
Pollard, and Robinson were Comedians, so was Shank who used to Act Sir Roger,
in the Scornful Lady. These were of the Blackfriers. Those of principal Note at
the Cockpit, were, Perkins, Michael Bowyer, Sumner, William Allen, and Bird,
eminent Actors. and Robins a Comedian. Of the other Companies I took little
notice.


Lovew. Were there so many Companies?


Trum. Before the Wars, there were in being all these Play Houses at the same
time. The Blackfriars, and Globe on the Bankside, a Winter and Summer House,
belonging to the same Company called the King's Servants; the Cockpit or
Phaenix, in Drury Lane, called the Queen's Servants; the private House in
Salisbury court, called the Prince's Servants; the Fortune near
White-cross-street, and the Red Bull at the upper end of St. John's-street: The
two last were mostly frequented by Citizens, and the meaner sort of People. All
these Companies got Money, and Lived in Reputation, especially those of the
Blackfriers, who were Men of grave and sober Behavior.


Lovew. Which I admire at; That the Town much less than at present, could then
maintain Five Companies, and yet now Two can hardly Subsist.


Trum. Do not wonder, but consider, That though the Town was then, perhaps, not
much more than half so Populous as now, yet then the Prices were small (there
being no Scenes) and better order kept among the Company that came; which made
very good People think a Play an Innocent Diversion for an idle Hour or two,
the Plays themselves being then, for the most part, more Instructive and Moral.
Whereas of late, the Play Houses are so extremely pestered with Vizard-masks
and their Trade, (occasioning continual Quarrels and Abuses) that many of the
more Civilized Part of the Town are uneasy in the Company, and shun the Theater
as they would a House of Scandal. It is an Argument of the worth of the Plays
and Actors, of the last Age, and easily inferred, that they were much beyond
ours in this, to consider that they could support themselves merely from their
own Merit; the weight of the Matter, and goodness of the Action, without Scenes
and Machines: Whereas the present Plays with all that show, can hardly draw an
Audience, unless there be the additional Invitation of a Signior Fideli, a
Monsieur L'abbe, or some such Foreign Regale expressed in the bottom of the Bill.


Lovew. To wave this Digression, I have Read of one Edward Allin, a Man so
famed for excellent Action, that among Ben. Johnson's Epigrams, I find one
directed to him, full of Encomium, and concluding thus Wear this Renown, it is
just that who did give
So many Poets Life, by one should Live.


Was he one of the Blackfriars?


Trum. Never, as I have heard; (for he was Dead before my time.) He was Master
of a Company of his own, for whom he Built the Fortune Playhouse from the
Ground, a large, round Brick Building. This is he that grew so Rich that he
purchased a great Estate in Surrey and elsewhere; and having no Issue, he Built
and largely endowed Dulwich College, in the Year 1619, for a Master, a Warden,
Four Fellows, Twelve aged poor People, and Twelve poor Boys, etc. A noble
Charity.


Lovew. What kind of Playhouses had they before the Wars?


Trum. The Blackfriars, Cockpit, and Salisbury-court, were called Private
Houses, and were very small to what we see now. The Cockpit was standing since
the Restoration, and Rhode's Company Acted there for some time.


Lovew. I have seen that.


Trum. Then you have seen the other two, in effect; for they were all three
Built almost exactly alike, for Form and Bigness. Here they had Pits for the
Gentry, and Acted by Candlelight. The Globe, Fortune and Bull, were large
Houses, and lay partly open to the Weather, and there they always Acted by
Daylight.


Lovew. But prithee, Truman, what became of these Players when the Stage was
put down, and the Rebellion raised?


Trum. Most of 'em, except Lowin, Tailor and Pollard, (who were superannuated)
went into the King's Army, and like good Men and true, Served their Old Master,
though in a different, yet more honorable, Capacity. Robinson was Killed at the
Taking of a Place (I think Basing House) by Harrison, he that was after Hanged
at Charing Cross, who refused him Quarter, and Shot him in the Head when he had
laid down his Arms; abusing Scripture at the same time, in saying, Cursed is he
that does the Work of the Lord negligently. Mohun was a Captain, (and after the
Wars were ended here, served in Flanders, where he received Pay as a Major)
Heart was a Lieutenant of Horse under Sir Thomas Dallison, in Prince Rupert's,
Regiment, Burt was Cornet in the same Troop, and Shatterel Quartermaster.
Allen of the Cockpit, was a Major, and Quarter Master General at Oxford. I have
not heard of one of these Players of any Note that sided with the other Party,
but only Swanston, and he professed himself a Presbyterian, took up the Trade of
a Jeweller, and lived in Aldermanbury, within the Territory of Father Calamy.
The rest either Lost, or exposed their Lives for their King. When the Wars were
over, and the Royalists totally Subdued; most of 'em who were left alive
gathered to London, and for a Subsistence endeavored to revive their Old
Trade, privately. They made up one Company out of all the Scattered Members of
Several; and in the Winter before the King's Murder, 1648, They ventured to Act
some Plays with as much caution and privacy as could be, at the Cockpit. They
continued undisturbed for three or four Days; but at last as they were
presenting the Tragedy of the Bloody Brother, (in which Lowin Acted Aubrey,
Tailor Rollo, Pollard the Cook, Burt Latorch, and I think Heart Otto) a Party of
Foot Soldiers beset the House, surprised 'em about the middle of the Play, and
carried 'em away in their habits, not admitting them to Shift, to Hatton-house
then a Prison, where having detained them sometime, they Plundered them of
their Cloths and let 'em loose again. Afterward in Oliver's time, they used to
Act privately, three or four Miles, or more, out of Town, now here, now there,
sometimes in Noblemens Houses, in particular Holland-house at Kensington, where
the Nobility and Gentry who met (but in no great Numbers) used to make a Sum
for them, each giving a broad Piece, or the like. And Alexander Goffe, the
Woman Actor at Blackfriers, (who had made himself known to Persons of Quality)
used to be the Jackal and give notice of Time and Place. At Christmas, and
Bartlemew-fair, they used to Bribe the Officer who Commanded the Guard at
Whitehall, and were thereupon connived at to Act for a few Days, at the Red
Bull; but were sometimes notwithstanding Disturbed by Soldiers. Some picked up a
little Money by publishing the Copies of Plays never before Printed, but kept
up in Manuscript. For instance, in the Year 1652, Beaumont and Fletcher's Wild
Goose Chase was Printed in Folio, for the Public use of all the Ingenious, (as
the Title Page says) and private Benefit of John Lowin and Joseph Tailor,
Servants to his late Majesty; and by them Dedicated To the Honored few Lovers
of Dramatick Poesy: Wherein they modestly intimate their Wants. And that with
sufficient Cause; for whatever they were before the Wars, they were, after,
reduced to a necessitous Condition. Lowin in his latter Days, kept an Inn (the
three Pidgions) at Brentford, where he Dyed very Old, (for he was an Actor of
eminent Note in the Reign of K. James the first) and his Poverty was as great
as his Age. Tailor Dyed at Richmond and was there Buried. Pollard who Lived
Single, and had a Competent Estate; Retired to some Relations he had in the
Country, and there ended his Life. Perkins and Sumner of the Cockpit, kept
House together at Clerkenwel, and were there Buried. These all Dyed some Years
before the Restoration. What followed after, I need not tell you: You can
easily Remember.


Lovew. Yes, presently after the Restoration, the King's Players Acted
publicly at the Red Bull for some time, and then Removed to a New-built
Playhouse in Vere-street by Claremarket. There they continued for a Year or
two, and then removed to the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, where they first made
use of Scenes, which had been a little before introduced upon the public Stage
by Sir William Davenant at the Duke's Old Theater in Lincolns-Inn-fields, but
afterward very much improved, with the Addition of curious Machines by Mr.
Betterton at the New Theater in Dorset-Garden, to the great Expense and
continual Charge of the Players. This much impaired their Profit over what it
was before; for I have been informed, (by one of 'em) That for several Years
next after the Restoration, every whole Sharer in Mr. Hart's Company, got 1000
l. per an. About the same time that Scenes first entered upon the Stage at
London, Women were taught to Act their own Parts; since when, we have seen at
both Houses several excellent Actresses, justly famed as well for Beauty, as
perfect good Action. And some Plays (in particular The Parson's Wedding) have
been Presented all by Women, as formerly all by Men. Thus it continued for
about 20 Years, when Mr. Heart and some of the Old Men began to grow weary, and
were minded to leave off; then the two Companies thought fit to Unite; hut of
late, you see, they have thought it no less fit to Divide again, though both
Companies keep the same Name of his Majesty's Servants. All this while the
Playhouse Music improved Yearly, and is now arrived to greater Perfection
than ever I knew it. Yet for all these Advantages, the Reputation of the Stage,
and Peoples Affection to it, are much Decayed. Some were lately severe against
it, and would hardly allow Stage Plays fit to be longer permitted. Have you
seen Mr. Collier's Book?


Trum. Yes, and his Opposer's.


Lovew. And what think you?


Trum. In my mind Mr. Collier's Reflections are Pertinent, and True, in the
Main; the Book ingeniously Writ, and well Intended: But he has overshot himself
in some Places; and his Respondents, perhaps, in more. My affection inclines me
not to Engage on either side, but rather Mediate. If there be Abuses relat^ng
to the Stage; (which I think is too apparent) Let the Abuse be reformed, and
not the use, for that Reason only, Abolished. 'Twas an Old saying when I was a
Boy, Absit Abusus non desit totaliter Vsus.

I shall not run through Mr. Collier's Book; I will only touch a little on two
or three general Notions, in which, I think he may be mistaken. What he urges
out of the Primitive Councils, and Fathers of the Church, seems to me to be
directed against the Heathen Plays, which were a sort of Religious Worship with
them, to the Honor of Ceres, Flora, or some of their false Deities; they had
always a little Altar on their Stages, as appears plain enough from some places
in Plautus. And Mr. Collier himself p. 235. tells us out of Livy, that Plays
were brought in upon the Score of Religion, to pacify the Gods. No wonder then,
they forbid Christans to be present at them, for it was almost the same as to
be present at their Sacrifices. We must also observe that this was in the
Infancy of Christianity, when the Church was under severe, and almost continual
Persecutions, and when all its true Members were of most strict and exemplary
Lives, not knowing when they should be called to the Stake, or thrown to
Wild-Beasts. They communicated Daily, and expected Death hourly; their thoughts
were intent upon the next World, they abstained almost wholly from all
Diversions and pleasures (though lawful and Innocent) in this. Afterward when
Persecution ceased, and the Church flourisht, Christians being then freed from
their former Terrors, allowed themselves, at proper times, the lawful
Recreations of Conversation, and among other (no doubt) this of Shows and
Representations. After this time, the Censures of the Church indeed, might be
continued, or revived, upon occasion, against Plays and Players, though (in my
Opinion) it can not be understood generally, but only against such Players who
were of Vicious and Licencious Lives, and represented profane Subjects,
inconsistant with the Morals and probity of Manners requisite to Christians;
and frequented chiefly by such loose and Debaucht People as were much more apt
to Corrupt than Divert those who associated with them. I say, I can not think
the Canons and Censures of the Fathers can be applied to all Players, quatenus
Players; for if so how could Plays be continued among the Christians, as they
were, of Divine Subject, and Scriptural Stories? A late French Author Speaking
of the Original of the Hotel De Bourgogne (a Playhouse in Paris) says that the
ancient Dukes of that Name gave it to the Brotherhood of the Passion,
established in the Church of Trinity-Hospital in the Rue S. Denis, on condition
that they should represent here Interludes of Devotion: And adds that there
have been public Shows in this Place 600 Years ago. The Spanish and Portuguize
continue still to have, for the most part, such Ecclesiastical Stories, for the
Subject of their Plays: And if we may believe Gage, they are Acted in their
Churches in Mexico, and the Spanish West Indies.


Lovew. That Is a great way off, Truman; I had rather you would come nearer
Home, and confine your discourse to Old England.


Trum. So I intend. The same has been done here in England; for otherwise how
comes it to be prohibited in the 88th Canon, among those past in Convocation,
1603. Certain it is that our ancient Plays were of Religious Subjects, and had
for their Actors, (if not Priests) yet Men relating to the Church.


Lovew. How does that appear?


Trum. Nothing clearer. Stow in his Survey of London, had one Chapter of the
Sports and Pastimes of old time used in this City, and there he tells us, That
in the Year 1391 (which was 15 R. 2.) a Stage Play was played by the
Parish-Clerks of London, at the Skinner's-well beside Smithfield, which Play
continued three Days together, the King, Queen, and Nobles of the Realm being
present. And another was played in the Year 1409 (11 H. 4.) which lasted eight
Days, and was of Matter from the Creation of the World; whereat was present
most part of the Nobility and Gentry of England. Sir William Dugdale in his
Antiquities of Warwickshire, p. 116, speaking of the Gray-Friers (or
Franciscans) at Coventry, says, Before the suppression of the Monasteries, this
City was very famous for the Pageants that were played therein upon
Corpus-Christi Day; which Pageants being acted with mighty State and Reverence
by the Friars of this House, had Theaters for the several Scenes very large and
high, placed upon Wheels, and drawn to all the eminent Parts of the City, for
the better advantage of the Spectators; and contained the Story of the New
Testament, composed in old English Rhyme. An ancient Manuscript of the same is
now to be seen in the Cottonian Library, Sub Effig. Vespat. D. 8. Since the
Reformation, in Queen Elizabeth's time, Plays were frequently acted by
Quiristers and Singing Boys; and several of our old Comedies have printed in
the Title Page, Acted by the Children of Paul'^, (not the School, but the
Church) others, By the Children of her Majesty's Chapel; in particular,
Cinthias Revels, and the Poetaster were played by them; who were at that time
famous for good Action. Among Ben. Johnson's Epigrams you may find An Epitaph
on S. P. (Sal. Pavy) one of the Children of Queen Elizabeth' s Chapel; part of
which runs thus, Years he counted scarce Thirteen
When Fates turned Cruel,
Yet three filled Zodiacks he had been
The Stages-Jewell.
And did act (what now we moan)
Old Man so duly,
As, sooth, the Parcae thought him one,
He played so truly.


Some of these Chapel Boys, when they grew Men, became Actors at the
Blackfriars; such were Nathan Field, and John Underwood. Now I can hardly
imagine that such Plays and Players as these, are included in the severe
Censure of the Councils and Fathers; but such only who are truly within the
Character given by Didacus de Tapia, cited by Mr. Collier, p. 276, viz. The
infamous Playhouse; a place of contradiction to the strictness and sobriety of
Religion; a place hated by God, and haunted by the Devil. And for such I have
as great an abhorrance as any Man.


Lovew. Can you guess of what Antiquity the representing of Religious Matters,
on the Stage, has been in England?


Trum. How long before the Conquest I know not, but that it was used in London
not long after, appears by Fitz-Stevens, an Author who wrote in the Reign of
King Henry the Second. His Words are, Londonia pro spectaculis theatralibus,
pro ludis scenicis, ludos habet sanctiores, Representationes miraculorum, quae
sancti Confessores operati sunt, seu Representationes passionum quibus claruit
constantia Martyrum. Of this, the Manuscript which I lately mentioned, in the
Cottonian Library, is a notable instance. Sir William Dugdale cites this
Manuscript, by the Title of Ludus Coventriae; but in the printed Catalogue of
that Library, p. 113, it is named thus, A Collection of Plays in old English
Meter. h. e. Dramata sacra in quibus exhibentur historiae veteris and N.
Testamenti, introductis quasi in Scenam personis illic memoratis, quas secum
invicem colloquentes pro ingenio fingit Poeta. Videntur olim coram populo, sive
ad instruendum sive ad placendum, a fratibus mendicantibus repraesentata. It
appears by the latter end of the Prologue, that these Plays or Interludes, were
not only played at Coventry, but in other Towns and Places upon occasion. And
possibly this may be the same Play which Stow tells us was played in the Reign
of King Henry IV, which lasted for Eight Days. The Book seems by the Character
and Language to be at least 300 Years old. It begins with a general Prologue,
giving the Arguments of 40 Pageants or Gesticulations (which were as so many
several Acts or Scenes) representing all the Histories of both Testaments from
the Creation, to the choosing of St. Mathias to be an Apostle. The Stories of
the New Testament are more largely expressed, viz. The Annunciation, Nativity,
Visitation; but more especially all Matters relating to the Passion very
particularly, the Resurrection, Ascension, the choice of St. Mathias: After
which is also represented the Assumption, and last Judgment. All these things
were treated of in a very homely Style, (as we now think) infinitely below the
Dignity of the Subject: But it seems the Gust of that Age was not so nice and
delicate in these Matters; the plain and incurious Judgment of our Ancestors,
being prepared with favor, and taking every thing by the right and easiest
Handle: For example, in the Scene relating to the Visitation.

Maria But Husband of oo thing pray you most mekely,
^aue knowing that our Cosyn Elizabeth with child is,
^^t it please you to go to her hastyly,
^^^ght we myth comfort her it were to me blys.

Joseph. (...) sake, is she with child, sche?
(...) her husband Zachary be merry.
In Montana they dwell, fer hence, so moty the,
In the City of Judah, I know it verily;
It is hence I trow miles two a fifty,
We are like to be weary or we come at the same.
I wole with a good will, blessed wyff Mary;
Now go we we forth then in goddys name, etc.

A little before the Resurrection.

Nunc dormient milites, and veniet anima Christi de inferno, cum Adam and Eva,
Abraham, John Baptist, and alijs.

Anima Christi. Come forth Adam, and Eve with the,
And all my fryndes that herein be,
In Paradys come forth with me
In bliss for to dwell.
The fend of hell that is yowr foo
He shall be wrappyd and woundyn in woo:
Fro woe to wealth now shall ye go,
With mirth ever mor to melle.

Adam. I thank the Lord of thy great grace
That now is forgiven my great trespace,
Now shall we dwellyn in blysfull pace, etc.

The last Scene or Pageant, which represents the Day of Judgment, begins thus.

Michael. Surgite, All men arise,
Venite ad judicium,
For now is set the High Justice:
And has assignyd the day of Dome;
Keep you redyly to this grett assyse,
Both great and small, all and sum,
And of yowr answer you now advise,
What you shall say when that you com, etc.

These and such like, were the Plays which in former Ages were presented
publicly: Whether they had any settled and constant Houses, for that purpose,
does not appear; I suppose not. But it is notorious. that in former times there
was hardly ever any Solemn Reception of Princes, or Noble Persons, but Pageants
(that is Stages Erected in the open Street) were part of the Entertainment. On
which there were Speeches by one or more Persons, in the nature of Scenes; and
besure one of the Speakers must be some Saint of the same Name with the Party
to whom the Honor is intended. For instance, there is an ancient Manuscript at
Coventry, called the Old Leet Book, wherein is set down in a very particular
manner, (fo. 168) the Reception of Queen Margaret, Wife of H. 6, who came to
Coventry (and I think, with her, her young Son Prince Edward) on the Feast of
the Exaltation of the Holy-Cross, 35. H. 6. (1456) Many Pageants and Speeches
were made for her Welcome; out of all which, I shall observe but two or three,
in the Old English, as it is Recorded.

St. Edward. Mother of mekenes, Dame Margarete, princes most excellent,
I King Edward welcome you with affection cordial,
Certefying to your highness mekely mine intent,
For the well of the King and you hertily pray I shall,
And for prince Edward my gostly child, who I love principal.
Praying the, John Evangelist, my help therein to be,
On that condition right humbly I give this Ring to the.

John Evangelist. Holy Edward crowned King, Brother in Verginity,
My power plainly I will prefer thy will to amplefy.
Most excellent princes of wymen mortal, your Bedeman will I be.
I know your Life so virtuous that God is pleased thereby
The birth of you unto this Reme shall cause great Melody:
The virtuous voice of Prince Edward shall daily well increase.
St. Edward his Godfader and I shall prey therefore doubtlese.

St. Margaret. Most notabul Princes of wymen earthle
Dame Margarete, the chief mirth of this Empire,
Ye be hertely welcome to this Cite.
To the pleasure of your highness I will set my desire;
Both nature and gentlenesie does me require,
Seth we be both of one name, to show you kindness;
Wherefore by my power ye shall have no distress.
I shall pray to the Prince that is endlese
To socour you with solas of his high grace;
He will here my petition this is doubtless,
For I wrought all my life that his will wace.
Therefore, Lady, when you be in any dreadful case,
Call on me boldly, thereof I pray you,
And trust in me feythfully, I will do that may pay you.

In the next Reign (as appears in the same Book, so. 221) an other Prince
Edward, Son of King Edward the 4, came to Coventry on the 28 of April, 14 E. 4,
(1474) and was entertained with many Pageants and Speeches, among which I shall
observe only two; one was of St. Edward again, who was then made to speak thus,

Noble Prince Edward, my Cousin and my Knight,
And very Prince of our Line com in dissent,
I Saint Edward have pursued for your faders imperial Right,
Whereof he was excluded by full furious intent.
Unto this your Chamber as Prince full excellent
Ye be right welcome. Thanked be Crist of his sonde.
For that that was ours is now in your faders hand.
The other Speech was from St. George; and thus says the Book.

-- Also upon the Condite in the Croscheping was St. George armed, and a kings
daughter kneling before him with a Lamb, and the fader and the mother being in a
Tower aboven beholding St. George saving their daughter from the Dragon, and
the Condite renning wine in four places, and Minstralcy of Organ playiug, and
St. George having this Speech underwritten.

O mighty God our all succor celestial
Which this Royme have given in dower
To the mother, and to me George protection perpetual
It to defend from enimys fer and nere,
And as this maiden defended was here
By thy grace from this Dragons devour,
So, Lord preserve this noble prince, and ever be his socour.

Lovew. I perceive these holy Matters consisted very much of Praying; but I
pity poor St. Edward the Confessor, who in the compass of a few Years, was
made to promise his favor and assistance to two young Princes of the same Name
indeed, but of as different and opposite Interests as the two Poles. I know not
how he could perform to both.


Trum. Alas! they were both unhappy, notwithstanding these fine Shows and
seeming caresses of Fortune, being both murdered, one by the Hand, the other by
the procurement of Rich. Duke of Gloucester. I will produce but one Example more
of this sort of Action, or Representations, and that is of later time, and an
Instance of much higher Nature than any yet mentioned, It was at the marriage
of Prince Arthur, eldest Son of King Henry 7. to the Princess Catherine of
Spain, An. 1501. Her passage through London was very magnificent, as I have
read it described in an old M. S. Chronicle of that time. The Pageants and
Speeches were many; the Persons represented St. Catherine, St. Vrsula, a
Senator, Noblesse, Virtue, an Angel, King Alphonse, Job, Boethius, etc. among
others one is thus described, -- When this Spech was ended, she held on her way
till she came unto the Standard in Chepe, where was ordained the fifth Pagend
made like an hevyn, theryn syttying a Personage representing the fader of
hevyn, keyng all formyd of Gold, and brennying beffor his trone vii Candyilis
of war standing in vii Candylitykis of Gold, the said personage being environed
with sundry Gyrarchies off Angelis, and sytting in a Cope of most rich cloth of
Tyssu, garnishyd with stoon and perle in most sumptuous wise. Foragain which
said Pagend upon the sowth side of the street stood at that time, in a hows
wheryn that time dwelled William Geffrey habyrdasher, the king, the Queen, my
Lady the Kingys mother, my, Lord of Oxynfford, with many other Lordys and Ladys,
and Perys of this Realm, with also certain Ambassadors of France lately sent
from the Frensh King: and so passing the said Estatys, either guyvyng to other
due and convenyent Saluts and Countenancs, so sone as her grace was approchid
unto the said Pagend, the fadyr began his Spech as folowyth.

H^nc veneram locum, septeno lumine septum.
Dignumque Arthuri totidem Astra micant.
I am begynyng and end, that made each creature
My sylfe, and for my sylfe, but man esspecially
Both male and female, made aftyr mine aun figure,
Whom I joined togydyr in Matrimony
And that in Paradyse, declaring opynly
That men shall weddyng in my Church solempnize,
Fygurid and signified by the erthly Paradyze.
In this my Church I am allway recydent
As my chyeff tabernacle, and most chosyn place,
Among these goldyn Candylstikkis which represent
My Catholyk Church, shynyng affor my face,
With light of feyth, wisdom, doctrine, and grace,
And mervelously eke enflamyd toward me
With the extyng wible fire of Charity.
Wherefore my welbelovid dowgthyr Katharyn,
Sith I have made you to mine awn semblance
In my Church to be married, and your noble Childryn
To regn in this land as in their enherytance,
Se that ye have me in special remembrance:
Love me and my Church yowr spiritual modyr.
For ye dispysing that oon, despise that othyr.
Look that ye walk in my precepts, and obey them well:
And here I give you the same blyssyng that I
Gave my well beloved chylder of Israel;
Blyssyd be the fruit of your belly;
Yower substance and frutys I shall increase and multyply;
Yower rebellious Enimyes I shall put in yowr hand,
Increasing in honor both you and yowr land.



Lovew. This would be censured now a days as profane to the higest degree.


Trum. No doubt on it: Yet you see there was a time when People were not so
nicely censorious in these Matters, but were willing to take things in the best
sense; and then this was thought a noble Entertainment for the greatest King in
Europe (such I esteem King H. 7. at that time) and proper for that Day of
mighty Joy and Triumph. And I must farther observe out of the Lord Bacon's
History of H. 7. that the chief Man who had the care of that Days Proceedings
was Bishop Fox, a grave Councelor for War or Peace, and also a good Surveyor of
Works, and a good Master of Ceremonies. and it seems he approved it. The said
Lord Bacon tells us farther, That whosoever had those Toys in compiling, they
were not altogether Pedantical.


Lovew. These things however are far from that which we understand by the name
of a Play.


Trum. It may be so; but these were the Plays of those times. Afterward in the
Reign of K. H. 8. both the Subject and Form of these Plays began to alter, and
have since varied more and more. I have by me, a thing called A merry Play
between the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curate and Neybour Pratte. Printed the
5 of April 1533. which was 24 H. 8. (a few Years before the Dissolution of
Monasteries) The design of this Play was to redicule Friars and Pardoners. Of
which I Will give you a taste. To begin it, the Friar enters with these Words,
Deus hic; the holy Trynyte
Preserve all that now here be.
Dear brethren, if ye will consider.
The Cause why I am com hyder,
Ye would be glad to know my intent;
For I com not hither for money nor for rent,
I com not hither for meat nor for meal,
But I com hither for your Souls heal, etc.


After a long Preamble, he adresses himself to Preach, when the Pardoner enters
with these Words,

God and St. Leonarde send ye all his grace
As many as ben assembled in this place, etc.
And makes a long Speech, showing his Bulls and his Relics, in order to sell
his Pardons for the raising some Money toward the rebuilding,

Of the holy Chapel of sweet saint Leonarde
Which late by fire was destroyed and marde.
Both these speaking together, with continual interruption, at last they fall
together by the Ears. Here the Curate enters (for you must know the Scene lies
in the Church)

Hold your hands; a vengeance on ye both two
That ever ye came hither to make this ado,
To polute my Church, etc.

Fri. Master Parson, I marvayll ye will give License
To this false knave in this Audience
To publish his ragman rolls with lies.
I desired him ywys more than ones or twyse
To hold his peace till that I had done,
But he would here no more than the man in the moon.

Pard. Why should I suffer the more than thou me?
Master parson gave me license before the.
And I would thou knowyest it I have relykes here.
Other manner stuff than thou do bear:
I will edefy more with the sight of it,
Than will all thy pratynge of holy wryt;
For that except that the precher himself live well
His predycacyon will help never a dell, etc.

Pars. No more of this wranglyng in my Church:
I shrewe yowr hertys both for this lurche.
Is there any blood shed here between these knaves?
Thanked be god they had no stauys,
Nor egoteles, for then it had been wrong.
Well, ye shall sing another song.

Here he calls his Neighbor Prat the Constable, with design to apprehend 'em,
and set 'em in the Stocks. But the Friar and Pardoner prove sturdy, and will
not be stockt, but fall upon the poor Parson and Constable, and bang 'em both
so well-favour'dly, that at last they are glad to let 'em go at liberty: And so
the Farce ends with a drawn Battle. Such as this were the Plays of that Age,
acted in Gentlemen's Halls at Christmas, or such like festival times, by the
Servants of the Family, or Strowlers who went about and made it a Trade. It is
not unlikely that Till the 25 Year of Queen Elizabeth, the Queen had not any
Players; but in that Year 12 of the best of all those who belonged to several
Lords, where chosen and sworn her Servants, as Grooms of the Chamber. Stow's
Annals, p. 698.
Lords in those days, and Persons of eminent Quality, had their several Gangs
of Players, as some have now of Fiddlers, to whom they give Cloaks and Badges.
The first Comedy that I have seen that looks like regular, is Gammer Gurton's
Needle, writ I think in the reign of King Edward 6. This is composed of five
Acts, the Scenes unbroken, and the unities of Time and Place duly observed. It
was acted at Christ College in Cambridge; there not being as yet any settled
and public Theaters.


Lovew. I observe, Truman, from what you have said, that Plays in England had a
beginning much like those of Greece, the Monologues and the Pageants drawn from
place to place on Wheels; answer exactly to the Cart of Thespis, and the
Improvements have been by such little steps and degrees as among the Ancients,
till at last, to use the Words of Sir George Back (in his Third University of
England) Dramatick Poesy is so lively expressed and represented upon the public
Stages and Theaters of this City, as Rome in the Auge (the highest pitch) of
her Pomp and Glory, never saw it better performed, I mean (says he) in respect
of the Action and Art, and not of the Cost and Sumptiousness. This he writ
about the Year 1631. But can you inform me Truman, when public Theaters were
first erected for this purpose in London?


Trum. Not certainly; but I presume about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. For Stow in his Survey of London (which Book was first printed in the
Year 1598) says, Of late Years in place of these Stage Plays (i. e. those of
Religious Matters) have been used Comedies, Tragedies, Interludes, and
Histories, both true and feigned; for the acting whereof certain public
Places, as the Theater, the Curtine, etc. have been erected. And the
continuator of Stows Annals, p. 1004, says, That in Sixty Years before the
publication of that Book (which was An. Dom. 1629) no less than 17 public
Stages, or common Playhouses, had been built in and about London. In which
number he reckons five Inns or Common Osteries, to have been in his time turned
into Playhouses, one Cockpit, St. Paul's singing School, one in the
Blackfriers, one in the Whitefriers, and one in former time at Newington Buts;
and adds, before the space of 60 Years past, I never knew, heard, or read, of
any such Theaters, set Stages, or Playhouses, as have been purposely built
within Man's Memory.


Lovew. After all, I have been told, that Stage Plays are inconsistant with the
Laws of this Kingdom, and Players made Rogues by Statute.


Trum. He that told you so strained a point of Truth. I never met with any Law
wholly to suppress them: Sometimes indeed they have been prohibited for a
Season; as in times of Lent, general Mourning or public Calamities, or upon
other occasions, when the Government saw fit. Thus by Proclamation, 7 of April,
in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth, Plays and Interludes were forbid till
Alhallow-tide next following. Hollinshed, p. 1184. Some Statutes have been made
for their Regulation or Reformation, not general suppression. By the Stat. 39
Eliz. c. 4. (which was made for the suppressing of Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy
Beggars) it is enacted, S. 2, That all persons that be, or utter themselves to
be, Proctors, Procurers, Patent gatherers, or Collectors for Goals, Prisons or
Hospitals, or Fencers, Barewards, common players of Interludes and Ministrels,
wandering abroad, (other than Players of Interludes belonging to any Baron of
this Realm, or any other honorable Personage of greater Degree, to be
authorized to play under the Hand and Seal of Arms of such Baron or Personage)
All Iuglers, Tinkers, Pedlers and Petty chapmen, wandering abroad, all wandering
Persons, etc. able in Body, using loytering, and refusing to work for such
reasonable Wages as is commonly given, etc. These shall he ajudged and deemed
Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, and punished as such.


Lovew. But this privilege of Authorizing or Licensing, is taken away by the
Stat. 1 Ja. 1. chapter 7. S. 1. and therefore all of them (as Mr. Collier says) are
without distinction brought under the foresaid Penalty.


Trum. If he me ans all Players without distintion, it is a great Mista ke. For
the 39th of the Queens Statute extends only to Wandering Player^, and not to
such as are the King or Queen's Servants, and established in settled Houses by
Royal Authority. On such, the ill Character of vagrant Players (or as they are
now called, Strolers) can cast no more aspersion, than the wandering Proctors,
in the same Statute mentioned, on those of Doctors-Commons. By a Stat. made 3.
Ja. 1. chapter 21. It was enacted, That if any person shall in any Stage Play,
Interlude, Show, Maygame or Pageant, jestingly or profanely speak or use the
holy name of God, Christ Jesus, the holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, he shall
forfeit for every such offense, 10 l. The Stat. 1. Char. 1. chapter 1. enacts, That
no Meetings, Assemblies, or concourse of People shall be out of their own
Parishes, on the Lords day, for any Sports or Pastimes whatsoever, nor any
Bear-bating, Bull-bating, Enterludes, Common Plays, or other unlawful Exercises
and Pastimes used by any person or persons within their own Parishes. These are
all the Statutes that I can think of relating to the Stage and Players; but
nothing to suppress them totally, till the two Ordinances of the Long
Parliament, one of the 22 of October 1647, the other of the 11 of Feb. 1647. By
which all Stage Plays and Interludes are absolutely forbid; the Stages, Seats,
Galleries, etc. to be pulled down; all Players though calling themselves the King
or Queens servants, and as such Ac^^ing within this Realm, all of them on
Conviction, to be punished and fined according to Law; the money forfeited by
them to go to the Poor of the Parish; and every Spectator to Pay 5 s. to the
use of the Poor. Also Cock-fighting was prohibited by one of Oliver's Acts of
31 Mar. 1654. But I suppose no body pretends these things to be Laws; I could
say more on this Subject, but I must break off here, and leave you, Lovewit; my
Occasions require it.

Love. Farewell, Old Cavalier.


Trum. It Is properly said; we are almost all of us, now, gone and forgoten.


FINIS.

