THE MOVRNERS Memorial, IN TWO SERMONS; On the Death of the Truly Pious Mris.
SUSANNA SOAME, Late Wife of Bartholomew Soame of Thurlow, Esquire; Who Deceased
Febru. 14. 1691/2.

With some Account of Her LIFE and DEATH.

By Timothy Wright, Robert Fleming,
Ministers of the Gospel.

London, Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising-Sun in Cornhil, and John
Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry, MDCXCII.

To the much Honored BARTHOLOMEW SOAME of Little Thurlow, Esquire;
Honored Sir,
THat Relation which these Discourses have to One who a few days ago stood in
the nearest upon earth to your self, rendering them peculiarly Yours, does
entitle them to your Patronage; And considering that upon the same account they
may be acceptable to many others unto whom her Memory is precious, though as they
are Ours we have little reason to expect they should be so to any: We do with
the greater readiness, in Obedience to your Commands, here humbly present them
to your Hand in that plain Countrey-dress in which they were lately directed to
your Ear among many others, to whom they were in that respect the more
suitable, as well as to the solemnity of the Occasion; Hopeing that as through
the Divine Grace they found some Access unto your Heart, when they first
visited your Ear, so they may be of some further use by the blessing of God to
renew, or rather fix and settle the impressions which were then made, being now
again presented to your Eye.

Sir, As there is none more deeply sensible of the greatness of the loss, which
You and Yours have sustained by the Death of so near and dear, and every way
useful a Relative; so there is none more sincerely desirous than We are, to the
utmost of our power, to be assistant both to You and them in bearing your
present Burdens, as far as Christianity does oblige, and Capacitate us to be
mutually helpful to one another in fulfilling that part of the Law of Christ.
And surely it cannot choose but be a very relieving thought to you to consider
what a vast disproportion there is between your Temporal loss, and her Eternal
gain, by her happy Exchange of a frail, Tottering Earthly Tabernacle for an
House not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens. It may very well be a
comfortable Alleviation to your Grief and Sorrow under the present afflictive
dispensation, when you first look backward and reflect upon the many wearisome
and painful Exercises, which One whom you so Dearly loved, and then so heartily
pityed, did for so long a time undergo in a distempered body; and then look
forward, and consider that She is now Eternally freed from all, being happily
arrived at that Everlasting Rest, where there is not only perfect ease, but
fullness of joy to make it the more complete, complacential and delightful. That
Eternal weight of Glory which she is now in the possession of does infinitely
preponderate both her former sufferings in a mortal body, and your present
heavy affliction and sorrow upon her going out of it. And therefore You have
greater reason to rejoice than to weep for her, in as much as she is now gone
unto her Heavenly Father. And though it cannot be denied, but we have all reason
to weep for our selves; as indeed the state of this wretched World in general,
(as well as of particular Families) is sadly to be lamented, when Persons of
Eminent endowments, and singular usefulness in their respective stations are in
so great numbers (as they have been of late) translated out of it, as being no
longer worthy of such excellent Inhabitants, and so few in many places
springing up in their room: Yet even in this respect we have no reason to
sorrow as those that have no hope; For, As there are in your Family many
pleasant and hopeful young Plants, upon which the Blessing of Genesis 17. v. 7.
Abraham is continually descending to make them yet more and more fruitful in
every good work, that it may still retain the beautiful Complexion of a Watered
Garden, and all that see Isa. 58. v. 11. cap. 61. v. ^.
them may acknowledge that they are the Seed which the Lord has blessed: So
with respect to the poor adjacent Country, who also have sustained a great
loss (of which they are very sensible) in the Decease of One who, by your kind
assistance and cheerful Concurrence, was more immediately instrumental in
procuring for them such plain wholesome food for their Souls, as they had a
grateful relish of notwithstanding what in that kind they do otherwise enjoy;
We are greatly encouraged to hope that the Father of Spirits, will in his wise,
and good Providence make up this loss also to them by continuing your Affairs
here in such a posture, that you may yet further pursue your own beneficent and
charitable inclination toward your Neighbors and Countrymen, in affording
them the like additional helps still for their spiritual improvement. And in so
doing We doubt not but You will find the Blessings of Heaven still multiplied
upon your Family, and abundance of peace and satisfaction in your own Spirit,
in persisting in and reflecting upon such a charitable piece of Service to the
Souls of men. In order whereunto both You and Yours (of whose numerous favors
to each of us we shall ever retain a most grateful sense) are with no less
sincerity than constancy recommended daily to the Compassionate Care of the
Father of Mercys, and the God of all Grace and Consolation, by,

Honored Sir, Your greatly obliged, faithful and humble Servants in Christ,
Timothy Wright, Robert Fleming.

Thurlow-Hall March, 7th. 1691/2.
A Funeral Sermon. By Timothy Wright, Chaplain in the Family.
Romans 2. 7. To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory
and Honor, and Immortality; Eternal Life.
Which words as connected with v. 6. are thus:

Who will render to every man according to his deeds: To them, who by patient
continuance in well-doing seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality; Eternal
Life. IT having pleased Almighty God, the Sovereign disposer of all things, (in
whose hands all our times are) to remove from us, and take unto himself, our
deservedly Honored, Dear, and useful Friend; who (as you all know) was in her
lifetime, not without the condescending and cheerful Concurrence of Her
surviving Head, very instrumental for the propagating the True knowledge of
Christ Jesus among you, by the Preaching of the Gospel in this place.

It is now the commendable and pious desire, and appointment of her nearest
surviving Relatives, that we should this day here pay our last solemn, and
public Respects together unto her Memory, in a Sermon or two dedicated unto
it. And my Station in the Family laying me under a peculiar Obligation to bear
my part in this solemn service, (though otherwise unworthy of it;) it was not
long after, I began more closely to apply my thoughts to the making some
slender preparation for it, that this Text presented it self to my mind, as a
proper subject for our most serious meditation on this sorrowful occasion: To
them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, etc. A Scripture that was
eminently Exemplified in her Life, and is now more fully accomplished, and made
good to her, in her death; and upon both accounts, I hope, so much the more
adapted for our present instruction, in Conjunction with that awakening and
teaching Providence, which gave the occasion to this Discourse upon it: Which
is designed both for an instructive lesson to the living, and a solemn Memorial
of the dead; and therefore I shall endeavor, by the Divine assistance, to cast
it into such a Method, and form, as may be in some measure accommodate to both
parts of that design; but to the latter in subserviency to the former, as that
which is principally to be regarded in such sacred discourses.

In the Words we have two things more generally offered to our serious
consideration. 1. The descriptive Character of the Heirs of future blessedness;
they are such who by patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality. 2. The final Happiness unto which they shall at last
be advanced by the gracious designation, and appointment of their Heavenly
Father: And this is briefly sum'd up in those two comprehensive words, Eternal
life; which indeed are both too big for our thoughts in this dark, imperfect
state, and are only thoroughly understood, where what is signified by them is
fully enjoyed.

The Character of the Persons here spoken of is full, and extensive, the
felicity that awaits them at the end of their course is great and glorious, and
the Connection that is between them is firm and certain, resulting from that
divine (...) which is spoken of in the preceding part of the Context, that
righteous Judgment of God, whereby he makes a true Estimate of Persons and
actions according to the proper Rules of Judgment; and will therefore render to
every one according to his deeds. And so with little variation, we may sum up
the sense of the Words in this Doctrinal Conclusion, viz.

Doct. That all they, who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for Glory,
and Honor, and Immortality, shall at last obtain the full possession of what
they seek after in Eternal life.

This is a Conclusion of that indubitable certainty, that the Truth of it
cannot be called in question without denying at once the divine veracity, and
remunerative justice; for as much as the written word of God, (according to
which his final distribution of Eternal Rewards and punishments, shall be made
at the last day) has expressly declared that it shall be thus: And that in many
other places of Scripture as well as in the Text: And therefore looking upon it
as altogether needless to insist upon the direct proof, or Confirmation of this
Truth, amongst those that do acknowledge the divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, and believe them to be the Word of God: All that I shall do further
in speaking to it, shall be, first to explain, and then to apply it to our
selves on this sorrowful occasion.

In the Explication there are three things to be distinctly considered and
spoken to, viz.

1. The Extensive import of the Character, by which the Heirs of future
blessedness are here described.

2. The nature and Excellency of that final happiness, which does by the divine
Ordination and appointment belong to them as their everlasting inheritance.

3. What kind of connection there is between the one, and the other, i. e.
between the qualifications imported in this Character, and that felicity, to
which all that bear it shall at last be advanced.

1. That which does most fitly come under our consideration in the first place,
is the extensive import of their Excellent Character, who are here spoken of.
And as in the general, we see they are described by the Spiritual, and Heavenly
Tendency and scope of their desires and aims; which are too high to be confined
to this lower World, or to take up their Rest in any thing, that is measured by
Time: So more particularly, there are three things in this Character to be
distinctly explained. 1. The great and Noble Object of their earnest desire,
and constant aim, expressed here by Glory, Honor, and Immortality. 2. Their
Souls Actual Motion toward this Object, here expressed by their seeking after
(...). 3. The regular Way and right Line, in which their desires move, and
their aims are directed toward this blessed Mark; and that is a patient
continuance in well-doing.

First, We may understand somewhat of the Excellency of the Character here
given us, of the Heirs of future Blessedness, by considering the Object of
their earnest Desire, and steady Aim; which indeed is great and noble,
well-beseeming the dignity of an heaven-born Soul, even Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality (or as it is in the Greek, incorruption) [(...).] three words that
carry a great deal in them; the two first expressing the substance of what they
seek after, Glory and Honor; and the third subjoyned, partly to set forth the
perpetuity, and everlasting duration of both, and partly to denote their own
endless existence, and continuance in the full possession and enjoyment of
them, when once they shall have reached the Mark at which they aim.

I Shall neither trouble my self, nor you with a needless enquiry into the more
nice and critical distinctions, that some may conceive to be between these two
words, as to the proper import of them, [(...)] Glory and Honor: Thus much
being sufficiently evident; not only from the third word, that is subjoyned to
them, but also from the manifest scope of the Text; that they are principally
designed both together to denote that everlasting happiness in another World,
which is in the close of the verse summed up in those other two words, Eternal
life; intimating that to be the great thing, which all the faithful servants of
God and Disciples of Christ do, in subordination to the Glory of their great
Lord and Master, chiefly seek after. Yet so as not to exclude, from being a
part of the Object of their Desire and Aim, whatsoever in this life is
necessary as preparative and introductory to the Glory and Happiness of
another: Much less excluding whatsoever else there may be in that future
blessedness it self, which cannot so aptly be conceived of under the notions of
Glory and Honor, especially if more strictly, and properly understood; such as
that eternal satisfaction, that inexpressible Joy, and that inconceivable
delight, which will undoubtedly accompany the glory and honor of that immortal
state.

Nothing short of that Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4.
that fades not away, can indeed ultimately terminate the Desires, or fully
answer the Aims of the Persons of that singular and noble Character, which we
are now considering. It is not any worldly honor or greatness, (though they
should be advanced never so high in those secular dignities, which many are so
ambitious to climb up unto) that can content them that seek the honor, which
comes Joh. 5. v. 44.
from God only; even that which he who is the fountain of honor and glory,
does finally conser upon all his children when they are grown up to full age,
and are put into the possession of that inheritance that is incorruptible and
undefiled, *(...). 1 Pet. 1. v. 4.
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them. And therefore these are
here expressly mentioned in the Description, the Apostle gives us of them, as
being what they do chiefly, and above all other things seek after. But though
these be the supreme and ultimate objects of their Heavenly desires and aims,
there are also other things to be considered as intermediate objects thereof;
which they must be supposed likewise to seek after in a due subordination to
the former. And indeed they are, in great part, but lower degrees of the same
things. For as there must be some fainter Rays of an Heavenly divine Glory
impressed upon those Souls in this life by the sanctifying operations of the
Spirit and Grace of God, which are to be more entirely glorified in that which
is to come: So in proportion to the degree, wherein they partake of this glory,
there is an heavenly-honour put upon all those here, who shall be advanced to
eternal honor hereafte^r. Wheresoever the Divine Image, which was defaced by
sin, comes to be restored by Grace, there is an heavenly glory put upon that
Soul; which is therefore in Scripture called a Divine 2 Pet. 1. v. 4.
Nature: And they that partake of it are said to be born of God, and born from
above. John 1. v. 13. cap. 3. 3. 1 John 5. v. 1.
And as there is a real internal glory stamped upon the Soul, when the divine
Image comes to be re-impress'd upon it; so surely it is to be reckoned a great
honor to a Man to be related to God as his Heavenly Father, to be his Son not
only faederally by the grace of Adoption, but really by Regeneration. And these
lower degrees of Glory, and Honor lead to higher, and so on to the highest of
all, and consequently are to be sought after in subordination thereunto. And
whosoever is regardless of the former, though his presumptuous pretenses be never
so high, cannot regularly seek the latter. And therefore we are by no means to
separate the one from the other in considering the great Object of the sincere
Christian's earnest desire and constant aim. Which was the first thing to be
considered in this descriptive Character of the Heirs of future blessedness.
And so

Secondly, That which comes in the next place to be spoken to is, their Souls
actual Motion toward this great, and noble Object of their Desire and Aim, as
it is here expressed by their (...) Est summo studio quaerere.
seeking after it. And here it will be necessary to show more particularly what
this seeking does import as it has respect to this Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, as the object of it. And this will lead us one step further
toward the right understanding the excellent, and comprehensive Character of
the happy persons that are here spoken of. And it is easy for us to apprehend
that there are some things necessarily supposed, and other things more directly
implied in this seeking for glory and honor and incorruption, which ought to
be considered distinctly; and therefore I shall give you a brief account of
both.

First, There are some things to be considered, which it does necessarily
suppose, and they are such as these:

1. It does suppose a competent measure of knowledge, and understanding of what
is revealed in the Gospel concerning these great things, and the way in which
they are to be sought after: Together with some hope that they may in that way
be attained. For as there can be no Rational desire after that which we have
Ignotinulla cupido.
no knowledge of; So a Man will seek but very faintly, if at all, after that
which he has little or no hope to obtain.

2. It does further suppose a Mind and Heart so far abstracted and drawn off
from the World, and its perishing vanities, as to be at the greater liberty,
and leisure to pursue these better, and more deserving Objects. For it is not
to be thought that a Soul that is so far carnalized, and sunk down into the
Earth as to be either drowned, and dissolved in sensual pleasures, or swallowed
up and buried alive in worldly cares, will with any serious earnestness seek
after spiritual and heavenly things. And therefore the Apostle speaks of a
Christians seeking those things, which are above, as a thing subsequent unto,
as well as evidential of his being spiritually risen with Christ. And
therefore. Col. 3. 1.


3. It does also suppose the divine efficacious grace to have been at work upon
the Soul, in some measure enlightening the Mind, renewing the Will, and
spiritualizing the Affections; whereby the main bent of the Soul comes to be
turned toward God, whereas its depraved inclination did before carry it quite
another way. For as it is not to be imagined that the Soul should with any
seriousness seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, before such a Change
is wrought in it: So it is certain that it could never work it in it self
without the powerful supervening operation and assistance of the Spirit and
Grace of God. And as these things are supposed; So

Secondly, There are other things more directly employed in this seeking for
glory, and honor, and immortality. As

1. It does imply a deliberate Judgment passed in the understanding upon
sufficient conviction concerning the preferableness of these great things to
all this World's Enjoyments, and an atual preferring and choosing the one
before the other accordingly. For all that are engaged in a serious, and
diligent prosecution of those things that conduce or pertain to their eternal
happiness and Salvation in another World, have been taught, by the Wisdom that
is from above, truly to reckon with themselves that, all those other things,
upon which the minds of most men are so busily intent, are but mean and
contemptible Trifles compared with these: The loving kindness of the Lord is to
them better than life it self, and therefore this is sought after, and prized
by them above any of the comforts of life. To live in peace and sweet communion
with God in Christ here, with the lively hope of being ever with the Lord
hereafter, is to them far more eligible, than to have the greatest affluence
and abundance of this Worlds enjoyments. And therefore while others in the
anxiety of their hearts are crying out, Who will show us any good? They pray
with the devout Psalmist, Lord lift Psalm. 4. v. 6.
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

2. It does further imply an habitual heavenly-mindedness, whereby the main
stream of the thoughts and affections is carried in a steady current for the
most part, toward those things that are above; which therefore are the Subject
of their daily meditation: As there is nothing more natural to us than to be
thinking much and often upon that which is the great Object of our desire and
aim. And so they have their conversation in Phil. 3. v. 20.
Heaven, even while their commoration and stay is yet upon earth.

3. It does further imply a strong emotion of ardent desires, and earnest
longings of Soul after those great and glorious enjoyments, which constitute
the happiness of the future state; and after whatsoever is antecedently
necessary in order to their attainment of a gracious Title unto, and meetness
for them. Desire is that Affection of the Soul whereby it moves toward that,
which is the Object of its Choice and Love; as it rests in Delight, when it
has attained to the full possession of it. And therefore the heavenly minded
Christian in this imperfect state, not having yet attained, is Phil. 3. v. 13,
14.
earnestly reaching forth, and pressing forward toward the Mark that is before
him. And so there is nothing in which those Noble Souls, that are seriously
engaged in seeking for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, do more frequently
or intensely exercise themselves than in constant humble Addresses unto God by
fervent Prayer for his Grace in Christ Jesus to fit them for, and conduct them
through present duty and service, unto eternal Glory and Happiness. And then.

4. It does in the last place imply a serious diligence, and Conscientious care
in the use of all divinely-prescribed and appointed means for the improvement
of their Spirits in all the excellent habits of Grace and Holiness here, in
order to their being meetly prepared, and qualified in due time for the eternal
enjoyment of Glory and Happiness hereafter; together with an humble dependence
upon the divine Grace, implored by earnest Prayer, for the making all such
means effectually conducive to their proper end.

Thirdly, That which we are to consider in the next place, respecting the
excellent Character of these happy Persons, is the regular Way or right Line,
in which their Desires move, and their Aims are directed toward this blessed
Mark: and that is a patient continuance in welldoing, [(...).] which the Vulgar
Latin renders thus: [secundum patientiam boni operis,] according to the
patience of a good work; or (to bring it nearer to the words of our
Translation) by patience in well-doing. Arias Montanus renders it [secundum
permanentiam] by perseverance in well-doing: and Beza Translates it [secundum
patientem expect ationem] by patient expectation. But I think our own
Translation is the most full and emphatical of them all, putting that together
which is severally expressed in them: Reading it thus; by patient continuance
in well-doing; therefore I shall adhere to that; and so much the rather,
because I find the word (...) does in Scripture style signify both patience
and perseverance. And I think the Emphasis of it here cannot be better
expressed than by putting them both together, and so understanding it to
signify patient continuance, or perseverance with patience in well-doing. Nor
do I see any thing in the more immediate context, or in the scope of the Text
it self, to incline me to prefer any other Translation of these words, that I
have seen before this which we have in our English Bibles. And therefore I
shall follow in giving you a brief account of the way wherein the Heirs of
future blessedness do seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, as it is
here described, namely by patient continuance in welldoing. In which
description of it, we may easily perceive these three gradations in it: by
well-doing; by continuance or perseverance in well-doing; and by patient
continuance in well-doing: All which I shall speak distinctly to in a few
words, beginning with the lowest degree first. viz.

1. All that do regularly seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, seek
them in the way of well-doing; which expression, being indefinite, is to be
understood in a very large extent, reaching to all the Duties incumbent upon a
Christian in this present state. For as this [(...) or] well-doing does in the
very formal notion of it carry a reference to some Rule, by which what is done
is to be measured, and to which, so far as it is well done, it does accord: So
it must be understood here to have a special reference unto the Gospel, or the
Law of Faith as the rule and measure of it. And therefore this well-doing does
plainly import a steady conformity in a Man's Actions, as to the main bent and
course of his conversation, unto the holy precepts of Christ Jesus laid down
in the Gospel, as the rule and standard of a Christians deportment. And so that
which is manifestly intended in this general expression, is no less than an
heedful attendance to all the duties of Christianity; or a serious care and
studious endeavor throughout the whole course of a Man's life to yield
obedience to the Laws of Christ, and so to walk worthy Col. 1. 10
of the Lord unto all pleasing. And being so understood, it is so far from
excluding that Faith in Christ, whereby a sinner does embrace and receive him
according to the Offer of the Gospel, as the way to obtain Salvation by him,
that it does necessarily include it: Forasmuch as this believing is an
essential part of that well-doing, by which all serious Christians do seek for
glory, and honor, and immortality. And therefore our Lord himself does
emphatically call it [(...)] the work of God. It is by well-doing in John 6. v.
29.
this comprehensive sense as it takes in both Faith and Good Works, in
conformity to the Precepts of the Gospel, that we must seek for eternal glory
and happiness, if ever we would obtain it. And whosoever they be that seek it
any other way, (either separating the one of these from the other, or carelessly
neglecting and disregarding both;) they will find at last that they did herein
miserably deceive themselves, and put a destructive Cheat upon their own Souls.
For the Lord Jesus Christ is the Author Heb. 5. v. 9.
of Eternal Salvation (not promiscuously unto all, but only) to all those that
obey him: And therefore he himself also tells us, that not every one that says
unto him Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the Will of Mat. 7. v. 21.
his Father which is in Heaven.

2. A further gradation expressed in this description of the only regular way
of seeking for future glory and blessedness, is that it is to be done by
continuance in well-doing, or by perseverance therein unto the end. And this is
no less necessary than the former: For if any man draw back it will be to his
own perdition, because God has declared he will Heb. 10. v. 38.
have no pleasure in him. He that would so run as to obtain, must not think it
enough to set out right, to begin well; but he must hold on till he comes to
the end of the prescribed course, or else he loses all. As he must be careful
to run the very race that is set before him, keeping his feet in the direct
path that is delineared for him by the divine Precepts, without turning aside
to any crooked way, either on the right hand or on the left; So he must be sure
to run to the end of it; not desisting till he arrive there, or else he will
run in vain.

3. The last and highest gradation in this account that the Text gives of the
way and manner of seeking regularly for glory, and honor, and immortality, is
made by the addition of patience unto this perseverance in well-doing. And this
Patience has respect both to present evils endured, and to future good
expected in the way of our duty. For patience is exercised by the Children of
God in this state of their minority and imperfection both these ways, viz. in
enduring and in waiting: and indeed in both respects they have need of
patience, that after they have done the Heb. 10. v. 36.
Will of God they may receive the promise. First, All the Heirs of Glory,
during the time of their minority, do stand in need of patience as it is to be
exercised in enduring the many afflictive evils that they meet with in the
course of their obedience and continuance in well-doing. For as Gods ancient
People Israel passed through a troublesome, and howling Wilderness into the
promised Land; So all. True Christians must expect through much Acts 14. v. 22.
tribulation to enter into the Kingdom of God: And therefore our Lord Jesus
Christ told his disciples, that in the John 16. v. 33.
World they should have tribulation. And indeed there is such a great variety
of troubles, to which the best of men are exposed here in this life as may
sufficiently convince them, that here is not Mich. 2. v. 10.
their rest. But all these are quietly, and patiently undergone with a silent,
humble, and meek submission to the divine Sovereign disposing hand that orders
all, by such as have eternal glory in their eye and aim; in so much that they do
not only persevere in doing good with unwearied diligence, but also hold out in
suffering evils with invincible patience, Col. 1. v. 11.
being strengthened thereunto according to the glorious power of the divine
grace. Secondly, They do exercise patience in waiting as well as in enduring.
For (as the Apostle speaks) they hope for Romans 8. v. 25.
that which yet they see not, and therefore do with patience wait for it. And
this is that kind of patience which the Apostle James exhorts unto. Jam. 5. 7,
8. Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the Lord; behold the
husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it until he receive the early and the latter rain: Be ye also patient,
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. And the right
Seekers after Glory and happiness are no strangers to the exercise of this kind
of patience. And therefore they are not weary in well-doing, because they know,
that in due season they shall Gal. 6. v. 9.
reap if they faint not, and that every thing is most pleasant as well as most
beautiful Eccl. 3. v. 11.
in its season.

And thus have I shown you at large the extensive import of the Character by
which the Heirs of future blessedness are here described. And so I come more
briefly

II. To consider in the next place the nature and excellency of that final
happiness, which does, by the divine ordination and appointment, belong to them
as their everlasting inheritance; as it is here summed up in those two
comprehensive words Eternal Life: Which contain more in them than all the
united eloquence of men and Angels is able to express and set forth. It is a
phrase more frequently than any other made use of in Scripture summarily to
express the great felicity, to which the glorified Saints are advanced in the
heavenly Mansions. And it does very aptly serve to lead our Minds into some
more general Conceptions of the greatness and glory of it; though indeed all that
can be said or thought falls infinitely short of being commensurate unto it.
Life is the sweetest of all enjoyments, and therefore that is the last thing
that any man will part with so long as he is able to retain it; and Eternal
life is the highest Job. 2. ver. 4.
and most noble kind of life, of which the nature of Man when in the utmost
elevation is susceptive of. And the excellency of it will more clearly appear
to us if we consider it more distinctly, first with respect to what is more
directly imported in it, and then with respect to what it does necessarily
connote, when understood in that latitude in which the phrase is most
frequently (if not always) used in Scripture.

1. If we consider it in the more direct import of it, so it appears to have a
very radiant excellency in it that does far outshine the brightest part of
this Worlds glory. For it must be understood to singifie somewhat more than a
bare immortality or a mere living for ever, (for that belongs also to the
wicked that are turned into Hell, and has no happiness in it if abstractly
considered,) even, a glorious ineffable and everlasting union with God, the
fountain of life; whereby the Spirits of just men made perfect, dwelling in
God, the all-comprehending Spirit, do (so far as the finite capacity of a
creature will admit) everlastingly possess a perfect plenitude of life. And
this is elsewhere in Scripture expressed by being ever with the Lord. And this
1 These. 4. v. 17.
we are to conceive the Souls of the Saints to enter upon immediately after
death, although their bodies are not to be advanced to a participation in it
until the resurrection, when they also shall be made immortal, and fashioned
like unto Christ's glorious Body, according to the Phil. 3. v. 21.
working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

2. If we consider this Eternal life with respect to what it does necessarily
connote, so it will appear to be still more excellent and glorious. For as that
God in whom the glorified Saints have most intimately their everlasting
residence, is in himself the fountain of life, or the living God; So he is also
the fountain of blessedness. And therefore, as by being for ever with the Lord,
they do everlastingly possess a perfect plenitude of life, in 2 Cor. 5. v. 4.
which every thing of mortality shall at last be swallowed up: So they must
needs also enjoy together therewith a perfect fullness of whatsoever can be
conceived of under the notion of happiness; a fullness of Glory both subjective
and objective, glory shining in them, and glory shining upon, and round about,
yea into them, transfusing its bright beams through them; a fullness of honor
infinitely transcending all those fading Titles, which advance one man so high
above another in this lower World; and a fullness of joy, satisfaction and
delight, even those pure, refined pleasures that are at Gods right Psalm. 16. v.
11.
hand for evermore. All this, and a great deal more that neither our words nor
thoughts can reach, is summarily comprehended in that Eternal Life, which all
they shall certainly attain at the end of their course, who by patient
continuance in well-doing do seek for glory, and honor, and immortality.

Which will more plainly appear to us by considering that which follows in the
next place in order, namely:

III. That which remains in the last place to be spoken to, is, the connection
between the qualifications imported in the foregoing Character and that
glorious felicity, unto which all that bear it shall at last be advanced;
between a Christians course and his crown; between his seeking for glory, and
honor, and immortality, in the way here described, and that eternal life, in
which he shall finally enjoy all that he sought for. That there is a connection
between them is sufficiently evident, inasmuch as the one is attainable no
other way but by the other: And of what kind this connection is, I am now to
show. And in short, It is easy forus to apprehend that this connection is not
natural and necessary but ordinate, not such as does necessarily result from
the nature of the things themselves that are here connected, but such as has
its foundation in the gracious ordination and appointment of God. For it is
sufficiently evident to any one, that does attentively and seriously consider
it, That there is no just and adequate proportion between the most diligent and
industrious Christians present service, and his future eternal reward. And so
it is no less obvious for us to conceive that the connection that is between
them is not founded in Merit, but in Free Grace. For when we have done all, we
must say we Luke 17. v. 10.
are unprofitable Servants, we have done only that which was our duty to do.
And it is most absurd for any one to think to merit any thing by the payment of
a just Debt. And therefore the Scripture speaks of eternal life under the
notion of a Gift, as obtained only by the free donation of God, and not as a
possession accruing to us by any desert of our own; whereas, on the other hand,
that eternal death, which is the just punishment of Sin is called Wages, as
being no more than what it does most justly deserve. Romans 6. 23. For the Wages
of Sin is death: But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord. And so the Reward of the eternal inheritance is several times in
Scripture under the Title of Mercy: As the Apostle prayed for Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1. 18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find Mercy of the Lord at that
day. And so we are exhorted to keep our selves in the love of God, looking for
the Mercy of our Jude v. 21.
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And therefore it is manifest that the
connection that is between the Christians service and reward, his Course and
his Crown, is not founded in merit, but in the free Grace and undeserved Love
of God in Christ; to which alone that gracious Promise or Covenant is entirely
owing, whereby he has been pleased to establish an immutable order between
them, so as that the one shall be infallibly consequent upon the other.

But the connection is never the less firm or certain for being so founded as
it is, but rather the more so; For the Covenant of Grace, which is the more
immediate ground and foundation of it, is an everlasting Covenant, a covenant
not 2 Samuel 23 v. 5.
only ordered in all things, but also sure: Forasmuch as the divine eternal
veracity is engaged to make good every Article of it to as many as have
regularly laid hold upon it, and by an hearty compliance with its conditions
come to have a real interest in it. For although God was unlimitedly free before
he made the promise, and established his Gracious Covenant with us; yet that
being once done, he is obliged, for the honor of his Truth and Righteousness,
to make it good. And so though in strictness he can owe nothing to us, he is a
Debtor to his own Promise. And at the last day he will be glorified not only as
the free and magnificent Donor of all the Treasures of Heaven, but also as the
God of Truth in fulfilling all the exceeding great and precious Promises that
he 2 Pet. 1. v. 4.
has made unto his faithful Servants. And therefore Unto them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, he will
not fail to render eternal Life.

And having thus, with as much brevity as the Subject could well admit,
finished what I proposed to speak doctrinally from this Text of Scripture; All
that now remains, is to make some application of what has been said, unto our
selves. And

1. From hence we learn with what magnanimity and nobleness of Spirit true
living Christianity does inspire those in whom it takes place; elevating and
raising their minds and hearts above this perishing World, and all its fading
transitory enjoyments: Steadily inclining them to seek those things that are
above; Col. 3. v. 1.
insomuch that nothing lower than heavenly glory and immortal honor can now
content them, or compose their Desires into a complacential Rest and
satisfaction. While others, that are acted by the forbid abject and base Spirit
of this World, lie grovelling in the dust of this earth, drudging and toyling
for what is only accommodate unto their mortal part; the living Christian,
being made alive to God through Romans 6. v. 11.
Jesus Christ his Lord, and having received not the Spirit of this World, but
the Spirit that is from God, is continually 1 Cor. 2. v. 12.
aspiring upwards in heavenly thoughts, desires and aims, ever seeking for
glory, and honor, and immortality, till he comes to the actual fruition of all
in eternal life.

2. What has been said may serve also to discover to us the preposterous folly
of their presumptuous hopes, who think at last to obtain eternal life, though
they take no care to seek it in that way which the Gospel does prescribe, and
in which only it is to be found, even by a patient continuance in well-doing.
Heaven and eternal happiness are promised to none as an absolute irrespective
Gift, but as a Reward consequent upon service; And therefore whosoever are
careless and unconcerned about the duty and service of the present state, will
be sure to sall short of the glory and felicity of the future: And then the
higher their presumptuous and groundless hopes have been raised, the greater
will their shame and disappointment be when they and their hopes shall perish
together.

3. The firm and certain connection which the gracious Promise and Covenant of
God has made and settled between a patient continuance in well-doing here, and
the enjoyment of eternal life hereafter, may further serve for the comfort and
encouragement of all his sincere and faithful Servants under all the
difficulties and hardships, afflictions and sorrows, exercises and Trials,
which they undergo here in the course of their obedience. He that has obtained
a clear prospect by faith of the invisible World, and of the glory, honor and
incorruption, which are to be eternally enjoyed there by all that regularly
seek after them here; and is withal conscious to himself that he is one of that
happy number, can easily see through the darkest cloud, and discern a
comfortable end of all his present troubles. And therefore his Faith mightily
animating his Hope, and his Hope proportionably strengthening his Patience, he
does not faint in the day of Adversity, nor is he weary of well-doing; Prove.
24. v. 10.
because he is sufficiently assured that the time is short, and so that it will
be but yet a little while before all Tears shall be wiped away from his eyes,
and all Isa. 25. v. 8.
grief and sorrow banished from his heart, and endless Joys succeed in their
Rev. 7. v. 17.
room.

4. The same consideration may serve as a sweet and comfortable allay to the
sorrows of such as are mourning for the death of such of their near and dear
Relatives or Friends, who in their lifetime gave sufficient proof of their
exemplary care and diligence to persevere in such a steady course of duty and
obedience as has eternal life and glory connected with it. It is indeed very
selfish and unbecoming our Christian hope with immoderate and unallayed grief
and sorrow to lament the death of such: For as much as although their absence, and
departure from us be very sensibly our great loss, their presence with the Lord
is in an infinitely higher degree their gain. And therefore methinks even
natural affection, which makes us wish well to our dear Relatives, especially
when sanctified by Grace and assisted by faith, should give some check to our
immoderate grief for the Removal of such of them from us by the stroke of
death, concerning whom we have such comfortable and well-grounded hopes. For
why should we grieve at or regret their happy advancement unto that immortal
glory and honor which they had been long seeking for, but could never reach
before?

5. What we have heard, may serve both for our direction and excitation unto
such a regular and steady course of obedience here, that we may all obtain
eternal life hereafter. Let us endeavor therefore to have that Truth, which
has been this day suggested to us out of the Word of God, so deeply impressed
upon our very hearts, that the thoughts of it may continually dwell with us,
and have a constant influence upon us, by the grace of God, for the engageing
us to the most strenuous diligence and constancy in prosecuting our present
duty, as that which has by the divine ordination and appointment a direct
tendency to our future eternal felicity; Let us never forget that the only way
to glory and honor, and a blessed immortality, is a patient continuance in
well doing. And so let none of us any longer indulge our selves in the neglect
of that upon which our eternal welfare does so evidently depend; but let the
time past suffice us to have wrought the Wills of the Flesh, and to have
misemployed the active strength and vigor of our Souls in minding only earthly
things. And now let us resolve, by the grace of God, to call off our hearts and
affections from this lower World, and all its perishing vanities, and so set
our selves in good earnest to seek those things that are above: Minding the
great Duties of Christianity with a more serious care than ever we have
hitherto exercised about them: Making True practical Religion more our
business, as it is what will turn to the best account unto us at last: O let
none of us be guilty of such preposterous folly in the great concernments of
our immortal Souls, as we would be ashamed of in the management of our secular
affairs, separating the Way from the End, as if the one might be attained
without a serious and due attendance to the other. The Way in which we must
seek for future glory and happiness, if ever we would have it, is plainly
delineated to us in the Text: And all those that are gone before us, and have
actually received the Reward of the eternal inheritance, both sought and
obtained it in this way and no other, even by a patient continuance in
well-doing. It does therefore concern us to tread in their steps, that we also
may in due time, and in our appointed order come to the fruition of the same
happiness with them. And so my earnest exhortation to you is in the words of
the Apostle, Heb. 6. 11, 12. That every one of you do show the same diligence
to the full assurance of hope unto the end; that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.

And here for your further excitation I shall now, on this solemn occasion, set
before you the illustrious and worthy Example of our deservedly honored, and
lately deceased Friend, whose immortal part is now with Christ. For She was
indeed One upon whose Heart and Life the divine Spirit and Grace had in most
conspicuous and shining lineaments drawn that excellent and noble Character, by
which the Heirs of Blessedness are described in the Text; And to that in the
several parts of it I shall principally confine my self in the following
Account that I shall give you of her: Wherein my more immediate design and aim
is to show you how eminently this Text of Scripture was exemplified in her;
that you may thence be the more confirmed in your comfortable and well-grounded
assurance of her being now happily possessed of that Eternal Life, which by the
divine designation and appointment belongs to all that bear that Character. And
therefore not to say any thing of her natural endowments, either intellectual
or moral, although they were such as made the Grace of God to shine with the
greater luster in her discreet and wellordered conversation; I shall speak only
to those that were manifestly divine and supernatural. And for as much as my
happy acquaintance with her did commence too late to capacitate me to give you
any particular account of the more early impressions of the Divine Grace upon
her Soul, or the more distant Passages of her pious Life; and that I may keep
my self as remote as may be from all suspicion of flattery and falsehood in the
payment of this my last solemn Respect unto her Memory: I shall only speak of
what I have had the peculiar advantage of observing my self for the space of
almost seven years that I have (in two distinct periods) lived in her Family.
And I must have been very inobservant indeed if in all that time I had not
taken notice of what was so visible both in her habitual Temper and constant
carriage exactly answering to every part of that descriptive Character of the
true Christain, which I have been this day unfolding to you; of which I shall
give you a distinct and impartial account in the following Particulars. And

1. Her habitual heavenly-mindedness was such a shining Excellency in her as
could not be hid under that Veil of Humility and Modesty which was her
constant ornament; but did discover it self in an holy contempt of this lower
World and all its perishing Enjoyments, in a steady Aim directed unto higher
and more noble Objects, and in a continual aspiration after glory, and honor,
and immortality. The divine Grace had inspired her with that true magnanimity
and nobleness of Spirit, that her Desires and Hopes could by no means be
confined within the narrow limits of Time, nor be long together held down to
sublunary and terrene objects: And therefore her Soul would be often mounting
upward upon the Wings of Faith into the bright Regions of light and glory above
to contemplate the eternal and glorious Objects that are there; And more
especially toward the end of her Time, having been observed for some months
before her Death to have her thoughts much exercised about the State and
Enjoyments of Heaven: And particularly about separate Souls mutual knowledge of
and converse with one another; taking occasion very frequently to discourse
upon that sublime Subject, when in company with such as she apprehended might
be assistant to her in her endeavors to attain more distinct and clear notions
about it. Of which she now understands more than any one here could tell her.

2. The earnestness of her desires after heavenly glory and felicity was no
less conspicuous than the steadiness of her Aims principally directed that way.
She did not only set this glory, honor and immortality before her as the great
Mark at which she aimed, but was continually pressing forwards toward it,
seeking after these things with the most close and strenuous application of
mind. And that more espeically in fervent prayer, wherein she was wont to
breath out her very Soul to God every day: For as her natural Temper inclined
her to the love of Solitude, so Grace had taught her to make the best
improvement of her Solitary hours, which she was careful to employ not only in
diligent reading and devout meditation, but especially in secret prayer;
whereby she maintained and kept up a continual commerce with Heaven, which many
a time brought her in very rich Returns in divine communications and
manifestations. Nor was she content to seek alone for such great things as
Grace and Glory are; and therefore would often with earnest importunity
be-speak the joint-assistance of her more intimate Christian-friends, and
especially of such Ministers of her acquaintance as she could be most free
with, in managing this work; that so her Addresses to God might be the more
solemn by others assisting her therein, and Dedicating several hours together
unto that sacred service, as has been frequently done at her Request, and
principally upon her account in her own house.

3. She was no less careful about the regular way of seeking for glory, and
honor, and immortality, than she was earnest and zealous in the work it self.
For she was better instructed in the great Doctrines and Duties of Christinity,
and in the Method of obtaining Salvation by Jesus Christ, as it is revealed in
the Gospel, than to separate the Way from the End, or foolishly to think of
attaining the one without an heedful walking in the other. And therefore it was
her daily Study and sincere Endeavor in every thing to walk by rule; not
abusing the Grace of the Gospel as an encouragement to licentiousness, but
learning from it to deny all ungodliness and wordly lusts, and to live Tit. 2.
v. 11, 12. and 13.
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World; so looking for that
blessed hope, etc. Laboring to have her conversation such in all respects as
might Phil. 1. v. 27.
become the Gospel; and her behavior answerable to her hope. And therefore it
was her conscientious care, and earnest endeavor to be seriously diligent and
constant in performing all the Duties of a Christian, both in her personal and
relative capacities. And whereas in the latter she sometimes found some
difficulties (under such concurrent circumstances as need not be mentioned)
which did unavoidably discover such of her Infirmities as otherwise might have
been hid: I have this to add from certain knowledge, that they were by none
more deeply resented, or more sadly bewailed than by her self. For when at any
time, upon some slender provocation, the natural quickness of her Temper did on
a sudden betray and hurry her into some more hasty, passionate or indecent
expressions, they were soon followed with such an indignation against her self
as did more than bear proportion thereunto, and therefore might very justly (as
I doubt not but it did in a great measure) make atonement for them unto such as
were most nearly and sensibly touched by them. All which I should have passed
over in silence, had I not considered that what I have mentioned on the one
part might perhaps have been observed by many, unto whom what is said on the
other, in her just vindication, may be altogether unknown. And what I have thus
impartially hinted amounting to sufficient evidence that her Infirmities of
this kind were no other than were very well consistent with sincerity and a
good conscience both toward God and toward Man; I must after all in justice to
her Memory give her this general Character, (which all that knew her more
intimately will say she justly deserved:) That she was a loving, discreet and
prudent Wife, a careful, affectionate and tenderhearted Mother, a faithful
compassionate and beneficent friend; and, in all these respects and many more,
a most exemplary Christian. And then.

4. To complete the Character, her Patience and Perseverance were no less
eminent than her care and diligence, in well-doing. She was not only
unweariedly active and constant in doing, but eminently submissive and patient
in suffering the Will of her heavenly Father. And therefore under all her
painful and frequently renewed Exercises and Trials, which indeed were very
grievous, (especially for the last twelve Months of her Life,) she did with
unrepining submission, and as much cheerfulness as was consistent with her
acute pains, bow to the Sovereign disposing hand of God; resigning her Will to
his so as never to have been heard all the time to charge him foolishly in any
the least murmuring complaint against him under what in his paternal wisdom he
saw meet to lay upon her. Yea in the very midst of her weariness and pain when
her eyes have been held waking, and her sleep has fled from her, she would
often express the grateful sense which she had of the singular Mercy of God
toward her, in the many instances wherein it pleased him to intermix it with
her Affliction: Considering how much better it was with her, under her severest
exercises, than with many others of Gods dear Children, who, by reason of their
mean Circumstances in the World, could not be furnished with those external
helps and accomodations, which by the distinguishing Goodness of God she
enjoyed. Which she would often speak of with great compassion to others, and no
less thankfulness to God upon her own account; and especially in the late cold
and pinching season, wherein such were exposed to very great hardship as had
sickness added to poverty. And thus the excellent Character, that the Apostle
gives us of the Heirs of Heaven in the Text, was in every part of it eminently
found in her; who was indeed One who by patient continuance in well-doing
sought for glory and honor and immortality. And then I may add, That,

5. Agreeably hereunto her Faith and Hope were for the most part strong and
lively, (except at such times as she was under clouds of Melancholy arising
from bodily distemper, which made all things look dark unto her while it
prevailed) But most perceptibly did she improve in their strength and vigor
for some months before the expiration of her Time; whereby she did not only
obtain a comfortable victory in a great degree over the Fear of Death, which
had formerly been a very grievous exercise unto her: but was also greatly
supported and encouraged under her continued remaining Troubles of Life. For as
there were many comfortable Words in the Holy Scriptures whereon God had caused
her to hope, so by strengthening and increasing her Faith, he enabled her more
closely to apply them to her self, and so to take the comfort of them when she
needed it most. As under one of the last Returns of her Distempers, she did
very frequently revolve in her mind those words of afflicted but believing Job,
Chap. 23. v. 10. When he has tried me I shall come forth as gold: And God
inabling her to mix that word with faith, made it both at that time and
afterward very useful to her. And so in her last sickness, even the night
before her death, after she had been exercised with grievous pain the whole
night and day preceding, having a short interval of ^ase for a few moments
while I was with her, I observed her to repeat unto her self several times with
great complacency (as I apprehended from the pleasant tone of her voice though
but low) those encouraging words of the devout Psalmist, Psalm. 42. 8. The Lord
will command his loving kindness in the daytime, and in the night his Song
shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life: Adding in the close,
Lord, thou art the God of my life, natural life, spiritual life, yea eternal
life; and therefore my prayer is unto thee, After which her pain and sickness
again returning, she grew more and more apprehensive of her near approaching
dissolution; and after a short space said to me, as I stood by her bedside, I
have a dark valley to pass through: Whereupon encouraging her to hope in God, I
said to her, The Father of lights will be with you there, and he will enlighten
your darkness; to which she very sweetly replied, and turn the shadow of Death
into the morning. And not long after she spoke to me (in these or the like
words) I bless God I do not at all doubt my eternal Interest, but it is some
trouble to me that I have yet so little of the Joy of Gods Salvation: As at
another time (which whether it were before or after the former I do not exactly
remember) she said with some apparent Concern to a dear Friend standing by,
What! Come so near to the confines of a glorious eternity, and yet have no
clearer prospect of the glory of it! But although that unspeakable and glorious
Joy, which does sometimes attend the lively exercises of Faith in the children
of God in their last hours, was (as you may perceive by these hints) withheld
from her; She was not without Solid and great peace in believing; which of the
two the more substantial though not the more delectable enjoyment: And I make no
question but that now she has the other also in a better way as well as in a
greater proportion than ever any had it in this World, even fullness of Joy in
the divine presence, and pleasures for evermore. For faith and patience having
both had their perfect work in her, she is now gone to inherit the promises in
Eternal Life.

And now, my Christian Friends, the greatest honor and respect that we can pay
to her blessed Memory (which I hope will yet live among us) is to follow her
Worthy Example, every one seeking for glory and honor and immortality in that
way wherein she sought and has now obtained all. Let me therefore earnestly
recommend this unto you all; (as I desire also to charge it upon my self) And
more especially to you her nearest surviving Relatives, who had a greater
advantage than any others by your nearness to her most exemplary course of life
as an excellent pattern for you to imitate. And therefore as she has done
worthily in serving God and her Generation according to his Will, and now Rev.
14. v. 13. Heb. 4. v. 9.
rests from her labors in that everlasting Sabbatism which remains for the
People of God; (into which she entered on the close of that day of the week,
which is not unfitly called by us the Christian Sabbath.) Let it be your care
every one to do likewise.

And more particularly let me address my self unto you her hopeful Offspring,
her dear Children (for whom she put up many a Prayer to God that he would make
you all his Children.) And let me earnestly exhort you never to forget what a
Mother you had; what excellent instruction and wholesome counsel she often gave
you; and what a teaching Example she set before you, by which being now dead
she yet speaks to you: And surely it is your great Concern, as you love your
souls, to hearken to the Voice and to understand the Language of it. There are
some things which Actions do speak out louder than any Verbal Expressions; and
certainly if you have the heart attentively to consider and understand it, you
cannot be unapprehensive that your Mothers Example calls aloud upon you all to
mind the great Concernments of your Souls with serious care and diligence as
she did; to get your thoughts and affections abstracted and drawn off from this
World, and fixedly set upon things above, as hers were; to be diligent and
industrious in the careful and conscientious performance of all Christian
Duties, both relative and personal, as she was; to be constant and serious in
attending upon Ordinances, there seeking the appointed food of your Souls,
where she both often sought and found it; to dedicate some part of your
Precious Time every day to reading the Scriptures and other good Books, devout
Meditation, and secret Prayer, which you know was her constant Course as long
as her health and strength would permit; in a word, to make serious Religion
your main business, as it was most manifestly hers: And if you will hearken to
this Call in conjunction with the Calls of GOD's Word, and that Monitory
Providence that you are now under, so as heedfully to tread in your pious
Mothers steps, as Dear Children following her in those things wherein show was
a follower of God, and persisting in this Course to the end of your Life: Then
let me tell you for your Comfort, that although Death has at present made a
separation between her and you, it shall be but for a short season; and then
you shall again live together in the glorious and bright Mansions of Heaven,
and in the beatifick Vision and Fruition of God and Christ, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
A Funeral Sermon. By Robert Fleming, V. D. M. Preached in the Afternoon.
Eccles. vii. 1. -- Better is the Day of Death, than the Day of ones Birth.
AS all the Faculties of Man's Soul are become miserably depraved and corrupted
by reason of Sin: So in particular the leading and directive Faculty, the Mind
or Intellect is signally so. For besides the blindness and ignorance of men in
things natural, there is nothing more apparent, than that universal darkness
and stupidity which they are under, as to their apprehensions of things
spiritual and eternal. For although there seems to be remanent upon the minds of
all men naturally some (...) or imperfect r^dera of the true impressions of
good and evil, and some secret Persuasions of a sovereign Being, to which all
things owe their original and continuance; yet alas, what sad Conceptions do
men entertain of things of an immaterial and and spiritual nature; as appears
not only from the Writings of the more learned and ingenious Heathens, but from
innumerable and daily Instances even in the midst of the Meridian Light of the
Gospel: So that constant Experience does, in this matter, sufficiently confirm
Scripture-Testimony, that the natural man knows not the things of the Spirit of
God, as requiring a subjective as well as objective spiritual Light to discern
them by.

However, this is one of God's ends in Revealing his Word to us, that we may
(through his Blessing upon pains and industry) attain to rectified Notions and
Idaeas of things so excellent in themselves, and so momentous to be rightly
known by us. And, as this is the scope of the whole Scripture, to bring Life
and Immortality to Light unto us; so particularly of this Book of the wise and
in quisitive Solomon; who having undertaken a speculative Journey into all the
Regions of sublunary Enjoyments, returns an experienced Ecclesiastes or
Preachers of those things that he thought might be of universal use to be
known. And therefore having rubbed off the fine Varnish and gaudy Paint of
Earthly Objects, (with which they insinuate themselves at first view as
beautified to our vain imiginations;) he here represents them impartially to
our Reason, as they are in their own natures and usefulness to us.

Of this we might adduce many instances, if need were: But we go no farther
than the Words before us; wherein we may observe a Rectification of a twofold
Mistake, that we are apt to fall into. For, first, whereas men usually prefer
Riches to a good Name; we are here instructed that a good Name is better, and
more valuable, than precious ointment, i. e. than the fatness of the world, and
the affluence of all earthly wealth and riches. For thus I take the word,
according to Prove. 22. 1. (which seems to be a comment on this, or a plain
account of what is here figuratively imported) For precious ointment was
esteemed of old amongst the most valuable things of the Treasures of Princes,
as we see Isa. 39. 2. And hence it is, that Prove. 15. 30. A good name is said
to make the bones sat.

And, again, whereas Men generally prefer Life to Death; Solomon here tells us,
that we are greatly mistaken in the Case; for, that, upon the contrary, the day
of Death is much to be preferred to the day of ones Birth. According to which
Position, he goes on to show that the house of Mourning is better than the
house of Feasting, and sorrow preferable to Laughter, v. 2, 3, etc.

It is the second of these only, that I am directed to consider at this time,
viz.

That the day of Death is better than the day of ones Birth.

A strange Paradox! and enough to amaze the minds and thoughts of all such as
mind earthly things, and who have not attained to have their interior Senses
spiritually exercised to discern spiritual things. Nay I am apt to think, that
many even serious Christians may find it difficult to reconcile their thoughts
to this Doctrine. And therefore, on all hands, I foresee Objections.

What! (will the Atheist and Antiscripturist say) is it better not to be than
to be?

Is it possible (will the carnal Philosopher and Rationalist object) that the
destruction of nature it self should be preferable to its Being and Continuance.

Nay even many poor Christians will be ready to tell me; that it seems very
strange to them to prefer Death, which owes its Original to Sin, and is our
enemy, and the last to be destroyed, to prefer (I say) this to Life it self,
wherein we have opportunity to serve God, and do good to our selves and others.

And methinks I hear a multitude cry out at the hearing of this (and many such
Worldlings there are) What! Death better than Life: Here Is strange Doctrine
indeed! What! Leave all our Earthly Comforts, Friends and Possessions; and that
for Death and the Grave: who can have Faith to believe such Doctrine as this?

Well Friends, here is that which may silence all your Doubts, and answer all
your Questions as to this matter, if you will give ear to God himself; that
Death is preferable to Birth. But I must supersede the satisfying you, as to
your particular Scruples in this matter, till I shall have come to the
Improvement of the Doctrine, which I must now (lest I act preposterously)
previously inquire into.

And here, though the Words are in themselves so very plain, that I see no
momentous Variation among Critics in the translating of them: Yet I find some
considerable difference in the Sentiments of Expositors, as to the meaning of
them. For some understand the Text of all Mankind, with respect only to this
present Life, laying aside all Consideration of the future State; as many
Passages in this Book are undoubtedly to be understood. And if so, then the
meaning only is; That if We consider the Vanities and Miseries of Mankind in
this World (abstracting from the future) it is better to go out of it by Death,
than come into it by Birth.

But others understand it rather, as specially referring to the death of good
men, who are thereby not only freed from troubles here, but instated in true
happiness and felicity hereafter. And this sense, as it appears more consonant
to the tenor of Scripture Truth and Phraseology; so likewise seems not
obscurely to be hinted here, from its close connection with the preceding part
of the Verse. For it is the death of him that has a good Name, that seems to be
here spoken of, and whose Death is justly preferred to his Birth: For a good
Name does unquestionably suppose true worth and virtue, as its Foundation and
Basis. And though the Epithet of good be not expressed in the Hebrew, but simply
a name, which is preferred to precious ointment: Yet that is so far from
lessening the sense, that it express it with the greater Emphasis; as
insinuating, that wicked men have no name at all, properly speaking.

It is chiefly in this sense, that I conceive the proper meaning and scope of
the words to lie; though I would not totally exclude the former, by reason of the
largeness of the expression: for I think Scripture is to be understood in the
largest sense, where the words and scope will naturally bear it, without
contorsion and straining. And therefore the Doctrinal Proposition that I here
lay down, as the foundation of my ensuing Discourse, is this; That as the day
of Death is prefeferable to the day of ones Birth, with respect to all; when
the parallel is only in reference to this Life, considered as miserable,
abstracting from the Future: So far more is the day of death preferable to the
day of ones Birth, with respect to the Saints; when the parallel is not only in
reference to This Life, but inclusive also of the Future.

In which General Proposition, as we may see both senses of the Text conjoined,
as being no way opposite, dissonant, or exclusive the one of the other: So we
may observe them so conjoined, as notwithstanding to remain Distinct. And
therefore we must of necessity disjoyn them again in order to a distinct
handling. And though it is the second sense of the words, that I principally
intend to consider and prosecute: Yet, since it may be of use to premise some
brief Reflection upon the former; I shall therefore distinctly and apart
propose both senses in two Propositions; which are nothing else but the two
parts of the preceding General Doctrine.

First Proposition.
The Day of Death is preferable to the Day of ones Birth, with respect to All;
when the parallel is only in reference to this Life, considered as miserable,
abstracting from the Future.
I suppose there is none that considerately and seriously ponders this
Proposition, but will easily assent unto it; since I do not here barely and
nakedly reflect on the notions of Birth and Death in themselves, with respect
to Life simply considered; but only draw the parallel between them with respect
to Life as miserable, or (to speak plainly) with respect to the miserys of
Life. And I suppose none can duly consider this; but must instantly be
enforced to prefer the exit from Misery, to the intrat into it: Which is all
that, (according to this sense of the Text,) is understood by Death and Birth.

For let us but suppose, that we were under a necessity to go a dangerous,
tedious and afflictive Journey, wherein we were to encounter with all manner of
Miseries, pains and troubles; and it were then proposed to us, Whether we did
not prefer the End and Close of it, to the Beginning of it, and our Entry upon
it? I reasonably conclude (abstracting from all consideration of the place
whether that Journey might lead us,) that our Answer would be in the
Affirmative; from the Melancholy Idea and Representation of such a Journey.

And now, what else is our Life, in this Miserable world, but such a tedious
and afflictive Peregrination: For we are born to trouble, as the sparks fly
upward. No sooner do we enter by birth into the Society of the Living, but our
Infant Cries and Tears become a sad prelude to a succeeding sorrowful scene. Our
Childhood and Youth are wholly vanity, and spent in such a way, as we seem
rather to breath than live: And our propensity then to extravagancy and sin
oblige our best Friends to keep us under the Pedagogy of necessary, though to us
afflictive, Correction. And when ever we arrive to something of further
Maturity and judgment, we are immediately beset with cares and incumberances,
the inseparable Companions of worldly Business: Then do our hearts run out
impetuously after the Trifles of time, the nick-nam'd Honors, Profits and
Pleasures thereof; the Game which Ambitious, Covetous and Wanton Spirits fly
at. The fine varnish and gaudy show of gilded dross and dung takes us; and
after it are our endeavors bent. Here, cares to get this worlds dross, cares
to keep it, cares to increase it, and cares to dispose of it, eat out the best
part of our little time. And yet (notwithstanding our rising up early, sitting
up late and eating the bread of sorrows,) the defectiveness of the creature,
and its transitoriness, thwarts our hopes and expectations. Besides, that often a
secret curse from God blasts our endeavors, and breaks our measures in all
that we do. Riches and Estates take to themselves wings and fly away as an
Eagle toward Heaven, to receive a new disposal: And the fair image and shadow
of Honor, Grandeur and Pleasure passes away and leaves our minds perplexed
and troubled for the disappointment. Thus do we seek for the living among the
dead, and satisfaction and contentment where it is not to be found. Distance
and separation from our best Friends eat out the seeming comfort we might enjoy
in their company. Wants, pains, sickness, sorrows, fears and disappointments
swallow up any little pleasure that we meet with in the world, and drown the
sense of enjoyments otherwise comfortable. And besides all these things that
happen to our selves immediately; we are oftimes called to be sad spectators of
the many Tragedies acted in the world. We see National and Church Calamities,
and Family and Personal Distresses: And ofttimes the nearness of our Relation
to others obliges us, by something more than Sympathy, to suffer with them.

And now, all these things being impartially reflected on; if we return with
Solomon (chapter 4. 1, 2, 3.) and consider the oppressions that are done under the
sun, and how destitute, not only the Oppressed, but the Oppressors also, are of
True comfort, on that account: I say, considering these things we may see
ground with him to praise the Dead, rather than the Living; yea to conclude
that better is he than both these, who has not yet been, because he has not
seen the evil work which is done under the sun.

Object. How can we prefer Death to Birth and consequently to Life? Since even
Solomon himself chapter 9. v. 4, 5. Does plainly give the preference to Life; for a
living Dog is better (says he) than a Dead Lion, etc.

Answ. It is not strange or uncommon, for one and the same thing to come under
different considerations at some times: And when it does so, it may be very
proper accordingly to deduce quite different, yea and opposite, conclusions
from thence. And therefore it needs not seem strange that Solomon speaks of
Life, in chapter 9. in another Dialect, than he does here in my Text: Since he
reflects here and there upon the same things under quite different
considerations. For 1. in chapter 9. he compares Life and Death in their own
natures; and therefore has all the reason in the world to give the preference
to Life, as being so illustrious an effect of divine Wisdom and Power. But here
Solomon, does not compare these Opposites in themselves, but in an accidental
consideration only, with reference to the troubles and miseries our Lives here
are exposed to, by reason of sin: And therefore makes such an Inference hence,
as we have explained. 2. Solomon in chapter 9. does not only consider Life in it
self, but under the Notion also, of being the way and means, through the right
improvement whereof men may attain to happiness hereafter: Whereas those that
are dead are put out of capacity of doing any thing further for their Soul.
For, says he, to him that is joined to the living there is hope; but the dead
have no more portion in any thing that is done under the Sun. Which therefore
seems to be nothing else, but that which he more clearly unfolds, v. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, because there is
no work, etc. But now in this place Solomon speaks of life, abstracting from
its relation and use this way, and considers it merely in reference to its
miseries and troubles: And therefore his Inference here, is nothing but what
natively results from such a consideration thereof. 3. Solomon in the 9th chapter
seems to me to speak of Life and Death with respect to wicked men chiefly, if
not only: And in this respect, it is certain, Life is far preferable to Death;
since (as he says, v. 10.) There is no preparation work to be done after death
for the good of the Soul; whereas whilst there is life there is still hope that
wicked men may repent and reform, before it be too late; as he intimates v. 4.
and according to the old saying, Sperandum est vivis, non est spes ulla
sepultis. But now (as was said before) it seems not obscurely to be hinted
here; that we are to understand the words of my Text, as refering, if not only,
yet specially to the Saints, who through grace and holiness, have attained
worthily to deserve a good name. And this leads me to a Transition from the
first to the second and (as I judge) more native Meaning of the words, which I
lay down to be distinctly considered in the following Thesis.

Second Proposition.
The Day of Death is far preferable to the Day of ones Birth, with respect to
the Saints; when the parallel is not only in reference to this Life, but
inclusive also of the Future.
I don't say, that at all times and upon all accounts the day of Death is
actually to be prefered to the day of Birth and to Life: Since sometimes it may
be our duty to choose Life before Death. For even Paul himself, after a struggle
with himself on this account, whether he should prefer death or life, Phil. 1.
23. 24. having impartially weighed the reasons on both sides, concludes v. 25.
That considering the usefulness of his life to the Church on earth, it was for
the present to be preferred to death.

Neither do I say here, that the Saints attain always to prefer death to life.
No, alas; there are but few comparatively that get this length. Even an
Hezekiah will weep s^re at the thoughts of death, and chatter like a crane or
swallow, and mourn as a dove on that account, Isa. 38. 3, 14. And a David also
will on this account at sometimes be made to cry out. Psalm. 39. 13. O spare me
that I may recover strength, etc.

But that which I assert here in the Proposition laid down, is; That the Death
of a Saint is preferable to his Birth, because of the misery of this present
Life, and the happiness of the Life to come. For if, (as we showed before)
death be preferable to birth, merely because the comforts of this life are so
over-ballanced and weighed down by the sorrows of time: Then surely the
conclusion is much more strong, when we consider the glory and happiness of the
future Life, and lay it also in the scale over and above. For who then can
withstand the force of this Truth; that the entry upon happiness, which is by
Death, is much to be preferred to the entry upon a miserable life here, which
is by Birth.

And, as this Proposition so expressly Asserted in the Text, thus explained,
seems so clear in it self: So a more distinct consideration of things, will put
it beyond all further doubt and controversy. And therefore I came now to Prove
the Point further. Which being done, I shall proceed to Improve it.

The Proof.
And now to Prove this Point, I shall endeavor to do it by showing the
preferableness of the one to the other, upon the account given; and that in two
things: viz. 1. By explaining the Terms here used of Birth and Death; 2. By
considering more directly the Present and Future Life, that these two Periods
of Birth and Death enter the Saints upon.

And first I shall briefly reflect upon the Terms of Birth and Death. And here,
(as in many other things) I find a lameness and defectiveness in Words, by
which the true Notions of Things are often clouded and almost lost. And
therefore, though I take not upon me to rectify these terms as vulgarly used:
Yet the present subject necessarily leads me to some rectification of the
notions of the things themselves, which we have it may be from education too
easily imbibusd. For if in ordinary converse it be a Rule, quod loquendum cum
Vulgo; I think we may well subjoyn in serious Inquiries into things, quod
sentiendum cum D^ctis. And though I pretend not to such rectified notions of
things, as others may have reached; yet since this falls in my way, it may not
be amiss to consider what estimate we are to make of Birth and Death with
respect to a Saint.

And (1) as to Birth; though we must consider a Saint (as all other men) to be
made up of a Soul and Body, as his two constituent parts: Yet it is the Soul
which chiefly denominates the man. Whence it is that in Scripture our bodies
are called our Tents or Tabernacles, wherein we lodge for a time; so that, though
the Body be indeed an Essential part of man, yet it is the less principal part;
since the Soul can act and live as well out of it as in it. And therefore it is
from the Original of the Soul, that the birth of man is chiefly to be reckoned,
rather than from the formation of the body. Now if accordingly we compute the
birth of a Saint; we are led to a Threefold Birth which results from the
Consideration.

The 1st. is by Creation, when the Soul of Man is at first created and placed
in the body: Which indeed carries along with it the formation of the body also;
for we cannot conceive the body to be formed as to its due perfection, with
respect to union with the Soul, till the moment of the Souls infusion therein;
if, with the Schools, I may be admitted to use such a word, who tell us of the
Soul, that creando infunditur, and insundendo creatur. But that the Soul
derives its original from Gods immediate creating it, and not ex traduce (I
speak with all deference to learned and worthy Persons of another judgment,)
may seem plain, if it were but from that one Scripture, Zech. 12. 1. especially
if we duly consider its connection with what precedes. I say then, that the
first birth of man, to speak properly, is to be reckoned from the union of the
Soul and body in the womb; (which as to priority of time seems to be
instantaneously upon the Creation of the Soul;) rather than from the Egress of
the child from thence. But since we are most taken with what is most sensible
to us; I shall not contend about words, if the thing be understood: Especially
seeing the Scripture is so calculated in its Expressions, as to use words
commonly in use, and understood by the lowest form of Christians. Only
(howsoever we use words) I am confident to say, that the Birth of Man may very
well be reckoned from the Union of Soul and Body in the womb: For whatever has
these two constituent parts of man, can be assigned to no other class but that
of Mankind.

The 2. Birth of Man, according to the Soul, is in Regeneration or Conversion:
Of which Christ speaking Joh. 3. Calls it the birth of a man from above, v. 3.
(...).

The 3. Birth is in Glorification. And this admits of a Twofold Period, viz. 1.
As to the Soul only at Death, when it separates from the Body, and becomes from
that moment perfectly freed from sin and misery, and admitted to the enjoyment
of true happiness above: For the Souls of just persons even then are said to be
made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. 2. As to Soul and Body, when reunited, at the
Resurrection, which is called the Adoption and Redemption of the Body, Romans 8.
23.

Now from all this, we may arrive to make some tolerable Estimate of that which
we commonly call the Birth and Death of a Saint. For 1. that which we commonly
call Birth, is nothing else but man's Egress from the womb, and his Ingress into
the Society of Mortals here. Now what is this, but a kind of Death; since we,
being our selves Mortal, see and converse only with Mortal Objects, as all
things external here are. Whence it is, that all man's time on earth, even from
the Evening of the Worlds Creation to the Morning of the Resurrection, is
esteemed but as one Night; as is imported Psalm. 49. 14. When the Resurrection
is Emphatically Termed the Morning, both with respect to the night of time
preceding, and the day of eternity about to succeed: And hence also our Life on
earth, is called a Sleep, wherein we rather dream of things than really
apprehend them; and out of which we are first thoroughly awaked by Death: We may
see this plainly hinted, Psalm. 17. 15. Whereas 2. that which we call commonly
Death, is nothing else but the unpinning our mortal Tabernacles, and the
manumitting us, into the immortal Regions of Light, Love, and Liberty. Of which
the great Saints in Scripture speak no otherwise, than in the familiar Dialect
of putting off a suit of old Apparel for new and more glorious ones. Thus Paul
calls it, a being unclothed as to the Body, and clothed upon by having
Mortality swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. And Peter calls it, a putting off
this his Tabernacle. 2 Ephesians. 1. 14.

Again (2) let us consider Death; the right notion whereof will become more
facile to our apprehensions, by what we have said of Life. All therefore that I
shall say of it, is, that (besides that which we commonly call so) there is a
Twofold Death, in a Spiritual sense, which falls under consideration here.

The 1. is a Death in Sin, which is entered into at our Birth into the world:
For then it is, that we come to enter upon the Stage of a sinful world. We are
shapen in sin and conceived in iniquity: And our Birth into the world is rather
a kind of Death than Life; since we are exposed thereby to sinning and
suffering, to vanity and vexation of Spirit.

The 2. is a Death to Sin; which is entered upon at the dissolution of the tie
between Soul and body; upon which account it is called Death. But, though it
disunite soul and body for a time; yet it may rather be called the Birth of the
Soul, in as far as it translates it from all manner of sin and misery. It is
true indeed (as was said before) Regeneration is a kind of new Birth to the
Soul, in as far, as it delivers us from the death of sin in a great measure.
Yet, since that is but a deliverance in part; therefore it is by death only
that we come totally to dye to sin. Though I grant that this death to sin comes
to be more illustriously displayed at the great period of the Resurrection:
When the last enemy Death comes to be Totally destroyed and swallowed up in
Victory. 1 Cor. 15. 54. So that from hence we may see, that our Birth into this
world, is a Death in Sin: whereas our Dissolution, or the separation of soul
and body is properly a Death to Sin; or a manumission and freedom given us both
from Sin and misery.

Wherefore, from all that has been said in the Premises, as to both these
Terms of Birth and Death; we may not injustly invert the notion of them, with
respect to the Saints; and say, That the day of our Birth into this world, was
the day of our Death, in sin, ignorance, vanity and misery: Whereas the day of
our Death, may be justly reputed to be the day of our Birth, into the world of
purity, knowledge, light and rest.

But 2dly. I come now to consider what that thing we call Life is, which the
two Periods of Birth and Death enter us upon, and with respect to which we can
only pass a right judgment of the preferableness of either of them: And truly
as to this matter, we are very much in the dark, taking that to be life which
has little more of it, than the very show and appearance. Life is a more noble
thing than we imagine, when considered in its right notion and idea. We talk of
a vegetative and sensitive Life. But if in Philosophy these must needs creep in
as distinct species thereof: Yet Divinity will refine our thoughts of it a
little further. For since Life is one of the glorious Attributes of the supreme
Being, who designs himself ofttimes the Living God, we must needs conceive
something high and sublime therein. And as God is the fountain of all Life to
others, so it is only in him that We live. So that to speak properly, we have
no life in our selves, our breath being in our nostrils, and we depending every
moment on God for new supplies thereof. Therefore we find it the Property of
God only to have Life in him-self, yea and such a Property as is only
communicable to Christ, Joh. 5. 26. For as the Father has Life in himself; so
has he given to the Son to have Life in himself. And therefore this is spoken
of with respect to Christ, with a special mark of Observation, Joh. 1. 4. In
him was Life.

But I shall not run further than the Text, for the Ground of my notion of
Life. For we may plainly perceive by the very Terms of Birth and Death in the
words, that there is some Life here imported, with respect to which, as plainly
and necessarily presupposed, these periodical terms are made use of. Now this
Life herein presupposed must either be the present Life, or that which is to
come. If it be the present Life, then it is apparent, that Solomon had very
mean and low thoughts of it, since he prefers the destruction of it by Death to
the commencing it at first by Birth. And those very mean thoughts which he has
of it, are a plain Indication, that it does not deserve the noble designation
of Life; as being rather a shadow thereof, than the thing it self. But if it be
the Future Life that is here imported, then it presents us with a noble Idea of
true Life indeed, as inclusive of true Happiness and Felicity, and lets us see
with what good Reason Death is here preferred to Birth. But though this last
sense gives us the fairest prospect of Life, and the most solid ground of the
wise Solomon's determination of this case; yet I think, we are to include both
these sorts of Life as presupposed clearly in the Text. For as Solomon runs the
parallel expressly between Birth and Death: So his doing thus, does manifestly
presuppose that he had run the parallel also between the Present and Future
Life; for except the Periods of Birth and Death have respect to these, they
must be reckoned to stand as Ciphers here without any significancy. But, though
it is indubitable that Solomon runs the parallel here between Life Present and
Future: Yet we are not to imagine that he compares them, as being both included
in the true notion of Life, and so as species under the same Genus; but rather
as two Opposites; so as to consider that which we call the present Life under
the notion of a kind of Death or state of Death; and so to vendicate the notion
of true Life to the future only. For as I said before, (when I explained the
terms of Birth and Death,) that our Birth into this world, was rather our Death
in Sin and Misery: Whereas our death out of this world, is more properly our
Birth into Happiness and felicity. So I say now of the Present and Future Life;
that the Present Life is rather the state of the dead that we die into when we
are born: Whereas the Future Life is that only which deserves the name of Life,
as being that state that we are born into when we come to that period, which we
call death. And though this invertion of Terms may seem strange at first, to such
who are so immersed in sense, as not to reflect on things as they are indeed in
themselves: Yet if once we come to entertain genuine conceptions of time and
eternity, and what concerns these, we will see sufficient reason for such a
rectification of vulgar opinions, wherein men are often detained, contrary to
reason it self, from a misapplication of mere words.

Wherefore since I take Life for that which either is proper to God, or which
derivatively is communicated to subjects capable of it, (I mean made so by
himself;) it is therefore to be laid down. as the basis of our ensuing
reflections, that Life and Happiness are the same thing, though the words express
this differently to us. But it is only the consideration of true Life or
Perfection, as peculiar to the Saints that I am here to consider. Which, that
it may the more distinctly appear, it may not be amiss to run the Parallel a
little between the present and future Life, as we call them; that we may the
more easily admit of the Conclusion here in the Text, as to the preferableness
of the latter to the first: Which methinks the Apostle expresses well; when he
calls the future Life, by a (...) Life; assigning to the present Life the
designation of Mortality only, 2 Cor. 5. 4. And in doing this, I must first
consider what those Qualifications of Life are that denominate it excellent,
happy and, desirable. And as to this, I shall express my self in words common
and known to all; that the impressions may be the more clear and cogent. And
now, as to this matter, I cannot think of any Convenience or true Qualification
of Life wanting, where these seven Things Concur; viz. 1. Perfect Health; 2.
Full enjoyment of all Good; 3. Unmixed and undisturbed Peace and Joy; 4. The
most pleasant place of abode; 5. The most excellent Company; 6. An untainted
Good Name; 7. The perpetual Duration of all these. Wherefore let us consider
these Qualifications or Properties of Life, with respect both to the Present
and the Future; that we may see, whether our Passage by Birth into the one, or
by death into the other be to be preferred.

1. Perfect Health.
By this we understand perfect rectitude both of Soul and body, and all the
faculties and powers of them. And if so, our Inquiry must be, where this rare
Jewel is to be found, without which all our other comforts are insipid and
tastless.

Surely it cant be acquired in this miserable World, either as to Mind or Body.
For as to our Minds; how uncultivated are our judgments as to our apprehensions
of spiritual things! How vain are our thoughts! How perverse our wills! How
irregular our affections! How treacherous our memories! And how lame and
defective are our actions and performances, even to the most spiritual duties.
And as to our Bodies; do we not carry about with us the Principles of Diseases,
and the seeds of death it self? And what innumerable pains and maladies are we
here subject to; every day to most bringing along with it some new exercise or
other, or at least some tendency to it.

But then, if we cast our eyes forward upon that blessed state that is to ensue
upon the back of death; we may there see this invaluable blessing actually
attained. No cloud does then offuscate the mind and judgment; no vanity of
thought, no perverseness of will, no irregularity of affections, no treachery of
Memory, no deficiency in duty; I say none of all these things is then present
to disturb or corrupt the Soul. And when the great period of the Resurrection
comes, perfect health will be also the inseparable property of the Body: In
order to which, it remains in the mean time in the grave, in order to
purification and preparation for such a state; as being even then united to
Christ, as we see, 1 Cor. 6. 14, 15.

2. Full Enjoyment of Good.
True Life is not only inclusive of subjective, but of Objective Happiness too:
And therefore there must not only be perfect Health considered in its notion,
but the full Enjoyment of Good, even of all good, and the supreme good.

But now, let us reflect seriously with our selves, if this be attainable here.
But what! Are we not absent from the Lord whilst we are at home in the body?
And is it possible that we can be reckoned to enjoy fully true good; whilst we
are at such a distance from the supreme good, God himself. It is true, we may
enjoy here some tastes of Gods love and favor: But these are but some drops,
compared with the ocean of felicity. Do we not here Complain, Cry and Lament,
that we want this and the other good thing? We are still craving and never
satisfied. And therefore it is sufficiently evident that we want many things
needful, and conducive to make our life truly happy.

But, on the other hand, what can be wanting to us, when we come to enjoy God
fully, who is the only necessary Good, the only suitable Good, and the All
sufficient Good. O this blessed feast upon the hive of sweetness, the ocean of
pleasure, the Treasure of Happiness! upon which the Celestial inhabitants, are
ever feasting and yet ever full. Who can conceive the infinite bounty of the
King of Heaven, which he there lets out, to the wonder and ravishment of Angels
and glorified Souls! Who can express the joy, the satisfaction, the ecstasie,
that sills the thoughts and dilates the affections of those happy Banquetters!
All tears are now wiped away from the Saints once sorrowful and weeping eyes.
They have forgotten their former poverty, and remember their misery no more. O
blessed, blessed, ever blessed they, who are now got safe into this banqueting
House; and who have the banner of love displayed over them to the full! O how
pure! How perfect! Are those pleasures which are at Gods right hand! What can
be thought to be wanting to those, who see the face of God, and the Lamb for
ever, and who are admitted to eat of the tree of life, that is in the midst of
the Paradise of God. They thirst no more, but are led to the pure fountains of
living water that flows from the throne of God. In a word, we may easily
conceive, what their abundance and affluence of all things is, when we have
said, that God himself will be to them all in all.

3. True Peace and Joy.
And now what else can be the result and effect of both subjective and
objective happiness, but undisturbed peace and unmixed joy.

Which are such blessings, as we have only some pledges and earnests of here
below. For we all know, or at least may know, what allays these admit of here;
by troubles and perplexities, griefs and fears, that constantly attend us, and
give us sufficient reason to conclude that our rest is not here. All our mirth,
joy and quiet here, is fleshly, vain, and transitory. Our laughter is like the
crackling of thorns under a pot; and oftimes in the midst thereof the heart is
sorrowful, and the end thereof heaviness. And if at any time, we are here
admitted to the manifestations of Gods love, and the sight of his face, as a
just ground of peace and joy; yet how quickly do these remove from us, whereby
our Sky becomes overcast again with new clouds, which return after the rain.

But if we cast our eyes within the vail, we shall perceive true rest, peace
and joy prepared for the Saints; in so much, that even Heaven it self is upon
this account termed singly peace. Isa. 57. 1, 2. Thete our praises shall be
brim full with Raptures of satisfaction, joy and gladness.

4. The most delightful Place of Abode.
A pleasant situation is that which adds much to the satisfaction of ones abode
here; and a delightful seat and place to be in, is certainly one of the
greatest Conveniences of Life.

But can any spot of Earth bear this Character, in a true and full sense; when
the very ground is cursed upon the account of man's sin? No, no; we may justly
cry out, with David, woe is me that I dwell in Meschesh, and in the Sun scorched
Tents of Kedar. We are here only in a wilderness state. And though God has given
us many eminent Instances of his wisdom and power, in the admirable frame even
of this lower Creation: Yet alas, all these are but the dark shadows of the
glorious Lanskip of the upper Paradise.

For it is Heaven alone that can answer such a Character, as being a place
wholly made for true pleasure and delight. If the Palace of the great God may
be thought to be infinitely glorious and admirable, above the clay-cottages of
those whose habitation is in the dust; then let us entertain more suitable
thoughts of that so desirable a place: Which is such, as the heart of man could
never conceive any thing to bear any true resemblance unto it; the most
magnificent representation of it in Scripture, Rev. 21. Being only figurative,
and therefore far short of what it is in it self.

5. The most Excellent Company.
It is Society that Alleviats, in a great measure, our sorrows and griefs here,
and makes up the defects of other things: And as man is made for Society, so
there is nothing more desirable than excellent and suitable company.

But, though (comparatively speaking) some such may be found here; yet our best
company on earth is, as other things, vain, and short of the true Idea of such
a blessing. The best men are men at best, and subject to unruely passions and
humors; which is a great allay unto their company: besides that oft-times,
sins and scandals, miseries and wants, render the company of men but little
acceptable to one another. And if there were none of these things to disturb
us, yet all men are mortal, and can enjoy one aanother but for a short time on
earth.

But then, if we turn our thoughts from earth to heaven, we find our wishes and
desires this way fully answered. For there we shall be admitted to converse
with the great God himself, the most glorious object of delights, and
infinitely the best company. There we shall be admitted to lean our heads on
Christ's bosom, and tell him all our most concerning secrets, and have him to be
our dear friend and companion for ever. There we shall be equal to the Angels,
and become their fellow servants and fellow-worshippers. And there shall we
enjoy the company of all the glorified Saints, the Patriarchs, Kings, Priests,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and eminent Ministers and Christians,
that as bright clouds of witnesses have got to heaven before us. And there,
among others, we shall meet (with endeared Embraces) our loving and dear
Friends and Relatives, that were so acceptable to us on earth. We shall all
meet together in the Celestial Regions, and in the streets and Mansions of the
new Jerusalem: and as we shall be ever with the Lord, so shall we be ever also
with one another.

6. An untainted good Name.
This is yet another blessing that attends the true life: For to be exposed to
reproaches, and to underly calumnies and evil reports, is inconsistent with the
notion of this; though I grant God can turn this, as other evils, to the
advantage of his own.

But alas, this is one superadded misery to the many that we meet with here,
that we are tossed to and fro with the various censures of men. Even the
Apostles themselves were so far from escaping this Contagion, that they were
esteemed as the dross and refuse of mankind, as the very vilest of miscreants,
by a blind, mad world. Fame has been for a long time the Goddess of ambitious
and high Spirits: But it is the greatest nonsense to talk of perpetuating ones
name here; since the furthest that the fame of any can go, is but to the limits
of time and space.

Fame and good name then, are Jewels of the Eternal Crown of Happiness,
wherewith God does adorn such only as he admits to the everlasting enjoyment of
himself. He then that conquers the Universe, has but the shadow of true Fame,
which God bestows only on such who have through grace attained to overcome sin,
Satan and the world. And he also who has left his name behind in the
frontis-piece of an hundred learned Volumns, has yet fallen short of a
perpetual fame; except he has also attained to have his name engraven and
enrolled in the eternal Registers and Records of Heaven.

7. The Perpetual Duration of all these.
Had we all the forementied Qualifications of true and perfect Life; yet if we
did but admit of a suspicion in our thoughts as to their continuance and
permanency: This one suspicious thought would be enough to dump all our
satisfaction with respect to so many blessings. And therefore to make Life
every way happy and perfect, this superadded Qualification of the Eternity of
all, must of necessity come in.

And therefore we are hence led to see, that there is no true Life here, since
all our comforts and enjoyments are transitory and fading; as being momentary
and confined within the narrow limits and precincts of years, days, hours and
minutes. And no wonder; since even that which we call Life here, is it self but
a vapor, that appears for a little, and then vanishes away; yea, such a
vapor, as has not so much a being, as the show and appearance thereof: For to
this purpose does James, chapter 4. v. 14. Point it forth very expressively; when
he says it is a vapor, (...).

But on the other hand, this adds to all the happiness of the future Life, that
all the enyoyments and blessings there are permanent and eternal. No rust does
there corrupt them, nor Thief steal them, nor age wast them, nor death devour
them. They that once enter upon the actual fruition of such Enjoyments, do ever
retain their possession of them.

And thus I have run through the Qualifications and Properties of true Life, as
briefly as I could. Which, since they only quadrate with the future Life, of
perfection; I suppose it is easy to conceive, what Reason we have to conclude
with Solomon, that Death to a Saint is far preferable, on all accounts, to his
Birth; or, to speak it in his very words, Better is the day of such a ones
Death, than the day of his Birth.

The Improvement.
In the next place I come, to bring home the Doctrine to our selves, by a
serious Improvement thereof: Which I design shall be Judgment, and Regulative
of our Practice; with respect to our Duty, as to both.

1st. The Information of our Judgments.
Although all that has been said, was with this design to rectify our
thoughts, as to the Doctrine, which is the subject matter of the Text: Yet
there are these things farther that we may rationally and indeed necessarily
Infer hence.

1. Infer. We see (from what has been said) not only the certainty, of a
Future Life and state, but of an immediate Happiness and Glory also, which the
Souls of the Righteous pass into at Death. When the poor Beggar dyed, he was
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom; Luke 16. 26. And the poor penitent
Thief was on one and the same day, in misery on the Cross with Christ, and in
paradise with him. Luke 23. 43. And St. Paul, the great Columbus of the upper
world (who first made a voyage and returned again in time as we see 2 Cor. 12.
1, 4, etc.) Could never reflect afterward upon that paradise, which he then
saw, but with earnest breathings to be there again; as we see 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
etc. Phil. 1. 23. And indeed if there were not a future state, we could never
give any rational account, why God should make so Noble a Creature as Man; but
might then cry out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 89. 47. Wherefore have thou made
all men in vain. And were not this glorious life and state to be entered upon,
by the Souls of Believers, Immediately at Death, it would greatly damp the
sweet and comfortable reflections which they are called to have thereof then.

2. Infer. We have hence also a rational and satisfactory Answer to give, to
all the scruples and Objections, that can be put up by any against this
Doctrine. And now since we hinted before some Doubts, that naturally might
arise in men's minds, from the first proposal and idea of this Doctrine: I shall
therefore in this place briefly Answer the same, from what has been already
said.

Wherefore 1. Since Atheistical and Anti-scriptural Persons, cry out upon this
Doctrine as ridiculous, from a fond imagination, that the Soul has no existence
when separate from the body. I Answer, 1. That such an imagination, is not only
contrary to Scripture but Reason it self. For how is it possible for us to
conceive that such a noble, active and intelligent being as the Soul of Man,
should be merely dependant on the body, and have only its duration for a short
space in this vain world. Especially 2. since we see, that this present life is
rather an appearance than a reality, as all things we here converse with are
also.

Or, 2. If the carnal Rationalist and Philosopher further object, and argue
against this Doctrine, from the consideration of Deaths being the Destruction
of nature. I Answer, 1. that to speak properly, there is no such destruction of
nature by Death, as many imagine. For the Soul is not destroyed by it; but acts
and lives more nobly than before. Neither is the Body properly destroyed; but
only reduced into its first Principles, in order to be new molded and more
gloriously re-edified than before. And therefore, since the two Essential
constituent parts of man remain in being; man cannot be said to be destroyed:
For though the immediate Tie between Soul and Body be loosed, yet it is for a
time only; and in the mean time the relation they stand in to one another
continues, even when the actual union is suspended. And besides all this, it
being the Soul that is principally the Man; we are therefore to reckon that the
man is in being still, even when unbodied. But 2. let it be considered, that
Death is not preferred to Birth or Life, merely as it is the dissolution of
nature, as now existing; but the formal Reason of this is upon the account of
the excellency of the future Life, which death is the passage into. For upon
this account only is it, that the Apostle prefers death to life, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
Not for that we would be unclothed, says he, but clothed upon, that Mortality
may be swallowed up of Life.

But 3. as to what many poor sincere-Christians are apt to object against this
Point, from the expressions that sometimes Death goes under in Scripture; of
its being (as the punishment of sin) our enemy, and to be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.
26. I would for Answer, propose to them (besides what has been already said)
this one consideration; That, though Death be indeed our enemy, as it is
inflicted as a punishment of sin, since the fall: Yet it has now altered its
nature and end, with respect to Saints, since Christ's death especially; Christ
having slain death and him that had the power thereof. Indeed Death passes
still upon all men: but in very different respects. For to the wicked, death is
still continued as a grim Messenger and King of Terrors. But, as for the
Saints, Death is now become Christ's servant to convey home the Souls of his own
to himself. Therefore, as Christ is said to have abolished death, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
So he is said also, Rev. 1. 18. To have taken, into his custody and keeping,
the Keys of Hell and Death. Upon which accounts we may perceive, what little
reason we have to fear Death, when he acts only in commission under our dear
Lord and Savior; and when also so blessed a Guide as he leads the way.

And 4. As to the Objection, which the vulgar sort of grovelling Mortals are apt
to make against Death; that it robbs them of, and separates them from all their
comforts, friends, possessions, enjoyments and hopes. I Answer, that where the
case is thus with any, I must needs grant they have reason to prefer life to
death. If thou have all thy portion in this life, I shall not wonder to see
thee prefer earth to heaven, and dust to gold. But, O poor wretch, art thou not
ashamed of such an objection; which militates indeed against thee, but not
against this Doctrine. For the Saints (of whom we here speak) will tell thee;
that, whereas death separates thee from all thy comforts; it is in that way
alone, that they expect to reap the full harvest of all joy and comfort; for at
the right hand of God there is fullness of joy, and in his presence there are
pleasures for evermore.

3. Infer. We may see hence also, the folly and ignorance of the generality of
men, as to their notions and conceptions, of Life and Death: Who seem to think,
that all comforts are to be found only in this Life, and therefore give way to
strange and melancholy apprehensions of death and what follows it. As there
are many poor Creatures in the world, living in mean celles and cottages, in
some obscure corner; whose low minds (having never traveled from the smell of
their native thatch and turff,) represent the world to themselves no otherwise,
than according to the ideas which a barren spot of earth of a few miles
circumference has afforded them. So the generality of mankind seem to be so
pre-occupied with the prejudices of sense and custom; as never to have suitably
reflected on those things, which right Reason may not obscurely conclude, from
Scripture Premises, concerning the glory and excellency of the future state of
the spirits of just men made perfect. For if our thoughts were more inured to
such Divine Meditations, we would despise the vanities of a fading life more;
since we converse here but with imaginary comforts and joys, though with too real
griefs and miseries.

2d. The Regulation of our Practice.
As Practice is the end of Knowledge; so my design, in all that has been said,
was to bring you to a sincere and conscientious Performance of those Duties,
that the Doctrine handled does call for from you: And therefore suffer me to
lay them impartially before you, at this time. And, in doing this; since not
only the Doctrine in it self, but the present Occasion of this Discourse, calls
for a particular and becoming Consideration this way: I shall therefore
endeavor, (with what succinctness is convenient,) to do these two things here;
viz. 1. to Improve the Doctrine Practically, with respect to that Duty, that is
incumbent upon all from hence, as to the good of our Souls. 2. to Improve it
also specially, with respect to the sad occasion of this present meeting and
concourse.

And (1) I shall endeavor to Improve the Doctrine, in the General, so as may
be of use to all of you. And what I have thus to say to you, I will comprise
and sum up in these three Directions or Rules.

1. Direct. Take heed how you carry with respect to your Spiritual state, and
Interest in God through Christ. Which Advice, I will take up in these three
Parts; which I am sure you are all concerned seriously to mind.

1. Examine and Try your selves if God be your Portion and Christ your Savior.
What are you secure, whilst you remain at uncertainties as to this matter! What
ground have you to believe, that Christ is yours? Have you renounced Sin,
Satan, the world, and sinful self? Have you accepted Christ wholly in all his
offices? and have you laid hold on him as your alone Savior? Be careful, my
friends, that you found not your hopes on a mistake, and thus build on the
sand. Religion is more than a name, and Conversion more than a notion.
Therefore Judge your selves impartially as to this matter, lest you be judged
to condemnation by God for your neglect to do so.

2. Be sure, what ever you do, to lay the whole weight and stress of your
Salvation, in the merits and righteousness of Christ; and fancy not that your
own inherent Righteousness must go Partner with the Righteousness of Christ in
the point of Justification; lest thereby you impeach the all-sufficient Merits
of Christ of defectiveness, and claim the privilege to be accounted your own
Saviors. But endeavor, with the Apostle Phil. 3. 9. To be found in him, not
having your own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

3. Mind the concernment of your Souls Salvation with all earnestness and
diligence: For what profit will it be untoyou to gain the whole world, if you
lose your Souls, or what can you give in exchange again for them if once they
be lost. Therefore trifle not away precious time and golden opportunities in
doing nothing, or it may be things worse than nothing; lest you be forced at
length to cry out (as the great Grotius did when dying) Ah vitam perdidi
operose nihil agendo. Be not so besotted as to lay the stress of your hopes
upon an imaginary Deathbed Repentance: But since now you have a price put into
your hands to get wisdom with; beg and endeavor after that happy Part and Lot,
that shall never be taken from you, when once attained.

2. Direct. Take heed how you carry, with respect to your Bodies. And as to
this matter, I will give you a taste of my Thoughts, in these three things.

1. Watch against your Bodies, that they prove not snares to your Souls; as
they are I fear to many in more than one respect. For 1. how often do our senses
deceive and cheat the Soul, and presenting it with innumerable objects to
distract and disturb it from the pursuit of more noble things. And 2. the Fancy
and unruely Imagination does no less often discompose the Mind and Reason, by
innumerable Chimera's; in the forming and producing of which it is for the most
part strangely fruitful. Yea 3. the wants of the Body prove oft-times a great
Remora to the Soul in its spiritual operations, by giving occasion to
solicitude and anxious cares, about what we shall eat and drink, and
wherewithal we shall be clothed, and how we shall prevent such and such evils
and troubles, etc. In all which respects, we have great reason both to watch
over and to watch against our Bodies.

2. Live above your Bodies. Let not your thoughts and cares terminate only
there. What! Shall a mortal fadeing Carcass swallow up our thoughts and inhance
our affections; when the time is coming, that Death will at one blow cut down
the same, whereon we have bestowed so much pains in vain? Yea the time is
coming, when this beautiful outside will stink and turn to corruption: And then
worms must nestle in those holes, where sprightly eyes did once shine; and all
our graceful and well proportioned members and parts moulder down into
deformity and rottenness. Therefore let us hence learn to live above our Bodies.

3. Be content to be unbodied for a time. It is this way alone that we can
expect to see God fully, and to reach the happy Life; and therefore it is our
Duty to work up our hearts to an hearty contentment in and satisfaction with
this way, method and ordinance of Gods own appointment, in order to consummate
our felicity. Nay let me say further, that we ought to endeavor, not only to
be content to die, but to be willing and desirous to depart that we may be with
Christ, which is best of all. This was Paul's attainment, Phil. 1. 23. And not
his only, but that which was very common to the Saints in those more heavenly
times, Romans 8. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 4, 5. Yea the very inanimate Creation has an
earnest propensity this way, groaning for a dissolution as to its present form,
that it may be restored to its pristine glory and splendor, before it became
the stage of sin and theater of misery: This we may see, Romans 8. 19, 21, 22.
Which is a consideration that may well shame us out of our earthly frame, that
we have sunk into for the most part in these depraved days. I know indeed, that
we are apt to reckon it a great attainment in a Christian (and comparatively
indeed with the frame of most it is so) to be content to die, (in submission to
Divine good pleasure) yet desirous to live. But the excellency of the Christian
attainment and frame of spirit, in this matter, stands in the inversion of the
common order; viz. In being desirous to die, yet content to live, in submission
to Gods will, and in regard of service to be done for God further. And indeed,
when a Christian has once tasted of the pleasure and delight of communion with
God, and thus been admitted to some fore-tasts of the future glory, he can
scarce any longer contain himself (the love of God in Christ constraining him)
from crying out; O Time be gone! O Eternity make have! Why art thou so long a
coming to those that are ready to burst with longing after the immediate sight
and fruition of their God and Savior forever. Don't the Spirit and the Bride
both, Echo forth with a sweet pathos, come Lord Jesus: And shall not our Souls
join in the consort, and ingeminat, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, come, come.

3. Direct. Take heed, how you carry with respect to your Souls. Which Advice I
take up also in these Three Things; which I shall but very briefly propose.

First. Be careful to cultivate your Souls; that so you may grow daily in a
meetness and preparedness for Heaven and Glory. And as there are two principal
Faculties of the Soul, the Understanding and Will; so accordingly, let it be
your great study to adorn these, with what tends to render them more and more
excellent. And 1. Improve your Understandings, by dilating and enlarging them
by further degrees of true and spiritual Knowledge. Grow in the Knowledge of
God and Christ, of the Vanity of the World and Excellency of Heaven, and of the
Worth of the Soul; and in sum, of all Gospel Truths and Promises, and the
legal Precepts and Duties, that are revealed as needful to be known. 2. Improve
your Wills and Affections also, by more and more Grace; that the Habits thereof
may be strengthened by repeated Acts, and that so these habits thus
strengthened, may be exerted and put forth the more sweetly and freely, in the
out-going of the Soul in all its acts and operations.

2. Employ your Souls always in Gods service. This is and ought to be your
chief and constant work and business. Let us with complacency and cheerfulness
employ our selves this way; that it may be our meat and drink to do the will of
our Father who is in Heaven. What is our business in the world if it be not
this. For it is an opportunity to serve God here, that alone can make a Saint
content and willing to stay below in this Dunghill world, when his Soul is
otherwise wholly propending Heavenward.

3. Seek to have your Souls admitted to Converse with God here. For if we are
not admitted to this happy Society wholly, yet let us endeavor after this
Blessing here below, in as far as God may be pleased to privilege us with it.
Alas, that we should be satisfied with the Society of shadows and vanishing
things here below; whilst we may have communion with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ. It is this blessed Fellowship alone, that can sweeten and
familiarise Death and dissolution to us, and make separation appear rather a
change of our Place than of our Company.

But (2) I must also subjoyn some more special improvement of the Doctrine,
with respect to our Practice in relation to the sad Occasion of our present
Meeting together at this time. And here (though what I am to say further may be
of use to all, yet) I address my self more particularly to You, whom this
Dispensation of Providence does more nearly respect and concern. And what I
have to say here, I shall comprise in a Threefold Counsel or Advice.

1. Couns. Submit your selves cordially to Gods correcting hand in this stroke.
Remember the Patience of Job, under greater severity; and say with him, the
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. All
the Providence of God are the Effects of the highest wisdom, and with respect
to the Saints, they all flow from love and mercy also. Nothing falls out
casually in such matters, however they appear to us. For if a sparrow fall not
to the ground, without our Father which is in Heaven; then surely a Friend, a
Relative, and Child of God cannot be removed hence without his special
providence; for are we not of more value, than many sparrows?

2. Couns. Moderate your sorrows as to the Person deceased, from the
consideration of the place and company she is gone to, and the happiness she
now enjoys. For, blessed be God, we sorrow not to day as those that have no
hope: For we have not the least shadow of doubt as to her happiness and glory.
But if we have any thing to bewail this day, it is as to our selves, that we
are left behind. Indeed we have reason to lament her removal, as a loss to her
Relatives, a loss to her Friends, yea and a loss to the Country. But otherwise,
with respect to her self, we have rather cause of joy than sorrow. If I may be
so bold, as to suppose the Lord speaking to us, in the words of Jerome, (who to
comfort a pious Matron, named Paula, upon the death of her daughter, brings in
the Lord speaking to her,) may we not think that the Lord speaks, (by this
dispensation) unto you to this purpose. I have made this your Relative and
Friend mine. But what! Do you envy my possession? Where can she be better than
with me? Would you bring her back from Rivers of Pleasures to the valley of
Tears? From Health to Sickness? From a Throne to a Drageon. May we not
therefore, in this case, allude to our Lords expression, Joh. 14. 28. If ye
loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go to the Father. And I suppose, could we
now hear her speak to us, it would be in words of such an importance.

3. Couns. Imitate what was Good, Valuable and Praiseworthy in her. Imitate
her, in her Faith; in her Charity; in her Assiduity in Religious Duties; in an
impartial scrutiny into the state of her own Soul, in her closet retirements,
and public walk and conversation; in a sincere design to honor and please
God; in a cheerful delight in doing good to all; and in patience and submission
under affliction, and this Leads me to a Transition from the Doctrine to the
Person; in whom we may see a Laudable Example, which may serve to back the
Preceding Precepts, as being (at least to many of us here) an ocular
Demonstration thereof.

The Character.
And here give me leave to present you with a few hints of this worthy Saint;
which I have either known from her self immediately, or from an impartial
observation of her Life and walk. And I am the rather emboldned to do this;
because, although many others knew her much earlier and longer than I; yet
there were few, she was pleased to condescend to be more free with in the
concernments of her Soul. But, since my Brother, who has already preceded me,
on the same occasion, has, besides a General Character of her, given you some
succinct narrative of her last Hours; I shall therefore only present you
further with some account of her Christian Life and Conversation, that may be
of further use with respect to Imitation by others, as well as condusive to
make her Memory further precious.

Her natural Temper was Retired and serious, and altogether averse from crowds
of Company and the hurries of the world: Yet no way Morose and Sullen, but
Pleasant and Affable to All; and becomingly Free also with her Friends: And
such she specially reckoned so, who were truly Pious and Religious. For it
might justly be said of her, as of David, that all her delight was in the
Saints, whom she esteemed the excellent Ones of the Earth. And such Persons she
valued according to the degree of worth that she see in any, without regard to
the discriminating name of a Party. For she was careful, (besides her regard
for all pious and virtuous Persons) duly to ponder the super added
Qualifications that she see in any, that might entitle them to a more
particular share in her Friendship.

And as her Temper was naturally serious, so God blessed her very early, even
in her childhood, with true seriousness and Piety; as she has been forced
oftener than once to confess, with grateful Acknowledgments of Gods mercy to her
on that account, as well as comfortably to reflect upon the Blessing she had,
in being descended from eminently Religious Parents, and brought up in true
Christian Education.

A natural Modesty attended her, in all her Actions, even the most serious. An
eminent instance whereof was this; that, though she was educated in the
Congregational-way very strictly, yet she could never be induced, (as is usual
with such,) to give any open or formal account of her Souls concerns before
others; and upon that account she had been wholly debarred from the most
spiritual of ordinances; had not God, (by providential acquaintance) impressed
that just Character of her upon the mind of the Reverend Dr. Jacomb, as (upon
an inquiry into such things) to admit of her, (notwithstanding this) to all
ordinances with entire satisfaction. This I speak not, with the least design to
reflect on any Party or Way; (especially since God has been pleased of late to
cement the two sticks of Ephraim and Judah in so great a measure, (by an happy
Union:) but I mention it only, by way of Caution both to Ministers and
Churches; that we may see, what tenderness is required in debarring poor modest
Christians from what in Gods sight they have, it may be more right to than many
others, who can talk better and more; as well, as there ought to be a just
caution in the admitting Persons, who may be vicious and scandalous. However,
for my own part I must say, that I would in this case be under a great Dread
and Fear, to reject any poor Soul, in whom I think I see, (though in a small
degree, and as a grain of mustard seed,) Aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ's
Image: For I judge we err more safely on the side of Charity, (if indeed it be
possible so to err) than on the side of a precipitant and presumptuous judging
of ones state and fitness, from Rules of our own prescribing; when none can
tell me, what the least degree of sincerity and grace is which God does accept,
and which gives one right to participate of all Ordinances.

She was a careful and impartial Searcher of the Scriptures, which she read
with great judgment and observation, with the use of the best helps, she could
have for that end. But though she studied to understand every part of
Scripture; yet she was most conversant in the more spiritual parts thereof. She
took many a mental walk in the delicious Garden of David's Psalms, and sat often
with great pleasure, under the close Arbor of Solomon's song; which, as she
learned over by heart (as to the Words) in her Childhood; so attained, in a
great measure, both to understand and experience in her riper years.

And, together with the Scriptures, she read, with great pains and judgment,
many of the most solid and practical English Writers; as her Books she has
left behind will witness to such as have them, when they see the many Marginal
Writings, wherewith she has filled them, according as she was edified and
affected her self with what she read. And though her Characters be such, as none
can well understand; yet the consideration of those Truths, that she thereby
points at, will discover both the judiciousness and seriousness of her spirit.
And I hope these very hints, (though it may be not distinctly apprehended) may
be a leading Example of seriousness and piety to her surviving Relatives.

She was laborious and almost unwearied in Duty, especially Fasting and Prayer;
which last Ordinance seemed to be the very food she lived on, and the air she
breathed in. She hungered and thirsted after God, as the heart after the water
books; and would often pleasantly reflect on an expression of Mr. Rutherfoords
to that purpose (in his Book of Letters which she greatly delighted in) and
say, I think God feeds me with hunger, viz. After the enjoyment of God, and
manifestations of his Love.

She was zealously bent to advance Gods Honor, and propagate the Gospel,
(which I hope others will imitate her in,) and used to say, For what else has
God given me life, and any share of worldly things. And, upon this account, her
Temper being naturally timorous, she would often with great earnestness complain
of her self, That she feared her fears were such, as might dishonor God, and
disparage her Profession in the eyes of such as are without; though yet her
fears were more visible to her self than any else.

However, this fearful Temper did represent Death to her often in Melancholy
Ideas: Yet she would commonly say, I fear not to be dead, but only to dye;
neither do I fear Death so properly, as the very fears thereof. Upon which
account, she would often chide her self, as acting so irrationally and
unchristianly. But God gave her, in a great measure, the Conquest over such
Fears before her Death. However, this Temper of hers made her often say, That for
her own part, she could never join with that Prayer, (in the Service Book) From
sudden Death deliver us: For she feared a lingering rather than a sudden death;
which God in some measure did satisfy her in.

In the midst of her Complainings on whatever account, she would still break
out with a Caution to her self; But what do I? I must praise as well as pray;
for my mercies are more than my wants: yea, even my wants may be my mercy. And
therefore she would beg the assistance of others in this work; and say, I
desire you to praise as well as pray on my account.

Yea (which may seem strange) notwithstanding her fears as to her self, she was
of a bold and confident Temper in the public Concerns of Religion; and would
not easily be shaken in her resolutions that way, whatever Opposition or
Reflection she might meet with on that account from an ignorant World: And, if
there were any that thought or spoke contemptuously of serious piety, she could
not but with generous pity and compassion reflect upon them.

She had a very particular regard for her Relatives and Friends, especially as
to what might be conducive to the real profit of their Souls. And I may say,
That she traveled as it were in birth for her Children a second time, that she
might see Christ formed in them. And, I hope, that as God was pleased to give
her much satisfaction in this before her death; so her Prayers may come to be
yet further answered, in due time, this way.

She had attained a well-grounded Assurance of her Interest in God and Christ:
which, (to my observation) she never actually doubted of, even in the midst of
Temptations. Although, her natural Temper being suspicious, and not easily
satisfied in such a grand concern, she would often put up Questions, as to this
matter, (to such as she could be free with) in such a way, as if she seemed to
doubt thereof; and would often say, If it be so and so with me, why am I thus?
Yet (as she has intimated to some) this was rather, that she might be further
satisfied from the Reasons of others, as well as from her own Evidences; for
she thought she could never be too sure of this weighty and concerning Business.

She had several times some unusual Impressions of things upon her Spirit,
especially in Dreams; which, though she was cautious not to lay too great a
stress on; (for she founded on a surer word of Testimony; yet she could not but
take particular notice of. At one time, said she, (for I give this in her own
words as near as I can remember) I dreamed, that I saw the representation of
two Humane Bodies, but so glorious above what our frail Bodies are here, as
admits of no comparison. They were, to my Apprehension, like the finest and
purest Amber, with Rays proceeding from them like the shinings and glances of
Diamonds or Rubies; and so transparent, that the beautiful contexture and
motion of the internal parts appeared no less plainly to me, than the external
figure. Which, whilst with Ravishment I looked upon, methoughts it was
suggested to me, Such shall the Bodies of the Saints at the Resurrection be.
This extraordinary Dream she would speak of sometimes in these or the like
words; but never without a sensible emotion and emphasis, which added to the
pleasure of hearing the Account.

At another time, (in the midst of one of her tedious Exercises) falling
asleep, she seemed (according to her own expression) to be struggling and
conflicting with two Hands; which, as she thought, did at last so tire her out,
that she was ready to succumb, her strength quite failing her: In the midst of
which plunge and difficulty, another Hand quite different from the former, and
of a more pleasant and lovely aspect, came in to her assistance; and not only
struggled with the former Hands, until it overcame them; but, in the mean time,
did sweetly uphold and refresh her. And, said she, I thought that the
reflection I had of this matter at that time, was, That the two. Hands I was
conflicting with, were Corruption and Temptation; and that the Hand that came
to my relief, was the Hand of the Almighty, put forth in the Aids of his
Spirit, through Christ, to carry me safely through all my Trials. Which, when she
was relating, one said, May not the two Hands be supposed as well to mean
Temptation and Affliction? To which she humbly replied: I include Affliction
under the notion of Temptation; but what ever be left out, Corruption must be
reckoned to be included.

The Subject, for the most part, of all her Discourses with serious Persons,
was still divine and spiritual. And if at any time the strain of the Discourse
were turned otherwise, she would be ready to say, Come, let us leave such petty
Matters, and talk of what deserves our Thoughts and Considerations. And when
she could not come at her Friends, with whom she could be most free; she would
be sure to afford them some Work by Letters on such Subjects, as might be
mutually edifying. And indeed, in Writing, she commonly expressed her self in a
singular vein, both as to Spirituality and Good Thought. And as to this, I hope
it may not be unedifying to name you two or three Passages amongst many.

Writing to a Friend, concerning her spiritual state, she thus expresses her
self. -- I must acknowledge that I am useing the Means of Grace, as much as I
am able, with that little measure of Faith I have, (in a sense of great Guilt
daily contracted,) so as to have constant recourse to the blood of sprinkling,
for Cleansing and Healing; whence I have attained peace as to the matter of
Jestification. And I must also acknowledge that I am waiting and depending on
Christ daily for the Influences of his Spirit every moment, for the assisting
me to resist temptations, mortify corruptions, and perform hard and difficult
duties (as indeed all duties are to me,) as also to bear up under afflictions.
But I must tell you, that here lies the very stress of my Trial, that God seems
not (at least sensibly to me) to make out his promise, as to the proportioning
his supplies of strength, according as my day of trouble and trial is. I might
here take up all the expressions of lamentation used in Scripture and bewail my
state. But I check my self and acquiesce, because it is the Lord that does it.
And sure I am, it is not so much comforting manifestations, that I desire, as
supporting grace, that I may carry to the honor of Religion. But my temper is
suspicious, and I am always expecting new troubles; for waves call on waves in
my case. You tell me, that we are in storms to hope for calms. as well as in
calms to prepare for storms. And I grant it should be so. But I suppose
notwithstanding, that you are not ignorant; that it is more easy for us, when
in the light, to discern a cloud at a distance; than it is to see any thing in
the dark distinctly, a far off especially. But I will conclude, with what has
been much on my mind, I mean Herbert's Poem, called, Bitter-Sweet; which I
return you, with some Variation and Alteration, and which I think does now
exactly hold forth my Case.

My Dear, though Absent Lord,
Since thou can Love, yet Hide,
Withdraw, and yet support;
I will thy Will abide.
I will Complain and Pray,
Bewail and yet Approve;
And all my Gloomy Days,
I will Believe and Love.
At another she thus Writes. -- I am fully satisfied there may be much Love in
Corrections: For what Child is there that the Father Chastneth not? And my
earnest desire is, That while my Father keeps the Rod in his hand, I may hang
about him, and never cease my wrestling Supplications, until I get the
sanctified use of Afflictions. But indeed, this is not the sad part of my Case,
that God does not carry it to me, as a most wise, merciful, and compassionate
Father in all things: But it lies here, That I do not carry it as the Child of
such a Father, with that filial, believing, resigning, cheerful frame and
temper of Spirit, that is so acceptable to him, and so suitable to such a
Relation. But I adore the Wisdom of his Love, even in his Withdrawings. But Oh!
how can I be satisfied with my self, in not imitating more fully the Saints of
old, (and some I know yet alive) who breathed after the better Country: Which
Temper God has so far owned and honored, as to subjoyn, That therefore he is
not ashamed to be called their God. This, this, would be an effectual Remedy
against all my Distempers: Which therefore I pray for it, and desire you to do
so also on my account.

She earnestly and constantly prayed for and. breathed after the Influences of
the Spirit. Her thoughts of which she thus expresses to a Friend. -- Since God
has so freely promised to give his Spirit to those that ask it; have we not
great Encouragement thence, to desire and humbly beg for a more plentiful
effusion thereof upon us; that it may be, as water upon the thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground; that our wilderness may blossom as the Rose, and our
desert barren hearts be turned into a fruitful Garden, irriguated with Springs
of Living water. For by these and many such figurative Expressions in Scripture
I understand the powering forth of the Spirit upon us: And the consideration of
them has been very supporting to me under my present wants and unfruitfulness,
and a great encouragement to wait and hope in God, that it shall be better in
due time. Oh this blessed Spirit! What a change would it make in the world, and
on particular persons, were it given more plentifully. For which let us pray,
that it may be given as an Inlightning Spirit, as a Guiding and Conducting
Spirit, as a Quickening and Comforting Spirit. This would make us walk more
holyly and humbly, more prudently and wisely, more thankfully and cheerfully,
more above our fears and sorrows, with more Christian courage and fortitude of
Spirit, throughout our whole course, and with a temper more becoming the
children of such a Father, and the Heirs of such an inheritance. Would not this
make you fitter for the high and noble work of the Ministry, and make you more
useful and successful in Preaching the Everlasting Gospel? And would not this
make us both more servicable in our several stations and capacities, to
glorify God, which is the great end of our Lives, and I hope the great desire
of our Souls. And therefore I know nothing more worthy of our most earnest
wrestlings and greatest importunities. For, since I hope God has given us an
interest in himself, through his dear Son and our great Mediator; and so has
accepted our Persous in Justification, through the imputed righteousness of
Christ: I think the next work we have to do, is to be daily interceding for the
Influences of the Spirit in order to carry on the great business of
sanctification, that so we may grow in a fitness for every duty, and a meetness
for the future state, that we are hastening into.

It were long to produce all or many of the Expressions of this nature that
might be given. And therefore I shall only add one more, in a Letter to a
Friend; upon a Reprieve from Death, that she had providentially got beyond
expectation, for a time, and which she was apprehensive he had some hand in,
(with others,) as a Return of Prayer. -- Now methinks (says she) I have been
saying to you, (whom I believe to have been instrumental in this matter,) is
this your kindness to your Friend? When I seemed to have got so near to the
harbor of an hoped for rest, to use all your force and strength, to bring me
back again into this stormy and troublesome Sea, where I must expect to be
tossed with new Tempests, before I get to shore; of which I have now a much
clearer Prospect, than of any service I can do here in this world. Did I ever
desire you to pray for Life? Or was it not rather, that I might be carried
through the dark valley of the shadow of Death? But I must submit, since I know
you think you have acted Duty in this; and since all things of this nature are
ordered by a wise and gracious God for good to us. And this does abundantly
satisfy me in this, and I hope in all other dispensations concerning me.

And now from these few Expressions, as well as from what hints have been
besides given of this pious Person, we may easily perceive what Spirit she was
of, and what her great work and Business in the world was. She wisely chose the
Better part, which none could take from her: The whole of her Life being one
continued declaration that she sought a better Country; as knowing that we have
no continuing City or place of abode here. Through a patient continuance in
well-doing, she sought for honor and glory and immortality, both in Health and
Sickness. And, though an universal Decay of Spirits, (in Gods wise
determination,) did incapacitate her, in the hour of Deaths approach, from
having that sensible joy and ravishment, which sometimes the Saints then have,
from the prospect of the nearness of Glory; yet that Faith and Affiance, that
Reverence and Love, and that Resignation and full satisfaction, which she then
expressed, were such clear Evidences of her Grace, and such happy Prognostics
of that Happiness she was entering upon the Possession of; that we may justly
admire Gods Mercy in all this, both to Her and Us.

And now, my Friends, obey the Instruction and imitate the Pattern that I have
at this time set before you. Which that we may do, let us fervently implore the
divine Grace, and seriously improve the Gospel-Means. And then I question not,
but we shall come in due time to find this Doctrine verified in our own
Experience; That better is the Day of Death, than the Day of Birth. Amen.

TO THE MEMORY of the Truly Religious, Mrs. Susanna Soame; WHO Departed this
Life at Thurlow in Suffolk, Feb. 14. An. Dom. 169 1/2.
ART thou then gone, thou sweet and humble Mind,
Leaving thy Friends thus sorrowing behind?
And can our Thoughts within our breasts be pent,
Since sorrows double are, that have no vent?
No! No! My weeping Muse shall drop a Verse,
And offer at thy much lamented Hearse:
Thy Piety and Worth deserve no less:
And if my Lines be in an humble Dress;
It yet may Mourners suit, since it is required,
That such in Black, not Gold, should be attired.
Had I a Pen dropped from an Angels Wing,
Or could I hear the Anthems thou do sing;
Since thou art joined unto the Quire above,
And swallowed up in Raptures high of Love:
My Thoughts might then, it is like, my Pen inspire,
with such like Notes, as moved Wise Sol'mons Lyre,
When he did sing the Mystic Loves between
Heavens Glorious Darling and his Purchased Queen:
For now that Song (thou lov'dst so here) is known
To thee, since thou have reached the Heavenly Throne.
Yet when I think, how Holy Paul before,
Though thus rapt up to Heaven, could do no more,
But only tell he saw Things Glorious,
Which he nor could nor durst express to us:
I Am therefore left in silence to adore,
That Hand which casts a Veil such things before,
And wills us to believe they are too great
For this Imperfect State, where we await,
Until we also from our Corpse remove,
And mount all Earthly Dust and Shades, above.
Wherefore I Am left to muse on what is past,
And on thy by-gone-Lise some Thoughts to cast;
And here, methinks, as present still to day,
I see thy Face, and hear thee thus to say;
[An Acrostical Character of her Life.]
S oar fain I would above each earthly thing,
V nto my Lord, of all my Joy, the Spring.
S uch is my study, but alas! I find
A ll my Attempts too weak, too dark my Mind;
N ow Clouds bemist me, Grief o're-pow'rs my Soul,
N ow Fears alternate like the Waves do roll,
A nd all my Comforts, Joy and Hope control.
S weet Glances from my God, yet now and then,
O blidge my Soul from Sorrow to refrain,
A nd blast my Griefs, and cause my Fears to fly.
M y Case thus changes too and fro, whilst I
E ach day for Heaven long, yet fear to dye.
Yet, though all is but Folly that is said
By Living Mortals of the Immortal Dead:
Yet since we justly do conclude you are blessed,
And now from Pains and Sorrows all at rest,
Methinks I hear thy Voice from Heaven high,
Drop silent to my Ear thus through the Sky;
[An Acrostical Character of her Death.]
Soar now I do, above each earthly thing,
Unto my Lord of all my Joy the Spring.
Such was my Aim below, but then did find
All my Attempts too weak, too dark my Mind:
No Cloud bemists me now, and on my Soul,
No Grief or Fear alternately does roll,
As an Allay my Comforts to control.
Sweet Sights of God and Christ I do obtain:
O sweet my Life! Sweet Place where I remain!
Angels and Saints are now my Company;
My Friends below I Would pity, did not I,
Expect to see them to Eternity.
The Epitaph.
UNderneath this Stone does lie
Dust precious, for the Memory
Of a sweet Saint, who once did dwell
In such a fadeing Mortal Cell:
Who having got Gods Pass, took wing
Upwards to Heaven, to live and sing
Triumphant Hallelujahs there,
And breath more free in Sweeter Air.
An Acrostical Memorial.
Since Upwards Soared, All Notions New Attend Seen Objects: Ancient
Molestations End.

As the last Expression of Friendship on Earth, These Lines are Offered by R. F.

BOOKS Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey, and John Salusbury at the Rising Sun over against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil.
1. ANgliae Metropolis: Or, The Present State of London, with Memorials
comprehending a full and succienct Account of the Ancient and Modern State
thereof. First Written by the late Ingenious Tho. De Laune Gent. and continued
to this present Year, by a careful Hand.

2. The Life and Death of that Old Disciple of Jesus Christ, and Eminent
Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Hanserd Knollys, who dyed in the Ninety Third Year
of his Age. These Two Printed for J. Harris.

3. The Certainly of the Worlds of Spirits. Fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Operations, Voices, etc. Proving the
Immortality of Souls, the Malice and Miseries of the Devils and the Damned, and
the Blessedness of the Justified. By R. Baxter

4. An End of Doctrinal Controversies which have lately Troubled the Churches
by Reconciling Explication, without much Disputing. By R. Baxter. These Two
Printed for J. Salusbury.

CORRIGENDA.
Sermon. 1. page 7. lin. 20: after (...) insert and. p. 17. l. 20. after follow
insert that. p. 28. l. 10. after Scripture insert expressed. p. 45. l. 1. for
she read they. p. 47. l. 14. after which insert is. p. 48. l. 8. after her
insert to observe her. Sermon. 2. p. 55. l. ult. after must insert not. p. 72. l.
7. for Ephesians. read Ep.


