THREE SPEECHES, MADE BY Sir. John Wray, To the House of Commons, assembled in
Parliament.

1 Against Thomas Earl of Strafford, and the Bishop of Canterbury. 2 Being a
motion for the taking of an oath to maintain the Religion and vows
established. 3 Against the Oath and Canons made by the Assembly at the last
Convocation.
London Printed, 1641.

SIR JOHN VVRAYES SPEECH* April 6. 1641.
Master Speaker,
TRuth is the Daughter of Time, and experience the best Schoolmaster, who has
long since taught many men and States, the sad and woeful effects of an half
done work. Master Speaker, those Convulsions and renting pains, which the body
of Great Britain now shows that the ill humors and obstructions are not yet
fully purged nor dissolved.

Master Speaker, God will have a through work done, if in stead of redressing
evils, we think to trans-seat all by removings of Persons and not things,
well may we hush our troubles for a season, but they will return with a
greater violence, for believe it Master Speaker, Let (...) flatter our selves
as we please, any sighted eyes may see that although we think we have now
passed the Equinoxiall and Straffordian Line, and seem to have gone beyond
Canterbury; yet their faction, and their undermining. Agents (of all Religions)
grow daily more and more powerful, and no doubt do labor an extirpation of
all Parliaments; and men which will not think, say and swear to their
opinions and practices. Have we not then Master Speaker, a Wolf by the ears,
or rather a Fox by the tail? Is there any way to go scot-free or wolfe-free
but one? then let us take, and not forsake that old English Parliamentary road,
which is via tuta, and will bring us safely to our Iourneyes end, that is my
humble Motion.

SIR JOHN VVRAYES Speech, May the third, 1641.
Master Speaker,
IF ever we intend to perfect and finish those great works we have begun,
we must follow that via tuta which I formerly told you of, and in a word is
this, to become holy pilgrims in that path (not popish) and to endeavor to be
loyal Covenanters with God and the King, first binding ourselves by a
Parliamentarie and natural Oath, (not a Straffordian, nor a Prelaticall one)
to preserve our Religion entire and pure, without the least compound of
Superstition or Idolatry: next to defend the Defendor of the Faith, his Royal
Person, Crown and Dignity: and maintain our sufferance in his glory and
splendour, (which can never be eclypsed if the balance of Justice go right:
and his Laws be duly executed. Thus doing Master Speaker, and making
Jerusalem our chiefest joy, we shall be a blessed Nation, and a happy People:
but if we shall let go our Christian hold, and lose our Parliament proof,
and old English well tempered mettell, let us take heed then, Master Speaker,
that our Buckler break not, and our golden Candlestick be nor removed, which
God forbid, and let me never live to see, nor Enggland to feel the want of,
that's my Prayer to conclude my former Motion.

FINIS.
SIR JOHN WRAYES SPEECH Touching the Canons, December the fifteenth, 1640.
Master Speaker,
A Man may easily see to what tends all these Innovations, and alteration in
Doctrine and Discipline, and (without a prospective glass) discover affar off,
the active toylesomnesse of those spiritual Ingineers, to undermine the old
and true foundation of Religion, and to establish their tottering heresy in
room thereof; which lest it should not hold being built with untempered
mortar, you see how careful they are by a vast Oath to force men's consciences,
not to alter their Government Archiepiscopall, etc. Mr. Speaker, the thoughts
of the Righteous are right, but the Counsels of the wicked are deceit, and
nothing else is in their hearts but destruction, and devastation, but to the
Counselors of peace is joy, so long as they keep themselves within the circle
of spiritual Comerce, and studied to keep men's hearts upright to God and his
Truth: there was no such complaining in our streets of them, nor have we
overseene so many thousand hands against them as now there are come in, and no
marvel though God with draws so many hearts and hands from them, who have
turned so many from the Way of Truth, via tuta, they have stopped up; but via
devia, they have enlarged and laid open, as appears by their crooked Canons.
Master Speaker, I shall not go about to overthrow their government in the
plural, but to limit and qualify it in some perticulars: for as Sir Francis
Bacon long since well observed there were two things in the government of
Bishops, of which he could never be satisfied; no more am I, The first was, the
sole exercises of their authority, and secondly, the deputation of that
authority; but Mr. Speaker, I shall not now dispute of either, for my part, I
wish some of them so well, and am so charitable to the rest, that I wish rather
their reformation than their ruin: but let me tell you withal, that if we
shall find amongst them any proud Becket, or Woolsie, Prelates, who stick not
to write, Ego and Rex meus, or if there shall be found any cruel Bonners, etc.
such (I protest) I would not spare for they will spare none. But if in the
counter-ballance there may be found but one good Cranmer, or one Latimer, or
Ridley, I would esteem and prize them as rich Jewels, fit to be set in the
Kings own Cabbinet, for such I am sure will pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
and for the peace of King Charles, and his three Kingdoms; which God long
preserve in concord and unity, but Master Speaker, we must also be Actors in
the preservation of Religious Concordance which will never be safe nor well at
quiet, until these heavy drossy Canons with all their base mettel be melted and
desolved, let us then dismount them and distroy them, which is my humble motion.

FINIS.

