Mr. Anthony Wotton's DEFENSE Against Mr. George Walker's CHARGE, Accusing him
of Socinian Heresy and Blasphemy: Written by him in his lifetime, and given
in at an hearing by Mr WALKER procured; And now published out of his own papers
by SAMUEL WOTTON his Son. Together with a Preface and Postscript, briefly
relating the Occasion and Issue thereof, By THOMAS GATAKER, an eye and
eare-witnesse of either.

Hieronym. adv. Errores Joan. Hierosol. Nolo in suspicione haereseos quenquam
esse patientem. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the University.
Anno Dom. 1641.

The Preface.
IT has ever been and is generally held a breach, not of Charity alone, but
even of (...), Homer. Od. ch
Piety too, to insult over and trample upon persons deceased: which if in any
sort of men does well deserve such a censure, surely among Christian men
especially it may justly be so deemed for any in that manner to deal with their
Christian brethren, such as have lived and died in the profession of the same
common Faith in Christ, and in the fellowship of the same Church of God with
themselves. Not that it is presumed an act unwarrantable or uncharitable to
refute any error that such have broched while they lived, or to remove any
scruple that thereby may remain in the minds of those that yet survive: For
(...). Plut. de serae numin. vindict.
a fond thing were it, not to offer to pull out the shaft sticking yet in the
body, or not to seek to close up the wound by it made in the flesh, because the
party were gone and had withdrawn himself who had shot the one, and thereby
caused the other. Free it is at all times to defend necessary truths, whether
the Authors and Patrons of them survive yet or be deceased: but to insult and
triumph over any, when they are now dead and departed from us, as if we had
convinced and conquered them while they were yet alive with us, when as indeed
we have done nothing less; yea, to renew aspersions and imputations of the
most heinous and horrible guilt that can be against them long after their
decease, when we suppose the memory of things so long before past and gone may
be worn out with the most, and buried with the greater number of those that
were privy to what was then done, recharging them in most vehement and virulent
manner with those crimes which the parties then cleared themselves of, nor were
we then able to make any good proof of against them, may deservedly be censured
(if I be not much mistaken) to argue no small defect, not of piety and charity
alone, but even of humanity, (not to add, of common honesty it self) in those
that so do.

Now this whether Mr George Walker have made himself guilty of or no, in his
Treatise lately published under the Title of Socinianisme in the Fundamental
point of Justification discovered and confuted, concerning Mr Anthony Wotton, a
man, by Mr Walkers own confession, of special note for his piety, life and
learning, while he lived, which both the University of Cambridge, and the City
of London are able also to give ample testimony unto; I say nothing my self,
but leave it to be tried and judged by the sequel, wherein I shall be only a
relatour of that that my self was for the most part either an eye or an
ear-witnesse of, leaving Mr Wotton to plead his own cause, and Mr Walker's own
dayes-men by their award under their own hands either to cast or to clear him.

The Relation.
The Occasion.
NOt to hold my reader therefore long in the entry ere I come to the Relation:
Mr Walker in a letter directed to Mr Wotton (whom he had before bitterly
inveighed against both in private and public) dated May the second, 1614. yet
to be seen under his own hand, charge him (for you shall have it precisely in
his own words) on this wise, Mr Walkers charge
The Errors and Opinions which you maintain, and wherewith you have infected
diverse, are of all that ever were sown by the enemy of God and man amongst
Christian people the most pestilent and dangerous, being nothing else but the
heresies of Servetus and Socinus those most damnable and cursed heretics, the
greatest monsters that ever were born within the borders of Christ his Church.

And after this charge in such hideous terms conceived, in the same letter he
subjoyneth this peremptory challenge, His Challenge.
Meet me as a Christian before eight learned and godly Ministers chosen equally
by both, that they may be witnesses betwixt you and me, and that it may be seen
whether I do justly charge you with heresy and blasphemy or no, and whether
your writings do not show you to be a Socinian.

Upon receipt of this letter containing much other lavish and menacing language,
Mr Wotton repaired to the Right Reverend, the then Bishop of London, Dr King
their Diocesan, acquainted him with the business, and requested his Lordship
to convent Mr Walker and himself, and to hear them both together; not
refusing, if Mr Walker could make his charge good against him, to undergo such
censure and penalty as he should be deemed thereby to have justly deserved;
otherwise requiring due satisfaction by his Lordships means from him who had
wronged him in such manner. But the Bishop persuaded Mr Wotton rather,
according to Mr Walkers own Proposition, to refer the matter to such a number
of their brethren the Ministers as were by him mentioned, and so to make a
private end of the business. Whereunto Mr Wotton returned this answer, That
howsoever he desired rather that his Lordship would be pleased to have the
hearing of it himself, yet since that he seemed to like better of the other
course by Mr Walker propounded, he was well content to condescend thereunto, so
be that his Lordship would be pleased to assign one of his Chaplains then
present to be one of the four to be nominated by him, though a stranger to
him; for that he cared not who they were, acquaintance or strangers, so they be
godly and learned, that should hear and judge his cause. And the Bishop
accordingly promised that it should so be, assigning Mr Henry Mason, a grave
and reverend Divine, being then and there present, to undertake that office
with such others as were to be adjoined unto him in the same: who yet surviving
in the City is able to testify of this passage with the Bishop, whether it
were according to this relation or no. For I have this only from Mr Wotton's
own report (though nothing doubtful of the truth of it) who meeting me
accidentally in Paul's Church as he came from the Bishop, having not seen him
long before, showed me Mr Walker's letter, told me what speech he had had
thereupon with the Bishop, and what by the Bishops persuasion he had yielded
unto; withal requesting me to be one of those that were on his part to be
named for the discussing and deciding of this difference. Which motion of his
albeit I desired to wave, wishing him rather to make choice of some other, both
nearer at hand, and of better abilities, the City affoording such not a few;
yet at his instant request, the rather pressing it upon me, because he had, as
he said, so happily light upon me unexpected, and notwithstanding that he knew
before my judgment in some particulars to differ from his, having both by word
of mouth, and in writing also sometime at his own request manifested to him as
much, yet making no reckoning thereof, I was at length induced to condescend
thereunto.

The persons nominated by Mr Walker were Mr Stock, Mr Downame, Mr Gouge, and
Mr Westfield; whereof three is yet living, Mr Stock only is deceased. Those
that were nominated by Mr Wotton (because Mr Mason by occasion of an
extraordinary employment by his Majesty suddenly enjoined, of surveying a book
of Dr John Whites ready to be published, could not attend the business,
another therefore being substituted in his stead) were these, Mr Balmford, Mr
Randall, Mr Hicks, Chaplain to the Earl of Excester, and my self; who alone (I
suppose) of all the four now survive, and am the rather induced to afford
this Christian office to so worthy (...), Mortuum etiam haud sustineo amicum
prodere, Eurip. apud Dion. Prus. orat. 37
a deceased friend.

It was thought not so fit to meet in a private house (which at first we had
done, but found therein some inconvenience) as in some Church that stood out of
the way of ordinary concourse. By occasion hereof Dr Baylie, afterward Bishop
of Banghor, came in as one of us, and made up a ninth, because we desired to
make use of his Church. There accordingly we met, and some time being spent,
or, if you will, wasted, rather in loose invectives then in orderly disputes, I
made bold to propound a course to the rest of the company (because time was
precious, and my self came farthest) for the better expediting of the business
undertaken by us; which was also generally approved of by the rest, and by both
parties agreed unto.

The Proposition was this, That Mr Walker should in a Parallel consisting of
two columns set down Socinus his heretical and blasphemous errors and
positions on the one side, and Mr Wottons assertions, wherein he charged him to
concur with Socinus, over against them on the other side: upon view whereof
it might the sooner appear how the one suited with the other.

Mr Walker undertook so to do; and Mr Wotton required only to have Mr Walker's
said writing delivered unto him some two or three days before the set time of
our next meeting, that he might against that day prepare a brief answer
thereunto, in writing then to be exhibited. The motion was on either side
deemed equal; nor did Mr Walker himself mislike it.

Now by this means, God in his providence so disposing it (which at the present
in likelihood was little dreamed of) Mr Wotton, as Heb. 11.4.
Abel, though deceased, is enabled to speak in his own defense, and to plead
now his own cause as well as then he did.

Mr Walkers Parallel, and therein his Evidence produced for the proof of his
charge above mentioned, you shall have in his own words as it was then given
in; those pieces of it only that were conceived in Latin being faithfully
translated word for word, as near as could be, into English, because in English
Mr Walker's book with the renewed Charge is abroad.

Mr WALKER's evidence.
THat it may plainly appear that Socinus, Servetus, Ostorodius, Gittichius,
Arminius and Mr Wotton do in the doctrine of Justification hold one and the
same opinion in all points, I show by the parts and heads of their doctrine set
down in order, and by their own sayings and testimonies paralleled and set one
by another.

The first error of Socinus and his followers is, That Justification is
contained only in Remission of sins, without imputation of Christ his
Righteousness.
SOCINUS. His own words.
1 For (as often has been said by us) in remission of sins, which is the same
with not-imputation of sins, is our righteousness contained: and therefore with
Paul, not to impute sins, and to impute righteousness, or to account
righteous are the same. And with this imputation (as we have said) the
imputation of another righteousness has no commerce. Treatise of Christ the
Savior. Part. 4. chap. 4. page 463. column. 2. near the end.

2 There is no one syllable extant in holy writ of Christ's righteousness to be
imputed unto us, Chap. the same, page 462.

3 It is the same with Paul, to have sins covered, to have iniquities
remitted, to have sin not imputed, that it is, to have righteousness imputed
without works. And this manifestly declares, that there is no cause why we
should suspect mention to be made of another righteousness, since we read
that Faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness, or unto righteousness,
page the same. col. 2.

4 God delivered the Lord Jesus unto death, that by him rising from the dead we
might hope to obtain justification, that is, absolution from our sins, Page
463. col. 2.

5 That is first to be considered, that this imputation can in no wise be
upheld, In the same place.

WOTTON.
1 Albeit with Piscator I willingly acknowledge that the justification of a
sinner is wholly comprehended in the alone pardon of sins; yet I find no where
in Holy writ that there is need of the Imputation of Christ's passive obedience
unto the attaining of it, Theses in Latin.

2. That Christ's obedience is imputed by God to the justification of a sinner,
does not appear by any testimony of Scripture, or by any argument, or by any
type or ceremony in the Law, or by any signification in the Sacraments of the
Gospel, In the same, arg. 1.

3 No necessary use or end can be assigned of the imputation of the obedience
of Christ to the justification of a sinner, In the same, arg. 4.

4 I renounce the Law, both in whole and in part, performed by our selves, or
any other in our stead, to the justifying of us in the sight of God.

5 I assent to Piscator, that justification consists wholly in remission of
sins. For so does the Apostle, Romans 3. and 4. propound and dispute the
question, without any mention or inckling of Christ's righteousness. These are
his words in a little English Pamphlet, first published briefly, and secondly
by him enlarged.

The second point or error is, That Faith is a condition appointed by God to
be performed on our parts for obtaining of Justification.
SOCINUS.
1 The promise was made to Abraham not without a secret condition, to wit, that
he should walk before God and be perfect, that is, he should not refuse to obey
him. Now to walk before God, and to obey him, are included in faith, and cannot
be without it; yea they flow from it alone, as he himself teaches after in the
same chapter.

2 The confidence says he (which he had before affirmed to be faith) is the
cause of our obedience: Therefore a man believes, because he trusts. And it
is perfected by obedience: because no man is truly said to have trusted, before
he do indeed obey, Part. 4. chap. 11. page 555, 556.

And a little after,

3 Whereby that appears to be most true, which we even now strove to prove,
that that faith, which of it self so far as concerns what is in us does
justify us, is confidence in Christ, 559.

WOTTON.
1 The condition to be performed on our part to justification, is to believe,
Sermon 8. upon John, page 352.

2 The act of faith or believing brings justification and adoption only and
merely by the place and office which the Lord of his own mercy has assigned
it, to be the condition required on our parts for the atchieving of these
favors and honors, Sermon. 9. page 452.

The third error is, That Faith does not justify us, as it apprehends
Christ and his righteousness, but by it self, in a proper not metonymicall
sense.
SOCINUS.
1 We are justified by faith in Christ, so far forth as we trust in Christ,
Part. 4. chap. 11 page 558. col. 2.

2 The faith of Christ does justify us by it self, or (to speak more rightly)
God does justify us by himself, page 559. col. 1.

WOTTON.
1 Faith in that place (to wit, Romans 4.5.) is to be taken properly unless
peradventure it be used for to believe or to trust. For that which is by some
alleged of a trope, whereby they suppose that Christ's obedience apprehended by
faith is signified, I doubt how I may grant.

And a little after,

2 What trope should there lie hid, I see not.

3 Also Sermon. 9. on John. Abraham believed God; and it, that is, his believing,
was counted to him for righteousness, page 453.

4 Also in his Purgation, I think that faith in Christ, without a trope, in
proper speech is imputed to all believers for righteousness.

The fourth error is, That for faith properly taken, and dignified and made
worthy, not of it self, but in Gods acceptance and of his mercy, a man is
justified, and may lay claim (as it were) to remission of sins.
SOCINUS.
1 For faith we are deemed perfectly just.

And a little after,

2 Abraham believed God; and for that cause he was accounted of him for
righteous, Part. 4. chap. 4. page 462. col. 2.

3 For one act of faith was Abraham righteous, Servetus, Book 2. of Law and
Gospel, as Calvine recites in his refutation of Servetus, page 903.

WOTTON.
1 He that believes is accounted by God, to all purposes concerning eternal
life, to have done as much according to the covenant of the Gospel, as he
should have been accounted to have done, according to the covenant of the Law,
if he had perfectly fulfilled it, In his first English paper.

The fifth error is, That faith is no firm persuasion, by which men apprehend
and lay hold upon Christ and his righteousness, and apply them to themselves,
as of right belonging to us by our spiritual union: but that it is a trust and
confidence in Christ for salvation joined with obedience to Christ's precepts:
or (to speak plainly) a confidence that Christ, having obtained by his
obedience the Kingdom and all power, will certainly give us salvation, if we
rely on him, and obey his counsels.
SOCINUS.
1 Faith in Christ, which makes us righteous before God, is nothing else but
to trust in Christ, Part. 4. chap. 11. in the beginning: and in the same, page
560. col. 2.

2 To believe in Christ, is nothing else but to trust in Christ, to cleave to
Christ, and from the heart to embrace his doctrine as heavenly and healthsome.

And a little before,

3 This your apprehension of Christ, is a mere humane device, and a most empty
dream.

And toward the end of the chapter.

4 He calls our persuasion of righteousness, already obtained and gotten by
Christ, vain.

WOTTON.
1 As for that persuasion, wherein some would have faith to consist, it
follows him that is justified, not goes before, as faith must needs do, Ser.
on John, p. 392. also p. 338. and 448.

2 To believe in Christ is to trust in Christ, and to rest on him, to have his
heart settled, and to rely wholly and only on him.

And what this trust is, he describes more particularly, page 390. where he
says,

3 It is such a Faith, as makes us rest upon God for the performance of his
promise.

The sixth error is, That Christ's whole obedience and righteousness serve,
first and immediately for himself, to bring him into favor and authority with
God: and secondly only for us: Not that it might be communicated to us in him,
to make us truly and formally righteous, but only that it might serve for our
use in that it makes him gracious with God, and so both able to obtain that
faith might be accepted for righteousness, and we for it; and also powerful
to give those blessings which are promised to those that trust in him.
SOCINUS.
1 As Adams offense made him and all mankind procreated by him guilty of
death, so Christ's righteousness and obedience procured life eternal to Christ
himself. Whereby it comes to pass, that so many as shall by procreated by him
become partakers of the same life, Part. 4. chap. 6. and, 2. part. 2. Chap. 8.
p. 178. col. 2. and, 3. part. 3. chap. 3. in the end.

WOTTON.
In a paper written in Latin.

1 All the good will wherewith God embraces us proceeds from that grace,
that Christ is in with God. Now that is in these things for the most part
contained, that he is by nature the Son of God, that he is perfectly holy, that
he has performed obedience exact in all respects, both in fulfilling the Law,
and in performing all things belonging to the office of a Mediator: from
whence it follows, that those that believe are for Christ's righteousness
gracious with God.

And in the same paper,

2 If question be concerning the formal cause of justification, I exclude from
it either obedience of Christ. If of the efficient by way of merit, I maintain
it to depend upon both.

The seventh error is, That Christ did not satisfy the justice of God for us,
in such sort, that we may be said (when we truly believe) to have satisfied the
justice of God and his wrath in him: and that God of his mercy without Christ's
satisfaction made ours, does pardon our sins and justify and redeem us.
SOCINUS.
1 Read over all the places of the New Testament, in which mention is made of
redemption, and you shall find none in which there is evident mention of the
payment of any true price, or of satisfaction, Part. 2. chap. 1. page 109. col.
2.

And a little after,

2 As we are said to be sold under sin, that is, enslaved to it, without any
true price intervening; so are we said to be redeemed from the same by Christ,
that is, freed, though no price has truly and properly intervened.

3 Likewise Part. 1. chap. 7. in the end, he denies Satisfaction.

4 Also Chap. 4. page 84. col. 2. That there is no need of any satisfaction,
when the offense is not imputed to him that has offended by the party against
whom he has offended, or the debt is by the creditour remitted.

WOTTON.
In the paper written in Latin.

1 Neither (that I speak freely what I truly think) can I understand what place
is left for pardon, if by payment of pains in Christ we be deemed to have
satisfied the wrath of God, and to have born the punishment due to our sins:
for Pardon and Punishment are contraries.

2 Also in his English paper enlarged, the same words are rehearsed, and the
same reason given, even, Because Pardon and Punishment are contraries.

Thus have you the evidence by Mr Walker then given in for the justifying of
that his charge: which, for the effect and substance of it, is in as broad and
odious terms in print now again renewed, some six and twenty years after the
cause according to his own request heard, and some fourteen years after Mr
Wotton's decease.

May it please you now to hear Mr Wotton's answer in his own defense, as it
was in writing by him then exhibited.

Mr. Wotton's Defense.
Charge.
A. W. in the doctrine of Justification holds one and the same opinion in all
points with Socinus: and therefore is justly charged by G. W. to be guilty of
heresy and blasphemy.

That he does hold the same in all points, is showed by these seven Errors
following:

Error 1.
The first Error of Socinus and his followers is, That Justification is
contained only in Remission of Sins, without Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness.

Answer.
1. If you mean without Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as the meritorious
cause of Justification, I grant the Proposition to be heretical and
blasphemous. And so does Socinus deny Imputation.

I. Christ (says he) did not satisfy for our sins: Treatise of Christ the
Savior, Part 1. chap. 1. page 1. part 2. chap. 17. page 245. col. 1. part 3.
page 306. beginning, and chap. 1. page 307. col. 1.

II. He could not satisfy, Part 2. chap. 24. page 288. col. 2. part. 3. in
argum. chap. 6: page 406.

III. He did not pacify God, Part 2. chap. 2. page 120. col. 1. Part 1. chap.
7. page 76. col. 2.

IV. There was no need of any satisfaction to be made, Part 1. chap. 1. page 1.

V. God would not that any satisfaction should be made, Part 3. chap. 2. page
317. col. 2. and page 324. col. 1.

But I do not so deny Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: for I acknowledge
it to be the meritorious cause of our Justification, and that for it we are
accepted of God as fully as if we had fulfilled the Law perfectly, Treatise of
the Justification of a Sinner, in explication of the definition of
Reconciliation, and in the definition of Adoption, and in the Conclusion.

2. If you mean without Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as the formal
cause whereby we are made formally righteous, by having fulfilled the Law, and
satisfied the Justice of God in Christ, I say the Proposition is neither
heretical nor blasphemous.

And that I must be so understood, my writings show.

For, first, I profess that I speak of the formal cause of Justification,
Treat. of Justific. of a Sinner, in the State of the Question, in Answer to
Argum. for Position 1. and to Arg. 1. for Position 3. and in the Conclusion.

Secondly, I express that manner of formally righteous, Treat. of Justific. of
a Sinner: where I expound what it is to impute to a Sinner Christ's Obedience;
and of Justification, where I deliver mine own opinion, Sect. 2. which is the
very place that Mr Walker alleges against me out of the English.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this first Error, but am unjustly
charged to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy for holding one and the same
opinion with him in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

Error 2.
The second Error is, That Faith is a condition appointed by God to be
performed on our parts for obtaining Justification.

Answer.
1. Socinus defines believing on Christ to be nothing else then to yield ones
self obedient to God, according to the rule and prescript of Christ, and by so
doing to expect from Christ himself the crown of life eternal, Treat. of
Christ the Savior, Part 3. chap. 2. page 321. col. 1.

2. He makes Faith to be indeed (as Mr Walker says) a confidence in Christ,
but he adds immediately (which Mr Walker leaves it) that is, an obedience to
Christ's precepts, with a firm hope of obtaining those things which he has
promised to those that obey him, Part 4. chap. 11. page 559. col. 1. and in the
same page he labors to prove, That Faith does signify obedience to Christ's
Commandments, Sect. Hinc factum est.

3. He makes Repentance and Amendment of life the means to obtain that
forgiveness of sins which Christ has brought, Part 3. chap. 2. page 321.
col. 1.

4. And whereas Faith is added to Repentance, Act. 20.21. It is not (says he)
because Faith in Christ is required unto the obtaining of remission of sins,
as working somewhat more in us besides repentance it self, that does hereunto
appertain; but because this Repentance comes not but by Faith in Christ. In
the same column, Sect. Manifestum.

5. He says, that whereas John sent the people to Christ, and warned them to
believe in him; it was not as if they should find any other thing besides
Repentance in Christ that was requisite unto the obtaining of pardon from God,
but, first, that they might be exactly taught of Christ what that Repentance
ought to be. Besides, that from Christ they might understand that that was
wholly so indeed, which he delivered only as a messenger. Lastly, that they
might not be washed with water only, but have the holy Ghost poured upon them,
Part 3. page 320. col. 1. But I never writ, spoke, nor conceived so of Faith to
the obtaining of Justification. Nay, it is evident that I make Faith not a
believing of that which Christ taught, and an assurance of obtaining that he
promised upon our Repentance and Obedience (which is Socinus his confidence,
Part 4. chap. 11 page 559. col. 1.) but a resting and relying upon Christ, a
trusting to Christ for salvation, Sermon. 6. upon John, page 286. and Sermon. 8.
page 386, 389, 398. yea a means, and, if you will, an instrument to apprehend
and receive Christ to our Justification, Treat. of Justific. in explicat. of
the Definition of Reconcil. So that, for ought I hold of Faith, Christ's
Righteousness may be even the formal cause of our Justification.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this second Error, but am unjustly
charged to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy for holding one and the same
opinion with him in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

Error 3.
The third Error is, That Faith does not justify us, as it apprehends and
applies Christ and his Righteousness; but by it self, in a proper not
metonymicall sense.

Answer.
This third Error has two Propositions, which shall be answered to severally.

The former is, That Faith does not justify as it apprehends and applies
Christ and his Righteousness.

I hold this Proposition to be false; acknowledging and confessing that Faith
does not justify us but only as it apprehends and applies Christ and his
Righteousness; the very condition of the Gospel being, That by Faith we
apprehend and apply Christ and his righteousness to be justified thereby,
Treat. of Justify. in explic. of the definit. of Reconcil.

The other Proposition is, That Faith does justify us by it self in a proper
not metonymicall sense.

I never said or thought that Faith does justify us by it self. This only I
say, that in this Proposition, Faith is counted for Righteousness, the word
Faith is to be taken properly, not tropically; the question being in such
Propositions not of the meritorious or formal cause of our Justification, but
of the condition required on our part instead of keeping the Law.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this third Error, but am unjustly
charged to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy for holding one and the same
opinion with him in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

Error 4.
The fourth Error is, That for Faith properly taken, and dignified and made
worthy, not of it self but in Gods acceptance and of his mercy a man is
justified, and may lay claim to remission of sins.

Answer.
Neither Socinus nor Servetus (in the words you bring out of them) affirm that a
man is justified and may lay claim to remission of sins, for Faith any way
dignified, etc. Nay, Socinus avoucheth, that Repentance and Amendment of life
is that by which that forgiveness of sins which is brought by Christ is
obtained, Part 3. chap. 2. page 322. col. 1. How then am I proved to agree with
him in that Error which he is not proved to hold? Especially, seeing that I
never said that we are justified for Faith, and do renounce all dignity and
worth in Faith, and give the whole merit of our Justification to our Savior
Christ and his obedience.

That which is alleged out of my papers is no more but this, That the
condition of the Gospel being Faith, as the condition of the Law is Keeping of
the Law; he that believes in Christ has done as much, that is, performed the
condition of the Gospel, as well as he that keeps the Law has fulfilled the
condition of the Law: so that on his part God requires no more to his
Justification.

And that this is certainly my meaning, the words going before in that English
paper, and those also that follow in the other English paper, and in the
Latin, do manifestly show.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this fourth Error, but am unjustly
charged to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy for holding one and the same
opinion with him in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

Error 5.
The fifth Error is, That Faith is no firm persuasion by which we apprehend and
lay hold upon Christ and his Righteousness, and apply them to our selves as of
right belonging to us by our spiritual union; but that it is a trust and
confidence in Christ for salvation, joined with obedience to Christ's precepts:
or (to speak plainly) a confidence that Christ, having obtained by his
obedience the kingdom and all power, will certainly give us salvation if we
rely on him and obey his counsels.

Answer.
Whether the three Propositions set down in this Error, be rightly gathered
from the words alleged by Mr Walker out of Socinus or no, I leave to other
men's judgment. But whatsoever Socinus held, I have nothing to do with any of
these Propositions. Only of the first I say, That the persuasion, whereof I
speak in the place he brings, is that particular assurance that every man (as
some define Faith) must have to Justification; viz. that his sins are
forgiven in Christ: Whereas Faith (being the condition required on our part)
must go before Justification, at least in nature. But this persuasion follows
it, and is bred in us by the Spirit of God after we believe and are justified.
For it is given to us, being already adopted Sons, Gal. 4.5. and Adoption is a
Prerogative vouchsafed us upon our believing, John 1.12.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this fifth Error, but am unjustly
charged to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy for holding one and the same
opinion with him in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

Error 6.
The sixth Error is, That Christ's whole obedience and Righteousness serve
first and immediately for himself to bring him into favor and authority with
God; and secondly, only for us: Not that it might be communicated to us in
him, to make us truly and formally righteous; but only that it might serve for
our use, in that it makes him gracious with God, and so both able to obtain,
that Faith might be accepted for Righteousness and we for it; and also
powerful to give those blessings which are promised to those that trust in him.

Answer.
The words you allege out of Socinus prove no more (at the most) but the first
point of this Error, That Christ's whole Obedience and Righteousness serve
first and immediately for himself, to bring him into favor and authority with
God.

There is nothing in this sixth Error that touches me.

All that I say, in the former place alleged by Mr Walker, is no more but
this; That whatsoever makes Christ beloved of God is some cause of Gods love
to us who are beloved in and for him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 6. Now among other things
for which Christ is beloved, his holiness and obedience have no mean place.
Whereupon it follows that they may be reckoned in the number of those causes
that make us beloved of God in and for his Son our Savior Jesus Christ,
Treat. of Justific. of a Sinner, in explic. of the Definit. of Reconcil.

In the latter I say, That we are not accounted to be Formally Righteous, by
having fulfilled the Law and satisfied the Justice of God in Christ. And yet I
acknowledge that we are (for his obedience) accepted of God as righteous no
less then if we had indeed performed those things. And this was determined in
the first Error to be neither heresy nor blasphemy.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this sixth Error, but am unjustly
charged to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy, for holding one and the same
opinion with him in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

Error 7.
The seventh Error is, That Christ did not satisfy the Justice of God for us
in such sort that we may be said (when we truly believe) to have satisfied the
Justice of God and his wrath in him: And that God (of his Mercy) without
Christ's satisfaction made ours, does pardon our sins, and justify and redeem
us.

Answer.
Socinus denies all satisfaction by Christ, not only with limitation (as you
propound it in this seventh Error) but absolutely, as appeared in mine answer
to the first Error: and accordingly he maintains that we are pardoned,
justified, and redeemed without any satisfaction made by a true price paid to
God the Father by our Savior Christ for us.

But I acknowledge and profess that Christ has made satisfaction for us, by
paying a true price to God his Father for us: and that God does not pardon us
but for and in respect of that payment made for us.

In the places alleged out of my writings I say no more, but that we cannot be
held to have satisfied the wrath of God in Christ, and withal to be truly and
properly pardoned. If we have been punished, how are we pardoned? If we be
pardoned, we have not been punished. Christ has been punished for us; we are
pardoned for his punishment, Esa. 53.5.

Therefore I agree not with Socinus in this seventh Error, and (having cleared
my self of agreeing with him in any of the seven) am unjustly charged by Mr
Walker to be guilty of heresy and blasphemy for holding one and the same
opinion with Socinus in all points in the doctrine of Justification.

The Issue.
THus have you both Mr Walker's charge and evidence, and Mr Wotton's Answer in
his own Defense thereunto. You exspect now (I suppose) in the next place to
hear what the Issue of it was. Upon the delivery in therefore and view of both
compared together, there was by word of mouth further debating of the several
points at large, as well between Mr Walker and Mr Wotton, as by the parties
nominated on either side among themselves. Who albeit they agreed not with Mr
Wotton in all particulars; and in some things then debated were not all of one
mind, as in that question occasioned by Mr Wotton's answer to one branch of the
last Article, to wit, Whether in the work of redemption the faithful be
considered as one with Christ, or no: or in plainer terms, Whether our insition
into Christ in the order of Nature be deemed to precede the work of our
redemption, or the work of our redemption in the order of nature to go before
it: concerning which, being somewhat a nice subtlety, they were divided; some
holding the one part, and some the other: yet so far were they from
condemning Mr Wotton as guilty of heresy and blasphemy in the points above
mentioned, as that they professed diverse of them, and that some of Mr Walker's
own choice, no one denying or opposing the rest therein, to have often taught
some of them, namely the second, to wit, That faith is a condition appointed by
God to be performed on our part for obtaining justification: which yet Mr
Walker affirmed to be a most dangerous error.

In conclusion, it was without further question or contradiction of any of the
whole eight then present, as well the nominated by the one as those assigned by
the other, with unanimous consent generally resolved and pronounced, that there
appeared not to them either heresy or blasphemy in ought that Mr Wotton was by
Mr Walker convinced to have delivered or maintained.

Which Mr Wotton requiring further to be testified under their hands, albeit Mr
Walker, perceiving it to be deemed equal and meet, began to storm and fly
out, and demanded of them, whether they would take upon them to determine
heresy; whereunto such answer was returned as was fit: yet it was accordingly
(as of right it ought) yielded unto. The writing by all the eight then present
subscribed, being committed to the custody of Dr Bailey, upon promise by him
made to deliver it to Mr Wotton, when it should by two of the parties, one of
either side nominated, be demanded of him in his behalf.

Now howsoever the Doctor afterward upon some pretenses refused to deliver it
as he had promised to do, whether pressed by Mr Walker to detain it or no, I
wot not, himself best knows: yet for the truth of this issue, as it has here
been related in the behalf of Mr Wotton, it will plainly appear by the
attestation of two of those of Mr Walkers party yet surviving (for a third is
deceased, and the fourth was absent at the meeting that concluded all) in the
very terms ensuing, written with one of their hands, and subscribed by them
both.

We whose names are underwritten do testify, that the eight Ministers at the
hearing of the foresaid points in controversy betwixt Mr Wotton and Mr Walker,
and continuing till the end of that meeting (though in every part they assented
not to every of those Positions) under their hands witnessed, that they found
neither heresy nor blasphemy in any of them, or to the like purpose.

JOHN DOWNAME. WILLIAM GOUGH



Thus have you faithfully related, upon ground of proof undeniable, the
carriage of the business between Mr Walker, and Mr Wotton, and the issue of
the same. You have Mr Walker's charge and challenge, together with the evidence
produced and given in by him to make his charge good: you have Mr Wotton's
defense in way of answer thereunto: and you have the verdict and sentence of
select parties appealed to by joint consent, delivered upon diligent view and
due hearing both of the one and the other; who all say in effect, that Mr
Wotton did sufficiently clear himself from those foul imputations of heresy
and blasphemy, that Mr Walker then charged him with; and that Mr Walker failed
in making good that his charge then, which with so much vehemence and virulency
he renews now against him, yoking him with Peter Abeilard, and with Servetus
and Socinus, as agreeing with them in such damnable and detestable dotages as
they held and maintained, and for which they were condemned as blasphemous
heretics.

The iniquity whereof, though it may sufficiently appear by what has already
been related; yet that the Reader may the better judge how equally these
persons are here yoked together, it will not be amiss (though the matter be
but unsavory) to acquaint him with some general and principal heads of those
points, that Abeilardus, Servetus, and Socinus stand charged with.

Peter Abeilard, or Balard (for Fr. Amboesius in Praefat. Apol. pro Petr. Ab.
of his name they agree not) whom Beatus Rhenan. ad Tertull. calce Admonit. ad
Lect.
some affirm to have been one of the first Fathers of the Schoolmen, and first
founders of School-divinitie (for Joannes Cornub. apud Quercetan. in Notis ad
Abeilard.
Peter Lombard, say they, took from him) is by Bernard Bern. ep. 192.
charged, to have savoured of Arius in the doctrine of the Trinity; of
Pelagius, in the doctrine of Grace; of Nestorius concerning the person of
Christ: to have held Idem ep. 190.
Christ to be no true Redeemer of us, nor to have reconciled us to God by his
death: but to have been an exemplary Savior; that is, such an one as by his
life and death, piety and charity, obedience and patience, chalketh us out
the way to heaven: and to have broached in his books Idem Ep. 188.
a number of sacrilegious errors concerning the soul of Christ; his descent
into hell; the power of binding and loosing; Idem Ep. 193.
the sacraments of the Church, and by name that of the Altar; of original
sin; of concupiscence; of sins of delight, infirmity, and ignorance; of
sin in work and sin in will. But he tells us not what they were.

Now whether Bernard charge him truly herein or no (which for diverse causes may
be justly questioned; and the rather for that Abeilard in Abeilardus in
Apologia operibus praefixa: and Epistolarum l. 2. ep. 20. Et in Apolog. altera
apud Berengarium ejusdem discipulum ep. 17. contra Bern. p. 308.
his Apology flatly denies, that he ever wrote taught or once thought the
most of those points that Bernard fasteneth upon him, and for that Legantur
Bernardi Epist. 195, 196, 240. and in Cant. sermon. 55, and 56. sed and Illyric.
Catalog. Test. Verit. lib. 15. p. 1531.
Bernard's reports concerning others of those times, some whereof were his
scholars, are not unjustly suspected) it is not much material to our purpose;
the rather for that the charge granted to be true, the more pestilent and
blasphemous his errors are found to be, the greater inequality will appear in
the collation, unless the parties collated can be proved to have maintained
opinions as pestilent and as blasphemous as his.

But for Servetus and Socinus, the other two, what they held, we have records
of sufficient credit.

For Servetus, (from whom Mr Walker borrows only one small snip, wherewith
to piece up his Parallel) whether his works be extant or no, I wot not; and the
better it is, if they be not. But what he taught and maintained, we have taken
out of his writings, from Mr Calvine's relation, together with an ample
refutation of them adjoined thereunto.

His chief assertions, among a vast heap of other absurd, prodigious and
blasphemous ones, are these: That Calv. in relat. and refut. error. Servet.
Artic. 1. p. 607. col. 2.
there is no such Trinity of persons in the Deity, as is commonly maintained;
where he brandeth the orthodox tenet and the abettours of it with most hideous
terms raked up from Hell it self, and too vile to be related, and fasteneth many
uncouth and fantastical conceits full of impiety and blasphemy upon the
names given in Scripture to the second and third Persons. That Ibid. 657. col.
2.
God in the beginning of the world produced the Word and the Spirit: and began
then as a person to appear in three uncreated elements and communicated of his
essence unto all that he then made. That Ibid.
This Word being the face and image of God, is said then to have been begotten,
because God then began to breed it, but stayed for a woman to bear it, until
the Virgin Mary was; that Ibid. p. 658. c. 1.
then Christ was conceived in her womb, of the seed of the Word and the
substance of the Spirit: so that the Word was then first turned into flesh, and
then that flesh by the Spirit wholly turned into the essence of the Deity;
Ibid. p. 657. c. 1.
and that Christ has now a spiritual body, that fills heaven and earth.
That Ibid. p. 658. c. 1.
The Spirit is a kind of gentle breath, which at first proceeded from the Word,
consisting partly of the essence of God, and partly of a created power: which
Ibid. p. 656. c. 2.
having moved in the Creation on the face of the waters, and there finding no
rest, retired again to heaven, and there stayed, till at the Baptism of Christ
it came down again. That Ibid. P. 609. c. 1. art. 29. and page 658. c. 1.
Man is said to be made after Gods image, because the very essence of God is in
every man from his original, and that not in the soul only but in the body;
and that though the devil have by a kind of carnal copulation got into, and
possessed himself of the body, yet that the divine essence remains still in
the soul: which notwithstanding it is by sin become mortal, and is breathed
out into the air, yet in the regenerate by means of the Spirit it becomes
consubstantiall and coeternall with God. That Ibid. p. 657. c. 1.
Christ should have come to carry men to heaven, albeit Adam had never fallen;
and that the Tree of knowledge of good and evil was a figure of Christ, whom
Adam over-hastily desiring to taste of threw himself and his posterity into
perdition. That Page 609. c. 2. art. 37. and p. 547. c. 1.
None are guilty of mortal sin, till they be twenty year old; because they
have no knowledge of good or evil till then; Page 650. c. 2.
nor are therefore till then to be catechized: Page 649. c. 2.
nor any to be baptized, till they be thirty years old; because of that age the
first Adam was created, and at that age the second Adam was baptized. That Page
658. c. 1.
Before Christ's coming the Angels only, not God, were worshipped: Page 657. c.
2.
nor were any regenerate by the Spirit: Page 658. c. 1.
nor did their faith regard any more then terrestrial good things; save that
some few by apropheticall spirit might aloof off have some smatch of spiritual
things. That Page 658. c. 2.
From the beginning, as well Gentiles as Jews, that lived well according to
natures guidance, were thereby justified; and without faith of Christ shall
thereby at the last day attain to life eternal. That Page 652. c. 2.
The Law was given only for a time; and Page 655. c. 1.
that men were then saved by the observation of it; which was then observed,
when men did what they could, who might therefore glory then in their works,
being justified wholly by them: but Page 652. c. 2.
that men are not now to be scared with it. That Page 658. c. 2.
Faith is nothing else but to believe Christ to be the Son of God: and Page
656. c. 1.
to justify, nothing, but to make a man righteous, who was sinful before: and
that Page 658. c. 2.
we are now justified, partly by faith, and partly by works. That Page 653. c.
1.
On Gods part there is no promise required unto justification: nor does faith
depend upon any promise of God, or has any respect thereunto: in regard
whereof Page 654. c. 2.
he scoffeth at those that build their faith upon Gods promises, or that
mention them in their prayers. That Page 651. c. 2. and 654. c. 1.
There is a perfect purity in every holy action; and such as may endure even
the extreme rigor of Gods justice. That Page 655. c. 2.
Abraham was indeed justified by works: howbeit, that his believing is first
said to be imputed to him for righteousness, and he said to be just for one
act of faith; (the place by Mr Walker produced) as if a prince out of his
favor regarding his soldiers mind and good will, would be pleased to accept
the good endeavor for the thing fully performed: and so Abraham was therefore
by God deemed just, because by his believing it appeared that he stood well
affected to acquire a commendation of righteousness by his good works. Which
is all, says Calvine, that he ascribes unto faith, either in us, or in him.
Page 655. c. 2. and p. 658. c. 1.
Whose faith, also he says, as of others before Christ was no true faith but a
figure of true faith, and the righteousness imputed to him no spiritual but a
carnal righteousness, and insufficient; not a truth, but a shadow; and the
imputation of it but a type of the great grace of Christ to us.

And thus much, if not too much, of Servetus his blasphemous and prodigious
dreams and dotages: for I have raked overlong in this filthy sinck, in this
stinking puddle, which till upon this occasion I never pried or peered into
before, nor, it may be, should ever have done but for it.

Socinus remains, whose positions what they were, may appear by his writings
yet extant, and in the hands of too many; by means whereof it is to be feared
that they do the more hurt. The principal of his tenets, though not so
prodigious as those of Servetus, yet blasphemous and vile enough, are these: He
denies not Socin. in Evang. Joan. c. 1. v. 1. p. 4, 5.
Christ's deity and eternity only, with Epiphan. haer. 69. and Aug. haer. 49.
Arrius; but Socin. in Joan. 1.1. p. 7. and ad Cuteni object. art. 8.
his existence at all also before he was conceived by the Virgin Mary, with
Epiphan. haer. 71. and Aug. haer. 44
Photinus; and so makes him Socin. in Joan. 1.14. p. 35, 36.
a mere man. He denies Christ to have been Socin. de Christo Servatore l. 2.
c. 1. and 2. per totum.
a redeemer, or to have wrought any redemption, or to have paid any price or
ransom unto God for us, truly and properly so termed; or that Ibid. l. 1. c.
1. p. 145 and l. 3. c. 2. p. 317, and 321.
by his sufferings any satisfaction at all was made unto God for our sins; or
that Ibid. l. 1. c. 7. p. 76. and l. 2. c. 2. p. 120. and de Offic. Christ art.
38, 39.
God is thereby reconciled unto us; or that De Christ. Servat. l. 3. c. 5. and
de Justificat. synop. 1 p 4.
thereby he merited ought from God either for himself or for us. That De
Christ. Serve. l. 1. c. 1. initio.
he is therefore only called a Savior, and is said to save, partly De Christ.
Serve. l. 1. c. 2. de Offic. Christ. art. 5. ad object Cuteni, art. 9.
because he teaches us by his doctrine, and Ad Cuteni object. art. 14.
shows us by his practice the way to life eternal, and De Christ. Serve. l.
1. c. 3. de Offic. Christ. art. 35.
confirms the same to us by the miracles that he wrought, and De Offic.
Christ. art. 36, 37. and de Christ. Serve. l. 1. c. 5.
by his dying and rising again from the dead; and partly, De Christ. Serve. l.
1. c. 6. and de Offic. Christ art. 45.
because he has power given him by God to make the same good unto all that
believe in him: That De Christ. Serve. l. 4. c. 11. de Offic. Christ. art. 42.
ad Cuteni object. art. 17.
to believe in him is nothing else but to obey him, or to keep his precepts
under hope of eternal life thereby to be obtained; and that this is the very
De fide and oper. ad q. ^ p. 58. and ad q. 3. p. 60. ^ in Notis a^ Dial. N.N n.
16.
form and essence of justifying faith; and that De Christ. Serve. l. 4. c. ^ p.
462. c. 2. and p. 463. c.
for so doing a man is justified and accepted to life eternal; and that De
fide and oper. ad q. p. 62.
it is therefore in our power by our good works to attain thereunto. This is
the sum of his doctrine concerning man's justification and salvation; wherein
also I am the briefer, because much of it has been laid down before.

Now whether Mr Wotton or Mr Godwin do conspire and concur with Peter
Abeilard, Servetus and Socinus in these their blasphemous dotages, and are
therefore justly yoked with them by Mr Walker or no (it concerns not me) let
others try and determine. But for Mr Wotton his own defense of himself herein,
and the censure of others by Mr Walker himself appealed to, A sente^tia ex co^
promisso aditi appelari non posse, saep^ rescriptu^ est. Anto^ Imp. Cod. l.
tit. 55. leg. A sententi^ arbitri pa^tium volu^tate electi non appellatur, Jo.
Al. dicaeolog^ l. 3. c. 55. n. 15.

Ab electis judicibus appell^re non putamus lic^re, B^rn. ap 180.


which he cannot therefore in equity go from, I have faithfully delivered;
being confirmed by the attestation of those whom he cannot except against,
being men of his own choice, and of sufficient credit and good esteem
otherwise. And as for Mr Godwin, to me a mere stranger in regard of any
acquaintance, one whom I never heard or saw to my knowledge, save once of late
occasionally at the funeral of a friend, nor know certainly what he holds or
has taught, I say no more, but as they sometime of their son, John 9.
Aetatem habet, he is old enough, and (for ought I know) able enough to answer
for himself: and he surviveth yet so to do if he see good.

But whether Peter Abeilard ever moved this Question which Mr Walker says he
was the first mover of, to wit, Whether faith, or the righteousness of Christ
be imputed in the act of justification, is to me a great question. And Mr
Walker's reading herein (as, I confess, it may well be) is better then mine,
if he can show where either he did ever handle it, or is reported so to have
done. Nor do I find in all Mr Calvines large relation and refutation of
Servetus his blasphemies, where ever he propounded or maintained any question
in such terms, as this by Mr Walker is here conceived in. For Socinus, it is
true, that in prosecution of his discourses, wherein he labors to prove
Christ to be such a Savior only as was out of him before described, he is
enforced to acknowledge, that Faith, such as he means, that is, Obedience to
Christ's commandments does justify, without relation to ought done or suffered
by Christ, any satisfaction made by him, or merit of his; neither of which he
acknowledges: And the like may be deduced from what Servetus held, (though his
assertions, as Calvine also well observes, are found often to enterfere, and to
cross one another) and from that also that Abeilard is by Bernard charged to
have held.

But if Mr Walker will father this upon him concerning the denial of the
Imputation of Christ's righteousness, because from his positions it may be
deduced, he might have risen a great deal higher, and have fetched in Simon
Magus, Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion, Manes, and a whole rabble of old heretics
(and out of the ancient stories of the Church made a list as large almost as
his book is long) from whose pestilent positions the same might as well be
deduced, as from those things that Abeilardus and Servetus maintained.

Again, neither is this sufficient to prove a point to be heretical and
blasphemous, because it may be deduced from assertions of that nature: for if
we shall condemn as heretical and blasphemous, whatsoever by necessary
consequence may be extracted from those dotages that some blasphemous heretics
have held, the like censure may then, yea must then be passed upon many
orthodox tenets, in the negative especially, maintained by us against the
Church of Rome, since that they follow necessarily from those grounds that by
such heretics have been held. For example: That Christ's body is not really
present in the Sacrament, nor is sacrificed and offered up to God in the Mass,
does necessarily follow from the opinion of Aug. haer. ^2.
Eutyches and others, who maintained the humane nature of Christ to be
swallowed up into his Godhead; from the dotages of Aug. haer.
Simon, Epiphan. haer. 23.
Saturn, Idem haer. 24. and Aug haer. 4.
Basilides, and many more, who held that he never suffered at all; of Epiph.
haer 44. and Aug. haer. 23.
Apelles, who held that his body was dissolved into the four elements; of Aug.
haer. 59.
Seleucus, Aug. ibid.
Manes, Epiph. haer. 66.
and Hermes, that held it fastened to the stars, or lodged in the sun: That
there is no purgatory, nor use of invocation of Saints, or of singing masses
for souls deceased, follows necessarily from the opinion of Act. 23.8.
the Sadduces that held no spirits, and from the Calv. ad^ Psychopann^
Psychopannychites dream of the souls sleeping till the last day; which in
effect therefore, the sequestration of them at least from the divine presence
till then, that Chamaelion Spalatensis In concio^ne coram Jacobo Roge.
pretended the rather to maintain, because by it those Popish errors would be
easily and evidently overthrown. For who is so meanly versed in the art of
reasoning as not to know, That (...), Arist. Topi^ l. 8. c. 4.

Ex falsis fa^ sum, verum que aliquando sequetur. Ex veris poterit nil nisi
vera sequi


the clearest truths may be deduced from the grossest falsehoods that may be.
As, grant a stone to have life, and a man to be a stone, and it will thence
follow, that a man has life. And yet were it absurd from hence to conclude,
that whosoever holds the latter must needs either concur in judgment with
those that should maintain the former; or hold any falsehood, much less any
absurdity, though those positions that infer it be both false and absurd.

And let Mr Walker consider this calmly and seriously with himself: He has put
down this in his Parallel for an heretical and blasphemous assertion, That
Faith [in Christ] (for so he must needs mean) is a condition appointed by God
to be performed on our parts for the obtaining of Justification. Now should any
man hereupon enter an action against Mr Walker, accusing him as guilty of
Judaisme, Paganism and Mahumetanisme, would he not, think we, make grievous
complaint, yea with open mouth cry out and exclaim of extreme injury done him?
Yet is it as clear as the light at noonday, that whosoever shall deny Faith in
Christ to be a condition appointed by God to be performed on man's part for the
obtaining of Justification, shall have all Jews, Paganes, and Mahumetanes
concurring therein with him, as in a point naturally flowing and necessarily
following from what they hold.

To go yet a step further; Suppose a man do concur with such heretics as
have been spoken of in some point, be it a truth or an error that is held and
maintained by them, will it thence follow that he consents to them and
agrees with them in all things, or in such blasphemous opinions as they
otherwise hold? And here Mr Walker's candor may well a little be questioned.
To prove Mr Wotton to hold one and the same opinion with Servetus in all points
concerning the doctrine of Justification, he produces only this one saying of
Servetus, For one act of Faith was Abraham righteous. Whether he have proved Mr
Wotton to have said the same or no, is not now material, and I leave it to be
judged by what himself has spoken for his own defense in way of answer
thereunto. But should a man, putting in a cross interrogatorie, demand of Mr
Walker Whether he hold that Christ has fulfilled the Law for us or no? I doubt
not but he would answer in the affirmative, That he has. And the very same
thing in the very same words is found by Calvin related out of Servetus,
Carnali populo licuit in suis factis gloriari, nobis autem non licet nisi in
cruce D. N. J. C.
The carnal people, says he, might glory in their deeds, but we may not but
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: Solum licet nobis Christi facta
narrare, qui omnia opera pro nobis operatus est, and legem implendo pro nobis,
cum non possemus id praestare, Servet. l. 2. de Leg. and Evang. apud Calv. p.
655. col. 1.
We may only relate the facts of Christ, who has wrought all our works for
us, by fulfilling the law for us when we could not do it our selves. Yet I
suppose Mr Walker would take it in very ill part, and well he might, if any
should thence conclude, That Mr Walker therefore does in all points hold one
and the same opinion with Servetus concerning the doctrine of Justification.

Again for Socinus; he maintains, that Est verbum hoe justificationis
juridicum, in quo jure nemo justus efficitur, sed pronunciatur, Socin. de
justif. fragm. sect. 1. p. 45.
To justify is a term of judicature; that, In hac disputatione non significat
justum facere, Idem ibid.
it signifies not to make a man inherently righteous, or to infuse
righteousness into him; but Justificari nihil aliud est, quam pro justis
haberi, De justif. synops. 1. p. 6. Justificat, i. justos pronunciat, De
justif. these. 4. p. 9. Certissimum est justificationem in sacris literis aliud
nihil significare quam justum pronunciare, and pro justo habere, Idem in notis
ad Dial. N. N. n. 18. and n. 55.
to deem him, repute him, pronounce him righteous; that Autore Dialogi saepius
notat, quia justificationem cum vitae sanctimonia sive justitia and sanctitate,
qua quis praeditus est, confundit, Number. 1. n. 18. and n. 31. and n. 46. and n.
55. and n. 59.
they do amiss that confound justification and sanctification, the one with
the other; that Credere Jesum revera esse Christum Dei Filium, etc. non est
revera ea fides, quae nos Deo ad vitam aeternam gratos efficit, De fide and
oper. quaest. 1. p. 55. Neutrum horum, Credere Jesum esse Messiam, Et verbis
ejus fidem adhibere, est fides illa qua revera justificamur, Ibid. q. 2. p.
57.58. Fides, qua credimus Dei promissa esse vera, non est revera ea fides qua
justificamur, In notis ad Dial. n. 16.
That faith whereby we are justified is not a bare belief or assent unto the
truth of Gods word; that Fides, sive obedientia quam Christo praestamus, nec
efficiens nec meritoria causa est justificationis atque aeternae salutis, nec
eam per se meretur. De justif. These. 5. and ad Cuteni object. art. 8. and de
fide and oper. q. 4. p. 62. Credere vera esse quae Deus vel Christus dixit, non
est fides qua justificamur. De Christ. Serve. 1.4. c. 11. p. 554. c. 1. and p.
558. c. 2.
Neither faith, Ex merito ipsorum operum nequaquam justificamur, De justif.
These. 5. Non sunt meritoria, and sua^ vi hominem justificantia, De justif.
fragm, sect. 7. p. 50.
nor works, believing in Christ, or obeying him, are the meritorious causes of
justification; or Nulla esse opera, quae tanti sint, ut propter ipsorum meritum
justificari possimus, De justif. fragm. sect. 7. p. 48.
do or can, in regard of any worthin them, merit ought at Gods hands: Fides in
Christum non propria vi justificat, De Christo Servas. l. 4. c. 11. p. 560. c.
1.
nor does faith it self justify by any force of its own. And all these points
do our writers generally maintain against the Papists; yet never, that I know,
was any Papist so shameless (and yet shameless enough are they) as to condemn
them therefore for Socinian heretics, or to charge them to agree with Socinus
and his followers in all points concerning the doctrine of justification.

Again it is by Socinus held and maintained, that Formalis justificatio nostra
coram Deo fuit and semper erit remissio peccatorum nostrorum, Socin. de fide
and oper. q. 1. p. 56. Justificatio nostra nihil aliud reipsa est, quam
peccatorum deletio, Ibid. q. 3. p. 60.
justification consists in remission of sins, which for my part I deem
erroneous, and suppose that elsewhere I have evidently showed it so to be;
howbeit Justitiam Paulo nihil esse, quam remissione^ peccatorum Calvin. in Romans
4.6.
Calvine, Posira est omnis justificatio in in remissione peccatorum, Beza de
Coena Dom. p. 175.
Beza, Justificatio consistit in gratuita remissione peocatorum, Olev. in Romans
4.6.
Olevian, Idem sunt justificatio and remissio peccatorum, Ursin. explic.
catech. q. 60. sect. 3.
Ursine, Idem sunt, remissionem peccatorum consequi, and justificari, Zanch.
miscel. l. 2. de remiss. pecc. these. 10. p. 329.
Zanchie, Justitia imputata nihil est aliud quam remissio peccatorum, Piscat.
These. vol. 1. loc. 15. these. 14.
Piscator, Consistit in remissione, tectione, non-imputatione peccatorum: haec
est ejus forma privativa and positiva, Pareus in Romans 46. observe. 2. Deus
proprie justificat, cum absolvit gratis, remittens peccata propter meritum
Christi, Ibid. ad v. 5. obs. 3. Justificationis causa formalis est remissio
peccatorum, Idem cont. Bellarm. de justif. l. 2. c. 1. p. 365.
Pareus, Justificatio nihil est aliud quam remissio peccatorum parta per
sanguinem Christi, Muscul. in Joan. 3.18.
Musculus, Quid aliud est justificatio quam peccatorum remissio? Bullinger. in
Romans 4.8.
Bullinger, Justificatio constat proprie peccatorum remissione, Fox de Christ.
gratis justif. l. 3. p. 383.
Fox, and diverse others of great note and name, yea Credimus totam nostram
justitiam positam esse in peccatorum nostrorum remissione, Confess. Gallicana,
art. 18. Credimus peccatorum nostrorum remissione unica totam nostram justitiam
coram Deo contineri, Confess. Belgica, art. 23.
whole Synods of ours are found so to say; and yet were these men never yet,
that I ever heard or read, for so saying condemned as heretics, much less as
blasphemous heretics, but had in high esteem, as their worth, parts and works
well deserved, by those that therein dissented from them.

I will add but one instance more, Socinus in the very entrance into his
Treatise of Christ the Savior affirms, that Potest Deus de suo jure, quantum
velit, dimittere, Socin. de Christo Serve. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4. c. 2. Sicut
potuisset homines, licet peccantes, morti aeternae non mancipare, sic ex illius
imperio eximere, and quidem jure, sua sola voluntate potest, Ibid. page 5. c. 1.
God might if he had pleased, without breach of his justice, have pardoned man's
sin freely, without any satisfaction required: and the same he Potuit Deus
peccata nobis jure ignoscere, nulla a quoquam pro ipsis vera satisfactione
accepta, Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 1. page 306. cap. 1. and page 309. cap. 1.
after again presses and prosecuteth in his ensuing discourses. Whether this
be an error or no, I stand not now to discuss. In scripto Poster. ad Tossanum.
Vorstius herein concurred with Socinus; and In rescript. ad Vorstium.
is for the same reproved by Tossanus; Grotius likewise for De satisfactione
Christi adv. Socin. c. 3.
affirming the same is In judicio de Grotii libr. G. 2. p. 2. and G. 3.
taxed by Ravenspergerus; In Respons. ad judic. Ravensp. cap. 28.
defended by Vossius, who cites Divines not a few, both old and new, saying
the same: And it is maintained, to pass by all others, by Poterat nos Deus
verbo aut nutu redimere, nisi aliter nostra causa visum est, Calv. in Joan.
15.13.
Calvine, Si sic justus est Deus, ut sine detrimento justitiae suae misericors
esse nequeat; si sic, inquam, justitiae suae obstrictus est, ut non liceat
ipsi, quorum vult misereri and a peccatis absolvere teos, quod tamen permultos
sibi principes and magistratus libere permittere videmus, consequitur, non
tantum illi potestatis esse in ipsius creaturas, quantum est homini in suos
subditos, qua re quid potest magis impium cogitari? Muscul. in Loc. commun. de
justif. c. 3.
Musculus, Deus servare nos poterat solo suo imperio, peccata simpliciter ex
sua misericordia condonando, Zanch. de Incarnat. Christ. l. 2. c. 3. quest. 1.
Zanchie, Though it be not lawful for a man to justify the wicked, yet God
may do it, that is above all law: and the reason is, because God has right and
power to forgive sins, because they are committed chiefly against him.
Grineus and Faius, Willet on Romans 4.5. quest. 14. n. 2.
Grineus, Faius, Concedimus justitiam punientem peccata, and misericordiam ea
condonantem, utramque esse liberrimae Dei voluntatis effectum, Casman.
Anti-Socin. part. 2. c. 1.
Casman, Restituere five recreare hominem non minus liberum Deo fuit, quam
creare: peccatum. solo imperio tanquam nubem tollere poterat, Tilen. disput. de
Incarn. fill. Dei.
Tilenus, Potuisset omnino Deus primos parents and omnes homines ex mortis
imperio eximere and in gratiam recipere, sola voluntate citra Mediatoris
satisfactionem ullam, nisi prius and ante protulisset decretum suum
comminatorium, Franz. disp. de Sacrif. 14. these. 63.
Franzius, Utrumque Deus potuit, and absque ulla satisfactione, and cum
satisfactione peccata nobis remittere: de facto tamen eligit hoc posterius,
Smigles. de satisfact. Christ. adv. Smalcium cap. 11.
Smiglesius, and our reverend Dr Sine dubio potuit Deus, si sic ei visum
fuisset, Adae peccatum, aut ipsi condonare, aut in ipso tantum ulcisci,
posterisque omnibus gratiam salutarem, eo neutiquam obstante, libere
gratificari, Twiss. in Vindiciis Gratiae, Potest. ac Provid. Dei. de Praedest.
lib. 1. part. 1. sect. 4. digress. 4. cap. 3. page 39. col. 2.
Twisse; yet I am persuaded that no wise or discreet man at least will hence
conclude any of these to be therefore Socinian Heretics.

And Mr Walker might do well to be better advised before he charge his
Christian brethren and fellow laborers in the work of Gods Ministry, with
these odious imputations of heresy and blasphemy, (then which what can be
more heinous, more hideous, being taints of the deepest die?) upon such weak
and unjustifiable grounds as these are.

To conclude, if any shall demand of me why I have undertaken this office
(which from some, I know, I shall have small thanks for) and why I thrust my
finger needlessely into the fire? the answer is ready from what already has
been said; I am the only surviver for ought I know (for Whether Mr Hicks be
still living or no, I am not certain) of those that were on Mr Wotton's part
entrusted and employed in this business, and I could not therefore do less
for so worthy a servant of God, and mine ancient acquaintance; whom I always
reverenced while he lived as a man deserving singular respect for his piety
and learning, and zeal for Gods cause, which An answer to a Popish Pamphlet, or
Articles tending to prove the Protestants Religion to consist of palpable
absurdities and notorious errors.

A trial of the Romish Clergies Title to the church against A. D.

A defense of Mr Perkins his Reformed Catholic, against W B. Run from Rome,
of the necessity of departure from the Church of Rome. Sermons on part of the
first Chapter of S. John's Gospel. De Reconciliatione peccatoris libri 4.


his works left behind him do sufficiently manifest, and will testify to
ensuing posterity, and both do and shall still honor deservedly the memory
of him now deceased; and at rest, I doubt not, with the Lord, enjoying the
reward of his religious pains taken in his Masters work; then to testify what
I then heard and saw, was a party in, and subscribed to with others; and to
second the pious intents of his son, who treads carefully in his fathers
commendable steps, desirous to publish what in his fathers papers he found for
the vindicating of his postumous name and reputation, as dear unto him as his
own, with this Preface and Postscript adjoined thereunto.

I say no more, but wish only Veritatem cum Charitate, that Truth may with
Charity be pursued on all parts. So grant, good Lord, for thy Christ's sake,
now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

