AN ABANDONING OF THE Scottish Covenant BY MATTHEW the Lord Bishop of ELY.



LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell for Timothy Garthwait at the Kings Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

A BRIEF THEOLOGICAL TREATISE, Touching that UNLAWFUL SCOTTISH COVENANT, Which
was In the late ungracious times (with fraud enough, and force,) obtruded upon
the PEOPLE of ENGLAND.

WRITTEN FIRST, Upon Sundry private Occasions, in Prison, BY MATTHEW the Lord
Bishop of ELY, After the manner of a Sermon, upon these Words, PSALM 44. 18.
Nor behave our selves frowardly in Thy Covenant.

BUT Now thought fit to be published by Him, for the present use of his
DIOCESE: The readilyer to prepare all therein, (Divines, and others,) for that
due Abrenunciation of the said COVENANT, WHICH They are (out of hand) to make,
by virtue of the ACT for UNIFORMITY.

Ju^^. 5. 31. Sic pereant Inimici Tui, Domine; Qui autem diligunt Te, sint
sicut Sol in ortu suo. PSALM. 44. 18 Nor behave our selves frowardly in thy
Covenant.
THe words are the last part of that verse: The whole verse is, And though all
this be come upon us, yet do we not forget Thee, nor behave our selves
frowardly in Thy Covenant. Of this therefore now we are to treat.

But no; that we may be more then sure, if more may be, Pray let us look on it
once again. Yet do we not forget Thee, nor behave our selves frowardly in thy
Covenant; So goes our Old Translation, That Is sure. But then, Yet have we not
forgotten Thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our new
Translation goes so; And here is some difference in words But howsoever these
differing couples, Have not and Do not, Deal and Behave our selves, Frowardly
and Fasly; in effect they come both to one, and so all is the same: And it is no
other, I assure you, in the Latin and the Greek, and the Hebrew. So that by
the grace of God we are cock sure of the Text it self, every way.

And it is well we are, That we have a sufficient warrant by that; Otherwise
perhaps we might be to seek, How to bring both ends together* What? As the
times long have gone, to be in a Covenant, and yet not to behave our selves
perversely? To have any Engagement upon us, and yet not to deal falsely? Out
alas, 'tmust be the clean contrary, As frowardly then, as you will: Be it never
so perversely, nay, nothing but falsely: And all the better, because of the
Covenant. Haec est Lex Adami! Is it not? God knows, it is not to be denied; This
has been the manner of men lately, whatsoever is to come of it now.

Well, If it must be so, So be it: yet it is but hard luck though, to be brought
now to an after reckoning! But who can help that? The the other might have been
helped, when time was. But Spiritus spirat, ubi, and quando vult; And seeing
Gods Spirit has set it down so, All we cannot balk it, in the end.

On we must go therefore, and hear, what the holy Spirit says. And the sum
of it, if I apprehend it right, will consist of three particulars, One, is
presupposed; Another, is now professed; A third, is after aimed at.

That in a Covenant they were, That Is it they take for granted, and that is the
first.

Next, That in that Covenant their Demeanor ever was without Coven or
Collusion; neither Falsehood, nor Perverseness in the carriage of it; of thus
much they now make a solemn Profession; And that is the second.

Lastly, That God in his good Time will rescue and deliver them, that is to be
inferred here, and it is expressed in the close of the Psalm; And that is the third.

Now in the foremost of these will come to be considered the Persons; First,
who they are that pretend to this Covenant, Nos, We. And then with whom this
Covenant is, In Tuo, In Thy Covenant. And that is as much as we shall need. For
the knowing of these Two will make the Covenant it self known. So we shall not
be to seek in that neither.

The next part will be the harder of the Two; But yet in that we shall have Two
chief points to guide us.

The first, Matter of Law, what it is to be perverse, to be false and froward
in such a Case: And therein, no less then the Law it self, yea no other then
the Lawgiver, God himself, will be for our Rule. So we need not fear the frauds
of a bold pleader, to make a nose of wax of it: Nor the flaunts of a Rude
Hackster, to hew out his own pleasure in it. No: Annuntiabunt caeli justitiam
ejus; Quoniam Deus Judex ipse, Psalm. 50. 6. There Is our security, That Ipse,
It Is God himself must be the Judge in it.

The the other point will be the Matter of Fact; whither guilty they, or not
guilty of such Perverseness. And the Trial therein we all know how it lies: By
God and the Country. An excellent way surely! though not for some men's turns.

Trial by the Country, in this? How? Upon that Evidence, that all the Vicenage
will bring in, Nay, that all the world can give of it. I warrant you, the
Covenant of God shall be no preface to the first Psalm, shall not be at the
pleasure of a Council of the ungodly, (They have learned now to call it A
Council of War,) Nor of the common Way of Sinners, (in a paltry pack't
Committee:) Nor of the seat of the scornful (their High Court of Injustice:)
Else, you might be sure, what would become of it: Any of their own Fellows
should never be a Thief, But who they would, should be a Grand Malignant, and
hurried away to the Block: And where these rule the roast, it is necessary
indeed it should be so, 'Twould not be perverse enough, else: But you see, It
will be otherwise.

The second part of the Trial is, By God; And that, At both his own Bars: For
the present, first, At that of the Conscience, That Is here, The Common Pleas;
In which (...), Heb. 4. 13. All is barefaced, yea chined down the back, an you
will; that is, so laid open, so displayed, that sure we are, there can be no
Juggling there.

And there shall be another hereafter, The great Assizes, At the Kings High
Bench, Christ's own Tribunal: At which all shall appear; All Persons: 2 Cor. 5.
10. and all Things, For all Books and Records shall be opened: Apoc. 10. 12.
And what can be more?

But that is to come. In the mean while, The Hope and Assurance is, that God
will at last rouse up himself. [ Up Lord, why sleep Thou? ver. 23.] (Their
foes indeed made no other Account, but that they had lulled him fast enough:)
And, that remembering well, what they yet suffer, Why forgettest thou our
misery? ver. 24. He will set up his Mercy again, and help and deliver them,
ver. 26. And that is in brief the aim of all this Profession and Supplication.
So you have now the Contents of the Text.

And now of these, That I may be able to speak and you to hear, to the
Discharge of our Duties, and to the Instruction of our Souls, and all to the
Glory of Almighty God, I am to beseech and require you all, to join with me in
Humble prayer to Him, to the Glorious and Blessed Trinity, God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, for the Assistance of the Holy Spirit unto us, and for the gift
of all Divine Graces upon us. And that not upon us alone, but upon his Holy
Catholic Church, etc.

We have not behaved our selves frowardly in thy Covenant.
THe Persons are now the first Branch of our Discourse, We and Thee, say they,
We have not, and Not in Thy Covenant. In the Name of God then, Who are these?
who are They that speak this? And who is He to whom they speak it.

We.
FOr the Speakers, whosoever they prove to be, this you shall find of them,
They are the same all the Psalm through. They very first word is, We have
heard, verse. 1. And so it goes on, We overthrow our Enemies, verse. 6. and, Thou
savest Us, verse. 8. and, We make our boast, verse 9. And there ends the first
part of the Psalm: And that is all Eucharistical, an oblation of thanks and
praise, for all Blessings, Old and New.

Then begins the second part of the Psalm; and that is a Solemn Lamentation,
Humbling themselves lowly under the rod. And still it holds on in the same
Persons, Thou make Us to be a byword, ver. 15. and, Yet We do not forget
Thee, ver. 18. and, Thou have covered Us with the shaow of Death, ver. 20. and,
We are counted as sheep to be slain, ver. 22.

And there comes in the last part of the Psalm, A holy Letany or Supplication,
that all of them make for favor and mercy, Be not absent from Us for ever,
ver. 23. and Why forgettest Thou Our misery? ver. 24. and Our soul is brought
low, ver. 25. and Arise and help Us, ver. 26. But all the way you see, singing
their Praises, or making their Submission, or sending up their Petitions, still
it is, We, and Us, and Our, They are all the same still.

Very well then. But yet, How shall we find it, Who they are? Surely the Psalm
it self, though they be no where named there, yet has enough in it, unless I be
deceived, to tell us the name of them: For will you be pleased but to mark it,
that however the Persons be still the same, yet now and then the Number is
changed for a touch or two, and then they fall in again, as before: It Is, Thou
art My King O God, ver. 5. Not Our King, but My King, as if it were of One in
the Singular. And it is, I will not trust in My Bow, it is not My Sword that
shall save Me, ver. 7. These are in the Thanksgiving part. And so it is again in
the Humiliation part; We, and We, and Our, and Us a great while, and then on a
sudden, My confusion is daily before Me, and the shame of My Face has covered
Me, ver. 16.

Perceive you nothing then? Oh, it is plain by this, that the Church of God is
the Speaker in all this Psalm, and so it comes to be We and I; First We in the
name of all particular Persons, as so many Saints and Servants of God, and yet
I, in the name of the whole Corporation, the Holy Church: As One and All; one
Catholic Body, by the band of the Holy Spirit comprehending them all.

And wondrous wisely dealt they in it. They knew, they should be the welcomer
to God for this: In such a multitude, and yet in such an Unity, Ecce quam
bonum! Psalm. 133. to be sure God would never fail them: No, says David, For
there the Lord had promised his Blessing, ver 4. But what talk we of promise?
Though that be enough for us, yet God counts it too little for Him; the word
therefore indeed is, Ibi praecepit Dominus; God has commanded his Blessings,
all the Blessings of Life and Goodness, to attend in the end upon such sacred
Assemblies. This for the Speakers.

Thy Covenant.
There Is no stop at all then to be made neither about the the other Person, In
pacto Tuo, who it is, that is spoken to; For the whole address (we see) is unto
God; He is named at the very first; We have heard with our Ears O God, ver. 1.
and afterward He is spoken to, as God, ver 5. and, as our God, ver. 21. and, as
Lord, ver. 23. And had He not been named at all, yet it could be no other. For,
to whom the Church makes her Prayers; to whom she sends up praises; to whom she
ascribes the guidance of the world; under whose Hand she humbles her self; upon
whose mercy she relies for help and deliverance; It can be none but God, God
all in all. So now it is the Church of God that says this; And it is God to whom
she says it; And it is the Covenant of God of which she says it, Neither have
we behaved our selves frowardly in Thy Covenant.

If there be any thing then to be stood upon here, it must be but to find,
which of Gods Covenants they mean: For God, we shall find, had more Covenants
then one; In several Respects, several Covenants.

Pactum Providentiae.
IN respect of his Providence and the Government of the whole world: This very
natural course of Day and Night, God himself calls it His Covenant of the day,
and His Covenant of the night, Jerem. 33. 20 We may remember also he calls it
His Covenant, the saving of Noah in the Ark, Genesis 6. 18. and That the Earth
should never be destroyed with a Flood any more, Genesis 9. 9.

From these Generals, come we down to these in the Text, To the seed of
Abraham; And very that, we shall find, is the Covenant of God: First, That
Abraham should have such a seed; Five several times God terms it His Covenant,
Genesis 17. 2, 4. His everlasting Covenant, ver. 7. 19, 21.

Secondly, That this seed should inherit the Land of Canaan, that is His
Covenant too, Genesis 15. 18. And not to stay there, These are the Covenants which
He renewed with Isaac, Lev. 26. 45. and appointed the same to Jacob for a Law,
and to Israel for an everlasting Covenant, Psalm. 105. 10.

But now, if we weigh it well, none of all these could be the Covenant of our
Text; for they were not liable to the Lies and distortions of Perverse men:
'Twas not in them, in no man's power, to run counter therein, were they never so
froward; no body could set themselves against those Covenants.

Leaving therefore His Covenants of this sort, which concerned God's Power
alone, and His free conveyance of secular Blessings upon Men; we must look at
that sort of these Covenants, that concerned God's Worship also, and so had a
respect to the Duties, which God required His Church should perform to Him. It
was possible indeed for Men to be men, and to be perverse enough in these; Of
these therefore they must be understood to speak, when they profess on this
Fashion, That They have not dealt perversely in His Covenant.

Now I might easily here enlarge again about the Particulars that were of this
kind. For Covenants he had bound them to, before Moses received his Law; To the
Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17. 10. and the not observing of it was the
breach of Gods Covenant, ver. 14. The Sabbath also they had before they came at
Horeb, Exodus 16. 29. and it alone by it self was a perpetual Covenant to the
Children of Israel, Exodus 31. 16.

Pactum Religionis.
BUt then at Sinai, when the Law came, that took in all, Sabbath, and
Circumcision, and all other duties; And by this means that, above all,
(especially as comprehending the Ten Commandments, which by themselves have the
Title of His Covenant, Exodus 34. 28.) carried away the Name of the Covenant of
God. Therefore the book of it was called the Book of the Covenant, Exodus 24. 7.
and the very blood that Moses sprinkled the Book with, called the Blood of the
Covenant, ver. 8. And their walking contrary to it was made the Quarrel of
avenging Gods Covenant, Lev. 26. 25.

What shall we need more? I should but trouble your memories, and tire you out,
if I should draw you here to the several parcels of Moses Law? To show you,
that the Shewbread it self bare that style of an everlasting Covenant, Lev 24.
8. and the very Salt of their Sacrifices termed the Salt of the Covenant of
their God, Lev. 2. 13. So was the Priests portion, A Covenant of Salt for ever
before the Lord, Numb. 18. 19. Beside the Additional granted to Phineas and
those after him, as a perpetual Covenant, Numb. 25. 12.

But all this may be spared; the Point we are in yet (you know) is but, what
they took here for granted: And having proved, that it is the Church of God,
that says this, of necessity it must be granted, That they had the Right
worship of God among them, (Other Church there was none then in the world, and
nothing could make it a right Church but that;) They had both the Rule, and the
exercise of the Service of God, as he by His Law had Covenanted it with them.

Their Protestation
ANd in that, They had no way carried themselves perversely, that is now the
next Part; And it is the main Drift of all the Text aims at, the Protestation,
that Gods Church here makes.

Of which this would be noted at first, They make it not to men; Men by men may
be foully deceived, But to God himself it is made, Non in Tuo, it is to the Knower
of all Hearts, and to the Judge of all men. As much as to say, Thou O God
know that we lie not, there has been no falsehood, no frowardness in us; We
have been true in, and to thy Covenant.

So, to that we come now; yet always remembering, that the Sermon now is to us,
and not to God: Not to tell him, what he knows so well; But to tell you from
him, what he has taught us of this matter. That so, If you find them that say
it, true, By their Line you may level your selves: If wrong, yet you may see by
them, where and how to mend it.

For us then, the prime Enquiry will be, For the Matter of Law; That we be not
fooled with Fancies in our Religion, nor led by the nose with every false
Semblance; But that out of the Laws of God we may be truly informed, what it is
to be True or false in Gods Covenant.

Matter of Law.
I Pray therefore mark it, In Gods Covenant, I say only, I do not say in any
Covenant: No-tis out of our Quest that; For, such as the Covenant may be, The
forwarder in it, the worse, and the frowarder, the better, the further from
mischief. I know they have used a great while to tell you of a Solemn League
and Covenant, as though the Name of that should carry it. Alas, poor Souls! The
Solemner the League is, the Covenant's the more damnable, Unless it be a right,
and a lawful Covenant.

It Is not the Name therefore that warrants any thing; Nothing more usual then
wrong Names and false Titles; But they must be sure the thing it self be
without exception, if they look to have the Name of it without Question.

Otherwise, Do not we know, that there were Covenants with Devils, such as went
for the Gods of the Heathen! Exodus 23. 32. And the Prophet tells us of a
Covenant with Death and Hell. Esa. 28. 15. And such Covenants as these, the
frowarder in them, and the further off them, happier man be his dole, ever. As
it is in some Diseases, the less yielding, the better sign, and the more
peevish, the more hope of life: So to fly off from such Covenants with all the
speed we may, is to fly from Destruction; And the sooner they are broken and
quite abandoned, the sooner is our return back into Gods Covenant, and the
safer we by so much; The shorter our Sin, and the surer our Salvation.

Now the word that the Holy Spirit here has chosen, comes of Shakar, and the
Hebrews by that signify all manner of Lying and Prevarication. Our search
therefore here must be, whether men in the Covenant of God, that is, in their
Religion, or in any part of it, carry themselves thwart and contrary to it, as
far as they can make a lie their Refuge, or can shelter their foul Carriage
under any false pretense in it. Let it offend no body this Language, for it is
not mine, but the Prophets own description, in terminis, Esaias. 28. 15.

And he has another Question about it also, that would be a little thought on,
Is there not a Lie in my Right Hand? says he, Esaias 44. 20. A lie there? What
means He by that? Why, because it was a Jewish Ceremony in their Covenants and
Oaths, to lift up the Right Hand, by that he expresses his mind; And these
false dealers in their Religion, He says, they had so beguiled themselves,
that 'twas not possible for them to free their Souls. Now God forbid: Why not?
Because they never would think with themselves, Is there not a lie in my Right
Hand?

A Lie then to be sure there may be there, that is once; Satanas ad dextram, as
David's curse goes, Satan at a man's right hand, Psalm 109. 5. The Devil standing
there, not only to resist the man, (as he stood by the High Priest, till the
Angel took his room, Zech. 3. 1.) but to entice him, and win him to himself:
And woe is me, for such poor men, so willingly bewitched by him, as that they
could ever think they did best, when that they did was but to make good a lie
for him, and by making so foul a lie in their Religion, to snake hands with the
Devil!

But I am only now to lay the Law to them: The Church of the Jews, that
appeals here to God against perverseness in His Covenant, does it for that, for
a Legal Justification of her self from all Lying, (we must use that word which
the Spirit has used) that is, from Hypocrisy and Dissembling, and any false
carriage in the practice of their Religion. Now the By-ways of that, they are
many; as many almost as men; For several men have several devices, to cloak
their maliciousness, ever, and to put a Vizard of Godliness upon all that they
do: But we must now hold to the Text only, and not lose our selves on the By.

The High Road-ways, or (as I may say) the common Church-ways, such as a whole
Church are likely to take for perverseness in their Covenant with God, that is
in their Religion, are principally two: Either disclaiming the Old, and
pretending to another: Or, still pretending to the Old, and yet practicing
another.

Apostasy.
'TWas come to that pass in the Ten Tribes, when after the Calves had been up a
while, Elias for evidence of their open Apostasy, charges them with these two
particulars, That they had thrown down Gods Altars, and had destroyed His
Prophets: And by these He makes his proof ('it was the Law, that he laid against
them,) That they had quite forsaken the Covenant of God, 1 Reg. 19 14.

He thought indeed, that they had destroyed not the Prophets alone, but the
true Professors also, all but Himself: Till, God told him, No; He had yet seven
thousand among them, that continued steadfast in His Covenant, do they what they
could. But the generalty indeed was gone, carried away quite with their new
Devices, their New Feasts, that Moses never knew of, and their New Priests, no
Sons of Aaron, and had all Covenanted like men, with the Calves in Bethel and
Dan, 1 Reg. 12. 29.

After this, we meet with a dismal Curse also laid upon Judah, Esaias 24. 6. And
why? Because they also had broken the Covenant. What Covenant? The everlasting
Covenant he calls it, yet meaning that of their Religion, which God expected
they never should have started from. But how was that? By transgressing the
Laws, says he, and changing the Ordinances. The Ordinances indeed they had a
long while preserved; this therefore was downright now, Shakar to some purpose,
They of themselves to change all.

But then among them of Judah also, those few that were no such Changelings,
What became of them? Oh! He became a Savior to them! For he bears them that
witness, They were children yet that would not lie, lo Ieshakar, Esaias. 63. 8.
that is, How ere they sinned else, very grievously, Yet they would not fail in
the main of all, not forgo the Covenant of God; God therefore is pleased to
put his requital in the same phrase; Because He had promised it at first to
David, lo ashaker, therefore, says He I will be true to them and never fail
them, Psalm. 89 33. How ere I shall punish them for their sins, yet Never will I
break my Covenant, nor change the thing that is gone out of my Lips, ver. 34.
But it is so plain a Case this, that we need no more in it.

Hypocrisy.
THe the other is far the worse, as having the more danger in it; When they carry
the lie o'that fashion; Pretend nothing but Zeal for the right Covenant of God,
and yet practice naught but villainy against it! And that this is it he
principally aims at, the Psalmist indeed shows, Because withal he moves that
Question, If they do so, shall not God search it out? ver. 21.

Yes, to be sure, He will: Carry they it never so craftily, Do what they can,
all the great Masters of this Holy Lie, put what colors they list upon their
Covenants, all is in vain! For yet, there is light enough in Gods Word to discover
their Hypocrisy, and Law enough there also, unless God give them Repentance,
to cast them all down into the pit of Hell for it.

What a notable Precedent for this have ye in the Prophet Jeremy? God foresaw
these cunning tricks in the men of Judah, and to be sure to meet with them
i'th'end, He begins with them in it; He calls to the Prophet to proclaim to
them Dibre haberith, the words of the Covenant, Jer. 11. 2. and to lay his
Curse upon them that keep it not, ver. 3. That done, He makes him proclaim it
over again, ver. 6. and show them How He had plagued their Fathers for not
keeping it, ver. 8.

How then? Little dreamed they, that God did all this, to discover their Craft:
Therefore they presently (very Holy men!) put on a good face, and combine most
Religiously together, And now All as One man, They are for the Covenant, yea
mary are they; So that the Prophet himself (a man rightly meaning) thought, all
would have been well.

But then he presently tells us, God called again unto Him, and told Him, They
deceived Him, what ere they pretended, this of theirs was none of His Covenant,
'Twas all but Kesher, this, verse. 9. A strong Conspiracy between the Two
Houses. They had indeed now subtly made a Solemn League between those two
Kingdoms; But the Rebellion was the greater for that, Because it carried away
the poor people of God with that pretense; And thereby His Covenant, the right
and true Covenant of God, was the more foully broken by them, verse. 10. So that
He flatly commands the Prophet, (and that not once, but twice) Not so much as
once to pray for them, verse. 14.

And how think you of this now? But this is only to show, how such Cases stand
in Law; That Is our Point; And here God himself was the Judge in it, the Prophet
makes but the Report of it: But it comes home so close to us, that I doubt, all
the cunning 'twixt Orkney and Silley will be able to make no other Issue in it.

For if they think to tell us, There indeed it could be other then so, not but
a shameful Lie, and a very damnable Case, because all their conspiring then was
in truth, to promote the Worship of Baal verse. 17. But how can that be the Case
now among us? Alas, how easily is this put by? For, in competition with the
Covenant of God, every thing that is not it, is Baal; Let them call it the
Covenant, as much as they will, An Engagement, or what they will nickname it;
yet it is an Idol; and all the Worship they give it, is flat Idolatry; no better
then the Worshipping of Baal: For why? Is it not set up against God? Does it
not shoulder His Covenant? sits cheek by joll with it? Yea, it is the thing,
that is alone and principally intended by them: So they make a very Baal of it.

Let me tell them therefore, there are in the World more Baal, then one; An
'twere but a wisp, yet when they join it with that which belongs unto God, and
couple it with His Covenant, Their God they make it, it is a Baal to them. It is
not for nothing therefore, that the Scripture so often makes that word Plural;
We are told of leaving God, and serving Baalim, Judge 2. 11. that is, Any thing
else (that is in Divine esteem with men) but God; Any thing by them set up with
God, To them, that is their Baal, a privy Idol in their budget: So, that d'off
will no way help them.

Of all the rest not in this matter of Covenanting; For howsoever they have
gone to work too now, to make a wretched People willing to be cheated by them;
let me give them this gift, The first Idolatry, that the People of God ever
committed with any Baal, was in reference to a Covenant.

And how say you then? Does this suit right? Take another. The first Covenant
that ever Gods People made (of their own heads, without Gods Deputy to lead
them,) was a Covenant with Baal. And now I hope they will thank me, for I am
come close home to them.

But I will not fail to make it good; For the Word of God is express in it:
When Gideon was dead, they went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal Berith
their God Judge. 8. 33. Baal Berith a God? Now a' Gods name, what is that? Why in
plain English, it is the Idol of a Covenant; so Berith signifies. So that for
all brave Covenanters here you see, Baal is their Chief, The very first that
e're twang'd that way, to be entertained by the People, and to Covenant with
them.

And yet for the while then, who but He? Lord! such a Racket! In all have there
must be an House made for Him (a Temple forsooth, for a God) by the wise Lords
of Sichem, Judge. 9. 4. And there he must have his Exchequer, to receive what
came in upon the Public Faith: And then presently upon that score, brave and
jolly men, they make themselves, no less then King-makers, and out of their
Treasury, they assign him an Allowance of Seventy pieces of Silver for the
States service. What to do? A Holy Work, you may be sure: To hire vagring
Villains, to go and murder seventy of his Fathers Sons, that He only may be
their King, ver. 5.

And for a few years this held on bravely; Till at last, God in Vengeance upon
them all, sent an Evil Spirit between Him and his Makers, His great Masters:
And what was the Issue? First, He destroyed Them and their City, ver. 45. and
at once burnt the House of their God Berith, as great a God as he was, He and
his Covenant went to the Fire, (who but their new General against it more then
any?) and a Thousand of the chief Covenanters roasted together with it, verse.
49. And within a while after, this King of theirs had his own brains beaten
out, verse. 53. and yet as short a time as he had, to make it more remarkable,
he murdered himself also, by making his own Man to be his Murderer, verse. 54
This is the Account, which the Spirit of God gives you of that Solemn League
and Covenant, the first of the kind!

The Result whereof is this, That in point of Law the word it self works just
nothing: To talk therefore now of a Covenant, and to look, that alone should do
it, alas, it is but a poor piece of Sophistry; none but S. Paul's Galatians will
be bewitch't by the bare Name of it; For sacred it may be, and it may be
abominable. Do you not see, how the Holy Spirit used it, even when the Name of
God is joined to it? mentioning the Covenant of God, He meant the true God; But
yet naming it so, The God of their Covenant, He meant a Filthy Idol.

Will you any more? Is not, I pray, the same term of Covenanting given in
Scripture to the vilest of all Gods Enemies? The Edomites and Ismaelites, the
Moabites and Hagarens; Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, with them
that dwell at Tire; Assure also is joined unto them. A desperate Crew! Rake all
the world, and not find a worse! And now what of them? As we read it, it is,
They have cast their Heads together and are confederate against Thee. Psalm. 83.
5. Confederate! A word very unadvisedly (by their good leaves) here used; Else,
why was it then at the Reformation, turned out of Latin? Confederate is merely
Latin.

But this very Berith is the word in the Psalm, They have all entered into a
Covenant against Thee. You see therefore, what a goodly race of Covenanters
then there was, and of what Date they originally be. And this above all, Baal
Berithans they were all, The Servants of Baalim, of Idols and Devils; All in a
solemn Covenant against the true God: And therefore the Spirit of God would not
omit, there to set down their proper Motto also, The Sum of their Resolution
what it was, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession, verse.
12*

Well then, The Law proving to be this, That Covenant there is none justifiable
and good, with no Person, no People, no Nations, that is ever warrantable,
unless we can truly tell God the Covenant is His, that it is Pactum Tuum, such
as is in a fair Order to Him, for the true Drift of it, and for the chief right
in it, and such, as He will surely own it,

Therefore, to put upon Him that, that is none of His; Or under pretense of His
better Worship, and purer Service, to combine for ought, that is quite contrary
to His Will, But only, because they say it is His, they will force it upon
others, so to be taken, and so to be done, That this is Sheker in every degree
of it, very Froward, Lying, and false dealing with God, a perverse and wicked
course in all of them, opposite (less or more) to the true Covenant of God, and
that the Vengeance of God will at last seize on all, that have any hand in it,

The Trial will now be no long labor; to find, for Matter of Fact, Whether
their Plea here in the Psalm be true or no: Whither they for any froward
carriage toward the Covenant of their God, will be found to stand Not Guilty.

But it will be a longer business though, then we can hope to end it, before
the usual limitation of our Hour be ended. For be the Evidence, that will be
brought, never so clear, yet they must have Time to hear it all, and liberty to
except, what they can against it; They must also be heard at large, What they
have to say for themselves: God forbid else.

For any man to be accused, and he cannot tell by whom; To be impeached, and he
knows not of what; Condemned, and he never heard Why, nor ever was heard, what
he could say; If there be any Law to warrant such proceedings, it must be
fetched out of Scythia; If any Religion can suit with it, it is only that of the
Sichemites God, ycleped Baal Berith, The Lord of the New Covenant.

By your good leaves therefore, we will not huddle it, nor shall our Defendants
in the Text be pinch't at all in Time; Here therefore we will now adjourn, till
God give the next leisure.

The Second PART.
Nor behaved our selves frowardly in Thy Covenant.
Here Is one thing supposed in this Text; That Covenanters these men were,
comprised in a Covenant with Him whom they treat with.

And within the Verge of that, there are three particulars. First, that it is
the Church of the Jews that are the Persons now treating. Secondly, That God
Himself is the Person to whom they make this Address: And lastly, That the
Business is to clear themselves, as to His Covenant, from frowardness,
perverseness, and Lying in all their Deportment.

And all this, by the Blessing of God, has been formerly unfolded by us.

We then fell upon a Distinction also, as touching Gods Covenant. That here is
not meant the Providential parts thereof; At first, provided for Adam, in Gods
Blessings of Nature, by the Revolution of the Day and the Night; Nor the
second, vouchsafed to Noah, for the worlds security against any new Deluge; Nor
yet a third, by His Blessings upon Abraham, to give him an Holy feed, and so
continued to Isaac and Jacob, to settle that Seed in the Land of Promise.

None of these proved to be Gods Covenant here in the Text. But it is the
Conditional part of it that they now aim at; At the Rule, that God of old had
prescribed to them, for the worshipping of Him as God, and at those Duties,
that they were by His Covenant bound to, for the observing of His Holy Law: The
general Heads whereof we found to be these two, Their Religion, and their
Allegiance.

So there came in their Protestation (and that is made to God himself,) of their
Integrity, That they were all true men to this Covenant, ever had been, and
still were forward and ready and upright in their Duties, free from all
untowardness and frowardness, from all perverseness, lying, and dissembling, in
the whole managery of it.

So, that then led us necessarily to go and argue the Point a while; And first,
For Matter of Law, To define, what it is to be false in Gods Covenant.

And by that we found, That the bare Name of a Covenant works nothing, but that
the solemner a League is, the more damnable the Covenant may be, and so may
oblige men the straightlier to a speedy breaking of it, and to an utter
abandoning of it.

The Matter therefore of the Covenant was only to be looked to, to see,
VVhither they did not, either disclaim the old One, (the true one) and pretend
to another; Or if not so palpably cross, yet (which has more danger in it;)
VVhither pretending still to the old, they did not practice another.

For if so, if either of these, then by the Law, that proved an Abominable Lie,
no less then the setting up of an Idol, 'twas the Worshipping of Baal more then
God. And this was at large exemplified by their Baal Berith, the God (forsooth)
of their Covenant; That proved to be the first Idolatry that ever Gods People
committed with any Baal; And so, the first Covenant that the People took upon
them to bring in, was a Covenant with Baal, which the more they termed it Gods
Covenant, the fouler was the Lie, and the fiercer in the end was the Vengeance of
God upon it.

And thus far now, we went before. But then being come to the next Point, The
Matter of Fact, to examine their Plea of Not Guilty, and finding that, a larger
business by far, then the Time would then admit, there we adjourned. Therefore
now by gods Providence being brought upon it again, there we are now to set in
anew, and so to proceed in it, as God shall enable us.

Join you therefore with me, I beseech you, in Humble Prayer to Him for His
blessed Assistance, etc.

Nor behave our selves frowardly, etc.
WE are now to suppose the Court set again, That of our Conscience, first; And
now let us but see, how the Evidence comes trowling in.

First, False Rumors raised; Scandals divulged; Jealousies fomented; Gods
Anointed in his Footsteps standered.

Then, Routs approved of; Arms taken up; Wars levied; Gods Word rejected;
Gods Sword resisted.

After that, Men's properties invaded; their Persons destroyed; The Lords
Vineyard rooted up; All Rights baffled; Laws suppressed; The Ordinances all
changed. To go no higher yet then this; Though this be far the least part of
the public outrages rushing in with a Covenant.

Then for a Personal Charge upon Men. Such a one (not to name him now; though
who knows not many thousand such Ones?) That he might share in the booty, and
patch up a mean Fortune in a few Months: Another, That he might save his own
stake, and be out of the lash of the Common Scourge: A third, That he might
curry but favor enough, to get a little Release of the Curses upon him, To
comply with the Times, and run along as the stream goes, [As our Psalmist
elsewhere has it, With the froward to learn frowardness, Psalm. 18. But their
Guides from Rome, I understand, could play the good Fellows, and make a case of
Conscience of it, and termed it, submitting to the present Authority, under
whose Protection they lived;] All this, and more, abundantly proved, And yet
now in a Trial of Frowardness, will it be possible for such Covenant-mongers
not to be found Guilty?

But for a Defense in their Covenant, we must not but hear, what Plea they
would use. For they allege, That they had good Law for that they did: Have
they not clear Precedents from Gods People of old, as so many ruled Cases,
practiced by Them, and never reproved by God? Well then, Christians therefore
now are to do the like, for the due preserving of their Religion.

And somewhat of this they say, has truth enough in it; There are store of
Examples from Time to time in Scripture, of the Covenant of God renewed among
His People. But then I must tell them, Such Examples they are all, every one of
them, as if the Proceedings of our Times be applied to them, there shall need
no other Judgment. 'Twill prove as vast a difference, and as vile, set them
once together, as is the Picture of a Dog to the Image of a Man; Can they not
relish this? Then, as is the shape of a foul Fiend to the Pourtraiture of a
Blessed Angel.

1. Nothing added to Gods Covenant.
This for First, That from the first to the last, there is nothing Covenanted
for in Scripture, but what was ordained for them from the beginning; From the
beginning of their Law, which God gave them in Horeb, That was for his Worship,
and all relating thereunto; and from the beginning of their Kingdom, unto which
God had after brought them, That was for the whole Civil Government; But 'twas
one and the same Covenant still; None but the first, No new tricks, foisted in
at pleasure with the very Ordinance of God, upon any specious pretenses
whatsoever.

Only there is one Story indeed; If they mean that for their Pattern, worth our
looking at it. It was of the new Samaritans, that were placed in the Room of
the Captivated Israelites; The Lions had taught them to be very godly, and so
they got them a Priest, and of him they learned, how they should fear the Lord,
2 Reg. 17. 18. This was very well, was it not? Arrant Assirians of a sudden to
become so very holy? And how then? So they feared the Lord, says that Text,
ver. 32. That is, They used the right worship of the true God. But how though
did they it? Here comes in the point.

Not without tricks enough of their own, with it, First, They themselves became
Priest-makers: And next, 'Twas no matter Who, the meanest among them would
serve, and was set up to do the Sacrifice.

Well: Yet once again the Text there strikes upon the former string, and tells*
us, that They worshipped the Lord, ver. 33. Did they so? And what would we
more? Nothing: Did it not tells us withal, that there was more; For they served
their own Gods too. Oh, is that it? It Is plain therefore the Holy Ghost has set
it down this, but by way of an Irony, as an Holy Scoff upon them, Excellent
worshippers of God these, That worship Him, How they list, and whom they list
with Him!

So for a Conclusion in the verse following, the Holy Spirit deals plain and
down right with them. They feared not the Lord, ver. 34. But is not this
strange? Twice before They feared the Lord, and now flatly, They feared not the
Lord. How must this be unriddled? It Is done to our hands; The Reason follows
there. Because they did it not, According to the Statutes, and Ordinances, and
Law, that God had commanded at first, But besides the Right Covenant, ver. 38,
they had thrust in what pleased them, into the new Model of their Religion. And
you see how well God likes of that.

And that is the first Exception here, A Covenant for the Religion loudly cried
up, but yet sufficiently powdered with Additionals, of Hypocrisy, Perjury,
Violence, Treason, Rebellion; And yet still must go for the Covenant of God.
Find they any such medlies in Scripture, but of their good Brethren, the
Samaritans?

The sway of this Point therefore still lies in Tuo. For Tuum it cannot, it
will not be, none of Gods Covenant, lift they their hands never so high, unless
the Contents of it be taken out of His will alone, He the only Author and
Dictator of it, and no Compeers with Him (North, or South) in it to mingle
their good pleasures with it.

The Greek word (...) also implies as much. Other words there are that do
indifferently signify Agreements, and Compacts, Leagues also, and
Conspiracies. But Berith is never construed by these. To tell us, That Gods
Covenant with us, must still be (...). The New Testament, and the Old Testament
bear no other Name but that. And therefore it is not Tuum, unless it may stand
for Testamentum also. It Is none of that which is rightly called Gods Covenant,
Psalm. 105. 9. unless it may be added, that it is His Law, and His Everlasting
Testament, verse. 10 that is, His own known Will and Testament, devised and
established by Himself alone, and no sprinklings in it, cogg'd by others and
foisted in for His; Much less ever borrowed you wot where, and then obtruded,
and forced upon Him, that it shall be His, whether he will or no.

2. No Covenant without Gods Deputy.
YEt there is a second Exception, worse then the first: Because, but by means of
the second, the first could never be. And the ground of that is this.

In S. Scripture, there is not one of those Covenants to which they pretend, but
was of Gods only making and moving. As he had begun it in Horeb, there by
Himself first, with his own Voice from Heaven, He gave them the Ten
Commandments; And then for all the other parts of his covenant, and of the
Religion, to which He bound Them, He sent it all to them by His Deputy, Moses;
'Twas He, Gods Vicegerent, (and in place of King to them, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.) that
ordered all their Covenanting with God: And so it held on in all ^ges, No
Covenant then ever heard of, but what the King, who stood above them all, as in
Gods place, or who by Reason of His Absence or Age, was appointed by the Law of
God to stand in the Kings place, prescribed it unto them, or imposed it upon
them.

However the people then had a part in the Covenant, because it was for them,
and with them, yet it was but the Obeying part, meaning the Duty required of
Them, as one told them, Vobis obsequii gloria relicta est, That was all that
the people had to do with it; Upon them it was laid to see it performed; But as
for the Legislative part, the Authority in calling them to a Covenant, and in
designing, what the Tenor of that Covenant (this, or that part of the Law) then
should be, Mandata mea mihi, was Gods Rule ever, All the thousands of Israel
had nothing to do in that part, nor were ever to meddle with it: It was Holy to
the Lord that, and wholly appertained to the Supreme under Him.

To hear therefore now of a Covenant for Religion without Gods Deputy to lead
it; How much more, to have it hammered of purpose, not only against his
Leading or Meddling in it, but also by a Hellish Device (yet because of their
Use, allowed to be Holy, and very Divine) to frame such a blessed Distinction
in it, as safely thereby to commit an Horrible Rape in the presence of God, and
by force to snatch from Him His Royal Authority, and to Arm His Subjects with
it against His Person, and so, They to lead Him to what they list, and (at
last) to the very block,) and yet must this be countenanced out of Gods Word?
And must it go for His Covenant, that is so flatly against Him? Gods Covenant
point blank against Gods Anointed? Blessed Lord! What Logic call they This?

I must deal plainly. It can grow no where, but where this Covenant it self
grew; There indeed it has ever been found, what Reason soever, and proof to the
contrary, yet all the Reason, when they are at a pinch, that they regard to go
by, is, It is so, Because it is so. And therefore they must, and will have it
so, If a Bible in Hand, with Powder, and Shot will do it.

But you shall not trust me alone in this point. Use your own Eyes, I beseech
you, while I shall bestow so much Time upon them, as to point a finger to all
their Examples.

The first, I can meet with, was in Moab, more then 40. years after that in
Horeb, when all the first Breed was dead, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. and then Moses in stead
of God (there you have the Doer of it) He manages the business, and engages the
Children, as at first he had done their Fathers, to the observing the Law of
their God. There you have the Matter of it.

2. In Sechem, the same was done again, much after such a distance of Time, but
the difference else, in the main, none. For the same Law it was, and 'twas
Joshua now that did it. Josh. 24. 25.

3. After that, I do not light upon another, but what I acquainted you with, of
Baal Berith, till the Covenant made in Hebron, and that seems to have been
only about the Temporal Government; 'Twas in effect, but an Oath of
Allegiance, taken in the presence of God, and David the King Himself He takes
it of them, 2 Samuel 5*

4. The next was at Jerusalem, and it was only about the Religion; At which
they were all to swear solemnly, To seek the Lord, that was, To worship Him
only, upon pain of Death, as the Law of old was: But Asa the King He renewed
it now, and put it upon them, 2 Par. 15. 9.

5 Another after it there was at Jerusalem, and it was of both, both for the
Religion, for the Ancient Worship of God, (for Baals Religion had been
interloping) and for their Obedience to their true King Joash; He was but a
Child indeed, not seven years old, and Athaliah had usurped the Throne; But yet
all was now in his Name, and his Right, and done all by Jehoiada his Uncle, who
was the High Priest, and the Kings High Protector, 2 Reg. 11. 17.

6, Hezekiah's Covenant followed next. And to that the King first assembles all
the Priests and the Levites, and gives them in charge to sanctify themselves,
and to purge the Temple, (for much pollution there had been) and to set all
things right there, for the right Service of God. And the Reason he gives them
is, For it is in my heart to make the Covenant for the Lord, 2 Par. 29. 10. And
to that purpose he calls the whole Kingdom together. 2 Par. 30. 1.

7. Shall we need any more? There Is one Example yet, in a Time none of the
orderlyest, when Jerusalem was beset with the Army of Babylon, Jer. 34. 7. and
what was that? A Covenant, as the present occasion then gave them, of renewing
one point of their Law long disused, and Zedekiah the King was he that did it
ver. 8.

8. And one more yet: For after the return from Captivity, there is an Oath made
by all Israel, for performance of another particular, then most necessary: And
who was the Author of that? The people, if ever, now surely. No; 'Twas Ezra
the Priest, but as a Commissioner, come into the Land, with Authority from
Artaxerxes the great King, and so he takes it in hand, when Shecaniah, a Prince
of the blood Royal, (but, in no Commission) by moving him earnestly to it,
acknowledges, That it was not lawful for any of them, for all of them, to set
upon it without Him: [ Arise, says he, because this matter belongs to thee,
and we are to be ordered by thee; But be thou courageous and do it.] Ezra. 10.
3. and 4.

9. And that I may not seem to balk any, Take one more yet, that has not the
word of a Covenant in it, but in Truth it amounts to no less, an Oath with a
Curse upon them all, if they do not the Law, that God had prescribed them,
Nehem. 10. 29. wherein He as the Tirshatha (the Supreme Governor in
Commission) is the Leader of all. ver. 1.

And now, I think, I have left out none: Let this Covenanting Generation come
now, and bring out their Baal Berith, that Idol Covenant; And say, which of
these is the Copy they pretend to go by, for an Example in S. Scripture.

Will they be able to show you, they have put nothing in their Covenant, but
what was there of old, to be readily found in the Word and Will of God? Or
rather, clean contrary, very much of it, such as God abhorrs, so flat against
Godliness, Loyalty, Justice, and Truth?

Was God also at the making of it? Which of them sat at the Tables head for
Him: Who was Gods Deputy in it? What was His Name, that had power to call them
to it, and to require it of them? Well! Let them look to their Copy a little
better; For Covenant of God it will never be, whose soever it proves to be,
unless these two Conditions, The plain Will of God, and the Right Officer under
God, both be clearly in it.

3. All honest Covenants, are Gods.
Though I do not look, such Zelots as they are, should leave clamouring still
for their Covenant, in that I spy another starting hole they have yet. For
Agreements between man and man, private Covenants, touching Ordinary things,
are in S. Scripture styled, The Covenant of God. And shall not then a consent
of all the People be Sacred? The Resolution of whole Nations much more be
counted so, and without any Question be set upon Gods score?

And the Truth is, this they say, has not a little truth in it. For that
Covenant which Jonathan and David entered into 1 Samuel 18. 3, David himself
says, 'twas the Covenant of the Lord, 1 Samuel 20. 8. The Ordinary Contract
also, which every Wife made with her Husband, (who is to the Wife ever in Gods
stead,) 'twas the Covenant of her God, Prove. 2. 17.

Nay, we will come home to them; A League, that the men of Tire, Heathen men,
(mark that;) had made with the Jews, God ownes it so, that he acknowledges it
for a Brotherly Covenant, (lo ye there) and will avenge the breach of it, Amos
2, 9. And that Oath which the King of Babylon had put upon the King of Judah,
of Fealty to Him, when he revolted from it, God was so highly displeased, that
He (to make it surer) took His Oath, [ As I live, says the Lord, my Oath,
which he has despised, and my Covenant which he has broken, (Mine, and Mine,
All now was Gods,) will I recompense upon his own Head.] Ezech. 17. 19.

By the way then upon this, shall we not desire, that our godly Brethren would
show us, whether he be the same God, still? If he be, Then how go they to work
with this God, or what order have they taken with him, about their Oaths of
Supremacy, and of Allegiance, of Canonical Obedience also, and sundry other
Bonds they were in by Local Statutes upon those Preferments, and Offices, that
he had brought them to? I but ask them this by the way.

Now the Reason of all this, what is it, but thus? Because every Covenant, be
it but private, between man and man, be it also with whom it will be (with a
Jew, or a Turk; that is all one, by all their leaves, that would persuade you
otherwise, both at Rome and here;) Yet if it be broken, there lies a Complaint
to God about it, Psalm. 55. 21. For supposing the thing agreed upon to be in it
self Just and Lawful, (In Re Licita, So Lawful, as that Well and Rightly it
may be done; How much more, if it be Res Debita, So Due, as that of Right it
ought to be done!) It Is not only a Branch of the Law of God, as a Quil out of
that wing, and in that Relation entitles God to it;

But also, seeing the Parties were agreed to call God to it, (and call him they
did at the making of it,) both as a witness in it, and as the Judge of it, and
also as the Avenger for it, thus all honest Covenants come to be Gods; Let but
the matter be Justifiable and Due, have Truth and Honesty in it* and whose
bargain so e're it be, or wheresoever it be driven, be it but in a Scriveners
shop, nay under a Hedge, (as Jonathan's and David's was little other, 1 Samuel 23.
16.) yet it binds, because of the Power and Presence of God.

But 'oth' the other side, if the matter agreed upon be naught and Illegal, carry
it any Iniquity folded up in it, it is never good then from the beginning, far
enough from having any Interest in God, never hope for it, there is no beguiling
of him, all the Combining in the world cannot make God their Pandar. No, All in
that kind is but Vinculum Iniquitatis, and the more Solemnity or Admixture of
Holy Forms, the worse the business ever, and the sooner must men repent, and
utterly forsake it. For it is no better then, then what is usually to be found in
Stangate-hole, or on Shooters Hill; No circumstances of Time, or Place, or
Persons, or Manner, or any thing else, can hallow it.

But then over and above all this, It Is another thing quite, when it is ordained
to carry a Solemnity between God, and men, aiming at any Public Obligement of
themselves unto God. For there, be they never so many, the People are all but
one Party still, there is but one side, yet; So all this while it is a Covenant
with no Body, till God make himself a Party; Some body therefore must be there
for Him, for God.

And then, for the best of our Brethren (woe is me for them; They are indeed
Hail fellow with God in too many things;) to make account, that they have him
at a whistle, and can force God, to make one at it, whether He will or no, or
when they would have Him, if they do but hold up a finger; By their good
leaves, this falls under that of David, The Fool said in his heart, Non Deus.
Psalm. 14. 1. It Is to make Him their Drudge, and not their God; No God, such a
one, be bold on it, but a Servant, so mean and vile a servant, that an honest
man's slave would be loath to change with him.

Make no other Account therefore, but that the Verdict here must needs go
against them; 'Twill be found Frowardly and Falsely, more then enough, and cast
they will be (all the sort of them) for perverse carriage in the Covenant of
God.

Time was, I find, when the Prophet would have been content, if he might, to
have excused such another company of them; But on no side could he look, that
it proved not False play, every way: He is forced therefore to give it over,
and to find the Bill, Though they swear, The Lord lives, yet to be sure, they
swear falsely, says he, Jer. 5. 2. How so? Because what they swear, much of it
is that, that is false, the rest, is that they mean to make false.

Howbeit then, before it come to that, here is a step in the Text, that must well
be looked to. For in any matter of our Duty to God and Man, suppose it our
Allegiance, or any other due Obedience, Know we must, it is a spice of
Frowardness, not to be forward, not toward ever, and zealously ready to perform
our Duty, so bent upon it, that we need not fear to appeal unto God about it.

Much more then savours it of extreme untowardness, to seek excuses, or delays
in it, and to be ready to take any diversions from it, or occasions against it:
But then, of all the rest, to pretend hotly to it, and yet to go quite another
way; When they make a Solemn Covenant for it, and needs will pull God in to be
a party, then to swear falsely, this the Prophet calls, Judgment springing up as
Hemlock, Hos. 10. 4. And his meaning is, No Venom so abominable, and gross as
this, So that 'twill be impossible to escape the Judgment.

How to be known, this.
BUt how then? Where are we now? Will any plead Ignorance in it? Will they
allege, That that they do in it, being commonly and loudly cried up for the
Covenant of God, And that, not in the Streets alone by a Rabble, but amidst the
Sages, and the Common-Councils; Nay, the very Pulpits of those, that ever bare
their Heads for mighty Prophets among them, sounding out nothing else
continually, but the Goodness of the Cause, and the Curse upon Meroz, Judge. 5.
23. Damnation to them, that joined not in such a Duty, How should other Men be
able to Judge it? Which way should one of a Thousand among the People be able
to tell himself, Whether it were the Covenant of God or no?

All this has fully been resolved already, by those two infallible Marks,
First, If it have any thing else in it, that is not to be had out of the Word
and Will of God, by a Clear Consequence from it. Next, if it be a Headless
piece, and Gods Vicegerent, His true Deputy, be not the Stipulator for God, and
the Leader in it. And though the former of these two may be thought too deep
for every one to skill of, yet the second is plain enough, and he that has but
half an Eye may easily discover it.

But what shall we need to go further then the Text for it? I pray do but mark
that. The care of Gods Church there, is, To clear her self to God, from
Perverseness, from all that may be called Lying, and froward dealing in His
Covenant. Well and good then; If Gods Covenant be such, so pure and holy, that
it may not abide any Lying, upon no terms endure any frowardness of ours, or
perverse behavior in us, so much as to be mingled with it, To build upon it
then, absolutely in it self, there can be no such matter, No froward dealing
must there ever be, no false meaning at all in it, or else Covenant it must be
none of Gods.

Put it upon that Issue then, let the good People of God look but to that, and
go no further; Leaving them all their Sophistry and Pulpit slights, examine you
no more but that. Say then, Find you false pretending in it? (You have had it
long enough, to know it thoroughly.) Is any thing said there, in that Covenant,
that you see is not, never was, intended? Find you any Lying at all, either in
the Device, or in the Carriage of it? Is one thing said, and quite another
thing done? Go to then, This is enough. For, if so, then this is Falsely and
Frowardly, to be sure: And by this then it is clear, that it is none of Gods
Covenant. Now this every man of you is able to discover, that can but tell
Twenty.

I must be bold therefore to tell you; He that sees it not, it is not for want
of Eyes, nor for want of Light, (either of these indeed would be some excuse,)
but it is for want of Will only. As our Savior has turned it out of the
Prophet, Their Eyes are shut, says He, Esaias 6. 9. But they themselves have
shut them, says Christ, Matthew. 13. 15. And why? Because the god of this world
has blinded their minds, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 4. There Is the business; And
now, rather then not enjoy this world; that God shall content them, a God he is
there called, and now be the Covenant what it will be, so that upon any report
God be there, They will look for no other God in it, least otherwise the
Crosses of this world should betide them for it.

But then, this also is point blank against the Text. For that begins, And
though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget thee, nor behave our
selves frowardly in thy Covenant. No play false with God they would not, to
ease themselves of any misery that was fallen upon them: Much less, had they
already done it, to prevent the coming of it; Least of all, only for filthy
lucres sake, to make themselves gainers and to suck advantages out of the milk
of any other Covenant.

Pactum Iuum, therefore they were still able to say to God, and not Pactum
Nostrum? They knew no other Covenant, but His. But that, they so well knew to
be His, Given by Him alone, and not taken up by men (no new Humane, Forgery
shall I call it? or rather idolatry, made, as Idols use ever to be, after some
resemblance of Gods Covenant, and colored very like it?) that they would be
able to give him a true account of His own, and of their upright dealings in it.

Yet I would now pray you, to mark that also, that In Pacto Tuo, is all they
say: they pretend to no more; It is no Pharisaical brag of them this, as who
should say, their doings were quite without Sin, or, that they would justify
all their ways before God; Far be it from them, to have any such thought* No?
It Is only intended here, as concerning the point of their Allegiance, and of
their Worshipping of God aright.

You may trace it out by this; For nothing carries the Name of God so much, and
so kindly, as those two do, The worship of God, and Gods Vicegerent. Now they
presently expound themselves so; That they had not forgotten the Name of their
God, ver. 21. Their meaning therefore here must needs be, That to the Rule of
his Worship, which was given them in His Name, Or to that Authority, which bare
His Name, and had given the Rule, they could never be brought to show any
frowardness.

And from hence those three Children of God, no doubt, drew their pattern.
Charged indeed they were upon grievous pains to forgo the right Worship of
God, and to do as others did, to worship the New Image, that was all of gold,
Dan 3. 10. But these golden pretenses could not work upon them; Their answer
therefore was ready, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, and He will
deliver us; That was well, if they were sure of that part: But if not, be it
known, we will not worship any new Image, whatsoever come of it. An Holy and a
brave Resolution this! But no more then is due from all Gods Servants, in any
such trials, nothing must make them transgress that Covenant which they were
in, for their serving of God; If God by himself, or by his second self the
King, called for no altering, they were never to endure any, much less, to
induce any.

And what we say of our Religion, must still be taken of our Allegiance also;
They ever go together; And Alterations there may be in both, No body says to
the contrary. But then, it is God alone, and not man, that must alter them. It
was for nothing else, that God, after he had changed the Government of Israel
from one form to another, till at last he had brought it to Kings, and in that
course had once removed it too, from Saul to David, yet then He set up his
rest, and to tell them so, He termed it His Covenant, Psalm. 89. 3. I have made
it a Covenant with my servant David, and his seed after him, to last for ever.

And this it was, that made David's great Grandchild Abiah, to challenge it by
the Right of God, as given to David, and to his sons by a Covenant of salt, 2
Par. 13. 5. That Abiah was not in the right though, and that his Argument held
not, it was Because God himself had there made the Division of the Kingdoms,
and had sent one Prophet to foretell it, 1 Reg. 11. 35. and another after to
warrant it, The thing is done by me, 2 Par. 11. 4.

But otherwise, by man it could never else have been done rightly, nor would it
ever have held; No man, not all the men in the Kingdom (whatsoever is told you
of the Power of the People, by those that worship that many headed Monster) had
Power or Authority to alter that Covenant of God with David, more then they had
to alter his Covenant of the Day and the Night in their Seasons, says God
himself, if men would believe him, Jerem. 33. 21. They were never to meddle
with it, unless God himself gave order expressly in it.

You shall find it so in the forenamed Psalm, There it is, My Covenant with
David, Psalm. 89. 3. and My Covenant shall stand fast with him. ver. 29. and My
Covenant will I not break, ver. 34. and who dare now go contrary? And yet at
last we hear of him, Thou art displeased at him, and thou have broken the
Covenant of thy Servant, ver. 38. Yes, Thou have! God may do it, No man denies
that; But the men that do it without order from God, Howe'ere they make the
Success of their Sin to be a sign of Gods Will, Out alas, it is no such matter,
It Is but a Lie in His Covenant all they do, and the men of Belial they are for
it, and God will not suffer them to go unavenged, (first or last,) that do it:
No, nor them neither (I fear me) that suffer it, and yield to have other men do
it.

And I could now show you the like of the Holy Priesthood also, For God is in
Covenant likewise with them, and His Covenant with them is by Himself (once and
again) set in the same equipage with his Covenant of the Kingdom, and with his
Covenant of the day and night, Jer. 33. 22. And had it not been ever meant so,
it had been but an odd Farewell, that the Blessed Son of God (when he had now
altered the Priesthood, as he had Power to do) took off his twelve Apostles;
For Lo I am with you always unto the end of the world, are the last words He
says to them, Math. 28. 20.

But lo, By your leave, you shall not, Sir, have the brave Baal Berithans,
your new Covenanters sworn, if men will but rightly conster them: For to be
with Them to the end of the world, Christ could not mean it, not with the
Apostles themselves, That was impossible, but in their Successors; And the
Successors of the Apostles were those, whom the Apostles themselves called
Bishops, with whom the Apostles left the Power of Ego mitto Vos, of continuing
that Order, or of Subordaining any New. And concerning the Bishops, you know
what the Covenanters have sworn, and in very that, have forsworn sufficiently.

But I make no stay at this, though I thought it not unfit to cast it in, only
by the way, because of their word Covenant, that you might have a taste of all
the Covenants of God, and of these men's Counter-Covenanting. But I have
another-gates Covenant now to conclude all with.

Full well therefore may this Covenant in the Text be said to concern the King,
Gods Secular Minister, and the Priest, Gods Spiritual Minister, when as Christ
himself, (the Son of God; He, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Author
of all our Religion, our great High Priest, and the Bishop or our Souls, the
very root therefore of all Episcopacy, which they shall never be able to root
out, however they may sometimes lopp of His Branches, He that is the Maker of
all that are His to be Kings and Priests unto God his Father, Apoc. 1. 6.) is
Himself the very Covenant, for all those that belong unto God.

Think not strange of this, I can show you the very Charter of it, and it is
worthy your looking on. It begins in a most Solemn and Divine Form, Thus says
God the Lord, He that created the Heavens, and stretched them out, that
spreads forth the Earth, and all that comes out of it; That gives Breath to
all People upon it, and Spirit to all that walk therein; I the Lord have called
Thee in Righteousness, and I will take Thee by thy Hand, and will preserve
Thee, and will give Thee for a Covenant to the People, for a Light to the
Gentiles. Esaias 42. 5, 6. And lest that should not stick with them* again he is
at it, In an acceptable time, and in the day of Salvation, will I give Thee for
a Covenant of the People. Esaias 49. 8. Now we have S. Paul's warrant, That time
was then, when Christ was given, 2 Cor. 6 2.

There are of the succeeding Prophets also express in it. By Jeremy the Record
of it is at large set down, under the Title of a New Covenant, Jer: 31. 31. And
that he means it all of the New Covenant Christ, is clear by the Apostles
recital of it, Heb. 8. 8. Then, it was a New one: But ever it was to be New,
because to last Eternally, never no other Covenant to be after It, after Christ.

And so likewise Ezekiel, after many Heavenly Amplifications of it, and
exclusive all to the old Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 61, He reduces it all into this
Personal Aphorism, I will be their God, and they shall be my People, Ezekiel 37.
27. And that this also is all meant of Christ himself, the same Apostle informs
us, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

For the Love of God then, I beseech you all, have some care of your Souls, and
be not thus fooled out of them. Away with all other Devices, All these Baal
Beriths, these Idol, newfangled Covenants; Avaunt All, but the Covenant of
Grace in Christ.

And in the Ministration of It, what alterations at any Time are needful, doubt
it not, but God is more mindful, then You; and when He sees Time, that God
(that when need was, did put it into that way, that so long you had then
forgotten, into the Heart of His Deputy the King, and of his Bishops at the
Reformation, to do it:) is the same God still, the God of his Church: And needs
no Aerian Presbyters now, to lift up a lying Hand* because God is asleep, to
waken Him. No, God is awake in His Holy Temple, and however he seems to wink a
while, yet they will find, that He sees through all, Et palpebrae ejus
interrogant, Psalm. 11. 5. His very Eyelids try the Children of Men.

Hold we only therefore to this sure Covenant of God, that, in it self (we are
sure) is Christ, and as to us, it is with Christ, in Christ, and for Christ, and
Christ (to be sure) will see well enough to it, without any of these new (bold,
and blind,) Seers.

Be we therefore All in All alone for Christ, for our Anointed Lord, and for
the Lords Anointed, Taking Care for nothing else, but not to behave our selves
perversely in this Covenant, no way to be froward and untoward to Him. Of all
the rest, not to put such foul scorns upon Him, as if He needed our Lying, and
could not well be God any longer, without our abominable Dissembling, which was
the Badge that Christ put upon the old Pharisaisme, and is the very Soul of
that new Scottish Covenant. [Now God be merciful unto them all, that lie but
within the Shadow of it. Amen.

FINIS.

